APHORISMS CIVIL AND MILITARY: Amplified with Authorities, and exemplified
with History, out of the first Quarterne of Fr. Guicciardine.

LIP. DE GVICCIARD. Prudens pexitusque Scriptor, and qui tales Lectores suos
facit.

BASIL. REX, DE HIST. Per historias veteres ire ne recusa. Ibi enim reperies
sine labor, quae alij cum labor collegerunt, at que illinc hauries, and
bonorum virtutes, and improborum vitia: vit^ humanae varias mutationes, and
rerum in ea conuersiones: mundi huius instabilitatem, and imperiorum instabiles
casus: Et vt verbo complectar, malorum facinorum poenas, and bonorum praemia:
quorum illa fugies, ne in diuinae iustitiae manus incidas; haec amplecteris, vt
praemijs quae ea commit antur potiaris.

LONDON, Imprinted for EDWARD BLOVNT. 1613.



TO THE HIGH AND MIGHTY, CHARLES PRINCE OF GREAT BRITANNIE, etc.
My gracious Lo. and Mr. SIR,
ALL eyes are upon you. Those your sweet graces of nature, and ingenuous
dispositions to goodness, makes men look upon your worthy Brother in your
princely self; holding you the true inheritor of his virtues as of his
fortunes, and making full account that he had no odds of you but in years. If
you will not have them fall short in their reckoning, this Imprimis of your
hopeful beginnings, must be continued with many Items of virtuous proceedings,
and closed up with a Summa-totalis of all princely worthiness: So shall you
like a great and high Steward (as you are) perfect the account you are to make,
to your King and to your country. Hereunto Example and Precept will enable
you. Examples you may have in your own family, and (which few Princes have
had) in your own time. Your matchless Brother for these seven years to come,
may take you by the hand, and lead you in the fair apprentisage of all honor
and virtue: and then your royal Father may for many and many years (we hope
and pray) be a living and lively Mirror unto you of Piety, Wisdom, Justice,
Clemency, and all other regal endowments fit for the high calling to which
you are borne. As for Precepts, you may have them from those that have worthily
that place of service about you, besides others you shall meet with in
approved Authors, whereof I humbly tender you this Epitome. It was your
Brothers, and sues among other his servants for entertainment: hoping under the
Impression of his worthy memory, and Stamp of your gracious favor to pass
current.

Your Highness humblest servant DALLINGTON.

To the Reader.
I Never yet durst hazard my short Scantling of knowledge, to be tried by the
just Standart of your Judgment, nor put those few grains of mine upon the
indifferent Scales of your Censure, as being conscious to my self how much
they are wanting, both in weight and measure. Please you but remember how I
long since disclaimed the publication of the View of France and Suruay of
Tuscany, (though I could not disauow the things themselves) it will make you a
fair way to the truth of this my ingenuous protestation. But now I must
confess, the desire I have to make him live still in your memories, (in whose
great hopes while he breathed all gentle spirits lived,) has dulled my sense
against those tender impressions, and violently driven me, either upon the
rock of your just reproof, or into the arms of your good favor; I know not
yet whether. Be mine the hazard, so his be the honor: by whose gracious
influence every little star in that goodly Sphaere of his subalterne
government, moved in their proper Orb to do him service: and among these my
self, the vnablest of many in that Academy (for so was his family) had this
especial employment, for his proper use; which he pleased favor ably to
entertain, and often to read over. Whose all-promising virtues and
all-deserued praises while you shall sing, I will sigh the loss of all in
sorrowful silence, and offer you these his papers in his memory. The Argument
is general, wherein the public Minister may meet with his experience, the
Soldier with his practice, the Scholar with his reading: and every of these
in his own Element parallel both the Aphorism, Example, and Authorities. The
Method is not vulgar, for though books of Civil discourse be full of axioms,
Philosophers of proofs, and Historians of instances; yet shall ye hardly meet
them all combined in one couplement. Out of their legions of Authorities I have
drawn out these Maniples, because our Masters in the art of war do teach
us, that these are more ready for use, upon all sudden occasion of service. I
have enter-laced them with variety of Language, to procure his better appetite
for whom they were written, I was the more plentiful in Authorities, because,
to read many and great volumes few young men have the will, no Prince has the
leisure. It is true many of them may serve to several Aphorisms, so does the
workmans Last for several men's wearing, and yet neither the shoe is cut, or
foot pinched: Nor are they so loose but that with Lipsius Soder you may cyment
them together, and make them con-center in the maine proposition. To the
Aphorisms I have given some farce of illustration, which falls not
necessarily in the nature of the conclusion; but this I did of purpose, to give
them better relish in the dainty palate of a Prince, and to draw him on with
the variety of his viands. Some of them likewise compared together may seem
one and the same, yet is not their co-incidence so close, but that the more
diligent reader may observe a difference, either in the Root or in the
Branches, as also in the Authorities and Examples. In the Examples I have bound
my self to the truth of the history, but used my liberty for the phrase and
manner of relation: because my Authors periods are ouerlong, to suit with that
perspicuity which I intended. What else is to be observed, your judgment may
discern, whereunto I subscribe: and your favor accept, whereupon I rely.

R. DALLINGTON.

APHORISMS, CIVIL AND MILITARY, AMPLIFIED WITH AVTHORITIES, AND exemplified
with History, out of the first Quarterne of Fra. Guicciardine.
APHORISM I.
IN (...) Hippoc. aph. 3.
(...). i. Ad summum boni habitus periculosi, si in extremo fuerint, non enim
possunt in eodem permanere.

Terra quo melior, eo magis corrumpitur, vbi negligitur. Plutarch. Aristot.


Nullius vini species vehementius acescit, quam quae ab initio habuit
dulcedinem.


natural bodies, the longer they subsist in perfect health, the more dangerous
is the disease when it comes, and the longer in curing; as having none of
those humors spent, which by distemper give foment and force to the
approaching malady. In se magna ruunt: laetisque hunc numina rebus Lucan. l. 1.


Crescendi posuere modum. --

Quae alia res ciuiles furores peperit, quam nimia foelicitas? Flor. l. 3. c.
12 Ibidem.


Opes atque diuitiae afflixere Seculi mores, mersamque vitijs suis quasi
sentina Rempub. pessundedere.

Certis eunt cuncta temporibus, nasci debent, crescere, extingui. Senec. Epist.
Pro. Ital.


Piu scende chi piu sale.

Suis and ipsa Roma viribus ruit. Horat. Epod 16.



So it is in bodies politic: when war once seizes upon a country, rich in
the plenties of a long peace, and full with the surfets of a continual ease;
it never leaves purging those superfluities, till all be wasted and consumed.

About the year 1490. Italy the most glorious and goodliest country of
Europe, stood in fairer terms of happiness and prosperity, then ever it had
done since the first declination of the Roman Empire: she had enjoyed the
sweet fruits of a long peace: she was not subject to any command, but of
natural Italians: full of people and riches: many great Princes and States:
many noble and fair Cities: besides, the Sea and Majesty of Religion: many
personages of worthy eminency, in both the professions of Arts and Arms: and
in great reputation with all other Nations. All which fair flowers of peace
were suddenly blasted: most of the governments changed: the people wasted: the
wealth exhausted: the cities demolished: Arts and Arms decayed: Reputation
lost: and all by the heart-burning and iealowsie of her own Princes, which set
that noble country in combustion; and being once on fire, ministered so much
fuel of her self, as in forty years space it could not be quenched.

APHORISM II.
AS Hoc innuit fabula illa de membris cibum ventri detrectantibus, tanquam
Aesop. fab. 15. Idem. Ibid.
ociosae and inutili corporis parti.

Mutuis officijs, mutuis operibus vtendum est: neque diuitiae, neque dignitatum
apices hominem satis tuentur: vnicum and summum praesidium plurium amicitia
est.

Nulla Regio aut Resp. ex omni part (...), id est, sibi sufficiens. Arist.
Pol. lib. 2. Virgil.


Varium coeli praediscere morem,

Et quid quaeque fer at regio, and quid quaeque recuset.

Nam haec quoque mira naturae differentia, alia alijs locis negat: tanquam
genera frugum fruticumque, sic and animalium: non nasci translatitium, inuecta
Plin. not. hist lib. 10. c. 29.
emori mirum.


in man (the worlds Epitome) one member has need of another, nor can the more
noble parts execute their office and faculty without the assistance of the
most base: So in that greater world, Providence has severally dispensed her
graces and blessings to several countries, that standing in need each of
others help, there might be a sociable negotiation, and friendly consociation
between them. Suam quisque fortunam in consilio habeat, cum de aliena
deliberat. Curt. l. 4. Virgil. Arist. rhet. ad Alex.


Quisque suos patimur Manes -- immo petimus fines.

Socios legi suadeam, non qui mediocri valiant potentia, and in proximo
habitent.

Bocchum legati monuerunt, ne florentes res suas, cum Iugurthae perditis
misceret. Salust. Iug.


Amicitias inimicitiasque non ex re, sed ex commodo aestimare, magisque vultum
Salust. Cat.
quam ingenium bonum habere.

Le leghe sogliono rendere i Prencipi, and piu forti, and piu animosi: perch
molte Rag. di Stat. lib. 8.
cose non puo, and non ardisce da se vno, che potra, and imprendera,
accompagnato da altri.

Diuersi sono i pensieri di diuersi huomini, and cio che in quello caso (delle
Leghe) Paruta. Disc. 5. lib. 1.
importa piu, non pur diuersi ma contrarij per lo piu, and repugnanti i
Consigli and le Resolutioni, con le quali si reggono i Prencipi confederati.


Hence is it that Leagues are made between States, for the mutual supplement
and support one of another. But the Colleagues have commonly their particular
ends, besides the general good pretended.

Ferdinand King of Naples, with Lodowick Zforza Protector of his nephew John
Galeazzo young Duke of Millan, and Laurence Medici, chief magistrate and
citizen of Florence, renew the league formerly made between these three
States, to continue yet longer inviolable for five and twenty years. Their
maine end was this, To be able thus combined, to oppose against the Venetian
greatness, which severally and distracted, they were not able to do. They had
also their particular ends, whereat they aimed: Medici, that he might still
stand great in his cities command, and she happy in her peace. Ferdinand, that
he might quietly and peaceably enjoy that his kingdom, to which he knew the
house of France made claim, and to whom many of his Neapolitan Nobility stood
overmuch affected: And Zforza, to maintain and hold still that power and
authority he held in Millan through usurpation, by assuming the right, and
abusing the youth and weakness of his nephew, the lawful Prince and true
heir of that Duchy.

APHORISM III.
WHen Mentre la Carica, sta ben compartita, il vascello solca commodissimamente
leonde: ma se tutto il peso scorre a vna part, se ne va sozzopra, and
sirinuersa. Boter. in Caes.

the Ballast or lading is well stowed in the ship, she makes good way, and
saileth fairly: but being unevenly bestowed, it hinders her course, and
sometimes sinketh her. Bonus habitus optima quaedam sanitas.

Optima corporis constitutio, in moderata similium partium temperie constat,
Gal. lib. de bon. hab. Id. ibid. Ibid.
exacta dissimilium mensura.

Natara temperata ad iustitiam, non ad pondus: in qua quatuor qualitates ad
aequilibrium miscentur.


As also, where is an equal temperature of the humors, there is perfect
health, and a good constitution of the body: but where these are distempered,
and the malign are predominant, there the former good habit is turned to some
desperate disease. Cum Magnates opprimunt subditos, idem est, ac si caput
corporis intumescat: vt a membris omnino, vel certe sine magna molestia, ferri
non posset. Plato de leg.


Ambitiosi priuatim degeneres, in publicum exitiosi, nihil spei, nisi per
discordias habent. Seneca.


Nemo eorum qui in Repub. versantur, quos vincat, sed a quibus vincatur, Ibidem.
aspicit.

Vbi in vrbe deteriora vincunt, tum peccata pessundant Ciuitatem. Sophocles.



So is it in a State, where the vicious and ambitious succeed in the place and
authority, but not in the virtues and worth of their noble predecessors.

Laurence Medici being dead, who tempered the ambitious humor of Lodowick
Zforza, qualified the iealousies of Ferdinand, pacified the indignations of
Alphonso Prince of Calabria, and kept the States of Italy counterpoised in
equal balance: and Pope Innocent the 8. being also now gone, who after a long
disposition to troubles, had yet at last, some years before his death, given
them over, and labored nothing more then peace: Peter Medici succeeds in his
fathers place, but not in his virtues: a man insolently imperious in his
cariages, and desperately precipitate in his deliberations. And Roderigo Borgia
a Spaniard enters the Papacy, under the name of Alexander the 6. a man though
singular in policy and maturitie of judgment, excellent in counsel,
admirable in persuasion, unmatchable in attempting, undergoing, and effecting
great matters; yet of a most lewd and abominable life, of no faith, no
religion, insatiably covetous, immoderately ambitious, barbarously cruel, and
furiously enflamed with a burning desire to raise his children to temporal
preferments, by war, blood, or what means soever. Upon these two (a rash
young man, and covetous old wretch) together with Zforza the third incendiarie
of his country, lies justly all the imputation of putting all Italy into such
miserable garboile.

APHORISM IIII.
AS C'est vne virtue excellent es Magistrates, de bien entendre comme ils ont
Amyot. in Plutarch. Phocion.
a se gouuerner, and que leur doiuent aprendre les hommes, qui ont fait
excellent preuue de leur suffisance, au manicment des affairs publiques, aux
perfections and fautes dequels hommes ils ont a bien prendre guard.
in matter of public negotiation, a Prince ought to give nothing in charge to
his Ambassador, but what may stand with his own honor, and good of his State:
I Consigli noui and inusitati, possono al primo aspetto parer forse piu
gloriosi, Porcac. in Guicc.
and piu magnanimi, ma riesconvani.

Chilascia la strada vecchia per la nuoua,

Spesse volte ingannato siritruoua. Pro. Ital.


Quae in suo statu, eademque manent, etsi deteriora sint, tamen vtiliora sunt
reip. Dion. lib. 11.
his, quae per innouationem vt meliora inducuntur.

Super omnibus negotijs, melius atque rectius olim prouisum, and quae
conuertuntur, in deterius mutantur. Tacit. Annal. l. 15.


In minimis quoque rebus, omnia antiquae consuetudinis momenta seruanda. Valor.
Max. l 2.


Il homines tutissime agunt, qui praesentibus moribus legibusque, etiamsi
deteriores sint, minimum variantes, remp. administrant. Thucyd. l. 6.



So in the manner of handling, he must prescribe him no unusual or unheard of
form, and for which he has no former precedent, seem the motion propounded
never so plausible.

It was requisite that Lodowick Zforza, according to the ancient custom,
should send his Ambassador to Rome, as well as other Princes, to congratulate
the new Popes assumption to that Sea, to kiss his feet, and offer his
obedience. But he would needs propound to those his confederates of Florence
and Naples, that all their Ambassadors should enter Rome together; should
together present themselves in the Consistory; and that one for all should
make the Oration. A form never formerly used, yet very plausible in
appearance: for by this means, great reputation (as he supposed) would grow to
them all: all Italy would take notice, that there was not only a league and
amity between them, but such a combination of hearts and affections, as if
they were all but one Prince and one State. To this Peter Medici opposes,
holding it a blemish to that glory and magnificence, wherewith himself meant
in person to enter Rome: the rather being hereunto persuaded by Gentile Bishop
of Arezzo, who (as ambitious to have the delivery of the Oration from the
Florentine State) was grieved to be forestalled of the means to show his
eloquence in so honorable a Legation. Hereupon Zforza grows jealous that
Medici was secretly combined with the Arragonese, and a close enemy to him.
Medici discouers some distrust in Zforza, and cools in his affiance of him.
Which in the end bred to such a festered ulcer of malice and rancor between
them, as the core could never be rooted out of their hearts, till their hearts
were out of their bodies, and bodies out of their States.

APHORISM V.
IT Deliberandum tenseo, res magna est: idque diu: Ne luas grauius ob rem
leuem. Terent. Eunuch.


Quicquid praeter opinionem in bello euenire potest, priusquam ingrediare
considera. Thucyd. l. 11.


Plura in summa fortuna auspicijs and consilijs, quam telis and manibus
geruntur. Tacit. Annal l. 13. Paruta. lib. 2. disc. 4.



was a prudent advice of the late French King, to his brother Henry the 3. who
would needs with those small forces they had, sally out of Tours upon the great
army of Charles Duke of Mayen: Sire (quoth he) n'hazardons pas un double Henry
contre un Carolus. i. Let us not venture adouble duckat to a single penie. For
such gamesters fall to play with overmuch confidence, and fall by play into
very much loss. Non si deuono tentar quelle cose, nelle quali il consiglio sia
incerto, e l'vtile che possa seguirne molto dubbioso: ne lasciarsi condurre a
tale stato, che la necessita di prender altropartito, tolga il benefizio dell'
elezione.

Princeps, non speciosa dictu, sed vsu necessaria, sequatur. Q. Curt. lib. 3.
Sueton de Aug. fol. 101.


Augustus dixit praelium aut bellum nunquam suscipiendum, nisi quum mayor
emolumenti spes, quam damni metus ostenderetur. Nam minima commoda non minimo
sectantes discrimine, similes esse aiebat aureo hamo piscantibus, cuius abrupti
damnum nulla captura pensari possit.


It is therefore an ill grounded deliberation in a Prince, to engage himself
in an action, the success whereof can be but slight and of small moment,
whereas the miscarriage may beget dangerous effects to him and his State.

Ferdinand King of Naples, encouraged Virginio Orsini to purchase certain
castles, and other seigneuries in the territory of Rome, of Franceschetto Cibo
the Popes base son; and lent him money to go through with the bargain:
persuading himself that the stronger Orsini was, the better it were for him,
being his dependant and kinsman; and the more prejudicial to the Church, of
whose strength and power he was jealous, because of her nearenesse to Naples,
and pretense of title she made to that State. Hereat the Popestormeth, because
those castles and lordships held in fee of the Church. Lodowicke Zforza and
Ascanius sharpen him on. They complain to the other Princes of Italy, of the
injustice of the fact and wrong offered to the Sea of Rome. They levy forces
for redress, and break the shell of those troubles, which were before but in
the hatching against Ferdinand and his kingdom.

APHORISM VI.
AS Cumque putant viuere, tunc ruunt maxim: Nulla vita sua cruce caret: Plaut.
Merc. Solon. apud Just. Plutar. Fab.
Nemo ante obitum, supremaque funera foelix.

(...). i. Vt nihil peccemus in rebus magnis, maius est quam penes hominem.

Permittite illi vt homo sit, neque enim Philosophia vel imperium tollit
affectus. An. Pi. de Marco.


Pauca aliqua vnusvideat, vnus audiat. Xen. Cyr. l. 8. sac. An. l. 3. Porcac.
in Guicc.


Princeps sua scientia non potest cuncta complecti.

Non sempregli huomini sauij giudicano perfettamente, bisogna che spesso si
dimostrino segni della debolezza dell' intellet to humano.


there is no condition of life, be it never so happy, but it has his cross;
to show us that perfect felicity is to be expected elsewhere. So is there no
Prince living, be he never so wise, but he sometimes erreth; for it is of
necessity that he prove himself to be but man.

Ferdinand one of the wisest Princes of his time, had procured the Popes
indignation, by furthering underhand the purchase which Orsini had made. He had
increased Zforza his fears, by having secret intelligence with Peter Medici.
He much doubted lest these two Princes should join in league with the State of
Venice against him. All this in his wisdom he saw, and might easily have
prevented, had he but yielded his sons base daughter with a competent dowry
to one of the Popes sons: a match greatly by him desired. Wherein he suffered
his wisdom to be ouerswayed with the swinge of Alphonso his pride and disdain,
who scorned to condescend to a match of such disparitie in blood and honor,
and of such disparagement to the house of Arragon.

APHORISM VII.
WEll Exempla, fidelissimum praecipiendi genus. Plin. l. 8. Liuij l. 25. Manil.
l. 1.


Exempla vetera, pro documentis habenda.

Per varios casus, Artem experientia fecit,

Exemplo monstrante viam. --

Vsus omnium Magistrorum praecepta superat. Cic. de Orat. l. 1.


Longum iter per praecepta, breue and efficax per exempla. Sen. Epist. 6.


Pauci prudentia, honesta a deterioribus, vtilia a noxijs discernunt. Plures
aliorum euentis docentur. Tacit. An. l. 3.


Firmare animum expedit, constantibus exemplis. Tacit. An. l. 16.



governed States admit of no alliance but upon well grounded reasons. No
grounds of reason so firm to build such contracts upon, as those that are
confirmed by former examples. No examples so forcible as those of our own, and
of these, the later the surer. Un grand Politic, doit auoir non moins de
memoire pour retenir and marquer Amiot. in Plut. Cic.
vne infinite des chooses passees, que de bon judgment, pour les appliquer a
leur droit usage.

Io guardo and osseruo, tutti i detti and fatti d' Augusto, non altrimente che
vna Tacit. de Tiber. hist. l. 4.
leg.


Yet are we not so peremptorily bound to these, but that we may loosen our
selves, and take a new course, when the new deliberation brings with it an
apparent and demonstratiue assurance of the public good and safety.

A resolution is taken by Alexander the 6. and Lodowicke Zforza, to break with
Ferdinand of Naples, and Peter Medici, and to enter a new league with the
Venetians, against them both. The ouuerture and offer hereof is made to this
State. She likes well of their disunion, but makes scruple to enter the
league. Her reason: she suspects double dealing in the Pope, who grew daily
less trusted of all men: but especially the remembrance of those leagues which
she had formerly made with Sixtus and Innocentius, withhold her. For from the
one she had received much trouble and little good. And Sixtus (when her wars
were at the hotest with the Duke of Ferrara, to which himself had incited her)
not only combined with other Princes of Italy against her, but prosecuted her
also with spiritual arms. Yet upon mature deliberation, that by this offer
entertained and accepted, that bond should be broken, which was knit at first
by her enemies, to impeach her greatness: she treates upon the conditions, and
enters the league.

APHORISM VIII.
Jealousy Res est solliciti plena timoris amor.

Ingenia Regum, prona ad formidinem. Ovid. epist. Salust. lug.


Dubia pro certis, solent timere Reges.

Principes aemuli, and suapte natura, potentiae anxij.

Qui Sceptra duro saeuius imperio regit, Tacit. An. 15.


Timet timentes: Metus in authorem redit. Sen. Oed.



in State, like that in love, has a double passion, of fear and hate.
Excessit medicina modum, nimiumque sequutae

Qua morbi duxere manus. -- Lucan. l. 2.


Nihil magis periculosum in morbis, quam immatura and violenta remedia. Sen. de
ira.


Intempestiua remedia, delicta accendunt. Tacit. An. 12.


Scio Medicos plus interdum quiet, quam mouendo atque agendo proficere. Liuij
lib. 12.


Spesso accade ne' corpi pieni d'humori corrotti, ch'vn rimedio vsato per
proueder al disordine d'vna part, ne genera de piu perniziosi, and di maggior
pericolo. Guicc. l. 8.


Se il rimedio non e bastante, non guarisce l'infermita: se e molto gagliardo,
Ammir. in Tacit. l. 3. Por. in Guic. l. 8.
non che il male vccide, anche lapersona in cui e il male.

E'troppo nociuo, il prendere vna volta tanto cibo, che lo stomacho non sia
potente a comportarlo.


This causes the patient to think all remedies too weak for the danger; and
to apply more violent Physic then either the quality of the disease, or
complexion of the diseased can sustain. Se tu non hai forza da preuenire, and
d' offendere l' auuersario, resta il concitargli adosso, qualche potente
nemico: ma che ben tu ti guardi, che non si peggiori Rag. Stat. l. 6.
lo Stato: come auuenne a Lodouico il Moro, che per assicurarsi da gl'
Aragonesi, si fece preda de' Francesi.

Par inconsidere and temerair conseil, on entreprend beaucoup de mauuais acts:
don't s'ensuiuent des desordres, ausquels on ne peut apres remedier. Amyot. in
Plut. Anton.



Then which nothing is more pernicious either in bodies or States.

Lodowicke Zforza had broke all bonds of friendship with his ancient allies of
Naples and Florence. He had knit a new knot with the Church and Venice: these
new friends he knew had diverse ends to his; and therefore durst not trust them,
doubting lest when their own turns were served, the foundation of this late
alliance would be sore shaken, if not utterly fall. Hereupon he resolves and
effects the calling in of the French nation: pulling in more with one finger,
then he could after thrust out with both his shoulders; to the general
disturbance of the peace of Italy, and to his own proper ruin, and utter
destruction.

APHORISM IX.
THe Ferunt Pantherarum odore mire sollicitari quadrupedes cunctas: sed capitis
toruitate terreri. Quamobrem occultato eo, reliqua dulcedine inuitatas,
corripiunt. Plin. not. hist. lib. 8. cap. 17.


Non sabe la volpeia, con quien trobeia. Pro. Hisp.



Panther carries with him a sweet sent, but an ugly face; that enticeth beasts
after him, this affrighteth them: therefore he hides his head, till he have the
prey within danger. Id in Seiano, Vindice, Hippatio, Theophobo: in Mario
quoque, Pompeio, Caesare, Sylla, Cinna, and alijs plurimis liquet ex historia.

Vetus, acpride^ insita mortalibus, potentiae cupido, omnibus affectibus
flagrantior. Tacit. hist. 2.
Ambiticsi, honores quos quieta Rep desperant, perturbata consequi se posse
arbitrantur. Cic. Cat. 2.


Ne quis nimium sublata secundis colla gerat:

Quid Crassos, quid Pompeios euertit, and illum Claud. 2.

Ruff.




Adsua qui domitos deduxit flagra Quirites?

Summus nempe locus, nulla non art petitus,

Magnaque Numinibus vota exaudita malignis.

Humanus animus insatiabilis est eo, quod fortuna spondet, and ad altiora, and
non Liuij l. 14.
concessa tendit.

Quos non Oriens, non Occidens satiauerit.

Vastus animus immoderata, incredibilia, nimis alta semper cupiebat. Tacit.
Agric. Sal. de Catil. Senec. ep. Sen. Oed. Virg. Pro. Gal. Amyot. in Plut. Cat.


Habet hoc vitium omnis ambitio, non respicit.


So is the savor of sovereignty very sweet, but the ugly face of those means
by which it is gotten, men see not, and so run into the toil, and perish in
the pursuit. Quicquid excessit modum, pendet instabili loco.

Incidit in Scyllam, qui vult vitare Charybdim.

Tomber de Fieure, en chaudmal.

Ambition, non conseille bien son Esclaue.


For being once embarked in so bad a cause, the farther they wade, the deeper
they are drowned in the whirlpoole of their own errors: the more they weaue
in the loome of such deceitful plots, the faster they are ensnared in the trap
devised for others.

Zforza had abused the weakness of his nephew John Galeazzo, (true Duke of
Millan) and the power of his own Protectorship: to the dishonor of his master,
and vexation of his country. What he had gotten by proximitie of blood, he
intended to hold by dexterity of wit and policy. The guilt of this fact, made
him suspect all: but none more then the King of Naples, into whose house his
nephew was matched. To this effect he insinuates with Peter Medici, puts him in
mind how capital enemies they of Aragon had been to the Florentine State: who
notwithstanding was so far from inclining to his part, as he stuck so much
the faster to the other. He then labors the Pope to war upon him, as
successor to those Princes, who ever since Frederick Barbarossa his time, had
stood ill affected to the Sea of Rome. But the Pope entertained his hopes no
longer, then till he had made use of his friendship, and after leaves Lodowick
in the lash. This string being broken, he combines with Venice, who had also
her proper end; and besides, by her power and neighborhood was ablest and
readiest to offend him, as afterward appeared. And lastly, for a conclusion of
his utmost craft and policy, which indeed proved the original of all his
future trouble and final calamity, he unadvisedly calls in the French King,
under pretext of the just title he had to the kingdom of Naples, from Charles
Earl of Prouence: who after with his sword pleaded also his right to the
Dukedom of Millan, and wanneit, as lawfully descended from the Dukes of
Orleans.

APHORISM X.
THe Coniuga fere vagantur: nec nisi cum compare vita est: itaque alterutra
Plin. not. hist l. 8. cap. 23.
interempta, incredibilis alteri vltionis cura. Persequitur interfectorem,
vnamque eum, in quantolibet populi agmine, notitia quadam infestat: perrumpit
omnes difficultates, etc.


Aspicke pursues him that has hurt or killed his mate, and knows him among a
multitude: him he still hunteth, and lays for his life, and breaks through
all difficulties and dangers to come at him. Colit hic Reges, calcet vt omnes,

Perdatque aliquos, nullumque leuet: Senec. Herc. Oct.


Tantam vt noceat, cupit esse potens.


So does the malicious and reuengefull. For all unbridled passions in man, and
upon which reason bears not a hard hand, are impetuous; but that of ambition
is impetuously furious, and (when joined with reuengefull disdain) furiously
outrageous. Pertinax honoris cupiditas multas saepius edidit strages. Am.
Marcel. l. 17.


Quis tot refer facinorum formas potest

Regnum petentis, per gradum scelerum omnium? Sen. Oct.


Parcite o Dites, inhibete dextras,

Laudis est, purum tenuisse ferrum. Senec. Oed.


All sceleratezze, suole condur glihuomini, la sete pestifera del dominare,
and Por. in Guic.
lo sdegno.

Il n'y a sort de meschancete, tant detestable soit elle, que l'ambition ne
commette, Amyot. in Plut. Agis.
pour satisfaire a ses desseins.


Injustice is the minister of disdain, and revenge is the executioner of
injustice.

Pope Alexander the 6. to exalt his sons the Duke of Candy and Caesar Borgia
to temporal States: and to be revenged upon Ferdinand King of Naples, and
Alphonso his son, for their scornful rejecting his offer of a match between
a son of his and their daughter, ioynes now with Zforza in the embassage to
France, for the inciting and aiding that King to war upon Naples: to the
shedding of much Christian blood, and spoil of the goodliest country in
Christendom. An act in it self bloody and odious, but much more in him, who
by his profession and place, was the pretended Head of the Church, and Father
of peace.

APHORISM XI.
THree things are necessary to every work: the workman, the tools, and the
matter. So every matter that falls into deliberation, and is to be concluded in
Council, must have Justice, for the mouer and efficient: Facility, for the
means and instrumental: and Profit, for the object and final causes.
Therefore in determinable cases of this nature, the Counselor must insist upon
these three points, and prove them. Omnes qui magnarum rerum consilia
suscipiunt, aestimare debent, an quod inchoatur, Tacit. hist. 2.
Reipub. vtile, ipsis gloriosum, aut promptum effectu, aut certe non arduum
sit: simul ipse qui suadet consideraendus est, adijciatne consilio periculum
suum.

In omnibus quae in deliberationem veniunt, adesse haec duo oportet: posse
illud Leo Imp. de appar. bell.
fieri, at que vtile esse.

La giustitia della causa, la facilita delvincere, il frutto grandissimo della
vittoria: sono tutti i fondamenti, che consider arsi debbono, nel deliberar l'
impresa. Por. Guice.


Idem testatur Cicero Offic. lib. 2. and ad Heren. lib. 3. Et Arist. Rhetor.
lib. 2. c. 4. and ad Alexand. cap. 4.

Augustus, nulli Genti, sine justice and necessarijs causis, bellum intulit.
Sucton. cap. 11.





Charles of Barbiano, Earl of Belgioioso, Ambassador from Alexander the 6.
and Zforza, to Charles the 8. to move him to war upon Ferdinand King of
Naples; proves the justice of the action: for that this kingdom iuridically
belonged to him by lineall descent from Charles Earl of Prouence and Rene Duke
of Aniou, both of the blood of France: in which houses it had succesfully and
successively continued almost two hundred years. The facility of the
enterprise, because he was assured of the Churches aid, and of that of Millan:
Genoa was at his devotion: Venice would not expose her self to a certain
expense and no gain, nor would she lightly break her ancient amity with
France: Florence durst not: the Barons of Naples were generally discontented
with the present government, and many of them were still of the Aniouine
faction. The profit, because he should enlarge his Empire, enable himself by
the strength and site of this kingdom (not being above seventy miles from
Greece) to war upon the Turk, the common enemy of Christendom, and by all
likelihood beat him out of his Imperial seat of Constantinople, and drive
him over the Hellespont, quite out of Europe.

APHORISM XII.
SO Ex omni vita, simulatio, dissimulatioque tollenda. Cic. Off. l. 2. De
priuata fateor, de publica valde nego. Nunquam enim regent, qui non tegent.
Lip. pol. l4


Sanctitas, pietas, fides, priuata bona sunt. Sen. Thyest. Sigis. Imp. Sen.
Agam.


Nescit imperare, qui nescit dissmulare.

Lex alia in solio est, alia priuato in thoro.

Vt ad effectum consiliorum suorum veniant, multa simulent oportet, and
dissimulent, cum dolor. Cic. ep. l. 10.


Quod plerunque turpe haberi solet, turpe non erit: semper officio fungitur,
vtilitati Cic. off. l. 3.
hominum consulens, and societati.

Eruditus vtilia honestis miscere. Tacit. Agric.


Quantunque simular, sia le piu volte

Ripreso, and dia di mala mente indizij: Ariost. cant. 4.


Si troua pur in molte cose e molte,

Hauer fatto euidenti benefizij.


goodly a thing is virtue in it self, as even her shadow, if it be in Princes,
does much good: to particular men, by imitation; and to the public, by
participation. Wherefore, though simulation of what is good, and dissimulation
of what is evil, be vices in a private man, yet in a public person they are
necessary evils. In whom, to be ouuert in expressing his nature, or free in
venting his purpose, is a thing of dangerous consequence. Malum sub lingua, non
in lingua habens.

Professa perdunt odia vindictae locum. Greg. Sen. Med. Tacit. hist. 3.


Simplicitas ac liberalitas, ni adsit modus, in exitium vertuntur.


For it harms himself, and arms his enemy with prevention.

Ferdinand was a Prince, in whom the semblance of virtue, friendship, and other
good things were very familiar, as also the dissemblance of hate or displeasure
which he bare toward any of his neighbor Princes. This made him more wary of
giving offense, or seeming offended, till he had fit time of taking revenge.
But his son Alphonso, a man in the strength of his age, and therefore of a
hotter blood and more fiery spirit, seeing his kinsman Galeazzo so much abused
by the shameful usurpation of his uncle Zforza, he could not temper his
passions, but even now when great plots were in laying against his father and
country, he breaks out with more freedom then prudence, into contumelious
speeches and bitter menaces against Lodowick; which forced him the sooner, and
with more violence to run into a war that brought confusion to them both, and
destruction to their States.

APHORISM XIII.
IN Mixime salua est ciuitas, vbi consilia senum, and iuuenum arma obtinent.
Plut. an sen. ger. resp. 789 Marc. Ant. philosop.


Aequius est vt ego, tot taliumque amicorum consilia sequar, quam tot talesque
amici, meam vnius voluntatem.

Eum qui de sua vnius sententia omnia gerit, superbum iudico magis, quam
sapientem. Liuij l. 44.


Natura mortalium, hoc nomine praua and sinistra dici potest, quod in suo
quisque Curt. l. 9.
negotio, hebetior est quam alieno.


consultations a Prince must yield least to his own passions. Grave
Counselors, whose wisdom and experience have formerly approved their
service, must have greatest credit in cases of greatest weight. (...). i.
Consule, non quae suauissima, sed Laert. in Solon.
quae optima.

Improbi illi, qui very copiam non faciunt: sed suspensa, and quo ducantur
inclinatura, Tacit. An. 13.
respondent.

Qui cum fortuna potius Principis loquuntur, quam cum ipso. Tacit. An. l. 1.
Lip. Anot. l. 3.


Ad commodum suum, aut arbitrium Principis, videbis ab ijs plerunque re ferri.

Turbida sunt consilia eorum, quibus obstat metus, cupidit as, aut naturalis,
eorum quae cogitauerint amor. Curt. l. 7.



Such as advise, either to soothe the Princes humor, or for their own
particular advantage, may well be heard, but ought not to be followed. Ego ita
comperi, regna, civitates, nationes, vsque eo prosperum imperium Salust.
habuisse, dum apud eos vera consilia valuerunt: vbicunque gratia, timor,
voluptas, ea corrupere, post paulo imminutae opes, deinde ademptum imperium,
postremo seruitus imposita est.


Where it is otherwise, the effects are dangerous.

Charles the 8. a Prince of a haughty spirit, raised to attempts of highest
nature, in the prime of his youth, at two and twenty years of age,
transported with an ambitious desire of glory, and grounded more upon force of
will, then maturitie of judgment; is advised by Stephen de Verse, Seneshall of
Belcari, and the Kings minion: by William Brissonnet, (after Bishop of S Malo,
and Superintendent of the Finances): by Antonello da San Seuerino Prince of
Salerno: and Barnardino of the same house (both exiles from the kingdom of
Naples) to entertain the solicitation of Lodowick Zforza, for the wars with
Ferdinand. De Verse hoped for great estates in Naples: Brissonnet expected great
preferment from the Church: and the banished exiles promised themselves
restoration of their honors, and restitution of their livings. Thus all of
them for their particular advantage and proper end, fed the Kings humor,
violently carried that way. But the more ancient, wise, and true hearted
Nobility, and among these the Admiral Grauilla dissuaded the action;
alleging it to be an enterprise of great difficulty and danger: because he
must lead his army into a far country, and against a powerful nation.
That Ferdinand was a Prince of great wisdom, and Alphonso his son a
commander of great courage, and eminent reputation; and that by confiscation of
so many Barons lands, in thirty years space, it was to be presumed he was
grown very rich. On the other side, that the King was too weak in those his
green years, to sustain in person the weight of so great a burden. And that
those in chiefegrace about him, were insufficient, either in counsel or
experience, to manage so great an action. That he was unfurnished of money.
That the Italians, and chiefly Zforza, were cautelous and deceitful, calling
him in but to serve their own turns. That none of them could endure a King of
France, to be peaceably possessed of Naples. That it were necessary, before he
engaged himself in this expedition, to compound all differences with his
neighbor Princes. That there wanted no occasions of jealousy and discord
between him and the King of Spain. That he had but cold correspondencie with
Maximilian king of the Romans, and Philip Archduke of Austria, by reason of
many emulations, competitions and differences depending undecided and
unsatisfied between them. Besides the just fear he ought to have of the
English nation, if his back were once turned, and his country laid open unto
them. All these weighty considerations notwithstanding, and whatsoever was or
might be said to the contrary, he wilfully reiects all, follows the advice of
his favorites Brissonnet and DeVers, persists in his first resolution,
condescends to the motion of war, and dispatcheth with all speed the
Ambassador Belgioioso, with the articles of agreement, and other necessary
instructions, for the war.

APHORISM XIIII.
PRinces Conuocauit ad se omnes literatos, and maxim eos qui historias norunt:
requirens, Lamp. de Seuero.
quid in talibus causis (quales in disceptatione versabantur) veteres
Imperatores, vel Romani, vel exterarum nationum fecissent.

Alios Magistros exue: satis amplis Doctoribus instructus, maioribus tuis. Tac.
Ann. l. 15. Liuij l. 34.


Adeo nihil motum ex antiquo probabile est: veteribus, nisi quae vsus arguit
euidenter, stari malunt.

Moribus antiquis res stat Romana, virisque

(...): i. Discite ab ijs qui Ennius. Xenoph. Cirus filijs moriturus. Pindarus.
Tacit. An. 14
ante nos: quae doctrinae ratio optima est.

(...). i. Experientia index.


in actions of greatest consequent, should be instructed by the rule of State,
or directed by the prudent course of their Predecessors: Multis noua and
ancipitia praecolere, auida and plerunque fallax ambitio est.


Else they give warrant to every mean understanding, to judge of the action,
and fore-iudge of the event.

Francis Zforza, father of Lodowick, a Prince of singular valor and prudence,
though a professed enemy to the house of Arragon, and a strict ally to them of
Aniou: yet when John Duke of Aniou made his claim to the kingdom of Naples,
and with all the forces that himself and friends could make, assailed it: he
was so far from joining with the French, as he gave aid and assistance to
Ferdinand: so as from him alone the King acknowledged to have obtained the
victory, and saved his Crown. This did old Zforza, not out of any love he
bare the Arragonese, but, that the French might have no footing so near him in
Italy. Upon which reason Philip-Maria Visconti (before him) fell from them of
Aniou, and set free Alphonso, his prisoner and capital enemy, whom he had
that time in Millan castle. On the other side, Jews the 11. (father to this
Charles the 6.) utterly refused the offer of Genoa, and means to war upon
Naples: holding the hazard and uncertainty of the purchase, unworthy the great
expense, and certainty of the loss. Yet these two sons (Lodowick of Millan
and Charles of France) quite contrary to their fathers principles, the one out
of a despiteous desire of revenge, the other out of an impetuous ambition of
dominion, embraced the motion, and engaged themselves in the action.

APHORISM XV.
HIde Cautus nauigandi magister, clauuos pro fluctuum motu, erigit vel
inclinat. Am. Marcel. l. 12. Plutarch. in vita oratoru^. Sabellic. l. 4. d. 2.
Sid. App. 8.
Veluti a prora dirigere vrbem: Animal (vt ait Plato) (...). i.
versatilissimum.

Gubernare nauem, and rempub. simile.

Medicus in desperatione, Gubernator in tempestate, cognoscitur. Horum omnium
famam, praecedentia pericula, extollunt.

Fair bonne mine, au mauuais ieu. Pro. Gal. Liuij l. 22.



not from thy Lawyer or Physician, the state of thy cause, or body: nor
discover to thy subject or enemy, thy wants or thy fears: for it gives
encouragement to the one, and quite dismayeth the other. Imitate rather the
well-aduised seaman, when thou steerest at the stern of a great State, beset
and set upon by many and great forces: who seeing the clouds gather, the winds
rise, and the waves swell, besides diverse Pirates having him in chase; as if
both heaven and earth had conspired his confusion: he raises the dejected
thoughts of his soldiers and mariners, with many words of assurance, in the
thightnesse of his ship, the goodness of her tackle, the swiftness of her
sailing, and many other advantages he has upon the enemy (though in his own
heart he truly apprehend the danger as it is). Principes natura magni, libenter
audiunt, and audacter praedicant magnifica. Spem magis ipsam, quam spei causam
intuentes.

Solet abrupta saepe discrimina, salutis vltima desperatio propulsare. Sid. Ap.
l. 10. Virg. l. 10.


Tu ne cede malis, sed contra audentior ito.

Quo timoris minus est, eo minus ferme periculi est. Liuij l. 22.


Ronus animus, in re mala, dimidium est mali. Plaut. Pseud.


Conquesti detti le smarrite menti,

Consola, e consereno e lieto aspetto: Tasso cant. 5.


Mapreme mill cure egre, e dolenti

Altamente riposte in mezzo al petto.

Ad efficiundos milites strenuos, nihil mihi videtur efficacius esse, quam
bonas Xenoph. Cyripaed.
hominibus spes inijcere posse.


Whereby he makes his resistance the stronger, or procures his peace, upon
better terms.

Ferdinand of Naples saw the States of the Church, Venice and Millan,
confederate against him: and the force of all France, like a mighty storm
coming upon him. He gives out to the world, how little he feared all their
machinations and threats. If they meant to assail him by sea, they should find
him provided of a royal Armada, able to encounter them: his Ports well
fortified, and all in his own hands. No Baron in his kingdom to give them
footing, (as the Prince of Rossana had formerly done to the Duke of Aniou.) If
by land, his fear was then less: for they were to lead their troops a march
of a thousand miles, through diverse States, not without great jealousy of
those Princes who would not fail to impeach their passage: And at their coming
they should find his kingdom full of men at arms, and other horses of
service: store of munition, artillery, and all other warlicke habillements:
full coffers in his Exchequer, to maintain those forces, and to raise new upon
occasion: many worthy Commanders; and his son Alphonso in chief, a Prince
reputed through Europe, of eminent fame, and experience in martial affairs.
Besides, he had the king of Spain, his kinsman by blood, and brother by
marriage, of whose aid he was sure in all his extremities. These were his
Brauadoes, given out in public. But as he was a Prince of singular wisdom
and great practice in the world, he had other considerations tormented him in
his inmost thoughts; having there a deep impression of all the troubles he had
formerly endured by the French nation: he deeply weighed how he was to wage
war with a courageous and warlike people, far too strong for him in horse,
foot, shipping, munition and money; and daring to expose themselves to all
dangers for the honor and greatness of their king. Himself on the other
side, had assurance of none: his subjects some of them bearing an inueterate
hate to him and his house: others too much inclined to those men he had
banished: and all the rest, a people less true to their Prince, and more
desirous of change then any other nation under heaven. As for his allie of
Spain, he had often found by experience, that his offers are large, and report
of his preparations great, but the effects, either none or small; and those
very late, and out of time. And lastly, for his own money, he had not such
store as to serve his turn for the present; and when that was spent which he
had in ready cash, the wars would bereave him of all means to levy more.
Thus he rightly judged of things, though he gave out otherwise. Whereby he
encouraged his people, and raised forces both by sea and land, to encounter the
enemy: who else, for fear of the French reputation and great preparation,
would have been hardly drawn to the service.

APHORISM XVI.
SVch Ita est vita hominis, quasi cum ludas tesseris. Si illud quod est maxim
opus iactu, non cadit: illud quod cecidit forte, art vt corrigas. Terent.
Plat. de rep. lib. 10.


(...). i. Oportet in talorum iactu, ad id quod ceciderit, res suas aptare,
quocunque ratio id optimum esse duxerit.


are the changes and chances of man's life, as are the casts at Dice: good and
bad. A good chance may be marred with oversight, and an ill one helped by good
play. Omnia prius consilio, quam armis experiri, sapientem decet. Terent. Eun.
Valor. Falcc.


-- Non solis viribus aequum

Credere: saepe acri potior prudentia dextra.

Cautis, quam acrioribus consilijs, potentia tutius habetur.

Tutius consilijs and astu, res externas moliri: arma procul habere. Tac. An.
l. 11. Id. ibid.


Plura consilio, quam vi perficiuntur. Tac. An. l. 2.


Militibus cupido pugnandi conuenit: Duces, prouidendo, consultando,
cunctatione, saepius, quam temeritate prosunt. Tacit. hist. 3.


Ante equidem summa de re statuisse Latini,

Et vellem, and fuerat melius, non tempore tali, Virgil. Aen. l. 11.


Cogere Concilium, cum muros obsidet hostis.


So must a prudent and well-aduised Prince, take heed that he govern his good
fortune well: and if the necessities of the times, threaten war and ruin
upon him, let him seek to avoid them by all the means he possibly may.

Ferdinands lot was cast: and a furious torrent of troubles falling upon him.
To stop the violent current hereof, he must either pacify the French king by
some fair offers, or pick some principal Stone out of that foundation of the
late league, which was first plotted and entered by those confederate States,
only for his proper damage and ruin. To this effect he sends Camillo Pandone
to the French Court: he fees the chief favorites about the king, with gifts,
pensions, and other fair promises, to further his suite. And rather then not
prevail, he offers to hold his kingdom of Charles the 8. and his successors,
with recognition of homage, and yearly tribute. He interposeth in the
difference between the Pope and the Orsini: and brings it by arbitration to a
final and peaceable end. He offers the Lady Sances (his sons daughter) to
match with Don Giuffre the Popes son; and gives them the assurance and
inuestiture of the Principality of Squillaci, with an annual revenue of ten
thousand Ducats, and a command of one hundred men at arms in pay. He treates
likewise with Lodowick Zforza (first broacher and mouer of all the mischief)
and offers to refer himself to his will and pleasure, in all matters
concerning his nephew John Galeazzo and the State of Millan. Thus he failed
not, in this desperate estate of his affairs, to use all possible means of
reconciliation with the Pope and Zforza, and of pacification and accord with
the French king. But all would not serve.

APHORISM XVII.
THe (...). i. Medio magis opponitur defectus. Arist. eth. l. 2. c. 8. Id.
ibid. Martial.


Quae enim plus a medio distant, esse magis contraria videntur.


defect of a virtue, is commonly much worse then the excess: because this,
though it ouerpasse the golden line of Mediocritie, yet it has much in it,
that still relisheth of the virtue. Whereas that other extreme of the defect,
never comes near it. Res est imperiosa timor.

All deliberationi precipitose, si conduce non meno ageuolmente il timido, per
la desperatione: che il temerario, per inconsideratione. Por. in Guic.


Timidi parcere nesciunt, and saeuius agunt.

Necessitas, remedium and arma vltima desperatorum. Diog. Laert. Liuij l. 4.
Sen. Her. fur. Stat. 3. Theb. Virg. l. 4. Tacit. hist. 2.


Prona est timori, semper in peius fides.

Pessimus in dubijs augur, timor.

Degeneres animos, timor arguit.


Hence is it, that the passion of Fear is of such force, as by it, the
timorous are carried to more precipitate resolutions, through despair, then
the temerarious, through inconsideration. Fortes ac strenui contra fortunam,
insistunt spei: timidi and ignaui ad deliberationem formidine properant.

Nec prouoces bella, nec timeas. Plut. Paneg. Flor. de Sex. Pomp. Plut. de
fort. Alex. fol. 342


Quod magnae indolis signum, (sperare semper.)

Viaticum Alexandri in Asiam contendentis, Spes. Diuisa enim refamiliari and
reditu regio inter amicos, tibi vero (inquit Perdiccas) quid facies reliquum?
respondit, Spes.

Si quid irrita spe tentauerint, noua rursus spe amissa reparantes. Thucid. l.
1.



So violently are they tossed in the sea of dangers, that have lost their
anchor of Hope.

The fair offers which Ferdinand king of Naples had made to Zforza, were in
fair way of prevailing with him, had not the fiery and furious passion of
Alphonso the kings son, marred all. For he, because he knew well the timorous
and suspicious nature of Lodowick, thought to dash all his attempts, and daunt
him from proceeding farther, with high words of threats and menaces. Wherein
the young Prince erred much. For by this means, he took from Zforza all hope
of unfeigned reconciliation, which made him obstinately persist in his first
resolution, and desperately proceed to call in the French, and further the
action: though he now began to fear the danger, as well as other Princes of
Italy. Not caring, so he might certainly undo his enemy, though he put his
own fortunes and country into manifest hazard.

APHORISM XVIII.
ALL Callent enim in hoc cuncta animalia, sciuntque non sua modo, verum and
hostium aduersa. Norunt sua tela: norunt occasiones: partesque dissidentium
imbelles. Plin. not. hist. lib. 8. cap. 25.


Elephantis frigidissimus est sanguis, ob id aestu torrente a Draconibus
expetuntur: Idem cap. 12.
quamobrem in amnes mersos insidiantur: attractisque illigata manu, in aurem
morsum defigunt, quoniam is tantum locus defendi non potest. Ita eos a
Draconibus ebibi, siccatosque concidere, and ipsos inebriatos opprimi, common
rique.


creatures are naturally skillful and cunning to know not only their own
good, but what may hurt and annoy their enemy. And therefore the Dragon biteth
the Elephants ear, and thence sucketh his blood: because he knows that to be
the only place, which he cannot reach with his Tronke, to defend. Quaelibet
extinctos iniuria suscitat ignes. Ovid. art. l. ^. Terent. Eun.


Quod cauere possis stultum admittere est: Malo ego nos prospicere, quam hunc
vlcisci accepta iniuria.

Procliuius est iniuriae, quam beneficio vicem exoluere: Quia gratia oneri,
vltio Tacit. hist. 3.
in quaestu habetur.

Si non insaniat satis sua sponte, instiga. Terent. Pro. Gal. Amyot. in Plut.
Agis.


Ietter del' hurl au feu.

Le Despit est un execrable Conseiller.

Statuit eum obiectare periculis, and eo modo fortunam tentare: Sperans, vel
ostentando virtutem, vel hostium saeuitia eum occasurum, praefecit Numidis,
Salust. fol. 70 de Mic. and Iu.
etc.

Sic Alcibiades consilium dedit Tisapherni, animo quam maxim obnoxium Thucyd.
l. 8.
criminibus eum faciendi.

Sic Irene filio Constantino inuiso suasit, vt vxorem suam repudiaret, quo
omnium Lamp. fol. 44
odia in se concitauit.


So the party injured (if he find no other way) reuengeth himself upon the
iniurer, by infusing ill counsel into his ears. A Prince therefore, must
either not wrong his neighbor, or not take his advice whom he has wronged.

Hercules d'Este, Duke of Ferrara, and father in law to Zforza, understood very
well, that it was he only which had ouer-ruled the other States, newly entered
into league with Venice, to condescend to this award: That the Venetians should
quietly enjoy Polisene: which they had taken from the Duchy of Ferrara, some
ten years before. Yet Lodowick made fair semblance to have stood his great
friend in the matter: and the Duke took no notice, of that which he knew well
enough. Zforza now desires to be advised by him, as by a kinsman and good
allie, in this great affair he had against Ferdinand. Hercules gives him the
most pestilent counsel he can, and especially above all the rest, he advises
him to call in the French.

APHORISM XIX.
NAture, Vide Plinij naturalem historiam per totum libri octaui tractum. Plin.
not. hist. lib. 8.



out of the rich treasure of her storehouse, has furnished many armies of her
creatures with armours of defense: but to all in general she has given a care
of their preservation, and some small means to avoid (if not resist) a
danger. To man, liable to more dangers, she has been more plentiful of her
means to escape them. Non magis hostibus vllo modo nocueris, quam si amicitiam
illorum simules. Xenoph.


Decipere, pro moribus temporum, summa est prudentia. Plin. ep. l. 8. Valor. l.
2.


Quod temporis angustiae negant, sagacitate consilij assequuntur.

Illud amicitiae quondam venerabile nomen

Prostat, and in quaestu pro meretrice sedet. Ou. 2. Pont. 3


Ei insidiantes, quem ob imbecillitatem vident magis expositum iniuriae. Plut.
de frat. am. fol. 490. Virg. Plut. Lysan. Pacuu. Ovid. art. 3. Ovid.



And therefore when he fears a mischief, from those whom he has justly
incensed against him, he faines all artifice of amends, and semblance of
friendship, to avoid that just revenge, which they might worthily inflict, and
he necessarily expect. Arma parent, and quae sit rebus causa nouandis,
dissimulent.

Vbi Leonina pellis non pertingit, oportet vulpinam assuere.

Cum contendi nequitum est, clam tendenda est plaga.

Iudice me, fraus est concessa, repellere fraudem.

Tuta frequensque via est per amici fallere nomen,

Tuta frequensque licet sit via, crimen habet.


A course, though not of sincerity, yet of safety: though not to be taught
for a rule, yet to be excused for necessity.

Lodowick Zforza seeing the Princes of Italy incensed against him, and jealous
of the French his coming down to Naples, which they laid to his charge, and
that even they of the confederacion feared it as much as the rest; undertakes
to Ferdinand, the Pope, and Peter Medici, that he will cool the heat of
Charles the 8. and divert his forces from Italy. He protests, that himself
also resenteth that intended war, both for the general good of them all, as
also for his own proper interest, being no less prejudicial and fearful to
him, then to any other Prince of that country. He alleges, that what he had
hitherto done, was of necessity: forced thereunto by the ancient confederation
between his house, and that of France: and holding all he possessed in Genoa,
in fee of that Crown. This did Zforza, to entertain them with vain hopes,
and amuse them with delays, least they should all set upon him, before the
French forces were on foot, and ready for his succors.

APHORISM XX.
THe Lupo-Ceruario quamuis in fame mandenti, si respexerit, obliuionem cibi
subrepere aiunt: digressumque quaerere aliud. Plin. not. hist. lib. 8. cap. 22.
Idem c. 37. l. 11. Terent. Eun. Aesop. fab. 4


Insatiabilia animalium: quibus a ventre protinus recto intestino transeant
cibi, vt Lupis-Ceruarijs.


Hart-wolfe, be he never so hungry and ready to eat, yet if he see another
prey, he forsakes his meat and follows after it. Such a wolf in the heart is
ambitious covetousness: it makes no use of what it has gotten, but greedily
hunteth after more: and like Aesops dog, loses the morsel in his mouth, by
snapping at the shadow in the water. Spem pretio non emam.

Miser, deerat cupiditati tuae modus: satis superque erat ni desipuisses: iam
per tuam stultitiam minus nihilo tibi est.

Nelle cose degli Stati, e grande infamia, quando l'imprudentia e accompagnato
dal danno. Parut. l. 2.


Quantumuis opibus tuis confidas, non debes certa pro incertis mutare.

Venator sequitur fugientia, capta relinquit, Salust. Iug. Ovid. Am. 2.


Semper and inuentis vlteriora petit.

Certa amittimus, dum incerta petimus. Plaut. Pseud


Ben giro e di fortuna audace e stolto, Tasso cant. 2.


Por contra il poco e incerto, il certo e'l molto.

Che poco saggio si puo dir colui, Ariost. cant. 38.


Chi perde il suo, per acquistar l' altrui.


He therefore makes his bargain ill, that buys a future hope with a present
loss; and parts from a certain possession, to make an uncertain purchase.

Charles the 8. to be assured that the king of Spain should not aid his cosen
Ferdinand, nor seek occasion of troubles in his absence, restores, without one
penie paying, the strong town of Perpignan, and the whole county of
Rossiglion, morgaged to his father Jews the 11. for a great sum of money. A
thing ill taken by all the three Estates in France. Because, it being seated at
the foot of the Pyrenaean mountains, impeached on that side, the Spaniards
coming into their country. He restores likewise to the Emperor Maximilian,
all the towns he held in Artois, reserving only the Cittadels in his own
hands, till Philip the heir of Burgundy, came of age to confirm this
covenant, Of not molesting his State of France, while he was busied in the
wars of Italy: And then, upon performance thereof, to make resignation of
those Cittadels also.

APHORISM XXI.
NOthing Emittens limum flagrantem, (maltham vocant) quam terra tantum
restingui docuere experimenta. Plin. not. hist l. 2. c. 104. Idem lib. 2. cap.
106. Hor. l. 3. od. 2


Flagrat mons Chimaera, immortali flamma: ignem eius accendi aqua, extingui
vero terra and fimo, Gnidius Ctesias tradit.


can quench the combustible slime of the pond in Samosaris, nor the burning
flame of the high hill Chimaera, but only earth. Improbae crescunt diuitiae,
tamen

Curtae nescio quid semper abest rei.

-- Ergo paratur

Altera villa tibi, cum rus non sufficit vnum, Iuuen. Sat. 14


Et proferre libet fines, maiorque videtur,

Et melior vicina seges: mercaris and hanc. etc.

Auarus in nullum bonus, in se pessimus. Seneca. Hor. l. 2. od. 2


Crescit indulgens sibi dirus hydrops.

Crescit amor nummi, quantum ipsa pecunia crescit,

Et minus hoc optat, qui non habet. -- luuen. Sat. 10


Tam deest auaro quod habet, quam quod non habit.

Vnus Pelaeo Iuueni non sufficit orbis, Pub. luuen. Sat. 10


Cum tamen a figulis munitam intrauerit vrbem,

Sarcophago contentus erit: Mors sola fatetur

Quantula sint hominum corpuscula.

At primum scelerum matrem, quae semper habend^

Plus sitiens, patulis rimatur, faucibus aurum, Claudian. paneg. 3.


Trudis auaritiam: cuius foedissima matter

Ambitio, quae vestibulis foribusque potentum

Excubat, and pretijs commercia poscit honorum,

Pulsa simul. --

Iamais l'ambition n'a d'arrest, and n'a pas si tossed commence vne besogne,
qu'elle embrasse un autre: don't, la sin est, de ne laisser iamais, ni soy, ni
les autres en repos. Am. in Plut. Demet.
Qui miserable croist, tant plus croist sarichesse, Bartas fur.


Fire monstre, sans respect, sans amity, sans foy,

Qui nuit a ses voisins, and plus encor' a soy.


So nothing can satisfy the muddie thoughts of the covetous, or the inflamed
heart of the malicious, but only the grave. For when his imagination persuades
him, that he has made sure his first purchase; the unsatisfied disease of this
Dropfie, drives him beyond all limits of justice or reason, to thirst after
more; and to think it good purchase. Remota Iustitia, quid sunt Regna,
nisimagna latrocinia? August. Iuuenal. Salust. Cat.


Semita certe tranquillae per virtutem patet vnica vitae.

Diuitiarum aetque formae gloria, fluxa atque fragilisest, Virtus clara
aeternaque habetur.

(...). Xenophon.
i. Ego vero arbitror nullam possessionem, viro praecipue Principi, meliorem
aut pulchriorem esse, Virtute and Iustitia.


Whereas there are no perquisites of lasting and sure tenure, but only those
of Virtue and Justice.

Lodowick Zforza persuaded himself, that by the coming of the French, and
weakening of the Neapolitan, he need now no longer fear to be put out of his
Protectorship and Vicegerencie of Millan. He therefore erects his thoughts to a
higher pitch. He gives in marriage his niece Bianca-Maria (John Galeazzo his
sister) to the new elect Emperor Maximilian, with covenant of four hundred
thousand Ducats in money, and forty thousand in Jewels, and other furniture:
conditionally, that the Emperor should confer upon him, and his heirs, the
Inuestiture of the Duchy of Millan: to the odious and shameful disinheriting
of his nephew, the lawful and present Prince: under pretense that this State
was iuridically deuolued to the Empire, for default of heirs males, ever since
the death of Philip-Maria Visconti. By which he did insinuate, that his father,
brother, and nephew, succeeding one another in that government, were all
usurpers.

APHORISM XXII.
THe Tam auida haec fera est Aconiti, vt a Pastoribus in aliquo vase, ex
industria suspensum sit altius, quam vt queant saltu attingere, vt ita,
iaculando se Plin. not. hist lib. 8. cap. 27
appetendoque deficiat, and postremo expiret.
poisonfull Aconite, so much desired of the Panther, is purposely hung up by
hunters, in vessels above their reach: whereof they are so greedy, as they
never leave leaping and straining thereat, till they burst and kill themselves,
and so are taken. Nullum est officium tam sanctum atque solenne, quod non
ambitio comminuere, Cicero.
ac violare solet.

Omnia recta and honesta negligunt, dummodo potentiam consequantur.

L'Ambition n'aime que soy, and pour peu viole tous droicts d'amitie, and d'
estroite Cic. off. 1. 3. Amyot. in Plut. Them. Bartas. fur.
alliance.

Et toy Cupidite, que laterre, que l'air,

Que la mer, que le ciel, ne peuuent pas souler:

Qui as de Crocs pour yeux, pour Boyaux des Abismes,

Et de Griffes pour maines, contre l'ame tu t'escrimes:

Et menez au combat l'enflee ambition,

Qui brusle a petit feu, de qui la passion,

Ne se laisse borner des Mondes d'epicure.

Quousque fines prorogabitis? Ager vni Domino, qui populum cepit, angustus Sen.
ep. 89.
est.

Animum habuit semper ingentia, semper infinita expetentem. Cuspin. de Caesare.
Hor. l. 3. od. 2



So do men that aim at Honor, too high for their reach, and too great for
their merit. For a heart ouergrowne with this rank Aconite, neither admits the
beams of Grace to mollify the hardness, nor the bounds of nature to
restrain the swelling: but is unnaturally carried to wrong those of his own
blood that are living; and to blemish the honorable fame of his Predecessors
departed. Dominaretumidus, spiritus altos gere:

Sequitur superbos vltor a tergo Deus.

Raro antecedentem scelestum,

Deseruit pede poena claudo. Sen. Hec. fur.


Quosdam praecipitat, subiecta potentia magnae

Inuidiae, mergit long a atque insignis honorum Iuue. Sat. 10.


Pagina. --


Such tyrants may bear themselves up for a time, but in the end they find,
that though divine Justice has leaden feet, she has iron hands: though slow
in coming, yet she strikes home.

After the death of Philip-Maria Visconti, he leaving no other children,
Frances Zforza married his base daughter, and so came to be possessed of the
Duchy of Millan. This State he left to Galeazzo, his eldest son: and he to
John Galeazzo the grander child. Now Lodowick Zforza to make his claim seem
just, and purchase lawful, does no longer covertly insinuate the unlawful
usurpation of his father, brother, and nephew, but impudently and most
unnaturally publishes to the world, and protests it, in justification of his
own ambitious aspiring. He also pretends and pleads his right, by the case
of Cyrus against Artaxerxes, because forsooth he was borne to his father after
he was Duke. And in the end he gains his process, and wears the diadem;
more by corrupting the Emperor with money, then by any just title of his own.
Which though he held for some years, yet he never enjoyed one days quiet:
but what with the impressions of his own guilt, and the pressures of his many
and great enemies, he was daily embroiled in the troubles of war, and in the
end died miserably a prisoner in France.

APHORISM XXIII.
IN Is qui nil dubitat, nil capit inde boni. Gram. vulg. Claudian.



schools of Art, Doubt begets knowledge: for he that doubts much, asks
often, and learneth much. -- Ductorque placebat Non qui praecipiti traheret
simul omnia casu: Sed qui maturo, vellaeta vel aspera rerum Consilio momenta
gerens. --

-- Quantum mortalia pectora Ou. Met. l 6.
Cece noctis habent? --

Hic magnus sedet Aeneas, secumque volutat Virg.
Euentus bellivarios. --

Modum imponere secundis rebus, nec nimis credere serenitati praesentis
temporis, Liu. l. 30.
prudentis hominis, and merito foelicis est.

Si nil velis timere, metuas omnia. Senec. sent.


-- Haec mensura timoris Velle putant quodcunque potest. Lucan. lib. 8.



In the school of Policy, she is the mother of good success: for, he that
fears the worst, preuenteth it soonest. Quod nimis miseri volunt, hoc facile
credunt.
It is true, that man is naturally apter to interpret things to his own
wished end, then to the good of his enemy: and rather to doubt less then he
should, then more: Omnia audens contemnitur, nil temere agens metuitur. Seneca.
Liuij l. 24.
Velocitas iuxta formidinem: cunctatio propior constantiae est.

Omissis praecipitibus, tuta and salutaria capessenda. Tac. An. l. 4. Ibid.
Pub. Mi. Scip. ap. Val. Seneca. sent.


Velox consilium sequitur poenitentia.

Turpe est, dicere non putaram.

Qui timet insidias omnes, in nullas incidit.


Though this later, be the surerway.

Ferdinand is mistaken in the proceedings and actions of Lodowick, by
construing them to such purpose as himself wished. His hopes are increased by
the Parentade, which he saw lately concluded between him and the Emperor. For
he persuades himself, that now of necessity Millan must quit her alliance and
confederation with France, by reason of the enmity betwixt the Empire and that
Crown. He assures himself, that to minister such great sums of money as
were to be disbursed in dower with Lady Bianca, to the Kings Rival and
professed enemy, would breed much diffidence and dislike between him and
Lodowick. He supposes that Zforzaes fear must now needs be as much, and his
danger as great, by the coming in of the French, as any others: And doubts
not but that the Venetians (who were now held the greatest power of Italy)
would never brook the coming in of a greater then themselves. In all which
vain hopes, the crafty Duke cunningly fed him, till it was too late to be
better advised.

APHORISM XXIIII.
THough Communis vtilitas, nodus and vinculum foederis. Liuij l. 6.

the general good of the Colleagues, make the frame of all Confederations:
Cura quid expediat, prior est, quam quid sit honestum: Ovid. de Pont. 2.
Et reditus i am quisque suos amat, and sibi quid sit Vtile, sollicitis
computat articulis.

In queste amicizie, o colleganze de Prencipi, ha ogni vno per sola mira, lo
stesso suo commodo, and particolar benefizio: and in tanto poi quello d'altri,
in quanto per Parut. l. 2. disc. 5.
l'accidente, con suo proprio conuenga.

I Prencipi per l'ordinario non si muouono, se non per interesse: and non
cognoscono Rag. Stat. l. 8
amico, o nemico, se non per lo been che ne sperano, o per lo male che ne
temano. Et le leghe tanto durano, quanto dura l'vtilita de' collegati.

Amitiez d'ambitieux, ne tiennent iamais ferme, de quelques liens qu'vn les Am.
in Plut. Anton.
puisse serrer.

Assez d'accords, mais peu, ou point d'amitie, enter les grands.

Id consilium accipere, ad quod occasio duceret, quamuis non videretur esse ex
sua Ibid. Mac. disc. l. 1. cap. 37. Flor. de Romans l. 2.
dignitate.


yet particular interest, is the foundation whereupon they are built: and as
this continues sound or weak, in any one of the accomplices, so stands or
falls that great building. For one State combines with another, in one and
the same action, and concurres to one and the same general end, no longer then
it is for it own proper good. Summa foederum religio est: Neque statim ad arma
procurrunt, dum prius more legitimo querimalunt.

Continui foederis reuerentia.

Foecialis in foedere sanciendo -- Si prior defecerit publico consilio, dolo
malo: Tu Tacit. An. 15. Liu. lib. 1. fol. 11.
illo die Jupiter populum sic ferito, vt ego hunc porcum hodie feriam --
porcumque saxo silice percussit.

Sin aliter, aut ago aut cogito, peream, vt hic lapis emanibus decidit. Polyb.
lib. 3. fol. 81.



The Practice runs often thus: the Rule stands otherwise.

Had the strict confederation which Ferdinand made with Medici, or his new
affinity and parentade with the Pope continued firm, without vacillation on
either part: he had made those two States (of Rome and Florence) as two maine
Vaw-mures and bulwarks, against the French forces: and laid a strong foundation
for his imminent war. But the Florentines staggered, upon their first summons
to a peace and league with France, (though they declared not so soon) for
fear of losing their commerce and traffic with that Realm. And Alexander
the 6. who thought it best fishing in troubled waters, picked new quarrels with
Ferdinand: either to force the distressed King to satisfy his ambitious
greediness, with greater matters then he yet had: or by his mediation and
labor, to reduce the Cardinal S. Peter in Vincola, to his obedience, who
detained from the Sea of Rome, the strong Rocks of Ostia, Ronsiglione, and
Grotta-ferrata, and kept them by strong hand against him: (a matter which was
not in the power of the poor king to effect.) And thus in short time was this
strong League dissolved.

APHORISM XXV.
THe -- Phalaris licet imperet vt sis Falsus, and admoto dictet periuria Tauro,
Iuu. Sat. 10.
Summum orede nefas animam praeferre pudori, Et propter vitam, viuendi per dear
causas.
laws Divine and Humane, have left men no such bond of assurance, to tie one
to another, as that of an oath: which should be taken in sincerity, and kept
inuiolably. Aditum nocendi, perfido praestat fides. Fraus distringit, non
dissoluit periurium. Sen. Oed. Cic. off. l. 3. Iuu. Sat. 13.
Tam facile and pronum est, superos contemnere testes, Si mortalis idem nemo
sciat.
But seeing the deprauation of our nature has perverted these laws, and
abused this lawful Act, by Equivocations and mental reseruations, making it
like a Gypsies knot, fast or loose, at their pleasure: Poco s' aspetta
sincerita, o opere fideli, da chi e venuto in concetto de gli buomini, d'esser
solito a gouernarsi, con duplicita, and con artifizij. Por. Guicc.


Fides vt anima, vnde abijt, eo nunquam redit.

Etenim redire, cum perit pudor, nescit, Senec. sent. Sen. Agam.


Qui a commise vne injustice, se lashe furieusement la bride a des autres
iniustices, encores plus grandes, que les premieres. Amyot. in Plut. Agis.
Plut. Gracch Virg. Aen. 2 Eras. apopth l. 6.


Un meschant entasse tousiours, crimes sur crimes.

Sic notus Ulysses? Eguo ne credit Teucri.

Carbone pollicente quippiam, and addente iusiurandum, populus Romans vicissim
iurauit, se illi non credere.


The law of State prescribes us this remedy, to trust no man of noted
falsehood, and duplicitie, but upon good caution. For, he that has once passed
the bounds of honesty, and made no religion of Oath, or Covenant, for his
proper advantage, never after makes scruple in his cauteriate conscience, to
offend in like sort upon like occasion.

Pope Alexander, a man beyond example for falsehood, had now contrary to his
protestations and league with Ferdinand, inclined to a contract of friendship
with France. He had promised a Cardinals hat to S. Malo; at the kings instance.
He with Zforza, had entertained in pay Prospero Colonna, and diverse troops of
men at arms, for the kings service against Naples. Yet presently again,
contrary to his assurances given to the French, he confederates himself with
Alphonso the new king, and son of Ferdinand, in a league defensive for both
their States. He grants him the inuestiture of the kingdom of Naples, with a
diminution of the tribute. He sends a Legate a Latere to crown him: he creates
Lodowick, son of Henry, his base brother, Cardinal of Arragon. The price is
this. Alphonso must give the Pope in ready money thirty thousand Ducats: he
must give his eldest son, the Duke of Candia, estates in Naples, to the value
of twelve thousand Ducats. He must have also the reuersion of the first of the
seven principal offices that shall fall in that kingdom. He must give him the
command and entertainment for three hundred men at arms. To his second son
Caesar Borgia, he must give the annual entrade of diverse Ecclesiastical
livings. And to Giuffre the youngest son, (over and besides what he already
possessed in that kingdom) he must also give the office of Protonotarie.

APHORISM XXVI.
Justice (...). i. Iustitia in se virtutes continet Arist. eth. l. 5.
omnes.

(...). i. Intustitia, non pars est vitij, sed totum. Ibid.


Fundamentum perpetuae commendationis, and famae, Iustitia est. Cic. Off. l. 3.
Aug. apud Sen. Hesiod. (...). l. 1. Protag. de leg. l. 5.


Pietate and Iustitia, Principes Dij fiunt.

Virgo est Iustitia, Jove prognata,

Casta, and veneranda Dijs coelicolis.

(...). i. Deus metuens ne totum humanum genus interiret, donauit hominibus
Pudorem and Iustitiam: vt essent ciuitatum ornamenta, and vincula, and
amicitiae conciliatrices.


and injustice, are the most general of all other moral or political habits.
There is no virtue or vice, which they do not comprehend. Periere mores, ius,
decus, fides. Sen. Her. fur. Sen. Med. Sen. Hippol.


Nullum ad nocendum tempus, angustum est malis.

Quod non potest, vult posse, qui nimtum potest.

Minimum decet libere, cui multum licet. Sen. Troa.



Therefore he which is untrue in his word, and unjust in his actions, is apt to
perpetrate all other nefarious villainies, and to suborne others to do the like.
Where his own attestation may not be admitted by law, he will foist in false
witnesses: and where Justice and Equity restraines him, his power and pleasure
shall prevail. For, what he may not do, he will list to do, because he may do
what he list.

Caesar Borgia was base son to Pope Alexander the 6. now because it was
against the Church Canons to admit any bastard to the dignity of Cardinal, his
father (who was seldom true in any of his promises, or just in any of his
dealings) deals falsely also in this. He subornes certain knights of the post,
to come into Court, and swear, that Borgia was the legitimate son of another
man.

APHORISM XXVII.
LOng -- Sero medicina paratur

Cum mala per longas conualuere moras. Ovid.


Vt in Hydropicis, aqua inter cutem laborantibus, orta in corpore vlcera haud
Hipp. aph. 8. sec. 6.
facile sanantur.


festered ulcers are beyond the possibility of cure, in a body where the
humors are rank and venomous. -- Vindicta Sen. Thyest.


Nullum relinquit facimus, and nullum est satis.

Minuti semper and infirmi est animi exiguique, voluptas vltionis: hoc patet in
Ex hist.
Alcibiade, Coriolano, Narsete, Roberto Comite Artesiae, in Comite-Stabuli S.
Paulo, Duce Borbonio, and alijs.

E proprio vffizio della Prudenza, moderare lo Sdegno iusto, con la maturita
Guicc.
del giudizio, and con la considerazione dell'vtilita, and dell'interesse
publico.

Priuata vulnera, reip malis operire statuit. Tacit. hist. 1. Herodian.


Vt beneficia in ipso excidunt vsu, sic tenax est iniuriarum memoria.


So a turbulent spirit, exulcerate with the corrasiues of many wrongs, and
impatient of delay in his revenge, is so far transported from reason, or
accepting the supple oil of reconciliation, as he enters into resolutions of
desperate consequence; and vents the poison of his malice, by the pipes of his
treasonable practices, into every vein of his native country. To the great
hazard of her health, and public safety.

Julian della Rouere, by birth a Genouese, by title Cardinal of S. Peter in
Vincola, between whom and Roderigo Borgia (now Pope) was an inueterate and
implacable hatred, had a strong party in his native city of Genoa, and the
fittest means to save all Italy from trouble, by hindering the deseignes of
the French in that town: whereof he had given some hope to Alphonso. Mediation
is made by many of the Italian Princes, for a perfect reconciliation of these
two Prelates. Good caution is offered for the Cardinals safe conduct to Rome,
there to make a final and full end of all differences and quarrels between
the Pope and him. But so deeply rooted was the Cardinals rancor and hatred, as
he refuses all means of atonement. He posteth from Genoa where he was borne,
to Auignon where he was Legate; thence to Lions, where he met the French king:
and became chief head of the Italian exiles, and principal instigator and
procurer of all those troubles that shortly after followed in Italy.

APHORISM XXVIII.
IN Quando non effugias quin alterum habiturus sis inimicum, aut socium:
iacienda Sueton.
tunc alea, and alterutri adhaerendum.

Qui euentum expectaueris, vt Fortunae applicares consilia tua, praeda victoris
eris. Liuij l. 32.


Romanos socios si aspernamini, vix sanae mentis estis: sed aut socios aut
hosts habeatis necesse est. Liu. de. 4. l. 2


Vidimus quos ignauia aut praua calliditas (vt alienis laboribus tuti essent)
armis Sal. ep. Mith.
abstinuit, acerbissimas poenas soluisse.

Inter impotentes and validos, falso acquiesces. Tac. de mor. Germ. Hor. 1. ep.
18


Ecquid ad te post paulo ventura pericula sentis?

Tum tua res agitur, paries cum proximus ardet.


a war begun between two mighty Princes, it is dangerous for a third, and
neighbor to them both, not to be a party, being called into the action: for
he is in peril to be a prey to the victor. Lo stringersi in amicizia and
confederatione con altro Prencipe, piu potente, and molto vicino, quando si
tratti d'accressergli con tale congionzione Potenza, Parut. l. 2. dis. 9.
come non manca may del pericolo, cosi e consiglio da non prendersi, se non per
grande necessita. Et massime per quei Prencipi, che non sono tanto deboli, che
conuengano appoggiarsi ad altri, and accompagnar in ogni euento delle cose, la
sua fortuna con quella d'altri.

La Neutralita nella guerra de gli altri, e cosa lodeuole, e per ella si
fuggono Guicc. l. 20.
molte molestie, and spese: quando non sono si deboli le tue forze, che tu
habbi da temere la vittoria, di ciascuna delle parti.

Quiescite, possidentes res vestras, ac neutrorum parts sequimini: Recipite
vtrosque Thucyd. l. 2. fol. 50.
amicos: sed belli gratia neutros.


But to him that is strong, and likelier to get then lose by the bargain,
which side soever preuailes, there is the less hazard. Therefore in such
cases, the safest is to be neuter.

Ambassadors come from Charles the 8. to Venice, to draw that State into
amity and league with him, by example of many former confederations between
them and the Crown of France: they excuse themselves, by the fear they
pretend of the Turks forces, which at this time were great, and the means he
had to molest them, their State confining upon his, so many miles both by land
and sea: in which regard they were forced to be at an insupportable charge, by
maintenance of many garrisons in the Arci-pelago, and Port-townes upon the
Adriatique sea. But indeed they hoped, by the long war of the other Italian
Princes, engaged either with or against the French, to enlarge their own
dominions: or at least (being so strong as they were) they had no cause to
fear the Conqueror. And therefore they held it a counsel ill grounded, to
embroile themselves in others troubles, or make another man's quarrel their
own, without evident necessity.

APHORISM XXIX.
AS Tousiours en vne reuolte generale, il faut punir les chefs des seditions,
and Am. in Plut. and Hail. affair l. 2. Dion. Halic.
pardonner au rest.

Sic Faecialium officium erat, laesi faederis authors laesis dedere: Sic in
defectione Fidenatium a Romany, Martius rex paucos ex ijs defectionis
authors, supplicio affecit.


in a general defection or rebellion, some few, not all, are to be punished,
for example: so a general repulse to a great Princes demand, by a popular
State, is not to have a general revenge: It is better to punish the head for
the motion, then the hands or the feet for the action. Quicquid multis
peccatur, multum est.

Vnius improbi supplicio, multorum improbitas coercetur. Lucan. Cic. in Ver. 3
Cic. pro Clu. Tacit. Agric.


Poena ad paucos, metus ad omnes perueniat.

Debet Princeps omnia scire, non omnia exequi: paruis peccatis veniam, magnis
seueritatem commodare: nec poena semper, sed saepius poenitentia contentus
esse.

Temperatus timor est qui cohibet, assiduus and acer ad vindictam excitat.

Noua cupientibus auferatur Dux and Author. Ibid. Tac. An. l. 16. Senec. Thob.
Zenoph. in Hieron. Sen. de Cl. 5. Salust. Cat.


Qui vult amari, languida regnet manu.

Viro Principi vbi poenarum aut coerctionis res est, alijs id delegandum: vbi
praemiorum aut munerum, ipsi obeundum.

Frequens vindicta, paucorum odium reprimit, omnium irritat.

In arduis rebus, pericula solent incumbere consilij authoribus.


Because by this means, the Prince may insinuate himself into the general
favor of that multitude, and procure their dislike against his particular
opposites.

The Florentine State receives Ambassadors from the French King, to solicit
their alliance, and passage for his army, through their country. The favors
and merits of his ancestors to that commonwealth are urged: and particularly to
Peter Medici, with commemoration of the honors done to his house by the Crown
of France. But Medici, rather measuring things by will, then by prudence, too
much trusting in himself, and vainly persuaded, that all their great
preparations would vanish to smoke and rumor, stiffly resolves to continue in
friendship with the house of Arragon. The rest of the Florentines are forced to
yield to this one man's greatness. Upon the first ouuerture in France of this
denial, the King causes all the Bankers for the Medici, that were in Lions,
presently to depart his Realm. But suffers the other Florentine Merchants to
abide there still, and enjoy their former liberty and privileges. Hereupon
Medici himself grew daily in greater dislike with the other citizens, and the
King not long after found them willing to accept of his motion to a League with
them, and concluded it.

APHORISM XXX.
THe Musica Theorica est, quae diuersorum sonorum proportionem, ingenio and
ratione considerat, reique tantum cognitione contentus est: Practica, quae
circa sonorum Los. Eroten.
and consonantiarum praxin versatur: Choralis vero quae in suis notulis
aequalem seruat mensuram, etc.

(...). Quibus, quaecunque, and quando, and vbi, honestum Arist. eth. l. 4.
cap. 1. and l. 2. cap. 9. Cic. pro Mil.
est.


contemplative part of Music, consists chiefly in a true disposition of
Proportions: and the Active, is in a symphonie and right setting of the
Instruments one to another, and the voice to both. In Oeconomie, men must cut
their coat to their cloth: and in morality, quid, quantum, quibus, quando,
and quomodo, are necessary attributes to every virtue. Illud est non modo
iustum, sed etiam necessarium, cum vis vi illata defenditur: hoc, and ratio
doctis, and necessitas barbaris, and mos gentibus, and feris ipsa natura
praescripsit.

Ducis in consilio, posita est virtus militaris.

(...). i. Periculosares, Dux inconsultus. Publius. Eurip.



So likewise in policy, a prudent Prince standing upon the defensive part, is
to measure and proportion his resistance according to the strength or weakness
of the assailer; Negotijs difficillimis, saepe dispositio tempestiua prospexit.
Amm. Mar. l. 16. Brut. ep. 29.


Apparatio quae minime in tempore fit, non plus conducit quam inapparatio, quae
penitus est inutilis.

Acqua lontana, non spegne fuoco vicino.


and that in due time: Con le Preuentioni, and con le Diuersioni, sivincono le
guerre. Pro. Ital. Guic. l. 10. Pro. Ital. Vegetius.


Alla Pentola che bolle, le Mosche non vi s' appressano.

Nemo prouocare audet, aut facere iniuriam, ei regno aut populo, quem
intelligit expeditum and promptum ad vindicandum.

Qui desider at pacem, praeparet bellum. Idem.



by frustrating (as much as in him lies) the Mines made to blow him up, by his
own countermines of Prevention, and Diuersion.

The French king was assured of Genoa, Millan, the Colonnesi, and the banished
Neapolitans. Alphonso was combined with the Pope, Florentines, and the Orsini.
The King sends two thousand Swisse to Genoa, under the conduct of the Bailiffe
of Dijon; and three hundred Lances into Lombardy, under the command of Monsieur
d' Aubigny; with five hundred more under San Seuerino, Count Gaiazzo,
Galeotto-Pico Mirandula, and Rodolpho de Gonzaga. On the other side, Alphonso
sends an army of one hundred Squadrons of men at arms, (twenty horse to a
Squadron) besides three thousand light horse, and crosse-bowes on horseback,
with many companies of foot, for the wars in Romagna, under the charge of
Ferdinand Duke of Calabria, (his eldest son) to be advised and directed by
Iohn-Iacob Triultio and the Count Petigliano, two famous Captains. The French
king prepares a great army at sea, of galleys, ships, and other vessels;
with all manner of artillery, munition, and other necessary provision. He
makes ready another at Marseilles, and Villa-Franca. And Alphonso with like
care and military policy, conuents secretly with Cardinal Fregoso, and
Obietto Fiesco (who had strong parties in Genoa) with a great fleet to put
into that city all the banished Genoweses, of the faction Adorna: so to
prevent the enemy of that Port, and divert him some other way. To this effect
he sent Don Frederick to their aid, with a squadron of thirty five galleys,
and eighteen ships, well appointed, and three thousand soldiers for land.

APHORISM XXXI.
NOthing Fama malum quo non aliud velocius vllum Mobilitate viget, viresque
acquirit eundo. Virg.


Niuna cosa vola piu, che l' occasion. Guicc. l. 11. Liu. lib. 25.



rides on swifter wings then fame and opportunity: here is only the
difference, that flies still forward, this backward. Si in occasionis momento,
cuius praeteruolat opportunitas, cunctatus fueris, nequicquam post omissam quer
are.

Non ego vt nihil agatur (iubeo) sed vt agentem te, ratio ducat, non fortuna:
Liu. l. 24. de Fab.
tuae potestatis semper tu, tuaque omnia sint: vt neque tuae occasioni desis,
neque suam hosti des.

-- Post est occasio calua. Adag. Pro. bell. Per*


Opportunitatis momenta, omnino redire nesciunt.

Omne malum nascens, facile opprimitur, inueter atum fit robustius.

Il male che nel principio suo, e quasi Ruscelletto, che si possa passar a
piedi, col Rag. Stat. l. 3 Rag. di Stat. l. 5. Plaut. Aul.
progresso acquista forze, and diuenta formidabile.

Quando occasio perijt, post sero cupimus.

Dubitando and dies prolatando, magne opportunitates saepe corrumpuntur.
Salust. Cat. Polyb. l. 8.
(...). i. Multum potest in rebus humanis occasio: plurimum autem in bellicis.

(...), Tempus vt nor is iubet: sed (...) iste, tempestiuum tempus est. Auson.
87.



She must therefore be taken by the fore-top, at the very instant of her
coming. For occasion past is irrecouerable, and the loss by slacking it,
irreparable. Fortune seems after to cross all a man's actions: and to be true
hand-maide to no mistress, but occasion.

Had Don Frederick, when his navy was ready, and forces shipped, made a maine
for Genoa, as it was ordered and resolved, he had been master of the town
before the Swisses arrival, or the enemies shipping was ready. But staying
upon the coast of Siena for two thousand foot more, and being deluded by the
deceitful hopes which were sent him from Zforza, and foreslacking this fair
occasion, he afterward found that Imprese impossible, which but one month
sooner had been most faisible. As also the land army, under Ferdinands
leading, being now grown mighty and strong, by uniting the forces of Medici
and Bentiuoglio, had been fair for some notable success in Lombardy (whither
it was first desseigned) had it not made such slow haste from Naples, and
suffered d' Auligni, San Seuerino, Galeotto Pico, and Gonsaga, with their
forces to enter Romagna, before their coming. And so were forced to make that
(being their own country) the seat of the war.

APHORISM XXXII.
THe Praecipuum in medico, qui aegrotum curat, vt cor been defendat.


first work of physic in a diseased body, is to repel the venomous humors
from the heart: because a disease once seated in this metropolis, is incurable.
And the first care of the members in man, is to ward a blow made at the head.
Art and Nature, in preserving and defending these two nobler parts, are to be
imitated by a wise Prince, in guarding a place of chiefest importance. Huius
consilij fructum inter multos alios ceperunt, in obsidione Patauina Crol. Chyn.
Ex hist.
Veneti: in Viennensi Carolus quintus: in Miletensi Equites illius ordinis.
Cremona propugnaculum aduer sus Gallos trans Padum, and si qua alia vis per
Alps rueret. Tacit. hist. l. 2.


Existimo omnes fortunas nostras, nunquam adducendas in periculum tale, quod
non omnibus viribus propulsare queamus. Mac. dis. 22.


Oppida aut Castella, aduer sus moras obsidionis, annuis copijs firmentur.
Tacit. Agric


Et propugnacula bello tuta parent.


He must send in succors, and draw out the discontented and dangerous
mutiners: Nescis quo valeat nummus, quem praebeat vsum. Vir. Aen. l. 2 Hor.
Ser. 1 Tere^. Heaut. Idem. Liu. de. 5. l. 4. Seneca.


Mixime quandoque lucratur, qui nummis parcit minime.

Pecuniam in loco negligere, maximum interdum est lucrum.

Nc sit Rex, vt Perseus, Pecuniae guam Regni melior custos.

Pecunia ancilla est, si scis vti: si nescis, domina.


and spare for no cost, to save that piece, in the loss whereof consists the
Maine of all his business.

Zforza, besides the Swisse sent to Genoa by the French, sends thither also
Iaspar San Seuerino, surnamed Fracassa, and Antonio-Maria, his brother, with
two companies of foot. He winnes to his devotion, with gifts, pensions, and
other large promises, Iohn-Luigi Fiesco, and many of the Adorni, with diverse
other gentlemen and commoners. And lastly, to leave nothing unsure or
unprovided for, (considering how much the assurance of this town imported the
war of Naples) he calls to Millan from Genoa, and all the country
thereabouts, all such as he suspected to be partisans with the banished
Genoweses, or the faction of Arragon. And thus became assured of the place.

APHORISM XXXIII.
ALL Quod sibi volunt, dum id impetrent, boni sunt: sed id vbi iam penes se
habent, ex bonis pessimi and fraudulentissimi sunt. Plaut.


Le speranze de Fuorusciti, misurate piu col desiderio, che con laragione,
riescon quasi sempre vanissime. Guicc. l. 9.



creatures suppose their own brood the fairest: and all men think the air of
their own country the sweetest. Hence is it, that mal-content exiles stir up
foreign Princes to war upon it: not caring to what peril they expose others,
so themselves may be Rimpatriate. Niltam instabile, quam fama potentia, non sua
vi nixae.

Stulti est fastidire res certas, amplecti ambiguas spes. Tacit. Pettarch.
Macc. disc. 2.


Agnoscamus quam parui faciendae sunt, huiusmodi hominum qui patria pulsi sunt,
promissiones. Nam si fortuna aliam ijs offer at occasionem in patriam redeundi,
necquicquam fidem seruabunt, quicquid tibi promiserint.

Multa tibi promittent vt restituas eos, multa etiam praestare se posse
arbitrantur, Ibidem.
sed plura etiam adiungunt: ex quibus omnibus, situ rei been gerendae spe
permouerite sinas, facile eo deduceris, vt ingenti sumptu tuam ipsius ruinam
interitumque expetas.

In caducum parietem ne inclina. Hadria. Senec. sent. Tac. de mor. Germ.


Nullus sapientum proditori credidit.

Cuius ruina, te quoque tractura sit.

Quaerunt, cum qua gente cadant.

Si regum at que Imperatorum animi virtus, in pace ita vti in bello valeret,
aequabilius Lucan. 8. Sal. bell. Catil
atque constantias seseres humanae haberent: neque aliud alio ferri, neque
mutari, ac misceri omnia cerneres.


But no man's strength lies in another arm: nor is that power firm, which
subsists not of it self. Princes therefore that far engage themselves upon
such instigation, and rely upon such promise, they do but lean on broken
reeds, and build their hopes on sandy foundations.

The Neapolitan fleet altering the first desseigne which it had upon the Port
of Genoa, because they understood it was too well assured, by the coming of
the Swisse, and the provident course which Zforza had taken, in drawing out of
the city such as he most suspected, they now resolve to attempt some place,
either upon the East or West coast. Herein they advise with the exiles that
were in the fleet among them. Obietto Fiesco persuades them to attack upon the
East: gives them assurance that he and his fellows had many friends on that
side. They fall upon Porto-Venere: give many assaults: lose many of their men,
and are repulsed. So, without hope to carry the place, because they find none
of those seconds promised by Fiesco, they turn sail to Ligorne, for fresh
supplies of victuals and men.

APHORISM XXXIIII.
Sooner Aegrius expellitur, quam non admittitur hospes.


may one prevent, then cure a deadly sickness; and easilier keep out, then
thrust out an unwelcome guest. Il mantener la guerra nella casa altrui, e
sempre vtile consiglio: ma piu Ovid. Parut. l. 2. disc. 5. Cic. pro leg. Man.
Ammir. l. 18.
sicuro in quelli che ne sono lontani.

Seeds belli semper miserrima: cuius non aduentus solum, sed etiam metus,
affert calamitatem.

Il Duca d'Alua essendo sfidato, and prouocato alla Battaglia, dal Duca di
Ghisa, in casapropria (cio e nel regno di Napoli) rispose, che egli non volea
in vna giornata, auerturar un Regno, per vna soproueste di Broccato.

Hannibal negabat Romanos, nisi in Italia, opprimi posse. Amm. ^ Liu.


Propinqua Cremonensium moenia, quanto plus spei ad effugium, tanto minorem
Tacit. l. 29.
ad resistendum, animum dabant.

Vtrum in Macedoniam legiones transportetis, an hostem in Italiam accipiatis,
Sulp. apud Liu.
hoc quantum intersit, si vnquam alias, Punico certe proximo bello experti
estis.

Omne bellum sumitur facile, aegerrime desinit: nec in eiusdem potestate
initium and finis est. Salust. Iug.


Hostium vrbes agrique ferro atque igni vastentur: Expertiiam sumus, foris
nobis, Liu. l. 21.
quam domi, foeliciora potentioraque arma esse.

Plus animi est inferenti periculum, quam propulsanti. Liu. l. 28.



Such a dangerous disease, and bad guest, is war to any country. Wise
Princes therefore keep it as far from home as they can: and never quench the
fire in their neighbors house, to kindle it in their own.

The State of Venice, solicited by Alphonso, that for the common good of
Italy, she would declare her self against the French: or at least let Zforza
know how ill at his hands she took these new motions of war, to the general
disturbance of the quiet and peace of that country; returns this answer: That
it is the office of a wise Prince, not to quench the fire in his neighbors
house, to kindle it in his own. The like prudence showed Lodowick in act, that
this State delivered in deliberation. For, such was his vigilancie and
providence, to prevent that the enemy might not assail him in Lombardie at
his own doors, as that he had sent the French and Millanese troops (led by
d'Aubigni and Count Gaiazzo) into the Popes State of Romagna, before the
Arragonese forces, were half way on their journey: and by this means were
forced (contrary to their first deseigne) to make the Seat of the wars in
Romagna, which were first intended for Lombardie.

APHORISM XXXV.
MEn Sic teneros animos aliena opprobria saepe Horat.


Absterrent vitijs. --

Tum pudor incendit vires, and conscia virtus. Virg. Aen. 1. Tacit. An. l. 4


Contemptu famae contemnuntur virtutes.


usually palliate and cover their vices, under the cloak and name of some
virtue: base covetousness, they call good husbandry; and prodigality,
bounty. They blush not at the fact, though they be ashamed of the title. This
shows that the sense of shame is one of the strongest restraints to keep men
from sin: and the last passion that leaves him. Qui semel verecundiae limits
transiliuit, eum gnauiter impudentem esse Cic. cp. l. 5.
oportet.

Maximus omnium morborum, inter homines, Impudentia. Eurip. Xenophon.


(...). i. Impudens Princeps omnium rerum pessimus.

Sed animo per libidines corrupto, nihil honestum inerat. Tac. An. l. 11.
Seneca.


Vbi non est pudor, ibi nec cura iuris, sanctitas, pietas, fides.


He therefore that is once past this apprehension, lets loose the reins of his
own will, and abandons himself to all manner of mischief.

Other actions of Pope Alexander, show him deuoide of all grace, but he now
shows himself to be likewise past all shame. For, he blusheth not (being the
pretended Head of the Church) to send George Bucciardo a creature of his own,
with Camillo Pandone the messenger of Alphonso, to Baiaset the Great Turk, and
professed enemy of Christian religion, for arms and aid against the French
king. And rather then his turn should not be served in time, by the Spanish
fleet, which could not yet set forward for want of money; he consents and
allows that that money which was levied in Spain by the Authority
Apostolic, for a Crociata against the Infidels, should most sacrilegiously be
transferred from that holy use, and employed in this war of Christians one
against another.

APHORISM XXXVI.
TRuth Recte factorum verus fructus est, fecisse: Nec vllum virtutibus pretium
dignum illis, extra ipsas est. Sen. de Cle^. l. 1. Sil. l. 13. Plutarch.


Ipsa quidem virtus, sibimet pulcherrima merces.


and virtue are rather to be embraced and loved for their own sakes, then for
ours: for that they are good in themselves, not for the good we get by them.
Sentiunt verum falso esse melius, sed vtriusque dignitatem and praestantiam, ex
vsu discerni.

Amicitias, inimicitiasque, non ex re, sed ex commodo aestimare. Salust. Cat.


Decipiunt verbis, literis, legatis, atque adeo ipsos legatos.

Eos per quos alium fallere cogitant, fallunt. Lip. pol. l. 4. Sen. Thyest.
Claudian.



Princes therefore, that make no difference between truth and falsehood, virtue
and vice, but by the use: care not whom, or how they deceive or wrong, so they
make that use. Quam been dispositum terris, vt dignus iniqui

Fructus consilij, primis authoribus instet?

Saepe Polypus dum carnem Conchae captat, ipse capitur. Eras. Salust. Iug.


Praua incoepta, consultoribus noxae esse, par est.

(...). i. Malum consilium, consultori pessimum. Hesiod. (...).


Saepe in magistrum, scelera redierunt suum.

(...). i. Alteri malum machinatus, sibijpsi Sen. Thyest. Hesiod.
machinatur.


The actions and counsels of such men, as they are tainted in the nature, so
are they thwarted in the success: for they always prove dangerous to those
that follow them, but especially to the giuers themselves.

Lodowick Zforza had given in charge to his agent in Florence, to encourage
Peter Medici by all possible means, in his strict confederation with the king
of Naples, against Charles of France. Some think he did it bonafide, because
he would use the French in Italy, but to his own particular ends. Others
suppose he did it out of his malice, to bereave Medici of all hope of
reconciliation with the French. Peter acquaints Alphonso with the matter: who
advises him to make this double dealing of the Millanese, known to the King,
and so to catch Lodowick in his own snare. To this effect Medici conueyeth the
French Ambassador behind the hangings of his bedchamber: feines himself
sick: sends for the Agent: draws him by discourse to make full relation of
his Masters mind, touching this point. The Ambassador ouer-heares all; and
writes home to his King, that he is betrayed by Lodowick. But the French (not
apt to believe what they would not were true, and hoping by this means to set
those Princes further out) acquaints Lodowick with the matter, and the manner
of the discovery. He, more enraged hereupon with despite and revenge, both
against Alphonso and Medici, then ever before, instantly follicites the King,
to lose no more time, but with his forces now in readiness to set upon Naples.

APHORISM XXXVII.
THe (...). Arist. de any ma, lib. 3.
i. Nam sensus non potest sentire post vehemens sensibile: sed intellectus cum
intellexerit aliquid valde intelligibile, nihilominus intelligit inferiora,
immo etiam magis.


discoursing power of the soul, is the most excellent of all her other parts:
because the more it conceiueth, and the greater the subject is, the more purely
it apprehends, and the more perfectly it comprehends. Whereas her other
faculties, are, by the difficulty of the object, or assiduitie of the
intention, dazzled, dulled, and stupefied. Nil minus in Duce quam festinationem,
conuenire arbitrabatur: crebro Sueton. de Aug. cap. 25.
itaque illa iactabat, (...): i. festina lent.

(...). i. Secundae cogitationes sunt sapientiores.

Omnia non properanti clara, certaque sunt: festinatio improuida est etc. eca.
Scapula. Liu. l. 22. Tac. hist. l. 2. Curt. l. 8.


Festinatio hostibus, mora ipsis vtilis.

Nullus est idem diuturnus, and praecox fructus.

Scelera impetu, bona consilia mora valescunt.

Sat cito, si sat been. Tac. hist. l. 1., Pro. Lat. Senec. sent.


Velox consilium sequitur poenitentia.

Is quippe solus rei gerendae est efficax,

Meditatur omne qui prius negotium. Auson. fol. 91



Hence is it, that second considerations and resolutions, are more wise and
more safe then the former: because they are grounded upon reasons, not at first
considered.

Charles the 8. had resolved upon a voyage for Naples. He had prepared two
nauies, one at Genoa, another at Marseilles. He had already sent diverse
troops of horse and foot into Italy: the rest were upon their march. He had
settled his affairs at home during his absence. He had compounded his business
with Spain and the Empire. He is on his way toward Italy, as far as
Dolphenie. Here, he sticks upon those points, which before he never called in
question. He considers of the ordinary and necessary difficulties of every
great enterprise: of the dangers to ensue, in case his Italian confederates
should not keep touch with him and the impossibility to carry so great a
business with so small store of money, as he presently found himself
furnished withal. This caused in him an approbation of their opinions, who
first dissuaded this war: a vacillation in the first mouers, and a further
pause in himself, with a resolution to set no farther forward, till he were
better provided of himself for the enterprise, and better assured of his
Italian confederates.

APHORISM XXXVIII.
ALL Quidam hoc animal quamdiu viuit, crescere arbitrantur. Plin. not. hist l.
8. cap. 25. Por. in Guic.



plants and other creatures, have their growth and increase to a period, and
then their declination and decay: except only the Crocodile, who ever grows
bigger and bigger, even till death. Lasciarsi trapportar da gli sdegni, contra
ilben publico, e leggierezza, anzi sceleratezza.

Qual duro freno, o qual ferigno nodo, Ariost. cant. 42.


Qual (s' esser puo) catena di Diamante,

Fara, che l' ira serui ordine emodo,

Che non trascorra oltre al prescritto inante.

-- Vengeance,

Qui trifte fait cracquer comme un senglier les dents,

Her isse ses cheueux, roiie or' ses yeux ardents,

Or' les attache a terre. --

Desir de vengeance viole nature, and humanite.

Difficile est se despestre des filez d'vn malicieux. Am. Plu. Cic. Id. Anton.
Am. Plu. Cic.


Les Factieux ne peuuent souffrir, qu'on leur face test, and taschent de s'en
venger auec des arms descouuertes.


So have all passions and perturbations in man's mind, their intentions and
remissions, increase and decrease, except only malicious revenge. For this,
the longer it lasts, the stronger it waxes, and works still, even when the
malign humors of avarice and ambition are settled or spent. Nouandis quam ger
endis rebus aptiores. Lip. pol. l. 3. Thucyd. l. 1.


In id nati, vt nec ipsi quiescant, nec alios sinant.

Quoniam quidem circumuentus, ab inimicis praeceps agor, incendium meum Cat. in
Sal.
ruina extinguam.

Ira and aegritudo permista cum maxima cura, vltum ire iniurias festinat.

Sceleratis ingenijs, and plus quam ciuilia agitantibus, non dominari, instar
seruitutis est. Salust. Iug. Calpur.



Wherefore such fiery spirits as these, apter for innovation then
administration, are always most dangerous in a State.

Julian della Rouere a fatal instrument of troubles to his country, and the
chief worker of the broiles in Italy, both now while he is Cardinal, and
after when he is Pope, blows afresh the coals of war, when they were raked
up in the cold embers of distrust and fear, and almost dead in the heart of
the French king: whom he never leaves with his importunate instigations, till
he had again set his heart on fire, with the impetuous fury of following his
first resolution, against the Pope and kingdom of Naples.

APHORISM XXXIX.
THe Necat frutices, non contactos modo, verum and afflatos: exurit herbas,
rumpit saxa. Plin. not. hist. l. 8. cap. 21.

Sen. Her. fur.



nature of the Basiliske, is to kill all trees and shrubs it breathes upon; and
to scorch and burn all herbs and grass it passes over. Si aeterna semper
odia mortales gerant,

Nec coeptus vnquam cedat ex animo furor;

Sed arma foelix teneat, infoelix paret:

Nihil relinquent bella. Tum vastis ager

Squallebit aruis, subdita tectis face,

Altus sepultas obruet Gentes cinis.

Le Desordre, l' Effroy, le Desespoir, la Fuyte, Bartas fur.


Ailez marchent deuant son meurtrier Exercite,

Comme l'Embrasement, l'Orgueil, l'Impiete,

La Rage, le Discord, le Sac, l'Impunite,

La Cruaute, l'Horreur, le Degast, la Ruin,

L'accompagnent par tout, ou barbare elle chemine:

Le Dueil, la Solitude, auec la Pauurete,

Suyuent les pas sanglants, de son Ost indompte.


Such are the effects of war. For, be the title never so clear, and the
cause just, yet the means are not without fire and sword: nor the end without
horror and bloodshed. Melior tutiorque certa Pax, quam sperata victoria: Illa,
in tua: haec, deorum in manu est. Liu. l. 30.


-- Pax optima rerum, Sil. l. 11.


Quas homini nouisse datum est: pax vna triumphis

Innumeris potior. --

Non cognosce la Pace, and non la stima, Ariost. cant. 31.


Chi prouato non ha la guerra prima.

Iniustissimam pacem iustissimo bello antefero.

Nulla salus bello, pacem te poscimus omnes. Cic. ad Attic Vir. Aen. 11. Ovid.
art. 3. Senec. Oed.


Candida pax homines, trux decet ira fer as.

Non expedit concutere foelicem statum.


Peace therefore is to be preferred; so it be not with the blemish of the
Princes honor, or prejudice of the public good.

Charles the 8. was right heir to the house of Aniou, and hereby his claim
direct to the kingdom of Naples. In this his just quarrel he passed the
Alps, by the mountain Gineura, with war in his heart, and the means in his
hands. After that, Jews the 12. entered Italy, to conquer Millan, whereto he
also laid claim, and wanne it. The effects of which expeditions were these:
Subversion of States: desolation of countries: demolition of towns: occision
of people. New laws: new customs: new habits: new diseases: and all that the
extremity of war, and the insolency of a Victor could inflict.

APHORISM XL.
A Business well begun, is half ended. Wherefore it much imports to the
happy, or desastrous issue of any affair, what manner of entrance and
beginning we make, especially in that of war. For, good success in the first
encounter, greatly aduanceth the maine of our business; and takes away both
courage and reputation, yea and resolution from the losing side. Herein
therefore ought to consist the chief care of a General. (...). i. Dimidium
plus toto. Adag. Eras. Hor. l. 1. ep. 2


Dimidium facti, qui been coepit habet.

Chi ben comincia, ha la meta dell' opra,

Et non si comincia ben se non dal cielo. Pastor. fid.


Bonum principium, dimidium totius.

I successi della Guerra, dependono in gran part, dalla riputazione. Pro. Lat.
Por. in Guic. Tac. An. 13. Id. An. 12.


Fama in nouis coeptis validissima est.

Primis euentibus, metus aut fiducia gignitur.




Don Frederick, after his return from Porto-Venere to Ligorne, repaires his
ships, refreshes his army, re-enforceth his troops, returns: gives upon
Rappallo: carries the place: San Seuerino and John Adorno, with part of the
landforces, and the Duke of Orleans, with a thousand Swisse, by sea (drawn
all out of Genoa) make to the succors, to impeach the enemies further
proceeding. They assail the Arragonese with excellent resolution. These
receive their first impression, with no less valor. Victory stands long as
neuter, unresolved to which side to incline: until at length the artillery
from the ships playing upon the Neapolitans in flank, and sore galling them,
and the alarm of John Fiescos approach with fresh supplies to the French,
disorders their troops, and puts them to rout. Julian Orsini a commander of a
troop of Lances, Fregosino the son of Cardinal Fregoso, and Orlandino of
the same house, with many more men of mark, are taken prisoners: more slain:
some drowned: the rest recover their ships. Don Frederick himself, with his
broken troops, bears back again for Ligorne: where, though he had provided
himself of new supplies, and new matter of attempt was propounded to him, yet
durst he never after undertake any; but quite abandons the coast of Genoa, and
gives the enemy just cause to triumph over his losle, and insult over his fear.

APHORISM XLI.
HE Auribus Lupum tenere.


that entertaines an army of Auxiliaries, takes a Wolf by the ears: there is
danger in holding him, and more in letting him go. And in a State where
Legionaries are ordained, the Subject will be liable to any tailly or
imposition, rather then suffer such troops to be quartered or billetted upon
them. Le but d'vn bon Prince est, de chasser les soldats loin de terres de ses
Suiects, and Alliez. Pro. Lat. Am. in Plut. Agesil.


C'est estre un bon Captain, d'empescher que la guerre n'entre en son pais,
and n'y permettre pas la longue demeuree d'vne Armee, voire, de ses bons amiss
and Ide^. Phocion
alliez.

Venalesque manus, ibi fas vbi maxima merces.

Non fide, non affectu tenentur, vt velint dominationi alienae sanguinem suum
Lucan. Tac. Agric.
commodare.

Sunt Populatores terrae, quam a populationibus vindicare debebant.

Vere Hirundines Aerarij. Curt. l. 3. Cic. ad Attic. Eras. fol. 293. Mac. dis.
l. 2. cap. 20.


Qui tanem alit peregrinum, huic praeter funem nihil fit reliqui.

Neque Principes neque Resp. sine periculo vti posse auxiliario ac mercenario
milite.


A wise Prince therefore, albeit he must use their service, yet he will buy
their absence though at a great rate, and use all possible means to keep them
far off.

In the month of September, the Dukes of Millan and Ferrara, come to the
French king at Asti, a frontier town of the Duchy of Millan. They treat of
their great affairs: and resolve of the manner of proceeding, and carrying the
war. The Millanese fearing (if winter grew upon them) that the French army
would not dislodge, but lie upon his country all the winter, till the next
Spring, supplies the King presently with great sums of money (the only cause
of his staying) for his more speedy departing. And so got his country eased
of so heavy a burden.

APHORISM XLII.
WOrth Si come la bonta d'vna Fortezza, consiste piu nella forma, che nella
materia: Rag. Stat. l. 9
Cosi la forza d'vn Essercito, sta piu presto nell' ordine, che nel numero o
altera cosa.


is valewed by the quality, not the greatness of a thing. For, as the
goodness of a fortress consists rather in this, that the parts be one to
another conformable, and in distance answerable, then that they be
vnproportionably great and capacious: Nunquam bonos fortesque Milites habebis,
nisi haec duo velut instrumenta Lip. pol. l. 5.
adhibeas, Delectum and Disciplinam.

Multitudo non vires habet, sed pondus. Senec.


(...). i. Manibus multis, non nominibus, Synes. ep. 79
opus est in bello.

Peccant hic qui emunt militem, non legunt. Galba in Ta. Veget. l. 1. c. 8.
Tacit. An. 14.


In omni conflictu, non tam prodest multitudo, quam virtus.

Etiam in multis legionibus, pauci sunt qui praelia profligant.

Disciplina Maiorum, Rempub. tenet: Quae si dilabatur, and nomen Romanum, and
Imperium amittimus. Valor. l. 2. c. 7


Disce miles militare, Galba est, non Getulicus.

Sic quod praecipiti via Cuspin. 34. Boctius.


Certum deserat ordinem,

Laetos non habet exitus.


So the strength of an army, stands more in the valor, and good order of the
combattants, then in the number. Against which number, are these two principal
advantages, great Ordinance, and good Ordonnance.

The French had this odds upon the enemy, they brought great store of Canon
with them: an instrument of war scarce heard of in Italy, and therefore more
feared. As for the men at arms, (which were all des Ordonnances du Roy) they
were not of the populasse and vulgar sort, but of the noblesse or gentry.
Their troops full, and in good equipage of horse and arms: Men, out of their
own birth and education, carried to all noble attempts, through desire of
honor, and hope of advancement: Their Commanders great Lords, and but of
hundreds at the most: All natural subjects to their Chief, and himself among
them in person: and they under his pay immediately, and therefore in no danger
to quit their colors, either through ambition or avarice: nor in fear of
concurrence or competition with other Captains, to be advanced to a greater
conduct or charge. Whereas on the other side, many of the Italian men at
arms, were either Pesants or Plebeians, or vassals to other Princes, wholly
depending upon their own Captains, with whom they couenanted for their
entertainment, and in whose power it was to casse, or keep them: so as neither
by nature, nor circumstance, they had any extraordinary motive to perform
good service. Besides, the Captains themselves, being seldom his natural
subjects, who entertained them, had their proper ends, full of iealousies and
heart-burnings one with another: and being mercenary, never had their companies
strong; and often proved not only unconstant, but unfaithful to them they
served.

APHORISM XLIII.
AN Detto del Re Alphonso contra i Sanesi, neutrali nella guerra d' Italia: and
poi da' Soldati dell' vna Fazione and dell' altra, predati. Ammir. l. 18.


Questi talisono tra l' incudine, e'l martello. Inter Saxum and Sacrum. Mantua,
vae miserae nimium vicina Cremonae. Pro. Ital. Vir. eclog. 9. Lucan. de Arim.
lib. 1.


O male vicinis haec moenia condita Gallis, O tristi damnata loco.


In-mate lodged in the middle stage of a building, is troubled with noise, and
fall of urine, or other filth, from them that dwell above him: or with smoke,
from them in the nether room. In such streights is the Neuter, and so he
fares between two Princes up in arms. Inter vtrumque neuter, non media via
est, sed nulla.

Ita medium se gerendo, nec Plebis vitauit odium Seruilius, nec apud Patres
Liu. l. 34. Liu. l. 19.
gratiam inijt: Appius vero Patribus mire gratus.

Romanos aut socios habere oportet, aut hosts: media via nulla est.

Si inter se duo potentes confligant, tuam qui attingunt regionem, qualescunque
Arist. in Liu. Macc. Prin. c. 21.
illi fuerint, sieve quod altero debellato, tibi sit a victore timendum, sieve
non, vtilius semper crit, site patefacto apertum bellum geras.

E meglio cader con un compagno, o mettersi in auuentura di vincere,
dichiarandosi, Boter. de Neutral.
che a certezza di restar oppresso da chiunque vincera l' impresa, non si
dichiaerando.

Quod optimum esse dicunt, non interponi vos bello, nihil tam vanum, immo tam
alienum, rebus vestris est: quippe sine gratia, sine dignitate praeda victoris
Quint. in Liu. 35.
eritis.

Quod optimum atque ex vsu vestrae Reip. (Achiuorum) maxim fore isti Legati
Antiochi dicunt (ne vos soilicet hoc nostro bello implicemini) nihil est quod
Mac. Pr. c. 21
vobis magis sit contrarium.


This third therefore, a confiner, and weaker then either; as he must of
necessity adhere to the one: so ought he defer to declare himself, till the
times be fit.

The Colonnesi, whose Seignories and States lay near the king of Naples, (and
therefore in danger, unless they entered into a party) had secretly contracted
with the French king. Alphonso sollicites them to his side, by all possible
means. They delay him, with asking unreasonable demands. He grants all they
can desire. They temporize yet longer, still bearing him in hand, of their
willingness to quit the French service, and follow his fortunes, till
d'Aubigni with all his troops was come down into Lombardie. Now they declare
themselves. They surprise the strong rock of Ostia, through intelligence they
had with some Spaniards in the place. They valiantly defend Nettuno a Port of
their own, besieged by the joint forces of the Pope and Alphonso. They are
presently relieved, and the siege raised by Camillo Vitelli, and his brother,
whom the French sent to that service. Whereas if they had broke out any
sooner, those forces of the enemy must needs have overthrown them, before
these succors could have come at them.

APHORISM XLIIII.
THere De vita and regno velut ad casum Aleae periclitari, stultitiae est, and
vanitatis. Stobaeus.


Capienda non nisirebus in arduis, praeceps via est. Seneca. Liuij. 22. Agell.
Noct. l. 13. cap. 3.


Nullo loco nisi quantum necessit as cogit, committat se fortunae.

Paulus Aemilius dixit, perraro nimis bonum Imperatorem, signis collatis
decertare, nisi summa necessitudo, aut summa ei occasio data esset.

Sono incertissime piu che tutte gl' altre attioni humane, gl' cuenti della
battaglia. Guicc.



is no warrant to run an extreme hazard, save only extreme necessity.
Pridie caveat, ne faciat quod se pigeat postridie. Plaut. Stich. Publ. Claudian.


Animus vereri qui scit, scit tuto aggredi.

-- Nec tristibus impar,

Nec pro successu tumidus, spaciumque mor andi,

Vincendique modum, mut at is noscit habenis.

Fortunam inter dubia, virtutem inter certa numerare. Tacit. de Ger



And therefore a wise General never puts his fortunes upon one days trial,
nor ventures all his rest, upon one doubtful chance of battle: where he
foresees by all military inductio^, that he may obtain his purpose without
blows.

The two armies, French and Neapolitan, are come down into Romagna: young
Ferdinand marches toward Imola, where the enemy was encamped. D'Aubigni
retires between the wood of Lugo and Columbara, near the trenches of
Geniuolo, a very strong place. The Neapolitan Prince finding the disadvantage,
dislodgeth from Imola to Toscanella. D'Aubigni upon the others rising, remoues
again toward Imola: sets down upon the river Santerno, between Lugo and S.
Agatha: having the Po at his back, a site stronger then the former. The
enemy comes upon the same river, near Mordano and Bubano; and in ranged order
of battle, presents himself to fight. D'Aubigni would not out of his
strength: the other durst not force him, but retires to Barbiano. By this time
a great supply of soldiers are come to the French. They are now as strong as
the enemy, yet still they refuse to try their fortunes: and so do now the
Neapolitans also. They both persuade themselves to have obtained the end of
their coming thither: for Ferdinand had impeached the French army from taking
any towns in Romagna; and stopped his farther proceeding for that year. And
d'Aubigni came for no other end, but to hinder the Neapolitan army from
inuading Lombardie.

APHORISM XLV.
AS Venenum praecipue insidiatur cordi. G^euin. l. 2. Cic.

poison is of such force, that it corrupts both blood and spirit, besieging,
seizing, and infecting the heart with the venomous contagion thereof, quite
altering the complexion and disposition of the man that has drunk it:
Facillime ad res iniust as impellitur, quisquis est altissimo animo, and
gloriae cupido.

Regnandi Dira cupido.

Vrit miserum gloria pectus. Virg. Seneca. Liu. l. 28. Salust. iug.


Maximum cupiditas imperij malum, inter mortales est.

Famae, fidei, postremo omnibus rebus, commodum suum anteponunt.

L' Ambizione e tale infirmita, ne gl' animi humani, che oue vna voltaha
fermato le radici, se non e a viua forza and per necessita, suelta non gli
lascia may Parut. l. 2. dis 15.
liberi and sani: Anzi col tempo crescendo il male, gli rende quasi farnetici:
si che ogni cosa l'ambizioso appetisce, and di niuna si troua satollo, non
hauendo misura nefreno.

-- L'Ambizioso

Ha la natura si seluagia and ria Aricst.


Che may non empie la bramosa voglia, Edoppo il pasto ha piu fame che pria.

Heu gauem sortem, quoties iniquus

Additur saeuo gladius veneno? Boet. de con


-- Heu dulce venenum

Et mundi lethalis honos. Maph. Supp. in Virg.
--


So the pestiferous desire of Sovereignty, though it seize on a mind of mild
and mansuete disposition, yet it is of such forcible operation, as it not only
alters man's nature, but makes man unnatural.

Lodowick Zforza a man naturally inclining to mildness, and abhorring
bloodshed, was by Ambition so far carried beyond his nature, as he spared not
the life of his own nephew and Liege Lord, who was taken away by poison, as
Theodore di Pauia a Physician of good esteem, protested: and by his unnatural
Uncle, as the world verily believed. The chief Counselors of that State, were
suborned by him (under pretense forsooth of the dangerous times) to transfer
the Sovereignty of that State upon him. He, for fashions sake seemed unwilling
to undertake so great a charge, and made semblance of disabilitie to undergo so
weighty a burden. But this pretense was without all color, to them which
truly considered his former courses, and understood how he had trafficked with
the Emperor long before to that purpose.

APHORISM XLVI.
WHo Verum si incipias, neque perficias gnauiter, nihilo plus agas, quam si des
operam, vt cum ratione insanias. (haec ille de amore, idem de bello.) Terent.
Eun.


Mars communis, and victum saepe erigit, and affligit victorem.

(...). i. Pugnare necesse est, scu paratus, seu Liu. l 28. Sent Graec.
imparatus.

Infirmi ingenij est, summae rei diffidere, lapsu aliquo: cum exiguis momentis,
subito inclinentur omnia, quae in bello geruntur. Eges. l. 4. c. 2.


Omnia experiri oportet, more Anguium, qui obtrito capite, postremo cauda
minantur. Flor. l. 1. c. 5.


Et fractis rebus, violentior vltima virtus. Sil. l. 1. Plut. apopth.


(...). Aut hanc, aut super hanc. Laeconicarum mulierum dictum, viris suis in
bellum profici scentibus.

Ozar morir da la vida. Pro. Hisp.



puts to sea for a long journey, and at a great charge, must resolve to hold on
his course, against all winds and weather, or accidents, that may offer to
stop him. So a Prince far engaged in a great action, must wrestle with all
difficulties, rather then quit the enterprise. Better it were to foresee the
dangers at first, and prevent them, or desist from the motion. But being once
embarked, on he must, whether he win or lose, with a Caesarian confidence at
the Rubicon, and a Spartan resolution, to go on with the sword, or fall on the
sword. For in this, he puts his fortunes upon trial: but in the other, is
manifest shame and loss.

The French king is come to Placentia: he wants money: he discouers no
revolt, or innovation in his favor: he has certain intelligence, that Zforza
(for all his protestations) will come no more at him. His whole Court has in
suspicion the faith, and in horror the fact of this Duke, committed upon his
nephew. They think the King greatly abused, and his honor scandalized, whose
coming into those parts, countenanced and secured so abominable a parricide.
They all persuade his present return into France. The King stands a while like
the Roman at the river, in dispute what to do. But at last resolves to go on
howsoever he speed.

APHORISM XLVII.
MEn Miscereomnia, and priuata vulnera, Reip. malis operire statuunt. Tac.
hist. l. 5.


Pars, quae domestico certamine inferior est, externo potius se applicat, quam
ciui cedat. Liu. l. 34.


Honores quos quieta Repub. desperant, perturbata consequi posse arbitrantur.
Cic. Cat. 2.


Les traistres sont bien venus, pres de ceux, qui tirent grand profit de leurs
trahisons. Am. Plu. Artax. Am. Plu. Dio^


Tousiours les mutins veulent auoir moyen de se nourir en ses insolences.


in disgrace with the State, and dislike of the present times, seek their
revenge from the common enemy. Who likes well of their motion, accepts their
offer of service and means, and embraces the action: Proditores, etiam ijs
quos anteponunt, inuisi sunt. Tac. An. l. 1.


Leui post admissum scelus gratia, dein graniore odio. Tac. An. l. 14. Antig.
apud Plut.


(...): i. Amare se prodentes, odissevero quum prodiderint. dixit.


Not for their good that move it, but because he finds it stand with his own
advantage.

Laurence and Julian Medici, confined to their houses in the country, steal
over the Appennine, to the French king. They solicit him to march with his
army through the Florentine State, in his way to Naples. They assure him of
the peoples devotion, and their own particular affection and service to the
Crown of France. The King might have taken the way of Romagna: so by the
Marquisate of Ancona, and over the river Tronto: thence into Abbruzzo, a
Province of the kingdom. For the forces that Alphonso had that way, were
scarce able to make head against his Vanguard led by d'Aubigny. Yet upon this
motion he resolves upon the way by Toseana, and the territories of Rome:
holding it more for his honor, with banner displayed to march through the
heart of his enemies countries, then to give them occasion to vaunt, that fear
had driven him another way. Besides, he held it a chief principle of war,
not to carry his army so far, and to leave at his back those places
unassured.

APHORISM XLVIII.
THe Orator places his strongest arguments in the first entrance of his Plea,
to persuade and confirm the auditorie. So should a General bend all his best
forces upon the first piece he attempteth, to animate and encouraege his
soldiers, and to give reputation to the action he intends. For first,
actions make deepest impressions, either of fear or courage. He is therefore
so much to tender his reputation at the first onset, as to leave nothing behind
him unbroken, but that which bends. Instandum fame: nam prout prima
cesserint, succedent vniuersa. Tacit. l. 12. Parut. l. 1. dis. 2.


La riputazione and la fama, importano assai in ogni nostra operazione, ma
principal mente, nelle cose della guerra.

Principibus praecipua rerum, ad famam dirigendae. Tac. An. l. 3.


Fama bella constant.

Fama bellum conficit, and parua momenta in spem, metumve, impellunt animos.
Curt. l. 8. Liu. l. 27.


Non minus fama, quam vi, stant res Principum. Tacit. An. 3. Plut. Gracc. Id.
Phocion.


Estre en bonne opinion enter ses ennemys, sert plus que grande force.

La bonne reputation d' un Chef, est cause d' un grand bien pour son armee.




The French army is come into Toscany, by the nether way of Pontremoli, which
stands at the foot of the mountains upon Magra, (a river that diuides this
country from Liguria) it is to pass by Serezzana, a town well fortified, but
the garrison weak, and the Governor of small authority, and less credit.
Serezanello a rock right over the town, was a piece impregnable, if it had
been well manned: seated in a barren straight, between the Appennine and the
sea; by which means it did much pinch and angustiate the army with want of
victuals. The King might have left these two Pieces unattempted, and made a
maine forward on his journey for Naples, either by Pisa, or some other
important place in the Florentine State, and have taken them in, by the way.
But he, to give reputation to his army, and to make the world think, that no
place of strength was able to stand before him; or, least others should take
heart to oppose him, by this example; he sets down before the place, with full
resolution not to depart, till the siege were raised, or the place carried.

APHORISM XLIX.
IN In Salentino, iuxta oppidum Manduriam, lacus est ad margines plenus: qui
neque exhaustis aquis minuitur, neque infusis augetur. Plin. not. hist l. 2. c.
103. Liu. l. 45.



the Salentine country, there is a lake brim-full: put in never so much, it
runs not over; draw out what you can, it is still full. Is demum vir erit,
cuius animum nec prospera flatu suo efferant: nec aduersa infringant.

Aequam memento rebus in arduis Hor. 2. car. 3.


Seruare mentem: non secus in bonis

Ab insolenti temper atam letitia.

Si nihil possis sperare, desperes nihil.


Such is the nature of a constant man, resolved to all fortunes. Calamitas
querula est, and superba foelicitas. Seneca. Liu. lib. 44. Tacit. An. l. 1.
Tacit. l. 1.


Rebus secundis auidi, aduersis incauti.

Sunt molles in calamitate, mortalium animi.

Quem res plus nimio delectauere secundae,

Mutatae quatient. -- Horat.


Casibus aduersis fracta qui mente recumbit,

Fortuna ignorant dexteriore frui. Faust.


Humilis and paruus animus, prosperitatibus effertur: aduersis autem rebus
deprimitur. Epicar.


(...). i. Superbiens secundis, deiectus aduersis. Thucyd.


(...). i. Aduersus inferiores seuerus maxim, and superbus, erga superiores
imprimis adulator. Polyb.



Whereas the man who bears his prosperity, neither with moderation nor
prudence, but is full blown like abladder, with the wind of his own pride;
he seldom in adversity shows either constancy or courage: one prick of
desaster empties his swollen heart of all hopes: and like an unskillful and
dejected seaman, upon every little storm he cuts Cable and Mast, and throws
all over board; where, but the slaking of some few sails would serve.

Peter Medici upon no imminent necessity, nor apparent good to the State, had
tied himself to Alphonsoes fortunes: had scornfully rejected the counsel of
the grauer Citizens: had desperately provoked the arms and enmity of France
and Millan against him: had imprudently fore-slaked the fortifying of his
country, and making sure the passages: had improuidently fore-slowed the
raising of soldiers, and provision of arms: had slept supinely in all
carelessness, and boasted vainly in his security. But now that the wheel is
turned, the French forces at his doors, the Arragonese succors far off, and
himself destitute of all possible and present help: he seeks that at his
enemies hands, which he could not have of his friends: he buys his peace, and
the protection of his State, in a submisse and humble manner, and at a high and
hard rate: he renders up Serezzana, Serezzanello, and Pietra-Santa, for caution
of his faith, till the Kings return from his conquest of Naples: he undertakes
to procure him the Impressed of one hundred thousand Ducats, out of the city of
Florence; and to consigne the fortresses of Pisa and Ligorne into his hands.
And more would Medici have granted, if the King had demanded more: who ere
while would have been glad of his friendship, and alliance with that State,
upon far easier terms.

APHORISM L.
ONe Finis alterius mali, gradus est futuri. Sen. Guicc.


Il piu delle volte, l'Auuersita, non vanno sole.

I mali, non vengono may scompagnati.

Vim fortunae reputa, and omnia quae agimus, subiecta esse mill casibus.
Guazz. Liu. l. 30. Curt. l. 8.


Quotidie experimur, quam caduca foelicitas sit.

Cuncta mortalium incerta: quantoque plus adeptus sis, tanto magis in lubrico
te Tacit. An. 1.
censeas.

Quem dies vidit veniens superbum, Sen. Thyest.


Hunc dies vidit fugiens iacentem.

Si tossed que l'auuersite a commence a saisir un homme au colet, elle continue
ses secousses, par les quelles il ne tomb pas a la premiere, ni a la second;
mais en Am. Plut. Agis.
fin il est constraint, de prendre le saut.


mischief or loss comes seldom alone, but follows like billows, one in the
neck of another. In which Tide of misfortune, men are in few days more
ouer-whelmed with the waves of damage and trouble, then they can (after) free
themselves of, in the ebb of many years. And therefore they cry out on their
Stars, and rail at Fortune, who is so barren of her favors, and fruitful
otherwise: whereas the stars may rather complain of them, who are never with
any good fortune satisfied, nor by many desastrous accidents warned. Sapiens
pol ipse fingit fortunam sibi. Plaut. Trin. Pro. Lat.


Sapiens dominabitur astris.

Fortuna ius in hominis mores non habet.

Fatum congruere rebus putant, sed non e vagis stellis, verum apud principia
Senec. sent. Tacit. An. l. 6
and nexus naturalium causarum.

Si in secundis rebus bonam quoque mentem darent Dij, non ea solum quae
euenissent, Liu. l. 30.
sed etiam quae euenire possent, reputaremus.


But wise men (in this sense) do govern the stars.

Alphonso had failed in the oppugnation of Nettuno: his Sea-forces were sore
shaken at Porto-Venere; and forced to abandone the enterprise of Liguria. His
strict allie Medici had forsaken him, and made his peace with the French. So
did Riario the Lord of Imola and Furli. He had lost the strong town of
Mardano: and his army in Romagna much weakened in that fruitless voyage, was
retired by the way of Rome, into the kingdom of Naples. These desasters
succeeded immediately one in the neck of another: and then the flight from his
kingdom, the catastrophe and full sum of all his misfortunes.

APHORISM LI.
INsolent Tales isti potentiam suam non been ferunt, and ideo nec diu ferunt.
Lip. Pol. l. 3. Sen. de ira. Curt.


Parce vtere potestate tua, vt diu vtare.

Vide ne dum ad cacumen venire contendis, vna cum ipsis ramis quos deprehendis,
decidas.

Vide ne quanto altius elatus es, hoc foedius corruas.

In secundis rebus, nihil in quemquam superbe ac violenter consulere decet, nec
Liu. l. 21. Liu. l. 45.
praesenti credere fortunae, cum quid vesper ferat, incertum sit.

Impone foelicitati tuae frenos, facilius eam reges.

Arbores magnae diu crescunt, vna hora extirpantur. Curt. l. 7. Scyth. Alex.
Ammin. l. 5.



carriages, in the most eminent person of a Free State, against any particular
man or family, are long with patience endured, and by his popularitie and
dependence of friends, strongly borne out. Non si puo dar precetto meglio,
quando si vuole rimediar a vno inconueniente, il quale sia sotto in vno Stato,
per la molta potenza and autorita d'alcuno, che di mozzargli quelli mezzi and
istromenti, per i quali, egli a quella autorita perueniua.

(...). Plat. de Leg. l. 12. Cic. 4. At. 1. Plato.
i Si quis priuatim, sine publico Scito, pacem, bellumve fecerit, capitale esto.

Pinnas his incidas oportet, ne possint renasci.

Populus leuiter alicuius rei satur, and qui in huius societatem se adiungit,
miser est.

La Fureur des peuples est a craindre, a ceux qui sont leurs Chefs, si en tout
il ne Haill. Est. l. 2.
leur complaisent.

Il sentit bien, que la foydes peuples sent mal, and qu'il ne faut se parfumer
de Idem. lib. 3.
drogue si puante.


But when his errors come once to touch the public, and prejudice the
general good of the commonwealth, then every member is sensible of the wrong,
and puts a helping hand to his downe-fall.

Infinite had been the insolences and transgressions of Peter Medici, toward
diverse particular citizens, and those of the Nobility, and better sort, yet he
still held his greatness: till now that he had made a contract of peace and
amity with the French king, most prejudicial to his country: without the
consent of other magistrates and chief citizens; decree of the Council, or
commission from the State. This wound could in no wise be salued: the whole
city condemns it: his friends durst not excuse him: the commons stir up one
another to recover their liberty: Jacob Neri keeps him out of the Council
chamber, offering to come in. The city rises in arms: the Senate proclaims
him rebel: he flies with his two brethren, John and Julian: leaving the noble
family of the Medici overthrown, by the insolency and rashness of one young
man, which for threescore years together had had chief stroke in the manage
of those public affairs, and for many years before had flourished in all
fullness of wealth and reputation.

APHORISM LII.
IT Satis est si hoc habemus, ne quis nobis malefacere possit. Aug. in Suet ca.
51. Sen. ep 42.


Multorum, quia imbecilla sunt, latent vitia: non minus ausuri cum illis vires
suae placuerint.

A cassa aperta il giusto pecca. Pro. Ital. Sil. l. 32. Horat.



is then sure trusting, when we take from a man all means of breaking. For the
proverb says, that a true man can scarce hold his fingers, if he find a
chest open. O Reges, ne rumpite foedera pacis: nec Regnis postferte fidem.


As therefore it is a stain to the honor of a Prince, not to keep his word
and covenant: Dulcis inexpertis cultura potentis amici, Expertus metuet. --

Aliqui suspectum habent Regum nomen, vt fraudulentum in pactionibus. Dion.
Halyc. Ovid. trist. 2.


Nam quanquam soli possunt prodesse potentes,

Non prosunt, potius plurimum obesse solent.

Nulla ciuitatibus aduersus tyrannos melior cautio est, diffidentia. Plut.
reip. ger. 821. Vide Virg. Aen. l. 2. Senec. ep. 3.


Aut hoc inclusi ligno, etc. Aut haec in nostros, etc. Aut aliquis latet error,
etc. Quicquid id est, timeo Danaos.

Nec cito credideris, quantum cito credere laedat.


So is it no less blemish to the wisdom of a State, in time of just suspect,
not to prevent and stop the means of breaking it: or not to take pledges of
the discontented and suspected subject, as well in such jealous times, as
formerly in cases of less danger.

Charles the 8. is come to Pisa: he finds the citizens groaning under the
Florentine yoke, and imploring his Majesty to redress their wrongs, and free
them of their servitude. The King grants their desire, contrary to the late
articles concluded at Serezzana: where, this town was consigned into his
hands, for caution only, till his return from Naples: and then to be
surrendered up again. The Pisanes (under protection of the King) take arms;
pull down the ensigns of Florence in every place of the city, and reassume
their liberty. The Florentines (who upon all former occasions had been jealous
of the Pisanes loyalty, and doubtful of their revolt) had not in such a time
of danger as this, brought away their chief citizens, nor put a strong
garrison of strangers into the town, as in all good policy they ought to have
done.

APHORISM LIII.
NOnius La Liberte est un breuuage, qui empoisonne les entendements des hommes.
Haill. est. l. 2.


Le nom de Liberte, est la plus belle, la plus douce, and la plus tromperesse
chose du monde. Idem alibi.



chose rather to lose all his honors and fortunes, then to quit his Opall ring
to Anthony. Of such a price, but a far fairer jewel is Liberty: a thing so
sweet and precious, as it deserves the selling of all we have, and running
into any hazard. E' permesso a ciascuno, a desiderar divenir a meglior fortuna:
Ma deue anco ciascuno toller are quello, che la sort gli ha dato. Guicc.


Quoy qu'vn dit, que soit loisible, de s'exempter de la subjection de son
Seigneur, s'il est mal traitte: Cela s'entend de l'arrier vassal, qui a recours
a son Seigneur Souerain, Bodin. de rep. lib. 5.
and non pas du vassallige.

Nimia licentia semper euadit in aliquod magnum malum.

Quidam, vt imperium euertant, libertatem praeferunt: si peruerterint, ipsam
Teren. Adel. Tac. An. 16.
aggredientur.

Ne contumaciam cum pernicie, potius quam obsequium cum securitate, Tacit.
hist. 4.
malis.

Fallitur egregio quis quis sub Principe credit Claudian.


Seruitium: Nunquam libertas gratior extat,

Quam sub Rege pio. --


Yet, not in equity to be attempted against a lawful Sovereign: nor in
reason, where the possibility to hold it, is not so great as the means to get
it.

The Duke of Millan had plotted the revolt of Pisa, with certain banished
citizens: holding this the best and most compendious way for him to
in-signorize himself of that town: though indeed it after proved the very
source of all his misfortunes. These mal-contents like the motion, enter into
the action, and prevail: not considering the weakness of the city, how it
was dispeopled, how the remainder was impouerished: nor weighing the riches and
forces of the Florentines, and their determinate resolution never to quit it.
They called not into consideration the certainty of a continuing war, and
the uncertainty of their fleeting friends. And lastly, that no other Prince
would embarke himself into their troubles and charge, except it were to make
himself absolute Lord over them: with many other difficulties, which after
appeared, accompanied with their own extreme calamity.

APHORISM LIIII.
WHile Crocodilus satur, and semper esculento ore, in littore somno datus,
Trochilum inuitat ad purgandum dentes. In qua voluptate somno pressum
conspicatus Plin. not. hist. l. 8. c. 25.
Ichneumon, per easdem fauces, vt telum aliquod immissus, erodit aluum.


the Crocodile sleeps gaping with open mouth, the Indian Ratt shootes himself
into his belly, and gnawes his guts in sunder: Inter Scopulos quibus illidi ac
frangi Reip. Nauis solet, prima mihi fiducia occurrit. Lip. Pol. l. 3.


Tales isti, contemnendis, quam cauendis hostibus, aptiores. Tac. hist. l. 4.
Sen. de Ben. l. 6. c. 30.


Multi, dum se tam magnos quam audiunt, credunt, attraxere superuacua, and in
discrimen rerum omnium peruentur a bella.

Praeproperi and feroces semper incauti, grati tantum vulgo: Nam stolidis aut
barbaris, cunctatio vilis. Lip. Pol. l. 5.


(...). i. Cum supina fiducia Thucyd. l. 1.
sententiam dant, in reipsa trepidantes deficiunt.


So enters Mischief at the open gates of Security. Selfe-conceited
confidence in our own strength, and ouer-weening credulity of another
honesty, begets in men this supine negligence. Nimis homo nihil est, qui piger
est. Nam vigilare decet hominem, qui vult Plaut. Rud.
sua tempore conficere negotia.

Metiri sua regna decet, viresque fateri. Lucan. 8.


Quicquid est incoctum, non expromunt, been coctum duunt.

(...). i. Credulitas pariter ac diffidentia, Plaut. mil. gl. Hesiod. l. 1.
perdiderunt homines.


But a watchful providence preuents an imminent danger.

Charles the 8. as a late reconciled friend with Florence, approaches the city
with his whole army. For, d'Aubigny is newly come to him by commandment, with
all the troops he had in Romagna: only, for his more speed, he had left his
artillery at Castro Caro. The King enters Florence, armed, on horseback, with
his Lance on his thigh. He lays claim to the city by the law of arms,
because he had entered it in warlicke manner. The State foresaw this his
ambition, but durst not deny his entrance: yet, to prevent the worst, they had
formerly and prouidently given order, to fill the chief places of the town
(besides many private houses) with armed soldiers: that upon any sudden
tumult, the great Bell of the Palace should be rung; and that upon this
alarm, both these soldiers lodged within, and others quartered near about
the city, to this purpose, should come to the rescue. Which provisions so
well made, when they were known to the King, he presently quits his claim:
and falls to treat with them of a perfect League, upon more equal conditions.

APHORISM LV.
PRinces (...). i. Multi Regis oculi, multae aures.

An nescis long as Regibus esse manus? Xen. paed. l. 8 Ovid. ep. Hell Plat. in
The.



are said to have many eyes, and long arms: because, their understanding is
enlightened by many, and their power is exercised afar off. (...). i.
Consultor res est optima.

(...). i. Sacra res est Consultatio.

(...). i. Deliberatio and consultatio cum Sen. gr. Eras. Arist. pol. l. 4.
alijs, diuinissima res est inter homines.

Nullum magis sapientiae argumentum in Principe, quam sapientium virorum Bod.
l. 3.
delectum habere, vt eorum consilijs frui possit.

Vt alienis consilijs potius quam suis sapere, ac res gerere consuesceret: Sic
Ludouicus 11. Carolum filium institui voluit. Idem fol. 372



As therefore nothing is more needful to them, then faithful Counselors, and
upright executioners of their will: Pessimum very affectus, and iudicy venenum,
sua cuique vtilitas.

Priuatae res semper offecere, officientque publicis negotijs. Tac. hist. l. 2.
Liui. l. 22. Propert. l. 3.


Auro pulsa fides, auro venalia iura,

Aurum lex sequitur, mox sine lege pudor.

Ipse decor recti, facti si praemia desint, Ovid. Pon. 2


Non mouet, and gratis poenitet esse probum.

Priuato vsui bonum publicum postponitur. Tacit. An. 6.



So nothing is more perilous, when the party, whose service is used,
directs his counsels or actions, to his own particular advantage.

The French king is moved in the behalf of Peter Medici, to mediate for his
return from exile: he is persuaded by some of his Council, that his presence
would greatly further the kings affairs. He writes him letters of this effect,
and gives him assurance of his restoration to his country and honors. These
letters come to him at Venice. He is in much suspense: distracted between this
hope, and the fear not to fall into his enemies hands. He communicates the
matter with the Senate, and desires their advice. They knowing what benefit the
king would make of his return (then which nothing could be more unpleasing, or
prejudicial to them and their State) dissuade him from going: put him in mind
what a folly it were to entrust himself in their power, and then stand at
their mercy, whom he had offended so much: advise him to stay a fitter
occasion: offer to engage themselves in his quarrel; and when time shall
serve, with their uttermost power to restore him home again. He enclineth to
this counsel, refuses the kings offer, and remains a Bandito in Venice.

APHORISM LVI.
OF Vide Plinium Naturali historia, per totum libri octaui tractum. Plin. l. 8.
Tacit. An. l. 1. Lip. Pol. l. 3.

all the elements, fire is of the quickest and noblest nature: And of all
creatures, those are the brauest, and most warlicke, which are by nature of a
swift, courageous, and fiery disposition, as the Lion, the Horse, the Eagle,
the Dolphin; rather then the hugest and strongest, as the Elephant, the Camel,
the Ox, and the Whale. Cunctatione opus non est, vbi perniciosior sit quies,
quam temeritas.

Consilia calida and audacia, in omni administratione damnanda, at in nouo
aliquo aut subito discrimine, vtiliter and necessario saepe adhibenda.

Inter ancipitia, deterrimum est media sequi. Tacit. hist. l. 3 Id. Ibid.
Tasso. cant. 6


Plerique hic peccant: and in rebus afflictis, nec provident satis, nec audent.

Che spesso auuien, che ne' maggior perigli,

Sono i piu audaci, gl' ottimi consigli.

Si quis Princeps, ab alio quippiam impetrare cupiat, cuius multum intersit,
tunc Maccia. l. 3. disc.
saepe commodissima est ea occasio, quae, ei a quo petis, nullum deliber andi
spacium concedit: sed potius illi respondendi subitam necessitatem imponit: and
praesens periculum demonstrat, sinegatur id quod petitur.

Audendum est aliquid, si vis esse aliquid. Audaces fortuna iuuat. Adag. Eras.
Tacit. An. 15


Non ignauia magna imperia continentur, sed virorum armorumque faciendum
certamen.

Saepe fit vt impetu quodam and audacia, obtineatur id, quod legitime
progredienti nunquam contigisset. Macci.


Agendo, audendoque, res Romana creuit, non his segnibus consilijs quae timida
vocantur. Liui. l. 22.


In rebus asperis, and tenui spe, fortissima quaeque consilia, tutissima sunt.
Liui. l. 25. Senec. Aga^. Salust. lug.


Capienda rebus in arduis, praeceps via est.

Semper in praelio, his maximum periculum est, qui maxim timent.


So of the actions of men, those of Courage and brave Resolution are the
noblest; because they often prevail, even where counsel, wisdom, force, and
all other means do fail.

The Florentines treat with the French king, about the conditions of their
peace. The Kings demands are held to be most unreasonable: he will not be
drawn to any other, nor stir one iotte from what he had propounded. Peter
Capponi, a gentleman of a noble house, and one of the Commissioners for the
Treaty, snatcheth the paper of Articles out of the French Secretaries hands,
tears them before the kings face: bids him sound his trumpets to the fight,
and they would ring their Palace bell, (which was their alarm to the
battle:) and so he flings out of the chamber. This brave resolution and hot
courage of Capponi, thawes the icie and stiff demands of the king, and
reduces him to a more supple and reasonable conclusion. The Articles agreed
upon, are these: A reciprocal forgetfulness of fore-passed wrongs. That
Florence should be friend, confederate, and in perpetual protection of the
Crown of France. That the king should hold in his hands Pisa, Ligorne,
Pietra-Santa, Serezzana, and Serezzanello, till his return from the conquest
of Naples; and then to surrender them up to the Florentines, without demanding
charges; and in the mean time they to have the maine profits. That the
conquest should be understood perfect, when the king had taken the city of
Naples, or made a peace or truce for two years; or were himself in person
returned back out of Italy. That the Commanders of those places, and the
Captains of companies in them, should presently swear to the delivery of them
up, at the time assigned. That the city should contribute toward the kings
wars, fifty thousand Ducats within fifteen days; forty thousand more in
the month of March; and thirty thousand in June, next after following. That
Medici should be freed from his proscription, and confiscation of his lands and
goods, but that himself should not come within one hundred miles of the State
of Florence: nor his brethren within one hundred of the city.

APHORISM LVII.
NO Fides, nulla necessitate ad fallendum impellitur: nullo corrumpitur
praemio. Senec. ep. 89


Apud Romanos, iuxta diuinas religiones, fides humana colitur.

Iurando gratiam Scythas sancire ne credideris, colendo fidem, iurant. Liui. l.
9. Curt. l. 7. Idem. Ibid.


Graecorum ista cautio est, qui acta consignant, and Deos inuocant: nos
religionem in ipsa fide nouimus.


necessity can be forcible enough, nor pretense warrantable, to urge a man to
be disloyal, or make breach of his word and faith to his Prince. Quoties
necesse est fallere, aut falli, a tuis patiare potius ipse, quam facias scelus.
Senec. Theb


Perfidiosum and nefarium est, fidem frangere, quae continet vitam.

Qui non reuerentur homines, fallunt Deos. Cic. pro Ros. Liuij. Thucyd. l. 4.
Tibull.


Fraus foedior quam aperta violentia.


It is therefore hateful in all men, but more, when it is in a person noble by
blood, and a soldier; and most of all, when it is accompanied with
ingratitude. -- Etsi quis primo periuria celat,

Sera tamen tacitis poena venit pedibus,

Perfidi and ruptores pacis, vltioni and gloriae sunt mactandi. Tacit. An. 2.



Who seldom escapes the due rewards for such an offense.

Virginio Orsini was tied in many obligations of faith and allegiance to the
house of Arragon: he was natural vassal to Alphonso: he was Captaine-generall
of his army, and high Constable of the kingdom of Naples: his son
Iohn-Iordan had married the base daughter of Ferdinand; and by her had received
great favors, and possessed great estates in that Realm: besides, the war
between the Pope and his Master, grew first upon his quarrel. All this
notwithstanding, he causes his sons to accord with the French king; binding
themselves to supply victuals, and give free passage to his army through all
the estates they held within the jurisdiction of the Church. They deliver up
Campagnana and some other towns of good strength and great importance, for the
kings affairs, to the Cardinal Gurgense, in Deposito, for caution of
performance. They entertain the king in their chief castle of Bracciano. by
whom, both Virginio himself, and diverse others of his house, were not long
after taken prisoners.

APHORISM LVIII.
AS Tutissimum est infer, cum timeas, gradum.

E'meglio l' assaltar, che l' esser assaltato. Senec. H^^p Rag. Stat.


Hiero Syracusanus, persuasit Romany, ad transportandas legiones in Italiam:
Liu. l. 31.
vt and hosts in terra sua haberent, minusque laxamenti daretur ijs, ad
auxilia Hannibali sumenda.

Expedit metum vltro infer hosti, and ab se remoto periculo, alium in
discrimen Liu. l. 38.
adducere.

Quand on voit venir le danger, il faut gaigner le deuant, and n' attendre pas
Am. Plut. Caro.
que le mal soit fait, pour y donner order.

La Sicurezza consiste, ne'l tener il Nemico e'l pericolo lontano da casa
nostra: Perch, la vicinanza del male, e gran part d'esso male. Rag. Stat. l. 6


Era meglio ch' egli andasse

I nemici a trouar nella lor terra, Ariost. agg. 2


Esopra lor Campi alloggiasse,

Che dentro a le confine l' aspettasse.


they say in schools of Art, It is easier to oppose then answer: So they find
by proof in the art of war, that it is easier and safer to obuiate and meet
danger in the way, then to tarry till it come home to our own doors.
Inferimus bellum, infestisque signis descendimus in Italiam: tanto audacius
fortiusque pugnaturi, quanto mayor spes, maiorque animus inferentis est quam
arcentis. Han. ap. Liu.


Prouocando, tuis auges confidentiam, and aduersarijs minuis: quia, fortiores
videntur qui prouocare non dubitant. Liui.


Multum interest alienos populere fines an tu is vri excindique videas: plus
animi Liu. l. 38. Scipio.
est inferenti periculum quam propulsanti: Ad hoc, mayor ignotarum rerum est
terror.

Grande per l' ordinario, e l' auuantaggio di chi assalisce altrui, nella casa
propria: Paruta l. 2. disc. 5.
perch tiene lontani da se i pericoli, and i danni maggiori della guerra:
Accresce a suoi l' ardire: lo leua a' nemici: and non pur con le forze, ma con
la riputazione, and anco con lospauento, (che si met a nemici) si fa la
strada piu facile alla vittoria.


For, besides that the seat of war is always miserable, there is ever more
courage in the assailer, and commonly better success.

The State of Venice and Duke of Millan, observe with a watchful eye the
proceedings of the French army. They consider how the chief forts in Toscany,
are delivered him in caution: how he had left a gartison in Siena: had accorded
with the Orsini; and that nothing stood in his way, but yielded to his forces.
They fear that the kingdom of Naples alone, will not content an ambitious
king, puffed up with the pride of so great success. And therefore they treat
of a strong confederation and forces to be sent in Alphonsoes aid against him:
which though at first it found some let, nor could they send succors in time to
Naples, as they were purposed, by reason of the shameful flight of Alphonso,
from before the face of the French army at Viterbo: yet it was not long after,
but the former treaty was renewed, the League confirmed, and forces levied;
whereas they gave him a brave encounter in his return, upon Taro.

APHORISM LIX.
THe Le plus fort done la loy. Am. Plut. Gracc. Plaut. Herc. fur.


E malis, quod minimum est, id minimum est malum.

Pacem reduci velle victori expedit,

Victo necesse est. --


stronger gives the law, the weaker must take the less of evils. Therefore if
thou find thy self ouer-weake, make thy peace at as low a rate as thou can.
Il faut tousiours accepter la paix, quand un puissant enemi la cherche and Am.
Plut. Phoc. Liui. l. 25.
la present.

Aliqua tolerabili condition finies bellum.

Quauis tuta condition pacem accipere malis, quam cum valentiore certare.
Caes. bell. ciu.


Gubernator, vbi naufragium timet, iactura, quicquid sanari potest, redimit.
Curt. l. 5.


Il faut s'humilier deuant ceux, qui ont la guerre en la main. Am. Plu. pho.
Rag. Stat. l. 6


Se l'auuersario sia tanto potente, che non vi sia speranza di poterci
defendere, sara vffizio d'vnsauio Capitano, il riscuotersi dalla ruina
imminente, col minor male che si potra.


For any conditions are rather to be accepted, then an inevitable overthrow
expected. La guerre, -- Casse-loix, Casse-moeurs, Bartas. fur.


Rase-forts, verse-sang, Brusle-hostels, Aime-ploeurs:

Desoubs ses pieds d' Arrain, croulle toute la Terre,

Sa Bouche est un Brasier, sa voix est un Tonnerre,

Chasque doit de sa main, est un Charbon bruyant,

Et chasque son regard, un Esclair flamboyant.


So horrible are the effects of war.

Alexander the 6. was one of the first that called the French king against
Naples: and the first of all other, that had broken his faith, and the articles
of confederation with him. The remembrance hereof, and of his infamous and
symoniacall purchase of the Papacy, and lewd administration in that his
office, was a thing that terrified and perplexed him much: seeing the Cardinal
of S. Peter in Vincola, and other his capital and mortal enemies, so near in
grace, and great in power, with the King: who now with his army was approached
nigh Rome: Ciuita-Vecchia and Cornetto, with the greatest part of his country
on that side the Tiber, were already lost, and at the French devotion. He must
put the Duke of Calabria and his army out of Rome, and suffer the king to
enter, as he entered Florence, (armed on horseback with his Lance on his thigh)
or else look for no peace. It was a hard case to abandone his friends, and
commit himself to the power of his enemies, before all differences were
compounded, or his peace made: yet perforce he yields to those conditions,
and further capitulates thus: That between them shall be perpetual amity,
and confederation defensive: That the king shall hold Ciuita-Vecchia, Terracina
and Spoleto, for caution. That the Pope shall remit all offenses to those
Cardinals and Barons that had followed the French part. That he shall give the
king the Inuestiture of Naples. That he shall deliver him Gemyn, the brother of
Baiaset the great Turk, whom (corrupted with the Turks money, for the sum
of forty thousand Ducats yearly) he kept in safe custody, least he should
cause trouble and rebellion in the Ottoman Empire. That he should pardon the
Prefect or Provost of Rome, for intercepting the last years allowance of
forty thousand Ducats at Sinigaglia. And lastly, that Caesar Borgia Cardinal
of Valencia, should follow the kings army three months, (as Legate Apo
stolicke in show) but indeed as pledge for these conditions.

APHORISM LX.
THe Violenta nemo imperia continuit diu: moderata durant.

Malos Principes detestantur, etiam qui malos faciunt. Seneca. Plin. Paneg.
Incer. Aut. Sen. Her. fur.


Regna cum scelere, omnibus sunt exilijs grauiora.


building, whose ground-sels are rotten, may for a time be vnder-propped, and
kept up: but when it is once falling, there is no possible means to stay it.
So the Government, whose foundation is laid in blood, or banishment of the
Nobility, and oppression of the Commons, may subsist for a while: Semel
profecto premere foelices, Deus --

Cum coepit, vrget: hos habent magna exitus.

Adeo vt nullis consilijs vel auxilijs, id vitemus aut mutemus. Lip. pol. l. 1.
Sen. de Cle. l. 5.


Reges consenescunt, liberisque ac nepotibus tradunt regnum: Tyrannorum vero
execrabilis, ac breuis potestas est.

Geux qui veulent bastir leurs maisons, sur les ruins de l' estat public,
bastissent leur ruin propre. Am. Plu. Cic


Ad generum Cereris, sine caede and vulnere pauci

Descendunt Reges, and sicca morte tyranni. Iuuen. Sat. 10


-- Sic sors incerta vagatur,

Fertque refertque vices, and habent mortalia casum. Lucan. l. 2.


-- Sic omnia fatis Virgil.


In peius ruere, and retro sublapsa referri.


But when it once begins to fall, the downe-fall is violent, and sudden.

Rome is turned French. Aquila, and almost all Abbruzzi is revolted. The Flower
de Lys is set up in every place. Fabritio Colonna has taken in the countries
of Albi and Tagliacozzo. The Aniowine faction is up in arms. All the kingdom
cries out of the former cruelties and tyrannies of Alphonso, and his deceassed
father. The distressed king seeing now all things, not in the way of commotion,
but of manifest precipitation and open rebellion; amazed with the terror of
this sight, and tormented with the horror of his guilty conscience,
despairing of means to resist so fatal a tempest, and forgetting the
reputation and fame he had got in his former wars; flies secretly with some
few Jewels and treasure, into the Isle of Sicilia, and abandones all to the
enemy, not acquainting either his brother or his son with his flight.

APHORISM LXI.
THe Facile est vincere non repugnantem. Arist.


Non ille solus vincitur hostis, qui cadit in acie, pondere armorum oppressus,
and Curt.
virium: tutius etiam tuba tacente sub iugo mittitur voluntarius: qui sentit
expertus, nec fortitudinem in rebels, nec lenitatem in supplices animos,
hosti deesse.


conquest is easy, where there is neither valor, counsel, power, nor desire
of glory: though that be more noble which prevails against Resistance, and
opens his way with the sword, where he finds it shut against him. Censebant
Achaei, neque splendidam, neque firmam vllam victoriam, Poly. l. 13.
nisi quis palam and ex condicto depugnans, animos quoque deiecisset
aduersariorum.

-- Nulla est victoria mayor, Claudian.


Quam quae confessos animo quoque subiugat hosts.

-- Si decidit hostis Stat. Theb. 8.


Ire super satis est, vitamque relinquere victo.

Quae vindicta prior, quam cum formido superbos Claud. de bell. Get.


Flectit? --

-- Ignoscere pulchrum

Iam misero, poenaeque genus vidisse precantem. Id. Ibid.



But the greatest and most glorious victory of all, is, not only to break
the forces, but to triumph over the broken and dejected heart of the
vanquished.

Monte-fortino, a strong place belonging to Iacopo Conti a Roman Baron, is
besieged, battered, assaulted, and sacked, all in one day. Mount-S. John, a
piece likewise of good strength, is won in few hours, the soldiers all
slain, the town rifled, and burned. S. Germane is one of the keys of the
kingdom, it has before it the fair river Garigliano, whereupon it stands,
high and impassable rocks on the one side, and deep marshes on the other.
Here the new king Ferdinand, with an army of fifty Squadrons of horse, and
six thousand choice foot, attends the coming of the French, and intends to bid
him battle. Yet at the very first brute of the enemies approach, he shamefully
quits the place, and retires to Capua, thence to Naples, to appease the tumult
there. He is no sooner gone, but the Capuans with their governor Triultio,
render themselves to the French king. Auuersa follows the example of Capua:
and Naples of Auuersa. Such faithless and faint-hearted resistance made the
Neapolitans, and so easy a purchase had the French king of so large and noble
a kingdom: having with an incredible course of unheard of fortune, and beyond
the example even of Caesar himself, without spreading a tent, or breaking a
lance, conquered all lets, before he came at them.

APHORISM LXII.
IN Id est viri and ducis, non deesse fortunae praebentise, and oblata casu
flectere Liui. l. 28.
ad consilium.

Ars viuendi and bellandi est Prudentia, vt medicina valetudinis. Cic. de sin.
Lip. pol. l. 3. c Plutar.


Men's vna sapiens, plurium vincit manus: quae fallere non vult, falli non
potest.

Atqui ego si mihi adsistas caesia Diua, Homer. Il. N
Velter centum contra homines concurrere pugna

Ausim: te fretus comite, o Dea, and adiutrice.

(...). Principis propria est and vnica virtus, prudentia. Arist. pol. 2.



the active part of military service, the Captains greatest virtue is to
apprehend a present occasion of advantage, and to take it. Ma che gioua (ohime)
che del periglio Tasso. cant. 4.


Vicino, omai fosse praesago il cuore,

S'irresoluto in ritrouir rimedio,

La mia tenera eta rendesse'l timore.


So on the Passive side, the evasion from a sudden and imminent danger, is
much more noble then a forethought of prevention. For in this is only matter
of judgment, but in that is the life of action and execution.

Young Ferdinand had in open assembly made a speech full of compassion to the
Neapolitans. He had absolved them of their oath and allegiance: with a noble
and virtuous protestation, that whatsoever his fathers and grandfathers faults
were in their government, he for his own part had never wronged any man while
he was Prince, or since he was King. All will not serve. The city is in
revolt. The king upon his departure. When suddenly he has secret
intelligence, that the Dutch guard in Castel-nuouo (or the Palace) had
resolved to seize on his person, and sell him to the French king. He presently
apprehends the danger, and means of escape; thus: He bids the Dutch take
present spoil of all his goods and furniture in the Palace. They all run
greedily to the pillage. Mean while, he with his uncle Frederick, and the old
Queen his grandmother, have leisure to embarque themselves in certain light
galleys, and make their escape.

APHORISMS, CIVIL AND MILITARY. LIB. II.
APHORISM I.
COntracts Alexander, fatalis iugi lora cum soluere nonposset, abscidit. Aus.
praefat. Adag. Eras.


(...). i. Simul da and accipe: vbi res est cum homine parum certa fide, cui
non sit tutum quicquam credere.

Caeteros quod polliciti sunt tarde praestare: Tiberium quod praestet tarde
polliceri. Suet. fol. 189


Nonnulli dicunt te periculo imminente multa polliceri: sed si fortuna prospera
Xen. in exp. Cyr. l. 1.
vtare, nullius te rei memorem fore.

-- Quo pacto solent perplexarier, Pactum non pactum est. non pactum, pactum
est, cum illis lubet. Plaut. Aulul.


Pollicitis dives quilibet esse potest. Ovid. Tac. An. l. 1. Lip. l. 4.


Plus in oratione tali dignitatis, quam fidei.


between States, must be tied with a Gordian knot, that nothing but the sword,
and fine force may unloose them: else there lies a way open to the Defeizance;
and the advantage once discovered, is as easily taken. Quando imminet
periculum, nec rebuspub. nec Principibus credo confidere que is.

Qui cauet ne decipiatur, vix cauet, etiam cum cauet,

Etiam cum cauisse ratus est, saepe is cautor captus est. Plaut.


Nunquam te fallant animi, sub vulpe latentes. Hor. art.



Wherefore the proverb, Fast bind, fast find, is as necessary a rule
between States, as between man and man.

It was articled at Florence, between the French king and that State, that he
should hold Pisa in his hands, till his return from the conquest of Naples:
but the Florentines should still hold the Jurisdiction and profits. They
thought all sure, because he had personally sworn it, in their Cathedral
Church, in a solemn manner, and general assembly. He was no sooner on his way
toward Rome, but the Pisans rebel, drive the Florentine officers out of the
town, imprison others, and spoil the rest, of their goods, not leaving one
Florentine among them. Whereas, had the King given in charge to his
commissioners in the town, and those commanders he left there in garrison, to
see that duly performed, which he had solemnly sworn: or had the Florentines
taken French pledges for assurance thereof, that fire of rebellion had not
broke forth in this City, which afterward set all Italy in combustion: even
after the heat of the Neapolitan war, was raked up in the cold embers of
oblivion.

APHORISM II.
THere Libidinem dominandi, causam belli habent: and maximam gloriam in maximo
Salust. Cat.
imperio putant.

Quid pessimam Dearum amplecteris, Ambitionem, o fili? Ne facias: iniusta Lip.
ex Eurip
haec Dea multas in domos and civitates ingressa foeliciter, and egressa est
cum periculo vtentium.

Ambitio (...), Malum formidabile: (Et alibi) (...), calamitas eminens
appellatur. Idem. Eurip.


Afflatuque suo populos, vrbesque domosque Ovid. 2 Met.
Polluit. --

-- Auaricies and honorum coeca cupido, Lucret. 3.
Quaemiseros homines cogunt transcendere fines -- Iuris.


be some people that sleep with their eyes always open: such are ambitious
Princes: for though their senses be sometimes so bound, as they will not hear
the truth when it is told them, nor see the danger that is manifestly before
them: yet is the eye of their Imagination ever watchful, upon every advantage,
that may seem to further their end; so as they never take hours rest in the
sweet sleep of Content. O artem nimis hodie Principibus receptam. Lip. pol.
l. 4. Tacit. Agric. Ovid. Fast. 2.


In ipsa hostium acie, inuenies tuas manus.

Vbi vincere aperte non datur, insidias, armaque tecta parant.

Alios ab alijs diuer sos aggreditur, ac paulatim tentando, postquam opportunos
sibi cognouit, multa pollicendo persuadet. Salust. de Metell.



And for want of sufficient means, or fit instruments of their own, they sow
the seeds of Discontent, and then blow the coals of Sedition in the hearts of
rebellious subjects.

Lodowick Zforza had a great longing to the Sovereignty of Pisa, ever since he
was first there in exile. He calls to mind that Iohn-Galeazzo Visconti (first
Duke of Millan) being Lord thereof by conquest, had given it to his base son
Gabriel-Maria. Yet because it was got with the money and forces of Millan, he
thinks his plea good: but keeps the secret to himself, till a fitter time.
And therefore, now that he finds the Pisans mutine, and ready to run into
open rebellion, he thrusts them on; promises secret aid, and deals
underhand with them of Genoa, to help the Pisans with armor, munition, and
three hundred foot.

APHORISM III.
EMulation Aemulatio Cos virtutis.

Licorgo introdusse nella sua Rep. l'emulazione, come per un fomento della
Adag. Eras. Rag. Sta. l. 19.
virtu.

Sic The sei virtutem gloria incendit Herculis: and Themistocli somnum ademit
Plut. in These.
Miltiadis trophaeum.

Stimulos dabat aemula virtus. Lucan. l. 1.


Aemulatio and proximi exercitus gloria, repulerat segnitiem. Tac. hist. 2. de
Mucian.



of virtue, in great men is honorable, but of greatness, dangerous. For, many
times it breaks the neck of one, or both the Rivals: Factiones, -- publica
belli Lucan. l. 1.


Semina, quae populos semper mersere potentes.

Stimulat non raro priuati odij pertinacia, in publicum exitium.

-- O dirum exitium mortalibus, o nihil vnquam Tac. An. l. 2. Sil. l. 17.


Crescere, nec magnas patiens exurgere lauds Inuidia. --

Inuidiam quod habet, non solet esse diu. Propert. l. 2. cap. 15. Am. in Plut.
Cato. Tac. An. l. 2.


Un sage Conseiller ne doit rien dire, ny fair, pour faueur, ou pour haine
qu'il port a aucun particulier: ains auoir esgard seulement au bien public.

Ne emulatio inter pares, and ex eo impedimentum oriretur.


But it never fails of hindering their faithful service to their Prince and
the State.

The Seneshall of Belcari, and the Bishop of S. Malo, were the two only
minions about the French king. S. Malo favored the Florentines: Belcari,
envying the greatness of the other, being lately made Cardinal (though he was
the chief means to bring him in favor at first, that he might the better
keep down others) is corrupted with the Pisans money, but more with a desire
to cross the Cardinal, to favor their part: and therefore he moves the King
in their behalf, and prevails: contrary to his oath, and honor, and to the
great prejudice of his affairs on that side the Alps.

APHORISM IIII.
VIces (...). i. Unjust quidem agit, and just aliquis, cum ea Arist. eth. l.
5. cap. 8.
sponte agit: cum vero non sponte, nec unjust quidem, nec just agit, nisi per
accidens.
are stronger in the Aduerbe, then in the Adjective: and so be virtues. To do
that is well, is better then to do that is good: for, a man may do what is
honest sometimes, against his will: where as in all virtuous actions, there is
a free election. Qui statuit aliquid, part inaudita altera, Senec. Med.


Aequum licet statuerit, haud aequus fuit.

(...). i. Iudicare noli, nisi part vtraque audita. Aristoph.


Vicissim audi, and deinde re cognita, iudica.

In auditi at que indefensi, tanquam innocents pereunt. Sophocl. Tac. hist. l.
1. Senec. Med. Pub. Mim. Horat. In Aut.


Si iudicas, cognosce: Siregnas, iube.

Legem Nocens veretur, Fortunam innocens.

Male verum examinat omnis -- corruptus Index.

Nemo erit innocens, si accusasse sufficiat.

-- Il magnanimo suole,

Sempre prima che dannar la gente, Ariost. cant. 18.


Vederla in faccia, and vdir le ragion' ch'vsa,

Differir anco e giorni, e mesi, e anni

Prima che giudicar ne gl'altrui danni.


That Judge therefore, who gives sentence before both Parties be heard, may
judge the right, but not aright. A greater injustice it is, to hear the
equity of the Defendants cause, and yet doom for the Plaintiff: for this man
does neither justly, nor justice.

The case between Pisa and Florence, is heard before the French king.
Burgundio Lolo pleads for the Plaintiffes; shows, that his city has
eighty eightyeares endured an unjust servitude: that she which had been one of
the noblest cities of Italy, and extended her command even to the East, was
now by the cruelty and avarice of the Florentines, brought to extreme
desolation. That many of her chief citizens, rather then to be eyewitnesses
of the tyrannous vexation of the State-publik, and insolent oppressions of
private men, had abandoned their native country, and preferred a voluntary
exile. That they were deprived their ancient trade of Merchandise, and only
permitted to use mechanical occupations. That they were debarred the executing
of any public office, even of those which strangers might enjoy. That the
Florentine tyranny extended even to their lives, whom they sought to suffocate
and poison, with unwholesome fogs, and dampes of infectious air, by giving no
order for the keeping of their banks, and draining the ditches of their
marshes. That nothing remained to the Florentines cruelty and inhumanitie,
wherein they might farther plague the poor oppressed and distressed Pisans:
and therefore they humbly fly to his Majesty for redress. Francesco
Soderini, Bishop of Volterra, answers for the Defendants: declares the right of
their title to Pisa, from Gabriel-Maria Visconti, the true owner, of whom they
bought the town, and territories thereunto belonging: proves, that they were
no sooner in peaceable possession, but the Pisans by rebellious violence
deprived them thereof. That by a long and chargeable war, they were forced to
fight for their right: wanne it by fine force, being almost famished: and
brought in more victuals then arms, to recover their hunger-starued bodies.
That Pisa was never of power to enlarge her territories by land, so far as
Lucca, a town within ten miles: and for her power at sea, it lasted not long:
nay, by her own civil discords, and seditious mutinies (before Visconti had
possession) she was brought to so low an ebb, as Ser Iacopo Appiano, a base
petti-fogging Notary, made himself Lord of the town, and left the command
thereof to his posterity. That Pisa was no way beneficial to Florence, but by
the fitness of the site, and nearness of the sea: as for the exactions laid
upon her, they were so small, as they did little more then defray the charge.
That they were no more debarred the trading in merchandise, then other subjects
of their State, who all notwithstanding acknowledged to live under a lawful
and moderate government, and desired not to change their Lord: because they
were not so obstinately and insolently perfidious as the Pisans, whose
seditious rebellion was now grown to a common byword through all Italy. That
they were so far from depopulating the town, as they had there planted a
University, and recovered her Ligorne, without which Port she could not
subsist. That all possible care was yearly taken for the maintenance of her
banks, and cleansing of her ditches. So that finally, their lamentations are
fained, their objections calumnious, and their accusations false aspersions.
And therefore he humbly intreates his royal Majesty to tender the right of
their cause, and force of his own oath in that behalf. The King,
notwithstanding all these reasons, inclines to the Pisans, and will not restore
the Florentines to their right: only he declares not presently, until he had
got into his hands the seventy thousand Ducats yet behind, and due, by the
articles of the late treaty.

APHORISM V.
THere Non si ritroua fortezza piu sicura, che il petto del vassallo, armato
della beneuolenza, verso il suo Signore. Am. in Tac. 1.


Non sic excubiae, nec circumstantia tela,

Quam tutatur amor. Claudian. ad Honor. Plin. ep. 8.


Long valentior amor ad obtinendum quod velis, quam timor. Nam timor abit, si
recedis; manet amor, ac sic, vt ille in odium, hic in reuerentiam vertatur.

-- Peragit tranquilla potestas

Quod violenta nequit, mandataque fortius vrget Claud. Pan.


Imperiosus amor. --


is no such fortress for the safety of a State, as the breasts of subjects,
armed with loyalty and love to their Prince and country. Quem discordiae,
quem caedes ciuium, quem bellum civil delectat: cum ex numero hominum
eijciendum, ex finibus humanae naturae exterminandum Cic. Philip. 3
puto.

(...). Hom. Ilia. ^.
i.

Nefarius, sieve gente tribuque est hic talis, qui civil cupit ferum and
execrabile bellu^.

Proditio tantum incommodi humano generi affert, quantum salutis bona Valor. l.
9.
fides.

Les seditieux, and les plus grands traistres, se retirent verse les enemis de
leurs Am. Tac. De^.
maistres.

Sic Antiochus, blandimentis aduersus plebem, fraud in Ducem, Barbarorum
copias dissociat. Tac. An. l. 2.



On the other side, nothing more endangereth it, then their perfidious and
rebellious revolt: which rebels seldom want succors from the foreign enemy:
not in love to them, or care of their cause, but upon some other gainefull or
reuengefull purpose.

The Pisans, by instigation of Lodowick Zforza, and supportation of the French
kings commissaries and garrison, shake off the Florentine yoke, banish their
officers, and rob their merchants. They fly to the neighbor-States for aid.
Genoa relieues them with men and munition, upon an old grudge, ever since
Thomas Fregoso their Duke, sold Ligorne to the Florentines; and lately more
exasperate, by the fresh impression of their late loss of Pietra-Santa, and
Serezzana. And Siena with Lucca (two professed enemies to Florence) furnish the
Pisans with money. Lastly, Siena sends over and besides, certain troops of
horse to their aid.

APHORISM VI.
Injustice is never without some pretense to palliate her actions: and rather
then fail, she masketh under the vizard of Religion, which makes her more
ugly. Even as ill-fauoured complexions, the more they are painted, the fouler
they appear: and misshapen bodies, by putting on rich apparel, seem more
deformed. Per speciem sacrificandi obtruncare.

Semper aliguam fraudi speciem iuris imponunt. Tacit. hist. 5. Li. pol. l. 3.
Tac. An. l. 3. Por. in Guic


Ne specie Religionis, in ambitionem delabantur.

Gl' huomini sogliono ricuoprir la loco ambizione, col velo della pieta
Christiana.

Priuatae causae pietatis aguntur obtentu, and cupiditatum qulsque suarum,
religionem Leo. ep. 23.
veluti pedissequam habent.

(...). i. Ne ditescas unjust, sed ex just Phocylid.
partis viue.

Ambitio, Religionis praetextu velata. Melanct. Adag. Sen. Hippol.


Vox in choro, men's in foro. Virtutem non colere, sed colorare.

Pudor impudentem celat, audacemquies,

Pietas nefandum, vera fallaces probant.

-- Saepius olim Lucret.


Religio peperit scelerosa, atque impia facta.

Nihil in specie fallacius, quam praua religio est: vbi Deorum numen
praescinditur Liui. l. 39.
sceleribus.

L' injustice cherche des pretextes, a fin de cacher son insatiable conuoitise.
Am. Plu. Ant


Malus vbi bonum se simulat, tunc est pessimus. Senec.





The Cardinal S. Malo has the Kings commission, to draw from the Florentines
the seventy thousand Ducats due by the treaty; and mean while to entertain
them in hope, that he will restore them their privileges, and settle them in
the quiet possession of Pisa: he receiueh the money; promises a present
redress of their wrongs, and redintegration to their former right. He goes to
Pisa, with a show to effect it: does just nothing in the business, and
returns. He answers the Florentines expostulation, with this cautelous and
colored excuse, that he had no authority to command them, and he would not
use the King (his masters) power to compel them, because it was a matter could
not be done without blows: which was unfit for him, being a Priest, and a
pillar of the Christian commonwealth, to be the cause of shedding much
Christan blood: and so left them, cheated of their money, and frustrate of
their hope.

APHORISM VII.
A Flexuosum and occultum hominis ingenium, cuius vis proprie in art
solertiaque est posita: Apta tam ad cauendos, quam metuendos hosts. Front.
praef.


Ira quo plus tegitur, eo magis nocet: (Et sibi, and alijs.)

Professa per dunt odia vindictae locum. Senec. de ira Sen. Med. Am. Tac. l. 4.
Liui. l. 22. Curt. l. 4.


Quello fu sempre costume di Tiberio, d'andar cuoprendo, le sue sceler atezze.


Will to do hurt, is never less in the close then professed enemy, but the
means is always greater. Incautus tutius opprimitur hostis.

Quem spreueris, valentiorem negligentia facies.

Nemo celerius opprimitur, quam qui nihil timet. Vellei. l. 2. Ovid.


Tranquillas etiam naufragus horret aquas.

It a creed amico, ne sit inimico locus. Senec. sent.



Because, he that suspecteth least, is soonest and easiest overtaken and
overthrown: like the unskillful Fencer, who while he wardeth the head, is hit
at the heart, which lay out of guard.

The Duke of Millan, closely and under the name of the Genoweses, sends fresh
supplies to Pisa, conducted by Lucio Maluezzo, a Captain of good reputation.
With like secrecy he joins with Siena, in the entertainme^t of Appiano,
Lord of Piombino, and John Sauelli, with their troops, for the defense of
Monte-Pulciano, which town had lately revolted from the Florentines to them of
Siena: giving hereby less means of prevention, or resistance to them of
Florence, and more courage and assistance to both these towns, their enemies.

APHORISM VIII.
REligion is rather a setler, then a stickler in policy: she rather confirms
men in obedience to the government established, then encites them to meddle in
the erecting of a new. So ought they of religious order to do: for if they
work otherwise, they labor out of their vineyard, and move out of their
proper sphaere. The awful reverence men bear to their Cognizance, and the
opinion is had of their learning and sanctity, makes them more powerful to
persuade, then either the sound reasons of the wise, or authority of the
magistrate: and therefore when they abuse this Power, well ordered States
should both curb and correct them; which in a State merely popular, is merely
impossible.

Religio and Resp. mutuis stant non officijs solum, sed and beneficijs.

Nihil est in rebus humanis Religione praestantius, ideoque summa vi defen
Remig. Flor. Laer. inst. l. 5
denda.

(...). i. Ante omnia sit tibi cura rerum diuinarum. Arist. pol. l. 7


Religio, and timor Dei, solus est qui eustodit hominum inter se societatem.
Laer. de ira. c. 12. Idem. cap. 8.


Toll hoc vinculum, vita hominum stultitia, scelere, immanitate complebitur.

Prospera eueniunt colentibus Deos: aduersa spernentibus.

Non dubit auerunt sacris Imperia seruire, ita se rerum humanarum futura Liui.
l. 5. Valor. l. 1. c. 1.
regimen existimantia, si diuinae potentiae been atque constanter essent famu
lata.

Religio, vinculum and coagulum est omnis societatis, and Iustitiae
fundamentum. Plutarch. Plin not. hist l. 14.


Religione vita constat.


After the banishment of Peter Medici, and his brethren, an assembly of the
whole city is called, in the Palace yard, for the establishing of a new
government. Among all the rest, that form of rule was thought best fitting for
the present state of things, and the nature of that people, which under the
name of a Popular State, was notwithstanding to be managed by some few of the
better sort. This, though generally applauded, yet many of the chiefest Nobles
misliked. The matter is debated in Council. Paul-Anthony Soderini argues for a
State merely popular: because, by that other mixed kind of form, the family of
the Medici had usurped upon the public liberty, and suppressed the rest of
the Nobility. His discourse is excellent, full of reasons to prove, and of Art
to persuade. Guy-Anthony Vespucci redargues, answers every point fully;
conuinceth by demonstratiue argument, that no government is so fit for that
State, as a well composed Aristocrasie: draws the greater part of the Council
into his opinion, and is likely to carry the cause. When suddenly Sauanarola
steps up, a Friar Predicant, of great estimation in the city, for his known
learning and reputed sanctity of life, and held among the vulgar sort for a
Prophet. This man inueigheth most against that form, most applauded at this
Session: tells them it is the will of God, that the government should be
absolutely Popular: and that it ought not to be in the power of a few Citizens,
to alter the liberty, or prejudice the safety of others. He (because he had
often foretold in general, of troubles and foreign forces to invade Italy,
which they saw now come to pass) preuailes: and a government merely popular is
established.

APHORISM IX.
NO Huic omnia expensa, omnia referuntur accepta: in tota ratione mortalium,
sola vtramque paginam facit: adeoque obnoxij sumus forti, vt sors ipsa pro
Plin. l. 2. c. 7.
Deo sit.

Non puo maiil Capitano attribuire a se stesso tanta laud, nelle vittorie, che
Parut. l. 2. disc. 4. Ariost. cant. 16.
molt a part non se ne voglia, la buona sort.

Fortuna anco piu bisogna assai,

Che senza, val virtu poco, o non may.


Prince can challenge so much glory by victory, but that Fortune will put in
to be sharer with him: because she gives success, beyond the reach of Reason,
and all ordinary means. This is the common opinion. Victrix fortunae
sapientia. Iuue. Sat. 13. Liui. l. 22. Horat.


Bono Imperatori haud magni momenti fortuna est: men's ratioque dominatur.


But the wiser is, that this happy effect proceeds out of former causes, as
the direction of the Leader, quick execution of the soldier, the advantage of
number, order, place, and infinite such like. -- Valet ima summis

Mutare, and insignem attenuat Deus

Obscura promens. --

(...). Hesiod. op. and dies. l. 1.
i.

Facile potentem facit, and superbientem deprimit: insignem minuit, obscurum
auget: corrigit prauum, superbum attenuat.


But the truest is this, an allseeing eye, much unlike blind Fortune; and an
all-able hand, much stronger then weak Reason: who, as he is Lord of Hoasts,
so is he the giver of victories.

Two things remained to Charles the 8. for the perfecting of his victory: the
yielding up of New Castle and Egge-castle, and the reducing of other towns and
Provinces (not yet come in) to his obedience. A business in all reason, of
great trouble, and much time and charge. But the Dutch garrison in New Castle,
surrender it to the King, without abiding one shot of the Canon: And
Egge-castle (an impregnable piece, standing upon the sea, and at first
contiguous to the land, but divided by Lucullus, and now joined by a bridge) so
far distant from the city of Naples, as the Canon may reach at randon, but
not batter it in direct line, yields likewise upon composition. The Syndicks
and Consuls from all parts, strive who shall come first, to yield him
obedience. The Castellans make as much haste to surrender up their charges, and
offer their service. The rock of Gaetta, though strong and well provided,
yields to discretion. Finally, all the whole kingdom, except the fortresses of
Brindisi, Galliopoli, and Reggium, and all the Barons, except Alphonso d' Aualo
Marquis of Pescara, come in, and do their homage.

APHORISM X.
PEace and Power, are incompatible: they never dwell long together. For Caesar
will suffer no superior, and Pompey will admit no peer. As therefore it is
princely, to grant the vanquished enemy honorable estates: so is it good
policy to provide, that those Estates lie far off: Because, it is a gross
error to grant him any one foot in that kingdom, wherein he was formerly a
Competitor, and whereto he may hereafter lay claim. Difficilmente stanno in un
luogo, l'vnione, and la Potenza. Am. Tac. hist l. 4. De Romans and Rem. Tac. An.
l. 4. Tacit. hist. 1.


Sic Thaebanorum germanitas rupta: Sic Romanos geminos vnum non capit regnum,
quos vnius vteri cepit hospitium.

Arduum semper, eodem loci, potentiam and concordiam esse.

Pacis interest, omnem potestatem, ad vnum conferri.

Quando vnquam regni societas, vel cum fide coepit, vel sine cruore desiit?

Nulla fides regni socijs, omnisque potestas Cyp. Lucan. l. 1.


Impatiens consortis erit.

Nec quenquam iam far potest, Caesarve priorem, Lucan. fol. 6.


Pompeiusve parem. --

Infida est societas regni. Liui. l. 1. Sever. Agam


Nec regna socium far, nec tedae sciunt.

Ambitus impatiens, and summo dulcius vnum

Stare loco: socijsque comes discordia Regnis. Statilius.





Don Frederick, uncle to the vanquished and expulsed king Ferdinand, comes
under safe conduct to the French king treates in behalf of his nephew; that
since God and men and the kings good fortune, had all concurred to give the
kingdom of Naples to his Majesty, his kinsman thought it no shame to yield to
so great a Prince: nor was less willing then others, to live under his law,
and in his obedience, so he might have any Estate therein (aiming at Calabria)
by the kings most royal and gracious grant. Where, living not as a king, but
as a Baron of that Realm, he might honor and admire the clemency and
magnanimity of his victorious Majesty, in whose service he doubted not, but
one day to have the occasion of showing his loyal obedience: By this means,
he should purchase eternal glory to himself, like the old Romans, and
Princes of ancient times, who, for like actions, were reputed and held among
the people of future ages, for gods. That this act was no less safe then
glorious, because, having Ferdinand at his devotion, he should be assured of
the kingdom, and need fear no change of fortune. The King takes no long
pawse, to answer a demand of such nature: he is willing to inuest Ferdinand
with great estates and honors in France, and to give Don Frederick full
recompense for what himself had lost: but to give him any part of the kingdom
of Naples, whereof he was Competitor for the whole, he absolutely refuses, as
the fittest means to put all the rest in manifest hazard.

APHORISM XI.
THe more eminent men are in quality, the more foul is the quality of their
offense. And therefore, as dishonorable actions are greatest blemishes, in
those that are honorable by blood or profession, (as Gentlemen and soldiers)
because virtues are greater embellishments in them then in others: So wicked
and unchristian actions are most odious to those, that are not only
Professors, but professed Patrons of religion and virtue. In these, dissembled
hypocrisy doubleth the iniquity. Omne animi vitium tanto conspectius in se

Crimen habet, quanto mayor qui peccat habetur. Iuuenal.


Qui magno Imperio praediti, in excelso aetatem agunt, eorum facta cuncti
mortales nouere. It a in maxima fortuna, minima licentia est. Liui. l. 22.


Magna non latitant mala.

Nam Curios simulant, viuunt Bacchanalia. Senec. Med. Iuuenal. Adag.


Simulata sanctitas, duplex iniquitas.

Vincit sanctos dira libido.

Alia Leucon, alia Leuconis asinus portat. Dictum de Hypocritis. Sen. Hip. Adag.





Pope Alexander was forced to yield Gemyn the Great Turks brother, to the
French king. It grieved him (out of his avarice) to lose the forty thousand
Ducats, which he yearly received for him: and he repined (out of his envy)
that another should reap the benefit. He poisons him therefore in candid
Suckets, which wrought in such manner by little and little, as he was out of his
hands before the danger appeared, and died not thereof till he came at Naples.
This he did (by common report) at the instigation of Baiaset himself, who for
this purpose corrupted the Pope with a great sum of money, least he should
live to be cause of some rebellion and troubles in the Turkish Monarchy. A
shameful act of a Priest, and pretended Head of Christianity, wherein he was
justly tainted with the four ugly crimes, of Covetousness, Envy, Bribery,
and Murder.

APHORISM XII.
AN Quacunque art verborum quis iuret: Deus tamen qui conscientiae testis
Isid. de sum. bon. l. 2. Lip. pol. l. 4.
est, sic illud accipit, sicut ille cui iuratur, intelligit.


Oath is to be interpreted, not by him that takes it, but by him that takes his
assurance by it. Hij tales, sua improbe potius, quam callide augent.

Hij tales, struunt causas, vel sponte oblatas arripiunt.

Perfidos nunquam causa deficiet, cur pacto non stent. Tac. hist. l. 2. Liui.
l. 24. Cic. off. l. 3. Leo Imp. Procop.


Quaerunt latebram perturio.

Nihil fidei humanae magis conuenit, quam seruare pacta conuenta.

Turpe est, cum alijs omnibus, quibus vel minima virtus est cordi, tum imprimis
principi viro, mentiri ac fidem fallere: Iusiurandum autem, and pacta etiam
scripto sancita vtolare, nec abiectissimo quidem homini decorum esse arbitror.

Nouit vias quibus effugit Eucrates: Quadrat in eum qui semper aliquam inuenit
rimam, per quam elabatur, si quando fides esset praestanda. Adag. Poly.



And therefore, they that make no scruple to break those conditions, whereto
they are tied by this sacred and solemn obligation (if they find any nice
quillet in the Articles, which they may wrest to their purpose) they cannot
avoid the guilt, though they seek to remove the scandal. For howsoever
Politics have taken their advantage out of Custom, their policy could yet
never warrant it out of Justice.

The French king was tied by article, between him and the Duke of Millan, in
liew of his great aid, and furtherance of his wars in Italy, to confer
upon him the principality of Taranto, so soon as he had conquered Naples. The
conquest is made: the young king fled the land: All the Cities, Fortresses and
Provinces, with all the States, Commons and Barons (except some three or four)
are come in to his obedience. The Duke demands his due, by the covenant. The
King shifts him off with this nice construction, that so long as any one piece
or Peer held out, the conquest could not be understood perfect: and yet in the
kings treaty with Florence, the conquest was then to be understood perfect, so
soon as the city of Naples should be taken, and quietly possessed. In
semblable manner, Ferdinand and Isabel, King and Queen of Arragon and Castile,
had articled with Charles the 8. that they should neither directly or
indirectly hinder his conquest of Naples: and yet they are now ready to enter
in league with other States against him, and to drive him out of Italy. They
have this evasion for their oath, that there is a clause in that article, not
to be bound to anything in prejudice of the Church: so that if the Pope (who
challenged to be chief Lord of Naples) required their aid for the recovery
of that kingdom, (as now he did) they might do it, the article notwithstanding.

APHORISM XIII.
TO Helleborum frustra, cum iam cutis aegra tumescit, Pers. Sat. 3.


Poscentes videas: venienti occurrite morbo.

A paruis veniunt summa mala principijs. Pacat. paneg Cic. 5. de fin.


Omnium rerum principia parua sunt, sed suis progressionibus vsu augentur.

Modicis remedijs primi motus consedere. Tac. An 14.



keep a field from ouer-growing with weeds, is to pluck them up in the
spring: and to preserve ones body from ouer-charging with disease, is to purge
the bad humors betime. Il sospetto peggior di tutti mali, Ariost. agg. 2


Spirto peggior d'ogni maluaggia pest:

Che, l'infelici menti de mortali

Con velenoso stimolo moleste.

Il Sospetto cominciato fa, che tutte le cose si ripiglino, in mala part. Por.
in Guic. l. 15. Id. l. 16.


Dietro al Sospetto, viene l' odio: dietro all'odio, offese: con l'offese la
congionzione, and intrinsichezza co' nemici di chi s'offende.

Questa Peste lor' ricorda i danni

E morti dati, o in palese, o in ascoso, Ariost. can. 2.


Quinci dimostra che timor sol' d'vno

Han tutti gl'altri, and essin'han d'ognivno.

-- Se non fosse l' huomo sempre stimolato

Da quel sospetto rio, da quel timore, Ariost.


Da quel furor, da quella frenesia,

Da quella rabbia, detta gelosia.


Such seeds of sedition, and weeds of war, are Suspicion and Jealousy. If
they be not nipped in the bud, they bring forth much sower fruit, of trouble
and danger.

The proceedings of the Duke of Millan, are suspected by Charles the 8: he
therefore with gifts and large promises, assures to himself the Cardinal
Fregoso and Obietto Fiesco, two fit instruments for him, to stir any troubles
in Genoa. He entertaines also in pay, with the conduct of one hundred Lances,
Iohn-Iacob Triultio, the head of the Guelph-faction in Millan, and the Dukes
sworn enemy. On the other side, the Duke grows jealous of the French kings
greatness, and of his affection to him and his State: he fears that the vaste
thoughts of his ambition, would not limit themselves within the confines of the
kingdom of Naples. He therefore makes stay of the twelve Galleys that were in
readiness at Genoa, for the kings service, and forbids any other to be manned
or armed for his use: and is ready with the first, to make war upon him.

APHORISM XIIII.
IN Aliud cord premunt, aliud ore promunt.

Aliud ore, aliud animo, omnia dissimulans. Erasm. Cusp. de Tib. Ariost. can. 6.


Ben s'ode il ragionar, si vede il volto.

Ma dentro il petto, mal giudicar puossi.

Laudem occulto magis tramite, quam aperta via, petunt. Valor. l. 7. c. 3
Veget. l. 3.



a strict moral sense, to speak and not to think, is rather leasing then
ingenuitie, and therefore reproueable. Nulla sunt meliora consilia, quam quae
ignorauer it hostis, antequam fiunt.

Fieri quid debeat, cum multis tracta: Quid facturus sis, cum paucissimis, vel
Veget. l. 3.
potius ipse tecum.

Sententiam suam celent Principes. Lip. pol. l. 3. Polyae. stra. l. 2.


Agesilaus misit qui rumorem spargerent, eum (ad decipiendum Tisaphernem)
aperte and manifesto ad Lydiam contendere, clam vero and occulte ad Cariam:
Persa, Cariae praesidium imponit: Lacon, Lydiam infestat.

Prudentissimi Principes it a se comparant, vt quae minime omnium fieri
cupiunt, Bod. l. 3.
ea se iactent esse facturos.

Nec ostenderunt bellum prius quam intulerunt. Liu. de Sab.


Nihil magis optandum, quam vt rerum gerendarum consilia, quoad eius fieri
poter it, quam maxim occulta sint. Bod. l. 3.



But necessity gives a larger latitude, and freer scope, to the manage of
great affairs. For, nothing is here more expedient, then that the enemy know
nothing of our deliberations, till they be put in action, nor of our
preparations till they be on foot. It is therefore a usual and useful
policy, when such forces are prepared, either by sea or land, to pretend them
for one service, and intend another.

Ferdinand and Isabel, King and Queen of Spain, prepare a great navy,
furnish it with great store of land forces, both horse and foot, besides
armor, munition, and all other warlicke habillements. The doubtful and
jealous eye of the French king looks this way, and would feign be satisfied,
what Expedition those great preparations intended. The Spaniard gives out to
the world, that those forces were only levied for defense of his own kingdom
of Sicilia, and assurance of his other States, against all sudden irruptions
whatsoever. But it was indeed (as it after manifestly appeared) to assist the
Pope and Arragonese, against the French, for the recovery of the kingdom of
Naples, and the driving him quite out of Italy.

APHORISM XV.
THe Council of State is the Cabinet of the Commonwealth, Deliberations the
Jewels, and Secrecy the lock which shuts up this treasure from others; then
which, nothing more aduanceth the Public business. Hence is it, that
confederate Princes intimate many times to the world, the general cause of
their combination; and reserve to their own secrecy, and for fitter times,
the particulars of greatest moment.

Opus est ijs, quas in te semper intellexi, Fide and Taciturnitate.

Arcana Regni, mira celant fide: Non metus, non spes, elicit vocem, qua
prodantur Terent. And. Liui. l. 2.
occulta.

Taciturnitas, optimum atque tutissimum rerum administrandarum vinculum. Valor.
l. 1.


Vbi optimum ex omnibus consilijs reperis, apud te solum tene: ne aduersarijs
Leo Imp. de app. bell.
hoc indicetur, and insidijs eorum appetare.

Primum praecipuumque eorum, quae ad foelicem consilij exitum requiruntur, est
silere. Polyb. l. 19.


Alium silere quod voles prius sile.

Nulla res magna sustineri potest ab eo, cui tacere grave est. Sen. Hip. Curt.
l. 4. Ovid. Laer. in Sol.


Quis minor est autem quam tacuisse labor?

Nemo stultus tacere potest.

Eumenes, cum Romam venisset, and Regem Persen in Senatu accusasset, and detoto
Liui. l 42.
bello cum Patribus deliberasset: in praesentia nihil, praeterquam fuisse in
Curia regem, scire quis quam potuit.

Apud Persas, nemo consiliorum est conscius, praeter optimates taciturnos and
fidos: Ammian. l. 21
Apud quos Silentij quoque colitur Numen.


The prosperous success of Charles the 8. caused the king of Romans, the
Pope, the king of Spain, the Duke of Millan, and State of Venice, to contract
a strong confederation against him: it is proclaimed in Venice, where all their
Ambassadors are met to that purpose. The Proclamation only imported, that this
League was made for defense of their States, the one of the other: but it was
by them capitulated in Articles more particular and secret, that the Spanish
Armada, which was now in Sicile, should assist Ferdinand to recover his
kingdom of Naples. That at the same instant, the Venetians should by sea
assail the Coast towns of that Realm. That the Duke of Millan should attempt
the taking in of Asti, to impeach and stop the passage to all succors, that
should come out of France that way. And that the rest of the confederates
should contribute a certain sum of money (in such proportion as was secretly
agreed on between them) to the king of Romans, and the king of Spain,
toward their charge in warring upon the Realm of France it self: to be set
upon by them, in two several places at the same time.

APHORISM XVI.
HE Creed mihi, been qui latuit, been vixit, and intra Fortunam debet quisque
manner suam. Ovid. trist. 3.


Licet foris resonent omnia, dum intus tumultus non sit, dum inter se cupiditas
and timor non rixentur, been est animo. Senec. ep.


Ad quoduis aduersae fortunae supercilium, ex omni part quadratus.


lives safely, that lives closely, and prouides to meet Danger, which way
soever it comes. Suam quisque fortunam in consilio habeat, cum de aliena
deliberat. Cicero. Curt. l. 4. Lip. pol. l. 4. Arist. pol. l. 1. Tacit. hist. 2.


Aut iunge te, aut iuua: quid si occulte.

Caute in pericula descendendum, alioquin temeritatis erit.

Quando hostis imprudentia ruat, (quod loco Sapientiae est) alienam stultitiam
opperiri iuuat.

Plerumque vtilis and tuta est dilatio. Dio. Hal. l. 8.



Therefore, when Princes be up in arms round about us, and we in doubt whether
side to take, it is good policy so to forecast, as we may make our own State
sure, whosoever is victor, and save our own stake, whosoever is loser.

The Duke of Ferrara is required to enter the League with those other
confederates, against Charles the 8. He refuses: he holds himself fast to
his French alliance: yet he suffers his son and heir Alphonso, to be
entertained by the Duke of Millan, with charge of one hundred and fifty men at
arms, and title of Lieutenant-generall of all his forces. This course took
the old Duke (con cautela Italiana) that the son might make his fathers
peace, in case the leaguers prevailed: and himself might free his son, if
the French had the better.

APHORISM XVII.
FRiendship in Court, is like Music at a feast: a man has nothing but a
sweet sound for his money. Or rather, it is like those Apothecarie Drugs,
which are hot in the mouth, and cold in the operation. It is quick to promise,
and slow to perform; receiving substance, and returning smoke: sometimes it
moves the clients cause, but seldom urges it to prevail. In domo Principum,
nomen tantum amicitiae, inane irritumque permanet. Plin. pan.
-- In Aula

Cum tot populis stipatus eas, Sen. Her. fur.


In tot populis vix vna fides.

Caducae amicitiae, quarum delectatio vel vtilitas fundamentum: Nam and
stantibus illis tremunt, and recedentibus ruunt. Petrar.


Multi more atque exemplo isto viuunt, quos cum censeas esse amicos,
reperiuntur falsi falsimonijs: Plaut. Bacch.


Lingua factiosi, inertes opera, sublesta fide.

Pauci ex multis amici sunt homines, qui certi sient.

(...). Plaut. Pseud Arist. apud Laert. Ovid. trist. 3.


Vsibus edocto si quidquam credis amico,

Viue tibi: and long nomina magna fuge.

Piene d' insidie, e di sospetti

Corte Regali, e splendidi Palagi: Ariost. cant. 44.


Oue la Caritade e in tutto estinta,

Ne si vede Amicizia se non finta.




The Cardinal S. Malo, a man of great sway in the French Court, and especially
favored of the King, had received great sums of the Florentines, to stand
their sure friend, in all their occasions of suite to his Majesty. He
undertook the matter, and assured them, not to fail. Naples being now
conquered, and reduced to the French obedience, they are instant suitors
(according to the Articles of agreement between the king and them) that he
would surrender them up their cautionary towns, and not favor the Pisans
cause against them. Many of the Court persuade the king to the contrary, but
the Cardinals power was greater then all theirs, if he would have urged it: for
he might have pressed the king with the oath he had taken, and the money and
aid he had received. Yet, not to oppose himself ouer-stiffly against other
eminent men in the Court, he deals coldly in their business, and so they lose
their money, and fail in their suite.

APHORISM XVIII.
IN Tute hoc intristi, tibi omne est exedendum.

Faber est quisque fortunae suae. Terent. Salu. ad Ces. Curt. l. 4. Publi. Ovid.



the honor of great achieuements, other men partake with the Prince, according
to the measure of their place and merit. But the well or ill ordering of the
things achieued, redounds wholly to his own proper glory, or shame. Facilius
est quaedam vincere, quam victa tenere.

Fortunam citius reperias, quam retineas.

Non minor est virtus, quam quaerere, partatueri.

Plus est seruasse, quam quaesiisse decus. Sen. Liui. Flor. l. 4.


Parari singula acquirendo, facilius possunt, quam vniuersateneri.

Difficilius est Prouincias obtinere, quam parare: viribus parantur, iure
obtinentur.

Consultius est, sua tutari, quam aliena adiungere.

Ofaciles dare summa Deos, eademque tueri -- difficiles. Eges. l. 1. c. 13.
Lucan. l. 1. Senec. Liui. l. 37.


Parare and quaerere arduum, tueri difficilius.

Non minus est quaesita tueri, quam quaerere: alioqui quaerendi nulla foret
vtilitas: nihilque aliud esset quam cribro haurire.

Il est beaucoup plus fait, de garder un estat de ne tomber en ruin, que de l'
aggrandir, and enricher. Am. in Plut. Cicero.



He is therefore to have especial care in the establishment of his new
government, that every thing be reigled according to rule and order. For, it is
greater honor to come off with judgment, then to go on with courage: to use
victory wisely, then to get it happily: and more glory to retain a new
Possession, then to obtain it.

The French king had with incredible success and unheard of fortune,
impatronised himself of the kingdom of Naples: hitherto rather fortune then
force, seemed to fight for him. But now he omits to follow that happy current,
and take in those few places which yet held out, and which with small danger or
charge he might have reduced under obedience. His soldiers give themselves
over to pleasure and ease. The State yet unsettled, is not regled with such
order and providence, as was meet. He refuses to hear poor petitioners, or
complainants, and to redress their wrongs: he refers such business to his
Courtiers; who either through insufficiency were unable, or through avarice
unfit, to determine such causes. The Neapolitan Nobility were not regarded,
nor so graciously used as they ought: their deserts unrewarded, and themselves
debarred from audience, or access to the King. The Aniowine faction (of his
own party) were put off from day to day, from the restitution of their lands
and estates, with many difficulties and dilatorie procrastinations. Favors and
graces were obtained by none, but those which paid well for the purchase, and
taken from others without just cause. The Domaines of the Crown, and offices
of the State, were conferred only upon the French. The disorders and outrages
of the soldiers in those places where they were quartered, were many and
great. These were the chief causes of the declination of the French affairs,
of Fortunes turning her back toward them, and of the Neapolitans revolt from
them. Who were not so forward before to incline to their part, as they are now
willing to return to the Arragonese. Neither had they in times past, the
cruelty of their king in such detestation, as now they have his banishment and
misery in commiseration. Whereof strange effects not long after followed.

APHORISM XIX.
THe inconstant multitude, is naturally desirous of novelty, and apt for
change: hoping for more then they should, and enduring less then they ought;
and ever in dislike with the present times. They consider not, that though they
change their Lord, they change not their tenure; though they quit their old
master, yet they are still in service. They should therefore purge this humor
of new-fanglednesse, and remember, that if the same condition of servitude
cannot be avoided, it skils not whether it be under Lo. John, or Lo. Thomas:
and so sit still. La natura de' populi, e inclinata a sperar piu di quel che si
debbe, and a tollerar meno, di quel ch'e necessario, and ad hauer in fastidio
le cose presenti. Por. in Guic, l. 20. Plin. Caes. com. l. 4.


Est natura hominum nouitatis auida.

Subita and repentina ingenia, quae nouis semper rebus student, and ad bellum
mobiliter, celeriterque incitantur.

Quod sunt in consilijs capiendis mobiles, and nouis rebus students, nihil his
committendum statuit. Id. Com. l. 3. de Gallis.


Qui fit Mecaenas, vt nemo quam sibi sortem

Seu ratio dederit, seu fors obiecerit, illa Horat. sermon. l. 1. sat. 1.


Contentus viuat? laudet diuersa sequentes?

Vulgus cuiusque motus noui cupidum. Tacit. hist. l. 1.


Rome Tibur amo ventosus, Tibure Romam.

Saeuitque animis ignobile vulgus. Horat. Vir. Aen. l. 1.





Before the coming of the French, the Neapolitans desired nothing more then
their coming. They murmured against the government of old Ferdinand and
Alphonso. They exclaimed of their cruelty to the Nobles, and oppression of the
Commons. The French is now come: he has eased them of many Impositions and
taxes: in stead of which grieuances, he has given them privileges and
exemptions, to the yearly value of two hundred thousand Ducats. Yet are they
again weary of their new Lord. They call passionately to mind, the Oration
which young Ferdinand made to them at his departure. They promise themselves
greater happiness under his Rule. They excuse his fathers cruelty, with the
name of just severity; and his pride and insolency, with the fair titles of
nobleness of heart and princely courage. And again desire to have him rule
over them.

APHORISM XX.
WHen Vitieso humore genito, pars princeps aliqua consentit, a qua totum corpus
celeriter alteratur. Gal. loc. aff. l. 6. Plutar. Dorot. Dion. halica.


Sicut Haedera mire valet, ex qualibet se alligare ansa.

Sic Regula obliqua, quae recta sunt, obliquat.


an humor is strong and predominant, it not only conuerteth his proper
nutriment, but even that which is apt for contrary humors, into it own nature
and quality. Alia men's indigentibus, alia assecutis quibus eguerunt.

Fiducia valde obnoxia in consilijs, quia suas alienasque vires parum librat:
and euentus omnes aptat ad sua vota. Lip. pol. l. 3.


Aeger animus, falsa pro veris videt.

Reges and Dominos habere debet Sen Oed. Maitial. l. 2.


Qui se non habet, atque concupiscit,

Quod reges dominique concupiscunt.

Polybij sanum hic dogma, iubentis, nunquam de futuris rebus, tanquam iam
fac^tis, Lip. an. l. 3.
deliberare.

Sed quia coecus inest vitijs amor, omne futurum

Despicitur, suadentque breuem praesentia fructum, Claud. Eutr.


Et ruit in vetitum damni secura libido.

Euertere domos totas optantibus ipsis

Dij faciles: nocitura toga, nocitura petuntur Iuuen. Sat. 10


Militia. --


Of like force is a strong and wilful Desire, in the mind of man: for, it not
only feeds upon agreeable motions, but makes even those reasons which are
strongest against it, to be most for it.

The conquest of Naples is not yet absolutely perfect: some places are untaken:
many controversies undecided: the State not well settled: never more need of the
French kings stay in those parts, presence in those business, and prudence in
perfecting and setting all things straight. But the king has a great longing
to return into his country, and follow his former pleasures. All the Court is
of like humor, and think no air so sweet as that of France. While they burn
in this hot desire, comes news of the strong confederation against him, which
might in reason have cooled him: and before he could set forward on his
journey, comes an alarm, that the Venetian fleet is upon his coast in Puglia:
that Alphonso and the Spaniards are landed in Calabria: then which nothing
could be more forcible to cause his stay; except he meant wilfully to lose that
by his own fault, which fortune had so suddenly cast upon him. Yet he and his
Courtiers confidently construe all the contrary way, and make it the chief
reason of their more hasty return.

APHORISM XXI.
AMan may be overcome of his enemy, either by fortune or advantage: which,
when they alter, he may recover his honor, and repair his loss; because he
still has the heart and courage which he had at first. But he that is overcome
of his own passions, is in desperate case: because the inward hold, which was
his own, is lost. It is threfore the greatest victory to overcome ones self;
and to give his Judgment power over his affections; which will ever advise him
to unmask those blind guides, and to look to that course which is most for
his honor and safety. -- Flecte mentem, pectus antiquum aduoca Seneca.


Victasque magno pectore aerumnas doma:

Resist: tantis in malis vinci malum est.

Qui animum (i. affectiones) vincunt, quam quos animus, semper probiores Plaut.
Trin.
cluent.

Fortior est qui se, quam qui fortissima vincit Car. Pro.


Moenia. --

(...). i. Regere nequit qui non regitur. Arist. pol. l. 3.


Si omnia quae alium quemuis in te imperantem facere velies, ea ipse tua sponte
feceris, nec peccabis quicquam, and omnia rite diriges, and vitam ex eo
iucundissimam Dion.
and beatissimam viues.

Si animus hominem perpulit, actum est animo seruiuit, non sibi: Plaut. Trin.


Si ipse animum perpulit, dum viuit victor victorum cluet:

Tu, si animum vicisti potius, quam animus te, est quod gaudeas.

Multos reges, si ratio te rexerit. Sen. ep. 37.


Latias regnes, auidum domando

Spiritum, quam si Libiam remotis Hor. 2. od. 2.


Gadibus iungas, and vterque Poenus

Seruiat vni.




Charles the 8. is not yet surely seated in the royal throne and full
possession of the kingdom of Naples. His enemies begin again to hold up their
heads. Hereupon he is in conflict with himself, whether to return home, or
stay. Principles of war, and rules of State, plead his stay: but the desire
of enjoying his home-pleasures, have the more favorable audience and powerful
persuasions, in a mind captiuated to his own passions, and preuailes. He
disposes thus of his affairs: the one half of his troops he takes with him,
for the safeguard of his person; the remainder he leaves behind, for defense
of his late conquered kingdom. The troops he left were these: one half of
the Swisse and French foot: eight hundred French lances: and five hundred men
at arms, Italians: under the leading of the Prefect of Rome, Prospero, and
Fabritio Colonna, and Antonio Sauelio, Captains rewarded by him, with many
fair Estates: besides those Princes and Barons of the Realm, that were sure
on his side: and Gilbert Monpensier to command all in chief, whom he deputed
General for the wars; a man more esteemed for his greatness of Estate, and
nearness in blood to the King, then for his own valor or sufficiency.
D'Aubigni was left Great Constable of the kingdom, and Governor of Calabria.
Belcari was made high Chamberlain, and Governor of Gaetta. The Prince of
Salerno was restored to his office of high Admiral. By this division of his
forces (violently forced by his desire to return) he neither left the kingdom
well assured, nor his person without manifest hazard; as shortly after appeared.

APHORISM XXII.
WE L'Euento, e il Maestro de' stolti. Parut. l. 2. d. 5 Ovid. ep.


-- Careat succes sibus opto,

Quisquis ab euentu facta notanda putat.

Been vbi quod consiliu^ discimus accidisse, hominem catum eum esse declaramus,

Stultum autem illum cui vertit male. Plaut. Pseud


La Risolutione ch'e buona, deue esser misurata dalle Ragioni, che ti hanno
mosso Bot. l. 2. de Eccel. Capit.
a farla: non dal successo che ne segue: Delquale, perch puo auuenire fuor d'
ogni pensiero humano, e d' ogni ragione, niuno e obligato a renderne conto.

C'est mal fait de lover ou blasmer les entreprises, par la fin qu'en reussit:
and Bodin. rep. l. 3.
mesurer la Sagesse aupied de la Fortune.


may not measure the fize of Wisdom, by the Last of Fortune: for, Event is the
tutor of fools; to prevent is more judgment. Therefore the private man will
so far forth relieve his distressed neighbor, as that he leave not himself
unprovided: for (says he) Charity begins with it self. It a aequum est, me
vestra meis armis tutari, ne mea interim nudentur praesidijs. Liui. l. 31.


Proximus sum egomet mihi. Terent.



In like manner, it is good policy in States, so to furnish their allies in
time of need, as they disfurnish not themselves, and stand at the mercy of
fortune, and event.

The French king is returning toward Rome: he is denied the Inuestiture in his
new kingdom: the Pope fears himself and his Estate. He therefore requires
aid of the Venetians, and Duke of Millan. They readily assign him one
thousand light horse, and two thousand foot; with promise of one thousand men
at arms more. But afterward they call the matter to better deliberation; they
consider the danger of sending their troops so far from their own States,
by former examples, whereof they had repented. They find that the power left
behind, was not sufficient to defend themselves. They call to mind the Popes
falsehood, who had Ferdinands army in Rome, for his safety, but the year
before, and yet upon the kings first approach, made them perforce quit the town
to the French. They will not at their own hazard make new trial of his
honesty: and therefore they persuade him to retire himself into some place of
strength, till the kings army were past; and so upon better advice keep the
forces promised, for their own use.

APHORISM XXIII.
THe Incautus fuerit, si propria manu tale aliquid comprehenderit: A qua vtique
re, vnice cauere debes: Quod nihil sit quo tam facile conuincaris. Mac. disc. 3.


Vox audita perit, sed litera scripta manebit.

Qui audiunt, audita dicunt: qui vident, plane sciunt. Carm. Pro. Plaut.


Lingua mali pars pessima serui. Iuuen. Sat. 9. Plaut. Paen.


Istis est Thesaurus stultis in lingua situs,

Vt questui habeant male loqui melioribus.


tongue and the hand are unruly members, where honesty and reason have not the
ruling of them. The tongue is always the more ready; but the hand in this is
the more dangerous that, what is spoken may be helped, by supposition of
mistaking, or disagreement in the reporters, or death: whereas that of the hand
appears to posterity, suruiueth the speaker and hearers, and remains as a
thousand witnesses. Si come tradimento, non hapena, che a bastanza lo castighi:
cosi l'ingratitudine Remig. Flor.
non ha baiasimo, che a sufficienza la vituperi.

Tanto turpius gratiam non refer, quanto honestior causa referendae. Plin. 8.
ep. 12 Pub. Mim. Gell. l. 9.


Omne dixeris maledictum, cum ingratum hominem dixeris.


Wherefore as no vice lays a more foul afpersion upon man, then that of
ingratitude: Video barbam and pallium, Philosophum non video.

Pacuuij versum Macedo Philosophus scribi debere censebat prae foribus omnium
templorum: Ego odi homines ignaua opera, and philosopha sententia. Gell. l. 13.


Plerique Philosophi (...). i. Factis procul, verbis tenus. Gell. l. 17.



So no evidence is so strong to taint him therewith, or convict him thereof, as
his own handwriting in detestation of that vice, and approbation of the
contrary.

Iohn-Iouian Pontano a man singularly learned in all knowledge of good letters,
had to his high commendation published some works of the moral virtues: had
been Tutor to Alphonso in his minority: had long been Secretary to him and his
father: had been greatly preferred, and enriched by them both. This man
notwithstanding, at the Coronation of Charles the 8. in Naples, made the
gratulatory Oration, in the name of the whole city: wherein he strained his
eloquence (but more his honesty) not so much in extolling and magnifying the
French, as in deprauing and detracting from his old Masters, to his own
perpetual shame, and dislike even of the French themselves. So hard it is for
some men to observe those precepts in their own course of life, which with
singular learning and judgment they have taught to others.

APHORISM XXIIII.
THere Saepe audiui eum primum esse virum, qui ipse consulat, quod in rem sit:
secundum eum, qui been monenti obediat: Qui nec ipse consulere, nec alteri
parere Liui. l. 22.
scit, eum esse extremi ingenij.

Sapientissimum esse dicunt eum, cui quid opus sit, ipsi veniat in mentem:
proxime accedere eum, qui alterius been inuentis obtemperet. Cic. pro Clu.


(...). Hesiod. l. 1.
i.

Plurimum sapit, qui sibi ipse per omnia sapit: etiam ille qui been monenti
obtemperat: at qui nec sibi sapit, nec alium audire monentem in animum induxit,
inutilis prorsus hic vir est.

Raro eminentes viros non magnis adiutoribus, ad gubernandam fortunam suam
reperies. Vellei. l. 2.



is much wisdom in that Prince who can judge of the sever all aduices given
by his Counselors; yet greater is his virtue that can discern and follow the
best: but his sagacitie is singular, that can diue into their inward thoughts
and purposes who give it. In aures Principum, ficte ac simulate, quaestus sui
gratia, insusurrant.

Ceux qui ne visent qu' a leur particulier, en seruent aux grands, se
despensent Cic. ad Q. fra Am. Plu. De^.
aisement de leur foy.


Because it is dangerous to be carried away with that counsel, which tends
only to the particular profit of the counselor. Melior est Respub. in qua
Princeps malus, ea, in qua mali sunt Principis Lam. in Alex
ministri.

Tiberius Princeps crudelis and auarus; Seruitia habuit modesta: Galba Princeps
Tacit.
haud malus, praepotentes habuit libertos, omnia venalia offerentes. I mali
dell' vna and dell' altera corte, erano egualmente graui, ma non egualmente
scusati. Amirat. ibid.



For where the Prince is of so easy and tractable a nature, it were better for
the State to have him wicked, then for him to have such wicked ministers.

The French army is at Siena. The kings Council advises to make haste,
before the confederates should have levied their forces, and be drawn to a
head, to impeach their passage back. The Florentines require again with
greater instance then before, the restitution of their cautionary towns. They
offer him in consideration, the thirty thousand Ducats yet behind, due by the
treaty, as also to lend him three score thousand more. Moreover to send him
for his safe-gard out of Italy, three hundred men at arms, and two thousand
foot, under their General Francesco Secco, and to attend his army as far as
Asti. All the Council thought these offers large, and most needful for the
king to accept, in this time of urgent necessity, and extreme danger: as also
their demand to be most honest, just, and reasonable. Only Ligny, an
unexperienced young man, cousengermane to the king by the mother, and now the
only favorite (in disdain that the Florentines used the mediation of the
Cardinal S. Malo, and not his, and to have the government of Siena, whereto he
aspired) being seconded by Monsieur de Pienes, who also looked for the
government of Pisa and Ligorne, persuade the king to the contrary, and
prevail: to the breach of his promise and oath, and to the endangering of his
person and whole army in that journey.

APHORISM XXV.
THe In agro Pitinate, trans Appenninum, fluuius Nouanus omnibus solstitijs
Plin. not. hist l. 2. c. 103.
torrens, bruma siccatur.


river Nouanus in Lombardie, at every midsommer Solstice, swells and runs
over the banks, but in mid-winter is clean dry. Suas vires extollere,
hostium paucitatem contemnere, circumferri vinum largius iubent: debellaturi
super mensa ipsum Alexandrum. Curt. l. 7.


Vere galeati lepores, quibus in pedes men's decidit imos.

O tumide, rerum dum secundarum status Homer. Il. Sen. Tro.


Extollit animos: timide cum increpuit metus

Regum tyranne. --

Rebus secundis auidi, aduersis incauti sumus.

-- Ch'vna Nouella Tacit. An. 1. Ariost. agg. 2


Maipiu di venti o trenta di non campi:

Perch vien dietro, vn' altra che l' vccide

E piangera doman, l' huomo ch' hoggi ride.


Such is the nature of men, unresolved to several fortunes: they swell in the
sunshine of their prosperity, but when storms of danger and trouble arise,
they are dried up with despair. For a mind unprepared for desaster, is
unfurnished to sustain it when it comes. He that soareth too high in the one
fortune, sinketh too low in the other. Insolent brauing and base fear, are
individual and inseperable companions. Secunda foelices, aduersa magnos
probant. Plin. pan. Philo.


(...). i. In hoc enimvir viro praestat, quod and bonum and malum been ferat.

Sperat infestis, metuit secundis Hor. 1. Od.


Alteram sortem, been praeparatum

Pectus. --

-- Fortissimus ille est Lucan.


Qui promptus metuenda pati, si cominus instent,

Et differ potest.


But the resolved man, is ever the same, in the period of both fortunes.

The Duke of Millan had raised great forces, with his confederates, to impeach
the French King in his return, and to bid him battle upon the way. He has
received with all solemn pomp the privileges of Inuestiture for his
Dukedom, and sworn his Fealty and Homage, to the Emperor. He has armed ten
Galleys at Genoa, of his own proper charge: and four other great Ships,
upon the public. He has sent Galeazzo San Seuerino, with six hundred men at
arms, and three thousand foot, besides two thousand more raised in Germany,
to besiege Asti. He is now in the height of his glory: His State well settled:
and his forces great. In which pride, he peremptorily commandes the Duke of
Orleans, to quit his title and claim to Millan (which after the death of
Philip-Maria Visconti, his Father Charles and now he himself, challenged as
their lawful inheritance.) He insolently forbiddes him, to suffer any new
French forces pass that way into Italy: and to cause those already in Asti, to
pack presently over the mountains, and to surrender the Town into San
Seuerinos hands: with many other threats, full of scorn and vanity. But
Orleans attends the fortification of Asti: sends for French supplies from
France: takes the field with his army: winnes the Town and fortress of
Gualfinara: surpriseth the strong town of Nouara: rauageth all the country,
brings it under contribution, as far as Vigeuene: and might without
opposition have marched even to the walls of Millan. Herewith the Duke is so
amated, as he shows his fear with fruitless tears; and poorly goes to the
Venetian Ambassador, to recommend his desperate estate unto him, and to beg
more forces to come to his succors. And finally, fearing his own subjects,
(as conscious of his usurping, and mis-gouernment) he discharges them by
proclamation, of many tallages and impositions formerly laid upon them.

APHORISM XXVI.
THe Captiuam Getuliae reducem audiui, multorum Leonum impetum a se mitigatum
alloquio: ausam se dicere foeminam, profugam, infirmam, supplicem animalis
Plin. not. hist. l. 8. cap. 16.
omnium dignissimi, caeterisque imperantis, indignam eius gloria praedam.


Getulian captive, escaped the danger of devouring by many Lions, through her
humble gesture, and fair language: as saying unto them, that she was a silly
woman, a banished fugitive, a sickly, feeble, and weak creature, an humble
suitor, and lowly suppliant for mercy. As therefore the Lion is the noblest of
all the beasts in the forest; who never shows his force but where he finds
resistance: Debellare hosts fortunae est, refocillare victos, vere regium.
Panor. Pom. Laet. Ovid.


Ius, a quo clementia abest, crux est.

Regia creed mihi res est, succurrere laesis.

Nil habet fortuna maius, quam vt possit: Nec natura melius, quam vt velit
seruare. Cicero. Xenoph.


Honestius beneficiorum, quam Trophaeorum multitudinem relinquere.

Qui succurrere perituro potest, cum non succurrit, occidit. Senec. Ben. Tac.
An. 12.


Quanta peruicacia in hostem, tanta beneficentia aduersus supplices vtendum.

Che rileuar un chi fortuna rote

Tal' hor' al fondo, e consolar l' afflitto, Ariost. cant. 10.


May non fu biasimo, ma gloria souente.

Ignoscendo populi Romans magnitudinem auxit. Salust. Ariost. ca^. 36


Di Cortesia, di gentilezza essempi

Fra gl' antichi guerrier' si vider' molti,

E pochi fra i moderni: ma de gli empi

Costum' auuien', ch' assai ne vegga e ascolti:

Crudel Secolo, poi che pieno sei

Di Thiesti, di Tantali, e di Atrei.


So is the true soldier, the most honorable of all other professions; who
holds it as great a glory to relieve the oppressed, as to conquer the enemy.

The distressed Pisans importune the French king to hold them still under his
protection, against the Florentines: his Council advise the contrary, upon
weighty and urgent reasons. They bewail their lamentable estate: they run
to every mean Courtier: fall down with their wives and children at their
feet, and deplore their miserable condition, to move commiseration. No plaints,
no tears, prevail in Court: they flee to the men at arms, and the rest of
the troops; and implore their mediation to the King in their behalf. These
noble spirits take their complaint into a tender compassion: they go presently
to the King; desire him, for the honor of himself, the glory of the Crown
of France, and for their own sakes, who had been, and would ever be ready upon
all occasions to spend the last drop of their blood in his service, to take
pity upon the poor Pisans and if it were for need of money that he was forced
to abandon them, they offered their gold chains, and all the rest of their
jewels, besides such money as they had: yea and rather then fail, that he
should keep in his hands, and employ to his use, their pensions and
entertainment, due for their service. He is overcome at their importunate
suite; and re-assures them, in the word of a king, never to give them over into
the Florentines hands: howsoever he made semblance to that State of the
contrary.

APHORISM XXVII.
NOthing 1 is more necessary in a Chief, then the perfect exploration of the
courses his enemy takes, and a true estimate of the forces he brings: for,
by the ignorance of the first, and misprision of this other, he makes his
preparations, and builds his actions upon supposals and slipperie grounds; and
bereaues himself of many fair advantages. Ille difficile vincitur, qui de
suis, and aduersarij copijs, vere potest iudicare. Veget. l. 3.


Omnia ei hostium, non secus ac sua, nota erant. Liu. de Han l. 22. Macc. l. 3.
dis.


Nihil in Imperatore tam laudabile, quam si hostis sui deliberationes,
consiliaque praenoscat.

Celeritas and audacia, and impetus praeter rationem, and vanitas ac typhus,
hostibus quidem opportuna, noxia vero maxim amicis. Polyb. l. 3.


Ducem scire oportet, quis ordo agminis, quae cura explorandi, quantus vrgendo
trahendove bello modus. Tacit. An. 3.


Tuum est, hostium exercitum, locorum situm, naturam regionis nosse. Liui. l.
22. Am. Plut. Agis.


Recognoistre bien son ennemi, est un des principaux points de la science d'vn
Chef d'armee.

(...). i. Imperatoriam artem in hoc sitam esse puto, vt been cognoscat hostem,
quo maxim pacto Eurip.
possit cognosci.




The French vanguard is led by the Marshall of Ghienne: it passes the
Appenine, far before the body of the army; by reason of the difficulty of
carrying of the artillery over those mountains. It lodges at Furnuouo. The
army of the confederates, which was drawn into those parts to impeach their
passage, and give them battle, and consisted of two thousand five hundred men
at arms, eight thousand foot, and two thousand light horse, commanded in
chief by Francesco Gonzaga Marquis of Mantoa, lies within three Italian miles
of the enemy. They suppose at first, that the French (considering his small
forces) durst not have passed by land, but would have embarked himself for
France by sea. And now again that he is in view, they suppose his whole forces
to be there: whereas if they had had good scouts to observe the enemies
proceeding, and number, and that the battallion was far behind; they had
undoubtedly broken the vanguard, put the rest to manifest rout, and taken from
the King all means of passing that way to his forces in Piedmont, and
peradventure had little failed of seizing upon his person: of which fair
advantages, their ignorance bereaved them.

APHORISM XXVIII.
WHere (...). i. Saepe desperatio praestat, quod effici virtute ac fortitudine
non possit. Polyaen. stratag. lib. 1. Justin. l. 3. Port. Lat. Tacit An. l. 3
Ant. Pri. Tac. Veget. l. 3.


Necessitas, etiam timidos, fortes facit.

Grauissimi sunt morsus irritatae necessitatis.

Vbi extrema omnia in oculis, desperatione in audaciam accinguntur.

Ambigui, si deliberant: acres, si desperant.

Clausis in desperatione crescit audacia: and cum spei nihil est, sumit arma
formido.

Et fractis rebus violentior vltima virtus. Sil. l. 1. Flor. l. 2. c. 15 Tacit.
Agric. Sen. Oed. Tac. An. l. 2. Boter. de Scip. in Liu.


Quam maxim mortiferi esse solent morsus morientium bestiarum.

Plus impetus, mayor constantia, penes miserum.

Solent extrema securos facere mala.


there is no hope to escape, Despair takes arms: for Necessity makes the
most cowards valiant. Vicit ratio parcendi: Ne sublata spe veniae, pertinacia
accenderentur.

Al nemico non solo si dee lasciar la strada aperta and spedita, ma
lastricargliela.

Non si dee may serrar quella Porta, per laquale il nemico possa fuggire. Rag.
Stat. l. 3 Curt. l. 6. Am. Plu. De^. Polyaen. l. 1.


Reprehensi ex fuga, pugnabunt: quia fugere non possunt.

Le desespoir fait courir aux arms, and chercher salut en ruin.

Agesilaus, nunciante quodam hosts in templum consugere: iussit eos abire
quocunque vellent: quod esset periculosum cum ijs manum conserere, qui ex
desperatione pugnam redintegrarent.

(...). i. Hosts fugientes nolite trucidare, ne potius ducant manner quam
fugere. Licurg. in Polyae.



Wherefore, leave thine enemy a Port always open, whereby he may flee: and
rather then try what he can do, (when thou see what he would do) make him a
bridge of silver, that he may go his way.

A Herald is sent from the French king to the confederate army, to demand free
passage. A Council of war is called, to resolve of an answer: some think it
a great blemish to the reputation of so great an army, to suffer the enemy
pass, without blows: others, considering the force and valor of the French
lances, being all gentlemen, the assured firmness of the Swisse, and their
speedy and incredible conueyance of their artillery over those mountains, are
of a contrary opinion. They send to Millan for direction. The matter is debated
by the Ambassadors of all the confederates, who were there resiant: They of
the Empire and Spain, urge it to a day of battle: they infer, that
otherwise all Piedmont is like to be at the discretion of the French, by reason
of Asti and Nouara: they labor to prove, that in case they be not fought
withal, the State of Italy is in worse terms then ever. They protest, that
their masters should be forced to enter into new deliberations, and take some
other course to stop the current of the Frenches greatness, if the Italians
either would not, or durst not fight. But the Millanese and Venetian, whom it
concerned most, (the enemies army being now on their frontiers, and to be
fought with by their forces) thought it the safer way to give them free
passage, least the necessity of fighting should double the courage and force
of their small numbers: and so upon one chance set the Maine of all their
fortunes. This was resolved in Counsel, and Curriers dispatched to the camp
with direction accordingly. But the nearness of the armies one to another,
engaged them in the fight, before the news could come.

APHORISM XXIX.
THe Sublata causa tollitur effectus.


Topicke place in nature, that where the cause fails, the effect also dies:
has likewise his place in martial affairs. Temeritas, vbi primum impetum
effudit, sicut quaedam animalia amisso Aristot. Curt. l. 4.
aculeo, torpet.

Languebant omnium studia, etiam ij qui primum alacres, fidem atque animum
Tacit. An. 3.
ostentabant.

Multorum in impetu vis est, qui parua quidem mora vilescunt. Curt.


Inquire in mores, naturamque hostium: securitas enim in milite fugienda.

Frequentissimum initium calamitatis, securitas. Lip. pol. l. 5. Vellei. l. 2.
Liui. l. 21. Tacit. hist. 2. Claudian.


Saepe and contemptus hostis cruentum certamen edidit.

Satis cito incipis victoriam, vbi prouisum fuerit, ne vincare.

-- Ne fraena animo commit calenti:

Da spatium, tenuemque moram: male cuncta ministrat

Impetus. --

Quod multos etiam bonos pessum-dedit: qui spretis quae tarda, cum securitate,
Tacit. Ann. 3
praematura vel cum exitio, properant.


For, where men are courageous, not out of true resolution, but out of some
conceit of the enemies weakness, or wants: they lose that spirit and
animositie, when they find things contrary to those former impressions.

The confederate army, upon the encouragement of their Captains, and the
consideration of the small numbers of the enemy, but chiefly upon presumption
that they durst not make their way by the sword, through so great forces, as
were there ready ranged in battle, make a show of excellent resolution, and
desire to fight: on the other side, the French magnify their own valor,
vilipend the Italian soldiers, and come bravely on. But when the Italians saw
the gallant courage of the French, though few in number: and they again
observed the confederates, strongly embatteled in their trenches, and with a
face to fight, though before despised both the one and the other, find their
heat cooled, and edge rebated. The French would have been glad of a Pass,
quietly granted; and the Italians were as sorry they had no warrant to grant it.

APHORISM XXX.
NO Niuna nostra operazione, e piu soggetta a diuersi and inopinati
auuenimenti, che quelle delle battaglie: Nelle quali ben spesso sogliono da
leggierissimi Por. in Guic.
accidenti, nascere importantissimi effetti.


actions of men are more subject to sudden and unexpected event, then those of
war. Exercitus praedator, and ipse praeda hostium. Salust. Iug.


Nimis saepe obstitit vincentibus, prauum inter ipsos certamen (omisso host)
spolia consectandi. Tacit. hist. l. 4


Apraeda arcendi milites, donec plane vicerint.

Themistocles ad maris littus, torques armillasque passim disiectas vidit, and
praeterijt: Lip. pol. l. 5. Plut. Ihemi.
sed amico qui sequebatur dixit: Collige tu tibi, nam Themistocles non es.
Innuens, hanc indignam esse praedam egregio Duce, cui gloria debet esse satis
magnum virtutis praemium.


And in war, nothing so soon snatcheth victory out of our hands, as untimely
falling to the spoil. Euentus praeliorum, inter initia contra illos fuit,
quibus victoria debebatur. Veget. l. 3.


L'honorata vittoria che s'aspetta, Ariost. cant. 36.


Voltera il caluo, ou'hoza il crin ne mostra.


Upon such disorder, Fortune always turns her wheel, and makes victors of
them, which before were vanquished.

In the memorable battle of Taro, between the French and Italian
confederates: the Marshall of Ghienne, the Lord Triultio, and the Bailiffe of
Dijon, led the French vanguard: the King himself and the Lord of Tramouille,
the battle: the Count of Foix, brought on the rear. The baggage comes behind
slenderly guarded. The Marquis of Mantoa, with a Squadron of six hundred men
at arms, a gross troop of Estradiots, and six thousand foot, goes to charge
upon the Rear: leaves Antonio da Monte-feltro at stand, with a strong Squadron
to come to the succors, upon a signal given: gives order to the other
squadron of Estradiots (or Greek horse) to charge the enemy in flank, so
soon as he had charged in front: appoints Count Gaiazzo, with four hundred
men at arms, and two thousand foot, to give upon the vanguard: assigns the
rest of the Estradiots, to fall upon the carriages: sets Hannibal Bentiuoglio
to stand firm, with two hundred men at arms, for seconds to Gaiazzo, when he
should be called. The fight is begun: the fury on both sides great: the
success on whether side doubtful; till the valor of the Marquis Gonzaga,
performing both the office of a worthy Commander, by his direction, and the
duty of a brave soldier, by his sword, made the enemy stagger, and brought
the odds on his side. In this instant, those Estradiots appointed to charge
upon the Baggage, finding no resistance, fall to the spoil: and bring of, some
one kind of pillage, some another. Their fellows, appointed to charge the
enemy in Flank, seeing this, run also to the booty. The other Estradiots
already engaged in fight, follow their example: then horse and foot in whole
troops do the like. VVhereupon the Marquises forces being distracted and
weakened, and no longer able to endure the furious impression of the French, are
forced to quit the battle, and repasse the river Taro, with exceeding loss;
leaving the field to them which before were almost vanquished.

APHORISM XXXI.
EVery (...). Arist. eth. l. 1.
i. Arsomnis and omnis doctrina, itemque actio and propositum, bonum aliquod
appetere videtur.

Finis dicitur, non omne quod extremum, sed quod omnium est praestantissimum.
Ibid.


Quod per se bonum est, suaque vi and natura, id omne finis: and ita causa vt
eius gratia and fiant and sint caetera omnia. Arist. Metap.



action tends to his end: by which we judge, whether it be virtuous or
dishonest; worthy or base. Wherefore of causes, the final is the most noble:
and as the efficient gives motion, and the formal gives essence to the matter;
so the final gives the true judgment and appellation of all things. Chi
acquista il fine, per il quale s' e proceduto alla battaglia, and al combattere
il nemico, senza dubbio vince. Por. in Guic.


Vici ego Hannibalem, dum vincere prohibui, vt a vobis, quorum vigent nunc
vires, etiam vinci posset. Fab. ap. Liui lib. 27.



His claim is therefore best to the title of victory, and honor of the day,
not that kills more enemies, or takes more prisoners, but that by the battle
obtains his end, for which he fought.

The Italians challenge the honor of the day in the battle of Taro, because
they held still their lodging and carriages (for their retreit was but over the
river, which they had first passed to charge the enemy) and because they had
had the spoil of the French tents, even to the kings own pauillion. The
French on the other side claim the victory to be theirs, because the enemy
lost many more in the battle then they: as also they were forced to quit the
place of the fight, and to retire over Taro: but principally, because they had
obtained the end for which they fought; namely, a free passage into their
country, which they had now made, maugre the confederates, whose forces were
there only to impeach and stop them. This in the general opinion was the
stronger plea: and therefore the glory of that days encounter, is due to the
French.

APHORISM XXXII.
IN In Carrinensi Hispaniae agro, fons est, aurei coloris omnes ostendens
pisces: Plin. not. hist. lib. 2. ca. 103.
nihil extra illam aquam caeteris differentes.


the country Carrinensis (of Spain) there is a river, that shows all the
fish in it to be like gold; but take them into thy hand, and they appear in
their natural kind and color. Multa fidem promissa leuant, vbi before aequo

Laudat venales qui vult extrudere merces. Hor. ep. 2.


Verba promittentium Cupressis similia, quae sublimes cum sint and pulchrae,
fructum non habent. Plut. Apop.


Priusquam promittas delibera, and cum promiseris facias, vt ne quis merito tuo
Stob. de mor
te oderit.

Theagines (...), i. fumus cognominatus: quod magnifice polliceretur, cum esset
Polyanth.
pauper.


Such are fair promises in his mouth that would obtain his purpose: bring
them to the touch, and thou shall find, All is not gold that glistereth. Tale
nihil timeo, sed nec Medea timebat, Ovid. epist.


Fallitur augurio spes bona saepe suo.

Heu patior telis vulnera facta meis. Ovid. ep.



He therefore that will engage himself into a great action, upon promise of
great assistance, if he be not as sure of his friends ability in power, as
readiness in will, he reckons without his host, and sits down with the loss.

The Cardinal of S. Peter in Vincola, and Fregoso, with the troops of
Vitelli, and other landforces, besides a navy at sea, attempt upon the coast
of Genoa: they take two Port towns, Spezie and Rappallo: they expect when
those of their faction in Genoa, should arise in arms, raise some tumult, and
further this business. They find nothing less. The city sends out seven
hundred foot to the rescue of their people, and recovery of their towns:
they suddenly set upon Rappallo, and carry it: moreover, a fleet of Galleys,
one Carrack, and two Biscay ships, with some smaller vessels, set upon the
French navy, and the exiles, in the gulf of Rappallo, fire all their
shipping, kill many of the enemy, take the General prisoner, and obtain a
bloody and famous victory. This success had the French, relying upon the
promises of the Genowese exiles.

APHORISM XXXIII.
THat Habet praeteriti doloris secura recordatio delectationem. Cic. ep. l. 5.
Senec. Virg.


Quod fuit durum pati, meminisse dulce.

Olim haec meminisse iuuabit.

O passi grauiora, dabit Deus his quoque finem.


which pains us much to endure, glads us much to enjoy, and to remember. For,
there is nothing glorious or sweet in the fruition, that is not difficult and
painful in the acquisition: Nor can we taste the kernel of pleasure, unless
we crack the hard shell of danger. (...). i. Difficilia quae pulchra. Adag.
graec. Plaut. Sen. Her. fur. Ovid. Met. 7.


Qui e nuce nucleos esse vult, frangit nucem.

Non est ad Astra, mollis e terra via.

Flebile principium melior fortuna secuta est.

Tendit in ar dua virtus.

Quisquis enim duros casus virtutis amore Ovid. art. 2. Virg. opusc.


Vicerit, ille sibi laudemque decusque parabit.

-- Nil sine magno Hor. 1. Sat. 9.


Vita labor dedit mortalibus.

Signor, non sotto l' ombra, in piaggia molle Tasso. can. 1.


Tra fonti, e fior', tra nimfe, e tra Sirene,

Ma in cima alerto, e faticoso colle,

De la virtue, riposto e il nostro been.

Il ne faut, pour un rebout, ou deux, per dre le courage. Am. Plu. De^. Am.
Plu. Dio^. Apollodor.


Apres beaucoup des trauaux, l' homme verteueux gaigne le dessus.

(...). i. Nunquam oportet animum despondere hominem infortunatum.

Qui sehabet, nihil perdidit. Adag. Poly.



Such are the craggie and untrodden paths to virtue and honor: where, though
the first entrance be hard, and many times desastrous, yet overcome by true
resolution and perseverance, it after turns to a man's greater glory.

Gonsaluo Ernandes d'Aghilar of Corduba, a Spanish Captain, commands in chief
over his country soldiers, in Ferdinands army, at the battle of Seminara in
Calabria, against the French led by d'Aubigni. The French gain the day. The
Arragonese are all slain, or put to rout. Ferdinand himself flees by
shipping to Palma, and thence to Messina in Sicilia. Gonsaluo escapes hardly,
and takes his flight by land to Reggium, cross the mountains: yet in this
very kingdom, he shortly after purchased himself, and that worthily, in the
opinion of all men (even of his enemies) the title and surname of GranCapitano.

APHORISM XXXIIII.
EVery Magna sunt moment a temporum: and multum interest, idem illud vtrum
ante, an post decernatur, suscipiatur, agatur. Caes. com. l. 5.


Temporis opportunitas, operis est optima magistra, cuiusuis and incoepti
artifex. Sopho. in El.


Tempus est, in quo occasio: and occasio, in qua tempus: Medela tempore, est
etiam Hip. in praec.
vbi occasion contingit.

Temporibus medicina valet, data tempore prosunt, Ovid. remed


Et data non apto tempore, vina nocent.

Attraxit superuacua, and in discrimen rerum omnium, peruentura bella:
Dumflecti Sen. de Ben. l. 6.
non minus existimat turpe, quam vinci.


has his warrantie, from the collection of circumstances: and among these,
that of time is of greatest moment. For, not to adventure when we should, is
cowardice, not prudence: and to dare when we should not, is rashness, not
valor. Tempori aptari decet. Senec. Med. Auson. de oc


Tu quoque dum cogitas, dum percunctando moraris,

Elapsum dices me tibi de manibus.

Vlteriora mirari, praesentia sequi.

Consilium nobis resque locusque dabunt. Tacit. hist. 4. Ovid. Lip. an. l. 3.


Consilia noua pro nouis rebus, aut vbi priora improspera.


A wise man therefore must form his counsels, and frame his actions, upon the
mould of necessary circumstances.

Ferdinand, with a navy of four score ships in all, Spanish and Sicilian,
with Ricaiense Catelano Admiral of the Spanish Armada, presents himself in
good order of fight before Naples: he had scarce men enough to man his ships;
yet set he a good face on the matter, in hope of the Neapolitans revolt, with
whom he had secret intelligence. Monpensier Governor of the city, sets a
strong Guard in every place, and preuenteth or suppresseth all tumult. He is
advised by his Council of war, to man that shipping he had in the Port, and
to set upon the enemy, being so weakly provided. He will not be advised.
Ferdinand, frustrate of his expectation, bears back again to sea, for
Sicilia. The conspirators in the town, fear their treason will be discovered,
send out a small boat to Ferdinand; importune his return; he does so;
offers to land his men at Magdalena, a mile from the city of Naples.
Monpensier (as rashly forward now, as he was fearfully backward before) will
needs out of the city, to impeach their landing. An act of more advantage to
the conspirators, then they could have hoped. He is no sooner out, but the
Neapolitans are all in armens shut the gates upon him: and make the place good
for Ferdinand. The French thus engaged between the town and the enemy, are
forced (though with some difficulty) to recover the Castle. And Ferdinand by
this means regaineth Naples.

APHORISM XXXV.
WHere Reason sits as sovereign, and gouernes all other passions and
perturbations of the mind, that man's actions are reigled by the squire of
virtue, and confined within the limits of mediocritie. Now, because in a
multitude, these motions and affections, like so many mutinous soldiers, have
no such captain as Reason, to repair unto for direction: they are whirled
with a voluble and violent variation from one extreme to another: and neither
in obedience nor disloyalty, love or disdain, keep any settled stay. Mutabile
subitis vulgus, tam pronum in misericordiam, quam immodicum saeuitia fuerat.
Tacit. an. 17.


Multitudo praeceps fertur, non qua eundum est, sed qua itur.

Nec quicquam facilius, quam in quemlibet affectum mutare populum. Seneca.
Quintil. Am. in Tac. l. 5.


Populus, effigies Agrippinae and Neronis gerens, circumsistit Curiam: Il quale
con tutte queste dimostrazioni, non impedi, che iui a non lungo tempo, l' vno,
and l' altera non capitassero male.

Quegli che non sanno, and alcreder sono piu pronti, and pia d'altri ancora mal
Am. in Tacit. l. 1. Am. in Tac. l. 5. Id. Ibid.
contenti, and vaghi di cose nuoue.

I fauori del popolo sono cosa leggiera, and da non farui fondamento.

Il popolo non ha ne' suoi consegli alcuna fermezza: ma come ama hor' vno cosi
amarebbe ancora doppo poco vn' altro, se la fortuna si cambiasse.

Bellua multorum capitum.

Populus, nouarum rerum cupiens, pauidusque. Horat. Tac. an. l. 16. Liui. l. 23.


Haec est natura multitudinis, aut seruit humiliter, aut super be dominatur:
Libertatem, quae media est, nec spernere modice, nec habere sciuit.

Vulgus -- eosdem colit atque odit. Sen. Her. fur.





The citizens of Naples had disloyally revolted from their natural Liege Lord
and Sovereign, young Ferdinand, (a Prince that had never wronged them) to
Charles the 8. a stranger, and one they had never seen. They had forced him to
flee out of Naples; and before he could shift himself out of the town, they
had rifled his goods, and forcibly taken all his horses out of the stables,
with many other outrages, full of all insolency and villainy. Charles the 8.
had used them much better then they of the house of Arragon; he had eased them
of diverse grieuances and impositions yet is he no sooner out of the town, but
they shut the gates upon him, and take in again young Ferdinand: and him whom
they so shamefully used before, they now receive with general shouts and
acclamations of great joy. The women from the windows, cover him with flowers
as he passes by, rain showers of sweet waters upon his head, and run to
meet him in the streets, offering to kiss his feet, and wipe the sweat from
his face. So hard it is for the popular sort to keep any mean.

APHORISM XXXVI.
THough Rara quidem est virtus, quam non fortuna gubernat. Ovid. Trist. Caes.
com. l. 6 Pro. Ital. Cicero. Liui.


Multum cum in omnibus rebus, tum in re militari, potest fortuna.

Assai ben balla, achi fortuna suona.

Quicquid est prospere gestum, id pene omne ducit suum.

Vt quisque fortuna vtitur, it a praecellit, and exinde sapere eum omnes
dicimus.

-- Sed te

Nos facimus Fortuna deam, coeloque locamus. Iuuen. Sat. 10



Fortune be said to have a great stroke in all humane actions, and greatest in
those of war, yet can we not so transfer the fault upon her, but that the
greatest blame will light on our selves. For her two only advocates,
(blindness and ignorance) which plead her innocence, are our chief
accusers, and prove us guilty of our own destruction. Qui quae necessaria
sunt, non prouidet, non prorsus videt: Haec non sapere, Lip. pol. l. 3.
est plane decipere.

Fortuna fortes metuit, ignauos premit. Senec. Med. Polyb. l. 3.


Qui in aduersum aliquem casum inciderunt, si id forti ac magno animo tolerent,
plerumque fortunam suam in melius vertunt.


It is therefore the part of every commander, to open the one eye of his
providence upon the danger; and fix the other of his knowledge, upon the
remedy.

Monpensier, General of the Kings forces, Governor of the kingdom, and
Lieutenant of the city of Naples; while he was peaceably possessed of the
town, had neither the judgment to see, nor care to foresee, what was
necessary for the keeping thereof, although he could not but expect new
attempts from the enemy. He had not only not provided Castel-nuouo, and
Castel-vouo, of sufficient store of victuals and munition, against all future
accidents of extremity, but had also suffered what was there, in a reasonable
mediocritie, to be lauishly wasted and consumed. The Arragonese is now again
Master of the town: and Monpensier with his troops are driven into those two
places of strength (the one within the city, the other within canon shot) a
number far too great, for the small provision of victuals they found there.
Which took from him all possible means of holding those two strong pieces,
whereby he might very shortly and most assuredly have reduced that city to the
French obedience.

APHORISM XXXVII.
IT (...). i. Oportet quidlibet conantem, frangere aduersarium. Pin. is it. od. 4.


Cum iustum bellum suscipitur, vt aperte pugnet quis, aut ex insidijs, nihil ad
iustitiam attinet. August.


Id venenum quod Serpents sine sua pernicie continent, in alienam effundunt:
At malitia maximam sui partem bibit ipsa. Valor. Max.


(...). i. Confice sieve dolo, seu stricto comminus ense. Hom. odys. (...).
Vult. in Poly
Cum Homerus saepe hoc dicat, nihil aliud praecipit quam artibus and
stratagematis aduersus hosts vti: Sin hac non succedat, tum vero corporum vi
ac robore periclitandum esse.

Arma aperta palam vitare possis: fraus and dolus occulta sunt arma, eaque
ineuitabilia: Lip. e Tacit. an. 2.
quia non prius se prodit, quam perdit.

Qui a de l'argent, il trouue des traistres, pres a vendre, ou engager leur Am.
Plut. Phoc.
patrie.

Optimum in ipsa acie quicquam machinari: vt consilio praeueniente finem belli,
Polyaen. l. 1.
victoria paretur.


is usual, and allowable by the law of Arms, for a public and professed
enemy to attempt that by stratageme, fraud, or suborned treachery, which
cannot be got by fine force, without long time, uttermost danger, and extreme
charge: for this way the purchase is sooner made, and at a less rate. Qui
adiouste foy au dire d' un meschant, s' en repent, and s' en boit l' outrage
Amy. Plut.
puis apres.

Metuendum magis, quam cauendum malum. Lip. pol. l 5. Ariost. cant 36. de Pesc.


Ecco qui ne l' insidie, che gli ha tese,

Con un tratto doppio, il rio Ethiopo,

Come scannato di Saetta cade,

Il meglior Caualier di questa etade.


But it is dangerous for a chief commander, to treat in such a practice, and
be of the party, if he be to engage his person, and entrust his life in the
hands of the suborned traitor: least, while he seek to buy other men's lives
for money, he sell his own for naught.

The Marquis of Pescara, the greatest commander under the Arragonese, had with
his forces besieged and assailed the Monastery La-Croce, a place near Naples,
and of great importance, for his further desseignes: it was strongly fortified,
and bravely defended by the French: Pescara despaires to win it by force: he
deals with a Moore, who had sometimes been his slave, and was now a soldier
in the place, to betray it unto him. The Moore assigns him an hour in the
night, and prouides him a ladder to climb up the wall, that they two might
further treat of the matter, and resolve of the means: mean while he
discouers the plot to the French. At the hour of assignation the Marquis
comes; climeth up the ladder: is shot through the throat, and falls slain
in the place.

APHORISM XXXVIII.
IT Regium est ditare, non ditescere. Adag. Martial. 7.


Extra fortunam est, quicquid donatur amicis,

Quas dederis solas semper habebis opes.

Praeceps ille manu fluuios superabat Iberos Claud. pane. Prob.


Aurea dona vomens. --

Nil negat, and sese vel non poscentibus offert. Claud. pan. Arist. eth.


Molestius fert liberalis, si quid cum oportet, non erogauerit; quam si
erogauerit quod non oportet.


is more princely to en-rich, then be rich. Dissolutionem Imperij doces, si
fructus, quibus Respub. sustinetur, diminuantur. Tacit. hist. l. 3


Non ergo profuse offundende opes: Quae pacis ornamenta sunt, subsidia belli.
Cic. pro leg. Man. Tacit. hist. l. 1.


Falluntur quibus luxuria specie liberalitatis imponit: Perdere multi sciunt,
donare nesciunt.

Non priuatim largiendum, quod auidius de Rep. sumas. Tacit. hist. l. 2 Tacit.
an. l. 1. Tacit. an. 16. Alex. Sever. apud Lamp.


Aerarium ambitione exhaustum, per scelera supplendum erit.

Haud debet Princeps, grauitate sumptuum, iustos redditus profligare.

Nefas est, Dispensatorem publicum, in delectationes suas suorumve conuertere
id, quod Prouinciales dedissent.

Le Prince doit estre non seulement liberal, mais aussi magnifique: pourueu que
de magnifique, il ne deuienne prodigue: car de prodigue il deuiendra exacteur,
Bod. de rep. l. 5.
and d' exacteur tyran.

Cave ne beneficium maius sit facultate tua: inest enim tali liberalitate
cupiditas Senec. Ben.
rapiendi, vt ad largiendum suppetant copy.

Prouidendum est, vt ratio quaestuum, and necessitas erogationum, inter se
congruant. Tac. an. 14.


Le Prince doit regarder, que le loyer soit preallable au don. Bod. rep. l. 5.



This rule in it self implies a limit. For (being so) he maynot impouerish
himself, to make othersrich: least he be unable to perform that princely
office, and want means to reward well-deseruing in others. Wherefore a great
beggar must have a great sayer-nay; and a great giver, must not so glut his
follower, as that he take from him all edge of meriting more, or expecting more
good: least he offer the sacrifice of his old service upon a new altar, and
turn the point of his power, upon him that gave it.

The French king had enfeoffed Fabritio and Prospero Colonna with great
Seigneuries and States in the kingdom of Naples: he had given them whole
Provinces, more then to any other of that Nobility: his affairs begin now to
decline in that Realm, and his friends to fall from him; among which, these
two are the first of all, who of all other had least cause. They pretend for
excuse, want of pay: a slender pretense in them, that had had such gifts and
honors heaped upon them. They allege further, that Virginio Orsini, and the
Count Petigliano (capital enemies to their house) were in too much grace with
the French: when as these men had not yet obtained at his hands so much as
their liberty, which was due to them by the law of Arms, having their pardon
and safe conduct signed with the Kings own hands, before they were taken
prisoners. But indeed these were but pretended allegations of excuse, for their
ungrateful revolt, from so magnificent a Prince. It was the great Estates
conferred upon them, beyond the merit of their service, or proportion of others
(which ought to have bin the bridle to restrain them from such perfidious
backsliding, and to have kept them in all awful and dutiful obedience) that
were their only motives to quit his service. For now they hoped to make a new
purchase, by following a new Master: or at least, to save so great a stake.

APHORISM XXXIX.
NO Nemo fere credit nisi ei quem fidelem putat. Perditissimi est igitur
hominis, Cic. pro Ros.
fallere eum, qui laesus non esset, nisi credidisset.

In Rep. maxim conseruanda sunt iura belli.

-- (...). Cic. off. l. 2. Homer. Il. A.
i.

-- Deprauant publica iura,

Iustitiamque fugant, Diuum nil verba verentes.


man is more bound to be true, then he that is trusted: nor any more carefully
by us to be tendered, then they who by our means, and for our cause, are
brought in case not to help themselves. -- Rebus succurrite laesis, Ovid.
Trist. 2


Et date naufragio littora tutameo.

Is locus officio cum cessant prospera, cumque

Dura ad opem fortuna vocat: Nam laeta fouere Silius. l. 11.


Haudquaquam magni est animi decus.

-- Aduersis non deesse decet. Lucan. 8. Ovid. Pon. 2.


Turpe erit in miseris veteritibirebus amico

Auxilium nulla part tulisse tuum.

Quod te per superos and conscia numina very,

Per, si qua est, quae restat adhuc mortalibus vsquam, Virg. Aen. 2.


Intemerata fides, oro, miserere laborum

Tantorum, miserere animi non digna ferentis.


It is therefore a shameful thing in a Chief, to give Hostages for keeping of
articles capitulated: and after by wilful breaking of them, to leave the lives
of those pledges at discretion, and the enemies mercy.

Monpensier, a man of small deserving in martial affairs, weak in his
directions, cold in his resolutions, and unfortunate in his actions, in whom
nothing was noble or great but his blood, (which issued from the Master-veine
of France) is now straightly besieged in Castell-nuouo at Naples. He compounds
to yield the place (their lives and goods saved) if in thirty days he were
not relieved. He gives Iuo d'Allegri, and three other Captains of eminent
note, for pledges of the performance. Monsieur de Percy, and the Prince of
Bisignano, come to his succors, with what forces they can make. They overthrow
the Count of Matalona, at the lake of Pizzolo, near Eboli. They march on,
without resistance, till they come near Naples. Here, they find all places
strongly guarded, and all passages stopped. In despair therefore of relieuing
their distressed friends in Castel-nuouo, they retire. Monpensier, upon no
necessity, but by persuasion of the Prince of Salerno only, for sakes the
Castle, embarques himself by night with two thousand five hundred of the
garrison, and leaves the rest; with charge to hold still the place, beyond the
day assigned by the composition: and so abandons those Noble men, his pledges,
and leaves their lives at the discretion of Ferdinand.

APHORISM XL.
A Non fert ludibrium, insolens contumeliae animus. Tac. an. l. 8. Tac. an. 16.


Asper ae facetiae, vbi multum ex vero traxere, acrem sui memoriam relinquunt.

Con minor patienza si sent il dispregio, che il danno. Ammirat.



Man's eye and his honor, are two tender parts: the one cannot abide the rough
touch of the hand, nor the other endure the smart ierke of the tongue: As
therefore by the owners, they are carefully preserved, so by others that deal
with them, they should be tenderly used. Such pregnant wits as had rather lose
their friend, then their jest, must learn the lesson which is taught fresh
soldiers, to take heed, while they level and discharge upon others, they lie
not so open that they be hit themselves. Gorgias Sophistarecitabat orationem,
in Olympiacis ludis, de concordia: Hic hono (inquit Melanthus) de concordia
totius Graeciae disserit, qui sibi, vxori, and Apop. ^ Poly
ancillae, tribus duntaxat, vt concorditer viuant nondum persuasit.

Qui alterum incusat probri, ipsum se intueri oportet. Plaut. luue. Sat. 12
Idem. Sat. 2. Ibid.


Quis tuler it Gracchos, de seditione querentes?

Loripedem rectus derideat: Aethiopem albus.

-- Merito vitia vltima sictos

Contemnunt Seauros, and castigata remordent.

Gaudisserie sied mal aux grands: qui prennent plaisir de s'entrepicquer, and
qui est le plus coulpable, souuent est le plus outrageux. Am. in Plut. Ant.
Horat. Sat.


Cum tua peruideas oculis mala lippus inunctis,

Cur in amicorum vitijs tam cernis acutum

Quam aut Aquila aut Serpens Epidaurius?

Quis coelum terris non misceat, and mare coelo

Si sur displiceat Verri, homicida Miloni, Iuuenal.


Clodius accuset moechos, Catilina Cethegum?


For as witty speeches lose their relish, when they are ouer-seasoned with the
sour sauce of reprehension: so, when they come from him, upon whom they may be
justly retorted, by way of recrimination, they are most odious.

Between Peter Medici and the Duke of Millan, was no kind correspondencie:
they entertained jealous constructions one of another: yet the Duke being now
on his way, to come to the French king at Serezzana, Medici goes out well
mounted and attended, in complement to meet the Duke, and bring him into the
town. He fortunes to go out one way, and the Duke to come in another. At his
return, Sir (quoth he) I went out purposely to meet you upon the way, to have
offered you my service, and attended you into the town, but it seems you came
not the road way. Indeed Sir, replies the Duke, one of us has missed the
right way, but out of question it was your self. Covertly, and bitterly taxing
Medici of taking a wrong course, in not being formerly advised by him, but in
following the French party, and so bringing great troubles upon his own
city, and whole family, and all Italy besides. A fault whereof no man was
more guilty then the Duke himself. In like manner Alphonso the father, writes
from Messina in Sicilia, to his son Ferdinand at Naples (which he had newly
conquered) that he might again return to that city. Sir, answers the
son, I will first establish the State, settle the government, fortify the
city of Naples, and make all sure, least you should again flee from thence,
as erst ye did: whereas himself as well as the old man, had fearfully quit
the town, and fled away.

APHORISM XLI.
Men's Honores mutant mores. Adag. Arist. eth. Salust frag. Tacit. hist. l. 1


Magistratus virum indicat.

Malae secundaequeres, opes non ingenium mutare debent.

Secundae res acrioribus stimulis animum explorant: quia miseriae tolerantur,
foelicitates corrumpuntur.

Nemo confidat nimium secundis,

Nemo desperet meliora lapsus: Senec. Thiest


Miscet haec illis, prohibetque Clotho

Stare fortunam.


manners change with their honors: and therefore popular States have cut off
aspirers to overmuch greatness and popularitie, (though otherwise men of
eminent virtue and worth) because it is scarce known to themselves (much less
to the State) what manner of men they would prove, having gained their purpose.
Nulla sors longa est, Dolor and Voluptas

Inuicem cedunt: breuior voluptas. Seen. Thiest.


Habet has vices conditio mortalium, vt aduersa ex secundis, ex aduersis
secunda nascantur. Plin. paneg.


Quotidie experimur quam caduca foelicitas sit. Curt. l. 8. Cic. pro leg. Manil.


Sunt quidam hoc Astro, vt ijs ad amplitudinem and gloriam, and ad res magnas
been gerendas, diuinitus adiuncta fortuna videatur: Alij quibus etiam venti
tempestatesque obsecundant.

Alij quibus dormientibus Dij omnia conficiunt. Terent. Liui. l. 7. Erasm.
Eustath. Pro. Ariost. cant. 45.


In sinum ijs victoria de coelo deuolat.

Reti vrbes capiunt.

Sunt vero alij (...). i. Quarta luna nati, and infoelices.

Qui Domi habent equum Seianum.

Si vede per gli Essempi, di che piene

Sono l' antiche, e le modern history

Ch'il benva dietro al mal, e'l mal al been,

E fin son' l'vn dell' altro, e Biasimi e Glory.


So do men's fortunes often change with their honors: for as history gives us
instances of diverse Princes, to whom success and desaster, glory and
disgrace, have been alternatiue: so are they plentiful in examples of such as
have had a continual current of good fortune, to a certain period; and then a
perpetual ebb, and course of the contrary, all their life after.

Alphonso of Arragon, king of Naples, during the reign of his father old
Ferdinand, and while himself was but Duke of Calabria, was renowned through
all Europe for his famous deeds of arms, and succesfull issue in all his
actions. But after he once came to the Crown, there was no one enterprise
wherein he prospered: his glory was daily eclipsed with the thick clouds of
black infamy, for his cruelty, avarice, and oppression: and his felicity
hourly wained to the last change of extreme misfortune.

APHORISM XLII.
Unlawful (...). i. Nam in legibus seruandis, salus Arist. rhet. l. 3.
ciuitatis sita est.

Themistocles, postulanti ase Simonidi Poetae, vt sententiam quandam iniustam
ferret, respondit: Neque tu Poeta bonus esses si praeter numerum caneres, neque
ego Plut. apop.
Princeps bonus si contra leges iudicarem.

Si ius violare fas est, regnandi causa violandu^: verum enimvero (...). Eurip.
i. Non fas potentes posse, fieri quod nefas.


actions, proceeding from our free election, can no way be salued, nor
pargetted over with any color of excuse: the wound may well be bound up, but
the scarre will always remain. For, if law were to be violated, it should be
for a kingdom at least. Male vim suam potestas alienis iniurijs experitur.
Plin. paneg. Liui. l. 34. Seneca. Curr. l. 10.


Quo plus possumus, eo moderatius imperio vti debemus.

Quanto liceat magis, tanto libeat minus.

Nulla quaesita scelere potentia, potest esse diuturna.

Dicite Pontifices, in sancto quid facit aurum? Pers. Sat. 2.


Quid tuuat hoc templis nostris immittere mores?

Ite nunc ^ mali homines, parate vobis honorem per vim, Eurip. in Ino


Et contrahite diuitias vndecunque venantes,

Per fas simul atque nefas; deinde messem ipsarum infoelicem metite.


But neither the greatness of the purchase, nor of the party, can extenuate
the quality of the fact; nor patronize either the offender, or iustifier of
the offense, from just reproof.

Ferdinand is repossessed of Naples it self, and a great part of the kingdom.
He endeavors to be re-assured of the whole. To the effecting hereof, and
establishment of this State, his Council finds no means so good, nor knot so
strong, as a strict alliance and parentade with Spain. To which purpose he
contracteth in marriage with Joan (his Aunt) who was daughter to Ferdinand his
grandfather, by Joan the king of Spaines sister. He marries her: and the Pope
by his Bull of dispensation, ratifies the match. Thus, what neither the law of
nations allows, nor much less the Divine law, which expressly forbids it,
the Prince without conscience admits, and the Pope without shame permits.

APHORISM XLIII.
SCarres Iusto Cicatrix parta bello, honestat faciem. Petrarch. Idem. E Platone.


Speciosum pro iustitia acceptum vulnus.


in a soldiers face, are the marks of honor; and wounds in his weak body,
are strong pleaders for reward. Socrates interrogatus quaenam ciuitas rite
gubernari possit, respondit: Cum boni inuitantur praemijs, iniusti dant poenas.

Di grandissimo momento sara, che il Soldato sia sicuro, che se been egli nella
guerra restera stroppiato and impotente, il Prencipe non l'abandonera, anzi il
prouedera Rag. Stat. l. 9
d'honesto trattenimento, and modo di viuere.

Sic Tullus Hostilius, agrum magnum and vberem, promisit diuidi viritim inter
Romanos milites inopes. Dion. Halyc.


Eo impenditur labor ac periculum, vnde emolumentum at que honos speratur.

Nil non aggressuri sunt homines, si magna conantibus magna praemia
proponantur. Liui. l. 4. Id. l. 4.


Praemia bonorum malorumque bonos malosque faciunt.

-- Quis etiam virtutem amplectitur ipsam, Plin. Paneg. Iuuen. Sat. 10


Praemia si tollis? --

Homo, quum sit animalium omnium generosissimum, non tam minis ac supplicijs
cogi, quam praemijs oportebit ad officium inuitari legibus. Xenoph. de inst.
Prin.



Such therefore as shall lose any limme in their countries service, and be
disabled for other emploiments, are by law and their right, to be maintained at
the countries charges: for, Reward is as strong a supporter of the State, as
punishment. Wherefore they who actually perform what such laws justly
provide, deserve the sword of a soldier to be drawn for them in their need,
and to be enrolled in the register of Fame for ever.

The State of Venice, presently after the memorable battle of Taro, calls in
consideration the good service there done by those soldiers of their own
dominion, and in their entertainment. They think of a means to reward them;
and resolve it thus: The Marquis of Mantoa, Gonzaga, they make General of all
their forces, who before had but title of Governor. They increase the pay of
those that had borne themselves bravely in that days service, and meant still
to follow the wars. They give competent pensions to those that had been
maimed: they give stipends out of the public Treasury, to their sons that
had been slain in the battle, and dowers to their daughters, for their better
preferment. A memorable example for other States, and remarkable to the
perpetual honor of that Commonwealth.

APHORISM XLIIII.
THe Quod si Ciuicae Coronae honos, vno aliquo, ac vel humillimo ciue seruato,
Plin. not. hist. l. 22. c. 4.
praeclarus sacerque habetur: quid tandem existimari debet, vnius virtute
seruatus vniuersus exercitus?

Ciuica Corona, insigne clarissimum fuit militum: Cui cedunt Murales, Vallares,
Aureae, cedunt and Restratae. Plin. l. 16 c. 3



Ciuicke Garlands and Coronets, were given by the old Romans, to those
Generals that had saved the lives of many Citizens: and these were held more
noble, and of greater honor, then either the Murall and Vallare garlands,
given to them that first entered the enemies town or camp: or then the Nauall,
for doing some brave exploit at sea. For, they valewed the life of one of their
own, at ten of the enemy. Harei anzi voluto, seruare un Cittadino, che
amazzare molti nemici. Scip. in Plut. E Justin. l. 1.


Malo vnum Zopyrum, quam centum Babilonios capere.

Niuna vittoria e piu vtile, piu preclara, o piu preziosa, che quella che
s'acquista senza danno, and senza sanguine de'suoi Soldati. Guic. l. 15.


Pelopidas rogatus vt seipsum seruaret: Dux, inquit, hortandus est potius vt
seruet Ciues. Apoptheg.


Alieno sanguini tanquam suo parcit, and scit, homini non esse homine prodige
vtendum. Senec. ep. 89


Rien ne doit estre plus raccommandee a un sage Gouerneur, que de pouruoir a
Am. Plu. Cic
la sauuete de ses gens, and espargner leur sang.

Come Pastor quando fremendo intorno Tasso cant. 9.


Il vento, e i Tuoni, e balenando i Lampi

Vede oscurar di mill Nubi il giorno,

Ritrahe le Greggie da gli aperti Campi:

Et sollecito cerca alcun soggiorno

Oue l'ira del Ciel sicuro scampi:

Et con grido indrizzando, e con la verga

Le mandre inanti, e a gl'vltimi s'atterga. Cosi il Generale, etc.

Gl'e vero che la vittoria sanguinosa

Spesso far suol' il Capitan men degno: Ariost. cant. 15.


Ma quella eternamente e gloriosa,

Et de' diuini honori arriua al segno:

Quando seruando i suoi senza alcun danno,

Si fa che gl' inimici in rotta vanno.


Wherefore a worthy General should not hazard to get that by fine force, and
assault, with manifest loss of his men; which by all military collections, he
may be sure to carry otherwise.

At the famous siege of Nouara, in which place were above seven thousand choice
soldiers for defendants, besides able men of the town, and many of the
country fled thither for safety from the fury of the enemy, all under the
command of the Duke of Orleans. The confederate forces came before the town,
consisting of three thousand men at arms, three thousand light horse, one
thousand Reistres, five thousand Italian foot, and ten thousand Lance-knights,
commanded all by the Marquis Gonzaga for the Venetians, and by Galeazzo San
Seuerino for the Duke of Millan. Yet would not these commanders of this royal
army, attempt to win the place by assault, considering the manner of the
fortification, the number and valor of them within the town, and especially
because the enemy army not being yet on foot, could not possibly come to
raise the siege in any convenient time, and therefore the town being full of
people, and empty of provision, it must of necessity in short time surrender.

APHORISM XLV.
Custom to do well, is like the Dyers scouring, it cleanses and purges the
mind of vicious dregs, by Education: and then Reason and Exercise finding a
subject so well prepared, gives it the tincture of virtue in grain. Such is
the effect of martial practice and discipline in the exercise of Arms: it not
only habituates and inures men to be good soldiers, but even incorporates the
virtue in them and their race. But moral virtue, for want of exercise, and
through dis-use, comes to lose her accustomed habit, and turns to the former
soil of ill manners and vice. So does the virtue military. Educatio and
disciplina mores facit, and id sapit vnusquisque quod didicit: Itaque bona
consuetudo excutere debet quod mala instruxit: Haec, been docet loqui, been
Cic. de mor.
facere.

Adeo a teneris assuescere multum est. Virg. Geor. 2 Ariost. cant. 36. Ovid.
Trist.


Natura inclina a male, e viene a farsi

L'habito poi, difficile a mutarsi.

Add quod ingenium longa rubigine lesum

Torpet, and est multo quam fuit ante minus.

Neque vero potest quisquam nostrum subito fingi, neque cuiusquam subito Cicero.
vita mutari, aut natura repent conuerti.

Exercitus labor proficit, labor consenescit. Veget. Seneca. Ovid. Met. 2.


Assuetus habitus migrat in naturam.

Nam morem fecerat vsus.

Exercitus dicitur, quod melior fit exercitando. Varro. Liui. l. 25. Cic. Tusc.
2. Petron. Sat. Ovid. art. 2.


Consuetudine leuior labor fit.

Pugiles caestibus contusi, ne ingemiscunt quidem.

Potest bouem far, qui vitulum sustulerit.

Quod male fers, assuesce, feres: been multa vetustas

Lenit. --

Solus and artifices qui facit, vsus adest.

Quo semel est imbuta recens seruabit odorem Ovid. art. 1. Horat. ep. 1.


Testa diu. --




The ancient French was a valiant and warlike nation (as well testifies that
warlike and famous soldier and historian, who held it one of his greatest
trophies, to have conquered the Gauls:) many of their kings in succeeding
ages, fearing the fury of so fierce a people, by experience of their many
insurrections and bloody rebellions, took from them the use and exercise of
arms, and forced them to attend only to tillage and mechanical trades;
suffering none but the Nobility or Gentry, to be militant under their
ensigns. VVhereupon they quickly lost their ancient reputation; and since
that, have been held the worst foot of Europe. The consideration hereof, made
the French king, not dare to venture the relieuing of Nouara, till he had
levied strong forces of Swisse, to join with his French Lances in that service.

APHORISM XLVI.
Contrary Contrariarum causarum, contrarij effectus: Et contraria ratio.
Arist. interp.



causes, cannot but produce contrary effects. -- Grave and immutabile sanctis

Pondus adest verhis: Et vocem facta sequuntur. Statil.


Nemo potest personam fictam diu far: ficta in naturam suam cito recidunt:
Senec. ep. ad Neron.
quibus autem veritas subest, quaecunque ex solido enascuntur, in maius
meliusque procedunt.

Nulla res multitudinem efficacius regit, quam superstitio. Curt. l. 4. Liui.
l. 4. Cic. fin. 2. Plut. apop.


Eo trahunt ij, quibus quaestui sunt, capti superstitione animi.

Superstitione qui est imbutus, quietus esse nunquam potest.

Foris Antipater albo vtitur pallio, intus vero totus est purpureus.

Combien que Benoist 3. and Iules 2. ayent excommunie nos Roys, si n'ont ils
rien diminue, ains plus tossed accroist l' obeissance des suiets. Car, il se
trouue que le Porteur Bod. rep. l. 2.
de la Bulle de l' interdiction, fut constitue prisonnier, and la Bulle laceree
publiquement, par Arrest de la Cour.

Iean de Navarre, se disant Conte Palatin, fit quelques Notaires, and legitima
Ibid.
des Bastards, en virtue du pouuoir qu'il disoit auoir du Pape: Et fut condamne
par Arrest du Parliament, comme coulpable delese Majesty.


Sanctity and integrity of life (with purity of doctrine) gave the first
majesty and awful reverence to the Sea of Rome, and made her the most eminent
seat of Ecclesiastical jurisdiction and authority: which, since, by the
dissolute conversation of those men, and corruption of religion in that Church,
is very much diminished, and very worthily. If they will call men to their
former obedience, let them first re-call themselves to their former purity of
doctrine, and integrity of life and good manners.

The Pope, at the instance of the State of Venice, and Duke of Millan, sends
his Sergeant with a Brieffe or Mandate to the French king: Wherein he
peremptorily charge him to depart out of Italy with all his forces, within
ten days; and within certain days after, to call home all his soldiers out
of the kingdom of Naples: otherwise, that under pain of the Churches Censure,
he fail not to appear personally at Rome, to answer the contempt. The King
scorning his vain message, and proud menace, returns him this answer: That
seeing the Pope would not stay to see him, as he passed by Rome to Naples (for
indeed he had fearfully and shamefully run away, and durst not abide his
sight) he maruels much he should now be so desirous of his company. But yet to
show his Holiness, how dutiful a son he was, it should not be long ere he
would come to him, though he made his way with the sword; and therefore that he
would have the patience to stay till he came. Much unlike the effect which Pope
Adrians message wrought in elder times, with Desiderius king of Lombardie, whom
he dissuaded from a war, wherein he was much engaged, and well advanced,
causing him and all his troops to retire home from Terni to Pauia. Neither is
it marvel, when that awful and fearful reverence is decayed, which grew in
men's hearts by admiration of the Churches sanctity and holiness of life, if
now there succeed not the like effects.

APHORISM XLVII.
Necessity is neither ruled by Law, nor ouer-ruled by Power: her force is
great, not only in a passive resistance, against all hard impressions; but in
an active impetuositie, and violent passage, through all respects, obstacles,
or dangers whatsoever: she will find a way, or make it. And among all her
triumphs over man, this is not the least, she will make him honest in spite of
his teeth. Pittacus tantam necessitatis vim esse dicebat, vt nec Dij ipsi
reluctari possint. Laert. l. c. 5


Necessitas ante rationem est: Inuenit viam, aut facit. Curt. l. 7. Liui. Curt.
l. 4. Plin. 6. ep. 29 Phocyl. sent.


Durum telum necessitas.

Efficacior est omni art, imminens necessitas.

Nonnunquam necessitati, quae pars rationis est, parendum.

Qui volens unjust agit, malus est: Qui vero ex necessitate, non dico prorsus
malum.

Necessitas acuit ignauiam, in armis: acuit ingenium, in art: Nam Necessitas E
Curt. 5.
tropum genuit.

Thales interrogatus quid esset in tota rerum natura robustissimum, respondit,
Necessitas, superat enim omnia. Laert. l. 1. c. 1.


Diomedea necessitas. De ijs dictum, qui coacti non sponte aliquid faciunt.
Adag.





The French king had a desire to keep still in his hands Pietra-Santa and
Serezzana: they were fit baits for Genoa, to hook her to his devotion. As
desirous he was to hold Pisa and Ligorne: they were fit places to succor and
refresh his shipping, that should be sent with supplies from France to Naples.
The chief favorites in Court are furtherers hereof, and opposers against the
Florentine agents, who sue with great instance to have them surrendered. A new
accident unhappily falls out, which makes their suite more desperate; it was
this: The Florentines take in by composition, Ponte-Secco. The French soldiers
in the place, capitulate to depart with their lives saved. The Guascons
notwithstanding, as they march out of the Port, are barbarously slain, against
all faith given, and law of arms. This incenseth much the French camp and
Court, especially those who did mediate for the Pisans: yet for all this, it
was neither the Kings promises often made, nor his oath once solemnly taken,
(but his extreme need of money, to levy the Swisse for the affairs of
Nouara, and speedy relieuing of Naples,) which forced him to be as good as his
word, to surrender up all those places, and restore their right to the
Florentines.

APHORISM XLVIII.
IT (...). Pecunia neruus belli.

La prima cosa e pensar del pane, and poi delle Galee. Dion. Amir. Plut. Lip.
pol. l. 5.


Quemadmodum homines sine neruis ambulare nequeunt, ita nec bellum vsquam
progredi, sine Pecunia.


suffices not to the strength of the arms, to have flesh, blood, and bones,
unless they have also sinews to stretch out, or pull in, for defense of the
body. (...). Dion. l. 4.
i. Miles and pecunia, praeparant, defendunt, and augent potentiam.

(...). i. Bellum Thucyd. l. 2.
est non in armis maxim, sed in impensis and sumptibus, per quos efficacia
arma, and vtilia fiunt.

Cratetis celebratur Ephemeris, ad hunc habens modum: Ponito coquo minas december,
medico drachmam: adulatori talenta december, consiliario fumum: scorto talentum,
Laert. l. 6.
philosopho triobolum. Notans hominum stultitiam, qui in reshonestas and cum
primis necessarias minimum sumerent impendij, ad turpia prodigi.

Antequam inchoetur bellum, de copijs, expensisque, sollicitus debet esse
tractatus. Veget. l. 3.


Quis quis habet nummos secura nauiget aura. Petron. Sat.



So an army consisting of many valiant men, and furnished with all other
warlick habillements, is but lame, and vse-lesse, and unable to move it self,
without money, the sinews of war.

The city of Nouara is in great distress, for want of victuals the French
king is not able to raise forces to relieve it, for want of money. He had sent
the Bailiffe of Dijon into Swisserland for aid, but none would come to empty
coffers. At this pinch, he makes a final conclusion with the Florentines, for
the restitution of Pisa, and other cautionarie towns, and receives great
sums of money in consideration. Upon the first brute hereof, the Swisse that
before would not stir one foot, come down now in gross troops: and
whereas he had sent but for ten thousand, there now come above twenty: it was
impossible to stay them, when they heard the kings Checquer was full.

APHORISM XLIX.
IN Gubernator, vbi naufragium timet, iactura, quicquid sanari potest, redimit.
Lamp. Alex.


Melius dimidium tranquille obtinere, quam de toto dimicantes, perire. Iul.
Sil. 6. Liui. l. 30. Liui. l. 30. Parut. l. 1. disc. 4.


Incerti fallax fiducia Martis.

Simul parta ac sperata victoria, vnius horae fortuna euertere potest.

Nusquam minas quam in bello, euentus respondent.


a fearful tempest at sea, where men are in danger of ship-wracke, they throw
part of their goods over board, least the rest, the ship, themselves, and all
should perish. I prudenti Capitani (come sogliono i sauij Medici, ne' corpi
deboli, vsare molte volte per ridurgli alla Sanita, piu to sto la quiet, and
la buona regola d'ogni disordine, che la Medicina) deuono es si ancora andar
piu tosto cercando, temporeggiando, and procedendo sedatamente, and con ogni
lor vantaggio: che con vsar la forza dell' armi, and arrischiarsi alla
battaglia, liberare lo Stato dalli imminenti maggiori pericoli.

Non e meno vffizio del valoroso Capitano, fare operazione di Sauio, che
d'Animoso. Guicc. l. 14.


Parua sunt foris arma, nisi sit consilium domi. Cicero.


(...). i. Fortitudo est, si quis robore hosts pugnantes deuineit: Polyaen. l.
1.
consilium vero extra praelium art atque dolo victoriam adipisci.


So must a wise Prince, in the tempestuous storms of war: he must adapt his
consultations and actions to the necessity of the time: and not expose the
Maine to a manifest loss, by seeking to save the Bye. Wisdom is therefore
more necessary in a Chief, then valor.

It is debated by the French kings Council of war in his own presence,
whether (now the Swisse are come down) Nouara should be yielded to the Duke of
Millan, upon such conditions as he offered: or that they should engage all
their power and means, to raise the siege, and relieve the place. The Lord of
Tramouille is for the negative: his reasons these. It is inglorious for so
great a King, being once embarked in the action, to quit the place to the
enemy: for, he should rather at his coming to Asti, not have meddled with it at
all, as not belonging to himself, but to the Duke of Orleans, who likewise had
just title to the whole Duchy: but now as the case stands, the loss of
Nouara, can be no other in effect but the loss of Naples, and the destruction
or ruin of all his Nobility and Captains left in that kingdom, who must
necessarily despair of all succor, seeing so great an army, as he has here,
give way to the Italians. The success of war depends upon his reputation
that makes it: if this be once lost, there consequently follows the fainting
of soldiers, failing of friends, reuolting of subjects, decreasing of
revenues, encouragement of enemies, and doubling of all other difficulties: his
new purchased glory in Naples, will be buried in the infamous grave of Nouara.
This peace between his Majesty and the Duke of Millan, fits not with his
present affairs: it is not made Bonafide, on the Dukes part: he is a Prince
notoriously taxed of infidelity and fraud: a temporizer, and one that never
keeps touch, but to serve his own turn: the King shall no sooner be gone,
but the articles shall be broken. To raise the siege, and relieve the town, is
a matter of no great difficulty, to him that considers the greatness and
valor of the French army: the helps it has of the country adjoining, and
the enemy against whom it is to fight, being the same it had before beaten,
and put to flight at Taro, when the French had but three thousand Swisse in his
army, whereof were now above twenty thousand. The benefit will be great, for
all Italy will be the prise to him and his soldiers: there remaining no more
forces to make head against him. Thus argues Tramouille; but the Prince of
Orange advises the contrary: and proves, that the present estate of the Kings
affairs permits no time to join force with wisdom: for, Nouara must be
presently succored, or presently yielded, and lost. To attempt the present
relief by force, were against all Principles of war, and enough to lose the
whole army: the enemy was so strongly encamped, both by industry of art, and
nature of the situation. To divert him, by assailing anyother place of
importance, required maturitie of counsel, and length of time. Long stay were
dangerous for the army, winter growing on, and the Swisse being there in such
numbers: a people apt to mutine upon every occasion, but especially for want of
pay, for whose long entertainment the king had no means. It is very true, no
man can deny it, that the keeping of this place, would be more for the kings
honor, and assurance of his affairs in Naples: but it is not the part of a
wise Commander, to endanger the whole, for a part of such difficulty. Besides,
this Imprese belongs not to the King, but indirectly, considering he lays no
claim to the Duchy of Millan: neither was it the cause of the Kings coming
from Naples, to make war in Piemont. And therefore it neither engaged his
honor, nor profit, to endanger all his fortunes for the keeping of that which
was none of his own. It is likely enough the Duke will break the articles of
the accord, so is it as likely that some of the confederates will fall from
him. A collegation of many, is ever of this nature, there still happen
occasions to loosen the knot, which being once untied, is easily broken. This
resolution is therefore to be taken, not that it is in it self either
profitable or honorable, but that it is a rule among wise Captains, To allow
that for the best, which is of necessity, or which has least difficulty or
danger: to which we ought ever adapt all the deliberations and resolutions of
our actions. Orange prevails in the cause: the town is yielded; and the
peace concluded between France and Millan.

APHORISM L.
IT Id cauendum Ducibus, exemplaque pro documentis habenda, ne it a exteris
credant auxilijs, vt non plus sui roboris, suarumque proprie virium, in castris
habeant. Tacit. an. 6.


Galba soleua dire, che elleggeua, non comperaua soldati. Am. Tacit. an. 17.
Tac. de mor. Tacit. an. 1.



is a Prescription in the Physical rules of diet, not to receive more meat
into the stomach, then the natural heat may well digest, and the expulsive
faculty easily discharge: least it overcome nature, and overthrow the state of
the body: So is it a Military precept, to entertain no more mercenaries into
thine army, then thou may well order and use, or discharge at thy pleasure.
Non iuberi, non regi, cunctaque ex libidine agere volunt.

Contra morem obsequij, contra fas disciplinae, interdum in vim meditantur.

Omnia tanquam externa, aut vrbes hostium, vrere, vastare, rapere solent.
Tacit. hist. 2. Tacit. hist. 2.


Maiori ex aduerso mercede, ius fasque exuunt.

Pecuniola proponitur, tympanum strepit: and ecce coeunt aliquot ignoti inter
se, ignorantesque. Lip. e Liu. 21.


Purgamenta vrbium suarum.

Quorum lingua vana, manus rapacissimae, gula immensa, pedes fugaces, quae
Curt. l. 9. Lip. c Plaut. Sal. and Cic.
honest nominari non possunt inhonestissima.

La Mercenaria mal fida Canaglia

Prezzar gl' antichi Imperatori poco: Ariost. agg. 2.


Dalor Nation piu tosto venti

Volean, che cento di diverse Gent.


For, as they have not so noble ends as other soldiers (thy natural
subjects,) so are they apt upon every base cause, and fit occasion, to violate
all laws of arms and discipline.

The Swisse that never fights but for wages, demands three whole months pay
of the King, upon his preparing to return into France. They had not served him
at all in any action of war; they were but lately come to the camp, and in
greater numbers then he had demanded: he has now no further use of them:
besides, those Officers the King sent to raise them, had made no such covenant
with them: yet because (forsooth) Jews 11. the last king, had entertained them
upon such conditions, they will not be otherwise satisfied. They resolve to
seize on the Kings person, and some other of his Council and principal Lords,
till they were paid. The King fearing the worst, hastes himself out of their
fingers. They lay hold upon the Bailiffe of Dijon, and some other officers, and
will not deliver them, till they had assurance and pledges from his Majesty,
of what they demanded.

APHORISMS, CIVIL AND MILITARY. LIB. III.
APHORISM I.
AS Omnia inconsulti impetus coepta, initijs valida, spacio languescunt. Tacit.
hist. 3. Claud. bell. Get.


Sed caret euentu nimius furor, improba nunquam

Spes laetata diu. --

Fortuna vitrea est, cum splendet frangitur.


we observe in nature, that keen and razorwits, which will take a hair off
the hand, do turn edge at a more solid substance; and are apter for a fine
conceit, then a sound deliberation: whereas the tough and dull Axe, is able to
encounter the hard and sturdie Oak, and to ouer-master him: So experience
teaches us, that hot and fiery spirits, are apter to get a purchase, then to
keep it, and to win the garland, thento wear it. Bona perinde sunt vt eius
animus, qui ea possidet: Ei qui been vtitur, bona: Prob. Terent.
qui non vtitur, mala.

Diuitem esse in vtendo magis, quam in possidendo consistit. Arist. rhet. 1.
Prob. de Han Petrar. dial. 103.



Whereas the benefit of treasure, is not in the acquisition, but in the
fruition: for goods are not good, but by the use. Vincere scis Hannibal, vti
victoria nescis.

Vsus fructusque victoriae optimus, pax est: neque ad alium quam ad pacis finem
iusta bella suscipiuntur.

Cum victoria vti potuit, frui maluit.

Victoriam, nec victoris animo, nec magni Ducis more, metiens. Varr. de Han
Petrare. dial. Idem.


Victoria alata est, vide ne euolet.

Hodie penes hosts erat victoria: at non habebant Ducem, qui sciat victoria
vti. Plut. in Caes.


Ferme fit vt res secundae negligentiam creent.

Noscere hoc primum decet Liui. l. 21. Senec. Troa.


Quid facere victor debeat, victus pati.

Postquam vicisti, cave ne te vincat ira, superbia, crudelitas, furor, rabies:
Hi sunt enim victoriae comites, and victorum hosts, a quibus saepe clarissimi
victores Petrar. dial. 103.
turpissime victisunt.

Victor praelio saepe victus est bello. Idem.



He therefore that has the fortune to get the victory, but not the judgment
to make use thereof, has both the one and the other, for his greater fall.

Charles the 8. came into Italy like thunder and lightning; he is gone out
like smoke. He knew how to vanquish, but not how to use the victory. Fortune
gave him the kingdom of Naples, and his own error made a way to lose it. He
had left an insufficient Deputy to govern it: weak forces to defend it:
small means to hold it: and no money to defray them. The navy which he sent
for their succors, and money, with supplies of men from Florence, through
negligence and delay came to no purpose. Himself makes a dishonorable retreit
over the mountains, not out of any fear or want offorces, but out of
imprudence, disorder, and a vain desire to be in his own country, and enjoy
her pleasures. Yet more like one vanquished then a victor, and so much the more
inglorious, by how much his fortune rather then his sword, had raised him to so
high a pitch of glory and conquest.

APHORISM II.
INa Mediocrity of Fortune, men have measured thoughts, and teddered within the
limits of their mean estate: But hard it is to fore-iudge of those men, how
they will prove in their greater prosperity: So dangerous a bolus this is to
be swallowed, well digested, and turned to good humor: For it fills every
vein in the heart, with a windiness of vain-glorie, and thirstinesse after
more: ouerflowing the bounds of Reason, Equity and Justice. Difficile est,
cum praestare caeteris concupiueris, seruare aequabilitatem. Cic. off. 2.


(...). Magnam foelicitatem concoquere non possunt. Pin. oly. od. 1 Thucyd.
Tacit. hist. l. 1


(...). In bello, ob secundas res, exultantes.

Diu sordidi, repent diuites, mutationem fortunaemale tegunt, accensis
egestate cupidinibus, immoder ati.

Fragilitatis humanae, nimia in prosperis rebus obliuio est. Curt. l. 9. Sen.
Agam.


Prospera animos efferunt.

Res secundae valent commutare naturam, and raro quisquam erga sua bona Curt.
l. 10.
cautus est.

Nescia men's hominum fati sortisque futurae, Virg. Aen. 10.


Etseruare modum rebus plerumque secundis.

Luxuriant animi rebus plerumque secundis, Ovid. art. 2.


Nec facile est aequa commoda mente pati.

-- Regi fraenis nequit Sen. Troad.


Et ira, and ardens hostis, and victoria,

Gladiusque foelix. --

Arrogans is est, qui sibires magnas and praeclaras sumit and vendicat cum non
Arist. ari. l. 4.
insunt; vel maiora quam quae insunt.

Profecto hoc sic est, and puto omnibus nobis Terent.


Vt res dant sese, magni atque humiles sumus.




All Italy resounded the praise of the Venetian Senate, and Duke of Millan,
esteeming them worthy of erected Trophies to their perpetual fame and honor:
that with so wise deliberation, and noble resolution, had made head against the
victorious army of the French, fought with him in plain field, and restored
the Italian arms to their ancient reputation: freeing that noble Country, from
the sword and servitude of Tramontanes and strangers. And worthily had this
honor been theirs, had they not presently after tainted that virtue, and
eclipsed that glory, with the greedy desire of more then was their own, by
entering into the Pisan business: to their own proper loss and infamy, and to
the general stirring of new garboiles and troubles, through all the States of
Italy.

APHORISM III.
CIneas Chi offend, scriue in Poluere; and chi e offeso, in Marmo, Por. in
Guic. Seneca.


Quisquis de accipiendo cogitat, oblitus accepti est, nec vllum habet maius
malum cupidit as, quam quod ingrata est.

Adhoc res redijt, si quis quid reddit, magna habenda est gratia* Teren. Phor.
Laert. l. 5.


Quid cito senescit? quid tarde? Gratia, and iniuria.

Nulli mortalium iniuriae suae paruae videntur. Salust. Stobae.


Apud homines beneficium cito senescit.

Si quid benefeceris, leuior pluma est gratia,

Si quid peccatum est, plumbeas ir as gerunt. Plaut.



the Ambassador, after the first days audience, could remember every Senators
name in Rome. And Cyrus was able to call every poor Soldier by his name, that
was in the camp. Such perfect memories as these, men naturally have of every
little wrong done unto them. For benefits they write in dust, wrongs in
marble: as well those they offer, as those they suffer. Procliuius est
iniuriae, quam beneficio vicem exoluere. Tacit. hist. 4 Tacit. Agric. Eras.
Apop. Cic. post red Por. in Guic


Proprium est humani ingenij, odisse quem laeseris.

Iniuriae memoria tenacissima est, and beneficij breuissima.

Vlciscendae iniuriae facilior ratio est, quam beneficij remunerandi.

La natura di chi offend, e di ricordarsi d'hauer offeso.


Therefore the guilt of having done a wrong, has such deep impression in the
iniurer, as he never after affieth in the party injured, nor treatteth with him
in any sincerity.

Matters between the Duke of Millan and Charles the 8. are come to a final
composition. The Articles are thus concluded at Vercelly: That there should be
a perpetual Peace and Amity between them. That Nouara should be yielded to
the Duke. That Spezie, and other places upon the east coast of Genoa, should be
reciprocally surrendered: That it should be lawful for the King, to arm as
many ships as he would in the port of Genoa, for all uses and purposes, save
only in favor of the enemies of that State: That for security hereof the
Genoweses should give sufficient pledge and hostages. That the Duke should
restore the ships taken at Rappallo, and the twelve galleys arrested and
seized on in Genoa. That the year following, the Duke should furnish him with
three ships more, for the service of Naples: That he should grant free
passage through his State, to all such French troops, as should be sent into
Italy, so they came not above two hundred lances at once. That in case the
King returned in person, to the imprese of Naples, the Duke should follow him,
with a certain proportion of forces. That the Venetians should have three
months respite to enter into the League: If they did, then to call home their
navy from the kingdom of Naples, and to give no assistance to Ferdinand: If
not, that the Duke should aid him to war upon that State, and what was won
from them, should belong to the Duke. That he should pay the Duke of Orleans,
by March next following, the sum of fifty thousand Ducats, for his expense
upon Nouara. That he shoud quitte the King of eighty thousand of those
Ducats, which he borrowed of him at his first coming into Italy. That he
should release Triultio from the proclamation of banishment and proscription,
which was out against him. That he should set at liberty the bastard of
Burbon, taken prisoner at the battle of Taro: and Monsieur Miolanes taken at
Rappallo. That he should call home Fracassa from Pisa, with all his, and the
Genowese forces and not aid that city against the Florentines. That he should
leave the castle of Genoa, in Deposito, with the Duke of Ferrara, as an
indifferent man between them, to be consigned to the King upon the failing in
any of these premises, on the Dukes part. Mean while to put in pledges for
the delivery of the place. To all these articles the Duke of Millan
condescended, and swear: not in any sincerity, for he still misdoubted the
King, whom he had so many ways offended, and indeed meant himself to be the
first that should break: but with a desire to recover Nouara, and remove the
war from his own State. Those articles therefore which were apparently in
his own power, which could permit no delaie, and would admit no evasion, he
presently performed. He put in pledges forth castle of Genoa: he set free the
prisoners: he restored the shipping taken at Rappallo: he called home Fracassa:
he consigned the castle into the hands of the Duke of Ferrara. The rest, which
required no present performance, and for which he could pretend any false
color, he utterly broke.

APHORISM IIII.
THe Nuda est veritas, nec quaerit angulos. Adag.


Nulle due res inter se tam amice and concor des sunt, quam virtus and veritas:
Vi^es de anima.
Germanae sunt a Deo genitae, and humanis mentibus sicut vtilissimae, it a
etiam integris iucundissimae.

Ante Iouem gener ata, decus Diuumque hominumque,

Qua sine non tellus pacem, non aequora norunt: Sil. ad Fide^. lib. 2.


Iustitiae consors, tacitumque in pectore numen.

Satis ijs si quamcunque rimam effugio reperiant: ex qua liberatos se esse
iureiurando Cic. off. 2.
interpretantur.

Homines in duas parts sunt diuisi: aut captantur, aut captant. Petron. Sat.


Aperta odia armaque depelluntur, fraus and dolus obscura, eoque ineuitabilia.

Alij in ipso Capitolio fallunt, ac fulminantem peierant Iouem. Tacit. hist. 4.
Plin. l. 1. c. 7. Ovid. ep. 18.



beauty of Truth is in her nakedness, and therefore she seeks no corners, to
hide it: But falsehood is ugly, if stripped bare, and therefore like ill
complexions, she borrows colors to cover her deformity. Men justly taxed
with this foul aspersion, are not to be treated with, much less trusted. Non
boue mactato coelestia numina gaudent,

Sed quae praestanda est, and sine test fides.

-- Optimus ille

Militiae, cui postremum est primumque tenere

Inter bella fidem. -- Sil. l. 4.



But he which first and last keeps touch with his Allies, is a mirror of men,
and a pattern of Princes.

The Duke of Millan, contrary to the articles at Vercelli, agreed upon between
him and Charles 8. leaves Lucio Maluezzo, with store of forces in Pisa:
pretending they were the Genowese soldiers, whom he had no authority to draw
thence. He suffers two carrackes armed at Genoa, to go to the succors of
Ferdinand: and alleges for excuse, that they were hired for that service of
Naples, before the peace was concluded. He labors them of Genoa under hand; to
deliver no pledges; He persuades them not to suffer their ships, which were
all ready rigged and pressed for the Kings use, to be manned with French
soldiers, without good security for the restitution: a thing notably
prejudicial to the French affairs in Naples: but he has this evasion, that
his authority was not absolute over that city, but limited with such
restraints, as it was lawful for her to do what she list, in matter touching
her own particular. Yet this last was the finest fetch of all the rest: He
secretly procures the Pope, to command both himself, and the city of Genoa,
upon pain of the Churches censure, to suffer no ships to go out of that
port, for the French Kings service.

APHORISM V.
THere Legatus, vicarius est, est enim locum tenens, fiduciariam operam
superioris Bud. in l. post de orig. iuris
obtinens.

Sanctum and inuiolabile apud omnes nationes, Legatorum nomen.

Sentio ius Legatorum cum hominum praesidio munitum sit, etiam iure diuino
Caes. bell. Gal Cic. Arusp.
esse vallatum.

Legatos and caduceatores non solum constituit sacris proximos, verum etiam
inter Pasc. de Aes.
res ipsas sacras.

Si sint legati hostium nostrorum, inique queritur is qui ab host hostiliter
accipitur: Pasch. Legate
quippe hostis nihil hostile sanctum putat.


is nothing more sacred, or more religiously to be observed, then the
inviolable privilege and freedom of Ambassadors: for, they sustain in their
person, as well the majesty of their Master, as the manage of his affairs. No
Prince therefore ought to arrest his Ambassador, with whom he is not in open
war and utter defiance, or has had the like first offered to his own.
Legatorum priuilegia violare, rarum and inter hosts. Tacit. hist. l. 5 Liui.
lib. 1.


De Legatis paululum addubitatum est, and quanquam visi sunt commisisse, vt
hostium loco essent; ius tamen Gentium valuit.

Contraius Gentium est Legatos comprehendi.

Ambasciador non portapena. Liui. lib. 21. Pro. Ital.



He that does otherwise, violates all laws of arms and nations; and leaves
example of detestation, rather then of imitation.

Guy-Anthony Vespuccio the Florentine Ambassador to the French king, after his
dispatch at Turin in Piemont, is returning home, through the State of Millan,
without all fear or suspicion of arresting or intercepting by the way, because
that Duke and the French were now in amity, and the Commonwealth of Florence
had not as yet declared her self enemy to either of the parties. The Duke of
Millan is desirous to understand the secrets of his negotiation. He sends out
his Warrant to attach him in the way. He is arrested at Alexandria: brought to
Millan: and has all his writings and instructions taken from him. By these the
Duke knows the whole effect of the business concluded, and the capitulations
agreed upon between them and the king. Hereupon he with the State of Venice,
resolve presently to enter into the war of Pisa against them.

APHORISM VI.
CVstom Sunt and belli sicut pacis iura: just ea non minus quam fortiter debes
gerere. Liui. lib. 5.
Libertatem, patriam, parents, armistegas. Salust. Cat. Lip. pol. l. 5.



has taught nations, and Reason me^, and Nature beasts, that self-defence is
always lawful: but invasion has her prescribed limits. Inuasio iusta and
licita, cum iniuriam vindicas, and iure gentium res tuas repetis.

Ita bellum suscipiatur, vt nihil aliud quam pax quaesita videatur. Cic. off.
l. 3. Cic. off. l. 2.


Cum duo sint genera decertandi, vnum per disceptationem, alterum per vim:
cumque illud proprium sit hominis, hoe belluarum: confugiendum est ad
posterius, si vti non licet superiore.

Gloriam and imperium meditaris? Peccas. Nec dirigenda alio arma sunt, quam
Lip. c Cicer.
ad tranquillitatem and quietem.

Solus qui gloriam spernit, veram habebit: nam more Crocodile non nisi
fugientem sequitur. Apop. Senec


Is mihi videtur amplissimus, qui sua virtute in altiorem locum peruenit, non
qui ascendit per alterius incommodum and calamitatem. Cic. pro. Ros


Tu ergo quae habent speciem gloriae, collecta ex inanissimis splendoris
insignibus, contemn: breuia, fugacia, and caduca existima. Cic. Tusc. 3.



For, though the law of nature, which gave omnia omnibus, seem to allow it:
yet the law of State, which made meum and tuum, restraines it to these two
conditions, either to revenge an unjust wrong, or to recover a just right.
Wherefore Glory and Empire, are two goodly things, if gotten well: but they are
no good motives to make a war, or encroach and entrude upon the possessions
of others.

The strong building that at first was framed between the Italian Princes, to
impeach the Venetians greatness, is now at length shreudly shaken: one chief
corner stone (the king of Naples) is dislocate, and utterly broken. The king of
France is returned home; and has left Pisa abandoned to the hazard of her own
fortune, to be banded and tossed among the Princes of Italy. She is not able to
defend her self, nor willing to return to the Florentine subjection; she had
rather undergo any other misery, or submit her self under any other
government. Venice casts her eye upon this prey, as the only means to
compass the monarchy of Italy, to which she aspired. The same ambitious
intent has the Duke of Millan: though both the one and the other covered their
desseigned end, under pretense of the compassion they had upon the distressed
estate, and forlorn hopes of Ferdinand king of Naples: and of intention to
hinder the Floren tines, from sending money, and supplies of forces to the
French against him: but the truth was, as the end after showed, that their
chief motive to this enterprise was ambition.

APHORISM VII.
AS it is fit, that Princes in one hand should hold those in extraordinary
place of favor, whom they shall please; being more eminent then others, either
in blood, merit, or some cause else, best known to themselves: So is it as
requifite, that in the other hand they should hold the rod of Justice and
correction over them, when they abuse this favor. For when the favorite shall
dare to contradict, or disobey the express commandment of his Master; and to
give him check-mate, by stopping the draught of his power, it is intolerable:
it derogateth too much from his honor that so ill bestowed the favor, and
staineth the honesty of him that so unworthily received, and so ungratefully
requited it. Sicut ignis est vt vrat, and lucem praebeat: sic Regis est, vt
benefaciat and puniat. Procop.


(...). Communis imperij custodia Arist. pol. l. 5.
est, neminem vnum, magnum facere.

Nulli amicorum aut officialium tuorum, nimis est indulgenda potentia, sed it a
moderanda, vt nec te in culpam aut reprehensionem conijciant. Dion. lib. 3.


Periculosum, priuati hominis nomen, supra Principis, attolli.

His non solum magnos honores, sed and longos dari abnuo. Tacit. Agric. Lip.
pol. l. 4. Tacit. lust. l 2 Lip. pol. l. 4. Cic. ad Q. fr.


Esto mihi solus arbiter rerum, iure ac nomine regio.

Non solun a te praecipua vis, sed etiam apud te sit.

Species ipsa gratiosi liberti, aut serui, dignitatem habere nullam potest.

Ne ad famam tuam gestis exultes, sed ad authorem and Ducem vt minister,
fortunam refer as. Tacit. Agric.


Laeser at ingrato leo perfidus or e magistrum, Martial. ep. l. 1.


-- Ausus tam notas contaminare manus:

Sed dignas tanto persoluit crimine poenas,

-- Et qui non tulerat verbera, tela tulit.




D'Entraghes, a follower and creature of Ligni, the Kings minion, is left
Governor of the Cittadell of Pisa. The Kings express commandment by his
Letters patents is brought to him, charging him upon sight to surrender up that
place into the Florentines hands. He makes difficulty to obey, construing the
Kings letters in a wrong sense, and sometimes denying flatly to deliver up the
piece, till he had commission from Ligni, by a special token. The Florentines
are forced to send back to the King, for a stronger warrant. The king is
angry with Ligni: commands his pleasure to be fulfilled, and a man of worth
and authority to be sent to d' Entraghes, for dispatch of the business. Ligni
sends only a private gentleman, and as was thought, with commission quite
contrary to the Kings direct will and pleasure: as appeared by d' Entraghes
delay, who would not yet yield up the place. To the great hinderance of the
Florentine affairs, but greater derogation to the majesty and honor of the
King, and greatest imputation of insolence and obstinacy to the Minion
himself.

APHORISM VIII.
SMall Nil tam leave est, quod non magnae inter dum rei momentum faciat. Liui.
lib. 25.


Saepe paruis momentis magni casus: Qui vt nihil timendi, sic nec contemnendi.
Lip. pol. l. 4.


Nihil in bello oportet contemni. Aemy. Prob Liui. l. 32. Liui. l. 34. Curt. l.
8. Am. Plut. Agis. Macc. dis. l. 3


Bellum ex momentis paruarum saepe rerum dependet.

Saepe, vana pro veris, maxim in bello valent.

Saepe quod falso creditum est, very vicem obtinuit.

Un petit accident, est souuentesfois le commencement des grands maux,


matters have great effects in all humane actions, but greatest in those of
war: for, one only word misunderstood, overthrows many times both the
action and the actors. Ex quocumque vel leuis simo motu, in fugam conijcitur
miles, and caeteris metum incutere solet: itaque vel imprimis hoc cauere debet
prudens Imperator, ne tales aliquae voces, vel a se, vel a suis, in alium finem
emissae, male intellectae, motus alicuius causae fiant: Praestabit autem id si
militem assuescat, ne curet cuiusquam dicta dataque, nisi eorum qui ei
praefecti sunt.

Nocturni terrores Clearchi exercitum inuaserunt: At ille praecepit, si noctu
tumultus Polyaen. strat l. 2.
oriretur, nemo rectus consurgeret: Hoc praeceptum docuit milites contemnere
nocturnum terrorem.


Wherefore a wise General, should accustom his soldiers to this discipline,
Never to take a-larme, or apprehension of sudden danger, from what other do
or say; but from his own immediate Officer, or them in place above him.

The Factions, Guelphe and Ghibelline, had partialists in many great cities of
Italy. In Perugia the Baglioni were chief of the Guelphes, the Oddi of the
other. Those, had Spoletum, Camerino, and some other neighbor towns, to
friend: These, had Fuligni, and Ascesi. This, of the Oddi, being the weaker
party, is banished Perugia. They flee to their friends: gather forces, to the
number of three hundred horse, and five hundred foot: approach the city by
night: enter, and put some to the sword, the rest to flight: march forward as
masters of the town, to the head of a street butting upon the market place.
Here they find a chain drawn, which one of the foremost essaying to break
with his Axe, calls to them in the Rank next behind him, (who pressed so near
as they hindered him from fetching his blow) Back, back. The word passes from
Rank to Rank, to them in the Rear: these, supposing it to proceed from some
sudden danger, begin to flee. They before, seeing the Rear in rout, apprehend
some peril on that part, and flee also a-maine themselves: leaving the
victory which they had in their hands, to the enemy; by whom they were
pursued, overtaken, and slain in great numbers.

APHORISM IX.
HE Il faut de Biscuit, deuant que s'embarquer. Am. Pl. Age. Tac. hist. l. 3.



that will venture to sea, must provide Biscot; and he that will enter into
war, must have means of his own. Consilium ab omnibus datur, periculum
paucos sumit.

Che sempre e riputato pazzo espresso Arist. Ca. 40.


Che piu si fida in altri, che in se stesso.

Incipere bellum cuiuis licet, deponi cum victores velint. Salust. Iug. Lip.
pol. l. 5.


Vt in puteum facile te immiseris, haud facile eduxeris: sic in bellum.

Vovez la misere d'vn homme, qui se fie trop es autres: qu'au besoigne il est
constraint, Am. Plut. Gracc. Ibidem.
de se taire.

Qut s' appuye sur les paroles, et signs de faueur des hommes, conte sans son
host, et se trouuemal loge.

(...). i. Decepit vineam palus suam. Aristoph. Liui. lib. 11.


Parum tuta Maiestas, sine viribus est.

Vilius constat armis erudire suos, quam alienos mercede conducere.

Vires regni and Romani nominis, in prima delectorum examinatione consistit.
Veg. l. 1. c. 28 Ibid.


E qual e di pazzia segno piu espresso

Che per altrivoler, perder se stesso. Arist. Ca. 24.



For to settle his assurance upon the bare promise of Seconds (without covenant
or caution) is to set up his Rest when he sees but Color: and to embarque
himself into an affair of charge and danger, in hope of their aid, is to put
his goods in a rotten bottom. Such venturous Gamesters, often miss an
en-counter: and such Merchant-venturers seldom escape the Counter.

Venice, and Millan, wish the troubles of the State of Florence, that she might
neither be able to recover Pisa, nor aid the French: to this effect, they
persuade Peter Medici, and Virginio Orsini, to set upon that State with all the
force they can make: a motion plausible to them both, if they may be well
backed, and seconded: to the one being banished, to recover his country to the
other being a soldier, to be in action and entertainment. They make this
fair offer, for a better ground of the design, that while they two shall give
upon that State, on the side toward Siena, Bentiuoglio their stipendiary,
shall assail them toward Bologna, and the sons of Katherine Zforza (in pay
with the Duke) shall set upon that part toward Romagna: and so they shall be
beset on every side. Medici and Orsini enter the action, in hope of these
seconds: but Bentiuoglio will not embroile himself in troubles, against so
potent a State and neighbor, for another man's interest: the Duke falls off,
because, though he wished ill to Florence, yet he was loath that Medici, whom
he had so much wronged, should be rimpatriate, and recover his greatness.
Venice alone would not be at the charge. The Riarij, sons of the Lady, could
do little of themselves. And so the enterprise quailed, to the great loss
only of those that engaged themselves ouer-farre, in hope of these seconds.

APHORISM X.
THe (...). Spartae, ille qui rem dolo aut suasione confecit, Plutareh. Marcell.
bouem immolat: qui praelio, Gallum.

Facinorum militarium, ea sunt minoris laudis, ac momenti, quae propalam ac per
vim tractantur, hijs quae ex occasion, and per dolum. Thucyd. l. 9.



old Spartane that had conquered by policy offered an ox: but he that
prevailed by force, offered only a cock: Because the greater sacrifice of
thankfulness was due to the gods from him, and the greater praise and reward
was due to him from the State. Illa belli furta pulcherrimam laudem habent, per
quae hosts maxim decipiuntur, and amici plurimum iuuantur. Thucyd. l. 5.


Malo nodo malus querendus est cuneus. Adag. Poly.


Quamuis in caeteris humanis actionibus omnibus, detestabilis sit vsus fraudis,
Maccia. disc. l. 3.
tamen in bello gerendo, dolo quis summa cum laud vti poterit: nec minus
gloriosum est, hostem dolo, quim viribus superare.

Plura consilio, quam vi perficiuntur. Tac. An. l. 2.


Periculo atque negotijs compertum est, plurimum ingenium posse. Salust. Cat
Vlpain. l. 1.


Romani veteres bonum dolum dicebant: and pro solertia hoc nomen accipiebant,
maxim, si aduer sus hostem, latronemve quis machinaretur.

Fra lor' entrate, e in vltimo lor' danno, Tas. Cant. 4.


Hor' la forza s'adoprt, and hor' l'inganno.


But this is the greatest glory of all, to drive out the nail of thine enemies
practice, with a stronger of thine own, and to blow him up in his own mine.
Policy against force deserves much, and prevails often, but by stratageme
to prevail against policy, is ever excellent.

The soldiers of Ferdinand plot with some of the French garrison in Gifone
castle, near San-Seuerino, to betray the place unto them: the French
entertain the motion, and assign an hour, and the manner, for the execution:
mean while they secretly acquaint the governor. The Arragoneses come at the
time appointed: find a port open: and enter: they are taken in the trappe:
seven hundred of them, part horse, and part foot, are slain on the place: the
rest are taken prisoners.

APHORISM XI.
ALL Rex eligitur, non vt sese molliter curet, sed vt per ipsum, ij qui
elegerunt, Xen. dict. and fact. Soc. l. 3.
been beateque agant.

Malus ille, qui ex magna fortuna licentiam tantum vsurpat. Tacit. hist. 4.
Ibid. Tacit. hist. 3.


Maximo imperio, maxima cura inest.

Princeps remissum aliquando animum habebit, numquam solutum.

Est virtus placitis abstinuisse bonis. Ovid. Ter. Hecyr.


-- Sane hercle homo voluptati obsequens

Fuit dum vixit: and qui sic sunt haud multum haeredem iuuant.


things have their time. The Roman that wondered at those peoples folly, who
played with their little dogs and munkeyes, having little children of their
own to play with: what would he have said to such, who pursue their delights
with greatest earnestness, when they are far engaged in business of
greatest consequence? For, we should deal with our pleasures, as with little
whelps: Never play with them, but when we have nothing to do: or for want of
better company. Tu ciuem, patremque geras, tu consule cunctis: Sil. l. 15.


Quippe nec ira deum tantum, nec tela, nec hosts,

Quantum sola nocet animis illapsa voluptas.

Solute viuentes despicabiles fiunt, and multas opportunitates praebent
insidiantibus. Arist. pol. l. 5.


Nemo celerius opprimitur, quam qui nihil timet.

Magna imperia non continentur ignauia: sed virorum armorumque faciendum Tacit.
an. 15.
certamen.

Sperne voluptates: nocet empta dolor voluptas.

Fera est, mancipans sibi homines voluptas: vel potius non fera, nam si aperte
Hor. ep. l. 1. Plu. l. cont. voluptat.
pugnaret, cito caperetur: nunc autem etiam ideo inuisa magis, quod celat
inimicitiam, induta habitum beneuolentiae: itaque dupliciter auersanda, and
quod nocet, and quod fallit.


That Prince therefore that preferres the sweet of his delights, before the
care of his safety, and loves his ease more then his honor, makes his enemy
the stronger to offend him, and disables himself of all means of defense.
These appetites that are rather liquorous of toothsome then wholesome things,
are dangerous as well in States, as in men's bodies.

Monpensier can do no great good in Naples, for want of money to pay his
soldiers: especially the Swisse. Don Frederick and Don Caesar of Arragon, put
the French party to the worse in Puglia. The Count Pepoli has much the better
upon Gratiano, in Abbruzzi. D'Aubigni is sick, and Gonsaluo the great
captain, winnes daily ground upon him in Calabria. Thus over all that kingdom
the French goes to the wall. The King of Spain is come in person, with a great
army as far as Perpignan, and his Spanish troops, without resistance,
rauage, and harrey all over Languedock: yet for all these advantages, Ferdinand
(to enjoy the kingdom of Naples quietly) offers to hold it of the French King
and to pay him the yearly tribute of fifty thousand Ducats. Charles 8,
notwithstanding these hard terms, wherein his affairs stood, refuses the
offer: makes light of the Spanish incursions: prouides neither money nor
supplies for Naples. But gives himself wholly over to his delights, of the
Tilt, Turney, and other Court pleasures: like one that was neither capable to
maintain a war, nor entertain a peace. To the great declination of his
affairs in Italy, and blemish of his reputation in the world.

APHORISM XII.
AVthority Nemo potentes aggreditutus potest. Senec. Med.


Authoritatem toll, tollis Regnum: omnisque hic Imperij contextus, in multas
Sen. de Cle^.
parts dissiliet.

Ad fidem faciendam authoritas quaeritur. Cic. topic. Cic. Cat.


Nepatiatur hebescere aciem authoritatis suae.


is the life and soul of a Monarchy: And contempt of the Prince in a subject,
is more dangerous then hate: for, it is better to live in a State, where
nothing is lawful, then there where a man may do what he list. Contemptus,
pessima omnino res est Regnis: quorum anima and vita, ipsa est autoritas. Lip.
pol. l. 4.


Contemptus, mors est, and interitus regnorum: immo supra odium, aliquo
adspectu. Id. ibid.


Causa prima and motio euertendis regnis, plaerumque ab odio fit: sed extrema
and efficax maxim a contemptu. Lip. pol. l. 5.


Contemptus excutit timoris fraenum, and efficit, vt non velis solum, sed
audeas Lip. pol. l. 4.
and tents.

Malum est Principem habere, sub quo nihil vlli liceat: Peius vero eum sub quo
Dion.
omnia omnibus.

Cum duae causae sint, ob quas insurgitur in tyrannos: Odium, and Contemptus:
alteram earum adesse tyrannis oportet, odium: e contemptu vero plurimae fiunt
Ever Arist. pol. l. 5.
sionum.

Vt qui obtuso fraeno conatur equum domare excutitur, equo contemnente fraenum:
sic qui populum vincere conatur, non satis instructus potentia, ab imperio
deturbatur. Plin.



That Prince therefore, who suffers the vassal, to turn his awful obedience,
into wilful contumacy, without condign punishment, hinders his present
affairs, and dishonors his present government.

The French king offended with d'Entraghes, Governor of the Citta dell of
Pisa, for his disobedience and contumacie, in not yielding up the place upon
his first command, sends him now a new order, more strict and peremptory, with
menacing threats, if he should fail to execute forthwith this his express
will and commandment. The message is brought him by Gemel. He still persisteth
in his obstinate disobedience. Bona a kinsman of his own, is sent unto him, to
persuade him, whom d'Entraghes draws to be of his mind. These two traffic
with Lucio Maluezzo, the Duke of Millans factor, in that business. They sell
unto the Pisans the Cittadell (which the King commanded should be surrendered to
the Florentines) for twenty thousand Ducats: whereof, they divide eight among
the garrison; themselves share the rest. They consigne it into the hands of the
Pisans: by this consignation, the City was wholly at the devotion of the
confederates, the Kings professed enemies; and the French in Naples, could have
neither the men nor the money promised by the Florentines. Again, the bastard
of Bibbienna, Governor of Serezzana, by order and commission from Ligni the
Kings minion, sels the town to the Genowese, for twenty five thousand
Ducats: Whereas the King his master had sent express order to him by Robert
de Vest a gentleman of his chamber, that it should be re-deliuered to the
Florentines, whose commissaries and officers were already come to take
possession. The like did the Castellane of Serezzanello. Besides, d'Entraghes,
(under whose government were the fortresses of Pietra-santa, Mutrone, and
Libra-fatta) keeps this last Piece still in his hands, and sels the other two,
by the persuasion of the Duke of Millan, to the Lucchesi. Matters incredible,
that a Kings pleasure should be thus crossed, his will disobeyed, and his
lenity abused: except only to those, who knew the weakness and inconstancy
of this Prince, how little power he had among his own, and how much every one
will dare to presume in a State and against a Prince, under whom any thing is
lawful.

APHORISM XIII.
THe Circumualla pijs animum intentionibus, honestis vitam artibus: prudentiam
Petrar. Dial.
and fortitudinem ante fores loca: iustitiam ac modestiam in propugnaculis:
humanitatem and mansuetudinem vndique in muris: spem and fidem arcis in medio:
prouidentiam supremo turris in vertice: bonam denique famam in circuitu.

Vt subditi quos suspectos habemus; in officio contineantur, sunt muris,
fossis, Thucyd. l. 4.
and propugnaculis coercendi.

-- Vrbem premit,

Et contumacem regibus populum suum Sen. Thyest.


Habet sub ictu. --

Vbique arces sunt compedes libertatis,

Vere seeds seruitutis. Petr. dial. 82. Tacit. Agric. Petrar. dial.


Ego tibi ostendam tutissimam munitissimamque arcem, sine muris, sine turribus,
sine vllo prorsus operoso rerum apparatu. Si vis tuto viuere, been viue: nil
virtute securius.


best armor of proof and tower of defense to a Prince, are his virtues, if he
command over loyal subjects: and the best Bridles for headstrong rebels, are
Cittadels, then which nothing is more necessary to curb and restrain them.
Domiti vt pareant: non vt seruiant. Lip. pol. l. 4. Flor. l. 1.


Non assuetae fraenis seruitutis, tumidae gentium inflataeque ceruices, facile
ab imposito iugo resiliunt.

Sicut in corporibus aegris, nihil quod nociturum est Medici relinquunt, sic,
Curt. l. 6.
quicquid obstat imperio, sieve saluti, recidendum est.

Durum, inuisum, and grave est, seruitia far. Senec. Tro. Am. Plut. Them.


Nids de la tyranny, ne doiuent pas demeurer au bout: ains demandent d'estre
rages, apres que les funestes and mal-encontreux oiseaux de proye, logez
dedans, son deslogez.


But such people, who hold themselves subjects, not slaves, call them the Nests
of Tyrants: and therefore when they get them into their hands, demolish them to
the very foundation. As therefore it is good policy, to restrain that nature
by force, which will not be won by fair means: so on the other side, it is
a great ease to the offender, to see the rod burnt. Wherefore a people should
either not deserve them, or endure them: and a Prince should either not build
them, or keep them safe from surprisall.

The Pisans have bought the Cittadell for twenty thousand Ducats: a dear
purchase to them that were so poor: for of this sum, they were forced to
borrow four thousand of the Duke of Millan: as much of the State of Venice,
other four thousand of Genoa and Lucca: the rest they made up of their own.
The place is no sooner put into their hands, but the whole city men and women
run all pell-mell to the razing thereof, and never give over, while there is
one stone standing upon another.

APHORISM XIIII.
THe Quo tibi maxim places, idipsum te pessundabit, nempe opinio qua tibi
aliquis esse videris: perdidit enim etiam alios infinitos. Ex Menand.


Laeta omnia sibi fingunt.

Rebus secundis etiam egregij Duces insolescunt: Nimia haec autem fiducia,
magnae Tacit. an. l. 3. Prob.
calamitati solet esse.

Res secundae, non habent vnquam modum. Senec. Oed. Sil. l. 1. Ovid. Met. 6


Heu caecae mentes, tumefactaque corda secundis.

Sum foelix, quis enim neget hoc? foelixque manebo:

Hoc quoque quis dubitet? tutum me copia fecit,

Mayor sum quam cui possit Fortuna nocere.


vainglorious man looks upon himself through a false glass; which makes
every thing seem fairer and greater then it is. And this flatuous humor,
fills the empty bladder of his vaste thoughts, with so much wind of pride,
as he presumes, that Fortune, who has once been his good Mistress, should ever
be his Handmaid. But the wings of self-conceit, wherewith he towereth so
high, are patched of borrowed feathers, and these imped in the soft wax of
uncertain hope, which upon the encounter of every small heat of danger, will
melt and fail him. -- Clades praescire qui refugit suas,

Grauat timorem: dubia plus torquent mala. Sen. Agam.


Licet omne tecum Graeciae robur trahas,

Licet arma long miles, and late explicet: Sen. Theb.


Fortuna semper belli ancipiti est loco.

(...). i. Poenam arrogantiae effugit nemo suae.

Tolluntur in altum, vt lapsu grauiore ruant. Menander. Seneca. Justin. l. 31.



For Fortune deals with him, as the Eagle with the Tortoise, she carries him
the higher, that she may break him the easilier. Non minus in secundis
aduersa, quam in aduersis secunda, cogitanda sunt.

Continentia and moderatio in altissima quaque fortuna, eminentissimum bonum.
Curt. l. 6.


Licet foelicitas aspirare videatur, tamen ad vltimum temeritati non sufficit.
Curt. l. 4.


Fortunae mutabilitas, est immutabilis. Adag.


Quae modo laet a manet, vultus modo sumit acerbos. Ovid.


Et tantum constans in leuitate sua est.


And therefore a Prince, in the midst of his prosperity, must think of the
worlds instabilitie: and that Fortune is constant in nothing but Inconstancy.

The Duke of Millan called himself the son of Fortune, which he presumed to
hold in a band, and have at his commandment: so vainly was he transported,
and so big swollen with pride, because by his counsel, the French King came
down into Italy: Medici, who loved him not, was banished Florence. Florence
which opposed his desseignes, had lost Pisa: and the Arrogonese, his capital
enemies, were driven out of Naples. Again, when the state of things altered in
Italy, and that he found it fitting his purpose, he wrought the return of
Ferdinand into his lost kingdom: he plotted and effected the combination, of
many potentates, against the French King: and was the chief cause of his
dishonorable retreite out of Italy. This makes him misprise and vnder-valew,
the policy and wisdom of all other Princes, in respect of his own: to take
upon him the manage and direction of all affairs in Italy: and to presume of
like continuance of success, in all his future actions. But the event showed
shortly to his cost, and loss both of State and liberty, how far wide he
was of the true account, when he cast up this false reckoning, of what he had
done, and was due unto him: but forgot those his debtes to Fortune, and Nature,
which all wise Princes are careful of.

APHORISM XV.
ELder Dummodo morata been veniat, dotata est satis. Plaut. Aul.


Quae dos matronis pulcherrima? vita pudica. Auson. Horat.


Vxorem cum dote, fidemque, and amicos,

Et genus, and formam, regina pecunia donat.

Tace stulta, non tu nunc hominum mores vides, Plaut. Persa.


Cuiusmodi? hic cum mala fama facile nubitur.

Dum dos sit, nullum vitium vitio vertitur.


times held her to have sufficient dower, that was virtuously endowed: But
these latter, hold her good enough, that has goods enough. Le Ragioni di
Stato, sivestono di molti rispetti particolari, con i quali i Prencipi (tenuto
o solo o principal mente conto di cio, che lor' torna piu comodo et Parut. l.
2. disc. 2.
vtile) non chiamano ne' suoi consigli, La Guistitia, o l'equita: o non
l'attribuiscono quella part, che se le deue.

Quae toto orb terrarum committuntur scelera, plaeraque ex cupiditate
nascuntur. Quintil. 321.


Non est apud eos qui immodica cupiditate ducuntur, quicquam firmi vel sancti.
Demost.


Auida spes regni, praecipitem animum, ad vltimum nefas impellit.

Maximum, cupiditas imperij, malum inter mortales est. Curt. l. 6. Liui. 28.
Tacit. an. 13. Ariost. Cant. 44.


Vnde vtilitas ostendebatur, illuc libidinem transferebat.

Quindi auuien' che tra' Prencipi e signori,

Patte Conuenzion' sono si frali:

Fan lega hoggi, Re, Papi, imperadori.

Doman saran nemici capitali:

Perch, quell' apparenze esteriori

Non hanno i Cor', non han gl' animi tali,

Che non mirando al torto, piu ch'al dritto,

Attendon solamente a lor profitto.


So fares it in public purchases: for, the old position was this, Justice is
to be preferred before profit: But now the terms are transposed in the
proposition: and the ambitious desire of rule, never disputes the equity, but
the benefit of the action it undertakes. Thus stands the observation, but
the praecept teaches the contrary.

The State of Venice deliberates, whether to undertake the protection of Pisa,
or not: she calls not in question the Justice of the action, to defend rebels
against their lawful Lords, but, whether she should do it at her own charge,
or jointly with others: the matter is controuersed in Senate: The grauer and
wiser sort are for the negative, not to undertake it alone. Their reasons:
because it has in it great difficulty, Pisa being so far distant from this
State by land, but ten times farther by sea: of great expense, the
Florentines being so rich, and so resolutely bent not to quitte their right in
that city: Of great danger, the other States of Italy being already jealous of
the Venetian greatness, would now undoubtedly combine themselves against her:
especially Zforza (out of emulation and envy, that she should get this sweet
morsel from him, for which he had so long, and so greedily gaped) would fall to
his old trick of calling in the French nation, to a new trouble and
disturbance of the quiet of Italy. It were therefore good policy to join with
him, in the protection, least the Pisans should wholly submit themselves under
him: but in no case to draw upon their own head, such a weight of charge, and
such a world of envy, where there is no imminent nor urgent necessity. For,
praecipitate deliberations and hazardous, are only necessary to those, that
stand upon sinister and desperate terms: nor are they voluntarily entered
into, except by such great minds as cannot expect, but will needs take the
first occasion offered: Whereas Venice, being (in respect of other Kings and
Princes,) as it were immortal, and always the same, had no such reason to
hasten her deliberations, while the fruit was green, but to stay the
ripening, till the times were more favorable and fit for her purposed
desseignes. These were the allegations for the negative. But Augustino
Barbarigo, and the greater part of the Council, are for the contrary: because
it was an action of honor, to protect the oppressed: an act of just revenge,
to distress the Florentines, who had for many years, impeached the greatness
of Venice, as well in her desseigne upon Millan, presently after the death of
Phillip-Maria Visconty, as lately in her wars against Ferrara: An action of
proffit, the city of Pisa being the fittest Scale for Venice, to climb to
that height of sovereignty and monarchy of Italy, to which she aspired.
Besides, as the present State of things stood, all the other neighbor Princes,
were not able to oppose against her. And as for Zforza, he had so much wronged
the French already, as he would never dare to call him in again. Considering
therefore how seldom such fair occasions be offered, and what weakness it is
to ouerslippe them; they ought, for the glory of their State and enlargement
of her dominions, notwithstanding all dangers, and difficulties propounded
(whereof many by the benefit of Fortune and chance never happen, and the rest
may by providence be foreseen and prevented) undertake the protection of
Pisa. The former opinion had the stronger reasons, but this the stronger
party, and prevailed.

APHORISM XVI.
HE Aperti isti and simplices, qui animum in front promptum gerunt, nunquam
Lip. pol. l. 4
apti sunt theatro publico.

Vt vitrum quia pellucidum est nihil celat: ita quidam nihil tegere, nihil
dissimulare Sto. de prud.
norunt: quicquid in animo est, id protinus omnibus palam est.

-- Plenus rimarum, hac illac perfluit: E. Terent. Lip. pol. l. 4



that wears his heart in his forehead, and is of an ouuert and transparent
nature, through whose words, as through cristall, ye may see into every corner
of his thoughts: That man is fitter for a table of good-fellowshippe, then a
Council table: For upon the Theater of public employment either in peace or
war, the actors must of necessity wear vizardes, and change them in every
Scaene. Because, the general good and safety of a State, is the Center in
which all their actions, and counsels, must meet: To which men cannot
always arrive by plain paths, and beaten ways. Vinum, vinum esse non
desinit, si aqua leuiter temperatum: nec prudentia, prudentia, si guttulae in
ea fraudis.

Sirecta portum tenere nequeas, id ipsum mutata velificatione, assequaris.

Brutus er at stulti sapiens imitator, vt esset Cic. ep. 19. Ovid. fast. 2.


Tutus ab insidijs, dire tyranne tuis.

Vtile multis-dissimulasse fuit. Ovid. art. 2. Cic. off. 2.


Proprium hoc est prudentiae, conciliare sibi animos hominum, and ad vsus suos
adiungere.

Hoc poni debet inter magna illa exempla, quae habent aliqua ex iniquo, quod
aduersus Tacit. an. 14.
singulos, vtilitate publica rependitur.

Necessarium est in paruis a iustitia abire, qui eam saluam velint in magnis.

Societatem alterius palam indue: ad alterum per occulta, and fida magis
inclina. Lip. e Plutar Tacit. an. 12.



Wherefore a Prince may pretend a desire of friendship with the weaker, when
he means, and must, contract it with the stronger. He may sometimes leave the
common high way, and take down an vn-used bypath, in the lesser of dangers, so
he be sure to recompense it in the greater of safety.

The Venetians and Duke of Millan, labor their stipendiary John Bentiuoglio,
to war upon the Florentines, on that side toward Bologna. They offer (in
case he gat Pistoia) to keep it for him at their charge. He puttes them in
hope to undertake the action, not holding it safe for the present, to deny them
any thing: his city and his proper inheritance being seated in the midst of
the confederates. But fearing likewise the descent of the French army into
those parts, and greater danger that way, he sends secretly to the King, to
excuse the matter: promises to depend wholly upon him, and for his sake not to
molest the Florentines.

APHORISM XVII.
NOthing is dear, that is not of necessity. Some things are prised at a high
rate, either for the raritie of the matter, or curiosity of the workmanship:
but these (being only for ornament and pleasure) are not dear, because we may
be without them. Things of ordinary use, are at reasonable rates; because
there be many sellers, as well as buyers: but things of extreme necessity,
are valewed according to his need that must have them. For though so small a
thing as the twig of a bough will save a man from drowning, yet if he meet
with a hard Chapman, he must give him his asking, least he sink and perish: So
must a Prince that is on the losing hand, rather yield to any unreasonable
demands, then to lose all: for losers must be no choosers; nor beggars their
own caruers; but contented to part with a part, that they may save the rest.
Potius quam venias in periculum, diuidium face.

Melius, dimidium tranquille obtinere, quam de toto dimicantes perire.

Nunquam enim tam iniquae conditiones deferuntur, quin aliquid boni habeant,
Terent. Iul. Mac. disp. 2.
and in quo tu vicisse videri queas.

Rebus inclinatis, melius est vt te inclines. Lip. pol. 5.


Durum sed leuius fit patientia -- quicquid corrigere est nefas.

Feras quod laedit, vt quod prodest perfer as. Hor. 1. od. 24 Senec. Terent.
Val. Max.


Redime te captum, quam queas minimo.

Cedit inter dum generosus spiritus vtilitati, and fortunae viribus succumbit:
vbi, nisi tutiora consilia elegerit, specios a sequenti concidendum est.




Ferdinand is without money, and utterly unable of himself to recover his
kingdom. He therefore desires to be comprised with the other confederates, in
their League offensive and defensive against France. The Venetians knowing his
wants to be the fittest means for them to compass their desseigne, of sharing
some part in that kingdom, oppose stiffly against him, and will not have him
admitted. He despaires of any more help from Spain: and the other Colleagues
refuse to engage themselves in so great an expense. He must of necessity yield
some important places to the Venetians, such as lay fittest for them, and upon
the sea, or else be sure to lose all. He therefore chooses the less of evils,
and couenanteth with that State, to consigne into her hands, Otranto, Brindisi,
and Trani: besides Monopoli, and Pulignano, (which she held already) till she
had rimborsed all her charges of that war: provided, that the sum exceed
not two hundred thousand Ducats. In consideration whereof, that State is to
aid him with seven hundred men at arms, five hundred light horse, three
thousand foot, and the navy she had there on that side already: not to
recall those forces, but for her own defense. And lastly, for his present
necessity, she is to supply him with the Impressed of fifteen thousand Ducats.

APHORISM XVIII.
SOme Priusquam feceris, diu consulas oportet: postquam consulueris, mature
opus est facto. Salust.


(...). Oportet consulere tarde, cito consulta exequi. Arist. pol. 4.


Nam qui celeriter and extemplo consilium dant, quae in rem sunt maxim
consulunt. Cic. Philip. orat. 1.


Ma puo mal quel de gl'huomini esser buono,

Che maturo discorso non aiti, Ariost. cant. 27.


Oue non s'habbia a ruminarui sopra

Speso alcun' tempo, e molto studio, and opra.


States have got more upon their neighbors by treaties, then by the sword,
through their serious consultations, and slow resolutions. For, every thing is
done soon enough, that is well enough done. Multa impetu valida, per taedia
and moras cuanuere.

Saepe multis in rebus nocuit cunctatio. Tacit. hist. 1. Lib. def. Sil. l. 4.
Lucan. l. 1. Demost. de Athen.


Pelle moras, breuis est magnifortuna fauoris.

Toll moras, semper nocuit differ paratis.

Cum deliberare natura ipsa difficile sit ac grave, vos ipsum adhuc multo gra
uius reddidistis: nam reliqui omnes ante rem rerumque euentum deliberatione vti
consueuerunt, at vos postres tum demum deliberatis.


Wherefore, great actions require great deliberations; and (if once resolved)
speedy execution. All delays in this case are dangerous: especially such as
are upon triuiall and slight occasions. For, they both prejudice the success
of the affair in hand, and blemish the honor of the undertaker. A Prince
therefore once embarked into an action of this nature, must not say and stay,
but say and do.

The French affairs in Naples are in manifest declination, and (without
speedy succors) in imminent precipitation and ruin. The King calls his Nobles
to counsel: resolves thus of the reparation. Triultio must go before to Asti,
as the Kings Lieutenant, with eight hundred Lances, two thousand Swisse, and as
many Gascons. Thirty ships, with the two great Carracks, Normandy and
Rhodes, must take with them upon the coast of Prouence, thirty Galies, and
Gallions more, laden all with men, munition, money and victuals, for the supply
of that kingdom. The King himself, and the Duke of Orleans, are to follow
personally, and presently after, with the Maine of all the forces. All things
thus resolved and disposed, the King pretends he must first go to S. Denis, and
Tourcs, to perform his vows at those Shrines, as also to deal with the
chief cities of France, for a levy of greater sums of money, least
(forsooth) for want thereof, he should be driven to such streights and shifts,
as he was in his first voyage. But the truth was, the love he bare to a Lady
of the Queens chamber, carried him that way, and diuerted him from the course
so maturely resolved, and so resolutely undertaken, to the great prejudice of
this so important a service. From which, neither the disswasion of his
Council, nor the importunate deprecation of the Italian exiles (even with
tears) could remove him.

APHORISM XIX.
Armor for war, comes out of the public Magazine: but the weapons of
victory, are formed on the forge of Discipline. For, if they have not this
temper, they lose their edge in the trial, and turn their point into his
bowels that uses them. Wherefore, nothing is more necessary in a martial
government, either for the general good of the affair, or safety of the
soldier, then obedience. Ex disciplinae sinu omnes triumphi manarunt.

Cum miles Centurioni, Centurio Tribuno obsequitur, facilis fit aditus ad
Imperia. Valor. l 2. Tac. an. l. 1.


(...). Est vero nihil tam vtile, Xenoph.
aut decorum hominibus, quam ordo.

Intenti ad ducis non signum solum, sed nutum. Curt. l. 3.


Paucos viros fortes natura procreat: bona institutione plures reddit
industria. Veget l. 3.


Disciplina acriter retenta, Romano imperio terrarum principatum peperit.
Valor. l. 2.


Parendo potius, quam imperia ducum sciscitando, res militaris continetur.
Tacit. hist. l. 1


Miles haec tria curare debet: corpus, vt quam validissimum and pernicissimum
Liui. l. 44.
habeat: arma apta: animum paratum ad subita imperia. Caetera dijs immortalibus
and imperatori curae esse.




Eight hundred Dutch foot, come to the service of Ferdinand: they are
quartered in Troia, a town of the kingdom, and not far from Foggia, where
Ferdinand lodged with all his forces. The French army under Monpensier, lies
at Porcina, hard by the enemy, and between him and the Dutch: these new-come
soldiers, will needs of their own swinge, (not by any command) march out of
the towneto join with Ferdinand: Fabritio Colonna governor of the place,
advises and charge them to the contrary: he is not obeyed. In their march
they are set upon by the French; ouercharged with number, and (obstinate not to
yield) are all cut in pieces.

APHORISM XX.
SOme Poenitet o si quid miserorum creditur vlli,

Poenitet, and facto torqueor ipse meo. Ovid. Pon. 1.


Cumque sit exilium, magis est mihi culpa dolori:

Estque pati poenam quam meruisse minus.

Perfecto demum scelere, magnitudo cius apparet:

Potest nocenti contingere vt lateat: nocendi fides non potest. Tac. hist. 12.
Seneca. Senec. Hip. Lucan. l. 5.


Scelus aliqua tutum, nulla securum tulit.

Heu quantum misero poenae men's conscia donat?

Exemplo quodcunque malo committitur, ipsi Iuue. Sat. 13.


Displicet Authori: prima haec est vltio, quod se

Iudice, nemo nocens absoluitur.

Conscia men's vt cuique sua est, ita concipit intra Ovid. Fast. 1.


Pectora; pro facto spemque metumque suo.

Miser chi mal oprando si confida Ari. cant. 6.


Ch' ogn' hor' star debba il malefizio occolto:

Che, quando ogn' altro taccia, intorno grida

L'Aria, elaterra stessa, inch' e sepolta.


men are safe, but not secure: Such are they, who after a foul fact secretly
committed, or a great wrong closely offered, have a conscience of the guilt
still dwelling in them, though the danger of the punishment be ouerpast. For,
albeit they labor to hide it from others, and by all veiles of artifice to
keep it from the light, yet can they never persuade themselves but that it is
known: Cui illata est iniuria, ab inferente non creditur. Lip. pol. l. 5. Sen.
ep. 3. Lip. pol. 4. Pub. Mim.


Vtrumque in vitio est, and omnibus credere, and nulli.

Reipsa paucis, at in specie omnibus creed.

Cum inimico in gratiam nemo tuto redit.


And therefore as they in their nature ever fear the party wronged: so the
other in his reason, should never affie in them. For there is no sincerity in
reconciled enemies.

The Duke of Millan, was become of a professed friend and allie to the French
King, first, a secret ill wisher to his affairs, and after, an open enemy:
till the treaty at Vercelli: Here, they are reconciled, and a new amity and
league concluded: but the Duke means nothing less, then sincere performance.
He practices with the disloiallFrench in Pisa, to keep still that city from
the Florenrines, though the King their master had expressly commanded the
contrary. He counsaileth the Pope, the Venetians, and Ferdinand, to combine
together, for the protection thereof. He declares not himself openly, but
closely and underhand he supplies them both with men, and money: He animates
them of Genoa against the King, and persuades them to make stay of the ships,
that were ready in that port, for the Kings service in Naples. The King is now
resolved upon his journey for Italy: his preparations are great, and his
coming speedy: an expedition, that concerned none more nearely then the Duke
himself: The King sends Rigault, the Steward of his house, unto him: lets him
know, that now was the time, wherein he might cancel the memory of all former
wrongs: if he would restore him his galleys detained in Genoa, yield him the
carracks due by the capitulation, and suffer them to be armed in that port, for
the service of Naples. The Duke considers the equity of the demand: the
danger, to have so powerful an enemy: the seat of his Dukedom, which was
likeliest to be first exposed, to so great a war. Yet, the jealousy and
suspicion he had in his guilty conscience, of trusting one he had wronged so
much, makes him refuse to satisfy the King, and to run other courses, to his
greater peril, and indeed to his final ruin, as in the sequel appears.

APHORISM XXI.
TWo Gli Stati et le Guerre, si gouernono per lo piu, con due Terzi di
riputazione, Por. in Cuic.
and vnterzo di Robba.

Duo sunt quae Principatus comparent, augeant, seruent, milites, and pecunia.
Dion. l. 42. Them. Olyn. 1


Opus sunt opes, and sine ijs nihil fiet quod opus.


things are necessary for a merchant: Money in the purse, and credit on the
burse: So is nothing more needful for a Prince, then treasure and reputation:
He that will physically compound a right Dosis of these two simples, must, for
every ounce of the former, put in two of the latter: So shall he preserve in
health and safety, the body of his state. But, he were better to lose his
reputation abroad, then not to hold it at home: For, neither his maturitie of
judgment to undertake, nor his alacrity of spirit to execute, avail in the
perfecting of his intended and resolved enterprise, where he has not a
powerful majesty to command, and his officers an awful readiness to do as
they are commanded. Eumenes fratribus dicere solebat: Si me vt rege vsi
fueritis, vobis tanquam Poly. de pot.
fratribus gratificabor: sin autem tanquam fratre, ero vobis vt rex.

Imperij maistas, salutis tutela est. Curt. l. 3. Cic. pro. L. Mon.


Acre ea telum ad imperium, quae multum in bellis administrandis, imperio
militari valet.

Seueritas regem decet, maiestatem praestat, and dignitatem auget.

Facultas faciendi quod cuilibet visum, non potest comprimere ingenitam
hominibus Pet. de reg. Ari. pol. l. 5.
prauitatem.

Adhibenda est seueritas reip. causa, sine qua administrari ciuit as nulla
potest. Cic. off. 2. Arist. pol. 5. Valor. l. 2.


Non enim ita natum est, vt pudori obsequatur, sed vt met ui: nec vt abstineant
a prauis ob turpitudinem, sed ob supplicia, and poenas.

A militibus, imperator potius quam hostis, metui debet.

Vehementer pertinet ad bella administranda, quid hosts, magis vero quid
subditi de suis imperatoribus existiment. Cic.





The expedition for Naples, after much ventilation in counsel, is resolved.
The King is fully bent upon a personal return into Italy. The nobility
prepare to attend his majesty in the voyage. Careful order is taken, and
straight charge given to the officers, for a full and timely provision of all
things, necessary to so long a journey, and so great an action. But the
Cardinal S. Malo, in whose hands was the chief sway of the government, and
disposition of all things, being Superintendent of the finances, delays to
disburse such sums of money, as were instantly ex pedient for so great
preparations. The King is offended at his slacknesse: he, knowing well the
Kings soft nature, satisfies him with fair excuses, and promises, contrary to
the effects. So as, when the army should set forward, the provisions were not
ready, nor any thing in such order, as the necessity of so great an affair
required: to the great prejudice of that service, and the utter ruin ofthose
distressed forces, which were left behind in the kingdom of Naples.

APHORISM XXII.
THe (...). Prudentia manuum viribus praepollet. Agath.


Nullum Numen abest, si sit Prudentia.

Non tam magnitudine rerum gestarum, quam disciplina militari nobilitatus
Iuuen. Sat. 10 Prob. de Iph.
est.

La Disciplina e il Neruo della Militia: et disciplina chiamo l'arte di far
buon Rag. Stat. l. 9
soldato: and buon soldato colui, chi ardisce and obedisce.

(...). Ne contra stimulos tibi imperantium Eurip.
calcitres.


greatest assurance of an army, is in the prudent government of the
Commander. The greatest weakening thereof, is by disorder, and want of
discipline. The greatest cause of disorder, is want of pay. For pay is the
poor soldiers Aqua-vitae. Disciplinam non potest seruare ieiunus exercitus.
^^ssiodor. Tacit. hist. 4.


Nec quies gentium sine armis, nec arma sine stipendijs, nec stipendia sine
tributis, haberi queunt.

Quibusdam ob necessitatem, maxima peccandi necessitudo.

Omnia experiri necessitas subigit: quippe cum primas spes fortuna destituit,
Tacit. an. 3. Curt. l. 7.
futura praesentibus videntur esse potiora.

-- Sors autem vbi pessima est Ovid. Me. 14.


Sub pedibus timor est, securaeque summa malorum.

Nullus est miseris pudor. Senec. Oed. Pers. pr. Sat.


Magister artis, ingenijque largitor venture.

Perdifficile est ad carentem auribus ventrem verba facere: venture quippe cibi
auidus, praecepta non audit. Plut. in Cato


Lysimachus superatus a Dromichete, seipsum totumque exercitum propter sitim
tradidit: Is postquam captiuus bibisset, o Dij, inquit, quam paruae voluptatis
causa Polyae. Plut.
meipsum ex rege seruum feci!


But want is such an Aquafortis, as it eats through the iron doors of
discipline. For the enemies sword, and foreign force, do not so easily break
the Squadrons of an army, and put all to rout, as the steely headed weapon of
this homebred mutiner, hunger. That Prince therefore, who would be well
served, and obeyed in what he commands, must take heed, that he suffer not a
greater power in the camp, then his own. This powerful Commander is
necessity.

The French army is distressed in Abbruzzi, for want of money: the Commanders
can neither satisfy the needy soldier, nor well agree one with another. The
soldier is obedient to neither. If they command them upon any service, these
demand the pay, and refuse the emploiment. If any prey or victuals be gotten,
they are unequally distributed. The French and Swisse share all, and leave
nothing to the hungry Italians. These leave the Camp. The Prince of Bisignano,
with his own troops, goes to defend his own Estates. The Dutch are unpaid
for many months and depart to the service of Ferdinand. The necessitous army
gives ground daily to the enemy, and retires into the Province of Puglia.
Ferdinand follows them at their heels: cuts off all conuoyes, and stops the
passages. The French are as it were cooped up in Attella: where there is
neither victuals for many days, nor hope of succors appearing.

APHORISM XXIII.
SCilurus Scilurus octoginta liberos habens, moriturus fasciculum iaculorum
singulis Plut. Apop.
porrexit, iussitque rumpere. Quod cum non possent, ipse singula iacula exemit,
at que it a facile confregit omnia: filios admonens his verbis: si concordes
eritis, etc.

(...). i. Maxim Polyaen. l. 1.
vero effectum est vnanimitate Ducum, vt Barbari victoriam amitterent.

Optimum vero inimicitias omnes, and ambitiosa certamina exscindere, atque adeo
nec nomina nouae, aut aliud quid ex quo oriri discordiae possint, ipsis
permittere. Dion. l. 52.


Ibi semper est victoria, vbi concordia. Senec. Sent. Salust. Iug. Adag. graec.
Am. in Tacit. an. l. 2.


Concordia resparuae crescunt, discordia magnae dilabuntur.


shafts, while they were close bound in a bundle, could neither be broken nor
bowed: but taken one by one, they were easily knapped in sunder. So fares it
with the forces of an army, whose safety chiefly depends upon the unity and
mutual conjunction of the inferiors with the superiors, and of these one with
another. (...). Multi Imperantes Cariam perdiderunt.

Non e cosa che dia piu noia agli affari grandi, osieno di Pace, osieno di
Guerra, quanto le gare de'Capitani.

Factiones fuerunt eruntque pluribus populis magis exitio, quam bella externa,
quam fames, morbive, quaeque alia in Deum iras velut vltima publicorum malorum
Liui. l. 3.
vertunt.

Nobilium factiones, trahunt ad se, and in parts, vniuer sum populum. Arist.
pol. l. 5. Curt. Virg. Egl.


Discordia and seditio, omnia opportuna insidiantibus faciunt.

Impius haec tam culta noualia miles habebit, Barbarus has segetes? En quo
discordia ciues Perduxit miseros?

Pour l'ambition naturelle des Magistrates, la Rep. en souffrira, and luy
aduiendra, ce qu'il fit a la Pucelle, pour laquelle les Poursuyuans entrerent
en tell ialousie, and Bod. rep. l. 4.
passien, qu'ils la desmembrerent en pieces.

N'est pas possible que les Brebis ayent de bon temps, siles Bergers
s'entrebattent. Am. Plut. Gracch.



Wherefore, nothing is more dangerous in the services of war or peace, then
discord and faction among the great ones.

Ferdinand takes Frangete by assault. His soldiers fall to the spoil. The
Captains seeing the enemy so near, labor to reordinate their troops, and
bring them back to their colors. The soldiers disobey, and continue robbing
and rifling the town. Monpensier and Virginio Orsini, with all the French
forces, are quartered and encamped hard by: they epsy the advantage which
offered it self upon this disorder of the enemy. They call a Council of war,
and persuade the other Commanders, not to slip the occasion, but to set upon
the Arragonese in this confusion, there being but a narrow valley between
them: They give assurance (out of well grounded Principles) of a wished and
succesfull victory. But Monsieur de Perce, a man next to Monpensier in
authority, out of a young man's vanity and humor of opposition, or rather (as
was credibly thought) out of the envy he bore to his Generals glory,
withstandeth the direction, disswadeth the enterprise, and secretly persuades
the soldiers not to fight. With the loss of this fair occasion, fell the
French affairs in those parts, into manifest declination: Many causes
concurring thereunto at one and the same instant: as want of money, scarcity of
victuals, much hatred of the common people, open discord among the Captains,
obstinate disobedience of the soldiers, and almost a general forsaking of the
Camp.

APHORISM XXIIII.
THe two famous soldiers of Rome and Greece, which shot like two thunderbolts
into the West and East, and filled the whole world with the fame of their
victories, are renowned for nothing more then their celeritie in doing, and
preventing the very report of their coming. For, there is nothing so excellent
in a Chief, as prevention: it blesses the action with success, and crowns
the actor with glory. He therefore that would arrive at the Port of Victory,
and by her gates enter the Tower of Fame, must sail by this way. Tam celer in
agendo, and consulta exequendo, vt persaepe nuntios de se, praeuenerit. Suet.
de Ces.


Nullam virtutem Regis istius magis, quam celeritatem laudauerim.

Curt. de Al. Cicer.
Boni Imperatoris signa sunt haec: Labor in negotio, fortitudo in periculo,
industria in agendo, celeritas in conficiendo.

Quod temporis angustiae negant, sagacitate consilij est assecutus.

Saepenumero in bello, ea quae geri debent, celeritate facilius, quam vi
perficiuntur.

Valor. l. 7. Xenoph. l. 6.
Celeritas plurimum momenti ad res praeclare gerendas habet: nihilque magis
ducem, quam celeritatem and indefessam curam in agendo, sectari oportere certum
Chalco. l. 6.
est.

Veni, vidi, vici. Caes. ap. Plut Lucan l. 1.


-- Rapit agmina Ductor
Impiger, and torto Balearis verbere fundae
Ocyor, and missa Parthi post terga sagitta.
-- Caesar in omnia praeceps, Lucan. l. 2.

Nil actum credens, cum quid superess et agendum,
Instat atrox. --
Sed mora damnosa est, nec res dubitare remittit,

Dum superest aliquid, cuncti coeamus ad arma. Ovid. Met. 11





The Castle of Laino, stands upon the river Sapri, which diuides Calabria from
the Principato (another Province of the kingdom of Naples.) I he Borough is on
the other side of the river. The Count of Meleto, and Alberigo San-Seuerino,
with diverse other Barons and forces, equal to those of the Spaniard under
Gonsaluo, are come hither. Their troops daily increase: and their resolution
is, so soon as those other forces are come which they hourly look for, to
give upon the Spaniard. Gonsaluo is encamped at Castro-Villare, not far off.
He has intelligence of their purpose: resolves to prevent them: draws forth
his army a little before night: makes a sharp and speedy march over the hills:
sends his Foot to the Bridge, between the Castle and the Borough: passes
himself the river with all his horse, some two miles higher: comes to the
place before day: finds the enemy secure, without Sentinel or Guard: sets
upon him: takes thirteen Barons prisoners: and all the soldiers fleeing
toward the Bridge, are there by his Foot, either taken or slain.

APHORISM XXV.
THings Non durat, nec ad vltimum exit, nisi lenta foelicitas.

(...). Qui nimium properat serius absoluit: Seneca. Adag. Poly.
Monet adagium instituendae rei non tam celeritatem quam curam adhibendam esse,
ne postea sit in mora quod in operis ingressu fuerit erratum.

Immodicis rebus breuis est and rara senectus.

Cardan.
(...). O quam ruina splendidae vitae cita.

Augustus Caesar illud semper cito factum posse dici aiebat, quod cum factum
Comic. graec Fulgos. l. 7.
esset, been haberet: tarditatem enim quae tut a esset, celeritati cui
periculum esset coniunctum, anteponebat.


easiest got, are soonest lost. They are like summer fruit, soon ripe, soon
rotten; they cannot last out one winter of troubles. For as we observe in all
Natures, of reason, sense, or vegetation, that, the sooner they come to their
growth and perfection, the sooner they decline to their corruption and
dissolution: So is it natural in all kingdoms and States, the sooner they are
gotten, the hardlier they are kept, and easilier lost. Multi dum infer
pericula volunt, non cauent.

Sen. de ira. Cic. de Inue. l. 2.
Princeps habere debet ad sua conseruanda, and aliena obtinenda, idonearum
rerum facultatem.

-- Quoque fortuna altius

Sen. Troa.
Euexit at que leuauit humanas opes, Hoc se magis supprimere foelicem decet.


Wherefore the greater a man's fortune is in the winning, the greater must be
his care for the sure establishing of what he has won.

The French is straightly begirt in the town of Attella, by the united forces
of Ferdinand, Gonsaluo, and the Venetians. They are in want, and desperate of
succors. They capitulate, and yield the place, with all the Artillery, and
other towns that Monpensier held in the kingdom. All the other fortresses
(almost) which were consigned to the keeping of others, and of whose faith and
loialtie the King himself had the Counterpanes, follow the example of Attella.
This general surrender was accompanied with a general mortality, for of five
thousand natural French that were in the army, there were scarce five hundred,
that lived to return into France. Thus is Ferdinand as easily and as soon
repossessed of his State, as Charles 8. was invested with it.

APHORISM XXVI.
ACtions Turpis and foeda est illa vacillatio sententiam mutantium, and certum
signum non certae mentis: ideoque vilescit semper, qui vacillat. Lip. pol. 4.


Foedaque inconstantia, quae iusserat, vetat: quae vetuerat, iubet. Tac. hist.
l. 3. Sal. de Cic. Salust.


Aliud stans aliud sedens de repub. sentis.

Sunt qui ex aliena libidine huc illuc fluctuantes, agantur: interdum alia,
deinde alia decernunt: vt eorum qui dominantur simultas atque arrogantia fert,
ita bonum malumve publicum existimant.

Ad honesta ceu praua, iuxta leui haud fidendum. Tacit. an. 13. Tacit. de Fab
Valente.


Ipse inutili cunctatione, agendi tempora consultando consumpsit: moxvtrumque
consilium aspernatus, quod inter ancipitia deterrimum est, dum media sequitur,
nec ausus est satis, nec prouidet.


once resolved, like fixed stars, should hold one and the same station of
firmness, they should not be subject to irregular and retrograde motions.
For, the vacillation and irresolution of a Prince, whose thoughts are whirled
about the voluble Sphaere of several persuasions, and never fixed in one
Center of resolved constancy, turns to his dishonor, and prejudice of the
affair in hand. -- Facit constantia futile ne quid Claud. pan. 2.


Infirmumque geras. --

-- Esto animus tibi Hor. 4. od. 9.


Rerumque prudens, and secundis

Temporibus dubijsque rebus.

Otho humillimo cuique credulus, bonos metuens, rebus prosperis incertus.
Vitellius mobilitate ingenij, quod palam abnuerat, inter secreta conuiuij
largitur. Tacit. hist. 2.
At in Vespasiano nihil tumidum, arrogans, aut in rebus nouis nouum fuit.


He must therefore not resolve, or go through with his resolution.

Charles 8. is as far as Lions, resolved upon a personal and present voyage
for Italy: yet he returns to Paris, with purpose to stay but one month, and
then set forward. Here, some dissuade the journey, because the benefit of the
victory of Millan should not redound to him, but to the Duke of Orleans, to
whom of right it belonged. Others advise him not to go, until he had ended all
his differences with Spain. Others counsel him not to depart France, till he
had left an heir apparent of his own body, to so great a State, the Queen
his wife being now with child. On the other side, his distressed troops in the
kingdom of Naples, the exiled Italians, his friends the Florentines, and the
greater and better part of his Nobles, move, entreat, importune, and urge his
going. He stays four months in this irresolution whether to go or stay,
sometimes carried one way, sometimes another: mean while he loses all that he
held in Naples, and so the true end of this journey (by procrastination and
inconstancy,) is utterly overthrown.

APHORISM XXVII.
Weak appetites are drawn to take unpleasing meats, by the sauourie relish
which the cunning hand of the Cook gives them: So the Politician draws on
his confederates to actions unpleasing, by seasoning them with the sweet sauce
of profit, and gain For States are without natural affections, they contract
not amity as private men, by a sympathy of will, and a similitude of manners;
it is particular advantage, that knittes them together. Cum vtilitas ad
serapere, honestas contra reuocare ad se videtur, fit vt distrahatur Cic.
offic. 2.
deliberando animus, afferatque ancipitem cogitandi curam.

Turpe quidem dictu, sed si modo vera fatemur, Oui. Pon. 2.


Vulgus amicitias vtilitate probat.

Pecuniae imperijque libido sunt quasi materies omnium malorum. Salust. Cat.


Si come alcuni cibi insipidi, riceuono sapore dalla concia che da loro il
Cuoco: cosi Rag. stat. l. 4.
i Prencipi, essendo da se senza affezione, inclinano a questa, o a quella
part, se condo che l'interesse acconcia l'animo and affetto loro.

I Prencipi sono di natura cosi fatta, che non hanno nissuno per amico, ne per
Bot. e Poly.
inimico assolutamente: ma nelle amicizie and inimicizie si gouernano, secondo
che lor'torna commodo.

Communis vtilitas, societ atis maximum vinculum est. Liui. l. 26. Plaut. Stich.


Res animos inuenit.




Maximilian the Emperor comes with his forces into Italy, at the solicitation
of Zforza and the Venetians, to oppose with them against the French, of whose
great preparations they were all afraid: they covenant to give him thirty
thousand Ducats a month for three months together. The news of the Frenches
coming grows cold: the Venetians refuse to contribute their part: Zforza paies
all: and persuades the Emperor, with a discourse full of fraud and duplicity,
to undertake the cause of Pisa, and to arbitrate between it and Florence.
hoping if the town were once put in Deposito, into Caesar's hands, that he
should get it of him for money: A prey which he had long thirsted after. The
Venetians are willing hereunto, though they smoaked the drift of Zforza (which
they presumed they could easily prevent) because they hoped by Caesar's going
thither, that the Pisans might get the port of Ligorne, and then were the
Florentines utterly deprived of all hope, ever to recover that city, and
themselves in a fair way to obtain their purpose. The Emperor finds himself
needy of money: thinks Pisa a fit instrument to draw in round sums, of one
of these parties, or else of the Florentines, he cared not whether so his turn
were served, and therefore embraces the action. Yet all these made their
pretense, that it was for the public good of Italy, to suppress the
Florentines, and to force them quit their combination with France, the common
enemy.

APHORISM XXVIII.
THe In milite vnius sors est, in Imperatore vniuersorum periculum. Egesip.
Prob. de Ep.


Vnus homo pluris fuit, quam vniuersa ciuitas.

(...). Me vero (Ducem tuum) pro quantis Demet. Plut
(Nauibus) aestimas.


weapon of a General, is his truncheon; of a soldier, his sword: he, only to
command: this, only to execute: for, in this is the danger but of one man's
life, but in that, the hazard of all. That Commander whom his companion thought
to out-braue, because he had received more wounds in the wars: And I (quoth
he) hold this the greatest imputation which ever fell justly upon me, that in
the siege of Samos I approached so near to view the fortification, as my life
was in danger by a shot from the wall. Dubys praeliorum exemptus, summaererum
and Imperij seipsum reseruat. Tacit. l. 11. Hom. Ody. 9


Stetit sub Aiacis clipeo septemplice tectus.

Non e cosa piu indegna d' vn'accorto Prencipe, che'l commettersi alla
discrezione Rag. Stat. 2.
della fortuna.

Ordinatio exercitus instar humani corporis: Pectus Phalangem, manum leuis
Polyaen. l. 3.
armaturae milites, pedes Equitatum, caput Ducem aestima. Reliquorum si quid
desit, mancus exercitus: si deficiat Dux, totus inutilis.

Si status imperij, aut salus Prouinciarum, in discrimine vertatur, debebit in
acie stare Princeps. Tac. hist. 4.


Neutiquam mihi placet, quando nulla cogat res, committere se fortunae.

Rege incolumi men's omnibus vna est: Liui. l. 7. Virg. geor. 4


Amisso rupere fidem. --

(...). Galea ornatus, vel munitus Hector. Hom. od. 9. Poly. stra. l. 2


Clearchus Cyro dedit consilium, ne ipse se in periculum offerret, sed
inspectorem se pugne gereret. Pugnantem enim corpore nil magnum efficere: Si
vero quid damni acceperit, omnes se perditurum quos secum haberet.

-- Ah non sia vero

Ch'in un Capo s' arrischi il Campo tutto: Tasso. cant. 7


Duce sei tu, non semplice Guerriero,

Publico for a and non priuato il lutto:

Tu il Senno sol, il Sceptro solo adopra,

Ponga altri poi l' ardire, e'l ferro in opra.


Wherefore a Commander in chief should always stand covered under the
seuen-fold shield of Ajax: and never expose his person to apparent peril, but
in case of a general overthrow, and manifest deffaite.

The Pisans fortify their towns, on those higher grounds, whence they had
corn and provisions, and which stopped the Florentines free traffic to
Ligorne. The Florentines, to remove two so great inconveniences, send thither
their army, under the command of Peter Capponi their worthy General, to force
them of Pisa from those places, and to make the passage open. He besieges
Soiana: encampeth upon the river Casina: where, while himself is busy in
person, and in place of danger, about planting his artillery for battery, he is
shot with an Arquebuse from the town, and slain in the place. Hereupon the
Camp rises, without attempting any farther; and leaves a service of so great
consequence vneffected.

APHORISM XXIX.
THe Multis Simulationum inuolucris tegitur, and quasivelis quibusdam
obtenditur Cic. ad frat.
vniuscuiusque natura: Frons, oculi, vultus, persaepe mentiuntur, oration vero
quam saepissime.

Qui cito crediderit falletur saepe, leuisque

Est cordis. -- Verinus.


O vita fallax, abditos sensus geris. Sen. Hippol. Cic. ad Lent Cic. offic.


Front and vultu Simulatio facillime sustinetur.

Totius iniustitiae nulla capitalior, quam eorum, qui cum maxim fallunt, id
agunt vti boni viri videantur.


nature of deep Dissimulation, is to hide it self under certain veiles and
filmes, like the Optic virtue in the eye, that it may see all things and not
be seen it self: but the most frequent and safest couuert (though the most
dishonest) under which it lies tapissed and harbored, is fained friendship.
Fisores perijt, diffiso salua remansit. Senar. Pro. Terent. An. Ovid.


Fallacia alia aliam trudit.

Fallite fallentes, ex magna part profanum

Sunt genus: In laqueos quos posuere cadant.

Nil magis hic cauendum, quam ne diffidere videaris.

Non persuadebis, nesi persuaseris quidem. Lip. pol. l. 4. Aristoph.



The wisest and readiest way to vnkennell this Fox, and vn-earth him out of
this den of fained Protestation, is by a false fire of fained Credulity.

The Emperor means to chaffer for Pisa, and make his best market of her. He
sends two Ambassadors to Florence: pretends a voyage against the Infidels:
holds it fit before he go, to leave Italy in quiet and perfect peace:
persuades them to refer the cause of Pisa into his hands: promises to do
justice: requires in the interim, a cessation of arms on both sides. The Duke
of Millan failed not likewise on his part to advise them hereunto; under color
of being careful for their good, and jealous of the Venetians: he propounds
many fears and dangers, if they condescend not to Caesar's arbitration:
protests there is no other way to wring out the Venetians, and redintegrate
themselves into the possession of Pisa: a thing most necessary for the quiet of
Italy, and much desired of the other confederates. But the Florentines (well
acquainted with Zforzaes practices, and rightly conceiving the Emperors drift)
return this answer: How much they extol the glory of his intended voyage: how
much they admire the Christian resolution in his imperial Majesty, to make
war upon the sworn enemies of Christian Religion: how willing they are to
condescend to the Comprimise: and how much they affie in his goodness and
justice: promising to send him shortly Ambassadors of their own, with more
particular instructions, and full declaration of their purpose. Mean while,
they gather together all their soldiers: re-enforce their broken and decayed
companies: fortify Ligorne: store it with victuals, munition, and men, and
make good that place, against a strong and straight siege of the confederates,
which under the command of the Emperor was shortly laid against it: and
whence he was forced to make a shameful retreit into Lombardie, without doing
any act in this his expedition against the State of Florence, and Port of
Ligorne, answerable to the great charge and expectation of such a service, or
worthy the name of Caesar.

APHORISM XXX.
WHere Tiberio mandaua Druso suo figliuolo, co' Principali della Citta, and con
due company de' soldati della sua Guardia, all Legioni abbotinati in
Germania: Il che Am. in Tac. an. 2.
fece, senza dargli commessione limitata: Ma con ordine, di prendere sul fatto,
quel partito che gli paresse megliore.

Sunt mandata quaedam (...), and Legati quibus dantur tam libera mandata Pasch.
Leg.
dicuntur (...): quor um mandatis continetur nihil aliud, quam vt Legatus vti
facto opus crit, ita agat.


the Ambassador has Charge without limitation, he may negotiate in the
business according to discretion, and as he sees occurrence of circumstances
and occasions offered. Sua cuique mensura sicuti vires: nec vltra assuetum
procedit spacium, nec plus instituto oner e recipit. Plin. l. 8. c. 18


Legati munus est, omnia ad praescriptum imperiumque Consulis agere.

Quod militi arma and gubernatori clauus, hoc sunt Legato mandata. Mandatum
Alex. de Ale. Pasch. Leg.
est anima Legationis.

Legatus aut Praeco, si denunciando aut renunciando falsam legationem obierit:
Plat rep. l. 4
impie se gesserit, and contra hunc actiones instituantur.

Mitis Legatio, ni praeferoces Legatos, Gallisque magis quam Romany, similes
Liui. l. 5.
habuisset.


But when it is in prescript and express terms limited, he must imitate the
Camel, who never will carry any more weight then what at first was laid upon
him; nor go one foot beyond his ordinary journey: No more must the
Ambassador exceed one jot of his commission, but tie himself to the strict
words of his instructions.

The Florentines send their Ambassador to Caesar: they find him at Genoa:
they refuse to refer the cause of Pisa to his arbitration, unless they be
first possessed of the town: this done, they offer willingly to declare and
justify their right before his Majesty. He gives them no answer, till he came
to Molo: here, he sends them back to the Popes Legate at Genoa, to whom he
referred them for knowing his pleasure. The Legate puts them over to the Duke
of Millan: hither they come: they require audience. Solemn preparation is made
for the hearing. The Ambassadors for the confederates, and all the Dukes
Council, are assembled, out of a pride he had to show his eloquence, and
pleasure he took in the adversity of others. In this very instant the
Florentine Ambassadors receive direction from their State to return without
sceking any further answer. They come into the Assembly: tell the Duke they
have no other commission, but to visit him as a friend to their State, do him
honor, and take their leave. The Duke frustrate of his expectation, demands
what answer they had from Caesar: They reply, that by the laws of their
commonwealth, they might not communicate their business, but with those
Princes only, to whom they were addressed. If we (quoth the Duke) shall give
you your answer, for which you know that Caesar has sent you unto us, will you
not hear it? We are not forbidden to hear it (say they) nor can we forbid
your Highness to speak. We are content to give it you (replies the Duke) but
you must first deliver as much to us, as you did to Caesar. That we cannot (say
they) for the causes before alleged, and besides it is superfluous: for if
Caesar have given you commission to dispatch us, he has also given you
advertisement of our propositions. The Duke in a rage breaks up the
assembly: dismisseth them, with charge to depart presently his country: and
so receives part of the scorn, which he had thought to have put upon others.

APHORISM XXXI.
NO Ex omni occasion quaerunt triumphum. Plin. paneg. Tacit. an. l. 4.


Ab illis maximum discrimen est, penes quos aurum and opes praecipuae sunt
bellorum causae.

Ad Superos Astraea recessit. Iuue. Sat. 10. Lip. pol. l. 5.



causes are warrantable for the undertaking of awarre, if Justice be not one of
the Quorum: Fugies ista Princeps: nec vnquam bello te implicabis, nisi iusto:
iustum autem est, quod tria haec habet iusta, authorem, causam, finem.

Causa velut Caput bonae spei est, quod te ducit ad triumphales illas terras.

Iustum bellum quibus necessarium, and pia arma quibus nulla nisi in armis
relinquitur Id. Ibid. Liui. l 9.
spes.

In cum qui iure agere, and satisfacere paratus est, nefas bellum sumere,
tanquam in iniurium. Thucld. l. 1.


Multo honestius tunc bella gerebantur, quam nunc amicitiae coluntur.

Vera victoria est, quae salua fit, and integra pietate paratur. Justin. l. 25.
Liui. l. 2. Salust. fug. Liui. l. 21.


Bono vinci satius est, quam malo more iniuriam facere.


For the Justice of the action, is the Cape of good hope, by which men sail to
the assured Harbor of safety, and fortunate Islands of victory, and glory.
Euentus belli velut aequus iudex, vnde ius stabat, ei victoriam dabat.

(...). Iusta faciens pugna, and opem feret deus. Incert. Au. Erip.


(...).

Omnia summa ratione gesta, ettam fortuna sequitur.

Causa iubet Superos melior sperare secundos. Liui. l. 4. Lucan. l. 17. Prop.
ele. 4.


Frangit and at tollit vires in milite causa,

Quae nisi iusta subest, excutit arma pudor.


Wherefore of all encouragements to men of war, none ought to be more
forcible, then the equity of the cause: Because, just actions, besides the
ordinary endeavor and help of man, are often advanced by favor of the
heavens.

Ligorne is straightly besieged by the Emperor, both by Sea and Land. It is
bravely defended by the Garrison. A strong wind arises, which forces his
fleet to put out to sea, for fear of running on ground, and splitting upon
the shore. The same gale blowing fair for the French navy, coming from
Prouence toward the relief of Gaetta, puts into this port of Ligorne, and
brings the besieged happy supplies of what was wanting. Not long after,
arises another tempest, worse then the former, which splitteth the Grimalda, a
great ship of Genoa, with the loss of all the men and Artillery in her. The
like desaster happened to two Venetian galleys, upon S. Jacobs point: and the
rest of that Armada, was so sore shaken in other places, as they were no longer
fit for the service, but forced to raise the siege.

APHORISM XXXII.
ONe especial care of a Captain and among the first, for success in the
action, is, to look well to the arms, and armor, of the soldier: For, these
often prevail, both against the number, and valor, of the enemy. Wherefore, if
Seconds in simple fight be very circumspect, that there be no odds in the
combattants weapons, whom they put together upon all equal and indifferent
terms: Much more is a Leader to beware, that the enemy have not this
advantage upon him. Because, in single fight, the dexterity and skill of one
of the parties in using his weapon, or his agilitie and nimblenesse of body, or
his alacrity and viuacity of spirit, may prevail against this odds: But in a
battle, where the fight is in a firm station, and a greater desire of
offending and killing others, then of defending and saving themselves, odds of
the weapom is much more aduantageous. Horridus miles esse debet, non coelatus
auro argentoque sed ferro and animo.

Advictoriam plurimum refert, vt lectissimos de peditibus and equitibus (been
Tacit. hist. 1. Veget. l. 3. c. 17.
armatos) and post aciem in subsidium praeparatos habeas.

Cum tuas vires at que arma, tum vim fortunae, martemque belli communem propone
Liui. l. 6.
animo.

Dum vigilans, sobrius, prudens, tanquam de civilly causa inter parts
iudicaturus, Veg. l. 3. c. 9.
adhibito consilio, de suis and aduer sarij copijs iudicet: Et, si multis rebus
superior inuenitur, opportunum sibi non defer at conflictum.

Ensis habet vires, and gens quaecunque virorum est, Lucan. l. 8.


Bella gerit gladijs: Sed Medos praelia prima

Exarmant, vacuaeque iubent remeare Pharetrae.




Pope Alexander 6. is desirous to advance his children to temporal promotions,
though by the ruin of others. He sees Virginio Orsini, and the chief heads of
that family in prison at Naples: He takes the advantage of the time, and
denounces them rebels in open Consistory: he confiscates their lands to the
Church (whereof they held in chief) because they had served the French King in
his wars of Naples: and yet he himself was the first (next Zforza,) that had
called him thither. He commands the Colonnesi to assail them on the one side,
and sends his own forces under the leading of the Duke of Candy, and the
Cardinal of Luna, to war upon them on the other. The Venetians likewise
consent that the Duke of Vrbine, under their pay, should go to this service:
and Frederick sendes him Fabritio Colonna from Naples. Many towns, and pieces
of strength, are taken from the Orsini: their chief castle of Bracciano is
besieged: Bartholomeo d' A'uiano defends it bravely: Charles Orsini and
Vitellozzo, muster their forces, join, and come to the succors. The
Ecclesiastickes, fearing by their coming to be hemmed in, between them and the
castle; rise, and go to meet them at Soriano. A hot fight is maintained on
both sides many hours: in the end the Popes forces are overthrown, by an
advantage the enemy had of the weapon: for, Vitellozzo had provided his
soldiers of pikes, two foot longer then ordinary.

APHORISM XXXIII.
Prove Been igitur ratio accepti at que expensi inter nos conuenit, Plaut.
Most.


Tu me am is, ego te amo, merito id fieri existimat:

Haec qui gaudent, gaudeant perpetuo sao semper bono.

Cum fortuna manet, vultum seruatis amici: Petronius.


Cum c^cidit, turpi vertitis or a fuga.

Foedum, id quidem est amicos deserere. Cic. off. 2. Cic. ad At 8. Auson. epig.
Lip. l. 5. Liui. l. 4.


Ingratitudine nihil mali non inest.

Ingrato homine, terra peius nil procreat.


a man unthankful, and disprooue all his other actions: taint him justly of
this, and twit him worthily with all that naught is: For there is no obligation
to tie a man to honesty and faithful performance (next that of oath) so
strong, as this of gratitude. Ad robur and virtutem militum, valde possunt
praemia.

Praemia decreta ijs qui in Olympijs aut Nemeis vicissent, Socrates contraxit:
eaque maiora decreuit ijs qui in bello pro patria fortiter dimicassent.

Romani (hic) mirifici, qui non solum altiores ordines assignabant a virtute:
Lip. pol. l. 5.
sed etiam public lauds cumulabant and honores, donabantque pro concione
Hastas, Phaleras, Coronas.

Quemadmodum igitur conuenit, homines dignos communem fructum per cipere, ex
ciuilis Status prosperitate: Ita, vbipotentes pro tenuioris fortunae hominibus
Ex Stobaeo.
facere sumptum non sustinent, ibi misericordiae nullus locus in ciuitate
relinquitur.

Eadem sub bono Principe virtutis praemia, quae in liberate: nec tantum
benefactis Plin. panaeg.
ex conscientia merces, sed etiam praemia sunt.


And therefore, there can be no such maculation to the honor of a Prince, as
to abandon men of great worth and small means, who have engaged their lives,
and are taken prisoners in his service: giving them over to perpetual
imprisonment, or to pay their own ransom.

All differences are compounded between the Pope and the Orsini, by mediation
of the Spanish and Venetian Ambassadors. The Orsini are permitted to serve out
their time under the French king: they are to pay thirty thousand Ducats to
the Pope, upon the delivery of Iohn-Iordano and Paul Orsini out of the prison
of Naples, (for Virginio is already dead:) and thirty thousand more within
eight months after. They give the towns of Anguillara and Ceuetri, for
caution: depositate in the hands of Cardinal Ascanio and San-Seuerino, till
payment be made. The prisoners taken at the late battle of Soriano, are all to
be set at liberty, on both sides: save only the Duke of Vrbin; whom the Pope
very ungratefully and ignobly abandoned, and comprised not in the articles
(though he were taken in his service) because he knew the Orsini had no easy
means to pay him the foresaid sum, but by his ransom. The poor Duke is
forced to compound for himself, at forty thousand Ducats, and the exchange
of PaulVitelli, who was taken prisoner by the Marquis of Mantoa, at the taking
in of Atella.

APHORISM XXXIIII.
Friendship Vt Crystalli fragmenta sarciri nullo modo possunt: ita difficillimum
eos reconciliare, qui ex arctissima familiaritate in mutuum odium venerint.
Plutar.


Vt Adamas si frangi contingat, in minutissima dissilit: ita arctissima
necessitudo, Plin.
si quando conting at dirimi, in maximam vertitur simultatem.


once broken is hardly peeced. Nelle antiche and graui inimicitie, e difficile
stabilire vna fidele riconciliazione. Por. in Guic.


-- Manet alta mente repostum, Virg.


Iudicium Paridis, spretaeque iniuria formae.

Paucis credendum, nec nisi ijs, quorum longo vsu cognita tibi fides. Cic. ad
frat.


In victores victosque nunquam solida fides coals cit.

Dissensio ab alijs, a te reconciliatio incipiat: cum ignoscis, ita beneficium
tuum Tacit. hist. 2. Sen. Moral.
tempera, vt non ignoscere vtdearis sed absoluere: quia grauissimum poenae
genus est contumeliosa venia.

Il ne faut pas trop s'acointer d'vn puissant voisin, and ennemi reconcilie.
Am. Plu phoc Pro. Ital. Dion. l. 45.


Chi offend, non perdona.

Qui post vehementes inimicitias in gratiam redeunt, multa leuiuscula ac temere
accidentia, in suspicionem rapiunt: atque in vniuersum omnia tanquam consulto,
and in malam partem facta, ad conceptum ante odium apponunt.


And peeced Enmity never surely sodred: Reconcilement among such is like that
supple ointment which only eases the present smart, and skins the sore, but
searches not at the root, to eat out the rank flesh, and draw out the
malign humor. It is therefore impossible to cure this exulcerate wound, and
establish a sound and sincere friendship between them: because the old rancour
of malice is never well purged from the dregs of diffidence, and desire of
revenge. But the greatest disease of distrust and most incurable, is in him who
has wronged his Prince, whose guilty conscience feeds ever on fearful
distrust, though no just occasion at all be given.

The Princes of Bisignano and Salerno, had been long of the Aniowine faction,
against the King of Naples. I hey are now turned Arragonese, and in grace and
favor with Frederick the new King. Bisignano one evening walking forth of the
Court, is set upon by a Greek, and sore wounded. Salerno suspecting this a
plot of the Kings, in revenge of old wrongs, forsakes the Court, and flees to
his own city. The King cleares himself of the fact: protests his sincere
love and affection to him and his kinsman: and sends the Greek to him, to be
examined, and punished at his pleasure. The Greek auowes the original cause
of the attempt, to come from himself alone, without any setters on, in revenge
of a wrong done him by the Prince; who some few years before had dishonored
him, by having carnal use of his wife. This notwithstanding, the Prince could
never after be brought to trust the King, nor persuaded to a second
reconciliation.

APHORISM XXXV.
THe T. Manlius, filio e praelio prospere gesto, redeunti: Quandoquidem
aduersus Liui. l. 8.
edictum nostrum extra ordinem cum host pugnasti, etc. I lictor, deliga ad
Palum.

Manliana imperia, non in praesentia modo horrenda, sed exempli etiam tristis
Id. ibid.
in posterum.

Summum ius summa iniuria. Dictum de rigidis and austeris: nam tum maxim Adag.
Poly.
disceditur ab aequitate, quum maxim superstitiose haeretur in legum literis.


rigor of the old Romans, to punish the transgression of a commandment in
war, though the good success approve it, is not so strictly to be forced:
because in actions of this nature, we often meet with those advantages by
accident, which Reason and Judgment could not possibly fore-think of, much
less direct. For, things give better counsel to men, then men to the things.
Res dant Consilia hominibus, non homines rebus. Itaque aptare te ijs rebus Lip.
pol. l. 5.
debes, praesertim in bello.

Surculum defringere. Dictum de ijs qui non callent totam disciplinam
militarem, Cicero.
sed ex ea paululum quod ad praesens faciat decerpunt.

Statum nutantium rerum, recto consilio in bonam partem accepto, aliquoties Am.
Marcel. lib. 26.
diuina remedia repararunt.

Qui opportunae occasionis momentum neglexerit, neque statim rei been gerendae
occasionem arripuerit, frustra deinde praeterlapsam occasionem reuocabit.
Agath. l. 4.


Hanc rebus nouis inesse oportet constantiam, vt rapienda sint consilia, non
quaerenda. Capi. in Max


Turpissima est iactura, quae fit per negligentiam. Senec. epist.



But he that has once transgressed the limits of his commission, and thereby
has fair occasion offered, to make an honorable amends, and in ample sort to
justify his first transgression, and wipe out the forfeit; that man makes a
double fault, not to take it.

Triultio is sent Lieutenant-generall into Italy, with express charge to aid
Battestino Fregoso late Duke of Genoa, and the Cardinal of S. Peter in
Vincola, to rimpatriate them and their adherents, exiles, and to assure his
master Charles the 8. of that cities devotion and obedience. His commission
stretches no further. Direction is given, that Paul-Battista Fregoso with six
galleys, should make his attempt upon the West coast: and the King sends to
Florence, to move that State to set upon the Lieutenant, and Province of
Lunigiana. The ice thus broken, and way thus made, it is resolved and ordered,
that the Duke of Orleans shall follow presently after with a puissant army, to
war upon the State of Millan in his own right. Triultio and Battestino take
in the town of Noui, and other pieces thereabouts, unjustly detained from the
Genowese, and usurped by Zforza. Vincola forces Ventimiglia, and carries it:
approaches Sauona, finds no commotion in the town for his part, as he
expected; and in despair of prevailing, retires. To which service, if after
the taking in of Noui, Triultio had addressed his forces (as by his commission
he ought) it was very probable they had had a wished success. But he desires
to kindle the wars in the Duchy of Millan, (whereof he was a proscript)
enters into that State, besieges Bosco, takes it, and brings under
contribution a great part of the Duchy. By the taking in of this Castle, the
whole State is in manifest brandle and solleuation: some through fear, others
through desire of innovation. The Duke himself is appalled, and implores the
mediation of his uncle of Ferrara, to the French king, in his behalf. His
General Gaiazzo, with his forces in Alexandria, distrusts his own strength,
and is ready to give way. So deep an impression of fear and amazement was
struck into the whole State, by the reputation of this one action. But
Triultio thinking to mend his first error, commits indeed a greater: he
marches no farther: lets slip this fair occasion: and sets down with his
army between Noui and Bosco. Whereby the Duke has time to settle his
country in quiet: re-enforce his companies: and call in the aid of the
Venetians.

APHORISM XXXVI.
NAture yields for man's use, the Bud, the Flower, and the Fruit: But if he
will have the flower for his pleasure, he may not nip off the bud: and if he
will enjoy the fruit, for his use, he may not rash off the flower. So in a
man's actions, he must suffer every precedent cause to ripen, and have his
season, if he will reap the fruit of a wished effect. Qui in arduis versantur
negotijs, per iculi meminisse debent. Eras. Euripid.


Ne mihi periclitationes laudetis: nam ego, neque nautam amo, nimis audacem,
neque continentis praesidem.

Leuius fit patientia-quidquid corrigere est nefas.

Magnum malum est non posse far malum. Hor. 1. od. 28 Bion. Laert. Arist.
Cassi. ep. l. 1


Amo caute descendentes in pericula.

Mora proficua.

Malta, ne bellare necesse sit, homines voluntate remittunt: quae bello and
armis Liui. 35.
cogi non possunt.

Sis sine cupiditate, sine impotentia, quietus secretusque: Nam id beatius quam
Tacit. de Mor. Germ.
suas alienasque fortunas, Spe metuque versare.

Quis furor est atram bellis accersere mortem?

C'est chose dangereuse, s'aheurter a ce, don't on voit, qu'il ser a presque
impossible Tib. l. 1. c. 10. Am in Plut. Gracch.
de venir au bout.


It is therefore a well-grounded deliberation in States, not to snatch greedily
at the flower of a fair offer, except it certainly bring with it the sweet
fruit of profit: Nor to enter into a war, though for a iustreuenge, and
lawful recovery of their own, except there appear pregnant and demonstratiue
assurances, of the good success. Non si deue prender partito nuouo, oue non si
megliori il vecchio: come Bot. de Neu.
vediamo, che la Natura non lascia perire il fiore, si non per il frutto.




Florence is deeply engaged in the war of Pisa: wherein she has found
strong opposition, from all the States of Italy, but especially from that of
Genoa: The time is now come, to take the revenge; the means thus: The French
King has undertaken the cause of the exiled Genoweses, and earnestly
sollicites Florence, to join with him in the enterprise: she is glad so bad a
neighbor, shall have so powerful an enemy upon her back: but she holds it no
good policy, to embroyle her self in that war, till she saw the French
affairs better advanced: she refuses.

APHORISM XXXVII.
CRedulity Credulitas, error magis est quam culpa: and quidem in optimi
cuiusque mentem irrepit facillime. Cic. ep. l. 10.


Vt quisque est vir optimus, it a difficillime esse alios improbos suspicatur.


is rather a fault, then an offense. For, it hurts no man, but it self. But
in deceit is both the offense, in promising the credulous more then he means
to perform, (for, so he does what he should not:) And the fault in failing of
what he promised, (for, so he does not what he should.) Fraus in paruis fidem
sibi praestruit, vt cum operaepretium sit, cum magna Cic. ad frat. Liui. l. 28.
mercede fallat.

(...). i. In quibus neque insiurandum, neque Aristoph.
fides, neque altar locum habent.

In animis hominum multae sunt latebrae and multi recessus.

Temere affirmare de altero est periculosum, propter occultas hominum
voluntates, Cic. pro. Mil. Cic. ad Brut.
multiplicesque naturas.


The Maisterpeece of this art, is to draw on the credulous by performance of
small things, that he may the more finely fetch him over in the greater. (...).
i. Noli credere celerrime, antequam vere finem videas. Phocylid.


Pragmatici homines, omnibus historicis praeceptis, versibus denique cauere
iubent, Lip. ex Hist.
and vetant credere.

Magis amicorum inuidiam quam inimicorum insidias cauere debemus. Illud enim
Seneca.
apertum, hoc celatum est malum; nocendique fraus quae non speratur potentior
est.

Da chi mi fido, mi guardi Iddio,

Da chi mi non fido, mi guardero io. Pro. Ital.



The only remedy against such Craft-masters is this, not to trust: For he that
trusts not, can hardly be deceived.

A truce is treated between the French King, and the King of Spain. The
French will in no case admit, that the Italian confederates shall be comprised:
being desirous to prosecute his war with strong hand, on the other side the
mountains. The Spaniard for his Honors sake, nor can nor will leave them out,
being his Colleagues in the same confederation: But he assures the French
secretly, that the truce being concluded upon this condition, he will then be
as ready as he, to a final and perfect peace between them two: and that then
he will and may, with some colorable justification, join with him against the
Italians: and propoundes the Co-partcinery and equal sharing of the kingdom
of Naples with him. The condition is accepted: and a truce concluded, to
continue from the five and twentieth of April, to the last of October next
following.

APHORISM XXXVIII.
TRagedies Insperata accidunt magis saepe, quam quae speres.

-- Spero and Pauento Plaut. Most.


Sono Giudici incertissimi di Mart. Tasso. Ca. 10. Stat. l. 3. Th.



and Comedies are no where so rife, as upon the bloody stage of war. Hope and
fear are incompetent Judges in these listes: and cannot determine which side
has the better: Pessimus in dubijs augur timor.

It a postquam adempta spes est, lassus, cura confectus, stupet. Terent. An.
Salust. Iug. Cic. pro Mi.


Nunquam minus quam in bello, euentus respondent.

Incerti exitus pugnarum, and Mars communis: qui s^epe spoliantem iam and
exultantem euertit, and perculit ab abiecto.

Nescis quid serus vesper vehat: (Varronis monitum,) ne praesentium successuum
Gell. e. Varr.
prosperitate elati, futurorum curam abijciamus.

Frequenter iam fusa acies, dispersos ac passim sequentes, reparatis viribus
interemit. Veget. l. 3.


O, di quante Battaglie il fin success

Diuerso a quel, che si credette inante. Ariost. ca. 10.


Victori non vincenti gloria. Alciat. Emb.



Because the event, proves for the most part contrary to the beginning:
Wherefore let not him triumph that puts on his armor, but him that puts
it off.

In the Interim, before the truce came in force, Triultio, Battestino, and
Serenon, encampe before Albinga: at the first assault they had almost made
themselves masters of the place: but through disorder in their entry, they are
again beaten back, forced to quit the action, and raise the siege.
Contrarily: Conte Gaiazzo sets down before Noui: is beaten back with great
loss: rises with his army: returns: and happily carries the place.

APHORISM XXXIX.
Thankfulness is accounted a heavy burden: Revenge, a sweet refreshing:
Hence is it that men naturally are more prone to revenge a wrong, then requite
a good turn. Especially the envious, who like the Toade in the fable, swells
to be as big as the Ox, though he burst in swelling: and with a spiteful eye,
like that of the Basilisk hurts the object upon which it fixes. For, such
men cannot endure the prosperity of others, (especially such as were sometimes
their enemies) though the record of that former wrong has since been
cancelled, with the accumulation of many benefits. Proniores ad vindictam
sumus, quam ad gratiam.

Gratia oneri, vindicta in quaestu habetur. Bod. l. 5. rep. Tacit. hist. 4.
Comic. Grae. Terent. Ade.


(...). i. Simul and misertum est, interijtque gratia.

Abs quiuis homine cum opus est, beneficium accipere gaudeas,

Verum enim vero id demum iuuat, si quem aequum est benefacere is facit.

Qui largiuntur indignis ea quae dignis conferri debeant, tria committunt
absurda: Ant. Sermon. de Been.
nam and ipsi iacturam faciunt, and in bonos contumeliosi sunt, and malos
roborant, materia vitiorum suppeditata.

Improbus est homo, qui beneficium scit sumere, and reddere nescit.

Qui indignum aliquem honor afficiunt, simplicitatis ac stultitiae opinionem
Plaut. Persa. Demost. ad Leptin.
aliquim habent: qui vero de se benemeritis paria non referunt, malitiae
suspicionem incurrunt.

Malo si benefeceris, id beneficium interit.

Perfusum vas est ingratus homuncio, semper omne quod infundis perfluit in
Plaut. Trin. Cornar.
nihilum.

Rimarum plenus per dit tua donascelestus:

Si sapis integro vina reconde cado. Luscin.


Qui in ea est sententia, vt existimet, magnorum virorum inueterata odia
beneficijs nouis dilui, and in obliuionem induci posse, is vehementer fallitur.
Mac. Pri. c. 7.





Now that arms are laid aside in Italy, by force of the late truce; Lodowick
Zforza makes public acknowledgement to the world, of the obligation and
thankfulness he owes to the Venetian State, for their ready, timely, and full
succors in these his late troubles: He extols to the heavens the honor and
power of that Commonwealth: He approues the wisdom of John Galeazzo first
Duke of Millan, in making that State his Feoffee in trust, for the due
execution and performance of his last will and testament. Yet for all this, not
able to endure in his envious nature, that Pisa should be wholly at her
devotion, which himself had hunted after with so much policy and pain; he
works secretly with the Popes and Spanish Ambassadors, to procure that Pisa
might again be restored to the Florentines, and wrung out of the hands of the
Venetians.

APHORISM XL.
WHere Alcibiades cuidam dicenti, Non fidis patriae de te iudicaturae? Ego
sane, Plut. Alcib.
inquit, ne matri quidem: vererer enim ne insciens pro albo calculo nigrum
immitteret.

(...). Diffidentia prudentum hominum commune Demosth.
Thesaurarium.

Sapiente diffidentia non alia res vtilior mortalibus. Eurip. Horat. ep. 1.


Cautus enim metuit foueam, Lupus Accipiterque

Suspectos laqueos, and opertum Miluius hamum.


Election is free, we are to choose the best of benefits: where it is
restrained, we must take the least of dangers. Wherefore in a treaty between
States, when a demand is made, which the weaker would not willingly grant, (in
distrust of bad measure from the stronger) let him rather propound some
impossible caution, then make a flat denial: because, it gives the demander
no better advantage, and yet procures himself less displeasure. Minus malum
etiam boni speciem gerit quodam modo.

Istuc est sapere, qui vbicunque opus sit, animum possit flectere. Arist. eth.
l. 5. Teren. heaut Plaut. Paenul


Modus omnibus in rebus (soror) est optimum habitu,

Nimia omnia nimium exhibent negotium hominibus exse.

Imprudens est quisquis cum praestantioribus certare vult. Hesiod. Terent. And.
Cic. ad frat. ep. 1.


Vt quimus, aiunt, quando vt volumus, non licet.

Nihil est tam deforme, quam ad summum imperium acerbitatem naturae adiungere.

Satis est homines imprudentia lapsos non erigere: vrgere vero iacentes, aut
praecipitantes impellere, certe est inhumanum. Cic. pro Rab


(...). Dictum in homines praecipites and violentos. Rho enim litera canina
Adag. Poly.
est.


For, nothing is more harsh to him that motions a matter, then a peremptory
refusal: and we daily observe, that many suitors are sent away without their
purpose, better satisfied; then others that with bad terms and in ill manner
obtain it.

The Popes and Spanish Ambassadors deal with those of Venice, about the
resignation of Pisa: their allegations are answered by the Venetians; and that
point argued, to be both preiudicious and pernicious to the common good of
Italy, because the Florentines were in so strict amity with the French, as no
benefit of theirs could dissolve it. Yet, to show that the State of Venice was
as desirous of their love, and of the peace of Italy, as any other, she would
be content to resign the place, provided that the Florentines put in good
caution, not to aid the French. And no caution was sufficient for a matter of
such importance, but the Port of Ligorne to be put into the hands of the
confederates, for their assurance. A thing which the Venetians knew full well,
that the Florentines would not grant. So the Treaty brake off.

APHORISM XLI.
AS Amicus omnium, amicus nullorum.


he that is friend to all, is true friend to none: So that which has many
heads, has no head at all. A multitude is this many-headed monster, which has
neither head for brains, nor brains for government. And as in a medicine, if
there be not a due proportion of the Simples in the mixture, there is a
mischief for a remedy, not a remedy for a mischief: So, in a popular State,
where there is no equal temperature, and counterpoise of the nobilities power,
against this strong Ingredient of the multitude, there is disorder, and a way
open to confusion. Hydra and monstrum multorum capitum, est ipsa multitudo:
Ingenio Cic. de Am. Salust. Iug.
mobili, seditiosum, atque discordiosum, cupidum nouarum rerum, and otio
aduersum.

Vulgus sine Rectore, praeceps, pauidum, secors, atque etiam vecors.

Procacia plebis ingenia. Tacit. an 4. Tacit. an. 2. Tacit. an. 6. Id. l. an.
2. Cic. pro Ros. Cic. pro Do^.


Vulgus audacia turbidum, nisi vim metuat.

Vulgus aegris oculis aelienam foelicitatem intuetur.

Sic est vulgus, ex veritate pauca, ex opinione multa, iudicat.

In imperfecta multitudine, est varietas, and inconstantia, and crebra tanquam
tempestatum sic etiam sententiarum commutatio.

Nihil in vulgo modicum, terrent ni pauent: vbi pertimuerint, impune
contemnuntur. Tac. an. 1.


Vulgus est ad deteriora promptum.

Non delectu aliquo aut sapientia ducitur ad iudicandum, sed impetu nonnunquam
Tacit. an 16. Cic. pro Plan.
and quadam etiam temeritate: non est enim consilium in vulgo, non ratio, non
discrimen, non diligentia: semperque sapientes ea quae populus fecisset,
ferenda non laudanda duxerunt.

Non ego ventosae plebis suffragia venor

Impensis coenarum, and tritae munere vestis. Hor. 1. ep. 19.





The form of government last established in Florence, was not well reigled.
The mixture was made of these two Simples, Optimacie and Democracie, but it was
disproportionall: for, this latter being hot in the highest degree, had the
predominancie. Hence grew suspicions, iealousies, and factions among them: the
nobler sort had less authority then was fit, and yet the populasse thought
them ambitious, and chalengers of more then their due. This faecall part of the
people intrudeth into all deliberations of weightiest consequence, whereof they
were incapable. They change the supreme magistrate every two months, and by
that means the State-businesse is managed with manifest confusion. The great
charges and troubles of a long war, together with a present dearth and
scarcity of all things, puts the city into imminent hazard. This ill
disposition of the government, and general dislike of the present, encourages
Peter Medici, through the persuasion of the Pope, aid of the Venetians,
Petrucci, Aluiano, and his other friends abroad, together with the
solicitation of those mal-contents, and kinsmen he had in the town, to
attempt the recovery of his liberty, lands, and authority, that he had
deservedly lost in that city. It is true, the enterprise succeeded not: not
out of any failing of his friends abroad, or partisans in the town, but
through accident: for he missed to come with his forces to the gate which was
kept, and made good for him, many hours after the time assigned, being hindered
by a sudden and great fall of rain.

APHORISM XLII.
AN Qui non vetat peccare, cum potest, iubet.

Qui enim castigare, aut saltem cohibere, cum possit, non cohibet: palam est,
eum Seneca. Philo.
permittere, and pene mandare.

Inducit maximam illecebr am peccandi impunitatis spes. Cicero. Sen. de Cle.


Quis eum metuet, apud quem conditum, immo constrictum ferrum sit?

Quid leges sine moribus vanae proficiunt? Hor. 3. od. 24 Plaut. Trin.


Mores leges perduxerunt iam in potestatem suam: Ee miserae etiam adparietes
sunt fixae ferreis clauis, vbi malos adfigi erat aequius.

Nihil in discordijs ciuilibus festinatione tutius, vbi facto magis quam
consulto Tacit. hist. 1.
est opus.

Quos ipsa natura retinere in officio non potest, ij magnitudine poenae
maleficio Cic. pro Ros
submoueri debent.


ill executor of laws, is worse in a State then a great breaker of them. Not
to punish an offense, being under our charge, and in our power, is to commit
it. There is no greater offense to the weale-publick, and quiet thereof, then a
factious partaking and deadly Feud among the great ones. On mesprise and
deteste ceux, qui laissent viure leurs suiets en toute license Am. Plu. Cic.
de mal fair, and confondent les punitions auec les loyers.

Ce que done volonte and moyens aux hommes de grands esprits, de conspirer
Haill. l. 1.
contre leur Princes, and d'attenter a l'vsurpation de la coronne, est
l'imbecillite and la neantise d'iceux Princes.


Conniuence therefore in a Prince, to wink at such factions, and slacknesse
not to suppress them, is dangerous.

The factions, Guelphe and Ghibelline, increase in the Churches State: and some
notable ensuing mischief is feared. The Pope Alexander 6. careless of the
afflictions of his subjects, or his own honor, so it touched not his
particular profit or pleasure, stirs not to prevent the mischief, or
suppress the motion. Aluiano with his troops is called by the Guelphes into
the town of Todi: They sack it, and put to death three and thirty of the
principal heads of the other faction. In revenge hereof, Antonio Sauello
enters Terni: and the Gatteschi by the help of the Colonnesi, surprise
Viterbo. In both which places the Ghibellines commit like outrage and slaughter
upon the Guelphes.

APHORISM XLIII.
THere are degrees of vices: and how soever Ethics out of their Philosophy
determine those of excess to be less odious and hurtful: yet Polliticks
find out of their experience, that they are rather to be judged by the effect,
then the defect. By which rule, Lust and Ambition are two vices of all other
the most hateful: Because they are most powerful ministers to all nefarious
actions. Contumax res libido, aestropercita, and ad insaniam proxime accedens.
Tacit. hist. l. 1


Et ruit in vetitum damni secura libido. Ovid. Seneca. Cicero.


Ambitio res ventosa, nullum habens exitum aut terminum.

Complures se scelere contaminar unt imperij cupiditate.

Quaeque succensas agit libido mentes. Sen. Hippol. Idem, lb.


Quisquis secundis rebus exultat nimis,

Fluitque luxu, semper insolita appetens,

Tunc illum magnae dira fortunae comes

Subit libido. --

Maxim adducuntur plerique, vt eos iustitiae capiat obliuio, cum in
imperiorum, honorum, gloriaeve cupiditatem, inciderint. Cic. off. 1.


Libido Lex viro insipienti. Ficin.


In reliquis vitijs sequitur victoria pugnam,

Vincitur at celeri saeua libido fuga: Billi.


Nemo etenim nisi qui metuet fugietque periclum,

Tutus ab hac poter it viuere peste diu.




Caesar Borgia, Cardinal of Valencia, could not brook, that his elder brother
the Duke of Candia, should be advanced by the Pope their father, to temporal
honors, and be made General of the Ecclesiastic army: to which dignity
himself aspired, having a spirit altogether aliened from priestly function. He
was also enraged against him, because he was his corriuall and concurrent in
his Amors, and shared with him in the favor, and carnal use of his Mistress.
Hereupon he practices the death of his brother: and one night as he rode
privately through the streets of Rome, he caused him to be murdered, and
thrown into the river of Tyber.

APHORISM XLIIII.
NOcuments (...). Nocumenta documenta.

Miseria, Prudentiae bona Matter. Adag. graec. Lip. ann. l. 3. Ovid. Me. l. 6


-- Grande doloris

Ingenium est, miserisque venit solertia rebus.

-- Nec enim fortuna querenda Oui. Me. vlt.


Sola tua est: similes aliorum respice casus;

Mitius ista feres. --

Ictus piscator sapit. Adag. Lat. Terent. Pho.


Quod sors feret, feramus aequo animo,

Istuc viri est officium.


are Documents: and great afflictions are good lectures, to reformation of life
and manners. For, the harder the pressure is with calamity, the deeper is the
impression of our frailty, and lyablenesse to misery: -- Ad mores natura
recurrit Iuue. Sat. 13.


Damnatos fixa, and mutari nescia.

Naturam expellas furca licet, vsque recurrit. Horat. Sermon. l. 2. Sat. 2. Am.
Plu. Di.


Le plus grand judgment, que scauroit auenir aux meschants, est, qu'ils se
condemnent eux mesmes, and n'en deuiennent pas meilleurs.

Vnicuique dedit vitium natura creato.

Quicquid infixum and ingenitum est, lenitur art, non vincitur. Propert. l. 2.
Senec. de ira Pro. Gallic.


Le Mortier sent tousiours les Aulx.


But in a heart never moistened with the dew of Grace, and obdurate with the
continual practice of wickedness and villainy, they take no deeperoote: Such
mortars will still savor of the garlic.

The Pope is overcome with sorrow for the untimely and violent death of his
eldest son the Duke of Candia. He bewailes his loss with many tears: calls
his own former life into consideration: accuses himself in open Consistory
of his actions past, and whole course of life, till that present day: shows
great contrition: promises amendment: and requires the whole college of
Cardinals to join with him, in reformation of the disorders and corruptions
of the Court: But shortly after, when he knew the author of the murder, and
that Caesar Borgia, his own son was the assassinate, (which should have
aggrauated his grief) he cooles in his burning zeal to reformation, and
falls to his old byas of wickedness and treachery, with a more unbridled
fury of ambition and covetousness, then ever before.

APHORISM XLV.
IN Treason, the concealment is as capital as the practice: Here are no
Accessories: All are in like predicament of offense, and danger of law: For, he
deserves as ill of the State, that will not reveal a public mischief and
prevent it, as he that intends and practices it. Wherefore no punishment for
such, can by law be too sudden, or too cruel: though (unless the delay do
much endanger the State) it ought ever be such, as the law in like cases
ordains. Proditio tantum incommodi humano generi affert, quantum salutis bona
fides.

Nulla potest esse, in tanti sceleris immanitate punienda, crudelitas. Valor.
l. 9. Cic. Catil. Lip. Cic. pro Mi. Valor. l. 2. Plat. leg. l. 9.


Proditionis conuictos puni, and grauiter puni. Nam insidiatori aut latroni,
quae potest inferri iniusta nex?

Impia proditio celeri poena vindicanda est.

(...). Puniantur tanquam sacrilegi.

Ne sanguinem nostrum largiare, and dum paucis sceleratis parcis, bonos omnes
perditum eas. Salust. Cat.


Est vtilius vnius improbi supplicio multorum improbitatem coercere, quam Cic.
in Ver.
propter improbos multos vni parcere.

Tua cautio, nostra cautio est. Cic. pro. Ma. Curt. l. 3.


Latus a domesticis hostibus munies.

Qui dubitat vlcisci, improbos plures facit. Senec. sent. Tacit. an. 11.
Joseph. f. 278


Nulla cuiusquam misericordia, quia flagitiorum deformit as praeualebat.

Facinus non admittit lenta consilia.




The conspirators with Medici are discovered in the city of Florence: They are
apprehended, arraigned, and convicted by a lawful trial. Nicolo Ridolphi,
Gianozzo Pucci, and Giouanni Cambi are condemned, for soliciting him to come:
Lorenzo Tornabuoni for helping him with money: and Barnardo del Nero, for
having known the conspiracy, and concealing it. All gentlemen, of the chiefest
howses in Florence, and Nero at the same time Gonfaloner of Justice, (the
chief office in that State.) The kinsemen of the offenders appeal from this
judgment of the Senate, to the great Council of the commons (as by the law of
that government they might.) It is propounded at the table of Senators,
whether this appeal should stand good, or no; and is cast by voices, on the
negative part. The offenders are all executed that night in prison.

APHORISM XLVI.
PRecedents, are no justifiable warrants of Princes actions, when they are
taken from those who are generally and justly taxed of injustice. Yet such is
the deprauation of man's nature, as he rather imitates the worse, then the
better: And in ill, to exceed: in good, to come short of the example. Duo illa
nos maxim mouent, similitudo and exemplum. Cic. 3. de Or. Plaut.


Id genus hominum vniuersis est aduorsum, atque omni populo male facit; male
fidem seruando, illis quoque abrogant fidem, qui nihil meriti. Quippe ex eorum
ingenio, ingenium horum probant.

Vbi semel a recto deerratum est, in praeceps peruenitur, neque quisquam sibi
turpe Vellei. l. 2.
putat, quod alteri fuit fructuo sum.

Quod exemplo fit, id etiam iure fieri putant homines. Cic. ad Sulp. Por. in
Guic. l. 6.


L'imitazione del male, super a l' essempio: Si come per lo contrario,
l'imitazione del been e sempre inferiore.

Prodest sine dubio custodem tibi proposuisse, and habere quem respicias: Long
autem melius est, cum iam profeceris tantum, vt sit tibi etiam tui reuerentia,
and tc Senec ep. ad Lucil.
cum feceris, cum quo peccare non audeas.

-- Dociles imitandis

Turpibus ac prauis omnes sumus: and Catilinam Iuuen. Sat. 14


Quocunque in populo videas, quocunque sub axe,

Sed nec Brutus erit, Bruti nec auunculus vsquam.




The Spaniard seems loath to abandon the Italians his confederates, to the
power of the French. And yet now upon a new truce concluded between them
(which was to continue ad beneplacitum of both the parties, and two months
after the reuocation) he quite excludes those Princes his allies. They
complain of this his tergiuersation. He iustifies himself thus: That it was
as lawful for him to do this, without their leave or comprisall, as for the
Duke of Millan to make peace with France, at the treaty of Vercelli, without
his consent or notice. But yet for their better satisfaction, he pretends that
he will revoke this truce, whenever they shall rimbourse unto him one hundred
and fifty thousand Ducats, which he has already spent in those wars: and
when withal the Venetians shall quit their possession and interest in Pisa,
for the common quiet of Italy.

APHORISM XLVII.
Justice and Fortune are painted blind: to show us what the one does, and what
the other should not do: for, the one uses to give without respect, and the
other in no respect is to take. Those Princes therefore, that for bribe, fear,
or any other particular end, fail of doing every man right, swerve from the
prescript rule of Justice and Equity, which admits of none to sit in her Seat
but such, whose eyes are seeled from respecting persons, and hands closed from
accepting rewards. Iustum and tenacem propositi virum, Hor. 3. car. 3.


Non ciuium ardor praua iubentium,

Non vultus instantis tyranni

Mente quatit solida.

Nihil in penatibus eius venale sit, aut ambitioni peruium. Tacit. an. l. 13
Claudian.


Corrumpentia sensus dona: -- Persuadere dona and dijs fama est.

(...). Iudicium donis emptum. Phocylid. Ex Hesiod.


Iudices, neque (...), neque (...) esse debent.

-- Bonus atque fidus Hor. l. 4. od. 9


Iudex, honestum praetulit vtili, and

Reiecit alto dona nocentium

Vultu. --

-- Prouincia cum te

Rectorem accipiet, pone irae frena, modumque Iuuen. Sat. 18


Pone and auaritiae.

(...). Hesiod. l. 1.


Qui iura tam hospitibus quam popularibus dant iusta, nec a iusto quicquam
exorbitant, ijs viget vrbs, populus vero floret in ipsa.

Vir iustus est, non qui non facit iniuriam,

Sed qui cum iniuriari possit, non vult tamen,

Nec qui a paruis capiendis instituit, Philem. in Palamid.


Sed qui magna sustinet non accipere,

Quamuis habere queat and possidere sine periculo.




In the treaty at Vercelli it was articled, that the Castle of Genoa should be
left in deposito with the Duke of Ferrara, for performance of all covenants
between the Duke of Millan and the French King: with prouiso to be redeliuered
to the Duke at two years end, in case he kept all conditions couenanted in the
treaty, and paid half the charge of the garrison for that time, otherwise
not. The time is expired. Zforza has failed on his part, in the performance of
many covenants: Ferrara demands half the charges of the King. He yields
willingly to pay it: And because Ferrara urged that he had not his liquidation,
and full reckoning for the rest of his charges, the King requires him to hold
the place still, till the case were fully decided, to which of the two he ought
to consigne it: A demand very reasonable and just. But Ferrara is overcome by
Zforzaes persuasions and flatteries, and by bestowing the Archbishopric of
Millan upon his son the Cardinal d'Este: but most of all through fear of
displeasing two so powerful neghbours to his State, as Venice and Millan. He
therefore delivers the Castle of Genoa into the Dukes hands: receiving the
remainder of the sum due for the guard of the place: and the State of Venice
by way of gratification, gives his other son Don Ferrando, the command of one
hundred men at arms in pay.

APHORISM XLVIII.
HE Impunitae iniuriae exemplum, omnibus minatur iniuriam: Etenim si liceat
Plu. de Cato
impune laedere, nullus erit tutus ab improborum violentia.

Veterem ferendo iniuriam, inuitas nouam. Senec. de ira.


Princeps nisi se ab iniuria vindicauerit, -- subuersa iacebit

Pristina maiestas soliorum, and Sceptra superba. Lucret. l. 5.


Subitis offensis, vel intempestiuis blanditijs mutabilem, merito condemnant.
Tacit. an. l. 2. Haill. Estat. l. 3.


Voy-la le mal-heur d'vn siecle miserable and unjust, de cognoistre l'
injustice, and ne l'oser dire, n'y en fair la punition: voy-la comment les
Princes souuent cognossent le mal, and iugeans au contraire, donnent
l'absolution: estants a cela contraints par les temps, aux quels leur injustice
ils donnent cette license, et apres en recoyuent les premiers le mal.

Vitellius contemptior indies, segniorque.

Grauius est contemni, quam stultitia percuti. Tacit. hist. 2. Seneca. Cic. in
Ver. 3 Lip. pol. l. 5.



that bears one blow at an enemies hand, as keth another: and he that endures
one contemptible neglect from his subject, shall be sure of many. For, not to
have sense of a foreign affront, and be displeased at homebred abuses, and
capable to redress both, are things much derogating from the honor of a
Prince: the first argues a pusillanimitie of spirit; the other a debilitie of
judgment. Vnius improbi supplicio, multorum improbitas coercetur.

Si crebra nimis sit eorum insolentia, and tanquam mala herba nimium
succreuerit, falce est recidenda.

-- Primo in limine siste Statil. l. 5.


Conatus scelerum, atque animos infanda parantes.


He therefore that will not be wronged the second time, must remedy the first:
against a stranger, by the Lance; against a subject, by the Law.

The Duke of Ferrara sends to Charles 8. to excuse the consignation he had made
of the Castle of Genoa, into the Duke of Millans hands: an action of great
injustice and wrong to the French. The King hears thereof without any manner
of resentment or displeasure, as a matter of slight consequence, though indeed
it touched near his honor, and state of his present affairs, being still
resolved upon a personal return into Italy. To this expedition, the occasion
was never fairer, nor means stronger. For, the Florentines are willing to
entertain d'Aubigny, with one hundred and fifty men at arms, as General of
their forces, and to break the ice, and make the way to his coming. The
Marquis of Mantoa, returning victoriously from Naples, where he had commanded
under the Venetians, with great honor to himself, and advancement of their
affairs, is by them now at his return cassed from his command: and in
discontent, offers his service to the French King. The new Duke of Sauoy is
assuredly his: Bentiuoglio promises faithfully to follow his fortunes, so
soon as he shall have passed the mountains. The Pope (yet doubtful whether
to join with him, or be newter) is undoubtedly resolved not to be against him.
But his favorites, and courtiers abuse him with variety of artifice: some
invent new delights and pleasures to stay him at home: others, propound many
difficulties: the rest advise him not to set forward, till he had such a maine
power both at sea, and land, as no force the Italians could make, should be
able to resist him: and all these that he might be drawn to quit the action:
as for S Malo, who was chief treasurer, and had formerly failed in his
seasonable and sufficient supplies in time of most need, and yet was never
called to account to answer so great a neglect, he now at this instant uses
his old trick, of dispensing the kings money sparingly, slowly, and out of due
season: and failed of sending the entertainment due to the Orsini and the
Vitelli, a matter of great moment to the Kings service intended. Thus the King,
whose will depe^ded upon the pleasure of others, cooles in the business so
hotely intended: returns from Lions: thence to Toures: so to Amboise castle,
where he shortly after died.

APHORISM XLIX.
AS Tractare sacra illotis, quod aiunt, manibus.


sacred things should not be touched with unwashed hands: (...): velle ciuilem
Adag. Synes. ep. 67
virtutem coniungere cum sacerdotio, est miscere omnino non miscenda.

(...). Spiritualis contemplatio Nicephor.
and ciuilis administratio, vt plurimum inter se omnino non conueniunt.

Tantum religio potuit suadere malorum? Lucret. Liui. l. 39.


Nihil in speciem fallacius quam praua religio est, vbi deorum numen
praetenditur sce eribus.

(...). Phil. de co^fu linguarum.
Male affecti erga patria instituta, and in reprehensionem semper legum
accusationemque intenti.


So State matters should admit no vulgar handling: Prayer is here the
Church-mans only weapon. He must neither lift up his hand to reform, nor his
voice to reprove. To move to trouble and commotion, is a motion Exentrick,
and out of his commission. They are all in these cases barred Bye and Maine,
except they be of the Council, and in Council. For seditious Preachers
against the State Politic, and scandalous inueighers against the State
Ecclesiastic, under which they live, bring distraction in those States, and
destruction to themselves.

Sauanarola, a man of a fiery and impetuous spirit, had in his sermons from
time to time, persuaded the Florentines to a popular government, and
prevailed: Had furthered and forced the law of Appellation, from the
Magistrates to the Council of the Commons: Yet suffered it to take no effect,
when the benefit of that law was demanded, by the offenders in Medicis
conspiracy: whereby many of the Nobility lost their lives, and himself
purchased much hatred, from their friends and kinsmen. He had confidently
presaged of great felicity and enlargement to the Florentine State, and
declination to the Sea of Rome: which, for his greater credit and reputation,
he pretended to know by revelation. He is accused to the Pope, of preaching
scandalously against that Sea and Court: he is sequestered from preaching,
silenced, and cited to Rome. He disobeies in both. His enemies in the city of
Florence prefer new bills of complaint against him. He receives new
Mandates. The whole city is divided about him: so is the Clergy: in the end,
his adversaries get the upper hand, and imprison him: his process is framed:
it cleares him of many calumnies and foul aspersions, of avarice, lust, and
practice with other Princes: it charge him with scandalizing the present
Church government: with taxing the Court and Clergy of corrupt and dissolute
living: with chalenging the Popes of intrusion and unlawful obtaining the
Papacy: with persuading to an innovation of the present State, and reducing
things to the integrity of the times next after the Apostles: and moving to
have a general Council for reformation. For these causes, he is condemned,
degraded, committed to the secular power, hanged, and burned.

APHORISMS, CIVIL AND MILITARY. LIB. IIII.
APHORISM I.
AMong Nunquam os operit, nec pupillae motu sed totius oculi versionc
circumspicit: Plin. na. hist. l. 8. cap. 33.
celsus hiante ore, color mirabilior, mutat namque eum subinde.

Non timemus Vespasianum, ea principis aetas, ea moderatio. Tacit. hist. 4.
Tac. hist. l. 1.


Finis Neronis varios motus animorum non modo in vrbe apud patres, apud
populum, apud vrbanum militem, sed omnes legiones, ducesque conciuerat.

Finis vitae eius nobis luctuosus, extraneis etiam ignotisque non sine cura
fuit. Tac. Agric. Tac. Annal. l. 1. fol. 3.


Postquam prouecta iam senectus, aegro and corpore fagitabatur, aderatque finis
and spes nouae, pauci bona libertatis, plures bellum pauescere, alij cupere,
pars multo maxima imminentes dominos varijs rumoribus disserebant. Trucem
Agrippam, etc.


States that have intercourse of traffic, or dispute of right together; every
alteration in the one, begets new deliberations in all the rest: Especially
upon the death of any Prince, in whose State appears a new face of all things.
Wherefore in these deliberations, the neighbor States must imitate the
Camaelion, who often changes his color, and is always with his eyes open.
Temporibus seruiendum: Nec quicquam tutius, quam de illius consilijs, ex Lip.
an. l. 3.
ipsius indole, moribusque iudicare, aut eorum qui apud illum magni.

Principis naturam quocum rem habiturus es, aut ipse cognoscas oportet, aut
tangas Plin. Paneg
ad lapidem illum L^dium communis famae. Singuli enim decipere and decipi
possunt, nemo omnes, neminem omnes fefellerunt.

Chiha a fare prognostico delle deliberazioni d'altri, debbe (non si volendo
ingannare) Guicc. l. 7.
hauer in considerazione, non tanto quello che verisimilmente farebbe un Sauio,
quanto quello sia il ceruello e la natura, di chi ha a deliberare.

Verum ibi Prudentia conspicua fit, vbi quis discriminis naturam prospicit, at
que iniquae rationis quod est, id tanquam commodum ad rem praesentem arripit.
Macc. pr. 21.



So must they change their former resolutions, and look as well with the left
eye, upon what may be hurtful: as with the right, upon what may be
aduantageous to them.

Jews 12. succeedes to the crown of France. It was likely in all reason of
State, that he would not suddenly wrap himself into wars beyond the Alps,
in the beginning of his reign, before his State were well settled at home. But
those Princes of Italy that were best advised, suspected that their troubles
would be greater then before: a King of ripe years being advanced to that
Monarchy, experienced in the wars, a more moderate spender, more master of
himself then his predecessor, and who, besides his title to Naples by the
crown of France, laid claim also to Millan, as he was Duke of Orleans.

APHORISM II.
AFaire maid richly endowed, is never without Suitors: And a great State newly
fallen, never without claimers: nor these ambitious competitors ever without
some color of title. In which concurrence of pretenders, not the iustest
claim, but the sharpest sword commonly prevails. Virorum armorumque
faciendum certamen. Id in summa fortuna aequius quod Tacit. an. 15.
validius.

Qui isto gladio praeualet, is optime de finibus disputat. Plu. apop. Tasso.
cant. 2


-- E che ripone

Nella Spada sua leg, e sua ragione.

Sua retinere, priuatae domus: de alienis certare, regiam laudem putant. Tac.
an. l. 15. Aeneid. l. 11


Ipsum armis, ipsumque iubent decernere ferro,

Qui regnum Italiae and primos sibi poscat honores.

Si non dominaris filiola, iniuriam te accipere existimas. Suet. de Agr Lip. e
Luc. Lip. e Liuio Suet. fol. 102


Haec acies victum factura nocentem est. (Subtilissimae militiae est hoc
Poetae.)

In armis ius far: and omnia virorum fortium esse. (Improbum and hoc.)

Cornelius Centurio ostendens gladij capulum, non dubitauit in curia dicere,
Hic faciet si vos non feceritis.




Jews Duke of Orleans, brother to Charles 6. and grandfather to the present
King, married Lady Valentina, daughter to John Galeazzo, first Duke of Millan.
She had in Dower the town and Province of Asti; besides a great sum of
money, and an express covenant, (in case the line masculine failed) she or her
next heirs to succeed in the Dukedom. This conueighance was made the Emperor
being dead, and therefore inualidous, but that the French affirm it was
ratified by the Pope, who pretends to have this right in himself, vacant
Imperio. Upon the death of Philip-Maria Visconti, (the last heire-male of that
line) Charles, son to this Jews, puts in his claim: So does the Emperor
Frederick, as deuolued to the Empire, for default of heirs males. The like
does Alphonso king of Arragon and Naples, whom Philip-Maria had instituted his
heir, by his last will and testament. But Francis Zforza, father to Lodowick
the present Duke, who married the only daughter of Philip-Maria (though
illegitimate) a great soldier of his time, and more powerful in arms then
the other competitors, more prudent in his deliberations, and succesfull in his
actions, makes good his Plea with his sword: carries the Prise from them all,
and is invested with the Duchy of Millan.

APHORISM III.
IT Non minus est turpe sua relinquere, quam in aliena inuadere iniustum and
ambitiosum. Salust. Iug.


Quaenam est causa cur Philippus plures res quam nos superiori bello ex animi
sententia gessit? hic ipse militat, labores perfert, periculis adest, neque
occasionem Demost. Phil
rei been gerendae praetermittens, neque vllam anni partem omittens: Nos vero
nihil facientes hic perpetuo sedemus cunctabundi, etc.

Quod multa bello perdidimus, ignauiae nostrae iure adscribi conuenit.

Nihil agendo homines male agere perdiscunt. Demost. Oly Cato ap. Col Alciat.
Emb.


Segnities specie recti velata cucullo,

Non se, non alios vtilitate iuuat.

Qui quitte le ieu, le perd. Pro. Gall. Plut. de Con


Neque est prudentia solum (...), sed and (...): non solum (...), sed and
(...).


is as great a folly to lose what is our own, through overmuch negligence, as
it is an offense to intrude upon others through too much ambition. For, not to
seek our right, is want of prudence; not to recover it, is want of power; but
not to demand it at all, is to quit it altogether: as gamesters that give over
their game, yield it lost. Nam diuturnitas temporis efficere potest, vt quod
pernicioso more and exemplo inueterauit, potentius ipsa lege dominetur. Bod.
rep. l. 2.


Agros regis Apionis quondam habitos, and populo Romans cum regno relictos,
proximus quisque possessor inuaserant, diutinaque iniuria and licentia, quasi
iure and aequo Tac. an. l. 14.
nitebantur.

Diuturna illa praescriptio temporum (sine interruptione and interpellatione)
legitimae Bod. rep. 325
creationis vim habet.


Wherefore the Prince who means not to quit his right, must from time to time
put in his claim.

Charles Duke of Orleans, father to Jews 12. presently after the death of
Philip-Maria Visconti, puts in his claim to Millan, though he were then
prisoner in England, and there remained five and twenty years, after the
battle of Agencourt, where the English had upon the French a most famous
victory. After his return into France, in the time of Jews 11. he renewes his
claim. So did he again the third time, during the reign of Charles 8. And
now lastly, Jews his son is no sooner come to the Crown, but by advice of
his Council, he proclaims himself, not only king of France, but (in his
right to Naples) King of both the Sicils and Jerusalem, and (in right of his
birth, as from the Duke of Orleans) he entitles himself Duke of Millan. And
sends to the Princes of Italy public and express intimation, that he meant
to pursue this his right to that Duchy.

APHORISM IIII.
THe Eale, magnitudine Equi fluuiatilis, cauda Elephanti, color nigra vel
fulua: maxillas Apri habens, maiora cubitalibus cornua, mobilia, quae alterna
in pugna Plin. not. hist. lib. 8. cap. 21
sistit, variatque infesta aut obliqua.


Ethiopian Yeale has two horns of a cubit long, which he can in fight move as
he list, either both forward to offend, or both backward to defend, or the one
forward and the other backward, to both uses at once. Non cursum eundem tenere
oportet, sed portum. Lip. pol. l. 4. Seneca.


Hominem etiam frugis. epe flectit occasio.

Consilia ad euentus, and tempora accomodanda, and saepe inflectenda sunt. Lip.
an. lib. ^ Homer. Od. Am. Plu. Cat


Sic Poeta laudat Vlyssem (...).

Les aduis doiuent estre accommodez a la necessite du temps.

Honest seruit, qui succumbit tempori. Senec Sent. Adag. ex sh. Phocylid.


Praesentem mulge, quid fugientem persequeris?

Temporibus semper cautus seruire memento,

Nec reflare velis aduersum flamina venti.


So should wise men apply their counsels and actions, to the times: and either
put forth the horns of their power, or pull them in, as present occasions are
offered. For, as the Mariner changes his course upon the change of the wind
and weather, yet still holds his purpose of getting in to the harbrough: so
should Statesmen, upon every new occasion alter their sails, and veere
another way, still making their course to the Port of the public good and
safety.

Jews 12. is resolved to come down into Italy, to recover his right in Naples
and Millan. Now the Pope stirred on through his own particular ends and
interest, which he saw he could not formerly effect by the quiet of Italy, and
combination with those Princes against Charles 8; desires new troubles by this
new King, and desseignes to further him in his wars on that side the
mountains. The Venetians likewise being freed of their former fear of the
other King, for the many oppositions they had made, and wrongs they had done
him, see no cause of distrust in this Jews 12; and therefore they send their
Ambassadors, both to congratulate with him, and also to lay the foundation of
such an amity and peace, as the occurrence of their affairs should offer to
them both. But the Florentines on the other side, who in the former Kings time
were always in strict confederation with him against the other Italian Princes
and States, finding themselves not tied to Jews 12. in any such obligation of
friendship and correspondencie, as they were to his predecessor, by the
treaties of Florence and Asti; are now ready to fall from his alliance, and to
combine with the Duke of Millan: hoping of better help in the near and ready
supplies of Lombardie, then in the remote and slow succors of France.

APHORISM V.
AS Violentum non est mansiuum. Aver. Metap Arist. phy. l. 2 Auson. fol. 92
Sarisb. l. 8.


Nullum violentum est perpetuum.

Foelix criminibus nullus erit diu.

Origo tyranni iniquitas est, and de radice toxicata, mala and pestifera
germinat and pullulat arbor, securi qualibet succidenda.


in nature, so in government, nothing is permanent that is violent. It is
therefore hard to see a Tyrant old. For though for at time he uphold his State
by force and policy, Quippe ita se res habet, vt plerumque qui fortunam
mutaturus est, consilia corrumpat, efficiatque quod miserrimum est, vt quod
accidit, id etiam merito accidisse Vell. lib. 2.
videatur: and casus in culpam transeat.

Mentem scilicet tunc adimit hominibus diuira illa men's. Lip. pol. l. 1.



yet in the end divine justice confounds his practices, and infatuates his
counsels, to his own ruin and overthrow. Elephanti perpetua discordia cum
Dracone: Qui ipsum circumflexu facili Plin. not. hist l. 8. cap. 11.
ambit, nexuque nodi perstringit. Commoritur ea dimicatione, victusque
corruens, complexum elidit pondere.
For as in that mortal war between the great Elephant and poisonfull
Dragon, this one with his tail enclaspeth that others feet, making him fall,
and he in his fall bursteth himself, and crusheth that other in pieces: So
when Ambition and Envy meet as combattants in the heart of a man, he needs no
outward force to assail him: for the venomous tail of his Envy entangleth
the winged feet of his Ambition, making him fall, and in the fall to burst
with his own weight.

Lodowick Zforza, the poisoner of his Nephew, Usurper of Millan, and Incendiary
of all Italy, who had kindled the fire of all the late troubles in that
country; sees now the Duke of Orleans (his competitor for Millan) advanced to
the crown of France. He perceiues no possible means of atonement with him.
He knows by late experience, that all the States of Italy are not so
available for his safety against France, as that one of Venice. Yet, in
emulation of her greatness, that she should hold Pisa, and in envy that she
should reap the fruit of his long practices and travails, he ioynes at this
unseasonable and dangerous time with the Florentines against her, for the
recovery of that city. Foolishly presuming, that the war of Pisa would be
ended, before the French King could set forward: and vainly supposing that the
Venetians were too wise, ever to condescend that the French army should again
return into Italy, to satisfy any grudge or wrong of their own whatsoever:
A fault whereof himself had been more guilty then any other. Which ill
grounded deliberation of his, opened the floudgates to all his misfortunes,
with the stream whereof he was afterward carried prisoner into France, and
there died a most miserable exile.

APHORISM VI.
THe Zforzarsicon altrui spesa, far la strada a quanto egli con speranza haueua
Por. in Guic
disegnato.

Proinde arriperent vacui occupatos, integri fessos: dum alij Vespasianum, alij
Tacit. hist. 4.
Vitellium foueant, patere locum aduersus vtrumque.

Prius agitato and turbato stagno, sic capiunt anguillas. Aristoph. Sal. de
rep. or Io. bell. Iu. l. 5


It a defessos and exangues, praedae futuros.

Hostium dissensionem lucrum sibi esse sentientes.

Graecorumque dissensio, causa a Philippi incrementi and potentiae. Plutar.
Alex. Alci. em. 125


Dum saeuis ruerent in mutua vulnera telis

Vngue leaena ferox, dente timendus aper,

Accurrit vultur spectatum, and prandia captat,

Gloria victoris praeda futura sua est.


Frogge and the Mouse were better take up their quarrel, then that the Kite
should be their vmpire. For it has been a practice as old as since Philip of
Macedo, to nourish war between two neighbor Princes, to the weakening one of
another, that the third, a stronger, might take his advantage, and seize upon
both. (...). i. Mutantes inimiciti. is Herodot.
and odia in concordiam.

Sic Gnosii Gortinijque inito inter se foedere, and omnia communi consilio
agentes. Polyb. l. 4. Joseph.


Sic Iudaei visis Titi castris in monte Oliuarum, in vnum ordinem coegere qui
antea trifariam diuisi: and licet bello intestino sanguis per portas Jerusalem
efflueret, contra Romanos tamen quasi vnus vir.

Eaque in re par est imitari Cretenses, qui crebris seditionibus bellisque
ciuilibus exagitati, extrinsecus aduentantibus hostibus, pacem ac societatem
coiuerunt: (Hinc Plut. de frat. amor.
verbum Syncretismus.)


It is therefore a prudent deliberation in the weaker (having smoaked his
drift) to compound their difference between themselves, and prevent the
practisers desseigned plot.

Sharp wars are between the Orsini and Colonnesi, both whose States confine
upon the Church. Many towns and castles are taken on both sides: it comes to a
day of battle: many of them are slain: their enseignes lost: the rest put to
rout: and Charles Orsini taken prisoner. The Pope interposeth: offers to be
vmpire in their difference: deals with his wonted dissimulation and
duplicitie, meaning to set them further out. The Orsini renew their forces: set
down before Columbara a strong town of the enemy: the Colonnesi come to the
succors. Here, before one blow given they call into serious consideration the
Popes double dealing: how he had first animated the one side, and then set on
the other: giving foment to the war and encouragement to the sides, with a
purpose when they were both well wasted, to surprise both. Hereupon they come
to a parley, and conclude an honorable and a profitable peace for both parties.

APHORISM VII.
SVch Fortuna omnipotens, and ineluctabile fatum. Virg. Aen. 8 Mac. dis. l. 2.


Solent quidem fata suis vti medijs.

None cosa piu difficile a schifare, che il fato: nissun' rimedio e di hastanza
contra Por. in Guic.
i mali determinati.

Quae fato manent, quamuis significata, non vitantur. Tacit. hist. 1.


Certa si decreta sors est, quid cauere proderit? Aus. fol. 92. Mac. disc. l. 2.


Ne gli animi acciecati dall' immoderata cupiditate, la Prudenza soffocata
dalla temerita, non ha part alcuna.

Nec declinari transcendique posse agmina fati and volumina. Gell. l. 6. c. 2.
Id. lb.



is the force of Fate, as it can and will effect it ends, without any
assistance, against all resistance. Yet commonly it works not alone, it is
attended with second and subalterne causes, concurring in the party himself
whose ruin is destined. Ingenia tamen mentium nostrarum perinde sunt fato
obnoxia, vt proprietas eorum est ipsa qualitas: est enim quasi fatale and
consequens, vt mala ingenia peccatis and erroribus non vacent.

Praeualebant iam fata consilijs, omnemque animi eius aciem praestrinxerant.
Gell. l. 2.


Sieve dolo, seu iam Troiae sis fata'ferebant. Virg. Aen. 2 Oui. Pon. l. 4


Creed mihi, miseros prudentia prima reliquit,

Et sensus cum re consiliumque fugit.


For, his counsels and actions always change with his fortunes, and make the
way to his downe-fall.

Never was Prince more secret and cautelous in his practices, never any less
ouuert and more fained in his amities then Zforza: never had he more need then
now of that wary proceeding, nor greater reason to keep good quarter and
correspondencie with the Venetians, at least not to sharpen or exasperate them
with contumelies. Yet, contrary to his own nature, and old wont, he breathes
out many virulent opprobrious speeches, hebraues them with many and imperious
threats: he denies their soldiers passage through the Parmesan country: he
causes the Emperor to dismiss their Ambassadors: he sends their enemies (the
Florentines) three hundred crossebowes on horseback: he ioynes with them in
the charge of entertaining three hundred men at arms: he lends them money at
several times, to the sum of three hundred thousand Ducats and upwards: and
offers more aid, as they shall have need. This distraction from Venice, and
open profession of opposition against her, hastened his deserved and destined
overthrow.

APHORISM VIII.
THe 1 Monarch first propounds honor: then the public good: and lastly
proprietary interest and profit. Non didicit mouere puellas tibia. Quaestui
solo seruimus, non lactamur Aristain. l. 1. ep. 14.
cantilenis.

Ciuitati principatum obtinenti, nihil non honestum quod utile sit. Thucyd. l.
6. Hor. ep. l. 1.


Ociues ciues, quaerenda pecunia primum est,

Virtus post nummos.

Priuatam vtilitatem bono publico anteponunt.

Sogliono communemente piu ne gli huomini senza comparazione, gli stimoli Cic.
off. l. 3. Guicci. l. 13.
dell' interesse proprio, che il rispetto del benefizio commune.

Vulgus amicitias vtilitate probat. Ovid.



But the popular State evermore inuerteth this order: For it has private gain
in the first intention, the common good in the second, and honor in the last.
Which diversity of proceeding arises, not out of the different forms of their
government, but out of their different natures that govern. So great odds
there is between a Prince and a Citizen. Caeteris mortalibus in eo stare
consilia, quid sibi conducere putent: Principum diuersam esse sortem, quibus
praecipua rerum ad famam dirigenda. Tacit. An. 4.


Tot tantorumque bonorum and munerum quae dij largiuntur, nulius est fructus
aut Plut. ad imperit. ducem.
vsus rectus, sine lege, iure, and Principe. Ius, finis est legis: Lex, opus
est Principis: Princeps autem imago dci omnia administrantis.

Gloriam and honorem and imperium bonus and ignauus aeque sibi exoptant. Si
bonus Salust. Call.
vera nititur: sed ignauus quia bonae arts desunt, dolis atque fallacijs
contendit.

Nec tibi quid liceat, sed quid fecisse decebit Claudian. ad Theodo.


Occurrat, mentemque domet respectus honesti.

Retp. causa qui non id facit potius, quam sui quaesti, animus haud induci
potest Plaut. Mer.
cum esse ciuem and fidelem and bonum, sed legirupam.




Quarrels had been long militant and on foot, between the two States of
Venice and Genoa. For, besides their ancient emulation and grudge, the Genowese
were also of late grown jealous of the Venetians greatness and neighborhood,
if they should get Pisa into their peaceable possession; and therefore desired
nothing more then to stop her course in that purchase. Yet are they content
that the Venetian shipping employed in that service, should have harbor and
relief upon the coast of Genoa, paying well for it; and their Merchants
traffic and commerce with them, for such commodities as they need, because
many private citizens had benefit thereby.

APHORISM IX.
THe In ventre mollis tenuisque cutis Crocodilo: ideo sevt territi mergunt
Delphini, subeuntesque aluum illa secant spina. Plin. not. hist l. 8. cap. 25.
Prob. de Iph Thucyd. de Themist. Suet. de Caes. Bot. de Scip. e Plutarch. Am.
Plu phoc Thucyd. l. 3.



Dolphin finding himself unable to hurt the Crocodile, by reason of his hard
scales which no weapon can pierce, diueth under him, and with his sharp finne
strikes him into the belly being soft and tender, and so kills him. Nusquam
culpa male rem gessit, semper consilio vicit.

De instantibus atque improuisis vere, and de futuris calli d^ssime
conijciebat.

In obeundis expeditionibus, dubium cautior, an prudentior.

Essendo tassato di non esser molto pugnace, rispose: Che la sua Madre l'haueua
generato, non soldato ma Capitano.

La Prudence doit conduire and manier la force.

Plerumque quae secundum rationem hominibus prospera eueniunt, stabiliora sunt
quam quae praeter opinionem.


What Nature has taught the creature, Experience has taught man: To strike
the enemy where he may be most hurt, and leave things impossible unattempted.
For Prudence is of force, where force preuailes not. Parendo potius quam
imperia Ducum sciscitando res militaris continetur.

Diuisa inter Duces Militesque munia: His arma and manus sint, illis consilium
and Tac. an. l. 1. Tac. an. l. 1.
virtutis suae specimen relinquant.

Militem priuatum non solum debere esse (...), sed and (...): i. Non solum
volentem ad subeundum, sed and promptum ad parendum. Xenoph. Cyripaed. l. 2.
Virg. Aen. 1.


-- Tuus o Regina quod optes

Explorare labor, mihi iussa capessere fas est.

Tam nescire quaedam milites quam scire oportet; ita se Ducum authoritas, sic
Tacit. hist. 1.
rigor disciplinae habet: si vbi iubeantur, quaerere singulis liceat, pereunte
obsequio etiam imperium intercidit.


And therefore Direction is left to the Commander, Execution to the soldier:
who is not to ask why, but to do what he is commanded.

The Florentine General sets down before Casina, leuels the ground, razeth
the impeachments, and makes show as if he would take the place, and so march
directly to Pisa. The enemy expects no less, and prepares to receive him. But
he, considering the obstinate resolution of the Pisans, their valor by long
practice in war, the great forces of the Venetians joined with them, and the
strength of their works and fortifications about that place, holds it
impregnable. He resolves rather with time to wear them out, and with stopping
their succors to distress them, then by hazard of fight to force them.
Therefore he suddenly rises from before Casina, marches over the hills on the
right side the river Arno, to impeach all passages by land that way. He
encampes before Buti Castle, and takes it: he builds a fort upon the mountain
S. John della Vena: and another upon Pietra Dolorosa. He brings under
contribution all the Val-di Calci. He takes by composition the fort which the
Pisans had lately built upon Vico: and shortly after Vicopisano it self: and
lastly lays siege to Verrucola. In all which important services, not so much
his soldiers readiness in execution, as his own prudence in direction was
remarqueable.

APHORISM X.
THe Insidiantur temporibus aliena appetentes.

Prosperis tuis rebus certant ad obsequium, fortunam aduersam omnes ex aequo
Lip. pol. l. 4. Tacit. hist. l. 2
detractant,

(...). Ruente quercu, ligna quiuis colligit. Schol. in Th.


Quo vtilitas vexillum suum praetulit and explicuit, illuc eunt. Lip. pol. l.
4. Tacit. hist. 4.


Postulabant, non vt assequerentur, sed causam seditioni.

Crescit interea Roma Albaeruinis. Mac. e Liui.


Sic Serpens Serpentem edit vt Draco fiat. Adag.



country Cormorant makes his advantage of his poor neighbors distress, and
raises the market as he sees his need. So a covetous Prince will not afford
one barley corn of his assistance, at a less rate then one of the fairest
gemmes in his neighbors Crown. A price so high, and his necessity so great,
as he can neither with his honor grant, nor with his safety deny. Postulauit
Alcibiades quae adeo modam supergrederentur, vt per Athenienses (etsi
ingentibus sane postulatis acquiescerent) staret, quo minus conueniretur.
Thucyd. l. 8.


Ah nimium quod amice petis, moderatius opta, Ovid.


Et voti quaeso contrahe vela tui.

Iustam rem and facilem esse oratam a vobis volo, Plaut. Amph


Nam just a justice iustus sum orator datus.


But in so desastrous a Dilemma as this, he is rather to stake all his fortunes
upon one chance of hazardous battle, then to share with so covetous,
ambitious, and false afriend.

Pope Alexander desires to advance his son Caesar Borgia to temporal States,
being now resolved to renounce hs Cardinals hat: he sees the great distress of
Frederick king of Naples, if he should forsake him, and combine against him
with France: which he threatens to do, unless he will grant his daughter in
marriage to his son Caesar Borgia, and the Principality of Taranto to her
Dower: presuming, if Borgia (of a high spirit and great reach) were once Lord
of so important a member of that Realm, he might easily with his own forces,
and pretensions of the Church, drive his father in law out, being slenderly
provided of men, worse of money, and having many of the Barons ill affected,
and apt to rebel against him. Frederick discouers the metch, and sees the
mischief, which way soever he takes: therefore chooses rather to reject the
offer, and stand to the hazard, then by his own act to be accessory to his
own destruction.

APHORISM XI.
IN morality, it is a greater vice to commit a wickedness, then to omit the
doing of a virtuous act: So in martial government, it is worse for the
soldier to do what he is forbidden in his own camp, then not to do what he
is commanded upon the enemy: For this only bereaues him of some fair
advantage; but that lays himself open to all ambush and defeat. (...).

Velle, vereri, obedire, boni militis munia. Thucyd. l. 3.


Ne locum deserant, ne ordines turbent milites. Veget. l. 9. Idem. l. 2. Lip
pol. l. 5.


Ne vltra quam expedit, aut conglobent agmen, aut laxent.

Custodiendi milites intra limits, aliter soluitur militia tua, immo perit.

Omnibus imperij neruis, ad reuocandam pristinae disciplinam militiae, debes
inniti. Valor. l. 2.


Remedium seueritate quaesitum est, idque vsu salubre and misericordia melius
apparuit: quippe pauciores illa castra deseruere, quam ea in quibus
ignoscebatur. Tacit. an. 13.


Sic Pactium primipilum, tenere se munimentis and maiores copias operiri
iussum, rupto imperio pugnantem; Corbulo increpitum Pactium, and praefectos,
militesque Tacit. an. 13.
tendere omnes extra vallum iussit; Nec nisi precibus vniuersi exercitus
exsoluti sunt.

(...). i. Periculum subire instructo ordine. Xen. inst. Cyri.





After the Pisans victory at S. Regolo, their soldiers together with the
Venetian Estradiots range at pleasure up and down the country, in great
troops, and greater carelessness and disorder: I hey conform not themselves
to discipline, nor command of their Captains. Paul Vitelli General of the
Florentine forces espies the advantage: lies in ambush near Casina: sets
suddenly upon the Venetians, led by Marco Martinengo: puts them to flight, and
kills many of the Estradiors, with John Gradenigo Leader of their men at arms.
He takes prisoner Franco a commander of the Estradiots, and a hundred horse
besides.

APHORISM XII.
HOpe L'esperance demeure la derniere en la boette de la vie human. Am. Plu.
Cat Cato. in Plu.


Spes quae magna sunt, pusilla facit; quae pusilla, prorsus nulla.

Thales sciscitatus quid maxim esset commune omnibus? Spes, respondit: hanc
Stobae. Sermon
enim etiam illi habent, qui aliud nihil.

Spes nihil aliud quam vigilantium somnium. Plato.



is in the mind of man, as is the vital spirit in his body: the first that
possesses, and last that leaves the heart. But hope fastened upon no other
ground but will, is like the Mushromme, which starteth up in a night, and only
of all other Plants growing without root, is easily blown away, and
perishes. Nec quicquam potest esse diuturnum, cui non subit ratio. Vellei. l.
2. Curt. l. 4.


Haec talia velut repent fagitata deficiunt.

Spesso e proprio de gli Huomini, farsi facile con la voglia and con la
speranza, Por. in. Guic.
quello che con la ragione cognoscono esser difficile.

-- Che' l Miser suole Ariost. Ca. 1.


Dar facil credenza a quel che vuole.

Nous embrassons volunteers l'esperance, quand ell' est conformee a nos desirs.
Am. Plutar. Ovid. epist.


Alternant spesque timorque fidem.

Cum fallax vbi libet, tum in bello fallacissima spes est. Petr. dia. 12.
Piaut. Rud.


Nam multa praeter spem scio multis bona euenisse: S. at ego etiam qui
sperauerint spem decepisse multos.


So do the actions of men, built upon this light sand and loose hold of wilful
hope. Because it makes that seem easy and feasible to the eye of their
imagination, which reason and the event shows to be most difficult and
dangerous.

The soldiers in Pisa have a great desire to surprise and raze the fort built
lately upon Pietra Dolorosa; although it was strengthened round about with the
Florentine forces, and they under the command of Vitelli, a prudent and
vigilant Chieftaine: yet they hold the enterprise easy, if the attempt be
sudden and secretly carried. To this purpose they present themselves before
the place, early in the morning ere it was yet day; with two hundred light
horse, and some foot, (by report four hundred. They find greater resistance,
and the place better fortified, then they expected. They discover Vitelli upon
the hills, with one part of the army coming to their succors. They retire
toward Pisa. They are met in the way by Vitellozzo, and followed at the heels
by Vitelli. Thus, hemmed in on both sides, they are broken, many horses lost,
and most of the foot cut in pieces.

APHORISM XIII.
STatesmen must not always be fixed in one Center of resolution, but moved
with the turning Sphaere of their Commonweal: carried always to that point
of the circle in their present occurrents, wherein their public profit and
safety chiefly consists. Stare omnes debemus tanquam in aliquo orb reip. Qui
cum versatur, eam deligere partem debemus, ad quam nos illius vtilitas,
salusque conuertit. Cic. pro Pla.


Nouis ex rebus aucti, tuta and praesentia, quam vetera and periculosa mallent.
Tacit. An. 1.


Ad consilium de rep. dandum, optimum est nosse remp. Cic. de or l. 2 Plut. de
Mor


Circa bonum Prudentia quadrupliciter se gerit; quum aut acquirit bona, aut
tuetur, aut adauget, aut prudenter vtitur. Hi prudentiae sunt canones, quibus
ad vtramque vtendum est fortunam.

(...). 1. Theognis.


Polypodis mentem versuti sum, sub omni

Qui visu praebet se similem lapidi.

(...). i. Sapiens Plut. de tran.
melior a optat, altera quoque expectat, vtrisque vtitur.

(...). i. Qui vtilia nouit, non qui multa nouit, Aeschilus.
sapiens est.

Tu vires sine mente geris, mihi cura futuri est: Vlyss. A^aci. Ovid. Met.


Tu pugnare potes, pugnandi tempora mecum

Eligit Atrides: tutantum corpore prodes,

Nos animo: quantoque ratem qui temperat anteit

Remigis officium, quanto est dux milite mayor,

-- Tantum ego te supero.




The wars between the Florentines and Venetians in competition for the
Seignory of Pisa, had lasted long. In all this time the State of Florence never
sent any Ambassador to Venice, nor sought any accord. Partly, not to offend the
French King, their confederate: partly, because they found their own forces
weak, and therefore not likely to prevail in the motion. Charles 8. is now
dead, and their forces very great by Zforzas means: besides they understand by
the Duke of Ferrara and others, that the Venetians were willing to an accord,
if they were sought unto, and treated with as superiors not as equalles. The
State of Florence alters her former resolution: Makes choice of Guy-Antony
Vespucci and Barnardo Ruccellai, two honorable personages, to go thither in
Embassage. They are admitted to the presence of the Duke and Council, and have
audience. They excuse their sending no sooner, by the quality of the times, and
diverse accidents of let, in their State. They demand a final cessation from
war, and that the Venetians would relinquish the protection of Pisa. They are
answered: that if a course were taken, whereby the Pisans might enjoy their
liberty, they would make it appear to the world, that neither desire of
dominion, nor any other particular interest of their own, had caused them at
first to undertake that enterprise, or now to continue it longer. The
Florentines can get no other answer: they return: having thus far sounded
the Venetians resolution, that nothing but necessity could force them to quit
the protection of Pisa.

APHORISM XIIII.
WHile Come auuiene avn fiume, che mentre corre entiero and con tutta l'acqua
in Rag. Stat.
un Letto, fa con grandissimo impeto il suo corso, and spauenta le citta benche
benissimo murate: ma se si divide in piuparti, perde la forza, and e passato a
guazzo d'ogni vno. Cosi appunto le forze d'vn Essercito, etc.

Moltiplicandosi la forza and virtue de'Motori, si fa il Moto maggiore. Par. l.
2. dis. 5 Tac. de Mili. Apronij.



the river runs entire with all his water in one bed, his current is the
swifter, and his force the greater, and danteth the most hardy to adventure
passage: But being divided into several streams, it proves so slow and
shallow, as it may with safety, and at ease, be waded over. Satis validi si
simul incubuissent, per interuallum aduentantes, neque constantiam addiderant
turbatis, and pauore fugientium perterrebantur.

Nam Cecinna non simul cohortes, sed singulaes acciuerat: quae res in praelio
Tac. an. l. 17.
trepidationem auxit, cum dispersos nec vnquam validos, pauor fugientium
abriperet.

Vitellius dum disper git vires (inquit Tacitus) diede ad esser tagliati a
pezzi, and fatti prigioni i piu valorosi soldati suoi, and insino alla morte
risoluti a morir in Am. e Tacit.
seruizio suo. (infert Ammiratus.)

Virtus vnita fortior. Pro. Lat. Onup. de d^. Romans Imp. Tacit. Agric. Liui. l.
1.


Diuidens quod vnum validissimum erat, vtrumque reddidit imbecillius.

Dum singuli pugnant, vniuersi vincuntur.

Sic Horatius solus, vniuersis nequaquam par, capessit fugam vt hosts
segregaret.


So is it in the current of warlike actions: Power united is the stronger, and
the best means to weaken it, is by diuersion and distraction into several
services.

The Florentine army is strong in the territory of Pisa. The Venetians find
all the power they can make too weak to resist them, or to force them quit the
oppugnation of that city. They therefore entertain the Duke of Vrbine and
other Captains in pay, with five hundred men at arms, to assail some other
part of the Florentine State. They desseigne, that Peter Medici with Charles
Orsini, and Bartholomew Aluiano, with all their troops, shall give upon
another quarter. They earnestly labor John Bentiuoglio, to break in upon them
on that side toward Bologna: and importune them of Siena, to grant passage to
their forces. To the intent, that begirting the enemy thus on all sides, they
might force him to withdraw some of that power from the oppugnation of Pisa,
and employ it to the defense of other places, that they mean while might set
upon the rest of the army; which now (thus united) was far too strong for
them.

APHORISM XV.
TO Multitudo omnis sicut natura maris, per se immobilis est; vt venti and
aurae cient, ita aut tranquillum aut procelle in vobis sunt: and causa atque
origo omnis Liui. l. 8.
furoris penes authors est, vos contagione insanitis.

Populi mobilem animum, and si se Ducem praebuisset, easdem illas adulationes
pro Vespasiano fore. Tac. hist. l. 3.



nourish faction between officers in a great household, or great men in a
Monarchy, is no ill policy; so it have his awful limits curbed in the
supreme power; but in a free State it is very dangerous: because in such a
government, great men of factious emulation, are like strong (but contrary)
winds; and the multitude is like the sea (immovable of it self) but stirred
to fury and rage by others motion. Nobilium factiones trahunt ad se, and in
parts, vniuer sum populum. Arist. pol. l. 2. Id. pol. l. 5. Lucan. l. 1. Idem
eode^. Tacit. an. l. 1. Tacit. an. 1.


Sunt dissipandae magistratuum, and potentium factiones.

Alta sedent ciuilis vulnera dextrae.

Vsque adeo miserum est civilly vincere bello.

Nec aliud discordantis patriae remedium fuisse, quam vt ab vno regeretur.

Sic Augustus, cuncta discordijs ciuilibus fessa, nomine Principis sub imperium
accepit.

Sulla quod exiguum restahat sanguinis vrbi -- hausit. Lucan. l. 2.


Neque alius solet esse discordiarum exitus inter claros and potentes viros,
nisi aut vniuersus interitus, aut victoris dominatus ad regnum. Cic. de arusp



The effect therefore of such factions in such States, is either a general
dissipation of the whole, or a particular usurpation of the victor.

There is great discord in Siena between Pandolpho Petrucci on the one side,
and Nicholas Borghesi with the family Belanti on the other. These would have
passage granted through their State, to the Duke of Vrbine and his forces,
which came on the Venetians behalf to make war upon Florence. The greater
part of the citizens bandie on this party, being drawn by their dependence on
these Noblemen, and by their inueterate hatred to the Florentines. Petrucci
withstands them with stronger forces of reason, but weaker power of partisans
and adherents. He sends secretly for his friends and followers out of the
country: he procures the Florentines to send three hundred men at arms, and a
thousand foot to Poggibionsi, a place of theirs upon the frontiers of Siena.
With the reputation of these forces, and assistance of his friends in the
city, he forces his opposites to condescend to a peace with Florence for five
years. By this accord being grown more powerful, he kills Borghesi,
terrifieth the rest, and assures himself in the tyrannous usurpation of Siena.

APHORISM XVI.
AS Passio recipitur, non tam per conditionem agentis, quam dispositionem
patientis. Canon Log.


Receptiuum non recipit per modum imprimentis, sed per modum receptiuitatis.
Scal. ex. 16.



we feel more sensible comfort of the Suns heat when we are cold: So, the
greater our extremity is in any danger, the greater we hold the power by which
we are relieved: Eaedem stellae non vsquequaque pruinas aut calores cient, sed
mutant and variant, tempestatesque eodem in tempore alibi placidas alibi
violent as mouent: Gell. l. 14. c. 1.
Cur non euentu quoque rerum ac negotiorum, alia efficient in Chaldaeis, alia
in Getulis, alia apud Danubium, alia apud Nilum?

Et casus imprudentiae succurrit, vt pictori quondam equum pingenti, cum ex
taedio spongia in opus impacta esset, quod ars imitari non potuerat, casus
expressit. Bod. rep. 4.


Sic ipsa dimicationis hora, resolutus repent Rhenus, cum transitur as ad
Antonium copias Barbarorum inhibuisset, mira foelicitate Domitianum absentem
Suet. in Do.
victorem fecit.

Victoriam illi praelio error dedit.

Centum doctum hominum consilia, sola haec deuincit dea. (Fortuna.) Flor. l. 4.
Plaut. Plato.


(...). Ars militaris plurimum a fortuna dependet.

Existimo olim Maximo, Marcello, Scipioni, Mario, and caeteris magnis
Imperatoribus, non solum propter virtutem, sed etiam propter fortunam, saepius
imperia Cic. pro leg. Manil.
mandata atque exercitus esse commissos.


attributing that to fortune and miracle, which is in nature. -- Iddio Tasso.
cant. 9


Ha sotto i piediil fato, e la natura,

Ministri humili, e'l moto, e che'l misura.

Prouidentia omnia inferiora reguntur. Fici. in Plat.


Non haec sine numine Diuum -- eueniunt. Virg. Aen. 2. Vir. Aen. l. 12


Non haec humanis opibus, non art magistro

Proueniunt, mayor agit Deus.

-- Deum namque ire per omnes Virg. geor. 4.


Terrasque tractusque maris, coelumque profundum.

Vt hominum membra, mente ipsa and voluntate mouentur: Sic numine Deorum Cic.
not. Deor. l. 3.
omnia finguntur, mouentur, atque mutantur.


Yet is it most true, that all such operations (though natural) are guided and
disposed by a supernatural providence, which prepares and disposes the
Object to the present Influence.

Peter and Julian Medici take the Borrough of Marradi, a town belonging to the
Florentine State, seated upon the Appennine, near Romagna. They encampe before
the rock Castiglone, standing right over the town: a piece by situation
impregnable; yet they are in hope presently to carry it for want of water,
whereof they within had none at all, by reason of the height of the place, and
hardness of the flint it stood upon. They are in terms to render; when
suddenly there falls such wonderful store of rain, as all the cisternes and
vessels they have are filled. The assailants disappointed of their hopes by
this sudden accident, and now in despair to carry the place, rise up from
the siege, and depart. On the other side that State, toward the nether sea,
falls out another strange accident. Paul Vitelli sets down before Librafatta,
plants his artillery: makes a breach so assaultable, as he doubts not the next
morning to carry the town. The same night, by chance falls down an arch of
the wall, which filled the breach, and raised the rampart two else higher then
it was before. So as, after three days trial to get it by Scalada, and much
hurt received in his army by a piece from the town, he despaires of success,
and is upon rising. When suddenly a shot made at randon into the town,
dismounts that Piece, and kills the Cannonier; wherepon the besieged call a
parley, and yield.

APHORISM XVII.
THe La Virtue n'a iamais son luster, s'elle n'est pas combattue: and l'homme ne
se monstre iamais vertueux, si non alors qu'il est picque d'honeste ambition,
pour fair de beaux and grands exploits, and tousiours pour l'vtilite publigue.
Bod. rep. l. 4.


Les partialitez que tu nous reproaches sont vtiles au public: Car nous
debatons a qui mieux, pour vaincre son ennemi, en mieux faisant. Bod. rep. l. 5.



Sun shines brightest through a vapor dispersed, and virtue shows her best
luster upon an encounter. Men therefore that would stand before others in
glory, must strive to break through the mistie clouds of all passions and
perturbations, that their virtue may shine above others in worth. Such
contention as this, (to be best) is the whetstone and spur to courage and
wel-deseruing. Semper ita euenit, vt sint inter collegas aemulationes: Quae
deponendae sunt, aut saltem seponendae, Aristidis and Themistoclis exemplo.
Lip. an. l. 3.


Julius Classicianus Suetonio discors, bonum publicum priuatis simultatibus
impediebat. Tacit. hi. l. 14


Periculosa cosa e l'inuidiosa distribuzione della gratia, and dello
sproportionato honor. Rag. Stat. l. 3


Sic ego torrentem qua nil obstabat eunti, Ovid. Met.


Lenius and modico strepitu decurrere vidi:

At quacunque trabes obiectaque saxa tenebant,

Spumeus and feruens, and ab obice saeuior ibat.

Aemulatio quae ex contentione procedit quis eorum sit mayor, (and praecedentia
vocatur) inter Duces exitiabilis, maximisque negotijs nihil magis nocet.
Ammirat. l. 2


Ex discordia Consulum mala quaeque in administratione rerum militarium
euenire, and prope ad vltimum discrimen suis and collegae certaminibus nuper
ventum. Liui. lib. 10.


Remedium Tiberij huic morbo, vt non pares, sed titulis and authoritate
differentes Ammirat. l. 2
mitterentur.


But an emulation to be first, is the Remora of all good service.

The Duke of Millan entertaines the Marquis of Mantoa and his men at arms: a
brave soldier, and renowned commander; whose worth and reputation justly
purchased in the wars, was likely to advance much his affairs in Pisa. He,
among other conditions, assures the Marquis in the word of a Prince, to make
him General of all his army, within three months after. The time is expired:
promise is not kept: because the Duke would not displace nor displease Galeazzo
da San-Seuerino, a man greater with him in favor then in desert, who strongly
opposed the Marquis, not able to endure a Cortiuall. The Marquis holds
himself wronged, his worth undervalued, and his service unrewarded. He leaves
the Duke (to the hinderance of that service) and resolves to return to the
Venetians pay, who greatly desired it, and at this time and in this affair of
Pisa, were Zforzas professed enemies.

APHORISM XVIII.
IT Sono inutili i consigli dilligenti and prudenti, quando l'essecuzione
proceed Por. in Guic.
con Negligenzia, and con Imprudenzia.


were better not to make laws against the abuses of the times, or corruption
of men's manners, then being made, and broken, not to put them in execution.
For, this makes every private man's offense, the sin of the public. Because,
to omit the punishment thereof, is to commit it. Neque e periculo Principis
fama clementiae affectanda. Tacit. hist. 2. Salust. Catil.


Nae ista mansuetudo and miser icordia illi in miseriam vertat.

Tales isti abscindendi: non tam vlciscendi causa, quam vt in praesens
sceleratos Cic. ad Brut.
ciues timore ab impuganda Patria deterreas, and in posterum documentum
statuas, ne quis talem amentiam velit imitari.

Supplicium de ijs sumendum: non tam vt ipsi pereant, quam vt alios pereundo
Seen. de ira.
deterreant.

Debitas poenas dabit: Lentum est dabit. Dat: hoc quoque lentum est: dedit.
Sen. Her fu. Plu. de Doll.


Seram post scelus veniam quaerebat.

Consulere securitati iusta vltione, and modicis remedijs primos motus
consedisse. Tac. Ann. 14.


Nisi vindices delicta, improbitatem adiuues. Seneca Sent Seneca Sent Adag.


Qui culpae ignoscit vni, suadet pluribus.

Est quaedam crudelis misericordia.


Wherefore, direction for suppressing a conspiracy, and punishing the offenders
according to law, is not only fruitless, but dangerous, when the execution
both of the one and the other proceeds not speedily: being misled by a
credulous negligence, and miscarried by a foolish lenity. For, there is a
cruelty in some kind of mercy, though there be no mercy in cruelty.

The favorers of Peter Medici had conspired the betraying of Bibiena, a castle
of much importance in the Casentine country: the Florentines have some
inckling hereof by a general buzze there was of some such plot, but more
particular and certain notice by letters of advice from Bologna. To prevent
this mischief, they send a governor thither, with directions to attach the
practisers, and assure the place. He apprehends many of them: and foolishly
trusting their protestations, sets them free again. He appoints no Guards at
the ports: and suffers them to be opened every morning, as early as they were
wont to be in times of no suspicion. Aluiano, who entertained the plot with the
conspirators in the town, and had daily intelligence from them, sends certain
horsemen, in the habit of Victuallers, to march before: they travail all
night, and come to the place, just at the opening of the port. They possess
themselves of it without any resistance: other troops of horse come presently
after, and give out that they were friends of Vitellies companies, (the
Florentine General:) the conspirators within the town seeing their friends
come, rise in arms, join with them, and make themselves masters of the place.

APHORISM XIX.
THe Dum festino omnia celeriter percurrere, tardior sum. Plat. rep. 7. Pro.
Gall. Pro. Ital.


Perdre l'haleine au milieu de la carriere.

Con tempo and con la paglia maturano le nespole.


furious courser breaks his wind, and bursteth himself in the midst of
his carreer: whereas the Snaile comes to the top of the hill in her due time
as well as the Eagle. With time and straw men ripen medlars, and their affairs
with leisure and means. Scito militibus cupidinem pugnandi conuenire: Duces
prudentia, consultando, cunctatione, saepius quam temeritate prodesse. Tac.
hist. l. 3.


Vnus homo nobis cunctando restituit rem. Cic. ex Enni. Com. e Liui. Tac. de
Sue. Paulino.


Non minus est Imperatoris, consilio superare, quam gladio.

Contator natura, vt cui cauta potius consilia cum ratione, quam prospera ex
casu placerent.

Non stimaua egli le parole altrui, dove n'andasse l'interesse publico and la
salute Boter. de fab Max. e Liuio
della Patria: nesi curaua che la cautela si chiamasse timidita, o la
considerazione tardanza, o la disciplina dappocaggine: Et voleua anzi esser
temuto dal sauio nemico, che lodato da'pazzi Cittadini.

Fabio Massimo aspettando con Pazienza, la buona occasion del combattere,
Lotti. auuert 406.
sosteneua le parole sconcie, che di lui si diceuano: Non rispondendo altro,
che haueua per piu vile, chi temeua i maledici, che chi fuggiua da' nemici:
Perch questo fuggiua da'fatti, and quello solamente dalle parole.

Fabius nouam de Hannibale victoriam commentus est, Non pugnare: vt qui Florus.
l. 2.
srangi virtute non poterat, mora comminueretur. Hinc illi Cognomen nouum and
reip. salutare, (Cunctator.)

Un capitano, che d'inclito e di saggio Ari. Cant. 51.


E di Magno, e d'inuitto il nome merta,

Non dico per ricchezza o per linaggio

Ma perch spesso habbia fortuna esperta:

Non si suol may fidarsi sul vantaggio

Che la vittoria si prometta certa:

Sta sempre in dubbio, ch'hauer debbia cosa

Da ripararsi il suo nemico ascosa


Wherefore he that will do athing well, must have patience to tarry till it may
be well done. For, it hurts as much to anticipate the occasion, as to
fore-slow it being offered: And to pluck her as fruit before she be ripe,
harmeth as much as to suffer her rotte: Men of hot spirits err in the first;
for scarce do they perceive the shadow of her, but they run to catch at it,
and thinking to take hold of the solid substance, embrace nothing but the
empty air. Whereas the wary and well advised Commander, holds it safer to
weary and wear out the enemy by cunctation and delay, then to put all to
hazard by have: In this is danger, in that a Fabian virtue.

Aluiano with the Florentine exiles are strong in the Casentine Province: For
besides Bibiena, they have taken in many other places. The Duke of Vrbine,
Charles Orsini, and other Leaders, with seven hundred horse, and six thousand
foot, are joined with him. The State of Florence calls hither Paul Vitelli
their General, from the service of Pisa, to oppose against these so great
forces, and prevent this more imminent danger. He is come: determines to follow
his old wont, of tyring and wearing out the enemy with time, considering that
the country was mountaynous, the Pesants ready to take every least advantage
upon them, and that Arezzo was assured with a strong Garrison, under the
government of Count Rinuccio: So as he need not fear any matter of great
import to be attempted by them, to whom it would be hard to stay, and and more
difficult to do any good by staying. And therefore he resolves not to put his
whole army and maine of those wars, upon one days trial. But he stoppes the
passages of the mountains, and other places of the country with his Guardes,
Sconces, Rentrenchments, and other fortifications. The enemy by this means is
brought into great extremity, and despaires of succors, or prevailing with
those he had. He steals away by whole troops: and in those places and
streights is stripped and slain, by the soldiers of Vitellis army, or the
pesants of the country.

APHORISM XX.
HE that gives life to the law, may give life forfaited by the law: he may
pardon the offense, though he cannot wipe off the guilt. But until a law be
abrogated by the same power it was established, he can neither disanull the
force, nor warrant the fact: Much less can man dispense with the laws divine,
or warrant and approve what they condemn. Wherefore the Sea of Rome where all
things are vendible, and nothing unlawful that is not unprofitable, dasheth
against this rock. For it binds and loses, gives and takes away,
inuesteth and again deuesteth, so it be for promotion and preferment: Divorces
without just cause, and dispensations against divine laws are granted, in case
the Grantee will pay well for the purchase. (...). Omnia venalia Nummis. Arist.
Rh. l. 2.


Aurea nunc vere sunt secula, plurimus auro Ovid.


Vaenit honos, auro conciliatur amor.

Haud facile emergunt quorum virtutibus obstat Iuuen. Sat. 3


Res angusta domi: sed Romae durior illis

Conatus. --

O essecrabil auarizia, o ingordo Ariost. ca^. 34


Fame d'hauere: io non mi merauiglio

Ch'ad alma vile, e d' altre macchie lorda,

Si facilmente dar possi di piglio.

Curia pauper ibus clausa est; dat census honores, Ovid. am. 3.


Inde grauis Iudex, inde seuerus Eques.

Quid satis est si Roma parum? Lucan. l. 5. Iuue. Sat. 14.


Vnde habeas quaer at nemo, sed oportet habere.

Quandoquidem inter nos (n. Romae) sanctissima diuitiarum -- maiestas. Iuuen.
Sat. 1.


Vrbem venalem, si emptorem inuenerit. Salust. Iug.


Cuidam in quiet ostensum -- Innocentium quartum apud summum Iudicem accusari,
quod Ecclesiam conuertisset in mensam nummulariorum. Mat. Paris.


Omne Papale negotium manus agunt. Idem. Bodin. l. 6.


Hadrianus Pontifex, non modo magistratus and imperia, sed etiam sacerdotia sub
hasta vaenire passus est.




Pope Alexander has promise from Jews 12. that he will effect the marriage
between Caesar Borgia and Ciarlotta, daughter to Frederick king of Naples, who
was brought up in the French Court. A match, to which both father and son
upon ambitious ends greedily aspired. Upon this hope Borgia comes into the
Consistory, makes suit to his father the Pope, and whole College of Cardinals,
that whereas he never had mind to any Ecclesiastical function, he might be
permitted to renounce his Hat and habit of Cardinallat. It is granted him. He
puts on in their presence a Secular robe; and of a Cardinal and Archbishop of
Valencia, becomes entitled Duke Valentinois, and soldier of the French king,
with command of one hundred Lances, and twenty thousand Frankes of yearly
entertainment. Again; the French king desires to be divorced from his lawful
wife, the sister of Charles 8. (she was crook-backed) and to be dispensed
withal for marying of Anne Duchess and heir of Bretagne (she had a great
estate.) The Sea of Rome grants both: provided that the King give the Pope
thirty thousand Ducats: help him to recover the absolute dominion of
Romagna: further the match between Borgia and Ciarlotta: and entertain him
with a yearly and honorable pension.

APHORISM XXI.
HE Atque adeo quam non sint retegenda illa quae Princeps vult esse tecta, in
Pasch. Leg. cap. 21.
ipsis priscarum fabularum inuolucris explicitum est: nam and Thamyris a Musis,
and Tiresias a Pallade excaecati sunt: Marsias ille hispidus and multibarbus ab
Apolline excoriatus, and Lini temeritas morte punita.

Alexander, cum arcanas quasdam liter as Haephestioni legisset, detractum
digito annulum ori eius admouit. Cassiod. l. 8.


Philippide domandato da Lisimacho Re; qual maggior fauore gli potesse fare,
perch cognoscesse quanto l' amaua: rispose, Che tu non mi communichi alcuno di
Remig. Flor. e Plutarch.
tuoi segreti.

Principes non aliter videri volunt, quam qua forma sese aspiciendos praebent.

Non salti il Cuor fuor delle Labbre ignudo, Pasch. Legate Ex Ammirat


Che mal puo ricuoprir Elmo o Scudo.

Scire volunt secreta domus, atque inde timeri. Iuuen. Sat. 3. Am. e Soph.


Gran silentio e gran pondo a sostenerlo.

Consiliarij arcani esse debent, nec tamen arcanorum scrutatores. Lip. pol. l.
3. Tacit. an. l. 3.


Abditos Principis sensus, and si quid occultius parat exquirere, anceps,
periculosum.


that propounds an affair to his inward friend, would be advised. He that
imparts a resolved business, would have it concealed. In the first case, the
Counselor must unlock his heart: in the other he must seal up his lips.
Digito compesce labellum:

Accusator erit qui verbum dixerit, hic est. Iuuen. Sat. 1.


Tiberius ex viginti consiliarijs vix duos aut tres incolumes praestitit. Suet.
in Tib. Idem. Plut. de curi.


Thrasyllum secretorum temere conscium, in mare praecipitare destinat.

Quae suauissima and pulcherrima habent reges, ea conspectui sunt exposita:
coenae, opes, beneficia: si vero arcani quid est, cave accesseris aut moueris.
(...).

Lingua fuit damno, lingua faciente loquaci, Ovid.


Qui color albus erat, nunc est contrarius albo.

-- Tanti tibi non sit opaci,

Omnis arena Tagi -- vt a magno semper timearis amico. Iuuen. Sat. 3.



For it is dangerous to be of a great man's counsel, and not to keep it.

Duke Valentinois is sent into France with a Cardinals hat, to George of
Amboise Archbishop of Rouen. He follows his fathers principles of craft and
subtlety: for, having likewise brought with him a Bull of dispensation for the
Kings marriage with the daughter and heir of Bretagne; he pretends to have
brought no such matter: hoping that the Kings desire to have it, would work
him the sooner and better to his proper ends, rather then the memory thereof,
when he had once got it. Only the Bishop of Septa, the Popes Nuntio in France,
knew the secret, and reueales it closely to the King. The King without any
farther urging to have it (being as he thought all one toward God, since it
was granted) presently consummates the marriage. Valentinois when he saw no
other remedy, delivers it, and shortly after causes the Nuntio, by whom it
came to light, to be poisoned.

APHORISM XXII.
THere is alaw of Nature, another of Society, a third of Arms, a fourth of
Nations, a fifth of State. And each of these in their order bridle and restrain
one another with certain cautions and prouisoes. For, though the arbitration
of a third man between two parties in difference, either comes not within
compass of those former laws, or else is permitted without limitation of
circumstance, yet the law of State allows it not, but with this restriction,
Never to refer any matter of great importance to one much mightier then thy
self; as doubtful of his indifferency, and fearful of his greatness. La
Natural ragione dalla civil, and la civil dalla Militare, and quella dalla
ragione delle Genti, and questa da quella dello Stato, non scapestratamente, ma
con alcuni Am. in Tacit. l. 11.
freni and ritegni si confina.

In niuna cosa piu si palesa quanto vaglia un Prencipe, che nelle proposte che
gli si fanno: nelle quale se non si sta accorto, si possono pigliare
grandissimi errori. Id. lib. 6.


Si ha a por mente a colui, il quale propone o consiglia alcuna cosa, se in
quel consiglio si tratta del pericolo del proponente, o del vtile and benefizio
di colui a chi si Idem ibid.
propone.

Regum Pactiones sunt (...).

Sobrius esto, and memineris diffidere. Dion. Halyc. Epichar. Xenoph. l. 3.


Minime debes ambigere, licet ad agendam causam tibi descendere (ait Cyrus:
(...); i. Sed quis Iudex? (inquit Armenius) Is cui potestas ex arbitrio suo te
tractandi, (respondet Cyrus.)

Hei mihi (inquit Vulpes Rubo) confugi ad te tanquam ad auxiliatorem, sed tu
Aesop. fa. 70
peius me tractasti: Heus tu (inquit Rubus) errasti, quae me apprehendere
voluisti, qui omnes apprchendere soleo.

Fratres duo, reges Thraciae, disceptationum suarum iudicem Philippum eligunt:
Qui more ingenij sui ad iudicium veluti ad bellum, inopinantibus fratribus,
instructo Iastm. l. 8.
exercitu supernenit, and regno vtrumque non iudicis more, sed fraud latronis
ac scelere, spoliauit.




The French King holding it needful to combine with the two enemie-States,
Venice and Florence, labors them both to set aside all quarrels concerning
Pisa, and to refer the matter to him. Florence holds his alliance necessary,
but remembers withal how his predecessor dealt with her about the same
business and town: and doubting like measure, will not refer the
transaction of the cause to him, except mean while the city be put in
deposito, into the hands of Paul Vitelli. The Venetians are likewise willing to
embrace his friendship, (if it were to no other end but to revenge themselves
of the wrongs offered by the Duke of Millan) but yet they peremptorily deny to
yield to his arbitration: affying better in the Duke of Ferrara for an
honorable end, and restitution of their expenses in the war; who had
undertaken (if both parts were so pleased) to compromit in that matter, and
take up the difference between them.

APHORISM XXIII.
A Facile inuenias baculum quo canem caedas.

An non vides hunc ansam quaerere, rescindendae irritandaeque pactionis? Pro.
Lat. Plaut. Salust. hist. 1 Ovid.


Secundis rebus labefactatis, quam formidatus antea est, tam contemnetur.

Nunc quia contraxit vultum fortuna, recedis,

Auxilio postquam scis opus esse tuo.


Staff is easily found to beat a dog: and a small quarrel will serve
against him, whose fortunes are in their ebb of declination. For, where there
is no fear of revenge, there is little conscience of offense: Nullum est
officium tam sanctum atque solenne, quod non auaritia comminuere Cic. pro Quint.
ac violare potest.

(...). Auaritia malorum caput. Appollinar. Pindar.


(...). Lucrum superat Sapientiam.

Auaritia, fidem, probitatem, caeter asque arts bonas subuertit: and ambitio
multos Salust. Cat.
mortales falsos fieri subegit.

-- Pereunt discrimine nullo Lucan. l. 3


Amissae leges, sed pars vilissima rerum

Certamen mouistis opes. --


Especially in the auaricious and greedy minded man, in whom many favors
received, are not so strong to make him sure unto thee, as one small request
refused, to cast thee off.

The King of Romans enters Burgundy in arms, in defense of his Son the
Archduke of Austria, against the French King. The Duke of Millan supplies him
with great sums of money, upon hope, that either that war would divert the
French from the enterprise of Italy, or else, if there were peace made between
them, that then himself should be comprised, as the Emperor had faithfully
promised him. After many motions and treaties, the King concludes a peace with
the Archduke who was likewise Duke of Burgundy, and capitulates to render him
all the towns he held of his in Artois. The Emperor likewise takes a Truce
with the King, for many months, without any comprisall of the Duke of Millan:
pretending a great displeasure against him, because he had not from time to
time satisfied his infinite and immoderate pressings for money.

APHORISM XXIIII.
THe Deum semper (...): inquit Plato. Sympos. l. 8. Lip. pol. l. 3. Plut. Symp.
l. 8.


Hic, non tam appenduntur, quam numerantur sententiae.

Lvcurgus Arithmeticam proportionem, vt popularem and turbae aptam, Lacedaemone
eiecit: Geometricam vero vt paucorum modesto imperio, and legitimo regno
conuenientem, introduxit: Quippe, illa numero aequale omnibus tribuit, haec
ratione, cuique id quod meretur: Non sort aut libra, sed discrimine virtutis,
aut vitij.

Communem se relationem de ear fieri non passuros, ne par honos in dispari
merito Liui. bell. Ma
esset.

Honores prout quisque aliquod sui specimen dederit: nequeijs qui excerta part
Thucyd. l. 2.
ciuium sunt, potius quam ex virtute.

(...). i. Quod placet vulgo, sapientibus displicet. Plut. de lib. Educ.


Que ego scio non probat Populus: Quae Populus probat ego nescio. Seneca. Plut.
de virt. Por. in Guic.


Chorus eius mayor est, meus melius concinit.


name of Equality truly understood, is one of the most just and profitable
things, that is in a State: namely, when it is taken in a Geometrical sense
and proportion. For as in matter of tax or imposition, the best leuy is not by
the pole, but according to every man's hability; and as in conferring of
dignities and offices, the best choice is according to every man's worth and
sufficiency for the place: So in the deliberation of State affairs and
decision of doubts of greatest consequence, the soundest judgment should have
the greatest stroke: and voices should be considered, not by the number, but by
the weight Il popolo piu si gouerna con la volonta, che con la ragione.

Il volgo ignorante ogni un riprende, Ari. Can. 28.


Eparla piu di quel, che meno intend.

Et quum in suffragijs dandis omnes sint equales, suo quisque commodo vacant,
Thucyd. l. 1.
ex quo nihil perfecti effici sueuit.

Mill hominum species, and rerum discolor vsus, Persius.


Velle suum cuique est, nee voto viuitur vno.

Tres mihi conuiue prope dissentire videntur, Hor. 2. ser. 2.


Poscentes vario multum diuersa palato.


But in free States, plurality of voices ouers ways the strongest and best
grounded reasons. And therefore this form of government cannot be so good, as
that of a Monarchy.

The French King seeks the amity and confederation of the Venetians, in his
war against Millan. He offers them Cremona, and Ghiaradadda, for their share
of the conquest. It is debated in Council whether to combine with him, or no.
Antony Grimany, a man of great authority among them, opineth for the
affirmative: proves the action to be lawful, in revenge of Zforzas
ingratitude to this State, and obstinate opposition in the cause of Pisa,
against it: proves it honorable, because the world might see that this
Commonwealth aims not at base and vulgar ends, but for the preservation of
her honor and reputation: to be expedient, that the repentance of him who had
wronged Venice so much, might be an example to others not to dare to provoke
her: to be profitable, by the accrewment of two so fa re Estates to the
Venetian dominion, as Cremona and Ghiaradadda: to be necessary for the
prevention of Zforzas plots and machinations against this State, in case the
French expedition went not forward: to be easy, by reason of the combination
of two so great powers, against one only Duke: And finally to be without
danger after the end of the wars, both by the general resistance the King
should find in all the Princes of Italy, (if he should attempt any further,)
and by the natural disposition of the French nation, a people apter to get,
then to hold what they have gotten. Marchione Treuisano a man of reputed virtue
and judgment, redargues what is said, and stands for the negative. His
reasons: that it is imprudence, not to moderate revenge (though upon never so
just cause) with maturity of reason and consideration of the public good: that
it is scandalous for Venice to call in a foreign Prince, who had lately
professed her self The deliverer of Italy from the French: that it is
dangerous to have a great King quietly possessed of Millan, being a State so
near their doors, when as having formerly but got Naples, remote from them
and less to be feared, as also farther distant from France, and harder to be
kept, yet Venice and almost all Christendom were forced through fear, to
enter into confederation against him. To be unprofitable; for in time of wars
they are nearest to be troubled, and in time of peace they must always be
suspicious, and stand upon their Guard, maintaining their Frontires at
excessive charges: that it is prejudicial to the State, for neither will the
Duchy of Millan long suffer the alienation of two so fair members thereof, as
Cremona and Ghiaradadda, neither will the Emperor and Dutch nation sit still,
who pretend them to be parcelles of the Imperial Jurisdiction. And to be
feared in conclusion, least the French and Emperor join both against them,
holding so much land as they do already, belonging to the house of Austria.
Therefore, it is neither wisdom, nor glory, nor profit, nor safety, to
purchase the sweet fruits of revenge with the manifest hazard of the whole
State: wherein they must either be masters of all, or losers of all: Which
whether be more likely, he referres to the L L. of the Senate. This opinion
maintained with these and other weighty reasons, and approved of the grauer and
wiser sort, was ouerswayed by number, and the contrary carried by voices
through hate and ambition.

APHORISM XXV.
GReat Non est vnius men's tantae molis capax. Tac. hist. l. 1. Velle. l. 12.
Comic. Grae


Magna negotia magnis adiutoribus egent.


affairs require many heads to advise, and many hands to effect. One brain is
not capable of so great a charge, one arm insufficient for so insupportable a
burden. Consultor ille sit tibi vir qui sapit,

-- Sapientis enim consilia sapientia.

Triplex nature a ingeniorum hominum: vnum per se intelligit; alterum, quum
Macc. princ. cap. 22.
fuerit ei demonstratum; tertium, quod ne admonitum quidem, nedum per se id
praestare potest. Primum illud maxim excellit: quod huic additur excellit
quidem: at quod tertium est prorsus inutile est.

Nemo fidelius dare potest consilium, quam qui id alteri suaderet, quod ipse si
in Salina. apud Plutar.
eodem loco esset facturus fuerit.

Dubitatur an praestabilior Princeps sapientissimus sine consilio; an stupidus
Bodin. l. 3.
prudentium Senatorum multitudine abundans. Sapientibus quidem neutrum horum
probatur.

Palladem Ioui decumbenti assidere: Sc. Senatum Principi adesse oportere. Idem.
fo. 303 Vir. Aen. 12.


Consulere, atque omnes metuentem expendere casus.

Oportet (Athenienses) eum qui boni aliquid facere nostrae ciuitati cupit,
primum vestras aures sanare: corruptae enim sunt, adeo falsa and muta and
quaeuis potius, Demost. orat
quam optima audire consueuistis.


A Prince therefore ought not to stand so stiff in his own opinion, though
grounded upon probable supposition, as not to yield to his faithful
Counsailors, upon more forcible and demonstratiue reasons. For, he that
refuses all counsel is worse then a beast: he that needs none, is more
then a man.

The Venetian Ambassadors treat of a league with the French: there is no
scruple but only this, They will not refer the cause of Pisa to his
Majesty. The King takes their diffidence in ill part. He doubts if he have
not this Tie, both upon them and the Florentines, that he shall be assured of
neither. He enclines rather to make peace with the Emperor, which treaty was
then on foot; and propounded, that the one should war upon Millan, and the
other upon Venice, at the same instant: He assures the Florentine Ambassadors,
that he will never conclude with Venice upon other conditions then he had
already offered. But Duke Valentinois, the Cardinal S. Peter in Vincola, and
Triultio, with others of his Council in this affair, advise the contrary, by
effectual, well grounded, and demonstratiue reasons. They allege that he
ought not refuse the Venetians, for fear to lose the Florentines, because
their power was greater in forces, and means fitter in nearness, to oppress
the Duke of Millan. Besides, this deliberation might cause the Duke to quit the
Florentines, and combine with Venice, whose forces conjoined, late experience
had showed at Taro, what effects they might work. And to lay any foundation of
assurance upon the Emperor Maximilian, were most dangerous of all. He had made
good proof at his last being in Italy, that his desseignes are greater in the
project, then either his prudence to color them, or his means to carry them:
and in case he should have success, it were deeply to be weighed, how
dangerous such a greatness would be, in a professed and perpetual enemy of
the Crown of France. The King persuaded with the weight of these reasons,
alters his mind, takes the wiser way, and concludes with Venice, without any
specification at all of the difference of Pisa.

APHORISM XXVI.
THose Citius venit periculum, cum contemnitur.

Inopinata magis premunt mala. Seneca.



dangers are least avoided, which are unknown or unexpected: Anima consilij,
Secretum.

Metallus aliquid militiae interrogatus, si inquit tunicam meam arcani mihi
Lip. pol. l. 5. Plu. de Grac.
consciam scirem, exutam in ignem abijcerem.

Number omnes nuntios palam audiri, omnia consilia cunctis praesentibus tractari,
Tacit. hist. 1.
ratio rerum aut occasionum velocitas patitur?

Primum, praecipuumque eorum quae ad foelicem exitum requiruntur, est silere.
Tacit. an. l. 3. Bod. l. 3. Liui. de exp. Scipionis. Plut. in Rom


Res periculi plena, in senatu decreta manare in vulgus.

Nemo omnium quo iretur, praeter C. Laelium, sciebat.

Conso, quem faciebant consiliorum Deum, Ara sub terra: quia plane arcanum
debeat esse and tectum consilium.

Antigonus, filio quem er at regni haeredem habiturus, vocem arcanam non
credidit: Plu. de Grac.
sed quaerenti quando castra essent moturi; Quid, inquit, metuis ne solus tu
non audias tubam?

Vestra clementia, reuocatis ad interior a maioribus, ea disponit quae non sunt
omnibus publicanda: de quibus adiurare etiam soletis, ne quis ante rem
completam, Capitol. ad Dioclesian.
quicquam vel audiat, vel intelligat.

Si come delle frutte, altre sono che si mangiano la State, and altre che si
serbon per il verno: cosi hisogna far delle cose segrete: scerre quelle che si
posson dire, da Am. de Secr.
quelle che insino a un certo tempo, s'hanno a tacere.


And those counsels are best carried, which the enemy sees in execution,
before he hears them by relation. None in the army must know to what service
scipio leads his troops, but only C. Laelius: nor is it fit, things
determined in Council, should be communicated, but to those without whom they
cannot be effected. For as Expedition is the life of Action: so is Secrefie of
Deliberation.

The league is concluded between the French king and the Venetians. The
Articles these: They to assail Millan on the one side, while the King wars
on the other: And to have Cremona and Ghiaradadda with all their territories,
for their share. The rest of the Duchy to remain to the King, and twenty
else breadth along the river of Adda. To defend reciprocally and mutually the
one the others part, and all the Terra ferma of Venice, even to the marshes.
This business is carried with such secrecy, as the Duke knew not of it for
many months, nor yet the Pope, who held good correspondencie with the King.
They supposed it had been a confederation defensive only, as at first it was
solemnly proclaimed in the Court of France, and city of Venice.

APHORISM XXVII.
IT is a manly virtue in a Prince, and a Manlian advice, to prepare for war
when he propounds for peace; and not to stay his provisions for the one, though
he be treating upon conditions for the other. Because otherwise he seems to
beg or buy his peace, and gets it not but at a high rate. Wherefore peace is
never to be treated with our armor off, or sword sheathed: nor to be
concluded, but under a buckler, and upon sure terms. Ostendite modo bellum,
pacem habebitis, videant vos paratos ad vim, ius ipsi remittent. Manl. apud
Plurarch. Tac. an. f. 231 Salust. hist. 1. Bod. rep. l. 5. Demades de Athen.
Plut.


Media pace incauti circumueniuntur.

Pacem optatis magis quam defenditis. Pacem sub clipeo parare.

Iamais sage Prince, ny bon Capitain, ne fit la paix desarme.

Intempestiuo belligerandi studio deditos, nunquam nisi atratos pacem
decernere.

-- Dices non esse ad bella fugaces

Qui pacem potuere pati. -- Lucan. l. 2.


Silent leges inter arma; nec se expectari iubent, cum ei qui expectare velit,
ante Cic. pro Mil.
iniusta poena luenda sit, quam iusta repetenda.

Nec cito perit ruina, qui ruinam timet. Semper enim metuendo sapiens vitat
Pont. de fort
malum.

Crocodilus terribilis est in fagaces, fugax contra in sequentes: It a quidam
si Plin. l. 8. c. 25
concedas ac metuas, tum ferociunt; si strenue contemnas and obsistas, statim
concedunt.




The Venetian forces are much weakened in the Casentine province. One thousand
five hundred horse have left the army at several times; besides many foot.
The Duke of Vrbine, Aluiano, Astorre Bagliano, Marcello the Venetian treasurer,
and Julian Medici, are forced to abandon Montalone and Vernia, two important
places, either for succors to come to them, or for their safe retreit in case
of necessity: they are retired into Bibiena, and there much distressed. The
State of Venice is at this very instant in treaty with Florence, for a full
and final composition of all differences between them. The award is referred
to the Duke of Ferrara, both concerning the cause of Pisa, as also all other
their quarrels and demands. Yet for all this, though the peace be in so good
forwardness, the Venetians foreslow not to prepare great supplies for their
Casentine business, which they send under the leading of the Count Petigliano,
to the succors of those distressed troops: not for any advancement of that
service, but to have better conditions in the accord.

APHORISM XXVIII.
IT Tam est difficile in omni vitae genere, sic te gerere, vt ne impingas.

Neque quis quam omnium libidini simul and vsuiparuit. Lip. an. l. 3. Salust.
Cat. Commin. l. 1


Memini regem Ludouicum mecum sic loqui: vt diceret, fieri aliquando vt operae
nauatae laudabiliter minus pretium sit, idque culpa eorum qui nauassent: dum
elati quadam confidentia, insolenter and proterue se gererent.

Potentia cautis quam acrioribus consilijs tutius habetur. Tacit. an. 11.


Sed Demea, hoc tu facito cum animo cogites; Terent. Adel


Quam vos facillime agitis, quam estis maxim

Potentes, dites, fortunati, nobiles,

Tammaxime vos aequo animo aequa noscere

Oportet, si vos vultis per hiberi probos.


is hard for a man, so warily to walk in any condition of charge or service,
as that he dash not his foot against the stone of offense: especially in that
of command, where he must use his authority sparingly that would keep it
long. Ciuitas rimandis offensis sagax.

Il ny a rien si dangereux en vne Armee, que quand un Chef outrecuidant se
Tacit. hist. 4. Am. Plut. Ag
veut gouuerner selon son sens, sans respecter ses compagnons.

Celuy qui se hausse trop, done occasion a ceux qui s'estiment autant que luy,
de Am. Plut. Gr
se liguer, and chercher a quelque pris que se soit, les moyens de le ietter
par terre.

Non si puo dar Precetto meglio, che di mozzar l'autorita d'vn Generale,
diuenuto troppo potente and orgoglioso. Rag. Stat.



Wherefore that General which binds not himself within the limits of his
commission, nor uses the advice of his Council of war, shall never want
secret enemies among these he has neglected, to urge his transgression, and
work his confusion.

Paul Vitelli the Florentine General, who had borne that office with great
reputation, and managed the wars with singular prudence and happy success:
having now the enemy cooped up in Bibiena, grows daily more imperious in his
command and dispatches, then was thought fit for his place, or was lawful by
his commission. He grants safe conduct to the Duke of Vrbine being sick, to
depart into Romagna, without the consent or priuiuity of the Florentine
Commissaries: under which protection Julian Medici escaped also away. The State
is persuaded, that Vrbine would rather have yielded up the place, with all his
forces, then have stayed in that extremity of sickness: great offense is
likewise taken, that Medici, a rebel to his country, had so escaped their
hands. Many of the Citizens favor the General, for his former good services,
and some, because they were his kinsmen. But the greater part, in affection to
Rinuccio, their old and faithful servant and soldier, urged his
transgression. Rinuccio himself, who had commanded in chief, till his defeat
at S. Regolo, and now not brooking a superior; as at first in envy of Vitellies
glory, he slacked to further his service in the Casentine business, so now in
desire of revenge, he helps to work his destruction. This was the beginning
of Vitellies fall.

APHORISM XXIX.
POpular Casus tantum aduer sos ducibus tribuunt: secundos fortunae suae.

Ad reprehendenda aliena dicta and facta ardet omnibus animus, vix satis
Probus. Salust. Cat.
apertum os, aut lingua prompta videtur.

Iniquissima haec bellorum conditio est, prospera omnes sibi vendicant; aduersa
Tacit. Agric.
vni imputantur.

Vulgus fingendi auidum. Tac. hi. f. 33. Seneca Sent. Hom. Od. H.


Ad tristem partem strenua est suspicio.

Quippe homines plaerique sumus (...). i. suspiciosi.

Hinc inde commentum and nota ars ducum, hostem ducem in suspicionem apud Ammi.
l. 21.
suos adducere.


States attribute good success in war or peace, to their own proper courage
and direction: what falls out cross, they lay to the Generalles fault and
imputation. Against whom, no man's tongue seems prompt enough, or mouth
sufficiently wide, to breathe out contumelious menaces. Ad summum gradum cum
claritatis veneris, consistes aegre, and cum descendas, Tacit. an. l. 5.
decides.

Cecidi ego: cadet qui sequitur. Laberius. Am. Plut. Gr


Ceux qui commencent a perdre leur credit en un estat, sont aisement
desarconnez.

Le Peuple abandonne en necessite ceux qui se sont le plus employe pour eux.
Idem Ibid. Demost.


(...): i. Dissolutio vtriusque.


Wherefore let him that stands charged with so great an account, take heed
that he make a good reckoning, and that his present actions wipe out all scores
of former iealousies and surmises: for if he be once in suspect, and after trip
never so little, it is impossible to keep him from falling.

Vitelli has the enemy straightly begirt in Bibiena. He requires a supply
from Florence of four thousand men, to carry the place, drive the enemy quite
out of the Casentine, and to make a final end of that war. The Citizens upon
former distaste of his proceedings, suspect his counsel, and reject his
demand. And because there was of late and accidentally some piece of good
service done, upon the straggling and disordered enemy, by the country Pesants,
without the presence of him, or assistance of his soldiers, the meaner sort of
the city detract from his worth, and deprave all his actions: attributing the
continuance of the war to his want of fidelity, and desire he had to hold
himself still great in that his command: laying that to his will which was not
in his power to alter.

APHORISM XXX.
EVery Vnicuique in art sua credendum.

Nauem agere ignarus nauis timet, abrotonum aegro Arist. Horat. ep. 2.


Non audet nisi qui didicit, dare; quod medicorum est

Promittunt medici: tractant fabrilia fabri.

Ne Suitor vltra crepidam. A dag.



man must have credit in the art he professes: but no power to persuade to a
business which we call into deliberation, and may concern his advantage in
particular. For the Architect and master of the works will always advise us
to build, though we neither have matter enough prepared, norpurse sufficiently
lined for such a purpose: because it is for his proper employment and benefit.
Fuit ei consuetudo, vt side iure, aut de negotijs tractaret, solos doctos and
disertos Lamp. de Seuero.
adhiberet: Si vero de re militari, milites veteres and senes benemeritos, and
locorum peritos, and bellorum ac castrorum.

Peritissimos Centurionum dissentientes, and si consulerentur vera dicturos,
intimi Tacit. hist. 3. fol. 76.
amicorum Vitellij arcuere: ita formatis Principis auribus, vt aspera quae
vtilia, etc.

Minime enim omnium bellum ex decretis procedit, sed ipsum ex se multa inuenit,
Thucid. l. 1.
and vt res sunt natae.

Consilium inueniunt multi, sed docti explicant.

Quinetiam in defendenda vrbe, ministerio alienissimorum vtuntur, sed consilio
Seen. in fine. Tac. hist. l. 3.
tamen intimorum.


So States must be advised and ouer-ruled by the soldier, in the manage of a
war; but he seldom admitted to the deliberation of undertaking it.

The Count Petigliano comes with his Venetian troops to Elci, a castle of the
Duchy of Vrbine, upon the Florentine confines: here he meets Charles Orsini,
and Peter Medici: for this place was appointed the Rendez-vous, of all their
forces, which were to pass the Appennine, to the succors of the besieged in
Bibiena. He finds the mountains laden with snow, and the passages so narrow
and dangerous, even in more seasonable times and favorable weather, as he
thought it a dangerous resolution to venture through: and besides, he sees the
enemy strong at the foot of the hills, to receive him upon great advantage.
He has direction and peremptory commandment from the Senate at Venice to
advance forward, yet in regard of those military considerations, he holds it
better to disobey the command, then to expose the whole army to an apparent
overthrow. He stirs not a foot farther.

APHORISM XXXI.
AN At qui inaequalem temperiem sunt sortiti, ita vt his aliud iecinoris
temperamentum sit, aliud ventris, aut alicuius eorum quae circa iecur sunt, ijs
diuer sum Gal. San. tue^ lib. 6.
est quod assumptu incundum est, ab eo quod cuique particulae est idoneum.


Award between States in difference, is like Physic ministered to a body,
wherein is a hot liver and a cold stomach: what helps the one, commonly
hurts the other: Neque veteranorum, neque possessorum gratiam tenuit: alteris
pelli se, alteris non pro spe meritorum tractari, querentibus. Suct. Octau.
fol. 91.


Vnde Bunas Atheniensis, quum controuersiam (inter Caydonios and Eleos) vtrique
ad eius arbitrium deferrent, conuenerat autem vt a manibus temperarent, donec
Eras. ex Xen.
ille de negotio pronunciasset; per fictas occasiones rem in longum distulit,
nec vnquam de lite voluit pronunciare.

In receptis arbitrijs nemo qui noluit obligatur. Bod. l. 3. Adag. 38. Virg.
Eglo.


Ne depugnes in alieno negotio.

Non nostrum inter vos tantas componere lites.


So this seldom contenteth any of the parties, and often displeases all.
Wherefore as these are careful, that there be strict cautions and obligations
for abiding the Award, so should he be well advised before he undertake the
charge. For it is better to sit still, then be employed in a business where a
man is in no hope of getting any thing to himself, but in danger of losing
both his pains, and his friends.

The Duke of Ferrara is chosen by the States of Venice and Florence, to
compromit between them in the cause of Pisa. He awardeth thus: The Florentines
to pay the Venetians one hundred and eighty thousand Ducats (of the eight
hundred thousand they auowed to have spent in that war) in twelve years, by
equal portions. The Venetians to call home all their forces from Pisa and
Bibiena. The Pisans to be pardoned of all former offenses, and to have free
liberty of traffic, both by land and by sea. The fortresses of Pisa, and
other places in that territory, which were in their possession at the day of
this Award, so to remain. To have free choice of their garrison soldiers, so
they were not persons suspect to the Florentines; and to be paid out of the
Entrada or revenue of Pisa. All the forts built by the Florentines in the Pisan
territory during these wars, to stand or be razed, at the choice of the
Pisans. The Pisans to elect their Podesta for civil causes. The Florentines to
appoint the Capitano for guard of the Citadel, and governing in causes
criminal; but not to judge in case of life, limme, or confiscation, without
such Assessors as the Duke should appoint. All moveable goods to be restored:
but the profits of them in this interim of the wars, not to be answerable,
nor the party accountable. In all other things, the right and jurisdiction
over them, to remain inviolable: and the Pisans enjoined to practice no new
matter, in prejudice of the Florentines. The Award thus made, is of the greater
part of the Venetians utterly disliked, because it seems to abandon the Pisans
to their former servitude. The Florentines repine to repay any part of that
money which was so unjustly spent against them, and merely upon an ambitious
end. And the Pisans they complain that they are betrayed into the hands of the
enemy, and bought and sold between them.

APHORISM XXXII.
THe friendship of Princes is often personal; of free States never: for they,
either upon some friendly enterview, or intercourse of kind letters, or
enterchange of good turns, or affinity of blood, do condole the loss,
congratulate the success, supply the wants, relieve the distresses, and
redress the wrongs one of another, through some bond of blood or affection.
Whereas free States perform none of those good offices, but for their own
ends: and they that receive them, are thankful no longer then while they are in
receiving. For nothing is shorter lived among them then the memory of benefits.
One ounce of supposed unkindness over weighs a pound of former friendship.
And, Not to continue to do them good, is to begin to do them wrong. Niuna cosa
epiu breue, niuna ha vita minore, che la memoria de benefizij.

Vilia quecunque prioribus annis, and sordet quicquid spectauimus olim. Por. in
Guic. Calphur. Erasm.


Sic Lynces: clarissime cernunt quae ante oculos, sed obliuio illis rei ab
oculis semotae.

Firmior offensarum quam beneficiorum, tenaciorque memoria. Petratch. Plut. f.
541.


Tempestate oborta sub arborem hanc confug it is, inter digrediendum frondes eius
stringitis. (Themistocles Atheniensibus.)

Si humeris quempiam in coelum subuexeris, and tandem minus molliter
deposueris, infensiorem tibi ex hoc, quam conciliatiorem ex altero fore. Adag.
Teut.





The Pisans had revolted from the Florentine obedience, and run into manifest
rebellion, without the encouragement or consent of Venice. This city, in their
greatest extremity undertook their protection: which howsoever it were upon
ends of her own, yet was it an action of acceptable welcome to them, and
meriting thankfulness at their hands. The necessity of the times, and her
present affairs, force her now at last to quit their defense: yet she leaves
them in far better terms then she found them, or they without her could
possibly have hoped. This notwithstanding, they complain of hard dealing,
think themselves betrayed, and vpbraid her of injustice: yea, and in greater
despite upon the first ouuerture of the Award, they discharge her garrisons
from the Citadel, and her guards from the gates, as persons suspected, and
hinderers of their liberty, and will not suffer them to stay one night in the
city.

APHORISM XXXIII.
A Man of noted credit, may pass with a lie, and set a current stamp upon
such false coin. But he that is notorious for his perfidious and double
dealing, is always abnoxious to this one inevitable plague, Never to be
believed, though he tell the truth. Saepe falso plorat quis -- vti mox Hor. ep.
f. 268


Nulla fides damnis verisque doloribus adsit.

Non si creed al bugiardo, se dice il vero, Pro. Ital.


Si creed al verace, benche bugia.

Vbi quis semel peier arit, ei credi postea, etiamsi per plures iuret Deos, non
conuenit. Cic. pro C. Rab.


Qui ont rompu leur foy, leurs compagnons mesmes a la fin, ne se fient en eux.
Am. Plu. Ant Am. e Tacit. hist. l. 4.


Tiberio raccommanda suoi Nipoti al Senato (and questo faceua da douero) ma
diceua ancora (fintamente) che voleua render il gouerno della rep. and che i
consoli o qualunque altro ne pigliasse la cura. Et con questi suoi modi di
fauellare, faceua si, che le cose ch'egli diceua da douero quantunque honest,
non gli erano credute.

Mendax hoc lucratur, vt cum vera dixerit ei non credatur. Laert. l. 5.


Nec semelirrisus, triuijs attollere curat Hor. 1. ep. 17


Fracto crure planum: licet illi plurima manet

Lachryma: per sanctum iur atus dicat Osyrim,

Credit: non ludo: crudeles tollite claudum:

Quere peregrinum, vicinia rauca reclamat.




The abandoned Pisans resolve to run any fortune, rather then yield
themselves to the Florentines, whom they had so highly offended. They of Genoa,
Lucca, and Siena, more apt to give ill counsel, then able to yield any good
comfort, encourage them in this obstinacy. Only the Duke of Millan, contrary
to his old wont, is become a father of peace; persuades them to a submission:
and undertakes to mediate a good end for them, with full remission of all
former forseitures. They will not hereunto be persuaded: but offer freely to
him the tender of their obedience, and absolute sovereignty of their city and
State. The Duke considers the condition of the times, the greatness of his
enemies, with the nearness of his troubles, and resuseth the offer. The
Florentines will by no means be persuaded but that he was the man that
encouraged them to this contumacie and obstinatenesse, though he protested and
swore the contrary.

APHORISM XXXIIII.
HE -- Et front politus Pers. Sat. 5.


Astutam vapido seruat sub pectore vulpem.

Ipse long aliter animo agitabat, tamen pro tempore benign respondit. Salu.
de lug Plut. in Lac. apopth. f 229


Sic Lysander versutus and plaeraque fraud miscens, veritatem aiebat nihilo
meliorem esse mendacio: sed vtriusque dignitatem and precium vsu definiri. (Hoc
autem perfidum nimis.)

Etiam qui ex illis (Principibus) Rhetores non sunt, figurate tamen logui Mur.
de Prin
sciunt.

Solere in praesentiarum, orationis suauitate mulcere eos a quibus suspicantur,
in Thucyd. l. 6.
exequendo autem, ea postea agere quae sibi conducant.


that is a temporizer and deceiuer himself, has not whereof to complain, if
he be deceived in that kind: and where is no just cause of complaint, there is
no true proof of injustice. Per fraudem and dolum regna euertuntur: Quidni
praeseruentur? Lip. pol. l. 4. Pro. Lat. Adag. graec. Bodi. rep. l. 5.


Fallere fallentem non est fraus. Cretisare cum Cretensi.

(...). Cum vulpe iunctum, pariter vulpinarier.

Si l'vn des ennemis soit departi de sa promise, and a trompe l'autre, il n'a
que plaindre, s'on luy rend la pareille: Ma pourtant, la parfidie ne se doit
venger, ni repeter, apres qu'on a traitte paix and accord ensemble.


Wherefore, because States are many times overthrown by fraud and deceit, they
hold it lawful to preserve them by the same means from a public and
professed enemy, and one that is a Master in the same faculty.

The French King offers the State of Florence, to join with her in the
recovery of Pisa, so soon as he shall have conquered Millan, if in this his
war she will aid him with five hundred men at arms for a whole year. The
Duke of Millan offers first to assist her with what forces she shall require,
for the reducing of that town under her obedience, if after the service done,
she will be bound to his defense with three hundred men at arms, and two
thousand foot. This State deliberates in Council, which offer to accept. That
of the King, was less certain; this of the Duke, more present: Yet if the
King had good success in his war against Millan, the danger was greater from
him then the other. It is true, the Duke had stuck closest to them in their
greatest extremity, whereby he had incurred the hate of the Venetians, and
brought them upon his own back, in this dangerous combination with France
against him; which in all reason of gratitude, should move their inclination to
his demand: but so was it likewise as true, that he had been the first brewer
and broacher of the Pisans rebellion, which worthily cancelled the memory of
that other benefit, or any pleasure else whatsoever, which he had or could do
them. They are fearful to offend the King, and loath to distaste the Duke with a
flat denial. They therefore send him this cautelous and ambiguous answer, by a
Secretary of State: That the intention of their Commonwealth, is in effect the
same with his, though there be some difference in the manner. For they were
purposed, so soon as they had ended their own war against the rebels of
Pisa, to grant him the aid he demanded of them. But they hold it dangerous to
make express covenant with him, or to capitulate by writing, or to use his
forces, least they should provoke the Pope, French king, and Venetians to
impeach their proceedings against Pisa: and so both they and he be frustrate of
their ends. But they bound themselves secretly and by writing, to the French
king, in the contrary. The Duke finds this their answer full of cunning, as
one well practiced in that art, and therefore assures himself of nothing
less, then the friendship of Florence.

APHORISM XXXV.
THere is A consigli celesti, non si puo resistere. Por. in Guic. Mac. disp. 2.
Herod. l. 9. Virg.


Multa accidunt ex fato ita vrgente, vt ijs obuiam ire nemo potest.

Quod diuinitus contingere debet, homo a se nulla art cispellere potest.

-- Sors omnia versat.

Et si fata Deum, si men's non leua fuisset. Virg. Aen. 2


Haud equidem credo quia sit diuinitus illis Virg. Ge. 1.


Ingenium, aut rerum fato prudentia mayor.

Perch l'huomo ne per star ne per fuggire, Ario. Ca. 27.


Al suo fisso destin puo contradire.


nothing so dangerous in a great affair, as Irresolution and Tergiuersation:
especially in that Prince, whose good fortunes are come to their last period,
and his whole estate set upon one cast. But destruction decreed, cannot be
resisted; for Occulta vis fati tunc maxim vrget, quum misero mentis arbitrium
Incer. Auth.
eripit.

Hoc placet o Superi, cum vobis vertere cuncta Lucan. l 9.


Propositum, nostris erroribus addere crimen;

Cladibus irruimus, nocituraque poscimus arma.

Stultum facit fortuna quem vult per dear. Senec. in fin.



the object destined hereunto, loses himself in the intricate maze of his
own perplexities: by vn-doing what he has done, to his own undoing.

The Duke of Millan despaires of all hope but in himself and own forces. All
other Princes abandon him: only the King of Naples is willing to help him,
but unable. He therefore takes the best course he can in such an extremity. He
fortifies Anon, Nouara, and Alexandria della Paglia, (places first exposed to
the French impression.) He resolves to dispose the greatest part of his army
under Galeazzo da San-Seuerino, to resist the French on that side the Duchy:
the rest he disposes under the Marquis of Mantoaes leading, to oppose against
the Venetians on the other side. His forces thus prudently and prouidently
divided and disposed he orders otherwise, either through improuidence,
distrust, or covetousness. He dissolues those regiments under the Marquis his
charge, moving many difficulties, refusing to pay him the remainder of his
former entertainment, and demanding his oath, and unusual caution for his
sidelity. This he did to satisfy Galeazzo, who could not brook the others
precedence in title. Hereby he left that side naked to the Venetian army, and
lost the service of so brave a soldier, and worthy Commander; whom he after
sought by all means and mediation of friends, but could never win him till it
was too late.

APHORISM XXXVI.
Five Boni Ducis (...) quinque, Scientia, Virtus, Prouidentia, Authoritas,
Fortuna. Lip. pol. l. 5 e Cicer.


Gl' huomini debbon esse tirati a gl'honori, per gradi, non per salti. Amirat.
l. 6.


Non bisogna star solo ad esser nobile: Perch l'arte della guerra s'apprende,
con Amirat. l. 17.
lo star ne gl'esserciti, col veder il nemico in viso, and con venir seco all
mani: Non con esser nato de padri illustri, etc.

Dux sit in his castris senior, dum miles in illis.

Tu quis es qui tam magnifice? equesne an sagittarius? Nihil inquit horum, sed
Lucan. l. 2. Plut. Apop. fol. 187. Ario. Ca. 16.
qui sciam hisce omnibus imperare.


things are required in a General: Knowledge, Valor, Foresight, Authority,
and Fortune. He that is not renowned for all, or most of these virtues, is not
to be reputed fit for this charge: Nor can this glory be purchased but by
practice and proof. For the greatest Fencer is not always the best fighter,
nor the fairest Tilter, the ablest soldier: nor the greatest favorite in
Court, the fittest Commander in a camp. Bisogna di valor segni piu chiari,

Che por con leggiadria la Lancia in mano.

Conuien ad un Prencipe hauer summa cura and auuertenza nell' elettione de'
Parut. l. 2. dis
capitani, che hanno a preporre a grandi imprese: Consiosia cosa che, se questi
non saranno di natura and di costumi conformi a'pensieri del Prencipe, indarno
se gli daranno gl'ordini and le commissioni.

Tiberius hortabatur Senatum, vt eligeret Proconsulem in bello contra
Tacfarinatem, gnarum militiae, corpore validum, and bello suffecturum. Tac.
hist. l. 3.


E grandissimo errore nel dar i Carichi militari, non riguar dar ad altro,
oltre Idem Ibid.
alla sola nobilta.

Talche egli non daua vffizio, o tiraua a dignita cittadino alcuno, s'egli non
era Am. e Tac l. 4. de Tiberio
a bastanza cognosciuto, ch'egli lo meritasse.

Dux Bruto, Cato solus erit. Lucan. l. 2. Aus. fol. 92. Vellci. l. 2.


Non erunt honores vnquam fortuiti muneris.

Neque enim quaerendus erat quem legeret: sed legendus qui eminebat.


That Prince therefore is ill advised, who conferres this charge upon his
mynion, either for his courtshippe, or what other respect, neglecting those
more requisite and more noble properties.

Galeazzo da San-Seuerino a gallant Courtier, the Duke of Millans chief
favorite, a fair runner at Tilte, and a graceful man at arms, is made
General of the Millanese army. He commands one thousand six hundred lances,
one thousand five hundred light horse, ten thousand Italian foot, and five
hundred Dutch. He has direction to wait upon the French army newly come into
those parts, and consisting of one thousand six hundred men at arms, five
thousand Swisse, four thousand Gascoins, and sour thousand of other French
foot. He has commandment not to charge upon the enemy in Campagna rasa, and
battle ranged; but only to succor Anon, Nouara, Alexandria, and those other
places first exposed to danger, and to stand only upon the defensive. He
suffers to be taken even before his face, Arazzo, Anon, Valenza, Bassignano,
Castel-nuouo, Ponte-corone, and Tortona: all places of great strength and
importance. He retires into Alexandria with one thousand two hundred men at
arms, one thousand two hundred light horse, and three thousand foot. The
French besiege him: whence after two days (without acquainting any man of
command, save only Lucio Maluezzo,) he secretly and shamefully steals away,
and abandons the place to the assailants. An action of indelible stain to his
own honor, and of eternal blemish to his masters wisdom, to confer a
place of so great command, in so dangerous a time, upon a person of so little
worth.

APHORISM XXXVII.
OF Inuidia regni etiam inter domesticos, infida omnia atque infesta facit.
Liui. l. 1. Tass. Ca. 20


Duoi interni Auoltoi, Sdegno, and Dolor.

Vetera odere, noua expetunt, odio suarum rerum mutari omnia student. Salust.
Claud. ruff. 2.


Heu heu, quam breuibus pereunt ingentia causis!

Imperium tanto quaesitum sanguine, tanto

Seruatum, quod mill ducum peperere labores,

Quodtantis Romana manus contexuit annis,

Proditor vnus iners angusto tempore vertit.


all bad ingredients into the heart of man, there is none poisons it so much
with the venom of treasonable thoughts, as that of disdain. Suadeo vt occurr
as huic malo: Nam nisi incipiens and nondum adultum melioribus Cic. Phili. 5.
consilijs flectatur, teque remque publicam pessundabit.

Digitum praescindi oportet, ne ob eam rem gangraena ad brachium perueniat.
Varro. Frag.


Fortioribus remedijs agendum: facillimumque est cuilibet rei in ipso introitu
Poly. l. 3. 79.
obsistere.

Grauius est contemni quam stultitia percuti. Seneca. Adag. Eras.


(...). i. Post bellum auxilium: Dictum quando serius adhibetur remedium.


The Prince that sees this mischievous seed planted and grown amongst his
captains in time of their employment, and seeks not to root it up with a
quick and sharp hand, is in the high-roade to his own ruin.

Count Gaiazzo commands the Dukes forces in Ghiaradadda, against the Venetians:
he spleenes that Galeazzo his younger brother and a worse soldier, is preferred
before him to be General. Transported with this passion of disdain, he deals
secretly with the French, bargains to betray the service in his charge, and to
become the Kings pensioner. The Duke has notice of the practice: tells the
intelligencer sighing, that he could not be persuaded of so disloyal and
ungrateful a part in Gaiazzo: and if it were true, he knew not how to remedy
it, nor in whom to affie, if such as were most obliged to him, went about to
betray him. He holds it no less dangerous, to lose the service of such as he
accounted faithful, by suspicion, then to commit himself to their credits who
might be suspected, by cruel proceeding. He lets the matter so pass. Gaiazzo
goes on with his practice: he is commanded to pass the Po with his forces, and
to join with his brother against the French, who were now encamped before
Alexandria. He cunningly delays the time in making his bridge and passage over
the river: mean while Galeazzo forsakes the town. The enemy takes it: all the
rest of the Duchy follow the example of this place, and fortune of the victor.
The Duke with his sons, brethren, and some few friends, is forced presently
after to flee into Germany.

APHORISM XXXVIII.
WHen Come il Prencipe ha comminciato vna volta ad esser odiato, o been o male
che e' si faccia, ogni cosa e malfatta. Am. in Tac. an. l. 17. Sen. Her. fur.


Vidi cruentos carcere includi Duces,

Et impotentis terga plebeia manu

Scindi Tyranni.

Vtraque caedes sinistre accepta: and inuiso semel Principe, seu been seu male
facta Tacit. hist. 1.
premunt.

Ni gradus seruetur, nulli tutus est summus locus. Sen. in fine.



a Prince begins once to be hated of his subjects, and in declination of his
fortunes, be it well or ill that he does, all is ill taken. (...). i. Omnia
tempestiue gratiam habent.

Opprime dum noua sunt subiti mala semina morbi. Menander. Ovid. Plaut.


Sero atque stulte, quod prius cautum oportuit, postquam comedit rem, post
rationem putat.

Sero sapiunt Phryges. Adag. Menander. Ovid. remed


(...). i. Occasiones autem dissoluunt tyrannides.

Temporibus medicina valet, data tempore prosunt,

Et data non apto tempore vina nocent.


For reformations are no remedies, except they be in season; as Physic
ministered out of due time, rather poisoneth then preserves the body.

The Duke of Millan had ill ordered his affairs of war, by entrusting the
chief places of charge and command to persons either unable for the
undertaking, or unfaithful in the execution. He had also ill reigled his
civil government, by bringing his name in hatred, and his rule in dislike
among his subjects, through his many and heavy taxations imposed upon them. The
most of his best towns and places of strength are taken by the enemy: others
yielded by revolt. He now (though too late) seeks to confirm his chief city
of Millan in her obedience, and to stay her from the like revolt. To this end
he calls a public assembly: he enrolls all the men able to bear arms: he
makes a lamentable and passionate oration to them, to re-assure their loyalty
to him: he frees them of many impositions: excuses his former proceedings by
the necessities of the times: promises many more immunities and exemptions from
other general grieuances: with full amends for all that is past, and
reformation of all that is amiss. All will not serve. The Millaneses strive
with the other towns, who shall first yield to the French obedience: they rise
in arms: they kill Landriano the high Treasurer in the midst of the
streets, coming from the Court: they force the Duke himself to flee into the
Castle for his safety: and run into manifest revolt and open rebellion.

APHORISM XXXIX.
CReatures (...). Proditiones, non proditores amo. Plut. de Phil.


Amo prodituros, non proditores. Stob. de eod Lip. pol. l. 4. Am. Tac. hist l.
4. de Tiber.


Rem amant, non reum.

Le piu volte, come s' egli s' era seruito dell' opera loro a bastanza e sazio;
in luogo di quelli, messo in opra de gl' altri, vsaua egli stesso di spegnere
quei vecchi, and perniziosi, et di gia venuti al colmo.

Camillus pueris virgas dedit, quibus proditorem agerent in vrbem. Liui. l. 5.
Flor. l. 1.


Sic virginem, quae Sabinis Romae portas prodidit: dum pretium rei petit, illi
ipsi clipeis obruebant.

Gl'essecutori delle sceleratezze di molta importanza, sono da' Prencipi
risguardati, come se tali seruigij gl'improuerassero. Am. in Tacit. an. lib.
15. Bodi. rep. l 5. e Plutarch.


Les Lacedemoniens condamnerent leur Capitain Phaebidas, d'auoir empiete la
Cadmee, contre la Teneur du Traitte fait auec les Thebains, and neantmoins ils
retendirent la place.

Quand ceux qui aiment les Trahisons ne se peuuent plus seruir des Traistres,
Am. Plu. Art
ils en tiennent peu de conte: Ce que met les Traistres en desespoir, don't
s'ensuit l' honteuse mort, qu'ils ont bien merit.


are cherished only for the use we have of them: when the Jade can work no
longer, we take his skin; when the Silk-worme has wouen her web, we let her
fly or die. As people deal with brute beasts, so deal Princes with that
brutish and beastly sort of people, that betray their Prince or country to
them: they cherish them but for their ends; they love the treason, but not the
traitor: Illo nocens se damnat, quo peccat die.

Heu conscientia, animi grauis seruitus. Sen. in fine. Ibid. Plut. de his qui
sero pun.


Vt primum quis improbe egit, iam obstrictus poenae tenetur, and suauitate
flagitij veluti esca illico deuorata, conscientiam intra vrgentem plectentemque
habens, fluctuat.

Sicut malefici cum ad supplicium educuntur, quisque suam effert crucem, sic
vitiositas Plut. ibid.
ex sese fabricatur singula tormenta.

La conscienza e potentissimo and certissimo flagello di chi fa male. Por. in
Guic.



whose surest and sorest scourge is his own conscience.

Barnardino da Corte a Pauese, and an old seruitor of the Duke, by him greatly
advanced, is put in trust by his Master with the keeping of the impregnable
castle of Millan, before Ascanio the Dukes own brother, who offered to
undertake the charge. At his departing from the city, he leaves with him three
thousand soldiers under trusty Captains; with provision of victuals, munition,
and money, for many months, hoping ere long to return out of Germany with
great succors. This Castellan not enduring one shot of the Cannon, or any
appearance of danger, sels the place within twelve days after the Duke was
gone, for a great sum of money: a conduct of one hundred Lances: and a pension
for life: besides many other favors and privileges. An act so infamous and
hateful, as even the French themselves to whom he betrayed it, abhorred him and
shunned his company and fellowship, as if he had bin some venomous serpent.
Insomuch as playing at cards, they would call for Barnardino da Corte, when they
were to pull for a traitor, (a sort in their pack, as Knaves are in ours) to his
perpetual reproach. With the shame hereof, and sting of a guilty conscience, he
was so tormented, as within few days he la^guished and died.

APHORISM XL.
LIghtning Laurus fulmine sola non icitur. Plin. na. l. 15. Plin. l. 2. c. 20


Omnis terrarum exhalatio rigens ac gelida, quicquid accipit ignei vaporis
extinguit: que ratio immunem Scythiam and circa rigentia, a fulminum casu
praestat.


hurtes not the Laurel, nor is seen in places far North and remote from the
Sun: Qui iacet in terra, non habet vnde cadat. Ovid. Seneca. Tacit. an. 14.
Seneca.


Paupertas summa est foelicitas, statum enim non metuit.

Ex mediocritate fortunae pauciora pericula.

Humili loco, sed certa sedet.

Sordida paruae fortuna domus:

Alte virtus animosa cadit.

-- O vitae tuta facultas Lucan. l. 5.


Pauperis, angustique lares, o munera nondum

Intellecta deum: quibus hoc contingere templis

Aut potuit muris, nullo trepidare tumultu,

-- Caesarea pulsante manu?

Fortuna saeuo laeta negotio, and

Ludum insolentem ludere pertinax. Horat.


Dum excelsus steti

Nunquam pauere destiti. Sen. Thiest.



no more is a peaceable and mean estate subject to the force of Fortune, or
danger of higher Powers. For, the tall Cedars on the mountains top are shaken
and ouer-turned with tempest, when the low shrubbes of the valley are in quiet.
So likewise, the meanest estate stands upon Brass, the highest upon Glass:
The way upward is craggie, downward ycie: Men climb by degrees, but fall at
once. Fortuna leuis est, cito reposcit quae dedit.

Regum maiestas difficilius ab summo ad medium detrahitur, quam a medijs ad
Senec. Sent.
ima praecipitatur. (inquit Tacitus.) I Re per la loro grandezza non sono si
facili Am. in Tacit
a cadere come i Priuati: Ma; se punto comminciano a sdrucciolare, non hanno
riparo.

Sic nubibus ipsis inserta caput

Turris pluuio vapulat austro. Seneca Oed.


Non enim his gradibus quibus ad summa peruentum est, itur: saepe inter
fortunam Sen. de Ben.
maximam and vltimam nihil interest.

Imperium cupientibus nihil medium inter praecipitia and summa. Tac. hist. l. 2.


Vt alta ventos semper excipiunt iuga,

Sen. Oed.
Imperia sic excelsa Fortunae subiacent.

Difficilius Principem a primo ordine in secundum, quam ex secundo in
nouissimum detrudi. Sueton.



Between the highest fortune and lowest there is no stay.

The city and castle of Millan are now at the French devotion: Montara, and
Pauia yield: So did all the towns in the provinces of Cremona, and
Ghiaradadda. Genoa follows: the like do all the other towns and forts of that
Duchy. Thus the French army coming down in the midst of August, has made
conquest of so strong and noble a State, has driven out of his country so
great and rich a Prince, with his children and brethren: and all this before
the end of September.

APHORISM XLI.
WHen the stomach has received plenty of food, all the heat in the exterior
parts has recourse thither, to dispose it to nutriment, and expel what is
hurtful. For nature rather defends her self against an intestine then
foreign enemy, (as being the more dangerous, either to the health of a man, or
safety of a State.) And therefore she draws all her forces from these Suburbs
of the body of a man, to this Metropolis of the stomach. As it fares in this
direction of nature, so stands it in the discipline of war: and as in the
body so in a Garrison town, the chiefest forces must be natural, and of our
own subjects: For, if the Mayor part be Mercenaries and strangers, it is
always in their power to curb or cross our command: and to give up the place
at their own pleasure. Nelle cose di Stato e regola generale, non douersi per
suo proprio solleuamento Parutal. 1. disc. 14.
valersi di forze straniere, che siano di molto superiori and piu potenti delle
proprie. Perch cosi conuiensi dipendere dalla voglia altrui.

Neminem ignotum militem inter suos admittendum. Joseph. in vi. Xen. Cyr. l. 8


Quare and homines ciues alienis praeferendi sunt, and qui vna sunt aliti, ijs
qui contubernales non sunt.

Turbulento mercenariorum militum motures Carthaginensium vexatae.

Possumus peregrinos illorum conducere maiori mercede: Mercenariae enim magis
Polyb. l. 3. Thucid. l. 1.
quam vernaculae sunt copiae.

Si quosdam tentabis regni concustodes efficere, nusquam aliunde prius incipe,
quam ab eo qui ex eodem loco natus est. Xen. Cyr. l. 8


Exercitum contractum ex diuersis simis gentibus, vt secundae res tenent, ita
aduersae Tacir. Agric.
dissoluunt.

Sic Carthaginenses per milites conductos extraneos, Hispanos alios, alios
Gallos, Poly. hist. 1. fol. 32.
Graecos, profugosque and seruos, in extremum fere discrimen deuenere.




Paul Vitelli encampeth before Casina, a place well manned, and provided of
all warlike habillements to hold out a long siege: well fortified with ditch,
bulwarks, and rampart. Yet within twenty six hours, after the cannon began
to play, the stranger soldiers within, being the stronger part, yield up the
town (maugre the rest) with condition of their lives and goods saved: and
leave the Pisan officers and soldiers to the discretion of the enemy.

APHORISM XLII.
ALL things requisite for a worthy General, are in himself; either by
nature, praecept, or experience; save only Fortune, which crowns his other
virtues with the wreathe of glory. For, to be fortunate is not in our selves,
we have it from above. And therefore Knowledge, Valor, Foresight, and
Authority, lead on the Van-gard of their actions with small success, except
Fortune bring up the Rear. (...). Dei domum est foelicitas. Thucyd. Lip. pol.
l. 4.


Foelicitas, comes fere semper consilij est and rationis: Sed tamen paulo
benignius quibusdam attributa a Deo.

Assai ben balla a chi fortuna suona. Pro. Ital. Plato. de Le.


Ars militaris plurimum fortunae eget.

Murique vicem Fortuna tuetur. Lucan. l. 10. Ariost. Ca. 6.


Fortuna anco piu bisogna assai,

Che senza, val virturaro, o may.

Fortuna plus homini quam consilium valet. Senec. Sent. Tacit. an. 3. Tacit.
an. 6.


Multa quae prouideri non possunt, fortuito in melius casura.

Consilium cui impar erat, fato permisit.

Inde Octauianus nepoti suo precatus, grauitatem Pompeij, fortitudinem
Caesaris, fortunam suam. Julian. Caesa. fol. 88.





Vitelli had taken in all the Pisan territory, save only the fort Verrucola,
and the small tower of Ascano, not worth the time and expense of a siege. He
sets down with his army before Pisa it self: he lies on the southwest side
of the city, rather then on the part toward Lucca, because, either he thought
the expugnation more easy, if he could carry the fortress Stampace, which
was on this quarter: or for better conueying of victuals to the camp from the
hilly contrie thereabouts: or hoping to find that part weakest, by reason the
Pisans expected and prepared for him on the other side, as he had his first
direction from Florence. He plants his Artillery: batters with twenty pieces
of canon: makes a large breach between Stampace, and Port S. Antonio: another
between that and the Seaport: and diverse others in other places, so that in
all there was beaten down one hundred and fifty fathom of wall. Mean while
he discouers, that they within had strongly entrenched and fortified against
him, and had all their forces ranged in good order of battle to receive him,
if he should give the assault. He wisely considers the danger, and holds fit,
first to carry Stampace, that from thence his Artillery might beat them in
flancke; and then, with less danger and more hope to give upon them. He
therefore bends the cannon upon this piece: plies the battery all that day and
the next night: and by break of day in the next morning, gives the assault,
and carries it. The defendants within the inner works seeing this, betake
themselves to flight: they of the camp come bravely on, (but without command)
in hope of the spoil. Vitelli not knowing the advantage, and resolving to make
the assault yet more easy, not only not leads them on to the trenches, where
they had found no resistance, (for the Pisans had quit their inner works) but
sounds a retreit and infortunatly calls them back, hoping to carry the town
with better assurance, and more safety of his soldiers. The Pisans are stayed
in their flight, and brought back to their trenches, which they after made
good: and Vitelli within few days is forced to raise his siege, by reason of
great infection and mortality in his camp. And so, that day which should have
been victorious to his immortal honor, was the original of his calamity and
utter destruction: for he was shortly after upon this and other offenses laid
to his charge, executed in Florence.

APHORISM XLIII.
IT is a hinderance to the general service, and a furtherance to the Generals
destruction, to give him manifest cause of discontent, and yet after employ him
in a great place of charge. For, neither can the State be assured of his
fidelity, when he is used; nor he of their favor, when he is accused.

Prouidendum, ne ciui qui insigni aliqua iniuria affectus est, demandetur
prouincia administrandi rem aliquam magni momenti. Macc. dis. l. 2


(...). i. Tam est periculosum, malitioso potentiam, quam furioso gladium dare.
Aeschin.


Animos vero eorum qui iniuriam passi sunt nondum didicistis, quos metus Xenop.
Cyr. ad filios.
sceler atis inijciunt, quas vltrices affectiones in nefarios immittunt.

Tanta in egregio ciue vindictae cupiditas, vt facile intelligamus, quid de
nostris hominibus sperare aut expectare debeamus, si quando magna iniuria
afficiantur. Macc. dis. 4. de Claudio.


Neque enim cuiquam mortaliu^m iniuriae suae paruae videntur, multi eas grauius
aequo habuere. Salust. Cat.


Ad motum comprimendum, exercitu ampliore, and non instrenuo Duce, cui tamen
tuto Suet. in Vesp
tanta res committeretur, opus esse.

Traditos fasces, regio quodam furore retinehant. Flor. l. 1. Adag.


Gladium dedisti quo se occideret.


The State of Florence had much discontented Paul Vitelli, by favoring Count
Rinuccio in his concurrence with him for the Generalate: by their slacknesse to
send him necessary supplies in their Casentine affairs: by crossing him in
matters of his own particular: and by their suspicious jealousy of his truth
and fidelity toward them in his service. Yet for all this they gave him
chief command in their wars upon Pisa. Whence being risen and gone to
Ligorne, they send Commissioners unto him, under pretense to advise with him
about the quartering of all his troops in garrison, for the winter following.
By them he is arrested: brought to Florence: committed to prison: and charged
with the miscarriage of the siege of Pisa: enforcing, that by his fault when
Stampace was won, the assault was not presently given, and the town taken:
that he had diverse times conference with them of Pisa, and never acquainted
their Commissaries for the war with the particular: that he had raised the
siege without the States commandment: that he had secretly dealt with diverse
Captains, to keep still in their hands Casina and Vico-pisano, with all the
munition therein, that in their paiments or other demands they might force the
Florentines to what conditions they list: that in the Casentino he had had
secret intelligence and correspondencie with the rebel Medici: and that at the
same time he had treated and concluded with the Venetians to be entertained in
their pay, had not the sudden accord between those two States prevented him;
and that hereupon he gave safeconduct to the Duke of Vrbine their enemy, and
to Julian Medici their proscript. Men's opinions were diverse concerning his
guiltiness in these articles. But howsoever, he is condemned upon them, not
having confessed any matter capital: and is presently put to death, without
further trial or examination of witnesses; least the French king, who was then
at Millan, should have demanded the life of so great a soldier, which they
durst not have refused him.

APHORISM XLIIII.
WHen Nimium difficile est reperiri amicum, it a vt nomen cluet: quoi tuam cum
rem credideris, sine omni cura dormias. Plaut.


Omissa spe fallaci authore, teip sum tuaque omnia cognitae permit fidei.

Paucis credas, nec nisi ijs, quorum longo vsu cognita tibi fides. Lip. pol. l.
5. Ibid. Euripid.


(...). Sapiente diffidentia non alia res vtilior mortalibus.


we are unable to hold in safety anything which is dear unto us; the more
another desires the safe-keeping of it, and the more he pretends it for our
good, the more cautelous and scrupulous we should be of entrusting him
therewith, least it be for his own particular end. O praeclarum custodem ouium
(vt aiunt) Lupum. Cicero. Plut. in paral Tacit. an. 2.


Sic Gestius Rustium puerum vna cum pecunia apud se depositum, interfecit.

Sic Antonius, regem Atmeniorum specie amicitiae illectum, dein catenis
oneratum, postremo interfecit.

Eheu quid volui misero mihi? floribus Austrum

Perditus and liquidis immisi fontibus apros. Virg. eclo. 2.


Sic Polydorum auri quondam cum pondere magno

Infoelix Priamus furtim mandarat alendum Virg. Aen. 3.


Threicio regi. -- Polydorum obtruncat, and auro

Vi potitur. --


For it is unsafe to commit the Lamb to the Wolfes guardiance: and as
dangerous it is to put the child that pretends a just title, into his hands
that has the possession.

Isabella d' Arragon, mother to young Galeazzo, who was son and heir to John
Galeazzo Duke of Millan, has her son in her own custody, after the death
of his poisoned father. His uncle Lodowick, upon his flight into Germany,
desires his mother that she will commit him to his careful charge, to be
conveyed out of that State, and kept safe from the hands of the French, the
common enemy. The Lady wisely refuses, and keeps him still with her. Jews
12. has now conquered Millan, and is returning home: he persuades the Lady
with many flattering speeches, to entrust the youth to his careful custody.
The improuident and credulous woman simply yields. The King carries him into
France, and shuts him up in a Monastery.

APHORISM XLV.
A Si come le cose naturali, si conseruano con quei mezzi, co' quali si sono
generate: cosi le cause della conseruazione de gli Stati, sono l' istesse. Rag.
Stat. l. 2.


Nouum imperium inchoantibus vtilis clementiae fama. Tacit. hist 4 Sen. de Ben.
Tac. de Mith


Melius beneficijs imperium custoditur, quam armis.

Atrocior quam nono regno conduceret.

Non aureum hoc sceptrum regnum seruat, sed amici multi sceptrum regibus Xen.
Cyr. l. 8
verissimum maximeque securum.

Non enim exercitus neque the sauri praesidia regni sunt, verum amici. Salust.
Iug.



State lately lost by the cruelty and oppression of the Prince, being newly
conquered, is preserved by the contrary means, and better kept by love then by
force. Illud clarum testatumque est, quod homines foelicitatem adsequantur,
benignitate in alios, and bona de se opinione: ijdem cum adepti quae voluerant,
ad iniurias Liui. l. 10.
and impotentiam in imperijs dilabuntur, fit meritissimo, vt vna cum
imperantium mutatione, ipsi quoque subditi se and affectus suos mutent.

Ciuium non seruitus tibi tradita, sed tutela: Nec resp. tam tua est, quam tu
reip. Sen. de cle.


Tu ciuem patremque geras, tu consule cunctis,

Non tibi: Nec tua te moueant sed publica damna. Claudian. ad Honorium.


Crebra etsi modica damna, famam partae victoriae lacerant.

-- Patriaeque impendere vitam, Taci. hist. l. 4. Lucan. l. 2.


Nec sibi, sed toti genitum se credere mundo.

-- Vrbi pater est, vrbique maritus, Idem


Iustitiae cultor, rigidi seruator honesti,

In commune bonus --. etc.


The victor Prince must think that he is as well the States, as the State his:
Non faciendo nocens, sed patiendo fuit. Aus. de Clau. Tac. de Tib. an. 4.


Ne Prouinciae nouis oneribus turbarentur, vtque vetera sine auaritia aut
crudelitate magistratuum tolerarent, prouidebat.

Quibus Aerarium est Spoliarium ciuium, cruentarumque praedarum receptaculum.
Plin. Paneg.


Tondere pecus decet, non deglubere.

I Signori, chi hanno trouato modo d'accressergli il Peculio regio, guadagnano
a Suet. Tiber. Am. in Tacit l. 4.
vncie, and perdono a libbre.

I Popoli aggrauati sopra le lor forze, o disertano il Paese, o si riuoltano
contra il lor' Prencipe, o si danno a' nemici. Rag. Stat. l. 1


Haueua l'occhio che le Prouincie di nuoue grauezze non fossero oppressate, and
le Tacit. de Tib
vecchie potessero tolerarsi, senza che da'Gouernatori loro fosse l'auarizia o
l'ambizione, ^ crudelta, in part alcuna vsata.

Quand un meschant homme gouuerne les affairs d'vn Estat, il ne faut attendre
que d'exactions and ruin du peuple: Mais luy de sa part, au lieu de s'amender,
fortify Am. Plut. Agis.
sa tyranny, mesprise les maistres, and contraint tout le monde de chercher
remede.


And therefore he ought be well advised, not only how he govern himself
among these new subjects, but also in his absence what governor he substitute
to keep them in obedience: least what he got by the ounce, he lose by the
pound; and with more dishonor in the deprivation, then he had glory by the
purchase.

Jews 12. returns to France without good order given for the establishing and
perfect settling of his new Government in Millan. He leaves Triultio Governor
general of the whole Duchy: a Millanese by birth, a professed enemy to
Lodowick Zforza, and head of the Guelph party. The citizens are distasted with
the insolent behavior of the French nation: they grudge that they are not
disburthened of all late impositions: but most of all they repine (especially
those of the Ghibelline Faction,) at the government of Triultio: whose
carriage is imperious, factious, and full of oppression: too partial to those
of his own party, and preiudicate to those of the other: he killes certain
butchers in the market place with his own hand, for denying to pay the Gabell
imposed upon flesh. Hereupon the greater part of the Nobility, and all the
Commons in general, are incensed against him: are weary of the present
government: wish the return of Lodowick, and stick not in public to call
upon his name.

APHORISM XLVI.
CElerity, besides the inward virtue and active life it has in it self, has
also the outward assistance of Fortune: upon which she more willingly and
frequently attends, then upon cold and considerate consultation. Wherefore an
action once resolved must be put in present execution: because nothing more
aduanceth the affair, then expedition. More fulminis, quod vno eodemque
momento venit, percussit, abscessit: nec vana de se praedicatio est Caesaris,
ante victum esse hostem quam visum. Flor. l. 4. c. 4.


Caesar cum Pharnacem superasset, ad amicos scripsit, (...).

Facto, non consulto in talipericulo opus esse: Maximum bonum in celeritate
Plut. in Lac. apopth. Sal. Cat. de Cethego. Lip. an. 2. Tasso. can. 17
putabat.

Hanc laudem imprimis attribuerunt, Alexandro Curtius, Caesari Suetonius.

S'arma frettoloso and con la Spene

Gia la vittoria vsurpa, and la preuiene.

(...). Demo. Phili.
Agendi tempus in apparatu consumimus: rerum autem occasiones non expectant
ignauiam vestram and tar ditatem.

Pergit properus, and praeueniens inimicorum astus, amicorum poenitentiam. Tac.
an. 6. de Artabano. Tacit. hist. 1. Liui. de Ma. Augu. de Ti. apud. Crisp.


Nullus cunctationi locus est in eo consilio, quod non potest laudari nisi per
actum.

Ita impigre rem agente, vt ducem abesse nec ciues nec hosts sentirent.

O miserum pop. Romans qui sub tam lentis maxillis edit.




Lodowick Zforza and his brother Ascanio have intelligence from Millan into
Germany, that those citizens dislike of the French government, and the
carriage of Triultio: and that they are ready to receive him again, if he
could find the means to return with any power. Upon this sudden and welcome
news, he will not expect the Emperors delaied succors: he speedily raises
eight thousand Swisse, and three hundred men at arms, Burgognians: he comes
before Millan, and repossesseth himself of that city, before Iuo d'Allegri
can come with his troops to the succors of Triultio, having a march no
farther the^ from Romagna, where he was at that time in the Popes service.
Whereas, if Zforza had not prevented him with such incredible speed, all his
hopes had been frustrate, and no possible means left of recovering (nay scarce
of footing) in that Dukedom.

APHORISM XLVII.
THough In turbido rerum humanarum Pelago, fas est obliquare sinus: and si
recta Cic. ad Len.
portum tenere nequeas, id ipsum mutata velificatione assequi.

Siprudentiam amplecteris vbique idem eris, and prout rerum and temporis
varietas Sen. de virt.
exigit, ita te accommodes tempori, nec te in aliquibus mutes: sicut manus quae
eadem cum in palmam extenditur, et cum in pugnum astringitur.

Si quam rem accures sobrie and frugaliter, Plaut. Persa.


Solet illa recte sub manus succedere;

Atque aedipol ferme vt quisquam rem accurat suam,

Sic ei procedit. --


it be true, that the Statesman as the Steeresman, may shape his course
according to the wind and weather of present occurrences, that he may arrive
to the harbrough of safety; sailing besides compass, and swaruing from the
direct line of sincere and ouuert dealing: Fidem qui perdit, nil vltra potest.

Priuatim praeterea sidem suam interponit, quam ille non minoris quam publicam
Senec. Sent. Sal. Cat. de Cassio.
ducebat.

Vera victoria, quae salua fide, and integra dignitate paratur. Flor. l. 1.
Plaut. Capt.


Fac fidelis sis fideli, cave fidem fluxam geras.

Fides etiam perfidis praestanda. Lip. pol. 2. Cic. off. 3.


Nec vlla res vehementius remp. continet quam fides.


Yet may he by no means, nor for any end whatsoever, be false of his faith or
breaker of his word.

Lodowick Zforza begirts Nouara with a straight siege. The French garrison is
unable to hold out long, and in despair of any succor: they capitulate to
render, their lives saved; and to depart with bag and baggage. Zforza swears
to the articles: many of his Council persuade him, that the cutting off of
these men would be a great means of his victory over the rest, and recovery of
the whole Duchy: they allege the authority of Politicians in justification of
the fact, and instance in the examples of some great Princes, who have violated
their faith to get a State, much more was it lawful for him, in recovery of
his own. He will not be persuaded to break his oath: but gives them a strong
Guard for their safe conduct, as far as Vercelli.

APHORISM XLVIII.
MErcenary soldiers, though leuyed by commission, are worse then those that
are natives: But such strangers and straglers as are taken up by drum, are
worst of all. For, their actions are evermore taxed with the dishonor of
cowardice, or tainted with the reproach of persidiousnesse. A Prince is
therefore to beware of such Swallows and swallowers of the Exchecquer: And not
to raise them but by public authority of the State: as also, never so far to
trust them, as to put his life and fortunes into their hands. Quamuis res
nostrae sint pater pauperculae,

Modice and modeste melius est vitam viuere: Plaut Persa.


Nam si ad paupertatem admigrant infamiae,

Grauior paupert as sit, fides sublestior.

Exteri milites infidi, refractarij, tumultuarij, non fide, non affectu
tenentur. Lip. e Tacit. Curt. ad Ale.


Praeferendos tibi censeo genitos milites, non ascitos.

Peregrinum and mercenarium militem, mos induxit, non ratio. Lip. pol. l. 5.
Iuue. Sat. 14


Falsus erit testis, vendet periuria summa -- exigua.

Nulla fides pietasque viris qui castra sequuntur. Lucan. Iuue. Sat. 14.


Inde fere scelerum causae, nec plura venena

Miscuit, aut ferro grassatur saepius vllum

Humanae mentis vitium, quam saeua cupido

Indomiti census. --




Many of the Swisse with Lodowick in Nouara, had lately revolted to his side
from Triultio and the French party; either for want of pay, or some other
treacherous and base end. There were other eight thousand of the same nation,
that Zforza had raised by the drum, by permission only, and without any
public commission of the Cantons. In the French army are likewise many
Swisse, but all levied for the Kings service by authority. These two armies
confront one another so near, as they are upon the point to give battle.
Those on Lodowickes side refuse to fight against their own nation and kindred:
they join with them like brothers, and resolve to depart home to their own
country. Zforza entreats their stay and that days service, even with tears.
Nothing can stop their perfidious tergiuersation. He desires (as his last
refuge) that at least he may depart in their troops, for his better safety
from the enemy: They had couenanted otherwise with the French commanders, and
flatly deny him this suit. They offer him this only favor, to suffer him be
apparelled in the habit of one of their ordinary foot, and if he can so make
his escape, to put it to Fortune. The miserable condition of his present estate
forces him to accept of this offer: he marches among them like a common
soldier through the French troops. Dilligent search is made for him: he is
discovered, and taken prisoner: So are Galeazzo da San-Seuerino, Fracassa and
Antonio-Maria, his brethren; clad likewise after the Swisse fashion, and
marching on foot like private soldiers. The Swisse are not free from the
imputation of betraying them thus into the enemies hands.

APHORISM XLIX.
SParing Contrahe, de multis grandis aceruus erit.

Diuitiae grandes homini sunt viuere parce. Ovid. 2. Rem Lucret. 5. Adag. Eras.
Lucan. de Caton. l. 2. Dion. l. 52. Th. Mor e Lucian.


Magnum vectigal parsimonia.

Huic epulae vicisse famem, magnique penates

Summouisse hyemem.

Magnae opes, non tam multa capiendo, quam haud multa perdendo, quaeruntur.

Vtere diuitijs tanquam moriturus, and idem

Tanquam victurus parcito diuitijs:

Parcere diuitijs qui tempore nouit and vti,

Ille modum seruans inter vtrumque sapit.


is a good revenue to a private man: but to a Prince nothing is worse beseeming
his honor, nor indeed more prejudicial to his affairs. Imperat aut seruit
collecta pecunia cuique.

(...). Argenteis pugna hastis, and omnia Horat. sermon. Philip. apud Plut.
vinces.

La plus forte place du monde sera tousiours prise: pourueu qu' un mulet charge
d'escuz y puisse entrer. Bod. rep. l. 5.


Pecuniarum cupiditas Spartam capiet. Eras. 487.



For, there is no bait to the golden hook; nor weapon to the silver spear;
nor Fort be it never so strong, that can long hold out against the Mulet
charged with treasure.

The Swisse in their return homeward from the wars of Millan, take by
surprise the strong town of Belinsone, a place of great importance, seated in
the mountains near Swisserland, and stopping the passage from thence into
this Duchy: it is offered to the French king for a small sum of money. He,
naturally given to sparing, refuses the purchase: the times alter, and
accidents not long after happen, whereupon he would gladly have had it at a
far higher rate, but could never compass it.

APHORISM L.
THat man's happiness is greatest, who has been in miserable condition: for he
tastes the double sweet, of remembering his fore-passed misery, and enjoying
his present felicity. So on the contrary, the greatest misery is to have been
happy. Various is the estate of men in their greatness, and great is their
misery in their fall. Non tam rebus secundis suam foelicitatem sentiunt, quam
malis conflictati Dion. Cass.
eam desiderant.

Actutum fortunae solent mutarier: varia vita est: Nos diuitem eum meminimus,
Plaut. Trucu
at que iste pauperes nos.

Miserum istuc verbum est and pessimum, habuisse, and nihil habere. Plaut. Rud.
Tasso. can. 12


Cade: e breu' hora, opere si lunghe atterra.

Fidarsi al huomo non si conuiene

In suo Tesoro, suo Regno, e sue vittorie Ariost. ca^. 45


Che sempre la sua Ruota in giro versa.

-- Si come il folgore non eade Tasso. can. 7.


In basso pian, ma su l'eccelse cime:

Cosi il furor di peregrine spade

Sol' de' gran Re l'altere test opprime.

Magna documenta instabilis fortunae, summaque and ima miscentis.

Cuncta mortalium incerta, quantoque plus adeptus foret, tanto se magis in
lubrico Tacit. hist 4. Tacit. de Tiber. an. 1.
dictans.

O vita nostra di Trauaglio piena

Come ogni tua allegrezza poco dura: Ariost. agg. 2


'Il tuo gioir e come Aria Serena

Ch'alla fredda Stagion troppo non dura.

Quando tengas mas Fortuna

Mira que es como la Luna. Pro. Hisp.


-- Quicquid in altum

Fortuna tulit, ruitura leuat. Seneca.


Quanto piu sul instabil Ruota vedi

Di Fortuna, ir in alto al miserabil huomo: Ariost. cant 45.


Tanto piu tosto hai a vedergli i piedi

Ou' hor' ha il Capo, efar cadendo il Tomo.




Lodowicke Zforza, late Duke of Millan, a Prince of many worthy parts:
excellent in eloquence, and other powers of the mind, and gifts of nature:
well deserving the titles of Mansuete and merciful, had he not stained this
honor with that one infamous taint of procuring his nephews death: Yet on the
other side, of an ambitious troublesome, and vain glorious spirit: a usual
breaker of his word, and ouer-valewer of his own worth, hardly admitting that
any should be held wise but himself, or at least to himself comparable;
presuming to carry all matters to the bent of his own will, by the dexterity
of his own wit. This great Prince is brought into Lions at noone days, for
the world to gaze upon, as the lively model of humane misery. He is not
permitted either the speech or sight of the King, but forthwith committed
prisoner to the tower of Loches: here he remained ten years, and then died:
having all that time of his durance, those high and vaste thoughts of his
immured within the streights of his prison walls, which erst the whole
country of Italy could scarce contain.

APHORISMS, CIVIL AND MILITARY. LIB. V.
APHORISM I.
AS Nimia omnia nimium exhibent negotium hominibus. Plaut. Tacit. an. l. 1.


Coercenda intra limits imperia.

Tu quoque formida nimium sublimia semper, Ovid. art. l. 2


Propositique memor, contrahe vela tui.

O faciles dare summa deos, eademque tueri Lucan. l. 1.


Difficiles.


many men sink for want of some small thing to hold themselves up above water:
so many others fall to the bottom of desperate ruin, by seeking to embrace
too much: For to ouer-graspe straineth and weakeneth the sinews, and forces
the hand to let fall what before it held fast. (...). Oportet Ducem magis Plut.
in Sert.
respicere quam prospicere.

La grandezza meglio si custodisce con gli auueduti and moderati consigli, che
co' Tac. an. l. 11.
precipitosi and troppo vehementi.

Non enim ego vt nihil agatur moneo: sed vt agentem te Ratio ducat non Fortuna.
Liui. l. 22.


Securitati potius quam potentiae consulebant. Tacit. hist. 4. Thucyd. l. 7.


Melius praeuenire pericula quam inuenire victorias.

Il buon Capitano deue hauer gli occhi non solo nella faccia, ma anco nelle
spalle: Bot. e Plut.
and guardarsi non meno da dietro che d'inanzi.

E vffizio di prudente Capitano, temer le cose che son degne d'effertemute:
anteuedendo quanti sono i pericoli, che sitira dietro colui, il quale del
continuo attend Am. Tac. l. 1.
ad occupat quello d'altri.


It is therefore the part of a wise Prince, to stint and moderate his fortunes;
whom it imports in his greatest success, rather to look backward then
forward: and rather to stop the current of dangers ensuing, then to follow the
stream of that victory by which they will more be increased.

Jews 12 has made a speedy, fortunate, and full conquest of the Duchy of
Millan. The Pope, Venetians, and Florentines are in confederation with him. The
other inferior Princes and States of Italy have made their peace, either by
mediation of their friends; or by money. His way lies open to Naples: his title
good: his forces great, and in a readiness. But on the other side he sees
Maximilian the Emperor and all the States of Germany offended, that so fair a
branch as Millan should be lopped and dismembered from the Empire. He hears his
Ambassador is dismissed and discharged that Court. He understands that a Diet
is called, and all those States summoned, to determine the speedy recovery of
that Duchy by the sword. Upon these weighty considerations of the great
preparations intended against him, and fearing that the getting of more might
be the cause of losing what he had already gotten, he gives over for this time
the enterprise of Naples.

APHORISM II.
SInce Pecunia, ex quo in honor esse coepit, verus rerum honos cecidit.

In pretio pretium nunc est, dat census honores, Senec. epist. Ovid.


Census amicitias. --


Profit began to ouer-ballance Honor, men traffic their friendship and
protection for money: So much are these times for gold: But in the golden
times, only Religion, Justice, and the public Quiet, were the three
Ioynt-purchasers of aid and friendship. Honor, maximum bonorum externorum.
Arist. ^th. l. 8.


L'Honor e di piu preggio che la vita,

Ch' a tutti altri piaceri e preferita. Ario. Ca. 38.


Interrogatus quo quis pacto regnum optime conseruet: respondit, Si lucrum
posthabeat. Plut. in Lac. apopth.


Gl' altri huomini nelle lor imprese and deliberazioni considerano quello solo
che loro possa esser vtile and profiteuole. Ma la condizione de' Prencipi e
d'altra sort: Am. in Tac. lib. 4.
and principalmente, di douere nelle Azioniloro auuertire alla fama, and nome
loro.

Quorum praemium honor est atque laus, long praestantiora sunt, quam ea quorum
praemium est pecunia. Arist. thet. l. 1


A l'honor ohe glimanca in un momento,

Non puo in cento anni satisfar, ne in cento. Ariost. Cant. 38.


Emitur sola virtute potestas. Claudian. Arist. pol. 8. Horat. Ario. Agg. 2.


Vtilitatem vbique quaerere non congruit magnanimo and ingenuo homini.

Vilius virtutibus anrum.

A la vita l'honor s'ha da proporre,

Fuor che l'honor non altra cosa alcuna:

Prima che may lasciarti l'honor torre

Dei mill vite perdre, non che vna.


Wherefore that old rule ought still stand in force, and when the case is
between Honor and advantage, the public negotiator (as well as the Prince
himself) ought to have the equity of the cause, and honor of his master, in
more especial recommendation.

The Florentines importune the French King, to have that aid from him for the
recovery of Pisa, to which he was tied by the articles of the last treaty, and
by his oath: They of Pisa, Genoa, Lucca, and Siena, instantly labor the
contrary. He referres the matter to the Cardinal of Roan, who was then
governor, and resiant in Millan. These cities make offer, that in case Pisa,
Pietrasanta, and Montepulciano, may be freed of the war and molestation of
the Florentines, to give the King in present money one hundred thousand
Ducats: Besides, if the Pisans may peaceably enjoy their own territories and
Ligorne, they will covenant to pay him yearly fifty thousand Ducats for
ever. Triultio and Iohn-Lewes Fiesco, two other of the Kings principal
officers, are both of them earnest solliciters and suitors in their behalf, and
urge how much it imported the Kings affairs in Italy, to keep the Florentines
low. But the Cardinal has more respect to his masters honor, engaged to this
State both by covenant and oath, then to these large offers, or politic ends.
He sends them the aid demanded.

APHORISM III.
POwer Authoritatis proles, foelicitas. Curt. Lip. pol. l. 2. Cic. pro leg. Man.


Habendus metus aut faciendus est.

Vehementer pertinet ad bella administranda, quid hosts, quid socij, de
imperatoribus existiment.

Un Generale deue di tanto auanzare gli altri di virtu, quanto di dignita.
Parut dis. l. 1 Tacit. An. 15 Tacit. Agric. Xen. Cyr. l. 2. Xen. de exp.


Multa auctoritate: quae viro militari pro facundia er at.

Seueritas amorem, facilitas auctoritatem diminuit.

Omnes hi Praefecti hoc primum habebant, quod a subditis colerentur.

Quia supplicia Ducis metuebant, magis obseruantes ordinis er ant.


and worth in the Commander beget fear and love in the soldier: and they are
in war as heat and moisture are in nature: They give life and growth to the
service in hand; without them, both to will and to do withers in the army:
For where his power has no virtue of heat to enforce and inflame the
soldiers cold stomach to courage, nor his worth the power of moisture to
supple and quicken his dull limbs to the action, there the hope of all good
success does wither and decay. Mars gradiuus dictus, non quod per saltum sed
gradatim ad officia militaria Cyr. Ammirat. l. 3
promotio fieri debeat.

Cyrus praemia proponebat ordinum ductoribus (sed optimis) vt fierent Tribuni:
Xen. inst. Cyr. l. 2. Xenop. Cyr. paed. 8.
primipilis vero (sed optimis) vt fierent ordinum ductores.

Quales Praefecti, tales etiam qui sub ipsis sunt frequentius fiunt.


Men are not therefore to be dignified with those high places, that are not
qualified with those noble parts.

The Cardinal of Roan sendes six hundred Lances, and five thousand Swisse, to
the service of the Florentines against Pisa: the King to pay the Lances; they
the Swisse. The Florentines af fying much in Beaumont, will needs obtain him
of the King for the General of their army, because he had formerly with such
readiness surrendered them Ligorne, upon the Kings commandment: A man of mean
rank, less experience, and least authority among the French Commanders. The
King had assigned to this charge Iuo d'Allegri, a Commander well practiced in
the war, of a noble family, of far greater reputation then the other, and
one whom the army would more willingly have obeyed. This ill made choice of
theirs was chief cause of all the ill success which shortly after happened in
that service.

APHORISM IIII.
MEn Lamiam domi dormire caecam, oculis in vasculo repositis: for as autem
egressam Plut. de Cutiosit.
inscrere oculos and videre: ita quisque nostrum, etc.

In alienis rebus Lynceis oculis cernimus, in nostris caecutimus.

Sic ictus munere Demosthenes, adiunxit se Harpalo: fingens vocem sibi
praeclusam Eras. adag. Plut. Demo.
esse.


can see to do right between party and party, when it concerns not their
own particular: But being parties themselves, the case is altered. For here
they which before were as sharp sighted as Lynx, turn as blind as a Mole:
and no marvel, Aurum perstringit oculos.

Corrumpentia sensus dona. Lip. pol. 4. Claudian. Cic. off. l. 2.


Nullum vitium tetrius auaritia, praesertim in Principibus and reip.
gubernatoribus.

(...). Pecunia sanguis and vita hominibus,

(...). Vniuersae nequitiae matter, amor nummi. Poet. graec. Phocylid. Adag.


Virtutem and Sapientiam vincunt testudines. i. Numismata: (Numisma antiquitus
dictum (...), ab insculpta testudine.)

Militia praemijs exercetur, vbi ea demiseris nemo omnium gratuito malus est.
Salu. de rep.



for profit and bribes put out the eyes of Justice. Wherefore let him that
would speed in an honest cause never refer it to a corrupt Judge.

The Cardinal had worthily respected and preferred the honor of his master
before his profit, by performance of covenants with the Florentines, in sending
them present aid and promising reassurance and surre^der of their cautionary
towns. The French forces take in Pietrasanta, which was one of those towns in
caution, and dispossess the Lucchesi thereof: who offer the Cardinal around
sum of money, not to deliver it into the Florentines hands. He accepts their
money: takes them into the Kings protection, and holds the place in deposito,
till the controversy be decided between them: contrary to what he had
formerly and faithfully promised.

APHORISM V.
Rashness Temeritas, praeterquam quod stulta est, est etiam infoelix. Liui.
22. Tac. an. l. 4.


Festiuatum temere bellum pari formidine deserunt.

-- Si cede al periglio Tasso. can. 19


Ch' audace appare improuido consiglio.

Peceat pene necessario qui festinat. Quod si tamen non labitur, quid efficit?
parum. Lip. pol. l. 5.


(...). Facilis hic talis est ad Polyb. l. 3.
omnem circumuentionem, fraudem, dolum.

Seiano cognosceua che Druso era giouane molto feroce, and pero piu ageuole ad
Am. in Tacit an. l. 4.
ingannarsi, and piu atto a mal capitare, per la' stessa ferocitasua.

Brutino era assai perito, se ei si fosse indrizzato per buon camino, and
itosene con lento passo, maegli fece troppa fretta. Am. in Tacit an. l. 3.


Incogitantes fors non consilium rapit.


is obnoxious to all manner of ambush and surprise: it is hot at hand, but
tireth at length: and having vented the first fury, dies like a waspe that
has lost her sting. Wherefore men must look before they leap, and consider
the danger before they run into it: least as they go on with small heed, they
come off with less gain. Argumentum solertiae Pastinacarum hoc est, quod cum
siat piscium tardissimi, Auson. 92. f. Plm. not. hist l. 9. c. 42.
Mugilem tamen omnium velocissimum in ventre habentes repertuntur.

Differ, habent paruae commoda magna morae. Ovid. 3. Fast. Ovid. epist.


Assumpsit vires, auctaque flamma mora est.


For as the Puffen, a fish of all other the most dull and slow, is often found
with a Mullet in his belly, of all other fishes the most swift in swimming: so
wise and well advised men do always overtake and overthrow the headstrong and
hasty.

Beaumont is set down before Pisa, between the gates Alle-Pioggie and
Calcesana. The artillery batters all the first night, and greatest part of the
next day: an assaultable breach is made of thirty fathom. The soldiers,
horse and foot run pell-mell to the assault, without any direction from
their Commanders, or order among themselves: not considering how they were to
pass a ditch, which the Pisans had made very deep, between the breach and
their in nerworkes. Discovering now the breadth and depth of this trench, and
how the defendants were there ready to receive them, they stand rather like
gazers on the difficulty, then soldiers that should assail it, and fall
coldly off, without giving any further attempt.

APHORISM VI.
THere Faciles isti and mites vilescunt.

Bis noxij, in se and in remp. qui Plebi reuerentiam excutiunt, and licentiam
praebent Lip. pol. l. 5. Id. an. l. 3.
peccandi.

Austeri Duces, suis: faciles, hostibus sunt vtiles. Appian.



is nothing so dangerous in a State or Camp, as contempt of the Prince or
General: there is nothing breeds it more in the subject or soldier, then
remissness and lenity. For he that suffers one mischief pass unpunished,
inuiteth another, which brings the command into discredit, and the service
into despair. Legiones veterem ad morem reduxit: ne quis agmine discederet,
nec pugnam nisi iussus iniret, etc. Feruntque, militem quia vallum non
accinctus, atque ali^m Tac. de Cor. bolon. an. 11.
quia pugione tantum accinctus foderet, morte punitos.

Corbuloni plus molis aduersus ignauiam militum, quam contra perfidiam hostium
erat. Tacit. an. 13.


-- Gaudet tamen esse timori

Tammagno populis, and se nec mallet amari. Lucan. l. 3. de Caes.



Wherefore, as in men of great rank, it is less blameworthy to be
ouer-stately and imperious, then ouer-familiar and base: So in men of great
office, it is a less fault to be ouer-rigorous, then not to punish offenders
at all.

The General Beaumont punished not that first fault of his soldiers, in
running to the breach without either direction or order. His army grows
therefore daily more careless of him: They go in and out of the army at
pleasure and converse and commerce with the Pisans as friends. They stick not
openly to justify their cause against the Florentines. Triultio and Iohn-Iacob
Palauisini give them encouragement: Vitellozzo sends Tarlatino to the succors
of Pisa. The French know of his coming, and yet suffer him and his troops to
enter the town without impeachment. The victuals that were coming to the
camp, themselves cut off by the way, that their General might be forced to
raise the siege. He now wants as much authority, as at first he did care, to
redress those disorders. The Gascoigns mutine, and forsake the camp: the
Dutch do the like: the Swisse go after the rest: and then the French lances:
leaving the Florentine affairs in great extremity.

APHORISM VII.
AS Vno absur do dato, infinita consequuntur. Arist int. l. 2. Seneca. Por. in
Guic. Thucyd. f. 52


Finis vnius principium alterius est mali.

Nelle cose della guerra, s' aggiongono sempre a disordini, disordini nuoui.

(...). Anceps conditio bellorum, and ex paruo fiunt multa.

Ideo Lysimachus dicere solebat, Duces in bello errantes nulla venia
dignosesse: vbi, si quid offenditur temeritate vel inscitia, emendari non
potest. Alex. in genial. l. 2. Lip. pol. l. 5. Thucyd. l. 1. Lucan. l. 1. Plut.
de prof. virtut.


Praeliorum enim delicta emendationem non recipient.


in School disputations, where one absurdity is granted, infinite others
follow: so in those actions of State which are disputed by the sword, one error
begets another, and this a third, a worse: Quoties aliquid inopinatum accidit,
consueuimus incusare fortunam.

Magno se iudice quisque tuetur.

Quanto quis magis inficiatur vitium suum, tanto magis in ipsum penetrat: and
quanto magis intro fugies, tanto magis in caupona eris.


especially in those men that will not acknowledge their first oversight: who,
howsoever they seek to transfer the imputation and blame upon others, the
loss and shame lights on themselves.

The desastrous success before Pisa, happening to the Florentines through their
own error in the bad choice of their General, is seconded with another worse
then the first, and imputable only to their own fault. It was thus: The
French king is highly displeased with the miscarriage of that service, as well
in regard that his good allies the Florentines should sustain such a war at
so great a charge to so little purpose: as that the glory of his army which
erst had triumphed almost over all Italy, should now lose that reputation, by
being so shamefully forced to leave a town, wherein were no other defendants
but inhabitants, and no soldier of mark to command them. He lays the blame
and justly upon themselves; yet desirous to repair their loss, and his own
credit, he wills them to consent that his French troops may be quartered for
that winter in the Pisan territory: and in the opening of the year, he assures
them of their service, and doubts not of a more fortunate success. The
Florentines will by no means acknowledge their own error: they transfer it
upon the French troops, and refuse this honorable offer. They of Siena, Lucca
and Genod, perceiving the King whom ere while they durst not offend, to be now
fallen from the Florentines, begin openly to aid the Pisans with men and money,
and drive the Florentines into worse streights of difficulty, then ever they
were before. And for a greater addition to their troubles, the two factions in
Pistoia, of the Panciatici and the Cancelieri, at that very instant turn their
secret grudges and heart-burnings into action of open hostility and
bloodshed, to the disturbance of the whole State, and hinderance of the Pisan
service. Against which mischief also the Florentines took no timely order for
redress.

APHORISM VIII.
AMong Chi per alcun accidente, non per been disposta volonta, si fa amico,
scuopren. Parut. l. 2. dis. 5.
dosiper altro caso and per qualche mutazione di cose i piu very affetti: resta
non pure come prima nemico, ma per qualche nuouo disgusto piu acerbo.

Vt cuique homini res parata est, firmi amici sunt: si labant res lassae,
itidem amici Plaut. Stich.
collabascunt.

Non aliud maius amoris magni indicium noui, quam pecunia. Aristain. l. 1.
Aristain. l. 1. Id. l. 2. ep. 1.


Argentum modo adsit, omnia confient.

Caduceus amicarum censeri debet auro Babylonico.


Suitors in love and in law, money is a common medler, and drives the bargain
and business to an vp-shot: By it, those contract their marriage, and these
conclude their peace: Non sunt fideles in amicitia, quos munus non gratia
copulat. Isidor. Arist. eth. l. 8.


Tales amicitiae celeriter dirimuntur.

Negotiatio est non amicitia, quae ad commodum accedit. Seneca. Arist. eth. l.
8.


Plenae querelarum and criminationum omnes amicitiae, quae fructibus and
emolumentis diriguntur.

Romana resp. amicitias auro nunquam comparauit.

Gaigner les hommes per argent, est vne ruse sotte and meschante, car il n'y a
Mac. dis. l. 1. Am Plut. Phoc.
point de foy en des amys d'argent.


But it is no sure contracter of friendship between States. Amity baptized in
this water is soon renounced: and bonds that are knit by this knot, are easily
by the same dissolved.

Frederick King of Naples gives the Emperor Maximilian forty thousand Ducats:
binds himself to pay him every month fifteen thousand more, toward the
maintenance of his wars against the French King. The Emperor promises to
begin the war in Millan, (if the case so require) to divert the French from
Naples: and vows never to come to any accord with him, except he also comprise
the King of Naples. The French will have truce with the Emperor at what rate
soever, before he set forward against Frederick. He uses the Archdukes
mediation, who was Duke of Burgundy, and the Emperors Son. The Duke unwilling
his Merchants should lose their traffic and commerce with France, and
desirous to match his young son Charles with Claude the Kings daughter, and
the Duchy of Millan in dower with her, (which was then propounded) works a
truce between his father and the French for many months, and prevails.
Among many articles of that accord, these were two, the Emperor to have a
certain sum of money, and the King of Naples to be excluded out of the truce.

APHORISM IX.
IT Foeder atum unjust fallere, impium: at hosts, non solum iustum, sed etiam
Plut. Ages.
suaue and fructuosum est.

Hanc rem exorsus sum facete and callide, Plaut. Persa.


Igitur prouenturam been confido mihi.

Etiam Romani veteres, auidi alias and tenaces virtutis and fidei seruande,
quendam Lip pol. l. 5.
bonum dolum dicebant.

Mutemus clypeos, Danaumque insignia nobis Virg. Aen. 2


Aptemus, dolus an virtus quis in host requirit?

Ne semper ab ijs caueatis, aliquando vos ipsis insidias tendite. Thucyd. l. 6.
Macc l. 3. Virg. l. 12.


Vsus fraudis in caeteris actionibus detestabilis, in bello gerendo laudabilis.

-- Quantum ipse feroci

Virtute exuper as, tanto me impensius aequum est

Consulere.


is so far from scandal or reproof, to circumuent and entrap a public and
professed enemy, as it is rather just, lawful, and profitable, be it by any
means possible but by breach of oath or covenant: Fraus triplex: prima leuis,
vt dissimulatio, and diffidentia: hanc suadeo. Lip. pol. l. 4.


Secunda media, vt conciliatio and deceptio: illam tolero. Tertia magna, vt
perfidia and iniustitia: istam damno.

Proditore turpius nihil vnquam sol vidit: cuius obscoenit as tanta est, vt and
qui Petrarch.
artificio cius egent, execrentur artificem: and qui caecerorum scelerum famam
quaerunt, huius infamiam reformident.

Sa ben quanto a maltermine, and a mal porto

E come spesso in van sospira e geme, Ario. Ca. 40.


Chiunque il Regno suo si lascia torre,

E per soccorso a Barbariricorre.


For, but upon relyance of one of these, an enemy is not properly said to be
deceived. But to betray a kinseman, friend, and confederate, is contrary to all
law, odious to all men, injurious to the party, and impious to God.

Though Jews 12. be assured of the Emperor, yet in his enterprise upon Naples,
he fears to have the King of Spain, Venetians, and Pope, opposite to him, in
jealousy of his greatness. He therefore treates with the Spaniard about the
sharing of that kingdom between them. The Spanish King had ever since the
conquest which his grandfather Alphonso made upon Naples, held his own title
good, and himself wronged by the Neapolitane Kings: yet he covered his
discontent with a Spanish craft and patience, and had continued in all good
offices of parentade and amity with those kings: he had given his sister in
marriage to old Ferdinand, and his consent to her daughters marriage with
Ferdinand the younger. Now therefore, the same ambitious desire concurring in
these two great Princes: in the one, to remove all obstacles to what he had
formerly desseigned, in the other, to have a share in that whereto he
pretended, they accord upon this partage: The French King to have the city of
Naples, with all the Terra di Lauoro, and Province of Abbruzzo: The Spanish
King to hold the Province of Calabria and Puglia. That this practice shall be
kept secret till the French kings army were advanced on the way, as far as
Rome: till which time, the Ambassadors of them both should bear the Pope in
hand, that these great preparations were made by their Masters for a war upon
the Infidels and the general good of Christendom: but that then they should
require the inuestiture from the Pope, according to the tenor of this accord:
The Spanish King to be entitled Duke of Calabria and Puglia: and the French,
King of Naples and Jerusalem. Now Frederick, not discovering this complot, and
understanding that the French forces, of one thousand lances, four thousand
Swisse, and six thousand foot of Gascoigns and other French, were advanced as
far as Tuscany; and not knowing that the Spanish Armada in Sicilia (under
show of friendship and assistance) was prepared and there ready against
himself, desires Consaluo the Gran Capitano, and chief Commander of the
Spanish forces, to bring that fleet to Gaett. 1, for his succors. Consaluo
under color of safe retreite for his soldiers (but indeed to make his
masters purchase more easy) demands possession of certain towns in Calabria,
till the wars were ended, and then to be again surrendered. They are
delivered freely, without any suspicion had, or caution taken. Thus is the
poor credulous Prince most deceived by his nearest kinsman, and greatest
friend, and in whose power and love he most of all affied.

APHORISM X.
PErfidious violation of oath and covenant is as damnable as Atheism (if not
more:) Because it wilfully and wittingly abuses and scorneth that Deity, which
it necessarily, though unwillingly acknowledges. But when it is accompanied
with unnatural lust, and unhuman cruelty, hell has not a fit name, nor the
world a sufficient punishment for it. La Pariure est plus execrable que
l'Atheisme: d'autant que l'Atheisme qui ne Bod. rep. l. 5.
croit point en Dieu, ne luy fait pas tant d'iniure (ne pensent point qu'il yen
ait) que celuy qui scait bien, and le pariure par mocquerie.

Tam facile and pronum est superos contemnere testes. Iuue. Sat. 13. Idem.


Hic putat esse Deos, and peierat.

Sed licet homines peierantes lateamus, Deum tamen non latebimus. Aeso. fol. 82
Claudi. Eur.


Et ruit in vetitum damni secura libido.

(...). i. Deum deierans ne putes latere. Menander. Aristo. rhaet. ad Alex.


(...). Ne peiera: timens supplicium a Deo, and ab hominibus infamiam.

In prolem dilata ruunt periuria patris, Claudian. in Curaet. Bod. rep. l. 5.


Et poenam merito filius ore luit.

Puis que la foy est seul fondement and appuye de Justice, sur laquelle sont
fondees toutes les Republiques, Alliances, and Societez des hommes: aussi fault
il qu'elle demeure sacree and inviolable, es chooses que ne sont point iniustes.

Se vantoit de tromper les grands aux sermens, and les enfants aux osseletes.
Bod. de Lysa Plut.





Duke Valentinois, after a long siege before Faenza, capitulates with the
town, and with Astorre Manfredi, Lord thereof. He binds himself by oath (upon
surrender of the place) to save the lives and goods of the inhabitants, and to
give Manfredi his liberty to live where he list, with fruition of his own
proper inheritance. They yield upon these conditions. He keeps his word with
the Faentines: but Manfredi, a beautiful young gentleman under eighteen years
of age, is stayed by the Duke: under pretense to have him brought up in his
Court: and at first is entertained with all honorable demonstration. But ere
long, his innocent youth is forced to yield to the perfidious cruelty of the
victor: by whom, after satisfaction (as was said) of his filthy and unnatural
lust, he and his base brother are murdered in Rome.

APHORISM XI.
Thanks for benefits received, are turned into hate when they are so great as
they cannot be requited; or when they are bestowed upon him who takes them as
done of duty or necessity, and is unwilling to requite them. For in such a
man, the desire of having more, is stronger to wrong his friend and make war
upon him, then the memory of kindnesses received, either to requite those
former favors, or relinquish the action undertaken. Beneficia vsque eo laeta
sunt; dum videntur posse exolui: vbi multum anteuenere, Tacit. an. l. 4.
pro gratia odium redditur.

Quidam quo plus debent magis oderint. Senec. ep. 19 Ibid.


Le^e^ es alienam, debitorem facit, grave inimicum.

Adiutoribus imperij, pro necessitudinis iure, proque meritorum gratia, cruenta
mors persoluta est. Suet. in Cali.


Et dum quaerendis inhiat, quaesita non meminit.

Sic Aries nutricationis mercedem persoluit. (...). i. Aries alituram Pet.
Dial. 93. Adag. 292.
rependit.




Valentinois, after the taking in of Faenza, is created Duke of Romagna by the
Pope his father, with approbation of the Consistory. Vitellozzo and Orsini,
chief Leaders under him, and professed enemies to Florence, (the one for
revenge of his brother Vitellies death, the other for the restoring of his
banished friend Peter Medici) persuade the Duke to take the advantage of the
time, and to war upon that State, now while the French king stands so highly
displeased with her. The Florentines had never wronged either him or his
father: they had done them many favors and offices of friends they had at his
instance renounced the protection of the Riarij and their estates, to which
they were bound by article of covenant: they had given him free passage through
their country, of victuals and other provisions for his army in Romagna. All
this notwithstanding, he embraces the motion to war upon them: and for the
first engageure thereof, sends Liuerotto da Fermo with three hundred horse to
the succors of Pisa.

APHORISM XII.
IT is a damnable policy to make those whose confusion thou do wish, the
instruments of their own destruction: and no less devilish a device it is,
to draw men into the complice of thine offense, that they may be copartners of
thy punishment. Les hommes transportez de l'esprit de vengeance, n'omettent
indignite quelconque Am. Pl. Grac
qu'ils ne practiquent, pour executer leurs cruels desseigns.

Les tyrans aident a deffaire ceux, de qui ils se sont seruis, and les
trahissent malheureusement. Am. Pl. Agis


Qui a l'enuie de ruiner un autre, ietta la conscience au loin, and se soiiille
de trahison, Id. ibid.
pour y paruenir.

Statuit eum obiectare periculis, and eo modo fortunam tentare: Sperans vel
ostentando Salust. Iug.
virtutem, vel hostium saeuitia eum occasurum.

Sic Tolumnius Fidenates cruento scelere interficiendi Legatos implicuit, ne
Liui. l. 4.
spem vllam a Romany possint respicere.

Sic Catilinam, populares sceleris sui vt fidos faceret tanti facinoris
conscios, humani Salust. Cat.
corporis sanguinem vino permixtum in pateris circumtulisse.

Facinus quos inquinat, aequat. Lucan. l. 5.





Valentinois enters into the confines of Bologna, resolves to vsurp upon that
State, and expel Bentiuoglio: receives express charge and commandment from
the French king, not to proceed in the enterprise, because Bentiuoglio and that
State are under his protection. He obeys perforce, and accords with
Bentiuoglio: yet, for that he wished the ruin of him and of that State, and
that he might incur the citizens hatred, and put all in danger, he persuades
him that the family Marescotti had called him and his troops to those
confines, and had intelligence with him for the attempt. The Marescotti are a
noble and great house in Bologna: Bentiuoglio murthereth them almost all: his
son Hermes, and diverse young Lords of the town are ministers of this bloody
execution, whom Bentiuoglio purposely drew into the massacre; that their hands
being embrued in the blood of the Marescotti, and as deeply engaged in the act
as he, they might be hated of that family and their friends as well as
himself, and bound to desire the conservation of his estate, or forced to
run like misfortune with him.

APHORISM XIII.
IF it be lawful to capitulate and covenant with the enemy, it is unlawful
and unjust not to keep touch upon the accord. If faith be not to be kept with
such, why then do thou capitulate? In contracts therefore of truce or peace,
take heed how thou trust him in anything, who is ready to yield to euerything.
For he that speaks much more then he thinks, performs always much less
then he speaks. Si la foy ne doit estre gardee aux ennemis, elle ne doit pas
estre donnee: and au contraire, s'il est licite de capituler auec les ennemis,
aussi est il necessaire de leur Bod. rep. l. 4.
garder la foy.

Celuy qui iure pour tromper son ennemi, il monstre euidemment, qu'il se mocque
de Dieu, and ne craint que son ennemi. Id. ibid.


(...). Homer. Il. 9.
i.

Inimicus enim ille mihi aeque ac inferni portae, qui aliud quidem occultat
animo, aliud vero dicit.

Cum induciae nondum exissent, turpe fuisset victori Anglo violare inducias.
Polyd. l. 19. Ariost. can. 2.


Promesso gli ho, non gia per osseruargli

(Che fatto per timor nullo e il contratto)

Ma la mia intention fu per vietargli

Quel, che per forza harebbe alhora fatto.




The Florentines and Valentinois are accorded: He, because the French king was
displeased with his enterprise upon that State: and they, because they feared
the return of Peter Medici. Though Valentinois out of an old grudge he bare to
Medici, intended nothing less then his good, howsoever he fed him with vain
hopes, and made him the Stale of his own ambitious purpose: for he thought by
this means to win some town of importance from the Florentines, or to force
them to a farther agreement for his own advantage. The Articles agreed upon
are these: A confederation defensive between them: In general, not to aid
the one the others rebels: More expressly, they not to assist the Lord of
Piombino; he not to defend the Pisans. To give him entertainment with three
hundred men at arms for three years: and a yearly pension of thirty six
thousand Ducats. This accord made, he marches to Signa; burns and spoils
all by the way, as if it had been in the enemy country: knowing that they
only entertained him in their pay, to be rid of him for the present. He sends
to demand artillery of them, for his desseigned enterprise upon Piombino: and
that they would advance a quarters impressed of his entertainment. That former,
they flatly deny, as not being comprised in the covenants. This other, they
cunningly defer, being resolved not to perform that at all to which they had
yielded by force, and whereof they had assurance from their Ledger in the
French Court, that the King would free them.

APHORISM XIIII.
A Large kingdom is a great morsel, yet not enough to suffice the hungry
mawes of two that are ambitious: each will win the borse or lose the saddle;
have all, or lose all: for Love and Lordship brook no fellowship. It is
therefore great imprudence in him that admits of an equal, where himself may
be sole commander, or at least chief vmpire. Encores qu'vn grand Empire soit
un bien gros morseau, si ne peut il souffire a deux. Am. Plu. Art.


Non been cum socijs Regna Venusque manent. Ovid. Tac. an. 1. f. 6.


Eam conditionem esse imper andi, vt non aliter ratio constet quam si vni
reddatur.

Vnum esse reip corpus, at que vnius animo regendum.

Duo aut premunt remp. aut distrabunt. Tacit. an. l. 1. Id. l. 1. fol. 5.
Lucan. l. 1.


-- Partiri non potes orbem,

Solus habere potes. --

Non bonum est multorum imperium, rex vnicus esto. Homer Il.





The French King grants the moiety of the kingdom of Naples to fall to the
Spaniards share, and admits of a Rival in Italy where before himself was sole
arbiter: to whom all his open enemies, and discontented friends, might have
recourse, and who was lincked in parentade, and strict interest, with the
Roman Emperor; whom of all other Princes in the world, the French had most
reason to suspect: Whereas Frederick then King of Naples made humble suit unto
him by all possible means, to hold that realm of him in fee, with recognition
of fealty, and payment of yearly tribute. A fault which his predecessor
Charles 8. avoided: who was willing to give one of those former kings, fair
Estates and Honors in the realm of France, but would never yield to allow him
any one foot in the kingdom of Naples: but here one is admitted for a
partner, who shortly after shoulders out his companion.

APHORISM XV.
IN (...). i. Aures magis incredulae, quam oculi. Herod. Clio. Ruffin. Adag.
Hor. de art. poet.


De fide cuiusque, magis oculis quam auribus credendum.

Plus valet oculatus testis quam auriti december.

Segnius irritant animos demissa per aurem

Quam quae sunt oculis subiecta fidelibus, and quae

Ipse sibi tradit spectator.


the Tribunal, where men's actions are brought to trial, the ear is but a
promoter, the eye is both witness and judge. For, if what we only hear by
report do inform us, and not what we see in effect and by proof, there must
needs be error in that judgment: Christianorum omnium Religio est, sine
scelere, sine macula viuere. Lactant. Seneca. Incer. Aut. Lip. pol. l. 1.


Optimus animus, pulcherrimus Dei cultus est.

Troianus equus ideo fefellit, quia Mineruam mentitus est.

In verbis ne nimium mihi pruri, ad facta abi.


Because moral honesty like Christian piety, consists not in verbal
profession and protestation, but in actual practice, void of all corruption,
and spotless. He therefore that will not be deceived by State-hypocrites, who
make honesty and religion the cloak of their ambition, must not listen after
their words, but look into their actions: least his ears that tickle with
such pleasing report, do afterward tingle with the smart of the blow.

The French and Spanish Kings, bearing the fair titles of most Christian and
Catholic, chalenging to be the first sons of the Church, and her chief
champions, having now their ambitious thoughts wheeling about the Sphaere of
Christendom, do at last con-center in this one point; to take Naples from
Frederick the present King, and share it between them. The bargain is already
made: the writings drawn: the covenants endorsed: nothing wants but the
sealing thereof, which of necessity must be with the blood of many innocent
Christians employed in that war. To which end the Spanish forces are ready in
Sicilia, and the French troops are advanced as far as Rome. Till now, they
had made a glorious protestation, that this army was prepared against the Turk,
but here they plainly discover themselves: their Ambassadors come into the
Consistory: intimate to the Pope and Cardinals the league and partage made
between their masters: and demand their inuestiture in that kingdom,
according to the Tenor of their covenants: that they may forsooth (this being
done) bend both their forces upon the common enemy of Christian religion: A
thing never by them intended. And again, Ferdinand King of Spain, shadows
his treachery toward his kinsman Frederick, and his copartcinery with Jews
12. under color of necessity: pretending great danger if he did either defend
or abandon him. For, to defend him, were to kindle such a fire of war, as
would put all Christendom in co^bustion, and open a way to the Turk, whose
preparations were then very great both by sea and by land: and to abandon him,
were to put the kingdom of Sicilia into manifest hazard, lying so near; and
to prejudice his own right to Naples, in case the line masculine of Frederick
failed. And therefore he had taken the middle way, in hope ere long (through
the misgouernement of the French) to get the other moiety also: and then he
protested so to dispose of the whole, as should be best for the public good of
Christendom.

APHORISM XVI.
THe mother of him that fears, seldom weepeth. Men must therefore look
before them least they stumble, and behind them least they be overtaken; and on
either side, to meet danger which way soever it comes: for no man is in
greater peril then he that fears it least. Wherefore, upon a parley and
treaty of peace between the besieged and the leaguer, neither part must be
secure, but stand upon like guard of diffidence, as when they were in terms
of greatest deffiance. Matter timidi non solet flere. Probus. Seneca. Senec.
Sent. Id. Ibid.


Citius venit periculum cum convemnitur.

Vbi timetur, nihil quod timetur nascitur.

Qui metuit calamitates, rarius accipit.

Quae posse fieri non putes, metuas tamen. Senec. Oed. Senec. Sent. Senec.
Thye. Senec. Sent.


Caret periculo qui etiam cum tutus est cauet.

Serum est cauendi tempus in medijs malis.

Cauendi nulla est dimittenda occasio.




Fabritio Colonna is straightly besieged in Capua. He despaires of succors:
comes out upon the bulwark, and treates over the walls with Count Gaiazzo
about the capitulations of surrender. The soldiers within the town, upon
expectation of a present accord, keep a careless and slack guard upon the
walls. They without espying the advantage, and being greedy of the spoil,
give a sudden and furious assault; carry the place: sack it: and take those
prisoners which remained alive, after the fury of hot blood was over.

APHORISM XVII.
Adversity bends but never breaks a noble and undaunted courage: he
abandons not himself though all the world forsake him: but hopes that when
Fortune is come to the Brumall solstice of her frowning, she will be
retrograde, and shine again upon him with the beams of better success. A
Prince therefore plunged to the lowest deep of desasters, must beware he
sincke not to the neathermost hell of despair, whence is no redemption: but
reserve himself to better fortunes. Viuite fortes, -- Fortiaque aduersis
opponite pectora rebus. Venusi. Lir. Tacit. an. l. 4. Am. Plu. Cic.


Erectum and fidentem animi teipsum ostende.

Il faut ployer plus tossed que rompre: and se reseruer a meilleur temps.

(...). Decet Menand.
virum vere generosum far tum bona tum mala, si lapsus fuerit.

Vir est sapientissimus, qui tum quom res secundae sunt, se poterit noscere,
and Plaut. Stych
qui aequo animo patietur, sibi esse peius quam fuit.

Animus aequus, optimum est aerumnarum condimentum. Plaut. Rud. Lucan. l. 4.


Virtutis iam sola fides, quam turbine nullo

Excutiet Fortuna tibi. --

Per vno de megliori consigli che si possa dar a Prencipe, o a Priuato, stimo
io che sia, l'accomodarsi l'animo a qualunque accidente, o prospero o
desauuenturato che Am. in Tacit lib. 10.
possa auuenirgli.

-- Fisus cuncta sibi cessur a pericula Caesar.

Virtusque nostra nescit ignauos metus. Lucan. l. 8. Senec. Oed. Virg. Aen. 3.
Sen. Med. Lucan 4.


Fata viam inuenient, aderitque vocatus Apollo.

Fortuna opes auferre non animum potest.

Maiestas non fracta malis.




Frederick King of Naples is dispossessed of all he held in the realm, by the
Victors. He resolves in hate of the Spaniard, to flee into the arms of the
French Kings mercy, and end the remainder of his days in France, as desperate
of all hope ever to recover. He desires safe conduct: obtaines it: and sails
thither. The King gives him the Duchy of Aniow: and thirty thousand Ducats of
yearly reuenew for his maintenance. Prospero Colonna, his trusty friend and
soldier, had ever advised and importuned him to the contrary: dissuading this
course as unfortunate and desperate. Whose counsel if he had followed, the
great wars and troubles which after fell out between those two great Kings,
had made him an open way (if retired into some neuter place, and reserved there
for some good occasion) to the recovery of his lost kingdom.

APHORISM XVIII.
WHere Ambition is Captain, and Profit carries the Colors, there the Troop
of vices is strong: which breaks through all lets, and makes way against all
opposition, of justice, honesty, promise, oath, or what other religious
obligation soever. And so rank is this weed, as it ouer-growes all virtuous
and wholesome plants in the garden of Simples, or hearts of sincere
contracters. But so venomous withal is the poison thereof when it seizes upon
man, as no Antidote of former judgment, worthiness, courage, or noble
quality whatsoever, is sovereign enough to cure it. Haec taliaque sunt, quae
rectissimas etiam mentes a recto abstrahunt: and quo vtilitas vexillum suum
praetulit and explicuit, eo eunt. Lip. pol. l. 4.


Vt nemo doceat scelerum and fraudis vias, regnum docebit. Sen. Thyest. Mac. l.
3. disc


Ea fraus quae fit in re militari, fidem frangendo, pacta non conseruando,
nequaquam gloriosa.

Impia sunt haec:

Dulce lucrum ex mendacijs. Eras. 438. Senec. sent.


Quamuis non rectum, quod iuuat rectum puta.

Magistratibus, non aliter quam Medicis aduersus pueros and aegrotos, Bod. in
rep. 4
mentiri licet.

La feed vnqua non deue esser rotta

O data a un solo, o data insieme a mill: Ariost. cant. 21.


E cosi in vna selua, in vna grotta,

Lontan da le cittadi, e da le ville;

Come dinanzi a Tribunali, in frotta

Di Testimon, di Scritte, and di Postille:

Senza iurar, o segno piu espresso,

Basta vna volta che s'habbia promesso.




Gonsaluo the gran Capitano had received of free gift many Castles and
Seigneuries from Frederick king of Naples, to his own proper use and
inheritance. His master now sends him to make war upon him in Calabria:
before he sets forward, he dispatcheth a messenger to Frederick, to renounce
and redeliuer all those Estates and Castles, which he held by his gift. The
King wondering at his nobleness of spirit, confirms the former grant, and
reassures those Estates upon him. Gonsaluo has good success in those
Calabrese wars: marches to Taranto: sets down before it. The young Duke of
Calabria (eldest son to Frederick) is in the town, committed to the charge
of the Count of Potinga, who commands there in chief. He is forced, after a
long and straight siege, to capitulate with Gonsaluo, to yield up the city and
fortress, if within four months they were not relieved: taking the oath of
Gonsaluo upon the Sacrament, to leave the young Duke at liberty to go where he
listed. The time is expired: the town delivered: but neither the fear of God,
nor shame of men, could so much in Gonsaluo, as the Interest of State, knowing
how available it might be to his masters desseignes, to have the young Prince
in his power. He therefore contrary to his oath, sends him with a strong guard
into Spain.

APHORISM XIX.
ALL Nullum vtile est, quod non sit honestum. Cic. off. l. 2.


(...). i. Lucrum id esse existima quod iustum. Hesiod. Seneca.



Morallists hold nothing profitable that is not honest: Vbicunque tantum
honesta dominanti licent, precario regnatur.

(...). i. Viro principi aut Thucyd. l. 6.
ciuitati imperium habenti, nihil inhonestum quod vtile.

Cui omnia cum pretio honesta videntur. Salust. Iug.


Al tempo nostro siritrouan rade,

A cui piu del guadagno, altro sia caro. Ariost. ca^t. 16


(...). i. Honestum and iustum in commodo and vtilitate ponens. Plut. Lacon.
apop. de Lys. senec. sent. Iuuen. Sat. 14


Nil turpe ducas pro salutis remedio.

Ne credas ponendum aliquid discriminis inter

Vnguenta and corium: Lucri bonus est odor ex re

Qualibet.


Some Politics have inuerted this order, and perverted the sense, by
transposing the terms in the proposition: holding nothing honest that is not
profitable. How soever those former may seem too straight laced, these surely
are too loose. Ciuilis virtus, dispositio potius ad virtutem quam virtus.

Virtutes ciuiles secundum normam a prudentia illis impositam operantur.
Plotin. Alcy. Platon Tacit. Agric. Plut. in polit Tacit. hist. 1. Auson. f. 92.


Velimus Principem alto animo, sed tamen eruditum vtilia honestis miscere.

Necessarium est in paruis a Iustitia abire, qui eam saluam velint in magnis.

Intuta quae indecora.

Nunquam discrepet vtile a decoro.


For there is a middle way between both, which aright Statesman must take.

Valentinois sends Vitellozzo and John Baglione to besiege the town of
Piombino. Jacob d' Appiano Lord thereof, and in the French kings protection,
leaves the town and fortress well manned, and goes into France. He desires
the King for his own honor, not to abandon his poor distressed client, and
see him perish. The King shadows his refusal with no veil of excuse, but
answers him in plain terms, that though indeed he ought to defend him, and
interpose in his business, yet he nor would nor could oppose against the Pope,
without great loss to himself. The poor Signor loses his Estate.

APHORISM XX.
IT is no Paradox, to be rich with little, nor to be poor with much because
Content is the poor man's riches, and Desire the rich man's poverty, which is
never satisfied. For whereas all things in nature are finite and terminable
within the limits of their peculiar period, and all humors and affections of
the mind are fixed upon their proper objects, and quietly settled in the center
of their fruition; only that of ambitious Couetise is infinite and endless:
For it gives as much vexation of soul after the purchase acquired, as there
was at first travail in the acquiring; still suggesting and supplying new
fuel to the fire of his desire. Difficile est nos contentos esse eo quod
offert occasio: quippe sordent prima quaeque, cum maiora sperantur. Curt. gest.
Alex.


Omnis cupido acquirendi, ex opinione inopiae venit: nec refert quam magnum sit
quod tibi minus est. Apul. deMagia. l. 1. Pot. in Guic. Senec. ep. 74


Dell' hauere ottenute le cose desiderate, s'accrescono sempre i disegni.

Nemo quos vincit, sed a quibus vincatur aspicit: Et illis non tam iucundum est
multos videre post se, quam grave aliquem ante se.

Et quando vberior vitiorum copia? quando Iuuen. Sat. 1.


Mayor auaritiae patuit sinus?

Creuerunt and opes, and opum furiosa cupido,

Et cum possideant plurima, plura petunt. Ovid.


Si quantas rapidis flatibus incitus

Pontus verset arenas, Boeth. de Con. l. 1. met. 2.


Tantas fundet opes, nec retrahat manum

Plena copia cornu,

Humanum miser as haud ideo genus

Cesset flere querelas.




Jews 12. is peacefully possessed of the Duchy of Millan: no one town there
of is out of his hands, but only Cremona and Ghiaradadda, which the Venetians
hold by virtue of the late covenants made between them, when they both entered
into the war upon this State. The King is not yet satisfied: those two Pieces
are eye-sores to him: he therefore treates of a peace with the Emperor, both
to be eased of a great deal of charge and danger, as also to obtain the
Inuestiture of this Duchy, but especially to have free power to offend the
Venetians, and to rincorporate those two fair members Cremona and Ghiaradadda
into the body of this State: and then after to take from them Bergamo, Crema
and Brescia, all branches of the same tree, but lopped off, and quietly
possessed by the Venetians, ever since the time of Philip-Maria Visconti.

APHORISM XXI.
THe vicissitude of things and change of times, begets new counsels and
deliberations in States, and enforces necessarily the knitting or dissoluing
of Alliance between them. What is useful to day, may be hurtful to morrow,
as showers that are seasonable in the Spring, and unwelcome in the Harvest.
Wherefore, to temporise by leuelling and adapting our actions to the occasion
present and presented, is requisite policy. (...). Nosce opportunitatem: haec
enim rerum est Hesiod.
optima.

(...). i. Praesentibus apt se accommodans. Scholi. Thu. Adag.


(...). Omnium rerum est vicissitudo.

(...). Amicum vel aduersarium fieri oportere ex Thucyd. l 6.
temporis commoditate.

Quo se fortuna, eo se favor hominum inclinat. Justin. l. 5. Di. Cafs. 391.
Polyb. l. 4.


Fidei ambiguae, ac semper foelicioris parts potiores habens.

Quamdiu spem subsidij in amicis ac socijs habent, tamdiu cum ijs amicitiam
putant seruandam.

Cum fato conuersa fides. Lucan. l. 2. Ovid.


Et cum fortuna statque caditque fides.




The Florentines had been long in the French Kings protection: The Cardinal of
Roan his Lieutenant governor in Millan, alleges the date thereof to be
expired. They sue for a prolungation: he is in hope of peace with the Emperor,
and will not hear their suite, or at least propounds such conditions as are
unreasonable. He takes into protection the Lucchesi, their enemies. He deals
with the Sanesi and Pisans to join together, for the restoring of the banished
Medici, and troubling of the State of Florence. He desires to draw from these
Allies no small sum of money. He makes his demands: the matter comes to
stipulation, and there quaileth: because these small States plead vnhability,
to pay the money demanded. Mean while the hope of peace between him and the
Emperor grows cold, and almost desperate. The Emperor himself is to go in
person to Rome, to be crowned. He sends to Florence: demands one hundred
Lances, and thirty thousand Ducats toward his conuoy, and expense in that
journey: upon which he will be engaged to undertake their protection against
all men. The French King fearing least they should condescend to the Emperors
demands, because they despaired of his friendship, enclines to more reasonable
conditions then at first he offered, and takes them anew into his protection.

APHORISM XXII.
AS in things we have, so in those we do, each has his proper trial, to
prove the excellency thereof in his kind: Gold by the test, the Diamant by
his hardness, Pearl by his water: So, the best discouerers of men's minds are
their actions: the best directer of actions is counsel: and the best trial
of counsels, is Experience. Nunguam ita quisquam hene subducta ratione ad
vitam fuit, Ter. Adelph.


Quin res, aetas, vsus, semper aliquid apportet noui,

Aliquid moneat, vt illa quae te scire credas, nescias,

Et quae tibi putaras prima, in experiundo repudies.

Il piu vero ammaestramento, e quello che si prende dall' esperienza, Am. in
Tacit Cicero.


Experientia omnium magistrorum praecepta superat.

Optima institutio experientia. Salust. Iug. Polyb. l. 1.


Experientia facit vt vita nostra secundum arts progrediatur, imperitia
secundam fortunam.

Instructiores ad operandum, qui periculis and rerum experientia quam qui artis
Plato. Gor.
solum praeceptis edocti sunt.

Scit been venator ceruis vbi retia tendat, Ovid. art. l. 1.


Scit been qua frendens valle moretur aper:

Aucupibus noti frutices, etc.

Eudamidus audito philosopho qui disseruerat (solum sapientem esse bonum belli
ducem) sermo inquit mirificus est, at qui eum dicit fide caret, eo quod illum
nunquam Plut. in Lac. Apop.
circumsonuit tuba. Probauit sententiam, sed indicauit neminem cum fide loqueui
de re, quam nullo modo sit expertus.




A confederation is concluded between the French King and the Florentines.
They may now boldly renew their war upon Pisa: wherein they had for a time
surceased, for fear of displeasing this King, or stirring other Princes of
Italy against them. The question is now debated in Council, how to make this
war. Some years before upon the first ouuerture of the Pisan rebellion, a
grave Councellor of State had advised them, rather to reduce the rebels to
obedience, by length of time, cutting off all means of succor or relief, and
extremity of want, then by assault and expugnation: Because, though it were a
longer, yet it was a surer way, of more hope, and less danger or charge. And
that in these general troubles and garboiles of Italy, by keeping their money
in the treasury, they might work their own ends upon all occasions: By
seeking to force them, they should find the enterprise very difficult, upon a
city so strongly fortified, and full of obstinate defendants: and when it were
brought to the last push, all the neighbor States that were loath it should be
lost, would give them assistance. This grave and prudent advice was then
refused, and the contrary embraced. But now at length that with many years
experience, great sums exhausted, and their business no whit advanced, they
had found it the best way, they resolve to follow it: and accordingly send all
their troops to wast and spoil all the corn and grain in the Pisan
territory: with express charge to proceed no further.

APHORISM XXIII.
AS in a particular Purchase, so in partage of a Kingdom, each boundary and
butting must precisely be set down: And the names of places must be taken
according to the latest and most vulgar acception: but yet, with an alias
dictus, and relation of their ancient appellation, to avoid all causes of
litigious quarrel, either by the law, or the sword. For such is the
wilfulness of covetous purchasers and ambitious Princes, as these limits are
seldom so perfectly butted out, but that they yield matter of difference and
occasion of wars to such as these, disposed ever to quarrel. Nelle
differenze de' nomi, and de' confini delle Prouincie, s' attend sempre all vso
Cuicciard.
present.

Dove s' accompagnano piu Prencipi che pretendono d'esser pari, nascono
facilmente Por. in Guic. l. ^.
tra loro sospetti, and contenzioni.

-- Sic Gallica certus Lucan. l. 1.


Limes ab Ausonijs disterminat arua Colonis. (scilicet Rubicon.)

Sic inter Carthaginenses and Cyrenenses, neque flumen neque mons erat qui
fines eoru^ Salust. Iug.
discerneret: quae res eos in magno diuturnoque bello inter se habuit: tande^
sponsionem faciunt vti certo die legati domo profecti, quo in loco inter se
obuij fuissent, is communis vtriusque populi finis haberetur. Ibique ex pacto
Philoeni fratres viui obruti, quo fines constituti.

Neque enim dubium quin extrema dissideant, nisi media coniungantur. Bod. fol.
607 Lucan. l. 5.


-- Iam voce doloris

Vtendum est, non ex aequo diuisimus orbem.




The Spaniard and the French have shared the whole kingdom of Naples between
them, according to the articles agreed upon. They are not in possession one
whole year, before they grow in difference for the Capitanato, a Province of
that realm. The French will have it no part of Puglia: the Spaniard will not
yield it a part of Abbruzzo. In the articles of their agreement the confines
and limits of each several Province were not so distinctly set down, as had
been requisite, for the clearing of all doubts, and prevention of all future
differences between those great Princes. It made the matter also more
litigious, because it is one of the fruitfullest Provinces of that kingdom,
and fullest of cattle: upon which, the Prince raises yearly a great reuenew.
They divide the Entrade by equal portions between them, till they have
farther order from their Kings. Mean while, another controversy no less
then the former, arises about the ancient and modern appellation of the
Provinces: the Spaniard affirms, that the Principato and Basilicata, with the
valley of Beneuentum (which the French held) were part of Calabria: and
therefore send their officers to Tripalda, to keep their Courts there, being a
place not two miles distant from Auelli, where the French officers did reside:
the French maintain the contrary: the matter proceeds to farther terms of
quarrel between them: Nemours the Viceroy, and Gonsaluo the Deputy, meet to
treat upon the difference: they disagree, and depart. Nemours within few days
after denounces war upon them, in case they quit not their pretended claim,
and sends his forces to Tripalda, to expulse the Spaniard. From which days
incursion, the war between those two great Princes took the beginning.

APHORISM XXIIII.
Upon Securitati consulas antequam vindictae. Tacit. an. l. 11


Discordiae retraxere Ducem, destinationis certum, ne noua moliretur nisi
prioribus firmatis. Tacit. an. 12.


Adhibito temporis spacio in consilium, quod minime locum parabit poenitentiae,
ad puniendum nos confer oportet. Plut. de his qui sero pun



certain notice of some treasonable plot or practice in a town, the Governor
must first assure the place, and then more fully search into the treason, and
punish the traitors: either all, for the offense; or the ringleaders for
example. Severity in this case is but Justice: Lenity puts all in hazard. Ne'
Gouerni, il premio e vtile, ma la pena e necessaria.

Cotys, increpanti seueritatem eius, and furorem non regnum appellanti: At meus
Rag. Stat. l. 9 Apop. Eras.
(inquit) hic furor subditos sanos reddit.

Perfugae Romani missi, virgis in comitio caesi, and de saxo deiecti.

In Veliternos, veteres ciues, grauiter saeuitum est, quod toties rebellassent:
Muri Bodi. e Liui. Liu. l. 8.
Deiecti, Senatus abductus.

At paucos, quibus haec rabies authoribus arsit, Lucan. l. 5.


Non Caesar sed poena tenet.

Vincite ferro, verberum vis extrahat secreta mentis. Senec. Hipol


Dum paucis sceleratis parcis, Bonos omnes is perditum. Salust.


Les Princes and Magistrates, qui affectent la gloire d'estre misericordieux,
versent Bod. rep. l. 4.
sur leur test la peine que les coulpables ont merit.

Adijciendos ex duce metus, sublatis seditionis authoribus.

Paucis interfectis, in reliquos data venia. Tacit. an. 1. Idem. an. 12. Tacit.
hist. 1. Thucyd. 3. Tacit. hist. 1. Mac. l. 3. c. 26


Autores seditionis ad supplicium postulabat.

December praecipui authors.

Decimatio Galbae.

Principibus seditionis securi percussis.


Wherefore against such intestine ambush, we must first take up the buckler of
safety, and then draw out the sword of justice.

Pazzi the Florentine Commissary in Arezzo has certain intelligence, that
diverse principal citizens had secretly conspired with Vitellozzo to betray the
town. He will not believe that the hearts of so many could be poisoned with so
pestilent a venom of treason. He persuades himself that the authority of the
name Public, would supply his want of greater forces; and therefore without
better strengthening of himself, or providing for suppression of the rest of
the conspirators, he only arrested and committed two of them. The people are
in tumult through the instigation of the other accomplices, and general hate
they bear the Florentines. They rise in arms: rescue the prisoners: imprison
Pazzi himself, with the other officers: send presently for Vitellozzo, and
stand out in manifest rebellion.

APHORISM XXV.
MVch A Cuniculis suffossum in Hispania oppidum: a Talpis in Thessalia, etc.
Plin. l. 8. c. 29 Plin. pan.



hurt has often been done by small contemptible creatures: a great town in
Spain undermined by Conies; another in Thessaly by Moles: in Assricke the
people were forced to quit their country by Locusts: out of Giaros they were
driven by Rats. In publicis Consilijs nil tam inaequale, quam ipsa aequalitas:
Nam cum sit impar omnium prudentia, par omnium ius est.

Tam mutabile est vulgi ingenium, vt quid constanter velit aut nolit, haud
Demost. oly.
facile intelligi potest.

Scinditur incertum studia in contraria vulgus.

Ait quis, aio: Negat, nego. (Vt Parasitus apud Poetam, sic vulgus.) Virg. Aen.
2. Terent. Lip. an. l. 3.


Hoc locum non habet in Principe, qui potens est rerum, and ad suam sententiam
omnes trahit.

Tarda sunt quae in commune expostulantur. Tacit. an. 1. Auson. fol. 92 Thucyd.
l. 1.


Aequalitas ordinem nescit pati.

Quum in suffragijs dandis omnes sint aequales, suo quisque commodo vacant,
commune honum ab omnibus perdi.

(...). i. In populo ignorantia, confusio, malitia. Xen. Athen. resp.



Like hurt does the contemptible multitude in a State merely Popular, upon any
case that comes into deliberation: because there is a disparitie of prudence in
their understandings, and yet a paritie of power in their voices, by which all
great affairs are carried and resolved.

It is debated in the Council at Florence, how to assure the Cittadell of
Arezzo, and to recover the town from Vitellozzo and the rest of the
conspirators. The wiser and better sort are of opinion, that nothing is more
necessary in this case then speed: that Vitellozzo, Baglione, Medici, Petrucci,
Orsini, and the rest of that practice, could not suddenly draw their troops
thither; because the Mine of the conspiracy took fire, and was discovered
sooner by many days then they expected, or their provisions were ready for the
enterprise desseigned: it was therefore most expedient for the State, presently
to send thither their army which lay encamped before Vicopisano: for, so should
the fruit of the enemies plot wither before it were ripe, and themselves fail
of their expectation. But they of the popular sort, who then bore chief office
and sway in the Council, and were the greater number by far, incapable of
any sound reason, and intractable to any good motion, affirm the cause of
Arezzo to be so slight, and the recovery so faisible, as the Pesants near
about that town were sufficient to regaine it: And that those other
Counselors had given that their advice, out of a dislike they had of the
present form of government, and because they would still have Pisa hold out in
rebellion. These men overrule the business: no forces are sent, nor order
taken for the recovery. The Cittadell is likewise lost: so is Cortona,
Castiglione, San Souino, and all other their towns and castles in the valley
of Chiana.

APHORISM XXVI.
IT Per maximam amicitiam, maxima fallendi copia. Salust. Iug.


Pompeius imagine pacis, Lepidus specie amicitiae deceptus.


was one of his policies, out of whose Actions sprang many of the Florentines
Axioms, To give most assurance of his faith and friendship to that man, whom
he first meant to deceive and despoile of his State. Pax viro Principi intoler
abilis, quae labem ei aut ignominiam affert. Tacit. an. 1. Lip. pol. l. 5. Cic.
Philip. Sen. Theb. Sen. de Tran Senec. Sent.


Pax ea sit, non pactio seruitutis. Pace suspecta tutius bellum.

In seruitutem cadere de regno, grave est.

Quandoque horae momentum est inter solium and aliena genua.

Ita habeas amicum, posse vt fieri inimicum putes.

Pacem and conditiones abnuebant, discrimen ac dedecus ostentantes, and fidem
in libidine victoris. Tacit. hist. 3


Habe amicum, quasi inimicum potentia. Senec. Sent.



He therefore that upon such trust disarmes himself, and puts the sword into
the others hand, is guilty through his foolish credulity, of his own proper
ruin. For such actions as these, are plain perfidie in the one, and mere
madness in the other.

Valentinois marches with his army from Rome: he pretends the expugnation of
Camerino; whither he had sent the Duke Grauina and Liuerotto da Fermo before,
to rauage and spoil the contry therabout. But indeed he desseignes by some
treacherous stratageme to surprise the Dukedom of Vrbine. He is come to the
co^fines of Perugia: he demands of Guidobaldo the present Duke, certain pieces
of Cannon and troops of men for this pretended siege of Camerino. The Duke
grants his demand, in an assured confidence of his friendship and truth,
because he had lately compounded all differences with him and the Pope his
father, and therefore saw now no cause of suspicion or apprehension of fear.
Valentinois had no sooner disarmed the credulous Duke, but he leads all his
army with a long and sharp march, (scarce allowing them time to feed) and
never stays till he come to Cagli a town of the Duchy. He sets down before
it, takes it, and in short space after, all the rest of that State, except
only the two forts of S. Leo and Maiuolo. The poor Duke, with his nephew the
Provost of Rome, are forced to flee the country in pesants attire. Again: after
Valentinois had effected this exploit, he sets upon Camerino: makes Iulio da
Varano Lord thereof believe, that he will yield to some good composition with
him. Varano comes to him to treat of the accord. During the treaty, he is
treacherously intrapped with his two sons, and the town surprised. This done,
he instantly strangleth the father and the children. Vitellozzo, Petrucci, and
the Orsini, his old soldiers and faithful followers, are amazed and
affrighted at the action, and abhor the actor. Their Estates likewise border
near upon his, and therefore fearing like measure, they fall from his service,
and combine against him.

APHORISM XXVII.
THe Aliquid mali propter vicinum malum. Plaut.


Decebat vos praecipue qui finitimi estis, quique secundum nos periclitabimini,
Thucyd. l. 6.
ista prospicere.

Si neglexissemus vos, ipsi periculum adiremus. Idem. fol. 160 Thucyd. l. 8.


At illi qui statum paucorum agitabant, posteaquam vulgo rem communicauerant,
rursus and sibijpsis and plerisque sodalium prospiciebant.

Propriae quoque causae stimulabant. Tacit. An. 2.



neighborhood to danger is dangerous: And therefore men must seek to quench
the fire in the next house, though it be their enemies, least it come to their
own. Rare volte succeed quel che e desiderato da molti: perch dependendo
communemente gl' Guicciard.
effetti dell'azioni humane dalla volonta di pochi, and essendo l'intentione
and i fini di questi, quasi sempre diuersi dall'intentione and i fini di molti:
possono difficilmente le cose succedere altrimente, che secondo l'intentione di
coloro chi danno loro il moto.


But such general desires are often thwarted and made frustrate; because the
ends of those few from whose means and authority such actions must have their
life and performance, are commonly contrary to the wills of those many that
make the motion.

The feate done upon Vrbine and Camerino, and the murder executed upon Varano
and his Sons by Valentinois, make other neighbor Princes and States of Italy
to look better about them. Vitellozzo, Petrucci, and the Orsini, send the
Cardinal Orsini to the French King, then at Asti, to complain of his
ambition, treachery, and cruelty. The Florentines, and many other States and
Princes, come either in person, or by their Agents, to make like complaint to
his Majesty, and sue for redress. The King is much incensed against
Valentinois: vows a journey in person, to tame the pride of such monsters in
nature as was he, and the Pope his father: protests, the service to be as holy
and meritorious, as if it were against the Turk himself. But this heat of the
Kings zeal is quickly cooled. For the Cardinal of Roan, desirous to advance
some of his creatures to church dignities, and thinking it a step to the papacy
whereto he aspired, and a great honor to be accounted protector of the sea of
Rome, by all possible means labors the King to the contrary. Besides the King
fears the Popes joining with the Emperor against his coming into Italy. He
suspects the Venetians will combine with them both: and lastly, he has not yet
ended his difference with the Swisse, about his pretension to Belinsone: nor
hopes of any good measure from the King of Spain, with whom he is now entered
into open war, about the parting of Naples. In all which considerations, he
forgets his former vow, and promise made to the Plaintiffes: accepts of the
message sent him from the Pope by Troccies: and receives Valentinois coming
unto him, wlth all demonstration of honor and favor.

APHORISM XXVIII.
ENter into no war but that which is just. No war can be just, unless it
be for the saving of thy honor or estate. Wherefore when two Princes are in
arms, and neither of these two Jewels in any danger of prejudice, engage thy
self with neither: for in this case, it is better to be a looker on, then to
be an abettor. Repello bellum non infero. Alex. Dario apud Curt. Cic. rep. l.
3. Lip. pol. l. 5.


Nullum bellum a ciuitate optima suscipitur, nisi aut pro fide, aut pro salute.

Maneas in defensione, nec hoc praetextupedem manumve moueas, vt aliena
apprehendas.

Tutum est, medium inter duos, expectare belli euentum. Dion. Cassi. Lucan. l.
3.


Pugnaces dubium Parthi tenuere fauorem

Contenti fecisse duos. --

Mente ambigua, fortunam seditionis alienae speculabantur. Tacit. An. 1.





The diffidence and jealousy which the Orsini and their adherents had of
Valentinois, does now break out to an open war. These men enter into a
confederation-defensiue, for them selves and the Duke of Vrbine, against
Valentinois only. And fearing to offend the French King by this league, they
offer him to be bound to serve him in person with all their forces, in any of
his wars, whenever he shall please to employ them. They seek also by all
means the favor and consent of the Venetians. To the State of Florence they
offer the recovery of Pisa, in case she will declare for them, and enter into
this combination. The French has not yet consented: the Venetians will give no
answer, till they see which way the French enclineth. But the Florentines,
holding both the one side and the other for their capital enemies, utterly
refuse to be comprised.

APHORISM XXIX.
IN an ancient Inheritance and well settled State, fortresses are only needful
upon the Frontiers, and against the bordering enemy: But in the bowels of a
country they are vselesse, and in some cases prejudicial and dangerous. If
therefore a Prince be forced to abandon his State, and give way to necessity,
and will ever hope to return when the times are more propitious; let him raze
all these inland forts before his departure: He shall find his return and
restitution more easy. In sinibus aut contra hostem, haud valde arces spernem,
in mediterreis and contra Lip. pol. l 4.
ciuem, valde.

Sane arces non tam firmae compedes quam censentur: ad exiguum motum valide,
Id. Ibid.
fragiles ad magnum.

Arces extruuntur duplici de causa: ad hosts arcendos, ad subditos
compescendos, Mac. l. 2. dis. 24.
and in officio continendos: ad priorem vsum non necessariae, ad posteriorem
inutiles and noxiae.

Arces and propugnacula ciuem ignauum efficient: O muliebres latebras (exclamat
Bod. rep. 5.
Cleomenes) de oppido art and natura munitissimo.

Inde Lycurgum Lacedaemonijs arces and propugnacula ademisse. Ibid.


Solummodo prodesse quount arces alique in finibus imperij, locis praesertim
maritimis Mac. l. 2. dis. 24.
positae, ad sustinendos hosts per dies aliquot, donec exercitus instruantur.




The Duke of Vrbine had been driven out of his State by Valentinois, and was
fled to Venice: during his absence the fortress of S. Leo, a piece of great
importance, and which held longest for him, returns now again to his
obedience. Upon the first intimation of this good news, he returns home by
sea, and quickly recouers the whole Duchy, some few castles excepted. Mean
while Valentinois accords with the Orsini, and their colleagues: and sends
them with all their troops to attempt Vrbine the second time, in assurance of
good success, and speedy prevailing, by reason of those castles within the
Duchy which still held good for him. The distressed Duke is distracted
between hope and fear, unresolved whether to affie in the confident
protestations of his subjects, who offered to live and die in his service, or to
avoid the tempest of so dangerous a war. At last the fear of danger
ouercomes his hope of assistance, and forces him flee the second time to
Venice. But before his departure, having learned by experience, the danger of
these inland fortresses, he razeth them all that were in that State, save only
S. Leo. and Maiuolo.

APHORISM XXX.
THere is no security against a reconciled enemy, and one of notorious perfidy;
but diffidence, and bolding him out at the swords point. For if thy credulity
bring thee within distance of his reach, and that he seethy life lie open
without good guarde, his malice and revenge straight take the advantage, and
play their parts: making the Act tragical, and the Scaene bloody. Pulchr a
loguentes, ijdem in pectore praua struebant. Ho. Ody. B. August.


Nocendi cupiditas, implacatus and implacabilis animus, feritas bellandi,
libido dominandi: haec sunt quae iure culpantur in bello.

Cum inimico nemo in gratiam tuto redit. Sen. Sent. Mur. in Tac. Tac. Agric.


Qui iniuria laesus sit, interdum ignoscere: qui iniuria laeserit, nunquam.

Optimum in praesentia statuit, reponere odium.

Destinatio vindictae si facult as oriretur. Id. An. 15.


Simultates Mutianus callide, eoque implacabilius nutriebat. Tac. hist. l. 3.
Am. Plut. Gr Id. Demet.


Il n'y a foy ny loyaute en des coeurs desireux de vengeance.

Quand l' Ambition seule gouuerne les hommes, on remarque encores quelque
courtoisie en leur folly: Mais, si l' Avarice and la vengeance s'y meslent,
leur tragedies sont sanglantes and du tout furieuses.




Valentinois finds the way stopped to his ambitious desseignes, unless he can
unknit the knot of the late combination against him. To work which his
purpose, he holds it fittest to deal with one of them apart; and of these, him
that he thought the weakest in judgment to discover his falsehood, and the
strongest in power to draw the rest. Such a one he held Paul Orsini. Him
therefore he calls to Imola, under safe conduct, and sends the Cardinal Borgia
in pledge for him. With him he uses many fair and flattering insinuations. He
complains to him, not so much because he and his fellows (who had faithfully
served him a long time) did now upon vain surmises and suspicions forsake him;
as of his own ignorance, that had not known how to carry himself toward so
many and so brave soldiers, nor how to prevent such future iealousies and
misconstructions. He hopes that this diffidence grown in them without just
cause given on his part, should beget between them and him a perpetual and
indissoluble conjunction: he protests, that having now better opened the eyes
of his understanding by this experience, he must and does ingenuously
acknowledge, that by their good direction and valor alone he was come to the
great for tune and reputation which he now has: and therefore is most desirous
to return to a true friendship, and renew the old league and confederation
between them: and offers for performance to give them what caution and
security they should demanund. Paul Orsini credits these his dissembled
protestations: deals with his kinsman the Cardinal Orsini, and draws him to
accept of the motion. These two, with Pandolpho Petrucci, persuade Vitellozzo
and John Baglione to yield to an accord. The articles concluded are these: A
cancellation of all fore-passed wrongs, and an extirpation of all conceived
hatred on both sides: a confirmation on his part, of their former
entertainment; and obligation on theirs, to go as his soldiers to the recovery
of Vrbine: but with this prouiso, for their better security, that they should
not be bound to go personally above one of them at once; nor should the
Cardinal be bound to make his residence at Rome. The cause of Bologna to be
referred over by way of transaction, to the free arbitration of Valentinois,
the Cardinal Orsini, and Petrucci. The accord thus made, they presently
recover him all the Duchy of Vrbine, with the town and province of Camerino.
They encampe before Sinigaglia: they take both the town and castle. While they
are thus warring for the advancement of Valentinois his affairs, himself is
as busy plotting their destruction. He dislodgeth from Imola to Cesena: thence
to Fano: from hence he sends word to Vitellozzo and the Orsini, that the next
day he would come with his own troops, and lodge in Sinigaglia: and therefore
wills them that they draw their companies out of the town, and dispose them in
the suburbs and villages thereabouts. His pleasure is fulfilled: their foot
are billetted in the suburbs: their horse are quartered in other places not
far off. Next day Valentinois comes: he is met upon the way by Paul Orsini,
the Duke of Grauina, Vitellozzo, and Liuerotto da Fermo. He receives them with
great semblance of love and favor. They attend him to the gates of the city,
where they find all his troops at a stand, in strong array, and greater
number then they expected. Their hearts begin to misdoubt, and to prompt them
that they are betrayed, yet they put on the best countenance, offer to take
leave, and return to their troops. He pretends farther cause of necessary
conference with them, and draws them (being now too late to refuse) into the
town. Here he caused them to be seized on, and sent out his troops presently
to deffeat and rifle their companies. Next day he strangleth Vitellozzo, and
Liuerotto da Fermo. Like dispatch he made within few days after of Paul
Orsini, and the Duke of Grauina.

APHORISM XXXI.
Seldom Alexander le Pape ne faisoit rien de ce qu'il disoit: son filz ne
disoit rien Bod. rep. l. 5.
de ce qu'il faisoit.

(...). Mali corui malum ouum. Eras. Adag. Allusio e Poeta.


Crudelis pater magis, an puer improbus ille?

Improbus ille puer, crudelis tu quoque pater.

Ex pessimo genere ne catulum quidem habendum. Cusp. de Max Sueto. Nero


Domitij vox fuit, negantis quicquam ex se and Agrippina nisi detestabile and
malo publico nasci potuisse.


shall we see such a father as Alexander, without such a son as Valentinois:
nor such a son but of such a father. For the plant is known by the fruit:
and as is the egg, so is the bird that hatcheth it: Immo nec in iudicium
quosdam Proditores adducere oportet, si necessitas Dion. l. 52.
it a postulat: sed hostium loco illico punire.

Toll omnes: nam profecto parents liberique eorum qui interfecti, and
propinqui, Sen. de Cle.
and amici, in locum singulorum succedunt: His poenam si tuto poteris donabis:
sin minus, temperabis.

Vindica princeps: Non tua proprie, sed reip. haec vindicta. Lip. pol. l4.
Eras. Adag.


Testudinis carnes aut edas, aut non edas. (n.) Si modice edantur ventris
tormina faciunt, si copiose, leniunt. Sic supplicia, etc.


Yet as in Physic, wholesome use is made of poison and venomous things; so in
policy men may learn by the villainous and bloody carriage of such men's
actions, how to manage a just and lawful cause in doing execution upon rebels
and traitors: Namely, to do nothing to the halfes: but when the sword of
justice is drawn, to throw the scabberd into the fire.

A post is dispatched to Rome from the son to his father, with news of the
stratageme at Sinigaglia. The Pope keeps it secret: sends for the Cardinal
Orsini then in town, to come to Court. He repaires to the Vatican upon the
first summons, in assurance of the late accord, and affiance in the Popes
promise. At his coming he is arrested, and committed prisoner to the Castle S.
Angelo. The Pope means to make all sure, and to lay hands upon all the other
heads of the family Orsini. Rinaldo the Archbishop of Florence, with the Abbot
of Aluiano, and Iacopo Santa Croce, are all suddenly apprehended in their
houses, and imprisoned. The Cardinal after twenty days durance, dies; of
sickness, as it was given out, but of poison, as it was verily and generally
believed. The Pope makes present seizure of all their lands.

APHORISM XXXII.
SOme advantages in battle are personal: as better men and horse, or more
numbers of both. Some are real: as more money, or better arms. Some are
formal: as better discipline in governing, and better order in fight. And some
are accidental, as the Sun, the wind, and the place. Now among all these,
the two last ( Disciplina est seuera conformatio militis ad robur and virtutem.
Quae quidem nunc dierum, non dicam languet apud nos, sed obijt: Neque mala sed
nulla est. Lip. pol. l. 4.


O quam facile erat orbis imperium occupare, aut mihi Romany militibus, aut me
rege Romany! Pirrh. in Flo.


In omni praelio non tam multitudo and virtus indocta, quam ars and exercitium,
Veget. l. 1.
solent praestare victoriam.

Ordinatus exercitus, iucundissimum aspectu amicis, molestissimum quiddam
Xenoph.
hostibus est.

Quod de Alexandro Seuero dicitur, Parthicam expeditionem tanta disciplina,
Cusp. fol. 97.
tanta reuerentia egisse, vti non milites sed Senatores ire dicerentur.


of better order in fight, Amplius potest locus saepe quam virtus. Veget. l. 3.
Lip. pol. l. 4. Veget. l. 3.


Loci ratio habenda, vtrum inimicis an tibi videatur accommodus.

Si equitatu audemus, campos debemus optare: si peditatu, loca eligere angusta,
fossis, paludibus, vel arboribus impedita.

Multum interest inter Ducem locorum peritum and imperitum.

Scipio pro se esse loci angustias ratus, and quod in arcto pugna Romano
aptior. Xenophon. Liu. bell. Pun Tacit. An. 12


Vi militum inferior, locorum fraud prior.


and better ground to fight on) are not the least means of obtaining the
victory.

The Count of Meleto, the Princes of Salerno and Bifignano, with all their
forces, are encamped before Terranuoua. Don Vgodi Cardona with eight hundred
foot Spanish, one hundred horse, and eight hundred other foot, Sicilians and
Calabrians come to the succors. The Count has notice hereof: rises from
before the town, and goes to encounter them. The Spaniards march through a
narrow plain, strengthened with hills on the one side, and a river on the
other. The French accoast them along the water which was between the armies,
and being sarre stronger then the enemy, is desirous to draw him to fight. The
Spaniard keeps on his march, in good array of battle, and holds his
advantage of the place. Meleto, perceiving he should not impeach their getting
into Terranuoua, without the hazard of a battle, passes the river with his
troops, to give upon them. Where, by the good and closse order of the Spanish
foot, and the difficulty of getting up the rivers bank, the French are
defeated, put to rout with great loss, and the town relieved.

APHORISM XXXIII.
EXample Princeps optimus faciendo docet: cumque sit imperio maximus, exemplo
mayor Vellei. l. 2.
est.

Consilia frigent, exemplis mouemur omnes. Adag. Ariost. agg. 2


Quando il signor e buono, i subditi anco

Fa buoni: Ch'ogni un incita chi regge.

Et eccitati al paterno essempio Tasso. Ca. 9.


Aguzzauano al sangue, il ferro e'l ira. Tasso. Ca. 18.


L'essempio all' opre arditee pelegrine

Spinge i compagni.

Non tam imperio opus, quam exemplo. Plin. paneg. Tasso.



is of greater force then Precept. Non so se meglior Duca o Caualiero.

(...). Simul and bonus Imperator, and Homer.
strenuus miles.

Strenui militis and boni Imperatoris officia simul exequebatur. Sal. bell. Cat.
Prob. de Epa Tac. de mor. Ger.


Plus in Duce repones, quam in exercitu.

Vnus homo pluris, quam vniuersa ciuitis.

Plus confidi existimo egregio Imperatori, si tempus habeat ad instruendum
militem, quam firmo sed insolenti exercitui, cui tumultuarius aliquis dux
praeficitur. Mac. dis. l. 2.


E'meglio vnessercito di Cerui, guidato da un Leone, che di Leoni guidati da un
Ceruo. Rag. Stat. e Plut.


Vbi summus Imperator non adest ad exercitum, citius quod facto non opus fit,
Plaut.
quam quod facto est opus.

(...). Vsus nullus ouium, si Pastor absit. Rag. stat. Plu Xer. in Hero.


Debes tu qui illorum rex es, duplum praestare quam singuli eorum.

Audebit primus sumpsisse labores, Silius l. 3.


Primus iter carpsisse pedem.

Monstrat tolerare labores, non iubet. Lucan. l. 9. Liu. de Val. Cor.


Facta mea non dicta milites sequi volo: Nec disciplinam, sed exemplum etiam a
me sumere.

-- Primus arenas

Ingrediar, primusque gradus in puluere ponam Lucan. l. 9.


Dux an miles eam. --

-- Ignaue venire

Te Caesar non ire iubet. -- Lucan. l. 5.


Interim seipsum exemplum praebet, cum in conficiendis admouendisque ad moenia
Polyb. de Hannib. l. 9.
machinis, tum in adeundis locis vbi magis imminens periculum ostendebatur:
omnia denique, non secus egit, quam si nihil inter se atque militem interesset.


It therefore behooves a General, as well to be a good soldier, as an able
directer: that by his presence and personal performance of what he commands
others, they may be encouraged to endure any pains, or undergo any danger. For
upon his actions and virtue especially, depends the success of all the
service. Whereupon the Greek Leader truly inferred, that an army of sheep led
by a Lion was better then an army of Lions led by a sheep.

Nemours, Viceroy of Naples, with all his forces, comes down to Matera, not
far from Barletta. He quarters his troops in places round about, to cut off
all conuoy of victual, or supply of men, that might come to the succor of
the Spaniard in the town: where the soldier was much afflicted with want, and
infected with pestilence. In which extremity the Spanish patience and
perseverance was great, through the remarqueable virtue and diligence of
Gonsaluo: who sometimes putting them in hope of a fresh and speedy supply of
two thousand Dutch foot, sometimes of other succors, and otherwhiles giving
out, that if they would have but a little patience, he would quit the place,
and retire with them safe by sea to Taranto: but most of all by his own
example, in undergoing and enduring with a cheerful countenance, all the
extremities of want and war in his own person; he wearied and wore out the
Vice-royes forces, who through disorder and misgouernement were shortly forced
to quit the siege: and he heartned and hardened his own soldiers, to stand it
out to the last, and to become of men almost vanquished, victorious over their
enemies.

APHORISM XXXIIII.
NOble and generous spirits strive as much not to be overcome in courtesy, as
the valiant and courageous not to be overthrown in combat. Hence it is, that
nothing more obliges the promiser to an unfeigned and free performance, then
the free and confident assurance, which the promittee professes to have in the
word and offer made him. Whereas on the contrary, many have taught others to
deceive, while they have appeared too fearful and jealous of being deceived.
Hominem homini obsequentem vltro nihil aliud facit quam fides, beneuolentiae,
Plut. Re. ger
integritatisque and iustitiae opinio.

Qui timet amicum, amicus vt timeat docet. Senec. Sent. Idem. Ibid.


Qui timet amicum, vim non nouit nominis.

Vult sibi quisque credi, and habita fides ipsam plerumque obligat fidem. Liui.
l. 22.


Quorum autem mihi longo vsu cognita fides, quid est quod non ijs and committi
Cic. ad frat.
and credi posse putem?

Qui timide rogat docet negare. Seneca. Sueton. fol. 126.


Inde Augustus quendam timide petentem ioco corripuit: quod sic sibi libellum
porrigeret quasi Elephanto stipem.

Multi fallere docuerunt, dum timent falli. Id. Ibid. Sue. in Calig Polyaen. l.
2.


Qui se suspectos sentiunt, etsi falso, conspirationem ineunt.

Sic optimates Tegeatarum falsam suspicionem metu coacti veram effecere.




Philip Archduke of Austria, heir apparent to the Roman Emperor, and
kingdoms of Spain, will needs take his journey thither, from the Low
countries, through France, though his Council persuade the contrary. He sends
to the French King for a free passage, and obtaines it. Diverse Peers of France
are sent into Flanders for pledges, till Philip should safely arrive on the
borders of Spain. At his very first setting forward he gives order, that all
those Noble men should be set free, and sent home again; to show how much he
affied in the honor of the King, and sincere performance of his word: the King
requites him with correspondency of like assurance in his love: gives order for
his entertainment in all places where he should pass, with all possible
demonstration of respect and welcome: himself receives him at Blois, in all
magnificent and royal manner. Where after some few days spent, part in
feasting and triumphs, and the rest in treating and concluding other affairs
of more weighty importance, he departs the Court with much satisfaction, and
arriueth in Spain, in very good safety.

APHORISM XXXV.
IN Vbi bona and composita militia, pedes praeualet: apud rudes aut barbaros
contra. Lip. pol. l. 5.


Ab equite and pedite, omne bellicis negotijs profluit robur: and sine quibus,
quamuis Tacit. l. 1.
egregia sint illa consiuia, sunt tamen inualida.

Ad pugnam equites, ad oppida propugnanda aut expugnanda aptiores sunt pedites.
Lip. l. 5.


Montanis locis and impeditis, quasi nullus equorum vsus: ex quo intelligitur
magis necessarios pedites, qui possunt vbique prodesse. Veget. l. 2.



professions either Civil or Military, those are more honorable which have
greater charge, or require greater knowledge. As to rule a State, is more noble
then to govern a town: and this, more eminent then to order a family. In
which respect, though the true end of horse and foot be one and the same, to
defend a right and redress a wrong, (and percase that of foot be generally
more useful:) Neque quis quam ex praeclaris Persis, vsquam pedes incedere sua
quidem sponte videbatur. Xen. Cy. l. 4.


Antea patrius mos erat, ne viderentur tum proficisci pedites alius cuiusquam
rei gratia, quam vt equites optimi efficerentur. Xen. Cy. paed. l. 8.


In equite apudantiquos omne robur: Quia ratio ordinandi militiam pedestrem
illis incognita fuit. Arist pol. l. 4


Ego vero si equitare didicero, quum in equo fuero, Hippocentauri quae sunt
faciam: quaternis tunc oculis coniectabo, auribus quaternis praesentiscam, Xen.
Cyr. l. 4
etc.


Yet this of horse is the more honorable service. Because his virtue and
knowledge is exercised, as well in managing and defending of his horse as of
himself: upon whose safe-gard his life and honor depends, as well as in
immediate defense of his own person.

A trumpet is sent to Barletta, where the Spanish and Italian forces lay, about
the ransom of certain French prisoners, lately taken in the deffeat at Rubos.
Some words pass from the Italian men at arms, in scorn and disparagement of
the French Cauallery: which the trumpet reports at his return. Answer is
made by the French, and replication returned them back again. The challenge
passes between them, and is accepted. The number of combattants are thirteen
on a side: the fight on horseback: the lists are appointed, midway between
Barletta, Andria, and Quadrato. The Generals on both parts assign diverse
troops of horse to a certain number, and equal distance from the lists, to
prevent ambush or any other advantage. They encourage their champions, and
commend them to their fortune. The signal is given: they charge with a noble
and brave courage on both sides, and vndeterminable odds on either. They
betake them to their swords, and use them with no less proof of emulous
prowess: the earth is covered with shiuers of armor, and shedding of blood,
yet still the victory in doubtful balance. Guglielmo Albimonte is unhorsed by
a Frenchman: who, more eager to pursue his death, then save his own life, is
slain by Francesco Salomone an Italian. Albimonte thus rescued, together with
Miale who was likewise unhorsed, draw forth their long broaches which they had
brought for the purpose, wherewith they kill some, and gall most of the French
horses: and by this advantage only get the victory of their enemies. They take
the rest prisoners, and return with all military triumph and applause into
Barletta.

APHORISM XXXVI.
HIstory Cui pariter dies and fortuna fuit. Senec. Herc. Ma^ol. Col. 4


Carolo quinto Imperatori vigesimam quartam diem Februarij fuisse euentibus
omnibus memorabilem: quod illa sit natus, illa Gallorum regem deuicerit,
captiuumque fecerit: illa quoque augustale diadema Bononiae susceperit.

Timoleon Corinthius praelia maxima natali suo die fecit omnia. Probus.


Sic Boeotijs in diem quintum mensis Hippodromij victorias clarissimas duas
fortuna contulit. Plut. Camil.



is the Calendar of time, and has her Critic days as well as Physic:
whereby Conceit fore-hopeth of the good success of an affair, as Art
fore-iudgeth of the decrease of a disease. For we have it exemplified by many
instances, that certain days have been perpetually succesfull to certain
persons or nations: Romani semper soliti erant interpretari auspicia, ita vt ad
illorum institutum atque voluntatem accommodarentur. Mac. l. 1. c. 14


Papyrio quod prudenter auspiciorum significationem fuisset interpretatus,
honores decreti suerant. Liui. l. 10.


Eo spectant buiusmodi auguria omnia, vt miles ad dimicandum alacrior
reddcretur: ex qua alacritate, victoria vt plurimum sequebatur. Mac l. 1. c. 14



Which, howsoever some men may interpret to Fate and Necessity, or others to
some other cause of circumstance or accident; yet is it the part of a wise
Leader to make use thereof, and to nourish and cherish that former conceit in
the common soldier, because he shall thereby the better encourage him to an
alacrity of spirit, and a hope of the victory.

D'Aubigny Governor of Calabria, of a noble and brave courage, and one of the
worthiest Captains that Charles 8. brought into Italy, comes with all his
forces near Seminara; where some few years before he had had a famous victory
against Ferdinand king of Naples, and Gonsaluo the gran Capitano. He lodges
his Foot in Gioia, and his horse in Losarno. The Spanish vanguard led by
Emanuel de Benauaida, aduanceth to the river side whereupon Gioia stands, and
affronteth the enemy. Mean while the Battallio^, led (as some say) by Don Vgo
di Cardona, and Antonio di Leua; with the Rear led by Andrada, draw along the
river, some mile and a half higher, and haste to pass the water. D'Aubigny
having notice hereof, rises suddenly without his artillery, and goes to
encounter them before their troops were passed over. He charge home bravely,
but with much better courage then fortune: For the Spaniards being all passed
the river, and ranged in good array of battle, entertain him to his loss. His
troops are broken: the Duke of Soma, with many Barons of the kingdom, are
taken: so is Ambricourte, with many French Captains. D'Aubigny himself flees
to the rock of Angitola; where he is besieged, and forced to yield. This
deffeat happened on a Friday. Within eight days after, Gonsaluo with his forces
rises from Barletta, comes before Cirignuola ten miles off, which held for the
French; and being likewise ten miles off from Canosa, where Nemours was lodged,
made as it were a triangle. The French Viceroy, after some little pause and
deliberation, resolves to fight: marches toward Cirignuola with all his army:
comes upon the enemy before he had fully entrenched the front of his camp, and
charge him with excellent valor and resolution: But with like success as
d'Aubigny had done some few days before. Nemours himself is slain, and the
battle lost. This overthrow was also on a Friday: A remarqueable day among the
Spaniards, wherein, as appears by history, they have achieved many notable
victories. But far better cause have we at this present, and so shall
posterity have after us, to keep Tuesday with a memorable celebration, ( --
Nec nobis gratior vlla Quam sibi quae Martis praescripsit pagina nomen) for the
several, happy, and miraculous deliueries of our dread Lord and Sovereign
that now reigns over us: and upon this day especially to be thankful to him
by whom Princes reign, and reigns himself for ever.

ERRATA.
Page 3. lin. 1. (...). p. 19. l. 34. Charles 6. Charles 8. p. 20. l. 23.
clauuos, clauos. p. 46. l. 26. expellitur, eijcitur. p. 60. l. 34. gauem,
grauem. p. 77. l. 2. sua haberent, sua bellum haberent. p. 90. l. 27. sieve,
sine. p. 113. l. 5. baiasimo, biasimo. p. 123 l. 12. hoza, hora. p. 160. l. 25.
State, States. p. 198. l. 31. simple, single. p. 224. l. 30. militiae,
malitiae. p. 262. l. 9. ni, vni. p. 296. l. 26. Militia, Malitia. page 331. l.
8. (...).

A BRIEF INFERENCE UPON GVICCIARDINES DIGRESSION, IN THE FOVRTH PART OF THE
FIRST QVARTER NE OF HIS HISTORY:

Forbidden the Impression, and effaced out of the Original by the Inquisition.

In answer to a Letter from an honorable friend.

LONDON, Imprinted for EDWARD BLOVNT. 1613.

A BRIEF INFERENCE upon GVICCIARDINES Digression.
SIR, by yours of the xiiij. of June, you desire to know the reason why the
Inquisition has effaced that excellent Digression out of the fourth book of
GVICCIARDINE: and what in my poor opinion may be inferred thereof. Which I
send you with this enclosed, for your private reading, being willing to
satisfy the request of one I respect so much, though in the discourse I
nothing satisfy either you or my self.


Ungracious children, borne of low and mean estate, when their fortune or
industry has advanced them to honor, (be the means good or bad) they are
ever ashamed of their pedigree, and will not acknowledge the humble estate and
condition of their forefathers. What reason else the Church of Rome has to
raze the memory of her Ancestors out of history, (the reverend records of
Antiquity) I for my part cannot see. For this worthy Historian was one of her
own: a Catholic in his profession, no man more: a reporter of things he saw
or knew, no man truer: and a creature of the Popes, employed in honorable
charges. By which Piece of his, thus unjustly rent and dismembered from the
rest, you may see our religion naked in her infancy; lapped only in the
swathing clothes of innocence; cherished in the warm bosom of securirie, and
supported by the strong hand of Secular authority. See what he says, and
believe what you see.

GVICCIAR. For the declaration whereof, and of many other things succeeding in
future times, it is requisite that mention be made, what claim the Church has
to the cities of Romagna, and others which she has held heretofore, or
possesses at this day: And in what manner she is come to these earthly States
and governments; being at first merely instituted for spiritual
administration: And likewise that it be set down as a thing of necessary
dependence, what conjunctions and alliances have been from time to time upon
these and other occasions, between the Bishops and Emperors of Rome.

THe necessity of this Digression from the maine current of the history,
arose upon this occasion. The LLs. of Romagna, who held of the Church of Rome
in Capite, had in effect for many years together withdrawn themselves from
their obedience under her dominion. For some of them refused to pay their
yearly tribute, in recognition of their homage and fealrie: others paid it, but
with much difficulty, and often out of time. But all of them in general,
without the Popes leave (their liege Lord) would accept of other Princes
entertainment, and put themselves and troops under their pay: Non obstante
that the war in hand was against the Church. And likewise they had these
Princes enterchangeably bound to them, to aid and defend them, though it were
against the arms of the Church. Now therefore the Pope insta^ceth the French
king to perform what he was tied to by Covenant, sc. Of assisting the Church
to recover her right in Romagna: which the King willingly grants: and sends
Iuo d'Alegri with three hundred lances, and four thousand Swisse under the
Bailiffe of Dijon, to the Duke Valentinois the Popes son, for this service. The
interest which the Church had to this State, and by what means it was lost,
our Author thinks it expedient to set down here at large: and therefore one
chief branch of this Digression, is nothing else but An authentical Evidence
of the Churches right to Romagna: a fair Charter how she holds it by a strong
Deed of gift, with proofs of the validity of the Conueyance and equity of
the Tenure. And this branch I suppose she would have suffered to grow still and
flourish. But then there is another, which shows by good record, how her
government was at first merely spiritual: which restriction she likes not, and
has stretched so much, as she has broken that True loves knot, which was
between Temporal and Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction. Besides, a third branch
there is, which lays open her ambitious purchase of greatness, and the means
how she got it, which she would have all men acknowledge for just, and none to
look into the unlawfulness of the usurpation. And these be the two branches,
for whose sake, she has injuriously lopt off all the three.

GVICCIAR. The Bishops of Rome, of whom the Apostle Peter was the first, their
power being laid by Jesus Christ in spiritual things, great in charity,
humility, patience, lowliness of spirit, and miracles; were not only without
all temporal power, but were persecuted by it: manifesting their name in
nothing more then in the persecutions, which they and their followers endured.
And thus they remained for many years obscure, and as it were unknown. For,
although (through the multitude of people that were then in Rome, and the
diversity of the Nations, and their Religions) the proceedings of the
Christians were little regarded, and some of the Emperors persecuted them not
at all, except when it appeared their public actions or exercises could not
be passed in silence; yet some of them, either through the cruelty of their
nature, or their devotion to their own heathenish gods, persecuted them with
all extremity, as bringers in of new Superstition, and ouerthrowers of (their)
true Religion.

THe Bishops of Rome in the primitive time of the Church, were so, rather by
Appellation from their mere spiritual function, then by Jurisdiction from
their consistoriall authority. For what Sea, what Chapter, what Diocese, what
Government had they? who lived always in obscurity, and exercised their
religion and service of the true God, only by stealth, and in corners: or else
being discovered, suffered under the heavy hand of persecution. Grave,
Learned, Religious, Pious men they were; the office of S. Peter and S. Paul
they executed, to instruct, and reprove: by the imposition of hands, and those
other solemn and sacred rites used by the Apostles, they conferred the holy
order of Pristhood on others: that with them they might cooperate in that new
planted Vineyard, to the building up of those few penitent Christians, (whereof
the greater part were poor, and obscure,) that came to them for comfort in
matter of conscience, or for direction in case of doubt. These they loosed from
their sins, and confirmed in the truth: Others they reproved and convinced of
their errors, and bound them from the participation of spiritual blessings, by
virtue of that power which Christ had left them in his Church. Whereby,
although they had an authority spiritual, and power of excommunication, yet a
farther power of goods, limme, or life, a power of deposing Kings, and
disposing kingdoms they had not: nor had S. Peter himself, from whom they
strive to derive their succession both in place and power. Of whose being at
Rome, we greatly dispute not, for it infers nothing of consequence, to that
they would insinuate. We know it was not Peter's being at Rome that gave her the
Supremacy over all other Churches, but Romes greatness that gave the occasion
of that greatness, which is now attributed to Peter. For though it be true,
that he had Superioritatem ordinis, before the rest of the Apostles, yet was he
not Superior potestate, which the Popes have since challenged. And if (three
hundred years after almost) when Constantine embraced, professed, and
maintained Christian religion, the Imperial Majesty had then resided in
France, as it did five hundred years after, and there continued some
fourscore years; orin Germany, where it has been ever since: we had had a
Pope of Paris, or of Prage, instead of this that we have now at Rome. But a
fatal thing it has been to this city to usurp over the world: First, by
holding in a temporal subjection all the countries of her neighbor Princes:
Since, by bringing into thraldom the hearts and consciences of Christians:
First, by intruding upon the inheritance of men; then, by incroaching upon the
heritage of Christ's own purchase. But say we grant that Peter were Head of
the Church, yet can it never be proved, that such a Clemens, such a Pius, or
Innocentius, whose abominable actions show they had their names (...), are the
true successors of Peter. Except they can tie Truth and Piety to a place,
which is more then all their censing, hallowing, and exorcizing can do. Rome
her self is an instance, which from the integrity of those former times is
become as Petrarch describes her.

Fontana di dolor, Albergo d'Ira,
Scuola d'Errori, Tempio d'Heresia,
Gia Roma, hor Babilonia, empia eria.
Per cui tanto sipiagne, esi sospira.
A Source of sorrow, Harbrough of ire,
A School of errors, Temple of heresies,
Erst Rome, now Babylon, full of villainies,
Forcing our tears of brine, and sighs of fire.
Succession therefore of place is a sandy ground, to build the marble
materials of Truth upon. For we see in this very section, that where Religion
has public authority to maintain it, the whole State to profess it, and a
long tract and continuance of time, to give it countenance (be it never so
false) yet power, unity, universality, and success, gives it the title of
Truth. Such was here the service of false gods in the Roman Empire: And how it
may now again be applied to Rome, let other men judge. But where a Religion is
poor, obscure, discount enanced, oppressed, without any to protect her, or
many to profess her, (be it never so ancient and true) it is wronged with the
aspersion of Novelty and Heresy. Such was here the service of the True God in
the Church of Rome: And whether it be not now the Protestants case, against the
false imputation which the Papist throws upon him, let the venerable Records
of these Primitive times be witness.

GVICCIAR. In which estate, famous for their voluntary Poverty, Integrity of
life, and Martyrdom, these Bishops continued till the time of Syluester: In
whose days Constantine the Emperor being brought to embrace the Christian
Religion, through the holy conversation which was daily observed in those that
professed the name of Christ: The Bishops now were freed from the danger
wherein they had lived 300. years, and had liberty to exercise publicly the
divine Service, and rites of Christians. Whereupon Christianity began to
spread it self maruelously, and the poverty of the Clergy to diminish,
through the reverence which was borne to the good behavior of the Professors,
the holy lessons which our Religion contains in it, and the readiness that
is in men to follow either through ambition (oftentimes) or through fear, the
example of the Prince. For the Emperor Constantine having built in Rome the
Church of S. John in the Lateran, S. Peter in the Vatican, that of S. Paul,
and many others in other places: He not only adorned them with rich vessels
and ornaments, but enfeoffed them also with possessions, and endowed them with
other revenues for the maintenance of those Churches in their apparaments and
buildings, and of the Clergy that served in that holy Ministry. So likewise
others in times succeeding, being persuaded, by Alms and Legacies to the
Church to make an easy purchase of the kingdom of heaven, did either build
and endow other Churches, or gave part of their wealth to those already built.
Yea by the law and ancient custom (following the example of the old Testament)
every man paid the Church the tenth of his fruits: Men being stirred
hereunto with great zeal, because at the first they observed the Clergy
themselves, to give all they had to the building and adorning of Churches, or
to other godly and charitable uses: Save only what was needful for a mean
sustentation of their life.

THe two glorious Lamps, Purity of Doctrine in the Christian Religion, and
Integrity of life in the professors thereof, do now blaze and shine forth
through the two thick mists, of profane gentilisme, and corruption of manners.
For, never was that Justice, Virtue, and Worth of the old Romans so much
adulterate and bastardized as now: Never such cruelty, lust, riot, and
oppression in their Princes, never such base flattery, false informations, and
ignoble supplantations in their Senators; never so much vice in general,
reigning both in the City and State. These two therefore were the true causes
of the Gospels entertainment, promulgation, and propagation. But all things
have their declination and decay, by the contraries to their life and growth.
For as we observe in natural bodies, that native heat and radical humor are
the causes of their increase and continuance; but the contraries to these do
cause them to decay and die: So in the body Ecclesiastic, it is no marvel,
if that primitive heat of zeal to piety and truth be grown cold in the
Church of Rome, and that moisture of grace to virtue and honesty be quite
dried up, though she fall to an utter ruin and decay. As for her corruption of
manners, her own children out of their just grief have expressly tainted her
with all the stains of vicious life in the particular, and all the strains of
ambitious usurpation in the general. I will exemplify both with two instances
out of this our Author.

GVICCIAR. Pope Alexander himself could not avoid his domestical
misfortunes, which too too much afflicted his house, with tragic examples,
lust, and horrible crucltie, even in all barbarous manner. For having from his
first entrance to the Papacy, resolved to lay all Temporal greatness upon
his eldest son the Duke of Candie; the Cardinal of Valence his younger son
having no disposition to Priestly function, aspired to the profession of Arms,
disdaining that his brother should be preferred to that honor before him:
being also much incensed because his brother shared with him in the love of the
Lady Lucrece, courted by them both, and sister to them both. Wherefore pricked
on with lust and ambition, (two powerful ministers of all villainy) he caused
him secretly one night to be murdered, and to be thrown into Tyber. The fame
went also, (if such an enormitie be to be believed) that not only the
brothers, but the father also himself concurred in the competition of the
Ladies love; who so soon as he was Pope, taking her from her first husband, as
being now too base for a Lady of her degree, he married her to John Zforza
Lord of Pesaro. And after, not enduring to have her own husband his Corriuall,
he dissolved the marriage which before was consummate, suborning some to
testify before Judges chosen for the purpose, (and them to give sentence) that
Zforza was frigidae naturae, and unapt for generation.

THus far Guicciardine of this virtuous son a Cardinal; and this holy
Father a Pope: of whose death he likewise truly reports in this History,
that he was poisoned by mistaking a cup which himself and his son had
provided for the dispatch of some other Cardinals, that stood in the way of
their devilish desseignes. This history is extant in many Editions, to the
shame of his memory, and stain of that Sea for ever. But the Oration of Pompey
Colonna and Anthony Sauello, two noble Gentlemen of Rome, which they made to
the citizens in the Capitol, upon the supposed death of Julius 2. is banished
this history by the Inquisition, whose proscriptions are like the Athenian
Ostracisme, that thrust out none but the best and most worthy. Which we may
justly call home again, and fitly plant in this place, to batter the rotten
bulwark of the Popes pride and usurped authority. It is thus:

GVICCIAR. The Nobility has been long enough trod down (O ye Romans,)
enough have those generous spirits (whilome the conquerours of the world) lived
in servitude. The times past perhaps may in some sort be excused, by the awful
reverence men bore to Religion: In respect whereof, being accompanied with
holiness of life and miracles, our ancestors yielded to the command of the
Clergy, and willingly submitted themselves under the sweet yoke of Christian
piety, without force of arms, or violence whatsoever. But now what
necessity, what worthiness of theirs can possibly cover the shame of our
slavery? What? The integrity of life? the good example of those Priests, or
the miracles they work? What generations is there I pray you in the world,
more corrupted, more polluted, with more brutish and beastly manners? In whom
it seems miraculous, that God the fountain of Justice, suffers their
villainies so long. Is this tyranny of theirs maintained by the sword? by the
industry of men? or by their daily providence for the preservation of the
Papal dignity? What generation of men is there less experienced in military
knowledge and practice? more given to sloth and pleasures? or more careless
of the honor and good of their successors? There are only two States in the
world, that may fitly be paralleled one with the other: This of the Popes of
Rome, and that of the Sultans of Cairo. Because neither the dignity of the
Sultan, nor the honors of the Mamaluches are hereditary, but passing
fro^nation to nation, they are conferred upon strangers. And yet this servitude
of the Romans is much more shameful then that of Egypt or of Syria: For it
covers in some sort the stain of their disgrace, that the Mamaluches are a
valorous and fierce people, accustomed to labors, and to a life free from all
delicacie. But who^ do we Romans serve? Drowsy and slothful persons,
strangers, and oftentimes most base, no less in blood then in condition. Time
it is now at length to awake from so heavy a sleepines, and to remember, That
to be a Roman is a most glorious name, when it is accompanied with virtue: but
that it doubleth the shame and infamy to him that forgets the honorable
fame of his Ancestors. The way is now made easy unto us: because that upon the
death of the Pope they are at discord among themselves, the minds of the great
ones are distracted, and the priestly tyranny is now more then ever heretofore
hateful to all Princes.

THis detestation of theirs, and protestation against the Popes temporal
Lordship over Rome, may Christian Princes justly take up against his spiritual
tyranny over them, and the Churches in their dominions, and say in the same
tenor of words (Regal authority has been long enough troddowne, O ye
Christians, long enough have those generous spirits, etc.) Which Oration,
whether it were theirs, or made by our Author in their persons (as Historians
usually do) it is not material: it plainly shows and truly, how the Romans
themselves stand affected and conceited to that Court, who are daily
eie-witnesses of the pride and filthiness thereof; which the Bigots of this
age, and in places far remote, either will not have the patience to hear, or
the grace to believe. They will not be persuaded but that the whole body of
that Church is sound, when her wise neighbors see how sick she is in the Head.
So much are they hood-winkt and blind-folded by the Jesuits those mineral
Doctors, who have dug very deep for plasters to cover, not for salues to
cure the ulcer; and have brought a mischief, not a remedy into the Church. For
no sooner had men appeared, whose skill was good to cure this foul leprosy,
but straight starts up this college of Quacksaluers to hinder the work: A
Loiola for a Luther, a Rowla^d for an Oliver. And as the Turkish Bashas assured
the army that the Ottoman Emperor was living, and in reasonable good state of
health, when he lay dead in his litter: so these Romish Ianisaries persuade the
poor people of our Christian camp, that all is well at Rome, and that the
Popes Holiness is just in his government, upright in his Religion, and sound
in his practice and conversation of life; when he lies sweltring oftentimes in
the soil of his rotten rule, and litter of lewd life: Venting for truth, and
to be received upon pain of damnation, the sale-able but not auailable trash of
his own weauing. No marvel therefore though their own Petrarch call for this
direful vengeance upon his Court:

Fiamma dal ciel su le tue treccie pioua
Maluaggia: che dal fiume e dalle ghiande,
Per altru' impouerir sei ricca e grande,
Poi che di mal oprar tanto ti gioua.
Nido di tradimenti in cuisi coua
Quanto mal per'l mondo hoggi si spande,
Di vin serua, di letti, and de viuande,
In cui lussuria fa l'vltima proua.
Let fire from heaven on thy proud tresses fall,
Thou wicked queen: who first on acornes fed,
Art now grown rich and fat by others bread,
Since to do well thou have no joy at all.
Thou neast of treasons, wherein hatched lies
All mischiefs broached through our Hemisphaere:
In thee wine, sloth, and viands domineere,
And lustful riot plays her utmost prise.
As for those other Doctors of that Church, whom we have here among us (the
Secular Priests) though they retain still the old Lees of that corrupted Cask
of the Romish Church, yet they appear to be guiltles, nay rather haters of
those furious novelties brought in by the Jesuits (at least if their internal
meaning agree with their external profession.) But if they dissemble with us,
impaling their consciences, and oaths of obedience to our King, within this
parenthesis (Rebus fic stantibus,) and reserving an implicit belief in the
Council of Trent, concerning the absolute necessity of subjection to the Pope;
such temporizing must needs be far from the ingenuity and sincerity of
Christian Religion, and wherein they much abuse their disciples here among us.
For we are in good hope, that since they profess so much to retain the old
Leaven of ancient Religion, they will not suffer themselves to be infected with
the new equivocations of the Jesuitical Sect: but as they maintain so
obstinately the ancient errors of the Romish Church, so they will be loath to
renounce the ancient honesty that the world (even in the time of greatest
blindness) did so carefully preserve, namely, honesty moral to their neighbor,
and due and faithful obedience to their Prince. So, though they be a little too
homely with the first Table in the point of worship; they will I hope (at least
I wish) prove careful and honest obseruers of the second: which, how little or
much it may avail them to their salvation, as I will not take upon me to
determine, yet I am sure it cannot fail to make them prove morally honest men
before the world. As for their Religion (the other cause considerable in this
Section) it is now so farded and daubed with the counterfeit parget of men's
traditions, like the painted women of this age, that we may say of it, as an
old Doctor of the Church said of them in his days, Vereor ne Deus creatur a^
non agnoscat sua^. For Christian religion was at first like the garment of
Christ without seame or rent, and the Church that professed it without Schism
or Faction: But now this Arc of Noah, like the Ship of Argos, is so peeced and
patched by them, with the rotten rags and soiled shreds of sinful man's
invention, as there is scarce any sound timber of the old Truth remaining.
First she was poor, then much added, after much altered, from better to worse,
and now at the worst; like Daniels image, whose head was of gold, breast and
arms of silver, belly and thighs of brass, legs of iron, feet part of iron
and part of clay. She was at first the sacred bond that tied Princes to their
people, in all lawful administration of Justice; and the people to their
Princes, in all awful performance of Allegiance: But now, the one often makes
her the cloak of his ambition, and the other the color of all their treasons:
Under which pretense, more Christian blood has bin shed, then is at this day
in all the States of Christendom. Christ left her with his Church poor and
naked, clothed only with Simplicity, supported by Faith, led by Humility,
attended with Piety, and armed with Constancy. For thus at the end of 300
years, did the Imperial authority find her, like an Orphan child in the
bosom of her poor mother the Church: But it entertained her as a dear
Sister: and for the mutuallloue they bare, and the comfort they found each in
other, like the Graces they enfolded and enclasped their arms of assistance
together: like Co-heires, they parted the inheritance between them: There was a
division, but no discord; in the diversity of order, there was an harmony of
government: their Motto was that of the blind man and the lame in Alciate,
(Mutuum Auxiliu^:) for Policy thought her self blind, without the direction
of Religion; and Religion found her self lame, without the support of Policy.
And thus they sat in their several Courts of Justice: the one in the Common
Pleas of every poor man's right: the other in the Consistory of every good man's
conscience. And now was the Church of Rome the mother of Truth, the nurse of
Piety, the sister of Policy, and protected by the sword and power of secular
authority. But when Princes had once endowed her with great riches, enfeoffed
her with fair possessions, and invested her in the joint participation of
their authority; then such was her pride, as no colors would serve her but
Scarlet and Purple: and such her ambition, as no share would content her but
all. Religio peperit diuitias, and filia deuorauit matrem. Since when, she has
hatched and brought forth falsehood in opinions, impiety in actions, treachery
in covenants, and ambiguitie in oaths and promises: cherishing
State-troublers, fostering King-quellers, and taking the double edged sword of
authority into her own hands. Princes resume your right: Take away the cause,
if ye like not the effect: It is her part to teach only; yours only to
command: Hers, only to be holy; yours to be just.

GVICCIAR. And then was the Bishop of Rome (ambition and pride not having yet
seized on their hearts) taken generally for the chief of all other Churches,
and of the Spiritual Jurisdiction, as the Successor of the Apostle S. Peter.
Both because that city by her ancient pre-eminence and greatness, kept still
the name and majesty of the Empire: as also because from her, Christian
Religion was spredd over the greatest part of Europe: and lastly because
Constantine himself baptized by Syluester, yielded willingly that power to him
and his successors.

NOW comes the Church to have her established Government, and a Head or chief
thereof acknowledged. For she could not well subsist, but by order; and order
cannot be, but by a graduall proceeding from the inferior to the next, and so
to the highest. This Head or chief was the Bishop of Rome. And herein he had a
double power, one as a member of the Church, from Christ the Head: But this
power was like the peace which Christ left his Apostles, (A peace of
conscience, a power of conscience,) a power in things merely Spiritual, a
power to bind and loose, to open and shut heaven gates: In which sense, every
poor Priest lawfully ordained is a Porter as well as S. Peter. But he had an
other power as head of the Church government, from the Emperor, the supreme
Head of all worldly power within his dominions: A power of Oyer and Terminer in
cases liable to the Consistory, as our Judges have under the King, in cases
within their several circuites: A power which the Emperor might well give him,
for it was not of matters originally and naturally Ecclesiastical (which he
and other Bishops have immediately from Christ,) but of determining some civil
causes in their Consistory, which he had by the Emperors indulgence: as also a
coactiue power, both for the honor of Episcopal dignity, and to make their
Spiritual censures in more awful fear and regard. And this power is like the
laws by which it rules. For as Ecclesiastical canons and constitutions are
positive, abrogatiue, and transitiue into new: So is the power conferrable,
changeable, and passable into another; Especially upon the alteration of the
Supreme Imperial power, from whence it is derived And if Constantine gave it
to the Bishops of Rome, for the three reasons alleged here by our Author, then
may he when these reasons fail, or the power is abused, or ambition and pride
seazeth on the hearts of those Bishops, take it from them, and confer it upon
other Bishops: as our Constantine has justly done, upon the Primates of our
Church in England. So then the Pope of Rome was the head of the Church
Government: the chief of all Bishops: the first and the last: what would he
have more? The first, in degree and precedence, the last in appellation, and
Dernier Ressort, as the Parliament of Paris is to the other Parlaments in
France. Pasce oues, and Tibi dabo, only gave him Claues Regni, and Forum
Conscientiae, (as also Accipite gave the same to the rest of the Apostles:) for
it Christ had intended him a farther power, he would have sealed his commission
with a plainer text, and a stronger warrant. But the temporal authority, which
allotted him temples for the exercise of Religion, and maintenance of livings
for the religious, gave him Claues canonum, and Forum iuris. The reasons why it
was given him before all others, are here expressed: because Rome had now the
Imperium and Emporium of the world, here was the seat of the Imperial
Majesty, and here-hence was that heavenly commodity (Religion) vented. For
till Constantines time, Rome was the golden mine, wherein the rich treasures of
the Truth lay hid, and as it were buried, under the stormy tempest and black
clouds of hot persecution: by the fire whereof it had been so purified and
refined from the dross of all earthly ure, as now coming to light, and to the
touch, it was found to be of good Allay, and passed current from this great
Mart, into most places of Europe. Now if this were one of the maine causes of
that Churches greatness, why did she not continue it so still unmingled and
vnsodred? why suffered she it to be abused and sophisticate by her Clippers,
and Coiners, and Forgers, and Faith-founders? why gave she us so just cause to
take no more Letters of credit from her Banckrupt checquer, and to return no
more Bills of due debt thither? why forced she us to raise a Bancke of our own
upon the Mercato Vecchio of the Primitive ruins, and to forsake her whom we
would have called still mother, and remained her obedient children, and at her
pappes, (as we did for long time) have sucked the sweet milk of pure Religion
and Piety? For although our ancestors the Brittons were originally more
beholden to the east Church, yet are we so ingenuous to give her this title, in
such sense as she must acknowledge Greece for her Mother Church, and they both
Jerusalem for Grandmother of all: because (Primo Iudaeo) gave her the
prerogative. These then were the true reasons why the Pope had given him this
Superiority or Supremacy, call it whether you will: for, to be superior over
any whatsoever, is to be supreme over all. But this is the Title they so much
affect, and we do not much grudge it them (in the true and genuine sense:)
only we complain of the abuse in the administration, and put them in mind,
though too late, that he must use his power sparingly, that would enjoy it
long. Now as pure Religion, and the Seat of the Empire were the two pillars
whereupon the Popes greatness was founded: so were they knit and ioynted
together in such a couplement, as either the failing of the one, or removing of
the other, endangered the sore shaking, if not final falling of this proud
Building. For by translation of the Imperial seat to Constantinople, the Pope
failed of that general recognition of Supremacy formerly yielded him. The
Bishop of this place contested with him for the Title: and he of Rauenna
likewise put his claim in suite, because here was the Court and Seat of the
Exarchat: But now was the Emperor too far off to be heard, and too weak to
decide the question between these ambitious Prelates; and the Pope grown too
great to quit the possession. Had he used it well, he might have used it still:
but having engrossed into his own hands the Sole-gouernment of the Church,
which at first was Aristocraticall in the Apostles, and after in the
Patriarchs: he was not content with that power which all of them had, nor
listed himself within the bounds of those wholesome laws and Canons, which
Truth and Antiquity had established for the Churchgouernment; but assumed to
himself the power of making and abrogating laws at his pleasure, and to be
above all Canons and Councels. And so whereas our Fathers of the Church, had in
all piety and prudent providence appointed these Councels as a Tribunitian
power to restrain his more then Consular greatness; to syndicate and control
his imperious and violent proceedings: he takes upon him, not only to stop the
course of their power, but also to hinder the calling of them, for curing such
diseases as should grow in the Church; which we now see to be many in the
members, but none so desperately incurable as those in the Head. So that, as the
Church government changed from an Aristocracie to a Monarchy; so likewise that
of Rome is now altered from this to a Tyranny. For all well reigled Monarchies
admit a due mixture and temperature of the three Estates with the Princes power
in all maine causes, such as those of abrogating old laws and customs, or
establishing new, as by the Diets of Germany and Poland, by the Assemblies of
France, and Parlaments of England, does appear. But where it is otherwise, and
where the peremptory will and wilfulness of the Prince shall be an absolute
law to the people, and be it right or wrong, with law or against it, all must
obey, or suffer; that power is merely tyrannical, as in this instance of the
Popes proceedings is plain. For he has now taken from Princes the power of
calling Councels, and from the Councels themselves their proper end and use.
Had they subsisted in their primitive force and freedom (as those Parlaments,
Diets, and Assemblies do) to ordain and abrogate laws in the Church, as the
necessity of times and vicissitude of things required, yea and to order and
restrain the Pope himself, if in his government he grew irregular and
tyrannous; then had the Papists a better cause to defend, and we less cause
to complain. For truly never was there government in this world planted and
vpheld with greater judgment and policy, having true Religion for the Basis
and firm foundation; and princely Authority for the stately roof and safe
covering of so goodly a building, had not the Church of Rome heaped so much
stubble and straw of man's constitutions upon the marble ground of Gods
ordinance. But Every tree which the heavenly Father has not planted, shall be
rooted up. For no policy of man can make any actions of his unlike himself
that makes them, (that is) permanent and perpetual: They have their
beginnings, motions, promotions, and arisings, to a period, (as all Monarchies
have had) and then they decline, decay, perish and fall, with the swinge of
their own greatness. Ruet and ipsa Roma mole sua: Romes Hierarchy must lie
in the dust, like man that raised it up to this pinnacle of pride: but Religion
the groundwork must ever stand like him that laid it, Who is yesterday, and to
day, and the same for ever: Who is, and that was, and that is to come.

GVICCIAR. It is further reported, that Constantine being forced by the
troubles of the East to transfer the seat of his Empire to Bisantium (now
Constantinople,) gave unto the Bishops of Rome the absolute dominion of that
city, and many other cities and countries of Italy. The which report though
the Bishops succeeding have diligently labored to maintain, and by their
authority is believed of many, yet of Authors of best credit it is much
reproved, but much more by the matter it self. For it is manifest that then
and long after, both Rome and all Italy was governed under magistrates deputed
by the Emperors, as being still subject to the Empire: yea and there be also
that deny (so deep is ignorance in Antiquities) all that has been said of
Constantine and Syluester, affirming that they lived in diverse times. But no
man gain-saieth that the Translation of the Empire was the original of the
Bishops greatness: For the Emperors authority growing to be weaker and weaker
in Italy by the crosses and troubles they had in the East, the people of Rome
withdrawing themselves from the Emperor, and therefore attributing more to the
Bishops, began willingly to yield them, not a plain subjection, but a certain
kind of obedience; though this appeared but slowly, by reason of the
ouer-running of the Vandals and other barbarous Nations, by whom Rome being
often taken and sacked, the Pontifical name was of long time base and obscure,
as touching Temporal causes: So was the authority of the Emperor through all
Italy, because he so shamefully left it abandoned to the Barbarians. Among
which barbarous people, whose rauage and spoil was but like the fury of a
sudden flood; that of the Goths lasted 60. years. A nation by name and
profession Christian, descended from the parts of Dacia and Tartaria: who at
length being driven out of Italy by the Emperors forces, she began anew to be
commanded by Greek governors, called of them Exarchs: who seated themselves
in Rauenna an ancient city, and in those days very rich, and very much
frequented, by reason of the fruitfulness of the country thereabouts, and for
that it was inhabited by diverse Captains and men of command, ever since the
enlargement it had by the great navy that Augustus Caesar and other Emperors
after him usually kept there: as also for that a long time it had been the
residence of Theodoricus king of the Goths, and of his Successors; who in
jealousy of the Emperors power, chose this place rather then Rome for the
Seat of their Court, by reason it is more fitly seated upon the Sea, and
nearer to Constantinople: upon which opportunity of situation, the Exarchs
likewise made that their residence, and deputed other particular Magistrates to
the government of Rome and other cities, under the title of Dukes. Hereupon all
that in Italy was called the Exarchat of Rauenna, which was immediately under
the government of these Exarchs, and had no particular Dukes.

THe Donation of Constantine has here two strong parties, and is stiffly argued
on both sides. The Popes and their followers stand for the affirmative: Authors
of best credit, for the negative. Those, come into the lists armed with
authority: these, with the Truth. The Pope is here on the one side, and the
Truth on the other. In this doubtful case, Guicciardine though he were the
Popes servant, yet by his masters leave he will forsake him, and lean to the
truth, as Aristotle quit his master Plato: Charus amicus, charior veritas. So
should we do; and not be such apprentises and bondmen to Ipse dixit, as to
run against the current of our own reason and reading in matter of history,
when it is so authentically and demonstratiuely (as here) confirmed. It is
true, the axioms of our faith and Religion are (...) fidem in se habentia;
objects of the heart not of the brain; and therefore in these we entertain
faith and belief alone, we shut out reason and sense: but in all other things
we must be directed by reason, which distinguishes us from all other
creatures. But is here the Pope on the one side, and the Truth on the other?
Then surely he may err; and by maintenance and obstinacy make his error an
heresy, even in matter of faith, as some of them have done. But this
(forsooth) is not e Cathedra. A nice distinction, which no reason can admit.
For when he comes to the Chair, to opine and determine, he leaves not his
passions and affections behind him: he finds no more knowledge nor grace then
he brought with him. Wherefore we acknowledge a reverence and awful respect to
all Seats of judgment, for Justice sake, which is there by Gods ordinance to
be duly administered, but we acknowledge no virtue in the place: I fear me they
have little of that wood in Rome, whereof to frame their Tribunalles. The Chair
they say is hole-ly, but in a sense more sensible. As for this free Deed of
gift whereby the Pope makes his claim to Rome, it is clearly overthrown and
cancelled by this Evidence. Because both in Constantines time, and long after,
not only this City, but all Italy was governed by the Emperors Deputies, and
the Roman Citizens upon their defection and revolt from the Emperor, gave it to
the Pope: but yet with terms of restriction and limitation; he was not
absolute. But what needs all this quarrel, and contention between the Popes
on the one side, and best Authors on the other about this point, whether he had
it by the Emperors free donation, or peoples consent with limitation, or his
own violent invasion? He has now held it in subjection (though not peaceable
possession) above 800. years: a prescription long enough to justify a bad
title, and no man at this day quarrels him for it: only he would not have us
search the Records, and look into the Conueyance, where we apparently find,
how the decay of the Imperial power was the raising of the Papal greatness:
and may most justly and fitly parallel this his rising from so low an estate
to his now sitting in his Pontificalibus in Rome, with that of the Turk: who,
from a poor and base condition, with his maniple and rabble of Tartars,
incroaching by little and little upon the Asian Princes, and taking his advantage
upon others discord and weakness, is now come to sit Grand Signor at
Constantinople.

GVICCIAR. In which time the Bishops of Rome having nothing to do with the
temporal sword, and growing slothful through their dissembling manners (which
already had begun to swerve from their former spiritual reverence) stood as
it were vassals to the Emperor: without whose confirmation, or of their
Exarchs, they durst not exercise or take upon them the Papacy. Nay the Bishops
of Constantinople and Rauenna, (because commonly the Seat of Religion
follows the power of the Empire and of Arms) contested with the Bishop for
superiority. But not long after the state of things altered, for the Lombards a
fierce nation, entering Italy, made themselves Lords of Gallia Cisalpina, (which
of them was called Lombardie) and of Rauenna, with all the Exarchat, besides
many other parts of Italy, yea they spread their arms as far as the
Marquisate of Ancona, Spoletum, and Beneuentum, which had their particular
Dukes. The Emperors mean while, partly through the troubles they had in Asia,
not providing remedy for these mischiefs, partly through negligence; Rome
seeing her self abandoned, and the office of Exarchat now extinct in Italy,
began to be governed by the advice and power of the Bishop: who at length
together with the Romans, being sore afflicted by the Lombards, ran for
succor to Pipin King of France. He passing Italy with amighty army, drove the^
from part of their dominions, having held it in subjection above 200 years;
and gave to the Bishop and Church of Rome, (as being his by law of Arms) not
only Vrbine Agobbio, Taro, and many other places adjoining to Rome, but also
Rauenna with her Exarchat: under which (they say) is included all that lies
from the confines of Placentia, near the territory of Pauia, between the
river Po and the Appennine hills, the marshes of Venice, and the Adriaticke
Sea, and from Rimini to the river Talfa then called Asaurus. But after Pipins
death, the Lombards troubling these Popes afresh, and that which was given
them, Charles the son of Pipin (who after his great victories was worthily
surnamed the Great) having utterly destroyed the Lombards, confirmed his
Fathers Donation to the Church of Rome; and during the time of this his war
reassured to the Pope, the gift of the Marquisate, and the Duchy of Spoletum,
which comprehended the city of Aquila, and part of Abruzzo. These things are
delivered for Truth: To which some Ecclesiastical writers add this also, that
Charles gave to the Church all Liguria, as far as the river Varo, the
furthest limit of Italy; Besides Mantoa, and all that which the Lombards held
in Furly, and in Istria: As much (says some one) of the Isle of Corsica, and
all the country which lies between the cities of Luni and Parma. For which
benefits the Kings of France being magnified and extolled by those Popes,
purchased the title of most Christian. And afterward in the year of our Lord
800, Pope Leo with the people of Rome, (without any authority but his, who was
as their Head) elected Charles Emperor of Rome: Separating this part of the
Empire even in title from that of the Emperor of Constantinople; as if Rome and
the West parts, not being defended by them, had need of an Emperor of their
own.

The State of the Empire had been now sick of a consumption for many years.
The Dacian and Tartarian Goths like two strong and malign humors, had seized
upon Rome, and other the more noble and vital parts of Italy; they had
intruded upon the Emperors inheritance, rauaging and spoiling all that goodly
country: but by his army and natural forces (as it were,) the venom of those
strong ingredients is again driven out, the office of Exarchat is established,
and the body of the Empire somewhat recovered from this desperate weakness,
though not wholly restored to the former state of perfect health and sound
constitution. Yet for all that the Pope is not so great, but that he still
continues the Emperors vassal, and dares not take upon him the Papacy, unless
he be first accepted and confirmed by the Emperor, or by his deputy the Exarch
of Rauenna. But shortly after the body of the Empire falls into a relapse, and
the effect shows that A recidiuation is more dangerous then the root of a
disease: for the Lombards a fierce people, assailing Italy afresh, tyrannize
over her with more violence and fury then the Goths; They pull down the
authority, and quite extinguish the office and name of the Exarchat; they
domineere with more insolence and continue longer: for those stood not in
their strength above 60. years, these 200. at the least. Rome and the Pope
smart under this scourge, and groan under this burden. They cannot help
themselves, and the Emperor is not so far offin place, as in ability and
means to relieve them: They flee to France for succor. The French King
inuades, subdues, and expelles the Lombards, and gives to the Church Vrbine,
Agobbio, Taro, Rauenna, and many other Signories. This then that our Author
here sets down out of authentical record, is the Popes fair Charter of
Romagna, with the Buttings and Boundaries precisely set down: whose title
thereunto is lawful and good: for what can be freer then gift, if the Doner
have a property and right in the thing given? And what right can be more just
and lawful then that of the sword upon an usurper? Besides, the son
confirms the fathers donation, which makes the title the stronger: and
reassures unto the Church the Marquisate of Ancona, and Duchy of Spoletum. As
for that other share in the Ligurian mountains, Furly, and Istria, whereunto
the Popes Proctors and Parasites have entitled him, and wherewith no Secular
power ever invested him, it is but an Vtopian Signory of the Popes: and if he
should put in his claim, the States of Venice, and Genoa, the Dukes of Sauoy,
and Mantoa, with other Italian Princes, would quickly put in their bar. But
for this munificence of the French Kings to the Church, the Pope returned him a
tribute, not of money or homage, (for he held it as Lord Paramount, and so it
was given him,) but of gratitude and thankfulness: In token whereof he gave
them the title of Most Christian: an honor which they in those times willingly
accepted, and they and their successors since have ever taken upon them; yet
was it not so sure to them and their heirs, but that it might be liable to
forfeiture, if it pleased his Holiness. For but 100. years since, upon a
displeasure taken against that King, he intended to take the title from him,
and to bestow it upon the King of England: the Bull was ready drawn for the
Seal, and nothing wanted but the dispatch by messenger. And as here he
resolved to take from that Crown, that Noble title of Most Christian, which he
challenged to do because he had given it: so, much about the same time, and upon
far iuster cause, many Christian Princes and States took from him his proud
title of Supreme Head of the Church-gouernment over them and their subjects:
because Princes had formerly grangranted him that power for the general good
and benefit of the Church, which now they saw by their experience, and felt to
their hurt, to be by him most grossly and shamefully abused. But so much have
our disloyal Loyolists benumbed men's senses with superstitious stupiditie, as
all that the Pope has, must be believed to be Iure diuino; all that he says,
to be Gospel and truth; all that he does, to be holy and just. And herein none
are so far from reason and sense as we of this Nation, that are far remote
from this Court, and see not the abuse: Nay we are so perverse, as we will not
believe what we see in this case; but they that are near it, and see daily the
contrary, are of contrary opinion. Let them read but Guicciardines conclusion
of this Digression, (which that Church has most wrongfully effaced without
desert, and reproved without answer:) he was a worthy Gentleman, of a noble
house, learned in the Laws, experienced in the greatest affairs, well read in
the most approved Authors, allowed of all wise men for his judgment, believed
of all good men for his truth; he wrote not but what he saw by proof, or knew
by reading; he complained not but upon just cause: Read they him, (I say
again) and be satisfied in this point or never. For why should these poor
ignorant men entrust those Ignatians only, and none others, with the treasure
of their dearest Jewels, their Knowledge, Judgment, Conscience, Soul and all?
Why may they not as well abuse us with lies from Rome, as they mis-informe the
simpler sort of Catholics there, of us? You shall see in some of their
Churches, Tables hung up to pourtray and express to the life, the several
persecutions of Catholics here in England, in the late Queens time, some
worried to death in beasts skins by mastiffes: others pricked under the nails
with sharp needles: others drawn in pieces with wild horses: and almost all
the several sorts of torture represented unto us in history out of the ten
first persecutions of the Primitive Church; to bring the simpler sort there in
detestation of us and our Religion: as by leasing and insinuation they bring
the simpler sort here into admiration, or rather adoration of their Pope. But
some of that Church (better experienced in our State-affaires, and more
impartial in their affections to us) wonder at our stupide credulity; others
that stand ill affected to our Country, laugh at our simplicity, and feed the
humor even at their own charge, expecting when it should prove the
predominant Quality in the body of this our famous Island, and by the fiery
inflammation thereof, set the whole in combustion. For who is so mad to think,
it is our souls health they seek? They seek not us but ours: they seek not
the poor, but the great ones: they are wise in their generation, for they know
one of these draws with him a thousand, and the taking in of one principal
Fort, brings under contribution the country round about. And they are wise in
our generations also, for they know what Stock in our country is fittest to
plant on, and which timber in our Forest is aptest to make their shafts of,
that the common enemy may have his quiver full of them when we meet him in
the Gates of danger. They are moreover wise in our natural inclinations: for
although the Masculine sex be more worthy then the Feminine, either in a
Grammatical construction or a Civil, yet they choose this latter, as the
apter for their end and purpose, because it is the easlier misled, and the
hardlier reclaimed; the weaker to resist by reason, and the stronger to persist
in wilfulness: newfangled in their opinions as in their attire, loving
nothing that is vulgar, no not the truth. And lastly, they are wise in our
Oeconomicall administration, for they know that mothers govern here in chief
in the hearts of children: Fathers but provide for them, mothers feed them;
fathers are austere, the mothers indulgent; fathers have the awe, mothers the
love; fathers have the eye, but mothers the heart: from whom with their milk
they suck this Veriuyce, where with the teeth of many great families are set
on edge, and whereby within these few years their number is increased here
among us to a greater proportion (it must needs be a weed it grows so fast)
then history can sum up unto us in Rome of good Christians, upon the account
of the first three hundred years. But return we to our history. That
prenominall Frontlet of Most Christian, the French King wears still as the
fairest gemme of his Diadem: So is the Real honor of the Imperial Majesty
conferred here upon him. The Pope and the people of Rome give the French this
Title. For who but the Romans should choose an Emperor of the Romans? And
therefore he had not this power alone, much less of himself, but jointly with
the rest of the citizens; And so by consequence, not as he was Head and
governor of the Church, but as he was Bishop of that city: for it was his
place in Rome, and not his office in the Church, that gave him this power;
which was not of ordination only in himself, but of suffrage with the rest.
And surely most consonant it was to the necessity of the times, that as in the
minority and weakness of the Church, the Emperor allotted her a Guardian
ofher own, to bring her up well, to maintain her rights and privileges, and
to defend her inheritance in his Court of Wards from the intrusion of others,
under the safe-gard and protection of the supreme Imperial Majesty: So now
the whole State of this city of Rome both Ecclesiastical and Civil, in this
utter decay of the Imperial power, should choose them a temporal Head of their
own, under whom both those States of that Town might rest secured from the
incursions and inundations of foreign and fierce Nations, whereunto formerly
it had bin subject.

GVICCIAR. By which separation, the Emperors of Constantinople neither lost
Sicilia, nor those parts of Italy, which running from Naples to Manfredonia,
are listed with the sea; for they were still under those Emperors. Neither for
all this, was that power taken from the Emperor, That the election of the Pope
should not stand good without the confirmation of the Emperor; in whose name
Rome was still governed: Nay the Popes in all their Bulls, Privileges and
Grants, expressed the Date in these formal words (Such a one our Lord the
Emperor reigning.) In which easy Subjection or Dependence, call it whether ye
will, the Popes continued till the success of things emboldened them to take
the rule themselves. For the power of the Emperors beginning to decline, first
in the Successors of Charles (while yet the Empire was among them) through
their discord and civil war: and after by being translated to the Princes of
Germany, not so powerful as were those other successors of Charles, by reason
of the greatness of the kingdom of France: The Pope and people of Rome, by
whose Magistrates she now began to be governed (though not without much trouble
and tumult) derogating by all means as much as they could from the
jurisdiction of the Emperors, established for a Law, That the election of the
Pope should be no more confirmed by them. Which Law for many years was
observed or broken, according as by the alteration of their affairs the
Imperial power increased or diminished. The which growing to some strength in
the race of the Othoes of Saxony (Gregory being likewise a Saxon and chosen
Pope) through the love he bare to his country, and hate to the Romans for the
persecutions he had endured by them, transferred to his own nation the power
of choosing the Emperor, in such form and manner as it is used at this day:
forbidding the Emperors elect (to reserve to the Pope some prerogative) to
take upon them the Title of Emperor or of Augustus, until they had received
the Imperial Crown. Hence grew the custom of their going to Rome to be
crowned, and till then to use no other Title but King of the Romans, or
Caesar. But afterward, when the Othoes line was extinct, and the power of the
Emperors diminished, by reason the empire remained not hereditarie in great
Princes, then began Rome openly to draw her neck out of the yoke of the
Emperors obedience, and many other cities with her rebelled, during the reign
of Conradus of Sueuia. The Popes of Rome also seeking to enlarge their own
power, became as it were Lords of Rome, though many times through the
insolences and dissentings among the people of Rome, they found many
oppositions. For the repressing whereof (by the favor of Henry 2. Emperor,
and then at Rome) the Pope by a law now made, transferred the power of choosing
Popes upon the Cardinals only.

THe glass of time from Christ to us is half run out: the Empire is rent in
two parts both in title and inheritance. The West Empire is given to France,
the East is left to Constantinople: he of the West possesses nothing of the
firm inheritance, but the Imperial Pre-eminence and Prerogative he retains
still, in a sample and large manner as before. For, concerning his
Pre-eminence, all the Popes Bulls, Briefs, and Grants had their date running
after this Tenor: (Such a one our Lord the Emperor reigning.) And as touching
his Prerogative, he still confirmed the Election of the Pope: without him the
act was inualidous and frustrate, the new Elect incapable, and the place void
by law. But by whom was the Pope elected? By the people of Rome: a mutinous,
seditious and rebellious multitude: the people and the Emperor make the Pope,
the people and the Pope make the Emperor. In both which elections, the people
seem to have the more active part, the Emperor and the Pope the negative
only. But is the Pope elected by that many-headed monster the multitude, that
will sing Osanna at noone, and cry Crucifige at night? comes he in by such an
election, where the multiplicity of voices ouerswayes the validity of reasons?
where commonly the greater part give their Placet to the vnworthier party?
Then surely many of our Forefathers feared justly, that the Holy Ghost (whom
they pretend to be President in all their Councels) had no Seat in such
Sessions: and therefore denied the necessity of this Consequence; that being
once Pope, all Christians are bound in conscience, and upon pain of damnation,
to obey him. But now comes in a new election of the Pope, by a new translation
of the Empire, which after some 80. years residence hereditary in the
successors of Charles the Great, is transferred from France to Germany, and
there made Elective. For these Princes being none of them so powerful as a
Monarch of France, the Emperor begins to lose his strength, and the Pope dares
to take much more upon himself then he was wont, and to detract much more from
others then in right he ought: he takes from the Emperor the prerogative of
confirming the new elect Pope, and from the Romans that double power which they
had: Of electing the Emperor (which he gives to certain German Princes,) and
electing the Pope of Rome, (which he gives to the Cardinals:) and surely had
he reserved to the Emperor his former right in the confirmation, this manner of
election had been much better then that other: not much unlike our elections in
the Church of England by the Deane and Chapter, confirmed by the King. For
these Cardinals were at the first simple Vicars or Prebends of several
parishes in Rome: but as the case now stands, the election is altered a malo
in peius, because they are not all as at the first, mere Churchmen: some of
them are not entered into any spiritual order (save that of Deacon) and many of
these he chooses out of great houses, and of Princes blood, without respect of
age, learning or piety; being so young (as the philosopher says) both in years
and manners, as they are Inidonei auditores moralis philosophiae, much more
Indigni Cardines sanctae matris Ecclesiae. These men he dignifieth with titles,
endoweth with revenues, and inuesteth with great offices and tot-quots of
Church-liuings, to maintain their riot and pomp: that they may back him with
their great families and friends to support his usurped authority and pride:
which he voweth to hold fast, like Julius 2, if not with Peter's keys, yet with
Paul's sword: If not by threats and excommunication, yet by war and
bloodshed: like the enraged witch of Greece, Flectere si nequeat Superos
Acheronta mouebit, if God will not hold him up, the devil shall: when paper
and lead lose their force, he tries what fire and powder can do. Now if these
be the Princes Electors of the Papacy, what hand can Christ have in their
election, but his withdrawing hand of long sufferance? where the choice is only
in the Cardinals, and the better part of these ouerborne by the greater, and
these carried away with particular respects of envy or malice, or to their
proper ends of ambition and covetousness. Two third parts of the Consistory
are sufficient to make a Pope, and be he never so insufficient or unworthy, yet
the election is Canonical. Look into any of their Conclaues or Sessions for an
election, you shall commonly find three or four several heads of Factions
(Minions to three or four precedent Popes) by whom they had their greatness,
and by it their followers: Among these you shall observe such iealousies and
emulations, such supplanting and subornation, such canuasing for voices, such
setting of stales, such working of friends, such undermining of opposites, such
promises and threats, such iugling and false play, that we may truly say of
the most of them, as is recorded of one; They enter like Foxes: with more
cunning and cheating then is used in the choice of any other Magistrate, in any
state whatsoever. Nay there be such proficients and craftsmasters in this art,
as have writ comments upon this text, and given the Cardinals a method and
rules, how to carry this business with finest conueyance, for effecting their
purpose, and electing a Papable creature of their own. Surely these men may
well choose him the Prince of the Churches State in Italy (as being Peers of
the same) and make him Supreme Governor of all causes as well Ecclesiastical as
Civil, in those her Signories and Dominions: But to make him Head and Governor
of the whole state of Christ's Church they cannot. Let them hold the power and
prerogative of the Palatines and Castellans in Poland (where the Scepter is
likewise eligible) to choose him Head over themselves and States, not over
others, whom they little known and have less to do withal. For what have the
Emperors to do over us? much less the Pope (his Vassalle) and the Popes
Vassalles least of all: who had all their authority and government originally
from the Emperor. If they will not approve our Bishops and Priests because they
have not their ordination from them, as they had heretofore: why should we
submit our selves to the Pope, or admit of this his election? For if this by
his Cardinals be good, what was then that former, when the whole city of Rome,
Clergy and Laity, chose him, and the Emperor confirmed him? But if both be
allowed for good, and the authority exercised by both maintained for just and
lawful; why should not the dignities and orders in our Church be sacred and
holy, though the ordination be altered? whereinto none can enter among us, but
he must first acknowledge an inward calling, and be approved for his
conversation of life, and sufficiency of learning, besides other things
necessarily required by our Canons. But what calling call ye that I pray you of
the Pope here in Conclaue? For he comes not to Peter's chair at Christ's call,
(Sequere me,) as Peter did: But a young Cardinal of the later edition, and
(perhaps) worst condition, a Nephew to the last Pope, and a Favorite of the
time, comes with his followers, out-numbers his opposites, and names his man:
Dixit and factus est; The business is at an end: Only the rest come in for
company, or for fear, when they see they cannot prevail. For in the
Cardinals Conclaue, as in Plutos Parliament, there must be a consent.
Adfremuit Proserpina, allatrauit Cerberus, asciuit plebs, fic apud eos
sanciuntur omnia: The whole Conclaue conuenteth, every faction propounds, the
strongest prevails, the whole Quire consenteh, and then Te Deum, the new Pope
is chosen. A new Pope indeed, and a new kind of Pope, far unlike those of
former times. For now he absolutely shakes off the yoke of obedience to the
Emperor. The city of Rome it self also with many other great towns run
into manifest rebellion against him: and this holy Head of the Church, becomes
chief head of the faction, as appears in this next section.

GVICCIAR. To the greatness of the Pope, now also happened this new
augmentation. For the Normans of whom the first was William Fierabacchio,
having got from the Emperors of Constantinople the Countries of Puglia and
Calabria: Robert Guicciadorno one of that race, either to strengthen himself
with some color of Religion, or to be more able to defend himself against
those Emperors, or for some other respect; restored Beneuentum to the Church,
as to it of right belonging: and acknowledged to hold the Duchy of Puglia and
Calabriain fee of the Church of Rome: whose example one of his family
imitating, and driving William one of the same stock out of Puglia and
Calabria, he recognized to hold those Provinces in fee of the Church, Anno
1130, under the title of the King of both Sicills: The one on this side the
Faro, the other beyond: The Popes not refusing, for their own particular
ambition and profit, to cherish and maintain the tyranny and usurpation of
others. For which cause, pretending yet further (as the ambitious desire of man
is never stayed) the Popes also began to deprive some of those kings, that were
not obedient to their commandments, and to grant those kingdoms to others. By
this means they came to Henry son of Frederick Barbarossa, and from Henry
to Frederick the 2. his son, all three successively Emperors of Rome. But
Frederick becoming a sharp scourge to the Church, (in whose time sprang up
the two factions Guelphes and Ghibellines, the Pope being head of the one, and
the Emperor of the other) the Pope after the death of the Emperor granted the
Inuestiture of those kingdoms to Charles Earl of Aniow and Prouence, imposing
upon them a yearly tribute of five thousand ounces of gold, and with
condition that thence after none of those Kings should accept to be Emperor:
which condition is ever since expressly specified in all their Instalments. The
kingdom of the Isle of Sicil being afterward possessed by the Kings of
Arragon, was in short time freed of that Tribute, and of the Recognition to be
held in fee of the Church. It is also a report (though not so true as what has
been said hitherto) that Mawde the Countess, a rich Princess in Italy, gave
to the Church that part of Italy which is limited by the river Pescia, and the
Castle of San Quirico on the one side, and by the river of Tyber, and the
nether sea on the other, now called the Patrimony of S. Peter. Others also
add, that she gave to the Church the city of Ferrara, but neither is this
certain. But that yet is more doubtful which some one has written, that
Autopert King of the Lombards, in their most flourishing time gave to the
Church the Cocceian Mountains, wherein they say is included Genoa, even as
far as Prouence. And that Lutiprand a King of the same nation, gave her
Sabina, a country near Rome, Narni and Ancona, with diverse other places.

NOw comes the Church of Rome to be entitled to both the Sicils, that is,
Sicilia it self, still so called, and almost all that which at this day is
called the kingdom of Naples. She had that of Romagna lawfully: how comes she
by this? By the grant of an usurper a tyrant. She gives him the title of King;
and he yields her the homage and fealty of a Vassal, as to his supreme
Sovereign. Thus for a time they hold good quarter and correspondencie together
comme Larrons en Foyre. But friendship baptized in Ambition and Tyranny, is
quickly renounced: for not long after she depriues these French (Successors of
Guicciadorno,) and inuesteth the Dutch (Successors of Barbarossa) in these
kingdoms; The father, son and grandfather, all three Emperors successively.
But the holy Father is displeased with this ungracious grandsonne, upon some
misdemeanour of his, and now in revenge he begins to play Rex (it is not yet
five hundred years since:) Now he begins to thunder and lighten like angry
Jove, and lays about him on all sides with his Keys in the one hand, and his
Sword in the other: the Histories are full of the troubles and miseries of
those times. But why did not he this before? Had none of those Christian
Emperors formerly failed of their duty to the Empire, when they left Rome
abandoned to the violence of the enemy? or of their obedience and awful
reverence to the Papacy, when they placed and displaced Popes at their
pleasure? If he had as great power before, why did he not use it when he had as
great cause? If he had it not then, why does he now usurp it? The death of
Henry 3. in France, and failing of the fire-worke here in England, will answer
us easily to this point. For the Pope, As he never approues a mischief till it
be done, so he never chalengeth a power till he be able by the sword and fine
force to maintain the usurpation. As here with his faction of Guelphes he did,
against the Emperor and his Ghibellines. But this fury against Frederick has
some color of justice; he might upon a forfeit give or take Naples to whom or
from who^ he pleased, for he was the chief Lord (though by grant of a tyra^t)
but now of later years he will give the West Indies to Spain, and the East to
Portugal: he will give Great Britain to him that can get it, and a new world
(if there be any) to him that can find it. The undertakers know well enough,
they be not his to give, (except from him that said, All this will I give
thee.) But every false Pretext is a just Title to the sharp sword of Ambition
once unsheathed: so that it is evident, there was never so covetous a taker,
nor so prodigal a giver. But if he will needs be giving, let him do it of his
own: let him give out of Romagna; his title has here been tried, and proved
lawful: Or out of S. Peter's Patrimony (a fair portion in Tuscanie) which is
here somewhat doubted, though neither trauersed nor euicted from him. Only I
would entreat him to spare Naples, it is in a good hand already, and one that
will hold it hard under his nose, and in spite of his teeth, though his
Holiness be much grieved at it.

GVICCIAR. Thus as the state of things varied, so varied the estate of these
Popes with the Emperors. For being at first for many ages persecuted by the
Emperors, and after freed from this terror by the conversion of Constantine,
they took rest: and attending only to spiritual matters, they lived as it
were merely subject many years under the shadow of the Emperors; and
continued long after in low estate, being quite debarred from meddling with
them, by reason of the Lombards greatness. But after that by the means of the
kings of France they had obtained a temporal power, they yet held strict
amity with the Emperors, and depended wholly upon their authority, so long as
the dignity Imperial continued in the Successors of Charles the Great, both
in memory of former benefits given and received between them, as also in
regard of the Emperors greatness. After the declination whereof, they
separating themselves wholly from their friendship, began to make open
profession that the Pontifical dignity was rather to give laws to the
Emperors, then to take them. And therefore hating above all things to return
to their former subjection, and that none of the Emperors might attempt their
former right, either in Rome or elsewhere (as some of them, either of greater
force, or of more noble spirits had essayed to do) they opposed themselves
openly by force of arms against the Emperors, being assisted with those
tyrants, which under the title of Princes (with the cities which had freed
themselves) had quit their allegiance, and acknowledged no longer the
authority of the Emperor. Hereupon it grew, that the Popes taking more and
more upon them, and using the terror of their spiritual arms for temporal
occasions; and interpreting that as the Vicars of Christ upon earth, they were
above the Emperors; and that the charge of worldly matters in many cases
appertained to them, they sometimes deprived them of their Imperial dignity,
and stirred up the Electors to choose others in their rooms: and on the other
side, the Emperors either chose, or caused to be chosen other Popes.

THis Recapitulation or Summary of what has formerly bin said, brings us to
the full period of the Popes height and greatness, (though his ambition be
boundless, and his pride without period.) For now he will no longer take
laws of the Emperors, but as Vicar of Christ will give laws unto them. He
proves it out of good authors, The Tyrants and Rebels in Italy: and by strong
arguments, Fire and sword, cursing and excommunication, arms temporal and
spiritual. But he carries it not so easily away: for the Emperor encounters
him at his own weapons: Fire against fire, sword against sword, father against
son, Ghibelline against Guelphe, with the effusion of much Christian blood; and
all the miserable effects that bloody war brings with it. Where is now our
great Lawgiver, by whose wholesome and peaceful ordinances the whole Church
should be governed? Where is this great Shepherds care of Christ's little
flock, that sends them thus to the shambles of death and destruction? Our
Lator-Legis and Pastor-Gregis, is now become a Legi-rupa and Sangui-suga. He
has turned Pasce oues to Vesci sanguine: he has passed his commission (as
Caesar did,) and is waded up to the chinne through the bloody Rubicon, and so
is become Rebel to his Sovereign Lord the Emperor, as also to the state of
the Church, whereof he had the government by commission Here therefore it is
not amiss to consider as Gamaliel did, whence the Pope had this commission,
whether of God, or of men? If of men, it must prove as other governments have
done: if of God, it must have the foundation in Humility, the raising in
Justice, and the continuance in Peace, as the Gospel had: out of which holy
Root can never grow such rank weeds of Pride, Injustice and War. But to say
(as they of the Romish Church write) that if Christ had not left this Governor
to his Church, he had left the sheep without a Shepherd; has no necessity
of consequence: we may rather infer, that it had been a committing of the
Lambs to the Wolf. But a care he had of his Church, and so he testified: a
Governor he promised, and so he performed. A Governor that should ever
comfort us in all our tribulations and afflictions, and that should ever
continue us in his Truth, (The Spirit of Truth) to direct and guide us in all
the ways of Godliness, Verity, and Virtue. This Governor he sent within ten
days after his Ascension. Other then this to rule in Chief in the inward man,
the Church has none; and he rules still in the hearts of her children, and
ever shall.

GVICCIAR. The state of the Church being much weakened by these discords, and
no less by the residence of the Court of Rome for 70. years together at the
city of Auignon, as also by the Schism which followed the Popes return into
Italy: many great men usurped upon the cities in their own countries, though
in subjection to the Church, especially those of Romagna: which usurpers the
Popes either pursued, or not being able to overcome them, made Grants of those
places to the same men; To hold of the Church in fee; or else set up other
heads against them, and gave (these) the inuestiture. Thus began the cities of
Romagna to have several Lords, under the title for the most part, of Vicars of
the Church: So the government of Ferrar a being given by the Pope, to Azzo
d'Este, was after granted him under the title of Vicar: whose family in
process of time was dignified with more noble titles. So Bologna being taken
by John Visconti Archbishop of Millan, was after granted him by the Pope, under
the title of a Vicariat. By like means, in many cities of the Marquisate of
Ancona, of the patrimony of Saint Peter, and of Vmbria, (now called the Duchy
of Spoleto) there start up several Lords either against the Popes will, or
with his forced consent. The like variations happening also to the Imperial
cities in Lombardie, it fell out very often that according to the current of
the times, the cities of Romagna, and others of the Churches state, reuolting
openly from her government, would acknowledge to hold those places in fee of
the Emperor: And those that held Millan, Mantoa, and other Imperial cities in
Lombardie, would acknowledge to hold them in fee of the Church. And in these
very times Rome was governed of her self: though the Church held still the
name of the government. For albeit at the first when the Popes returned from
Auignon into Italy, they were obeyed as Lords of the town: yet
notwithstanding the Romans shortly after, choosing the office of the Banderesi,
fell to their old obstinacy. Whereupon the Popes having little authority there,
left the Town, and resided elsewhere: until the townsmen being impouerished,
and fallen into great disorder, through the absence of the Court; and the year
1400. approaching, in which they hoped (if the Pope were at Rome,) there should
be great concourse of all Christendom, by reason of the Iubiley: they made
humble supplication to Pope Boniface, that he would return; offering to
abolish the office of the Banderesi, and to submit themselves wholly to his
obedience. Upon which conditions he returning, and the Romans attending to the
gain of that year; he possessed himself absolutely of the government of that
city, and put a Garrison in the Castle of S. Angelo. Whose Successors, though
till the time of Eugenius they had somewhat to do, yet afterward they governed
that city at their pleasure without any further trouble.

WE have formerly seen by what right the Church of Rome holds her temporal
Inheritance in Italy: Here we see how wrongfully it is wrested and wrung out
of her possession, and upon what occasion. The Lords of Romagna, and other
parts of Italy, see her much weakened by her foreign wars with the Empire,
and her intestine garboiles within her own bowels by a Schism, as also that
she is far from them, and the Court resident at Auignon, (the very reason of
the Churches revolt from the Empire) they take the advantage of the time, and
every one gets a fleece. It was unjustly done of them, (though she were justly
served, that had many times done the like upon the Empire.) There is like
revolt in many Imperial towns of Italy: they all change their Copy. The
Popes rebels acknowledge to hold of the Emperor, and the Emperors to hold of
the Church. Rome also will not be ruled, she will have officers of her own:
and were it not that she is poor of her self, and cannot live without the
residencie of the Court, she would no more then others live under the
presidencie of the Pope. But necessity drives the Romans to accept him for
their Sovereign Lord: and jealousy of another revolt, makes him to keep them
in awe, by his Garrison in S. Angelo, (as now in these later times he forces
the world to obedience, by his Legionaryes of S. Loyola.) Thus by a long series
and tract of time, has our Author brought us from the infancy of the Chuch,
and public maintenance thereof by Imperial authority, (the true time of the
Churches Iubiley) to the year of our Lord 1400. the second Iubiley of the
Churches Institution. For it began not till 1300. when it was ordained by
Boniface 8. to be celebrate and solemnized every hundredth year: after that it
changed to every fiftieth by Clement 6. and since to every five and twentieth
by Sixtus 4. The true reason of the Institution is here given us, and the same
(one of them) that we give for our Marts and Faires; not to draw people from
sin, but to draw multitudes to Rome; not for the good of Gods Church, but for
the enriching of that City and Court. Though the city I must confess,
affords us the better ware, and cheaper peniworth: for there we have food,
raiment and lodging for our money. But on the otherside of the Fair (which is
no better then a Fripperie of the rotten rags of man's invention,) as we have
nothing without money, so we have nothing for our money, but the ballets of
Indulgences and Pardons, babies of Saints-pictures, Rattles of Beads and
Medals, with other such hobby-horses, and trash, fit only for such as wipe
their noses on their sleeves; which the chapmen themselves stop mustard-pots
withal, howsoever the simple, religious, pious, honest Buier, holds them as
they cost him, (dear.) And thus having likewise brought the Popes Holiness to
this year of Iubiley, (a true Iubiley to him, who never till now could be
peaceably possessed of Rome) our Author leaves him, and shuts up this grave,
learned, and necessary Digression, with a worthy, just, and Christian
complaint, in this conclusion following.

GVICCIAR. By these foundations, and by these means, being raised to an
earthly power, casting off by little and little, the remembrance of the souls
health, and the laws of God, and bending all her thoughts to worldly
greatness: No longer using the Spiritual power, but as an instrument and
minister of the Temporal: Their cares and endeavors were now no longer a
sanctity of life, no longer a propagation of Religion, no longer a zeal and
charity toward their neighbor: but armies, but war against Christians,
managing their sacrifices with bloody hands and thoughts, and augmenting of
treasure: New laws, new tricks, new sleights, to get money on every side: To
use the spiritual arms without respect for this only end: To profane sacred
things without shame, for this only purpose. The great wealth lauishly
bestowed upon them and their whole Court, was accompanied with pride, luxury,
dishonesty, lust, and abominable pleasures. No care of their successors, no
thought of the perpetual dignity of the Papacy. But in stead thereof, an
ambitious and pesaforous desire to exalt their children, nephews and kindred,
not only to excessive riches, but to Principalities and Kingdoms. No longer
conferring dignities and preferments upon men of desert and virtue, but selling
them always as it were to the most giver, or casting them away upon persons
apt for ambition, for lust, and for shameful pleasures. By which acts of
theirs, the Papal reverence being utterly decayed in the hearts of men, and
yet notwithstanding their power being still supported by the effectual and
powerful majesty of Religion, and aided much by the means they have to
gratify great Princes, and those great personages which are about them, by
preforments and other Ecclesiastical grants; whereby knowing themselves to be
in great respect among men, and that who so takes arms against them purchases
much infamy, and oftentimes the opposition of other Princes, with small gain
whatsoever be the event: and that if they conquer, they use the victory as
they list; and if they be conquered, they have what conditions they will:
Ambition pricking them forward, to take from their neighbors both private
estates and Principalities, they have been very often and of long time, the
instruments to stir up war and new combustions in Italy. But to return to
my former purpose, from whence my just sorrow, and the public loss have
transported me, more far then becomes the rules of History, etc.

THus far Guicciardine: and where he leaves, take we up our complaint: and if
Protestant Princes have used that power which they have immediately from God, to
reform these abuses, to redress our wrongs, and to vindicate their right out
of the hands of this Usurper, who can justly challenge them? For seeing the
Church of Rome has incroached and intruded year by year, by little and
little upon this Freehold and Prerogative of Princes, as the year it self
does win certain minutes and seconds, which in long tract of time breed a
great alteration: they were forced to reform the Churches in their own
several States, as near the truth and custom of the Primitive Church as they
could, even as Rome has reduced the year ten days nearer to the Julian
account: yet neither are these Reformations without some small blemish, nor
those Reductions without some small error, that both Rome and they might in all
humility confess, All that is of man, to be imperfect like himself. Let God
be true, and every man a liar.

Our defection is therefore not from what she was, but from that she is; from
the Authority she at last usurped, not from the Religion she at first
received: That, she cannot in justice establish but in her own proper
dominions, where the Sword of France has made her absolute Princess: This,
God of his goodness has left free to the world, to be maintained by the
Scepter of Christian Princes, whose right of inheritance has made them as
absolute as her self. So that our Contestation with her, and Protestation
against her Papal tyranny, is in the end like that in former times of the
Barons of this Land (though not in the nature, because theirs was against their
natural liege Lord and Sovereign) who contested for their Franchisements and
Liberties which were granted them by the Magna Charta, and derived from those
good old laws of Saint Edward the Confessor. For this High Priest would take
from us that immunitie and freedom we had at first, of owing our obedience to
none but God, and our King, and would bring us under the yoke of his foreign
Jurisdiction, which in the good old world of the Primitive Church was not so,
and whereof we are freed by our Great Charter of the Gospel; Given us by the
Father, Penned by the holy Spirit, Sealed by his dear Son, and witnessed by
the death of many thousands of Martyrs.

WHy then should the Papist infer (I call him not Catholic, for to be a good
Catholic is to be a good Christian, but to be a Papist is to be a Romish
Statist, a disciple of the Jesuit, not of Jesus:) why should he urge (I say)
that we renounce our Religion to God, by quitting our obedience to the Pope,
when we see no such correlation between them? Nay we plainly discover a
manifest Antithesis and opposition of the Precept of the one, to the Practice
of the other. Surely, let them say what they can; to be a Catholic and to be a
Protestant, are not two several Religions in the root: both are Christians,
both build their faith and profession upon Christ. He is the Rock whereupon
they stand: he is the Truth, wherein they agree; other truth then in him there
is none. But many falsehoods there are, as those of the Turk and Persian, who
differ much in disputable points, yet are professors of one and the same
profane Mohammedan Religion. The Turk holds himself the only Mussullman, i.
true believer; and the Persian to be an heretic, and in a damnable way: So
thinks the Papist of the Protestant, but, id populus curat scilicet. As for
us, we are not so uncharitable to condemn all them of the Catholic Religion,
because they differ in disputable points from us; nor so ignorant in our own,
as not to be always able and ready to justify it for the same which was
planted by Christ, taught in his word, confirmed with miracles, and professed
in the Primitive Church. Now whatsoever concerns Religion, belongs either
to God or to Caesar: The matter and foundation (which is the truth) to God, who
has the Ministers of his word to deliver it: the manner and form of
exercising it (which is the government) to the King, who has those Ministers
of the word, the Ministers of his power, to put it in execution. Of this
neither ought the Papist to rob him, nor the Anabaptist to deny him. Give
unto Caesar what belongs to Caesar, and give unto God what belongs to God.
God spoke these words and said, I am the Lord thy God, etc. Here is the matter
of Religion, By God. All that the Lord commands by his servant Moses, that
will we do: here is the obedience both of Priest and people, in the form and
manner: By the hand of Moses and Christian Princes, not by the mouth; not to
teach them the truth, but to rule and govern them under the truth, and
according to the unchangeable and eternal laws and ordinances thereof.

WE have not therefore quit our first Colors of Christianity, we fight still
under the Standard of the red Cross, like true Christians, which will ever
dare to display it self for the maintenance of our Religion, and honor of our
State: and I assure my self there are many thousands amongst us (whom they
presume to be sure their own) who when they shall see those Colors flying
in open field, will with us fly in the face of the common enemy, though he
bring the Banner of the Cross keys before him. For howsoever they be nuzled
and misled by their corner catechizings in matter of belief and conscience,
yet if they be not wilfully blind, they may perceive with us, that the Pope
seeks not to rectify the Church in our State for the truths sake, but to
re-gaine his usurped authority in our Church for his profits sake: would we
but give him this, he would give us leave to believe what we list.

WE march still therefore with all good Catholics under him that is and was
their Leader and ours from the beginning. We may differ from them in
apparelling, arraying, and embattelling our men: but our weapons are faith and
works of piety, as theirs, and our end is all one: We fight for life. Here is
the chief and maine point we stand on, We will have a Prince of our own, to
go in and out before us: We will have a Lieutenant of our own, under Christ
our General, in this our Christian warfare, to govern our camp, and keep us
under military Discipline: we like not the Venetian manner, to have a foreign
hireling chief commander of our troops: We fear no usurpation as they do.
God and his Right has made our King what he is (next himself upon earth) in
these his dominions: he will be no more, he ought be no less. And therefore
him do we follow, under him will we serve, and with him will we fight, as in
all his battles of Honor and State, so much more in an action of such
consequence as this, Of life or death everlasting. If the Pope and his
Cardinals have clipped the vvings of the holy Ghost, (who they say is
President in all their Conclaues) that he cannot fly over the Alps to fetch a
fit man for that holy Sea, (for now of late they have resolved, That no
Tramontano shall be Papeable,) why may not we likewise establish by law, that
no cause of ours shall by a Tramontano be determinable? why should not we clip
his wings of Ambition that would still flutter over us, and pare his nails of
Avarice that would still be scratching from us; so high mountains, a large
Continent, and a maine Sea being between us?

Seeing therefore the Sun of Righteousness shines upon this land with the
bright beams of his Gospel, which neither abrogateth wholesome and civil
laws, nor abridgeth the power of Princes ordained by them: seeing he has
drawn the Romish foggie mists of superstition and error from our eyes, and
has rained his sweet dewes of blessings upon us, in a religious King, a
hope-full Prince, a peaceful Government, a prudent Council, and a powerful
State, able with his Sword to maintain his right against what enemy soever
to his power or peace: and seeing that nothing is vvanting to make us the
happiest people on earth, but an unanimous and uniform concurrence in the
Service of our God, and obedience of our Sovereign: let us all like true
Israelites follow this our Moses out of that Egyptian bondage; let us join
with the hearts of obedience and hands of assistance, in so just a quarrel,
for so good a Prince, against so Imperious an usurper. Let none of us be any
longer abused and ensnared, yea and gulled by these prosessors of Lysanders
doctrine, who taught that children must be deceived with Chance-bones, and men
with Oaths: So these, with the old stamp of the devils oracles at Delphos,
of aequiuocall amphibologies, and mental reseruations, cosen and delude the
world.

But Rome has preserved a form of a Church, and kept the books of Gods law,
and Records of our Religion, from the fury of Barbarians, and ruins of time,
else how had we known either the law or the Gospel? They say very well, we
acknowledge it so, and we thank God for it, that made her the means: But what
then? Did not the old Jews preserve the old Testament for the Christians? Else
how had these known, but by those venerable and sacred Records of Antiquity,
all the Prophecies which are there registered from the beginning of the world,
of their true Messiah, which have since been fulfilled in his coming? Were
Christians therefore so bound to the Jews, or Rome to Jerusalem, as not to
forsake them when they had forsaken their fore-promised Redeemer? and not to
seek a new city of Peace in Christ's holy Gospel? Nay rather Rome had a
fearful example by them, that such old treasurers of the Truth may become
Bank-rupt of all Faith and Piety: that she may preach to others, and be her
self a castaway. Had they any such warrant, not to err, not to fall? Ought
not she with more care to have preserved Religion in all Purity, and professed
it in all Humility? Be not high minded, but fear: For if God spared not the
natural Branches, take heed least he also spare not thee. Behold therefore the
bountifulness and severity of God: Toward them that are fallen, severity:
but toward thee, bountifulness, if thou continue in his bountifulness:
otherwise thou shall also be cut off. A memorable caveat and fearful threat,
from that Divine, and Divining Spirit of the blessed Apostle, even to this
very Rome with which we have now our contestation. For such is our case with
her, as was hers with the Jews: we have forsaken her, because she has
forsaken her first Faith. The faithful city is become an harlot. Let her
therefore no more vpbraide us with her three Conuersions of this our Land, we
can more justly challenge her of thirty subuersions she has attempted upon it.
For, to attacke upon the life and person of a Prince, to give foment to
treasons, and encouragement to Traitors, yea and reward also; what is this but
to seek the subversion of the whole State? As for the last Fire-worke, all the
powers of hell were combined in the conspiracy, and but hell it self can
afford it a fit name, as but Heaven alone could prevent the danger. A Friar
first inuenter of such hellish and sulphurious powder, and a Priest the latest
practiser to put it to the utmost proof: What work call ye this, ye workers
of iniquity, that sets a stigmaticall brand, and an indelible stain upon your
order for ever?

But they say, He that is not in the Bosom of the Church, is in the bowels of
perdition: He that is not saved in the Arc, perishes in the waters: He has
not God for his Father, that has not the Church for his Mother: Without the
Church there is no salvation. So say we: and that there is no damnation,
disinheriting, drowning, or destruction, to them that are in this bosom of
safety, ship of assurance, family of the faithful, and society of the elect.
But these propositions, howsoever they be spoken of the visible Church by the
ancient Fathers, yet most sure it is, that they meant not to tie the to the
Church of Rome. For S. Cyprian used one of those Maxims professedly against
Stephen the then Pope of Rome. And the Council of Basil proved the Pope (who
would needs be above the Councels) to be a Schismaticke and rent from the
Church, because he ought to be subject to the Church, Quanto matre inferior est
filius. Could they but persuade us, that these Maxims of the ancient Father's
were meant of the Church of Rome only, and necessarily tied thereunto; we
would come flocking thither in such full troops, as they never had the like
Iubiley there; and would all be humble suitors to his Holiness, that the
Porta-Santa might not be shut up, so long as five and twenty years together,
we would have a continual and perpetual Iubiley in Rome: wherein we would
make no doubt to prevail, having so good pleaders in our behalf, as that
whole Court and City, who would be glad to pay well for the purchase, and yet
be sure to get well by the bargain. But this they shall never be able to
persuade, that all that are under the Popes protection and Benedicite are safe,
as under the seuenfold shield of Ajax, from all those perils which befall him
who is fallen from the Church: nor they that are under his malediction and
curse, are liable to all those spiritual dangers, from which a Child of the
true Church is free. Wherefore, while the Church of Rome appropriates to her
self whatsoever is said of the Church Catholic, either in the Scriptures or
Fathers, she does but imitate the frantic Greek, who when he saw any ships
arrive in the Port of Athens, supposed them all his own, and (without any
warrant from the Custom House) would offer to make seazure of all the wares.
So she without any warrant of the Dogana-Santa of Gods word, or custom of the
Primitive Church, will seize upon this rich and heavenly commodity, and others
must have it but at second hand: She will have the fee simple of the
Inheritance, and other Churches must hold of her by Copy, and in Base service.
Now what is this but to tie Christ's Church to a particular place and people?
And what is that but mere Donatisme, which admitted no Church in those times
but that of Aphrica? Is it not Catholic and universal both in place, and
profession? Has not Christ his Church in Constantinople, Cairo, Rome, and
Geneua? in Europe, Afric, Asia, America, and places yet unknown? Or has God
made all the world, but this little Angle of Europe, (and by their reckoning)
not a moitie of that neither, for naught but perdition? Nimis altum sapiunt.
This is to press into the Sanctum Sanctorum of Gods secret counsels, where
none but the high Priest of our souls may enter: This is to dare look God in
the face, which Moses himself not could nor durst adventure. Let them look
lower where they are, lest they fall lower then they are. It is only known to
him who are his. His mercy is over all his works, by this he will be glorified
as well as by his judgments, even in places far remote, where the sound of
the Gospel has not yet been heard. Let them not therefore shut Charity out of
Heaven, though in this iron-age of the world she be almost quite banished the
earth already. Let the poor Fugitive have that place of refuge.

Wherefore let not Rome lay claim to the whole inheritance, who had just
title but to an elder daughters part, which she may also forfeit by breaking
covenants. For I am persuaded that what the ancient Fathers gave peculiarly to
her, when she shined more gloriously then her younger sisters in the beauty of
pure Religion and white Robes of godly conversation, if they were now living,
they would again take from her, upon this plain discovery of her defection
and deformity. It is reported, that Angelo the famous Artizan of Italy, drawing
the pictures of S. Peter and S. Paul, for a Cardinal, a good friend and
benefactor of his, pourtraied them with very red and high colored faces;
whereas neither the Scripture, nor any Ecclesiastical history, nor any
original Tablet describes them by such complexions: being asked the reason,
Because (quoth he) if they were now living, they could not but blush at the
pomp of you Cardinals, the pride of this Court, and the abuses of this Church
in general.

AS therefore they cannot prove us out of the Church, no more can they show us
fallen from her unity. From theirs we profess a division, and are now as
heretofore ready to justify our parting. But Schism or division in our own
Church we have none: we live under the obedience thereof in all awfullnesse,
with a more willing and less forced subjection then they: For what she
commands we readily obey, and were it but a matter in different before the
commandment, we now hold it a matter of conscience: because we acknowledge she
has this power over her own children, by Gods holy ordinance, which binds us
in this strong Tie of obedience, by the virtue of his word. We likewise
reverence the Order of Priesthood, that has the ordination from her, and
acknowledge the power and virtue thereof: we confess to have our Initiation
into Christianity, and to be made the members of Christ by Baptism from the
Priest: from him to have our incorporation into Christ assured unto us by the
blessed Sacrament of the Eucharist, or of the Altar, call it whether you will,
(for the one is but an Appellation from the Action, the other from the Place
where it is sanctified.) From him we have our Reconciliation to our Mother the
Church, after our fall, by confessing our sins unto him, and being absolved
by him: knowing that if our confession be true, our contrition hearty, and
repentance unfeigned; he has power by Gods ordinance to restore us to the state
of Grace, and to receive us into the bosom of the Church, otherwise not: For
his Absolution is not absolute, it is but ex Hypothesi. Nay we farther
confess, that we cannot have the participation of any of these graces and
blessings, but by his Ministry only; for this is Gods holy ordinance in his
Church, whereof we profess and maintain ours to be a principal member. So
that we have not cast off the sweet yoke of Christian government, nor are we
those Libertines they would feign make us: for whatsoever our Church enioyneth,
that will we, and must we do. If she command us to an Anniuersarie and
stationarie confession of our sins to the Priest, we will obey: for we ought
to go to him in case of doubt for instruction, and in case of conscience for
comfort; and so we do: We are not such enemies to Auricular confession, as they
take us: but it is true, the Cubicular confession which their Priests use here
among us, we do not allow, nor do I think the married Catholics in Italy
would ever admit it. If she command us to adorn our Churches with beautiful
Tablets and Apparaments, to deck our Priests with seemly Copes and Vestiments,
to grace our Service with Music of voice, Organs, and other Instruments; and
to burn Frankincense and other sweet odours in our Temples, (so it be not to
drive away ill Spirits and Hobgoblins) all this will we do, as well and as
willingly as they. For all these do stir up the spirits and powers of man's
soul to a more lively offering up of his living sacrifice of prayer, praise
and thanksgiving to God. These their Church enjoined, and many things more, as
in themselves (Adiaphora) upon very good reason, and to a most godly use, till
the abuse by corrupt usage grew to hurt the Church more, then the use at first
did it good: and therefore may be abolished, as all other constitutions of like
nature in that Church may be, and have been even by Rome her self. As for
their praying to Saints, worshipping of Images, and other Idolatries, our
Church has cancelled those Canons: for we Protestants have not our Deos
maiores, minores, and Medioxumos, our Demigods, and gods of a higher strain
and larger size, as the Heathens had. Our God is not like Baal, that must be
wakened with loud crying, nor like the gods of earth upon earth, that must be
sued unto by mediation. His Court is always where himself is, every where:
we need no Postillions to send to him, nor Favorites to speak for us. We
know not whether S. Peter can hear our Catholics here in England and them in
Italy all at once; no more then when he was at Alexandria he could hear or
see them in Rome. And of their other punie and paper-Saints, S. Rock, and S.
Stock, and such like, we doubt much more. Those silly souls therefore and
poor Christians that prefer their suites by such Solliciters, were in poor
case, if they could not enter the Presence but by their means: but this King
of Kings is a searcher of the heart, and finding (that) sincerely affected to
him, does no doubt accept them. This is our charitable construction of them;
and let this be their best comfort, till God who has touched their hearts with
the heat of Christian zeal, enlighten them also with understanding.

AS for the Schism and Rent among our selves, wherewith they vpbraid us, it
is not in principles of Faith, nor their conclusions: it is only in matter of
Church-policie: it is not grown to a Party, it has no Head, as theirs have
had when there were three Popes, and so three Heads at once. It is but of such
as are fallen from one extreme to another: from the Tyranny of Papisme to the
Anarchie of Anabaptisme, or to the ^aocrasie of John a-Knoxe or John a-Stile. A
thing which is natural in the revolution of Civil States, and so likewise of
Ecclesiastical. But our Church neither allows their Opinion, nor suffers
their Practice. They are sequestered and under censure, and liable to what the
Canons of our Church lays upon them, which in matter of faith or obedience to
government, ought to bind the conscience of all that are under her subjection:
and therefore Maius peccatum habent. For all Churches Constitutions agreeable
to Gods word, are sacred and inviolable under the government where they are
established, until they be abrogated by the same Authority: But Christians in
other States are no way bound unto them: nor we to those of the Roman Church,
more then they to ours. Might we but agree in the principles of Faith, and
their conclusions, this difference of Government might well be permitted,
without any rent in Christian Religion, it would only hinder the Rents of the
Popes Checquer. In many of which Principles though they and we differ much, and
wherein both their side and ours have bin too curious and busy; yet seeing the
difference in most of them is rather De modo essendi then de Esse rei, (how it
is so, then not to be so at all,) I see not at all why any of them should so
censure us, or we them, if there were as much true charity as pretended zeal
amongst us.

NOw concerning these Disputable points of Religion, I would to God they and we
had traveled less therein: In some things it is superfluous to know much, in
some things dangerous to search ouer-farre. When one offered the Philosopher to
teach him the Art of Memory: I had rather (quoth he) thou would teach me the
Art of Forgetfulness: So in many of these cases, a simple ignorance is better
then a curious knowledge: and in such a sense as this we agree with them, that
Ignorance is the mother of Devotion. For that Apple of the Tree of Knowledge is
a dangerous fruit to taste, it has a sweet relish but a sour digestion; it
pleases the palate, but it breeds corrupt blood. Our first parents but
tasted thereof, and all their childrens teeth were set on edge: it is a windy
fruit, it puffs up: and this swelling Impostume bred in the brain, falls
like a Catarre upon the heart, where it quenches the native heat of true
Zeal, and dries the Radical humor of spiritual Grace. Two Doctors of
Physic sat at table together, and a third man in their company, who had no
learning at all in their Art, but a better stomach then both they to his meat.
The one of these was a Galenist, the other a Paracelsian. In the midst of the
meal they fall in argument: The Galenist discourses of the Retentiue faculty
in the stomach, how the meat is there depressed for a time, and made fit for
digestion; how thence a milkie juice is sucked by the Mesaraicae venae, which
is forthwith conveyed to the Liver the workhouse of blood; thence to the
Heart, the storehouse of spirit; and so these two (the Liver and the Heart)
like two careful Pourueyers, send of their provisions by the Veins and
Arteries (as by two common Road ways) into every part of the little
commonwealth of man's body. The Paracelsian, a professor and practiser quite
contrary to the other, as well in his (...), as in his (...); in his order of
Diet, as in his manner of Cure, opposes himself tooth and nail against all
these assertions: partly out of opinion that the right was on his side, but
more, out of a contentious humor and spleen which he bore to the others
profession. They fall from argument to railing, so to chafing, and at last to
bitter war and deadly defiance: whereby, the meal they then made was hindered
in the digestion, Choler increased in the one, Melancholy in the other, and the
blood inflamed in both: so as they were both taken away (without saying Grace)
desperately sick; the Galenist of a shaking Agew, and the Paracelsian of a
Dead Palsy. But the third man that sat by all this while, and understood not
the cause, though he saw the quarrel, he would not therefore meddle between
them, but fell heartily to his meat, while they fell hard by the ears; rose,
and gave God thanks, and with the strength of that meals meat, went on with
good speed to labor out his days work in his vocation, until the evening,
when with his fellow laborers he received his days wages. Thus is it with the
great Rabbis in Religion, and the simple, honest, ignorant Christian. Let us
therefore strive to do more, and study to know less: Let us fall to prayer
and to practice, and leave the pen and the press. For it is a presumption to
think we can pearce the marble hardness of Gods secrets with the leaden Screw
of our dull understanding, or sound the bottomless depth of his Divine
Mysteries with the Plommet of our short-lined, and short-liued reason. He was a
good Philosopher that professed no more knowledge but this; Hoc scio, quod
nihil scio. So may he be a good Christian, who letting pass all transcendent
and swelling knowledge, glories only in this; to know Christ crucified:
resolves only in this, to live always to him that died once for all: and
desires only this, the fruition of a better life, by the merit of that
precious death. Here is the Faith, Hope, and Charity of a Christian, which
three are all, in him that is all in all, in the work of our salvation.

IT is therefore unnecessary and unprofitable to strain our wits, and beat our
brains as they do, about many of their superfluous and frivolous
controversies. That sacred vessel of the purest wine, wherewith our souls are
comforted to eternal life, the blessed Virgin S. Mary, what avails it them
(when they all know, she was a natural daughter of Adam) to search and dispute
whether she were borne in original sin, or without? whereupon their
Seraphicall Doctors have written so much, to amuse the readers, and abuse the
time, which they should rather spend in the meditation of Gods Mercy with
rejoicing, or of his Justice with trembling. Let them read the Scriptures,
which are able to instruct and correct, that the child of God may be perfect.
For here they may understand all is fit for them to know, and may find some
thing not fit they should understand. Scriptura omnibus accessibilis, there is
thy liberty, and the door open to thee; enter boldly, and gather of the fruit
of this garden of Eden, from these lower boughs; Paucis penetrabilis, there is
thy restraint, and the brazen gates barred upon thee: beware thou press not
into this privy Closet, nor perch so high as this vpmost fruit, lest a worse
thing befall unto thee. What is needful for faith and good life to salvation,
is there so plainly laid open, as even the simplest may understand: Other
abstruse secrets and hidden mysteries therebe, so closely locked up, as the
wisest themselves cannot attain, may not attempt. So that, as the world made
for us by God, is the Mirror of his power and providence: So this word left us
by him, is the only true glass, wherein we behold his unspeakable mercy, and
unsearchable wisdom.

MAny other such vselesse questions as that former, they trauerse among
themselves and canuas Pro and Contra, wherewith their tedious volumes are
farced, which I will pass over, and touch only a difference or two between
them and the Protestants in more material points, as in that of Justification.
They will have no Faith without good works, no more will we; nor we good
works without Faith, no more will they: If they tie good works to Faith, and
we it to them, then hitherto we agree (de facto,) and the difference is no more
(be it spoken without offense,) then to tie the hose to the doublet, or it to
the hose. Had they stayed here (which they might well have done,) the quarrel
had been at an end, or rather none begun. But when they would needs proceed
farther, to define (de modo) how we are iustifed; and standing so much upon
good works, would attribute their Justification to the merit of their
righteousness: we were then forced to enter the lists, and stand for the
truth of Justification by Faith; yet not ascribing it to the merit of Faith,
but to the object of Faith, namely the merit of Christ's redemption. But let
them and us leave to strive any longer, except it be in well doing. Let us
both strive to have both, so shall we both be justified: but if we want
either, let us assure our selves we have neither. Let it suffice us in this
point, to know that we are justified before God through the only mercy and
grace of our Lord and Savior Christ Jesus, who in the work of our
Redemption, Justification, and Sanctification, is Alpha and Omega, the first
cause and the last. He is the Way, the Truth, and the Life: The Way, whereby
we walk righteously: The Truth, wherein we believe steadfastly: The Life,
where on we hope eternally. The vvarrant of our actions, the Buttresse of our
Faith, the Anchor of our hope. Christ is the root, Religion the tree; Faith,
Hope and Charity the branches; good works are the fruit. Faith is the hand
that lays hold on the cause: Charity the foot that runs on in the course:
Hope is the eye that looks for the goal. Let us then neither look back
with Lots wife from this city of Zoar, this Castle of comfort; nor pry
farther with these gazers above the Moon. Let no man adventure to enter this
deep, (how, or why the great God does all things,) which is not to be vvaded
without danger of drowning: Be no man so hardy to tower so high, under pain
of presumption, and arrest of high treason to the highest Majesty, who will
have the (...) of his secret counsels and will believed and obeyed: but the
(...) thereof neither pried into nor examined.

COncerning that great mystery of the blessed Sacrament of Christ's precious
body and blood, where with the true receivers are nourished to eternal life:
that sacred Seal which he has fixed to the handwriting of his last Will and
Testament, for performance of all Legacies promised us in himself, and keeping
of all covenants between him and us: if it be a Mystery, why do they and we
labor to search so far? If we apply it to the same use as they, why do we
quarrel so much? For, both they and we acknowledge, that when we receive this
blessed Sacrament worthily, and with that faith and probation of our selves
which S. Paul enioynes to every Christian man in the performance of that
action; we are there and at that time made truly and really participant of the
very true and real body of our Savior: (but by the mouth of faith, and after
a spiritual manner.) Which two conditions, diverse of the most learned and
moderate of that Church do freely acknowledge. And therefore so far are we
from holding this holy Sacrament to be a bare sign (wherewith they slander
us,) as we freely confess, by the receiving thereof worthily, to have a true,
lively, powerful, and effectual conjunction with his precious body and
blood: whom, as well in our hearts, as in all our exterior actions we adore and
worship. This is therefore the quarrel that we vvish may be taken up between
us: which we may well do, if we will both confess with reverend S.
Austen, that Christ is there; but how? Misericordia quadam occulta. He is
there; that is his mercy and infinite power: We know not how; that is our
weakness and definite knowledge, till we shall see him in his glory face to
face: Then shall we no more see darkly as through a glass.

NOw, as they have tired themselves, and troubled the pure streams of
Religions current, with the puddle of their own brain, and froath of their
Philosophy, in such disputations of controversy as these, whereof we need
not be instructed in some, and in the rest we ought not be inquisitiue: but to
rest in the high mysteries of Gods ordinance, as in God himself; (believe that
he is a Trinity of Persons in an unity of Substance,) and dispute not how it
is, or doubt how it may be: So have they cloyed and surcharged the consciences
of Christians with whole cart loads of Canons, Injunctions, and
Constitutions, more to the hurt then good of the Church, and more to the
fettering then bettering the souls of her dear children. Heretofore in our
laws of England, this was a strong Conueyance; I give from me and mine, to
thee and thine. And this a good Assurance, In sign this is sooth, I seal it
with my Tooth. And this a full Attestation, Witness Maude my wife. Do the
great Deeds and Indentures with all their Ifs and Prouisoes make the Tenures
more strong now adays? Were not covenants then as well kept as now? were
Titles so often tried? So is it with the Canons and Constitutions of the Romish
Church. Their Canonists have done as much hurt with their Decretals,
Paragraffes, and Glosses, as their Schoolmen with their Questions,
Distinctions, and Sophistry. Good laws never so much broken, as since so many
bad made: never so key-colde in charity, as since they grew so fire-hot in
Disputation.

But these Laws and Ordinances of theirs are not binding, (as has formerly
been said) save only under their Jurisdiction by whose Authority they are
made: nor ought they be perpetual, but only so long as they quadrate with
the conditions of the time; and that there redound less hurt to the Church by
the execution, then good by the abolishing thereof. I will give only one
instance, as I have done in the former. What if the Church of Rome forbid
Priests marriage, because they may be more freed from vvorldly cares, and
attend better to the Function vvhereto they are called? Shall this Law
therefore stand perpetual? when by the corruption of man's nature, and
iniquity of these evil days wherein we live, experience has showed us too
many horrible and abominable facts in several kinds of beastly and
unnatural lust, which their Priests have committed by being thus restrained?
Maculantur coitu illicito cum ipsorum grauissimo peccato: vbi cum propria vxore
esset castitas. Vnde deberet Ecclesia facere sicut bonus Medicus, vt si
Medicina (experientia docente) plus officiat quam prosit, eam tollat. Atque
vtinam idem esset in omnibus Constitutionibus positiuis. This is the Vote of a
devoted Catholic of their own. Besides, what if conjugal fellowship be
forbidden Priests in Italy, and prostitution of harlots permitted, for fear
of ouer-charging that Land with people wherewith it swarmeth already? (as by
their own Proverb appears: Troppo feste, troppo tempeste, troppo test.)
Shall it therefore bind us here in England where they have no power to
command, nor we like cause to be prohibited? For, we have not the fourth part
of people that they; nor they the moiety of good arable and pasture ground that
we to maintain them.

THere remains yet one other thing, wherein they of the Roman Church have
much prejudiced the sincerity of Christian Religion, and that is, Their
Miracles. For, as they have been too full of their Canonical Constitutions,
and too free of their Philosophical Conclusions, wherewith their great Tomes
and Volumes are laden, like Cardinal Campegius Sumpters (with much trash but
little or no Treasure:) So have they been too lavish and vulgar in their
hyperbolicall Miracles. A great Miracle sure it is (if it were true) that they
should grow so thick in the Popish dry Territories, and thrive so little in
this moist Climate of ours. For if we have one in an age, it is but of a Straw,
and yet not worth a straw when we have it: A miracle but of foolish fancy and
unsettled imagination; such a one as the Eye of conceit may daily see, if it
look upon broken clouds; and the Ear of credulous fancy hourly hear, if it
listen to the ring of Bells. But let them no longer scandalize the Truth, nor
think to cosen the world with this counterfeit kind of coin. Their Golden
Legend of leaden lies is no more current. Men are no longer babes to take such
Counters for good payment, or so simple to believe they see a man in the Moon.
Let them if they be wise, stamp us no more miracles of this Mint, least while
they endeavor to make men believe what they see to be false, they be hardly
trusted in what is true. I dare undertake there be more of these iuggling
Miracles to be seen in the countries of Popery, then there have been hours
since Christ wrought his first Miracle at Cana in Galile: as appears by the
Crutches, Arms, Legs, and other Gambolls hung up for show thereof in all the
Churches and Chapels of Italy; some of which have been so palpably forged,
and so notoriously discovered, as all the Figge-leaues in Italy and Spain are
not sufficient to cover their nakedness; whereof the modester sort are much
ashamed, confessing them to be pia mendacia, and the vviser sort laugh at them.
Of this kind of stuff Rome it self is stuffed more then any place else;
where for my part I believed very few, but only this (which Colonna observed
before out of Guicciardine.) That it is a Miracle God suffers the pride and
abomination of that Sea so long unpunished. But of such miracles as this the
whole earth is full: All the works of God, from the great Frame of the world
to the most small and contemptible creatures, are Miracles of his Power: the
stay and upholding them in their first being, are Miracles of his Providence:
the punishing of the wicked, and protecting his children (especially those he
has set to reign over us) are Miracles of his Justice; whereof this our Land
can yield the world two famous and unmatchable Instances, in the late Queen of
happy memory, and our Sovereign Lord the King that now is; by their
several, many and miraculous deliverances, such as Rome can show none. Where
Theophylacts Cup, and the Italian Fig has made quick dispatch of diverse
Popes in a short time. What should I speak of those great Miracles of Gods
infinite Mercy? The sending of our Savior into the world, his Incarnation,
Resurrection and Ascension; and all other works of his, as Raising the dead,
Curing the diseased, Restoring the lame and blind to their limbs and sight,
registered to us in the sacred Chronicle of his holy word? These indeed were
truly Miracles, such as all Christians are bound to believe and confess. As
for those of the Roman Church, there is neither Truth in the Fact, nor Benefit
in the Belief. I will only instance in one of my particular observation, and
so conclude. In a Town of Italy where I abode four months, was a poor
Tradesman, who lived in the place full seven years, and had never spoke,
being generally taken to have been deaf and dumb from his birth. This man
undertook a Pilgrimage to the Lady of Loretto, the most famous and renowned
Shrine in Europe, and comparable (if the Papists have any) to that of Mahomet
in Mecha. They say she is as rich in lewels and Treasure, as famous in her
Miracle-facultie: I speak this but by relation, I had not the leisure to go
thither, but the good hap I had (though no great happiness) to see her Girdle
at Prato, among many thousand more that came to see it, (as they yearly do upon
the seventh of September:) a rich one I assure you it is, and such as you have
none in Court. Saint Thomas had it of our Ladies gift, and carried it with him
into India, and a Merchant got it from Saint Thomas, and brought it to Prato;
where likewise is to be seen the Scull of Saint Anne, our Ladies mother; two
singular great blessings to so little a Borough. Thus lies the Legend in the
story, but it is no part of this our Miracle: no more is that which is
reported of this glorious Shrine, namely that the Chapel wherein it stands,
was first transported by Angels over the Mediterranean Sea into Slauonia;
where, because that slavish nation did not receive it with due reverence, or
(which is more like) rewarded it not with due benevolence, it was again by the
same Porters carried stick and stone over the Venetian Golphe into Italy,
where now it works wonders, and is not yet weary. Among which this is not the
least, whereof I now relate. For this our Mutolo after some few weeks stay,
many Orisons of his own, and much prayer and fasting of the Fraternity,
received (forsooth) the ready use of his tongue and hearing; and returned to
the Town whence he went while I was there, as perfect a prater of Italian as
the best. A Miracle of no small wonderment, and worthy Duke Humfreys
observation, who discovered a counterfeit Ceco (that made the people believe he
was borne blind, and had got his sight at Saint Albons Shrine) because he
could readily tell him the color of his gown: So this Companion, though the
strings of his tongue had been loosed, yet should he not presently have spoken
so perfect language, without the greater miracle. Inquiring what Countreyman he
was, I found him to be borne in the Marquisate of Ancona hard by Loretto: I
needed no more for my satisfaction in this Miracle. For it is a thing usual
among them, to suborne such counterfeits and Spiritati to work upon, for the
more frequenting of their shrine, and better larding of their fatt.

ANd thus Sir have I answered your letter, though not your expectation, in
matter of higher predicament then I ought to meddle with my unwashed hands: And
therefore I submit my self to better Judgments, and commit you (for better
information) to them are able to instruct us both. You see, I believe not their
Miracles: I am not bound to their Canons: I trouble not my self with their
Controversies: I yield the duty of a Child to none but my Mother the Church of
England: I owe the Allegiance of a Subject to none under God, but my King. Will
you have in one word the whole Summary of Religion? Love God above all, and thy
neighbor as thy self: There is the Law and the Prophets, and in them thy
lesson. Christ came into the world to save Sinners, whereof thou art one: There
is the Gospel, and in it thy comfort. Of other things besides these take thou
heed my Son, for there is none end in making many books, and much reading
is a weariness of the flesh: Let us hear the end of all: Fear God, and keep
his Commandments, for this is the whole duty of Man. Hoc fac and viues. R. D.


