A SERMON PREACHED AT PLIMMOTH IN NEW ENGLAND December 9. 1621. In an
assembly of his Majesty's faithful Subjects, there inhabiting.

WHEREIN IS SHEVVED the danger of self-love, and the sweetness of true
Friendship.

TOGETHER WITH A PREFACE, Showing the state of the Country, and Condition of
the SAVAGES.

ROMANS 12. 10. Be affectioned to love one another with brotherly love. Written
in the year 1621.

LONDON Printed by I. D. for JOHN BELLAMIE, and are to be sold at his shop at
the two Greyhounds in Corne-hill, near the Royal Exchange. 1622.

TO HIS LOVING FRIENDS, THE ADVENTVRERS FOR NEW ENGLAND; TOGETHER WITH ALL
WELL-WILLERS, And well-wishers thereunto, Grace and Peace, etc.
NEW ENGLAND, so called, not only (to avoid novelties) because Captain Smith
has so entitled it in his Description, but because of the resemblance that is
in it, of England the native soil of Englishmen; It being much what the same
for heat and cold in Summer and Winter, it being Champion ground, but not
high mountains, somewhat like the soil in Kent and Essex; full of Dales, and
meddow ground, full of ryuers and sweet springs, as England is. But
principally, so far as we can yet find, it is an Island, and near about the
quantity of England, being cut off from the maine land of America, as England
is from the maine of Europe, by a great arm of the Sea, which enters in
forty degrees, and runs up North west and by West, and goes out either
into the South Sea, or else into the Bay of Canado. The certainty whereof, and
secrets of which, we have not yet so found as that as eyewitnesses we can make
narration thereof, but if God give time and means, we shall ere long, discover
both the extent of that River, together with the secrets thereof; and also try
what territories, habitations, or commodities, may be found, either in it, or
about it.

It pertains not to my purpose to speak any thing, either in praise, or
disprayse of the country, so it is by Gods providence, that a few of us are
there planted to our content, and have with great charge and difficulty
attained quiet and competent dwellings there. And thus much I will say for the
satisfaction of such as have any thought of going thither to inhabit; That for
men which have a large heart, and look after great riches, ease, pleasure,
dainties, and iollitie in this world (except they will live by other men's
sweat, or have great riches) I would not advise them to come there, for as yet
the country will afford no such matters: But if there be any, who are content
to lay out their estates, spend their time, labors, and endeavors, for the
benefit of them that shall come after, and in desire to further the Gospel
among those poor Heathens, quietly contenting themselves with such hardship
and difficulties, as by Gods providence shall fall upon them, being yet young,
and in their strength, such men I would advise and encourage to go, for their
ends cannot fail them.

And if it should please God to punish his people in the Christian countries of
Europe, (for their coldness, carnality, wanton abuse of the Gospel,
contention, etc.) either by Turkish slavery, or by Popish tyranny, which God
forbid, yet if the time be come, or shall come (as who knows) when Satan
shall be let loose, Reu. 12. 14. 15
to cast out his floods against them, here is a way opened for such as have
wings to fly into this Wilderness; and as by the dispersion of the Jewish
Church through persecution, Act. 11. 20. 21.
the Lord brought in the fullness of the Gentiles, so who knows, whether now
by tyranny, and affliction, which he suffers to come upon them, he will not
by little and little chase them, even amongst the Heathens, Luke 2. 32.
that so a light may rise up in the dark, and the kingdom of heaven be taken
from them which now have it, Math. 21. 43.
and given to a people that shall bring forth the fruit of it. This I leave to
the judgment of the godly wise, Amos 7. 14.
being neither Prophet nor son of a Prophet, but considering Gods dealing of
old, 2 King. 17. 23.
and seeing the name of Christian to be very great, but the true nature thereof
almost quite lost in all degrees and sects, I cannot think but that there is
some judgment not far off, and that God will shortly, even of stones, raise
up children unto Abraham. Math. 3. 5.


And who so rightly considers, what manner of entrance, abiding, and
proceedings, we have had amongst these poor Heathens since we came hither,
will easily think, that God has some great work to do toward them.

They were wont to be the most cruellest and trecherousest people in all these
parts, even like Lions, but to us they have been like Lambs, so kind, so
submissiue, and trusty, as a man may truly say many Christians are not so
kind, nor sincere.

They are very much wasted of late, by reason of a great mortality that fell
amongst them three years since, which together with their own civil
dissensions and blouddie wars, has so wasted them, as I think the twentieth
person is scarce left alive, and those that are left, have their courage much
abated, and their countenance is dejected, and they seem as a people
affrighted. And though when we came first into the country, we were few, and
many of us were sick, and many dyed by reason of the cold and wet, it being
the depth of winter, and we having no houses, nor shelter, yet when there was
not six able persons amongst us, and that they came daily to us by hundreths,
with their Sachems, or Kings, and might in one hour have made a dispatch of us
yet such a fear was upon them, as that they never offered us the least injury
in word or deed. And by reason of one Tisquanto, that lives amongst us, that
can speak English, we have daily commerce with their Kings, and can know what
is done or intended toward us amongst the Savages; Also we can acquaint them
with our courses and purposes, both humane and religious. And the greatest
Commander of the country called Massasoit, comes often to visit us, though
he live fifty miles from us, and often sends us presents, he having with many
other of their governors promised, yea, subscribed obedience to our Sovereign
Lord King JAMES, and for his cause to spend both strength and life. And we for
our parts, through Gods grace, have with that equity, justice, and compassion,
carried our selves toward them, as that they have received much favor, help,
and aid from us, but never the least injury, or wrong by us. We found the
place where we live empty, They offer us to dwell where we will.
the people being all dead and gone away, and none living near by 8. or 10.
miles; and and though in the time of some hardship we found (traveling
abroad) some 8. Bushels of Corn hid up in a Cave, and knew no owners of it,
yet afterward hearing of the owners of it, we gave them (in their estimation)
double the value of it. Our care also has been to maintain peace amongst
them, and have always set our selves against such of them as used any
rebellion, or treachery against their governors, and not only threatened such,
but in some sort paid them their due deserts; and when any of them are in want,
as often they are in the Winter, when their corn is done, we supply them to
our power, and have them in our houses eating and drinking, and warming
themselves, which thing (though it be something a trouble to us) ye because
they should see and take knowledge of our labors, orders, and diligence, both
for this life and a better, we are content to bear it, and we find in many of
them, especially, of the younger sort, such a tractable disposition, both to
Religion and humanity, as that if we had means to apparel them, and wholly
to retain them with us (as their desire is) they would doubtless in time
prove serviceable to God and man, and if ever God send us means we will bring
up hundreths of their children, both to labor and learning.

But leaving to speak of them till a further occasion be offered; If any shall
marvel at the publishing of this Treatise in England, seeing there is no want
of good books, but rather want of men to use good books, let them know, that
the especial end is, that we may 1 Cor. 2. 4.
let them know, that to paint out the Gospel in plain and flat English,
amongst a company of plain Englishmen (as we are) is the best and most
profitablest teaching; and we will study plainness, not curiosity, neither in
things human, nor heavenly. If any error, or unsoundness be in it, (as who
knows) impute it to that frail man which endited it, Chap. 8. 2.
which professes to know nothing as he ought to know it. I have not set down
my name, partly because I seek no name, and principally, because I would have
nothing esteemed by names, for I see a number of evils to arise through names,
when the persons are either famous, or infamous, and God and man is often
injured; if any good or profit arise to thee in the receiving of it, give God
the praise, and esteem me as a son of Adam, subject to all such frailties as
other men are.

And you my loving Friends the Adventurers to this plantation; as your care
has been, first to settle religion here, before either profit or popularitie,
so I pray you, go on, to do it much more, and be careful to send godly men,
though they want some of that worldly policy which this world has in her own
generation, Luke 16. 8.
and so though you loose, the Lord shall gain. I rejoice greatly in your free
and ready minds to your powers, yea, and beyond your powers to further this
work, Pro. 3. 9.
that you thus honor God with your riches, and I trust you shall be repayed
again double and treble in this world, yea, and the memory of this action
shall never die, but above all adding unto this (as I trust you do) like
freeness in all other Gods services, both at home and abroad, you shall find
a reward with GOD, ten thousand fold surpassing all that you can do or think,
be not therefore discouraged, for no labor is lost, nor money spent, which is
bestowed for God, your ends were good, your success is good, and your profit
is coming, even in this life, and in the life to come much more; And what
shall I say now, a word to men of understanding suffices, pardon I pray you my
boldness, read over the ensuing Treatise, and judge wisely of the poor
weakling, Psalm. 42. 1.
and the Lord, the God of Sea and Land, stretch out his arm of protection over
you and us, and over all our lawful and good enterprises, either this, or any
other way.

Plimmoth in New England. December 12. 1621.
A SERMON PREACHED at Plimmoth, in New England.
1. Cor. 10. 24. Let no man seek his own, The Text.
But every man another wealth.
THE occasion of these words of the Apostle Paul, The connection.
was because of the abuses which were in the Church of Corinth. Which abuses
arose chiefly through swelling pride, self-love and conceitednes, for although
this Church were planted by Paul, and watered by Apollo, and much increased by
the Lord; yet the sower of tares was not wanting to stir up evil workers and
fleshly minded hypocrites, Math. 13. 25.
under a show of godliness, and with Angellike holiness in appearance to creep
in amongst them to disturb their peace, Jude 4.
try their soundness, and prove their constancy. 1 Cor. 11. 13.
And this the Apostle complains of very often: as first, in their carnal
deuisions, Chap. 1. then in their extolling their eloquent teachers, and
despising Paul, Chap. 4. Then in their offensive going to Law, before the
heathen Judges Chap. 6. Then in eating things offered to Idols, to the
destroying of the tender consciences of their Brethren, Chap. 8. Then in their
insatiable loue-feastes, in the time and place of their Church meetings, the
rich which could together feed to fulness, despising and contemning the poor,
that had not to lay it on as they had, Chap 11. 2 Cor. 6. 13.
Finally in both the Epistles, he very often nippeth them for their pride, and
self-love, straitness and censorioushes, so that in the last Chapter he
wills them again and again to prove, 2 Cor. 13. 5.
try and examine themselves, to see whether Christ were in them or not, for
howsoever many of them seemed as thousands do at this day, to soar aloft, and
go with full sail to heaven: yet as men that row in Boats, Similie.
set their faces earnestly one way, when yet their whole body goes apace
another way: so there are many which set such a face upon Religion, Jude 16.
and have their mouths full of great swelling words: as if they would even
blow open the doors of heaven, despising all humble minded and broken hearted
people, 2 Cor. 10. 10.
as weak, simple, sottish etc. when yet notwithstanding, these Blusterers,
which seem to go so fast, and leave all others behind them, if like these
glosing Corinthians they carry affectedly their own glory with them, Ver. 18.
and seem thus to stand for the glory of God, What do they else but join
flesh to spirit, Job 1. 9.
serving not God for naught, but for wages, and so serving their bellies, Romans
16. 18.
whose end will be damnation, except a speedi^ and sound remedy be thought of,
which remedy is even that which our Savior teaches the rich young gallant,
and which Paul here prescribes, Math. 19. 21.
in willing them not to seek their own, but every man another wealth, which
Physic is as terrible to carnal professors, as abstinence from drink is to
a man that has the dropsy: and it is a sure note, that a man is sick of this
disease of self-love, if this be grievous to him, as appears in the man whom
Christ bid sell that he had, Ver. 22.
and he went away very sorrowful, yet surely this vein must be pricked, and
this humor let out, else it will spoil all, it will infect both soul and body,
yea and the contagion of it is such (as we shall see anon) as will even
hazard the welfare of that society, where self seekers and self lovers are.

As God then did direct this Apostle to lay down this brief direction as a
remedy for that evil in Corinth, so you may think it is by Gods special
providence, Act. 10. 33.
that I am now to speak unto you from this text: and say in your hearts surely
some thing is amiss this way: let us know it and amend it.

The parts of this text are two. Division.
1. a Dehortation, 2. an Exhortation. The Dehortation. Let no man seek his
own. The Exhortation But every man another wealth.

In handling of which, Order of handling.
I will first, open the words. Secondly, gather the Doctrine. Thirdly,
illustrate the Doctrine by Scriptures, experience and Reasons. Fourthly, apply
the same, to every one his portion.

The proper drift of the Apostle here is not to tax the Corinthians, for
seeking their own evil ends in evil actions, The Apostles drift.
but for aiming at themselves, and their own benefits in actions lawful, and
that appears in the former verse, where he says. All things are lawful etc.
viz. all such things as now we speak of, to eat any of Gods creatures,
offered to Idols or not, to feast and be merry together, to show love and
kindness to this or that person, etc. but when by such means we seek our
selves, and have not a charitable loving and reverent regard of others, then
they are inexpedient, unprofitable, yea unlawful, and must be forborne, and
he that has not learned to deny himself even the very use of lawful
things, when it tends to the contempt, reproach, grief offense, and shame of
his other Brethren and Associats, has learned nothing aright, but is
apparently a man that seeks himself, and against whom the Apostle here
deals most properly.

The manner of the speech may seem as counsel left at liberty: Exposition.
as Mat. 27. 49. and in our ordinary speech, we think they be but weak
charges, which are thus delivered, let a man do this, or let him do that. But
we must learn the Apostles modesty, and know that whatsoever the terms
seem to imply, yet even this and other the like in this Epistle, are most
absolute charges: as Let a man esteem of us, Chap. 4. 1.
as the ministers of Christ, that is, a man ought so to esteem of us. 1 Cor.
11. 28.
Let a man examine himself, that is, as if he said a man must examine
himself, 1 Cor. 14. 34.
Let your women keep silence in the Churches. that is, they ought so to do.

The meaning then summarily is, as if he said, the bane of all these
mischeifes which arise amongst you is, that men are to cleaving to themselves,
and their own matters, and disregarde and contemn all others: and therefore I
charge you, let this selfe-seeking be left off, and turn the stream another
way, namely, seek the good of your Brethren, please them, honor them,
r^uerence them, for otherwise it will never go well amongst you.

But does not the Apostle else wheresay? Object.
That he, which cares not for his own, 1 Timothy 5. 8.
is worse then an Infidel.

True but by (own) there, he means properly, Resp.
a man's kindred, and here by (own) he means properly a man's self.

Secondly, He there especially taxes such as were negligent in their labors
and callings, and so made themselves unable to give releife and entertainment
to such poor Widows and Orphans as were of their own flesh and blood.

Thirdly, Be it so that some man should even neglect his own self, his own
wife, children, friends, etc. and give that he had to strangers, that were but
some rare vice, in some one unnatural man, and if this vice stay a thousand,
self-love slays ten thousand.

And this the wisdom of God did well forsee, and has set no caueats in the
Scriptures either to tax men, or forewarne them from loving others, neither
says God any where, let no man seek the good of another, but let no man seek
his own, and every where in the Scriptures he has set watch words against
selfe-good, selfe-profit, selfe-seeking, etc. And thus the sense being
cleared, I come to the doctrine.

All men are to to apt and ready to seek themselves to much, Doct. 1.
and to prefer their own matters and causes beyond the due and lawful
measure, Amplific.
even to excess and offense against God, yea danger of their own souls, and
this is true not only in wicked men which are given over of God to vile lusts,
as Absolon in getting favor in his Fathers Court: 1 Samuel 15. 2. 3. 4
Jeroboam, in settling his kingdom fast in Samaria, 2 King. 12. 26.
Ahab in vehement seeking Nab^ths vineyard, but men, And 21. 2.
otherwise godly, have through frailty been foiled herein, and many
thousands which have a show of godliness, 1 Samuel 25. 13.
are lovers of themselves: 2 Chronicles. 16. 10.
David was about to seek himself when he was going to kill Naball; And 35. 22.
Asa in putting Hanani in prison; Josiah when he would go war with Necho,
Isaiah 39. 2.
against the counsel of God and reason; Gal. 2. 11. 12.
Peter when he dissembled about the Ceremonies of the Law, Phil. 2. 21.
yea and Paul complains of all his followers (Timothy excepted that they
sought their own to inordinately.

And why else are these caueats in the Scriptures, but to warn the godly that
they be not tainted herewith? Philip. 2. 4.
as look not every man on his own things, 1. Cor. 13. 6.
but on the things of another: Love seeks not her own things. Gal. 5. 26.
Be not desirous of vain glory. etc.

Yea and does not experience teach, Illustration experimental.
that even amongst professors of Religion, almost all the love and favor that
is showed unto others is with a secret aim at themselves, they will take
pains to do a man good, provided that he will take twice so much for them
they will give a penny so as it may advantage them a pound, labor hard so as
all the profit may come to themselves, else they are hartlesse and feeble.
Simile.
The vain and corrupt heart of man cannot better be resembled then by a
belly-god, Host, or Inkeeper, which welcommeth his guests with smilings, and
salutations, and a thousand welcomes, and rejoices greatly to have their
company to dice, card, eat, drink, and be merry, but should not the box be
paid, the pot be filling, and the money telling, all this while the Epicures
joy would soon be turned into sorrow, and his smiles turned into frowns, and
the door set open, and their absence craved: even so men blow the bellows
hard, when they have an Iron of their own a heating, work hard whilst their
own house is in building, dig hard whilst their own garden is in planting,
but is it so as the profit must go wholly or partly to others, their hands
wax feeble, their hearts wax faint, they grow churlish and give cross
answers like Naball, they are sour, discontent, and nothing will please them.
Psalm. 112. 9.
And where is that man to be found, that will sparse abroad, Eccle. 11. 1.
and cast his bread upon the waters, that will lend looking for nothing again,
Luke 6. 35.
that will do all duties to others freely and cheerfully in conscience of
God, 2 Cor. 11. 7.
and love unto men without his close and secret ends, or aiming at himself?
such a man, out of doubt, is a black Swanne, a white Crow almost, and yet
such shall stand before God with boldness at the last day, when others which
have sought themselves, though for love of themselves they have sought heaven,
yea and through self love persuaded themselves they should find it, yet
wanting love unto others, they will be found as sounding brass, 1 Cor. 13. 1.
and as a tinkling Cimbale, and whilst they have neglected others, and not
cared how others live, so as themselves may fare well, Mat. 25. 41. 42.
they will be found amongst them, that the Lord will say unto, I know you not,
depart ye cursed into everlasting fi^e.

But that I may not walk in generalities, Particular amplific.
the particular ways by which men seek their own are these, First such as
are covetous, seek their own by seeking riches, wealth, money, as Foelix
pretending love unto Paul, sent for him often, but it was in hope of money, Act.
24. 26.
who will show us any good, and pretend Religion, Psalm. 4. 7.
as some of the Jews did the keeping of the Sabbath, which yet cried out when
will the Sabbath be done, that we may sell corn and gain, Amos 8. 5.
if a man can tell them how to get gold out of a flint, and silver out of the
Adamant, no pains shall be spared, no time shall be neglected, for gold is
their hope, and the wedge of gold is their confidence, Job 31. 24.
their hearts are set upon the pelf of this world, and for love of it, all
things are let slipp, even all duties to God or men, they care not how basely
they serve, how wretchedly they neglect all others, so as they may get wealth:
pinch who will? and wring who will, all times are alike with them, and they
run for the bribe like Gehazie, 2 King. 5. 21.
and this is the first way that men seek their own.

Now the contrary is seen in Nehemiah, Neh. 5. 14. 15. 16.
who when the people were hard put to it, and the land raw, he took not the
duties which were due to him being a Magistrate, he bought no land, nor grew
not rich, for it was no time: but he maintained at his table many of his
brethren the Jews, Act. 20.
and so spent even his own proper goods. And Paul sought not man's gold nor
silver, 2 These. 3. 9.
but though he had authority, yet he took not bread of the Churches, but
labored with his hands: And why? It was no time to take, some Churches were
poor and stood in want, Ver. 8.
as Thessalonica, others were in danger to be preyed upon by covetous
belly-gods, 2 Cor. 11. 12.
as Corinth: and therefore he saw it no fit time now to take any thing of them.

And indeed here is the difference between a covetous worldling, and an
honest thriftie Christian, it is lawful sometimes for men to gather wealth,
and grow rich, even as there was a time for Joseph to store up corn, Genesis 41.
49.
but a godly and sincere Christian will see when this time is, and will not
hord up when he sees others of his brethren and associates to want, but then
is a time, if he have any thing to fetch it out and disperse it, but the
covetous gather good, he like Achan couets all that he sees, Josh. 7. 21.
and neglects no time, but gathers still and holds all fast, and if it were to
save the life of his brother, his baggs must not be minished, nor his chestes
lighted, nor his field set to sale, gather as much as he can, but its death to
diminish the least part of it.

Luke 11. 46.
or pleasure, as the Scribes and Pharisees, who would not touch the burden
with one of their fingers; so, there is a generation, which think to have more
in this world then Adams felicity in Innocence, Genesis 2. 15.
being borne (as they think) to take their pleasures, and their ease, Eccle.
10. 18.
let the roof of the house drop through, they stir not; Pro. 24. 30. 31.
let the field be ouer-growne with weeds, they care not, they must not soil
their hand, nor wet their foot, its enough for them to say, Go you, not let
us go, though never so much need; such idle Droanes are intolerable in a
settled Commonwealth, much more in a Commonwealth which is but as it were in
the bud; of what earth I pray thee art thou made, of any better then other of
the sons of Adam? And can thou see other of thy brethren toil their hearts
out, and thou sit idle at home, or take thy pleasure abroad? Remember the
example of Vriah, 2 Samuel 11. 11.
who would not take his ease, nor his pleasure, though the King required him,
and why? Because his brethren, his associates, better men then himself (as he
esteemed them) were under hard labors and conditions, lay in the fields in
tents, caves, etc.

Romans 16. 26.
knowing that the people had itching ears, and would easily entertain, and
willingly feed such nouelists, which brought in dissensions, schisms, and
contentions, and such were rocks, or pillars in their loue-feasts, Jude 12.
as Jude speaks, they were shadows in Gods service, but when feasting came,
then they were substances, then they were in their element. And certainly
there are some men which shape even their Religion, human state, and all,
even as the belly cheer is best, and that they must have, else all heart and
life is gone, let all conscience, care of others go, let Lazarus starve at the
gate, let Joseph's affliction be increased, they must have their dishes, their
dainties, Neh. 5. 14.
or no content. The contrary was seen in Nehemiah, who would not take his
large portion allotted to the governor, because he knew it went short with
others of his brethren; and Vriah would not receive the Kings present and go
banquet with his wife, because he knew the whole Host his brethren were feign
to snap short in the fields.

And the difference between a temperate good man, and a belly-God is this: Job
31. 17.
A good man will not eat his morsels alone, especially if he have better then
other, but if by Gods providence, he have gotten some meat which is better
then ordinary, and better then his other brethrens, he can have no rest in
himself, except he make other partaker with him. But a belly-God will slop all
in his own throat, yea, though his neighbor come in and behold him eat, yet
his griple gut shameth not to swallow all. And this may be done sometimes, as
well in mean fare as in greater dainties, for all countries afford not alike.

The fourth way by which men seek their own, is by seeking 1 Samuel 15. 30.
fame, and respect with men, as King Saul when he had lost all respect and
favor with God, then thought to give content to his heart by being honored
before the Elders of the people; and it is wonderful to see how some men are
desirous of vain glory, Gal. 5. 26.
and how earnestly they seek praise, favor, and respect with men, and can
have no quiet longer then their worldly favor lasts, and that they will have
what dishonor soever come to God, or disgrace unto men, yea, they will
disgrace, reproach, and disdain others, to gain honor and advancement to
themselves, yea, they will make bold with the Scriptures and word of God, to
wrest and wring, and slight it over for their credits sake. And let a man mark
some men's talk, stories, discourses, etc. and he shall see their whole drift
is to extol and set out themselves, and get praise and commendations of men.

Now the contrary was seen in Paul, 2 Cor. 3. 2.
he says, He needed no letters of commendations. 2 Cor. 10. 12.
And again, He is not affected with men's praise; and here is indeed the
difference between an humble minded Christian, and a proud selfe-louer; an
humble man often has praise, 1 Samuel 18. (...)
as David, Hezekiah, and Josiah, but he seeks it not, he desires it not, 2
King. 18. 3.
he is content to go without it, he loves not the praise of men, for he knows
it is but froth and vanity: But a proud selfe-louer, he seeks it still, get
it or not get it, and if he get it he is fully satisfied, if he get it not he
hangs the head like a Bull-rush, and has no comfort.

The fifth way by which men seek their own, is by seeking to have 1 Cor. 6. 8.
as the wrong doers in Corinth, who thought it not enough to do wrong and
harm to their brethren, but to have their wills enough of them, drew them
before the Heathen Magistrates.

And truly, some men are so Prince-like, or rather Papal, that their very
will and word is become a law, and if they have said it, it must be so, else
there is no rest nor quietness to be had, let never so many reasons be brought
to the contrary, its but fighting with the wind. They are like the obstinate
Jews, who, when against Gods law and reason, 1 Samuel 8. 19.
they had asked a King, though Samuel showed them that it would turn in the
end to their own smart, yet still held the conclusion, and said, nay, But we
will have a King. Thus men are caught by their own words, and ensnared by the
straitnes of their own hearts, and it is death to them not to have their wills,
1 King. 19. 2.
and howsoever sometimes (like Iezabell) they are cut short of their purposes,
yet selfe-willed men will strout and swell like Absolon, 2 Samuel 13. 22.
saying neither good nor bad, but hope for the day, and threaten like profane
Esall: Genesis 27. 41.
Now the contrary is seen in David, though a Prince, a Captain, a Warrior,
who having said, yea, sworn, that he would kill Naball, and all his family
that day, yet upon reasonable counsel given, 1 Samuel 25. 34.
and that but by a weak woman, he changed his mind, altered his purpose, and
returned, without striking one stroke, an example rare, and worthy imitation;
and when men are sick of will, let them think of David, it was his grace and
honor to go back from his word and practice, when reason came; Math. 14. 8.
9.
So was it Herod's disgrace and shame to hold his word and will against reason
and conscience.

But some man happily will say unto me, Quest.
It is true, that men seek their own by all these ways, But what should be
the reason and cause of this? that men seek so earnestly themselves, in
seeking riches, honor, ease, belly-cheare, will, etc. something there is that
carries them.

True, and the reasons and causes are specially these three;

First, Resp.
pride and high conceitednes, when men ouer-value themselves: And this made
Absolon to seek his Fathers kingdom, Reason 1.
because he thought himself worthy of it.: 2 Samuel 15. 4.
This made Haman so sore vexed, Hest. 3. 5.
because Mordecai bowed not to him, because he highly valued himself.

And surely, that which a man valueth at much, he gives much respect to, and
so it is a sure sign that a man loves himself most when he gives most to
himself, and some intolerable proud persons even think all the world is for
them, and all their purposes and endeavors show what a large conceit they have
of themselves.

Secondly, Reason 2.
want of due consideration and valuation of other men's endowments, abilities,
and deserts, when men pass those things by, Genesis 40. 23.
though they have both seen, heard, and felt them, as Pharaohs Butler forgot
Joseph's eminency when he was restored to his place, so men use to write their
own good actions in Brass, but other men's in Ashes, never remembering nor
considering the pains, labor, good properties, etc. which others have, and so
they have no love to them, but only to themselves; as if God had made all
other men unreasonable Beasts, and them only reasonable men.

Thirdly, Reason 3.
want of a heavenly conversation, and spiritual eye to behold the glory,
greatness, and majesty, and goodness of God, as the Queen of Sheba thought
highly of her own glory, wisdom, and happiness, 1 King. 10. 7. 8
till she saw Salomons wisdom and glory, and then she cried out, not of the
happiness of her own servants, but of his servants that stood before him; and
verily, if men were conversant Courtiers in heaven, Romans 11. 33.
they would cry out with Paul, Oh the deepnesse of the riches, wisdom, and
knowledge of God, etc. and would be ashamed of their own sinfulness, Similies.
nakedness, and misery; for, as country men which never saw the state of
Cities, nor the glory of courts, admire even their own country orders: And as
the Savages here which are clad in skins, and creep in woods and holes,
think their own brutish and inhumane life the best, which if they saw and did
rightly apprehend the benefit of comely humanity, the sweetness of Religion, and
the service of God, they would even shamefully hide themselves from the eye of
all noble Christians.

Even so, if men in serious contemplation, by the eye of faith, would behold
the glory of God, and what great riches, beauty, fullness, perfection, power,
dignity, and greatness is in God, they would leave admiring of themselves,
and seeking of themselves, and would say with David, 2 Samuel 7. 18.
What am I? And what is my Fathers house? that thou should thus bless me?
Psalm. 8. 3.
Yea, What is man? or the son of man that thou so regardest him?

But it is time that we now come to apply these things more particularly to our
selves, and see what use is to be made of them.

Is it so that God sees a proannes in all the sons of Adam, Use 1.
to seek themselves too much, and has given them warnings and watch words
thereof, as we have heard, and does experience confirm it? Then hence are
reproved a number of men, who think they can never show love enough to
themselves, nor seek their own enough, but think all cost, charges,
cheerishing, praise, honor, etc. too little for them, Mat. 16. 22.
and no man needs say to them, as Peter did to Christ, favor thy self, but
if they do a little for another man, they account it a great matter, though it
be but a morsel of bread, or a single penny; but no varieties of dainties is
too good for them, no silk, purple, cloth, or stuff is too good to cloth
them, the poor man's idleness and ill husbandry is often thrown in his dish,
but their own carnal delights and fleshly wantonness is never thought upon:
and why? Because they think even God and man owes all to them, but they owe
nothing to none. Why, thou foolish and besotted man, has not the holy Ghost
read it in the face of every son of Adam, that he is too apt to seek his
own, and art thou wiser then God, to think thou never seek thine own
enough? or dreamest thou that thou art made of other, and better metal then
other men are? Surely, I know no way to escape, having of corruption to thy
Father, and the worm to thy sister and brother. And if God had any where in
all the Scriptures said, love thy self, make much of thy self, provide for
one, etc. there were some reason for thee to take up the Nigards Proverbs,
Every man for himself, and God for us all; Charity begins at home, etc.
But God never taught thee these things; No, they are Satan's positions: Does
God ever commend a man for carnal love of himself? Romans 13. 14.
Nay, he brands it, and disgraceth it, 2 Timothy 3. 4.
as self-love; taking thought for the flesh; loving of pleasure, etc.

It is a point of good natural policy, Object.
for a man to care and provide for himself.

Then the most fools have most natural policy, Resp.
for see you not the greatest droanes and nouices, either in Church, or
Commonwealth, to be the greatest scratchers, Psalm. 73. 5. 7.
and scrapers, and gatherers of riches? Are they not also, for the most part,
best fed and clad? and live they not most easily? What shall I say? Even hoggs,
dogs, and bruit Beasts know their own ease, and can seek that which is good
for themselves; And what does this shifting, progging, and fat feeding which
some use, more resemble any thing then the fashion of hoggs? and so let it be
what natural policy it will.

If God see this disease of self-love so dangerous in us, Use 2.
then it stands us all in hand to suspect our selves, and so to seek out the
root of this disease, that it may be cured. If a learned Physician, shall see
by our countenance and eye, Simile.
that we have some dangerous disease growing on us, our hearts will smite us,
and we will bethink our selves, where the most grief lies, and how it should
come, whether with cold, heat, surfeit, ouer-flowing of blood, or through
grief, melancholy, or any such way, and every man will bestirre himself to
get rid of it, and will prevent all ways that feed the disease, and cherish
all courses that would destroy it.

Now, how much more ought we to bestirre our selves, for this matter of
self-love, since God himself has cast all our waters, and felt all our
pulses, and pronounced us all dangerously sick of this disease? believe it,
God cannot lie, nor be deceived; He that made the heart, does not he know it?
Let every man's heart smite him, and let him fall to examination of himself,
and see first, whether he love not riches and worldly wealth too much, whether
his heart be not too iocand at the coming of it in, and too heavy at the
going of it out, for if you find it so, there is great danger; if thou can
not buy as if thou possessedst not, 1 Cor. 7. 30. 31.
and use this world as thou use it not, thou art sick and had need to
look to it. So, if thou love thine ease and pleasure, Job 2. 10.
see whether thou can be content to receive at Gods hands evil as well as
good; whether thou have learned as well to abound as to want, Phil. 4. 10.
as well to endure hard labor, as to live at ease; and art as willing to go
to the house of mourning as to the house of mirth; Edele 7. 6.
for, else, out of doubt, thou love thy carnal pleasure and ease too much.

Again, Dan. 1. 15.
see whether thine heart cannot be as merry, and thy mind as joyful, and thy
countenance as cheerful, with course fare, with poulse, with bread and water
(if God offer thee no better, nor the times afford other) as if thou had
great dainties: So also whether thou can be content as well with the scorns
of men, when thou have done well, as with their praises, so if thou can with
comfort and good conscience say, 1 Cor. 4. 3.
I pass little for man's judgment, whether thou can do thy duty that God
requires, Heb. 12. 2.
and despise the shame, referring thy self unto God, for if thou be
dishartned, discouraged, and weakened in any duty because of men's disprayses,
its a sign thou love thy self too much.

So for the will, 1 Samuel 25. 34.
if thou can be content to give way even from that which thou have said
shall be, yea vowed shall be, when better reason comes, and have that reverence
of other men, as that when it stands but upon a matter of will, thou art as
willing their wills shall stand as thine, and art not sad, churlish, or
discontent, but cheerful in thine heart, 1 King. 21. 4.
though thy will be crossed, it is a good sign, but if not, thou art sick of
a self will, and must purge it out. I the rather press these things, because
I see many men both wise and religious, which yet are so tainted with this
pestilent self-love, Eccle. 10. 1.
as that it is in them even as a dead sly to the Apothecaries ointment,
spoiling the ^fficacie of all their graces, making their lives uncomfortable to
themselves, and unprofitable to others, being neither fit for Church nor common
wealth, but have even their very souls in hazard thereby, and therefore who
can say too much against it?

It is reported, A fair warning.
that there are many men gone to that other Plantation in Virginia, which,
whilst they lived in England, seemed very religious, zealous, and
conscionable; and have now lost even the sap of grace, and edge to all
goodness; and are become mere worldlings: This testimony I believe to be
partly true, and amongst many causes of it, this self-love is not the least;
It is indeed a matter of some commendations for a man to remove himself out
of a thronged place into a wide wilderness; to take in hand so long and
dangerous a journey, to be an instrument to carry the Gospel and humanity
among the brutish heathen; but there may be many goodly shows and gloses and
yet a pad in the straw, Psalm. 78. 5. 7.
men may make a great appearance of respect unto God, and yet but dissemble
with him, having their own lusts carrying them: and, out of doubt, men that
have taken in hand hither to come, out of disco^tentment, in regard of their
estates in England; and aiming at great matters here, affecting it to be
Gentlemen, landed men, or hoping for office, place, dignity, or fleshly
liberty; let the show be what it will, he substance is naught, and that bird of
self-love which was hatched at home, if it be not looked to, will eat out the
life of all grace and goodness: and though men have escaped the danger of the
sea, and that cruel mortality, which swept away so many of our loving friends
and brethren; yet except they purge out this self-love, a worse mischeife is
prepared for them: And who knows whether God in mercy have delivered those
just men which here departed, Isa. 57. 1.
from the evils to come; and from unreasonable men, in whom there neither was,
nor is, any comfort but grief, sorrow, affliction, and misery, till they cast
out this spaune of self-love.

But I have dwelt too long upon this first part; I come now to the second,
which concerns an Exhortation, as I showed you, in the Division.

But every man another wealth. Text.

IN direct opposition, he should say, Expli.
Let every man seek another, but the first part being compared with the
latter, and (seek) being taken out of the former and put to the latter, and
(wealth) taken out or rather implied, in the former, the whole sentence is thus
resolved, Let no man seek his own wealth, but let every man seek another
wealth.

And the word here tr^nslated wealth, is the same with that in Romans 13. 4. and
may not be taken only for riches, as Englishmen commonly understand it, but
for all kind of benefits, favors, comforts, either for soul or body; and so
here again, as before, you must understand an Affirmative Commandment, as the
Negative was before: and least any should say, If I may not seek my own good,
I may do nothing; Yes, says Paul, I Will tell thee, thou shall seek the good of
another, whereas now all thy seeking helps but one, by this means thou shall
help many: and this is further enforced by these two circumstances, (no man)
may seek his own, be he rich, learned, wise, etc. But every man must seek
the good of another.

The point of instruction is taken from the very letter and phrase, Doct. 2.
viz. A man must seek the good, the wealth, the profit of others, I say, he
must seek it, he must seek the comfort, profit, and benefit of his neighbor,
brother, associate, etc. His own good he need not seek, it will offer it
self to him every hour, but the good of others must be sought, a man must not
stay from doing good to others till he is sought unto, pulled and haled (as it
were) like the unjust Judge, Luke 18. 5.
for every benefit that is first craved, comes too late. And thus the
ancient Patriarchs did practice, Genesis 19. 1. 2.
when the trauayler and wayfaring man came by, they did not tarry till they
came and asked relief and refreshing, Judge. 19. 20. 21.
but sat at the gates to watch for such, and looked in the streets to find
them, Job 31. 32.
yea, set open their doors that they might freely and boldly enter in. And
howsoever, some may think this too large a practice, since, now the world is
so full of people, yet I see not but the more people there is, the larger
charity ought to be.

But be it so as a man may neglect, in some sort the general world, yet those
to whom he is bound, either in natural, civil, or religious bands, them he
must seek how to do them good: A notable example you have in David, who,
because there was twixt him and Jonathan a band and covenant, 2 Samuel 9. 1.
therefore he enquired, Whether there was any left of the house of Saul, to
whom he might show mercy for Ionathans sake; So, this people of Corinth, to
whom Paul writes, they were in a spiritual league and covenant in the
Gospel, and so were a body; Now for one member in the body to seek himself,
and neglect all other, 1 Cor. 12. 27.
were, as if a man should cloth one arm or one leg of his body with gold and
purple, and let all the rest of the members go naked.

Now brethren, I pray you, remember your selves, and know, that you are not in
a retired Monastical course, but have given your names and promises one to
another, and couenanted here to cleave together in the service of God, and the
King; What then must you do? May you live as retired Hermites? and look after
no body? Nay, you must seek still the wealth of one another; And enquire as
David, how lives such a man? How is he clad? How is he fed? He is my brother,
my associate; we ventered our lives together here, and had a hard brunt of it,
and we are in league together, is his labor harder then mine? surely, I will
ease him; has he no bed to lie on? why, I have two, I Will lend him one; has he
no apparel? why, I have two suits, I Will give him one of them; eats he course
fare, bread and water, and I have better? why, surely we will part stakes: He
is as good a man as I, and we are bound each to other, so that his w^nts must
be my wants, his sorrows my sorrows, his sickness my sickness, and his welfare
my welfare, for I am as he is. And such a sweet sympathy were excellent,
comfortable, yea, heavenly, and is the only maker and conseruer of Churches
and commonwealths, and where this is wanting, ruin comes on quickly, as it
did here in Corinth.

But besides these motives, Reasons. 1.
there are other reasons to provoke us not only to do good one to another;
but even to seek and search how to do it.

As first, to maintain modesty in all our associates, that of hungry wanters
they become not bold beggars and impudent crauers, for as one says of women,
that, when they have lost their shamefastnes, they have lost half their
honesty, so may it truly be said of a man, that when he has lost his
modesty, and puts on a begging face, he has lost his majesty, and the Image
of that noble creature, and man should not beg and crave of man but only of
God; true it is, John 4. 5.
that as Christ was feign to crave water of the Samaritan woman, so men are
forced to ask sometimes rather then starve, but indeed in all societies it
should be offered them, men often complain of men's boldness in asking, but how
comes this to pass, but because the world has been so full of
selfe-louers, as no man would offer their money, meat, garments, though they
saw men hungry, harborlesse, poor, and naked in the streets; and what is it
that makes men brazen faced, bold, brutish, tumultuous, mutinous, but because
they are pinched with want, and see others of their Companions (which it may be
have less deserved) to live in prosperity and pleasure?

It wonderfully encourages men in their duties, 2 Reason.
when they see the burden equally borne; but when some withdraw themselves and
retire to their own particular ease, pleasure, or profit; what heart can men
have to go on in their business? when men are come together, to lift some
weighty piece of timber or vessel; if one stand still and do not lift, shall
not the rest be weakened and dishartned? will not a few idle droanes spoil the
whole stock of laborious Bees: so one idle belly, one murmurer, one
complainer, one selfe-louer will weaken and disharten a whole Colonie. Great
matters have been brought to pass, where men have cheerfully as with one
heart, hand, and shoulder, gone about it both in wars, buildings, and
plantations, but where every man seeks himself, all comes to nothing.

The present necessity requires it, 3 Reason.
as it did in the days of the Jews, Neh. 5.
returning from captivity, and as it was here in Corinth. The Country is yet
raw, the land untilled, the Cities not builded, the Cattle not settled, we are
compassed about with a helpless and idle people, the natives of the Country,
which cannot in any comely or comfortable manner help themselves, much less
us. We also have been very chargeable to many of our loving friends, which
helped us hither, and now again supplied us, so that before we think of
gathering riches, 1 Samuel 30. 26. 31.
we must even in Conscience think of requiting their charge, love, and labor,
and cursed be that profit and gain which aymeth not at this. Besides, how many
of our dear friends, did here die at our first entrance, many of them no doubt
for want of good lodging, shelter, and comfortable things, and many more may
go after them quickly, if care be not taken. Is this then a time for men to
begin to seek themselves? 2 Timothy 3. 2.
Paul says, that men in the last days shall be lovers of themselves, but it
is here yet but the first days, and (as it were) the dawning of this new
world, it is now therefore no time for men to look to get riches, brave
clothes, dainty fare, but to look to present necessities; it is now no time
to pamper the flesh, live at ease, snatch, catch, scrape, and pill, and hoord
up, but rather to open the doors, the chests, and vessels, and say, brother,
neighbor, friend, what want ye, any thing that I have? make bold with it, it
is yours to command, to do you good, to comfort and cheerish you, and glad I
am that I have it for you.

And even the example of God himself, 4 Reason.
whom we should follow in all things within our power and capacity, Ephesians. 5.
1.
may teach us this lesson, for (with reverence to his Majesty be it spoken) he
might have kept all grace, Ioh. 1. 16.
goodness, and glory to himself, but he has communicated it to us, Psalm.
113. 6. 7.
even as far as we are capable of it in this life, 2 Timothy 4. 5.
and will communicate his glory in all fullness with his Elect in that life to
come; Ioh. 17. 22.
even so his Son Christ Jesus left his glory eclipsed for a time, And 15. 13.
and abased himself to a poor and distressed life in this world, that he
might, by it, bring us to happiness in the world to come. If God then have
delighted in this doing good and relieuing frail and miserable man, so far
inferior to himself, what delight ought man to have to relieve and comfort
man, which is equal to himself?

Even as we deal with others, 5 Reason.
our selves and others shall be dealt withal, Judge. 1. 6. 7.
carest thou not how others fare, how they toil, are grieved, sick, Mat. 7. 2.
pinched, cold, harborlesle, so as thou be in health, live at ease, warm in
thy nest, farest well? The days will come when thou shall labor and none
shall pity thee, be poor and none relieve thee, be sick, and lie and die
and none visit thee, yea, and thy children shall lie and statue in the streets,
and none shall relieve them, for it is the merciful that shall obtain mercy;
Mat. 5. 7.
and the memory of the Just shall be blessed even in his seed; Prou. 10.
and a merciful and loving man when he dies, though he leave his children
small and desolate, yet every one is mercifully stirred up for the Fathers sake
to show compassion, but the unkindness, currishnesse, and self-love of a
Father, 2 Samuel 21. 7. 8. 9.
is through Gods just judgment recompensed upon the children with neglect and
cruelty.

Lastly, 6 Reason.
that we may draw to an end; A merciless man, and a man without natural
affection or love, is reckoned among such as are given over of God to a
reprobate mind, Romans 1. 30.
and (as it were) transformed into a beast-like humor; for, what is a man if he
be not sociable, kind, affable, free hearted, liberal; He is a beast in the
shape of a man; or rather an infernal Spirit, walking amongst men which makes
the world a hell what in him lies; for, it is even a hell to live where there
are many such men: such the Scripture calls Nabals, Psalm. 14. 1.
which signifies fools and decayed men, which have lost both the sap of grace
and nature; and such merciles men are called Goats, Math. 25. 33.
and shall be set at Christ's left hand at the last day; Oh therefore seek the
wealth one of another.

But some will say, Object.
it is true, and it were well, if men would so do, but we see every man is so
for himself, as that if I should not do so, I should do full ill, for if I
have it not of my own, I may snap short sometimes, for I see no body shows
me any kindness, nor gives me any thing; if I have gold and silver, that
goes for payment, and if I want it, I may lie in the street, therefore I were
best keep that I have, and not be so liberal as you would have me, except I
saw others would be so toward me.

This Objection seems but equal and reasonable, as did the Answer of Naball
to David's men, Resp.
but it is most foolish and carnal, as his also was; for, if we should measure
our courses by most men's practices, a man should never do any godly duty;
for, Luke 13. 23. 24.
do not the most, yea, almost all, go the broad way that leads to death and
damnation? who then will follow a multitude? It is the word of God, and the
examples of the best men that we must follow. And what if others will do
nothing for thee, but are unkind, and unmerciful to thee? Know thou not
that they which will be the children of God must be kind to the unkind, Mat.
5. 44. 47.
loving to their enemies, and bless those that curse them? If all men were
kind to thee, it were but Publicans right eousnesse to be kind to them; If
all men be evil, will thou be so too? When David cried out; Help Lord, for
not a godly man is left. Did he himself turn ungodly also? Psalm. 12. 1.
Nay, he was rather the more strict: So, if love and charity be departed out
of this world, be thou one of them that shall first bring it in again. Romans
12. 20.


And let this be the first rule, which I will with two others conclude for this
time.

Never measure thy course by the most, 1 Rule.
but by the best, yea, and principally by Gods word; Look not what others do
to thee, but consider what thou art to do to them; seek to please God, not
thy self: did they in Matthew 25. 44. plead, that others did nothing for them?
No such matter, no such plea will stand before God, his word is plain to the
contrary, therefore, though all the world should neglect thee, disregard thee,
and contemn thee, yet remember thou have not to do with men, but with the
highest God, and so thou must do thy duty to them notwithstanding.

And let there be no Prodigal person to come forth and say, 2 Rule.
Give me the portion of lands and goods that appert^ineth to me, Luke 15. 12.
and let me shift for my self; It is you too soon to put men to their shi^ts;
Israel was seven yoares in Canaan, before the land was divided unto Tribes,
much longer, before it was divided unto Families: And why would thou have
thy particular portion, but because thou think to live better then thy
neighbor, and scornest to live so meanly as he? but who, I pray thee, brought
this particularizing first into the world? Esaias 14. 12. 13
Did not Satan, who was not content to keep that equal state with his
fellows, Jude 6.
but would set his throne above the Stars? Genesis 3. 5.
Did not he also entise man to despise his general felicity and happiness,
and go try particular knowledge of good and evil? And nothing in this world
does more resemble heavenly happiness, Psalm. 133. 1.
then for men to live as one, being of one heart, Act. 4. 32.
and one soul; neither any thing more resembles hellish horror, then for every
man to shift for himself; for if it be a good mind and practice, thus to
affect particulars, mine and thine, then it should be best also for God to
provide one heaven for thee, and another for thy neighbor.

But some will say, Object.
if all men would do their endeavor as I do, I could be content with this
generality, but many are idle and sloathful, and eat up others labors, and
therefore it is best to part, and then every man may do his pleasure.

First, Resp.
This, indeed, is the common plea of such as will endure no inconveniences, and
so for the hardness of men's hearts, God and man does often give way to that
which is not best, Math. 19. 8.
nor perpetual, 1 Samuel 8. 5.
but indeed if we take this course, to change ordinances and practices,
because of inconveniences, we shall have, every day, new laws.

Secondly, 2 These. 3. 9.
If others be idle, and thou diligent, thy fellowship, provocation, and example
may well help to cure that malady in them, being together, but being asunder,
shall they not be more idle, and shall not Gentry and Beggerie be quickly the
glorious Ensigns of your Commonwealth?

Thirdly, Romans 1. 29.
Construe things in the best part, be not too hasty to say, 1 Samuel 30. 10. 24.
men are idle and slothful, all men have not strength, skill, faculty,
spirit, and courage to work alike; it is thy glory and credit, that can do
so well, and his shame and reproach, that can do no better; and are not these
sufficient rewards to you both?

Fourthly, if any be idle apparently, you have a Law and Governors to execute
the same, and to follow that rule of the Apostle, Act. 19. 38.
to keep back their bread, and let them not eat, go not therefore
whisperingly, 2 These. 3. 10.
to charge men with idleness; but go to the Governor and prove them idle;
and thou shall see them have their deserts. Deuteronomy. 19. 15.


And as you are a body together, so hang not together by skins and gymocks, but
labor to be ioynted together and knit by flesh and synewes; away with envy at
the good of others, and rejoice in his good, 1 Samuel 18. 9.
and sorrow for his evil, let his joy be thy joy, and his sorrow thy sorrow:
Romans 12. 19.
let his sickness be thy sickness: his hunger thy hunger: his poverty thy
poverty: And if you profess friendship, Pro. 17. 17.
be friends in adversities: for then a friend is known, and tried, and not
before.

Lay away all thought of former things and forget them, 3 Rule.
and think upon the things that are, Genesis 42. 1.
look not gapingly one upon other, pleading your goodness, your birth, your
life you have lived, your means you had and might have had, here you are by
Gods providence, under difficulties, be thankful to God, it is no worse, and
take it in good part that which is, and lift not up your selves because of
former privileges, Job 2. 8.
when Job was brought to the dunghill, he sat down upon it. And when the
Almighty had been bitter to Naomie, Ruth 1. 20.
she would be called Marah, consider therefore what you are now, and where
you are, say not I could have lived thus and thus; but say, thus and thus I
must live: for God, and natural necessity requires, if your difficulties be
great, you had need to cleave the faster together, 1 Samuel 1. 6. 7.
and comfort and cheer up one another, laboring to make each others burden
lighter, there is no grief so tedious as a churlish companion, and nothing
makes sorrows easy more then cheerful associates: Gal. 6. 2.
Beareye therefore one another burden, 2 Samuel 15. 33.
and be not a burden one to another, avoid all factions, Heb. 10 29.
frowardnes, singularity, and withdrawings, and cleave fast to the Lord, Genesis
13. 7.
and one to another continually; so shall you be a notable preside it to these
poor Heathens, whose eyes are upon you, and who very bruitishly and cruelly
do daily eat and consume one another, through their emulations, wars, and
contentions; be you therefore ashamed of it, and win them to peace both with
your selves, and one another, by your peaceable examples, which will preach
louder to them, then if you could cry in their Barbarous language: Colos. 4. 5.
So also shall you be an encouragement to many of your Christian friends in
your native Country, to come to you, when they hear of your peace, love, and
kindness that is amongst you: Heb. 13. 2.
But above all, it shall go well with your souls, when that GOD of peace and
unity shall come to visit you with death, as he has done many of your
associates, you being found of him, not in murmurings, discontent and iarres,
but in brotherly love, 2 Pet. 3. 14.
and peace, may be translated from this wandering wilderness, unto that
joyful and heavenly Canaan. Heb. 4. 9.
()

FINIS.

