A NOTABLE History of the Saracens.

Briefly and faithfully descrybing the original beginning, continuance and
success as well of the Saracens, as also of Turks, Souldans, Mamalukes,
Assassines, Tartarians and Sophians. With a discourse of their Affairs and
Acts from the birth of Mahomet their first peevish Prophet and founder for
700 years space.

Whereunto is annexed a Compendious Chronycle of all their yearly exploytes,
from the said Mahomets time till this present year of grace. 1575.

Drawn out of Augustine Curio and sundry other good Authors by Thomas Newton.

Imprinted at London by William How, for Abraham Veale. 1575.

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE


To the Right honorable the Lord Charles Howarde, Baron of Effyngham, and
Knight of the most Noble Order of the Garter.
Right Honorable: Calling to remembrance what streict accoumpt every Man
particularly at the last general Audite, is enioygned to yield for time here
bestowed, I have somewhat in discharge of my duty that way, according to the
rate and measure of my small Talent, traueiled to bring to light for the
benefit of my Cuntreymen this historical Discourse of Saracens, Turks and
other Reprobates of the same stamp and Lyuerey, in hope that the same to your
Honor and others of ripe judgment thyrstinge after such needful knowledge,
shall be deemed labor and time not all together ill spent. Which matter
although it required the cunninge hand of a skilfuller Woorkeman, for the
better polisshing and bringing thereof into good frame and order, yet the
dilygent endeavor of such as do their vttermoste seems (in the mean
while) not to be rejected. For God bestows his Gifts and Benefits
diuerselye (some have more and some less) which although by Arythmeticall
proportion they seem very unequal, yet being Geometricallye examyned,
respected and waighed, they iumpe in a most even equalyty. Herein as in a
Myrrour is set down, how, when and by whom, this pestilent Generation was first
set abroche, what success in their Affairs ever since they have had, and if
we wyllnot by others harms take warning, what curtesye is to be looked for
at their hands, when and wheresoever they can espy any occasion or opportunity
to put in practice their bloody tyranny. They were (in deed) at the first very
far of from our Clyme and Region, and therefore the less to be feared, but now
they are even at our doors and ready to come into our Houses, if our penitent
hearts do not the sooner procure at the merciful hands of God, an unity,
peace and concord among the Princes, Potentates and People of that little
portion of Chrystendome yet left, which through division, discord and civil
dissension has from time to time enticed and brought this Babylonian
Nabugadnezar and turkish Pharao so near under our noses. The pitiful state
whereof although your L. is not now to learn yet for others sake, not so ripe in
Turkishe garboyles, I know your Honor according to the wonted generositie of
your noble nature will at my hands cherefully accept, as an earnest penny of my
loyal heart to your L. most addicted: who^ I beseech God with that most
virtuous and honorable Lady your wife to bless with all spiritual
benedictions, prosperous health and daily increase of much Honor.

At London the xii. of May. 1575. Your good Lordships most humble at
Commaundment. Thomas Newton.

The Authors Preface.
MAny a time and often, considering and debating with my felfe, the acwarde
course of this changeable world, among other things I have been greatly
desirous to know, what the very and chief cause should be, of the subversion
and ruin, from time to time, of al mighty kingdoms: And again of the
setting up and advancement of many obscure persons of base degree and
parentage to most high honors and dignities. For when I thoroughly consider and
call to remembrance the alteration and decay of the Roman Empire, and the
manifold calamities that have happened to noble* and puyssaunt Kingdoms in
times past, I well see, that dissolute life, ambition and discord of Rulers
among themselves has from time to time been the chief and original cause
thereof. Insomuch that by reading out of old Monumentes and Histories, things
long agone achieved and done, I perceive many Empires have been planted and
constituted, many Nations subdued, many Kingdoms with long continuance firmlye
established and most assured pear and tranquillytie among the Communaltie
conserved by temperaunce and sobriety, but chiefly and specially by civil
concord and mutual amytie. Wherefore, both reason, and daily examples enforce
me to think, that Wealth, Riches, strength and skillful policy in warlyke
affairs without concord and goodwyl of the people hurts many times, but
profits almost never. Whereas concord and benevolence (even without wealth
and richesse) be of great force and of themselves able to do very mutch.
Therefore, they which neglected the sauegard, quietness and commodity of
their subjects (whereby, goodwyll is both purchased and also nourished,) and
wholly yielded themselves to Ambition and desire of souereignty (bestowing al
their studies and cogitations only to enrich and bring themselves to hye
estate among their own People, desiring rather to be feared of them then of
their enemies) were in the end unprofitable to themselves and pernicious to
their country. Contrariwise, they that so arm themselves with the unfeigned
love and goodwyll of their own people and subjects, that they might both be
tenderly and intirelye beloved of them, and also be terrible and dreadful to
the enemy abroad: those (I say) were they, which notably benefited both
themselves and their common wealth. And if we would peruse and rip up the
ancient beginnings of al Kingdoms, and thoroughly consider their first
original, we shall find that so many of them as long flourished, were by most
honest Arts and ways at the first gotten, and by the best orders of government
constituted. For it is well enough known, that at the beginning, the name of a
king (which always was a name most holy and venerable) was given and
attributed to those that had done best service and been most meritorious to
their cuntrie, whom the people for their common profit and vtilytie created
Kings and Sovereigns over them. For when as the sacred word of God was not
yet among men acknowledged, no religyon reverenced, nor any civil order
regarded, when no man took any respect to lawful matrymonie, or to any
certain procreation of Children, and the due administration of justice and
laws with the profits thereof not once heard of, much less executed: when men
after a brutishe sort lived abroad in the woods and open fields, wholly
drowned in error and blind ignorance, abusing their strength and power only
to the satisfyinge of their own sensual affections and beastlye lusts: what
man's power was so great, or who was able with all the strength he had to
gathertogether these savage and rude persons lurking in woods and cabines
abrod, into one fellowship? and to persuade the^ to be obedient and conformable
to his commandments? Certes we must needs confess, that this reducing of
them from their first unmannerly rudeness, to honest order and comeliness,
was not brought to pass by force and violence, but by wisdom, equity,
justice, courteous dealyng and liberal benefits bestowed upon them all
generallye, whereby the hearts of the people were ravished and as it were with
a certain bond of benevolence allured to have them in admiration, and to bear
unto them an earneste zeal of dutyfull good will. And although at the first,
they seemed after a sort (because of the strangeness thereof) to be half
vnwyllynge, yet at length by means of benefits received, and other liberal
courtesies, together with an upright equity in every respect observed, they
brought them into order and ready to consent unto every thing that seemed
honest and profitable. By these politic means, Saturn the aunciente^^
founder of Rome reigned first in Armenia, and escaped the conspiracye and
force of the mightiest kings of Babylon by nothing so much, as by his justice
and equity and the assured good wills of his own people, and by their only
help, fleeing the fury and cruelty of Jupiter, obtained and wanne a new
kingdom in Italy. By this way, Romulus the other founder of Rome, of a poor
and beggarly sheapherd, was advanced to the degree of a king. In like manner
were Numa and Tarquinius Priscus of strangers and private persons, made Kings
in the same place. By such good will and affection of his Soldiers, Alexander
the Great conquered all the East. By concord, the Greeques victoriouslye
augmented and enlarged their dominions: by concord, the common wealth of the
Carthaginians grew to be most mighty: the same concord made the Romans,
Lords over al Lands, and conquerours of al foreign nations. In this bond of
concord the Sarracens a weak and slender rabble of Peyzants at the first, being
joined and linked together, overcame and possessed very many provinces
belonging to ye Roman empire: and by this means ye power of the Turks at the
first and ever since has increased. But Insolency, Ambition and Discord has been the subversion of all Kingdoms, mighty Empires and populous common
wealths. For when princes (neglecting and forsaking those trades and ways by
which their king domes were at the first constituted) think Money and wealth,
to be the chief defense, and as it were the Sinews and stays of their
kingdoms, when any secret hatred and heart burninge enkindleth between them
and their people, then do they hazard and endaunger both themselves their
Royalmes and subjects to the spoil of the enemy. For nature has thus
ordained, that as we feel and perceive others to be affected toward us, we
also ar affected toward the^: and Plato his saying is well known concerning y^
same matter who writes yt as the princes and rulers in a commonwealth are,
such commonly be the people and Citizens of the same. Therefore no man ought
to marvel, why those Princes which set more by their own private lucre and
gain then by the public commodytie of their Realm, are many times but
slenderlye beloved of their subjects: and that all their Officers under them
by their evil example, are more careful to enriche their own Coffers then to
further the common wealth of their country. Thus men's hearts being diversely
bent and their good wills alieuated one from an other, the common wealth
consequently goes to wrack and confusion. These were the causes, why the
Empire was first translated from the Chaldayes to the Assyrians, from the
Assyrians to the Medians, from the Medians to the Persians and last of all from
the Persians to the Macedonians. Discord was the overthrow and disparcling of
that famous and large Monarchy left by Alexander the Great, while his
successors (not content every man with his own Territory) quarelled among
themselves for the whole Monarchy. Discord abated and tamed the whole power
and common wealth of the Greeques: by discord and civil wars, the Roman
state was destroyed and brought almost to nothing: and again the civil
division of the Greeques among themselves was the only cause that the
flourishing empire of Constantinople was brought under the miserable yoke and
slauerye of a Nation most barbarous. Discord was the utter vndooyng and
defacyng of the Sarracens Empire, as in this History it shall plainly appear:
and the same plague does at this day so infest and trouble all Christendom
that I fear (and I beseech God my fear may be without effect) least we shall
to late rue and lament either the utter subversion or at least, the miserable
oppression thereof. What do we mean therefore? seeing Ambition and her
daughter Discord have ever been the causes of so great calamyties and
mischieues, why do we thus run headlong upon the Swords poinct, and cut one
another throat? why have we such delyght in civil wars and domestical
murder? why do we not (alas for pity that our minds should be so much
blinded and bewitched) lay aside all private grudges and controversies which
ought rather to be decided by equity and the infallible law of God, then with
war and effusion of Christian blood? why do we not rather bend all our force
and power against the professed enemies of Christianity, ye co^temners and
destroyers of all humanitye, relygion and learning? These wars (I say) which
are divided into many parts and factions among us, one conspiringe an others
bane and thyrsting after his brothers blood, will in the end bring all
Christendom to utter ruin and woeful desolation. Which if they would join in
one and live together in Christian league, no doubt, Constantinople might be
again recovered and annexed to the Roman Empire, Grecia and a great nnmber of
Christian cuntries now living in perpetual moorning, and pitiful slavery might
be delivered out of the thraldom of insufferable tyraunts, that Sathanical
crew of Turkish lurdens might be expulsed and driven to trudge out of all
Europa, and the sincere profession of christian religion there eftsoon planted
and truly acknowledged. Paraduenture some will cast doubts and object, that
this our mortal foe is not near hand, but must be sought out (as aforetime) in
far countries, that they must pass sundry adventures over many perilous
Seas, that they must go a great way beyond all Europa, and set foot into
ASIA and Syria by dangerous places, unknown ways suspect countreies and
fierce people. But behold, even at our doors and ready to come into our
houses, we have this arrogant and bragging helhound, triumphyng over us,
laughyng at our misfortunes, reioycinge to see us thus to lie together by the
ears, and gapyng in hope short lie to enjoy our goods and Scigniories. O
doleful and dangerous times. O corrupt and wylfull manners. In times past, one
Peter an Heremite being but a poor seely soul, was able with exhortyng words
and orations to persuade three hundredth thousand men to put on armur against
the Sarracens, and to procure innumerable Gentlemen and Potentates with all the
power they were able to make, to march against them, and to bring them as far
as into Afia, where they valiantly conquered and wanne from the Sarracens many
of their Kingdoms and Provinces. For the people in those days were of
themselves so willing to adueuture their lives in Christ's quarrel against the
blasphemers of his name, that without any stipend or wages (godly zeal so
pricked them forward) they took in hand such long Expeditions and weary
viages: and while Kings and Rulers were given either to rest and riotte, or
else busyed with civil and domestical wars, they carried their weapons into
far Regions to fight against the Infidels and miscreaunt people. But now
whereas our most mighty and the same most unmerciful Enemy the great Turk
is ready every day to spyll out blood and to work our confusion, possessing and
having already under his jurisdiction many of ye Christian Provinces, to some
others laiyng batterye and siege: and hopyng ere it be long, to spoil and
ouerrunne the rest, and albeit that Christendom has Maximilian an Emperor
most prudent and wise, yet nevertheless, by the sinister persuasions, and
deuilish counsels of some sedicious persons w^slea and kill one an other.
Which thing I considering, and greatly lamentyng the state wherein Christendom
presentlye stands, albeit that I being but one man, and such a one, that
lackyng both strength and health, am able in person to do no good in the
exploites of martial affairs: yet to the intent I might stir up and kindle
a desire and go dwyl in many others which are better hable, to repulse this our
common danger, by such examples as are in Histories registered and written, I
have here taken upon me orderlye to describe and set out the Acts of the
Sarracens and Turks, buried almost in the rust ye dongeon of cankard oblyuyon:
that we seeing by what means and sleightes they have increased, and by what
folies and ouersightes our power has diminished, may now at length decline and
eschew the like. This whole Historye breeflye comprysinge the whole Discourse
of their reigns and conquestes, collected as well out of many Greeque,
Constantinopolitan, and Latin Authors, as out of the Chronicles of the
Arabians and Moors, is divided into three Books. The first contains the
nativity, education, reign and continuance of dotynge Mahomet and the
beginning of the Saracens, with the success and increase of their Empire even
till it was at the highest, for two hundredth years space. The second is
continued from the first inclynation till the beginning of the destruction and
last end thereof, contayninge also the space of two hundredth years. The
third breefly comprehends the final end of it, and the original beginning of
the Turkishe Empire, (which succeeded the Saracenical Domination) till Othoman
the first Emperor of Turks which entreats of their acts, for the space of
three hundredth years. So that this Historye takes his beginning at the birth
of Mahomet, which was five hundred and sixty years after the incarnation of
our Savior Christ, and reaches unto ye year one thousand and three hundredth.
As for the several Acts of Othoman and other Emperors that succeeded him, we
have here omitted, because they be severally written and described by many
others. But of that argument which we in these three Books declare and
comprehend, there is none, neither among the Latins nor yet the Greeques
(that I know) which has compiled and made any several Historye. Which labor
of mine, if I may understand to be well lyked and allowed, by the judgment of
the honest and learned sort, I will hereafter adventure to take in hand other
matters of greater weight and importance.

The first Book.
Wherein is contained their first beginning and original, with the success and
increasing of their Empire.
I Am purposed to write an History concerning the Acts of the Saracens,
achieved as well in the East as in the West parts of the world: first because
they were great and renoumed over the face of the whole Earth and brought all
things out of good state into tumultuous broyle and confuse disorder, and also
because this power of theirs increased, through the discord and dissension of
the Christians: that we thereby taking example, may plainly perceive and
learn what boldness and strength, our civil warring and inward variance among
our selves gives to the adversaries and foes of Christianity. And that we no
longer in this sort offer our throats willingly to be cut by them, which
desire nothing more then our blood and destruction. For first of al, this is
well enough known, that the Roman Empire (which through concord temperance
and valiauntnes surmounted and grew to such high Majesty and estate, that all
nations almost in the world were obedienciaries and subject unto it) when the
Citizens being once lulled in to much ease, and dronken with superfluity of
riches and wealth began to addict themselves to riot and ambition (the very
causes that overthrew it, when it once began to decline with his own sway and
bigness, and many striued for title of the Crown) received at the hands of
none, such annoyance and calamity as of the Saracens. For although the Goths
most unmercifully and beastly destroying and making havoc of the ancient
Monumentes of the Roman valiaunce and worthiness, were the first that
triumphed over them, being the people which erst had vanquished and conquered
all other nations: Although Attila King of the Hunnes, like a most raging
swifte stream spoiled, ouerrunne and destroyed all where ever he came, from
the Riphaean to the Pyrene Mountains: Although the Lumbards occupied and
forcibly enjoyed a great portion of Italy, as the Frankes breaking out of
Germany into Gallia also did: yet their reigns and dominations in strange
Countries either continued not long, or else at least wise, living under a more
gentle and reasonable Clime, changed their former conditions, acknowledged
religion and the August Empire of the sovereign Caesar's. But the Saracens
because they would seem to be subduers and ouerthrowers both of the Roman
Empire and of all Christian religion also, violently breaking and issuyng out
of Arabia, despoyled and wasted the most noble parts of Asia, which in so many
sharp storms and troublesome garboyles of most fierce people ever before
remained free and untouched, quite abolishing in the same all the studies of
good letters and liberal Sciences and (which is most of all) utterly defacing
and inhibiting the true worshipping of God and Christian religion. And not only
infected the Provinces of Asia but also almost all Africa and the most part
of Spain with barbarous rites, mystie errors, blind ignorance, and with a
most deuelish, absurd and detestable religion of their own. And from thence
making sundry Roads into Italy, Greece and France lamentably afflicted and
laid wast the same, and by continuance and sufferance have planted such a huge
Empire, yt at this day (being in Anno. 1575. that is to say.900. years and
above since it first began, it daily threateneth our confusion and is
dreadful to all Christendom. For the Turks who now enjoy all their
dominions, have received from them as next heirs unto them, both their
Religion and Kingdoms: and yet to this day in Africa, some of the mere line
of the Saracens be of great power and authority. But before we go any further
to the declaration and discovery of their Acts and government, we must first
a little speak of the original Pedagrew of the first founder and author of
their damnable Sect. Arabie.
All Arabie is divided into three parts, whereof one is called Petreia, having
his name of an old ancient town in it, called Petra, the second is called
Deserta, and the third Faelix or Sabaea. Petreia has on the West side Aegipt
and is separated from it, first by the Mount Casius and then by wast
wilderness: on the North, it has Jury and Palestina: on the East, Arabia,
Deserta: and on the South the innermost part or arm of the Arabian Goulph
called Sinus Arabieus. Deserta, wherein the City Scene (otherwise called
Scenitis) stood, boundeth on the South upon the Mountains of Arabia Faelix,
on the North, it has Mesopotamia, and on the East the River Euphrates. Arabia
Faelix runs a long between the two bosoms of the Sea, the Arabian and the
Persian, being almost on every side environed with water like an Island.; It
has on the North Petreia and Deserta, on the West of the Arabian Gulphe, on
the East the Persian Gulphe, and on the South the red Sea. I find that these
Regions were inhabited by four kinds of people, that is, to wit, by the
ancient Arabians, which were descended from Arabus, Sabus and Petreius the
sons of Cures and the Nephews of Cham, of whom the three Arabies had their
names as Arabia Deserta of Arabus, Arabia, Sabaea (which is also called Faelix)
of Sabus and Petreia of Petreius (as witnesses Berosus Chaldaeus. Arabians are
the offspring of Ismael.
) Then of the Ismaelites, which were descended from Ismaell the Son of
Abraham by his handmayde Agar, of whom a part of the Country, called Agarena
and the Town Agarenum (which in Strabo are corruptly read Ararena and Agranum)
had their first beginning and denomination: as that part called Petreia was
called Nabathaea of Nabath, and the people Caedrei of Caedar the Sons of the
same, Ismael. The third people came and descended of the Sons of Ketura,
Abraham's second wife, which possessed a great part of Arabia Foelix, specially
that portion which lies toward the red Sea. They also made Colonies and
under Cities in Lybia, and peopled the same with inhabitauntes of their own
lineage and nation, where upon after ward (as Josephus witnesses) the Cuntrie
was called Africa, Africa.
of Ophre the Son of Mandanes, and Nephew to Abraham by his wife Ketura. The
fourth kind, took their original beginning of Esau the Son of Isaac, Esau
inhabited part of Arabie.
who inhabited the parts of Arabia Petreia next unto Jury, and of him the
people in Arabia Petreia, are of Pliny and Ptolomaeus called by ye name of
Saracens. For Isaac, Esau his father, was the Son of Abraham by his wife
Sara. And they were called Saracens, both because they might thereby show and
testify, that they were descended of the line of Sara, who was Mystresse, and
not of Agar the handmaid as the Ismaelites were: and also that they might be
discerned and known from the Jews, who also had the very same parents and
were proceeded out of the same stock and Progeny. Among al these, the people
Scenitae which inhabited Arabia Deserta, were most valiant and warlike, having
no habitation nor houses to dwelin, but wandered abroad and lay in Tents in
the open fields. These insolently bragged and made their auaunt, that they
were of most auncientie, and contended with all others for the nobility of
their race. There aid and help, the Roman Emperors in their wars
oftentimes used. The Arabians ever had many ordinances and Rites, such as the
Hebrews had, and do yet to this day retain and keep the same: for (as
Herodotus and Diodorus two ancient Historiographers affirm) they ever used
circumcision, and kept the same order of their Tribes and families that the
Jews did: and account it a heinous offense that a woman should be married to a
man of any other Tribe and family then she her self is, and likewise for a
man to take to wife a woman of another lineage. They inuiolablie keep the
nobility of their race and Pedagrew, so that none but of the noblest sort
should reign over them. Neither has one the regiment and governance over
all, but every Tribe to have their proper King, after whom, his own son
should not succeed in the kingdom, but the first that was borne of the seed
of a right noble man and woman, after he were saluted King, was kept and
brought up as heir apparaunt to the Crown. A people naturally and generally
given to theft and robbery, as all others commonly are which dwell in hoate
Countries. Many kinds of religion was used among them: for some worshipped
Christ, of whose nature, deity, and omnipotency at that time, whence this our
History takes his beginning (as in all other places at that time also) there
were diverse sects and opinions. Some observed the Rites and Ceremonies of the
Jews: some honored the Sun and Moon, some certain trees, some Serpents,
some a Tower called Alcaba, which they believed and thought was builded by
Ismael, some one thing and some another. In the time of these so great
garboyles and diversities in religions, and among such blockishe and rude
people, Mahomet.
was Mahomet borne at Itraripe a town of Arabia Deserta, belonging to Mecca,
being by his fathers side of the ancient line of Corah the son of Esau, or
(as some say) of Caedar the son of Ismael, in the month of February, and in
the year after the incarnation of Christ (as they say) 560. whose father was
named Abedela and his mother Emma a Jew borne, both poor folks and of base
parentage. By means whereof (his father being an Ismaelite and his mother a
Jew) he was in his tender age by them instructed and taught both the rites of
the Hebrews and the manner of worshipping that the Gentiles used. His Parents
dyed while he was but yet a tender and young ladde, so that then he was
committed to the charge and custody of one Salutelib, his uncle by the fathers
side. And when he came to man's stature he was taken prisoner of the Scenites,
which were (as before was showed) the fiercest and warlickest people in all
that Country, and lived altogether by robberies, and by them was he sold to a
rich Cobbe one Abdimoneples, an Ismaelite. Who quickly perceiving his prompt
wit and thoroughly understanding his impudent nature thought him to be a fit
instrument to make his factour into other Cuntries about his traffic of
merchandise, and so used oftentimes to send him out of Palestina where he
dwelte, into Egypt. Which trade of life, Mahomet the space of many years
exercising, got great acquaintance and crepte highly in favor with the
Hebrews, Christians and Gentiles. This Mahomet was of a mean stature, big
headded, somewhat broune complexioned, cheerfully countenaunced and lively
colored, a long bearde, and yet not hoare: because always as it began to
wax graye, with oyntmentes he altered it: his visage and look was grave and
portly, pretending a kind of Majesty joined with gentleness and courtesy,
his legs very well proportioned, his body in going or mouyng pleasant and
gentle, and like (as they term it) to the course of a still runnyng River, in
talk very courteous, in mind and body both stout, strong and venturous,
quick and prompte of wit, but the same (as Salust writes of Catiline)
wicked and disposed to all mischief, bold, hardy, and such a one that cared
for no perilles. (...) Whereof he gave once a manifest example, for being
mounted upon a marvelous fierce and untamed Horse (in the presence and sight
of sundry his friends) he so spourred and galloped him, that all the
beholders, seeing him in such great peril, earnestly desired him to alyght.
Unto whom with very amiable countenance and pleasant language, he answered,
that the Horse was like unto the Sea, dooyng them thereby to understand, that
he took no less pleasure and delectation in that prauncing then if he were
in a Ship upon the Sea. Also he was fickle minded and double in all his
doings, as the infinite rabble of Laws one clean contrarying an other, by him
made, do manyfestly witness: which thing caused great variety and diverse
sorts of sects in his Religion: he was also a deep counterfeytor and
dissembler in every matter, but by nature very eloquent withal.

His ambicious and haultie mind, gaped without measure. after promocion and
authority. In so much that consydering in his mind this great variety of
Sects, he was merueilously enflamed with a desire to establishe and make one
manner of religion, and to take unto him as well the Sovereignty of Empire, as
also of divine honor. Whereof he was put in great hope, by reason of the
great sedicion and discord of the Christians, the corruption of manners, and
the want of warlicke discipline. Moreover he was grealy anymated by the
perverse and Deuilyshe Counsel of one Sergius a Monk, who being exiled and
expulsed out of Constantinople, for mayntainyng the Heresy of the Arrians
fled into Arabie, and used oftentimes to come to the house of Abdimoneples,
Mahomets master, and entirely loved Mahomet for the singular dexterity that
he conceived to be in his wit and towardnes. Therefore as soon as his master
Abdimoneples was dead, leaving behind him no Children, his wife Hadigia, being
then wedow, a woman of fyftie years of age, and left sole heir of all her
husbands Lands, Goods and Cattells, took her servant Mahomet to husband.
Now, being in possession of the wedow and all her substance and by means
thereof grown to great wealth, he often fell grouelong on the ground, foming
and froathing at the mouth (for he had the falling sickness) and lay in a
horrible ecstasy or distraction of mind, which his wife took very heavily and
cursed her fortune, in that she had so lothsomely matched her self. He
therefore to appease her grief and to make her from great agony to leap to
sudden joy, told her that the same happened unto him by the operation of the
Spirit of God himself, who appeared unto him and revealed certain things,
which he should pronounce and show to the people, touching the law of Moses
and of Christ. For (quod he) our mortal bodies being subject to corruption are
not hable to sustain and abide the glorious and glittering sight of God,
whereby his body was in a manner at such times bereft and separated from his
mind. Which words the old trotte believing, as she that tenderly loved him
for his lusty courage and beautiful age, begann^ now not to love him as a
husband, but to worship and reverence him as a holy man and a divine Prophet
highly in Gods favor, and to blaze his holiness abroad among her Companions and
Gossippes. In so much that when she dyed, she not only left him wealthy in
goods and possessions (for she made him heir of all) but also in great
veneration and credit among the common people for an opinion of sanctity
which was thought to be in him. For which cause, Buback the chiefest and in
greatest authority among all of that part of Arabie, and of the same Tribe
that Mahomet was, gave his daughter Aissa to him in marriage, when he was but
yet thirty years of age. Puffed up with pride because of this new affinity,
and for the great abundance of wealth left unto him by his other wife, he
openly professed himself to be the messanger of God and a Prophet, and to
teach the people a new kind of religion, patched and gathered together out of
the erroneous Schisms and heretical dreams of all Sects. For he taught and
commanded Circumcision, Baptism, and abstinence from Swines flesh and wine.
He instituted a general fast to be kept one whole month in the year, and
that no meat for that space should be eaten in the day time, but only in
the night. He affirmed, that there were but three Prophets, that is to wit,
himself, Moses and Christ, and that Christ was not God, with an innumerable
rabble of most blasphemous opinions contained in his filthy Alcorane. Alcorane
is a Book containing Mahomettes Law.
Which assertions and opinions were of many at the first deryded and flouted
at, in so much that they accou^pted him no better the^ lunatique and distraught
of his right wits. But when that he had persuaded and allured all his
Allyantes and the family of Buback which bore great sway and authority, yea
and many of the common people also to credit and lean to his Sect, the
Magistrates of Mecca, perceiving that this new dotage and commotion would
breed a scab in the common wealth, if the inconvenience like to ensue thereby,
were not speedily prevented, and the impudency of the man by rigor repressed,
(for he slanderously would inueigh and openly rail upon Princes) determined
with them selves, to lay hands upon him and to put him to death. Mahomet
having understanding of their intentes and minds, fled out of Mecca: whom many
of his Kinsfolks, Alies, Friends and Clientes, (who were thoroughly persuaded
that he was such a one in deed, as he had professed and would seem to be)
followed. And from this year, which was after the Nativity of our Lord and
Savior Christ. 593. years, the Arabians do reckon their years: calling this,
the year of Legira, which is to say the year of flight or transmigration.
Mahomet therefore seeing such a great multitude to favor and stick to him,
putting more trust in his power then he did before, made unto them an Oration,
in effect as follows.

How earnest I have been and what desire I have always had to proclaim,
Oration of Mahomet.
advance and publishe that law which has been unto me revealed by the
Archangell and Messanger of Almighty God Gabriel, with commandment to teach
the same to all mortal wyghtes, both God himself knows and you most dear
friends can witness. For I never spared any labor, never refused any
danger, never any miseries or perilous extremity, where I thought my
painful travail might be available or redound to the benefit and souls
health of all people, and where without disturbaunce and molestation I might
conveniently execute the charge and office to me committed and enjoined from
the mouth of God. All which I have done to this end, that I might reclayme
and call home the people runnyng a stray from their wicked ways, to a holy and
sincere integrity of life: and out of the dongeon of Hell, (whither they run
headlonge,) bring them back into the joys of the celestial Kingdom:
following herein the steps and bountifulnes of God him self, whose message
and ministry we in earth do execute. Who when as all mankind through Adams
transgression and fault, was forfeyted and fallen into the hands of the
Devil, yet of his mere mercy vouchesafed to deliver and save his people, as
before he had promised to our father Abraham: that is to wit, by appoynting
unto them a law, whereby they might obtain everlasting life and salvation. And
therefore first he sent Moses, to lay the first foundations and beginnings of
this doctrine, and to call them for fear of everlasting pain and damnation,
to a newness and amendment of life. But when the Law of Moses little profyted
that way, he sent Jesus Christ, by gentler ways and means to allure and win
them, and to persuade them to live in the service and obedience of God. Now,
mankind being again so much depraved and gone a straie, that there is no
certain nor constant Religion among them, no discipline, no order nor honest
manners, but all out of square and forlorn: he has enjoined me (whom even from
the beginning of the world he had made choice of and predestined for that
purpose) to this office and function, that I should recure extreme euilles
with extreme remedies, and with fire and sword cut of, all iniquity and make
havoc of all them that once should dare to again say or open their mouth
against this law: and that I should enlarge the kingdom of God and constitute
a more sacred and a more imperial common wealth on earth, then ever any has
heretofore been, for who is so blind, which sees not, that unless we (who^
God has appointed to yt office) do set to our helping hands to redress these
so great mischiefs, all mankind shall shortly perish? for man's nature
without a Law (which in so great variety and licenciousnes of life can be
none nor stand in any force) must needs most grievously sin and offend. But
how shall we make and constitute any wholesome Law to them that are unwilling
to live under any, and despise all godly order? What spightfull reproaches and
slanderous reports, we that are careful and diligent to accomplish this
Commission and commandment of Almighty God, do sustain at their hands, you
most loving friends and companions have seen, and how they pursue after us
as after wild Beasts to have our innocent blood.

But happy are you and blessed, whom God has chosen to be as ministers and
helpers unto me in the exploite and atchieuing of these so great mysteries and
affairs, whose divine will it is, that you should not only be partakers and
Coheires with me of eternal felicity in the life to come, but also here in
this world should be enriched with great wealth and possessions, the which
undoubtedly if you show your selves men and constantly persist in faith you
shall shortly enjoy, by subduing innumerable Nations and conquering most
wealthy Countries. For (undoubtedly) it is the good will and pleasure of God,
that all those Countries and heaps of wealth, shall be yours, which now wicked
men, enemies and adversaries to this law do wrongfully possess. That all
these things shall thus happily succeed, both the wickedness of our
adversaries, which God will not suffer any longer to escape unpunished, and
your trusty aid and valiauntnes (most worthy friends and fellows) yea and
the most infallible oracles of Almighty God do put us in hope most assured.
Therefore if you desire to be partakers of the kingdom of Heaven, and of so
great richesse and glory upon Earth, it is meet and expedient that you all
swear and do homage unto me, that must be your Captain and Ringleader.

When he had thus made an end, the chief Princes and Rulers of the people and
namely Zaid the Son of Zuzara, Aomar and all the rest one after an other with
their swords drawn, promised by a solemn Oath to allow of none other law, but
that which Mahomet should make: in the defense and setting out whereof, they
then and there protested, at all assayes when need should require, to spend
their life and blood. This ended, Mahomet again commanding them to keep
silence, kneeled down on his knees a pretty while, as though he had pattered
over some mumbling meditatio^s, and afterward with a loud voice uttered these
words following.

Now (most courageous champions) make your selves ready to battle look that
you want neither weapons nor stomach to win our purpose withal, we have
the victory most sure already in our hands. Behold the things which you have
often desired and wyshed for, Richesse, Glory, Renown and perpetual felicity
are before our eyes. God has set the^ before you as rewards for your valiant
and victorious service: your own valiaunce, the excellency of the cause, and
all the things above named ought more to stir up your hearts and prick you
forward then any Oration that I can make.

After he had thus spoken, he appointed ten Capitaines over the people,
chosen out of the noblest in birth and chiefest in dignity among the rest, and
such as were allied unto him by marriage, and them did he appoint into Ensigns
and Bands. The names of which capitaines were these: Vbequar, Omar, Ozmen,
Alifre, Talaus, Azubeir, Zadin, Zaedine and Abuobeid, and so he marched in
battle array toward ye City of Mecca. The Magistrates of the City
understanding thereof, made out a power against him, which encou^tring with
Mahomet his Host, discomfited and put them all to flight. Wherefore for the
space of four years after, Mahomet never durst make any profer to besiege
that City any more. Notwithstanding, he ceased not continually with Orations
in ye open fields and Country villages, to move and stir up the people to
sedition, by means whereof he also caused certain vprores and tumultes among
the Scenites, which acknowledged for their Lords and Sovereigns the Roman
Emperors. Then once again he marched with a fresh supply of more Soldiers
against Mecca, where he was again repulsed and myssed his purpose: and two
years after he again the third time attempted the same and sped as he had
done twice before. In this mean while, Heraclius the Emperor perceiving the
youthful sort of the Scenites to begin mutyne and sedition, for ye better
quieting thereof, dispatched and sent a great number of the^ (under the color
of warfare) into far Countries. There reigned at yt time in Persia a King named
Cosdroes, who had married ye daughter of Maurice ye Emperor called Marie, at
whose insta^ce and persuasio^ he was contented to be Baptized: and so long as
his father in law lived, used himself most friendly toward all ye Christians
and was unto them very courteous and liberal. But after that he was
traitorously slain by Phocas, who succeeded him in the Empire, Cosdroes
detesting ye disloyal treachery and falsehod of them which had elected such a
wicked man, as Phocas, polluted with the bloody murder of his liege Lord and
Sovereign to be their Prince, reputing them as Accessaries to the same
horrible act and conspiracy, prepared a great army at the instigation and
procurement of his wife to revenge the death of his said father in Law. And the
more was he emboldened so to do, because he well enough perceived Heraclius (for
Phocas was slain within a while after) to be altogether lulled in security
and to lie quietly at home without attempting any thing against the Barbarous
Nations which with fire, and sword on every side despoiled Italy and the
Roman Empire. Whereupon with a huige and populous army he enuaded the
frontiers of the Empire, and subduyng by fine force all the South parts of
Asia, entered into Aegipt and took Alexandria: and yet not contented, went
further and conquered Carthage, withal Africa. And when he had taken good
order for the fortefying of that Country with strong garrisons, he retired
back to Alexandria, wasting Syria and Jury. Heraclius being not a little
netteled with these injurious dealings of Cosdroes, sent unto him for peace:
which when he could not obtain at his hands, rather enforced and driven by
necessity, then drawn to it by any goodwyl in himself levied an army, in
which he also had retained the Arabian Scenites, with whom some say that
Mahomet was, and that in a battle wherein Cosdroes side was discomfited, he
was sore wounded by a common Soldier named Turcus. And when Heraclius had many
times joined battle with Cosdroes, and in diverse conflictes put him to the
foil, at length he so much crushed his power yt he was glad to fly beyond the
river Tigranes, where he proclaimed his younger son called Medarses,
Successor and heyer apparaunt to his Crown, dishereting and not regardinge
his elder son Sirochis, a young Gentleman of great hope and towardness.
Whose heart not patiently brookyng this contumelious and unnatural dealyng,
secretlye conspyred with Heraclius, to betray both his Father and his Brother
Medarses, (whom his father had so unkindly preferred before him) with all their
richesse and princelye furniture. And promised further, to discampe and remove
out of all the Roman Provinces such Garrisons as his Father had placed there,
conditionallye that he might enjoy the Kingdom of Persia, and a firm peace
infringiblie to be kept between both Empires. In this poyncte, Heraclius
being a Christian Prince was no more ashamed to deliver the Kingdom of Persia
to a wicked and rank rebellious person, Traitor to his own Father, and Brother
(being now throughlye weakened with the losses of so many unlucky battles,
and now most certainly in his own hands, specially the King himself trusting to
his legs and fleeing, if he could have used his good fortune and victory when
it was offered unto him) and to buy a dishonorable cowardly peace, by consenting
to such a wicked deed: then yt wicked Barbarian and disloyal yonker was, by
such undue and detestable means to pull ye kingdom from the^ to himself. Such
desire of principality reigned in ye one, and so great love slouthful idleness
in the other.

Cosdroes therefore and Medarses with their wives being aprehended and brought
back from whence they were fled, were cast into prison, and within awhile
after, by the commandment of Syrochis, both put to death. In whom appeared a
cruel example of Fortunes variableness. Horrible and vnnaturable murder.
A goodly president and warning for Princes, to mark and consider upon, in
nominating their Successoure, that they at no hand reiectinge the stout and
valiant, elect and choose tender weaklynges and effiminate Meycokes. For
nothing so soon moves a noble and firce heart to furious impacience and
indignation, as (being stout and courageous) to be rejected and not accounted
of, among his own friends. All things in Persia by means of this League
appeased and set in order, and Syria and Jerusalem with the other Provinces
restored to the Roman Empire, Mahomet accompanied with a pompous train, met
with Heraclius in his return whomwarde from these wars, and of him desired
some Country for him, and his Soldiers to inhabit in, which suit and request
at the Emperors hands he obtained. Not long after, it happened that when the
Soldiers were paid their wages, the Arabians repyned, and found themselves
agreeued, that they were defrauded and cut short of their due stipende and
ordinary allowance. Which coming to the ears of the chief Paymaster, he
more rashly and arrogantly, then wisely and consideratly answered, that there
was skantlie innough to pay the Roman and Greeque soldiers, First cause of
grudge between the Christians and Saracens
much less for such a rascal company of Dogs as they were. Which words within
awhile after, were almost the subversion and ruin of all Christendom,
insomuch that even till this day they bear a grudge of reuengment for this
injury in their minds against us. Such a heap of mischieues many times does
the ouerthwartinge wilfulness of one rash person breed, specially when
stout and warlyke fellows shynk themselves apparently iniuried. For the
Arabians swellyng with anger, and incensed with fell disdain for this
reproachful and open contumelye, departed into Syria, and joined themselves to
Machomettes train and faction. Whereat Mahomet glad to see his power thus
increased, went the fourth time against Mecca, determining with might and maine
to besiege it. The Magistrates of Mecca perceived well enough his purpose and
what he pretended, wherefore with greater preparation and stronger power then
before, ye whole body almost of the City bent themselves to repulse his
invasion. Between whom there was at the river of Bredine a sore and terrible
conflict, wherein Mahomet got the victory, and slew of the nobilytie and chief
Citizens of Mecca (beside a very great number of the Communalty) three hundred
persons: Mahomet begins to ruffle.
in so much that at this battle the whole nobillytie of Mecca were in manner all
slain. And so Mahomet like a triumphant Conqueror entered, and took
possession of the fair City of Mecca, fortefiyng the same with a garrison of
his own appointment, and after, departing with his army thence, he laid seege
to Hunaimum, and wanne it, deuidinge the spoil thereof (which was very great)
among his Soldiers. After that, he besieged Tarsus, which City after he had
all in vain battred the space of a whole month, he raised his seege, and
returned into the maigne Country of Arabia and took first Itraripe
otherwise called Ietripe, and after that Medina a Mart town well peopled with
wealthy Jews. And grauntyng the spoil thereof to his Soldiers, he ranscaked
and made havoc of the town: but as for all the Jews which partly in ye
city and partly in other places of Arabi (because they being skillful in ye
divine law greatly withstood his attempts and procedings) he hated deadly, and
in the end in.xi. battles them utterly vanquished, and destroyed. Thence
retourninge to Itraripe, he appointed Azeib his Lieutenant of Mecca, who entered
into the City with a great route of Arabians or Saracens. For Mecca then was
and yet is, as well because of an opinion of great auncientie (for it is
thought to be builded by Ismael or else by Abraham himself) as also for, the
bigness of the City and resort of people most noble and famous. Then again
within the same year, discharging the said Azeib of his office, he appointed
Moad the Son of Gadel Lieutenant of the same City in his room: with this
commandment, that after Mahomet his death he should desend and maintain his
law, and diligently look that the same should of the people be reverently
observed, and so in the mean season to minister judgment and execution of his
laws to the Mecchyans. Al things in this sort being set in good frame and
order, he removed to Tambicum, and there builded a Temple, which is to be
seen at this day. Thence he sent an army under the conducte of Zalid and
Malid two of his chief Captains against Alozaid the Son of Almathaliph,
King of Aliendel, whom by force of arms they overcame, and made tributarie.
And thus all Arabia being brought in subjection, he commanded Eubocar with
part of his Host to go to Mecca (he himself lying still at Itraripe) and
charged him that he should leave never a mothers Son a live in it, nor suffer
any forrayner to enter saving only such as willingly would obey his Law and
believe his doctrine. For his meaning and intent was, (as afterward he brought
it to pass) that Mecca should be the Metropolitan City of his religion and
Empire. And thus within a short space, Mecca was replenished with none but
Mahometanes. And not only Mecca but all Arabia besides (as they are people by
nature light of belief and newfangled) embraced his pestilent errors. And
from that time, all they which yielded themselves to that Sect, were called by
the name of Saracens, both because that error sprung up and was first begone
by the Saracens, and also for that, Mahomet persuaded them that all the
promyses, in the Scriptures promised to the Seed of Abraham, belonged and
appertayned to them. Being puffed up with arrogance by reason of this good
success in his affairs, he sent Ambassades to Kings and Princes near
adjoining, aduisyng them to embrace his Religion, and unto them addressed his
letters, sealed with a Signet of Silver, wherein were engraven these words:
Mahomet the messanger of God: namely to the Emperor of Constatinople, to the
King of Persia, the King of Egypt and to other Princes. Afterward he created
sour Tribunes or chief Capitaynes in wars commonly called Admyralles,
which had every one under them many Peticapitaines and Centurions: and these
four he would commonly use to call the sharp Swords of God, and them he
commanded to go into the four parts of the world, every one by him self
a several way, and to kill all such as repugned his Law. There names were,
Ebubezer, Omar, Ozmen and Ali the Son of his uncle Salutelib, unto whom he
also joined in marriage Fatema, his daughter in Law by his first wife.

Of these four, Ebubezer, called of some Vbequar and of some other Buback or
Eubocar, father in Law to Mahomet took his voyage to Palestina, and there
laid Siege to a certain town called Muchea, the Captain whereof was one
Theodorus Begarius who had the rule of the town in the behalf and name of
Caesar. Who gathering together his power, suddenly set upon the Saracens with
such valiant courage and force, that many of them being slain, the residue
like tall fellows ran away. At which time, (...) third Ides of March,
Mahomet dyed, in the year of our salvation.637. when he had reigned ten
years, in the house of Aissa his wife, in the City Medina, and in the very
same bed wherein he was wont to sleep and take his rest. His body without
any Princely furniture or ceremonial solemnity, was shrined and lapped in a
white Sheet three times double, and so being chested in an iron coffin, was
after a homely sort buried: where afterward his kinsfolks and Allies edified
a sumptuous and magnificall Temple of brick work, and arched the same with a
vault so pargetted with Lodestones (whose nature is to draw iron unto it) that
the iron Coffyn wherein Mahomet his body was enclosed, was drawn up, even unto
the top of the Church and there hangs. For which cause that place is yet
with great devotion and Pilgrimage worshipped of all the East. They say that
while he was banished his Country, going once on Pylgrimage into Mauritania
Tingintana, he crossed the Seas over into Spain. But when he vndestoode that
Bishop Isidore laid wait to have caught him, he immediately shifted thence and
conveyed himself away. Upon his death bed, he appointed Ali his son in law
to be his Successor and the Caliph (that is to say the chief Prelate) of
his Sect and unto him together with his daughter, he committed the whole
charge of his body. But Eubocar his father in law stopped them a tide, in that
matter, alleging that for as much as Mahomet deceassed in his house, and by
his only means had stepped up to such credit, wealth, estimation and
government, as being bolstered, mainteyned and preferred by his countenance and
freendship, none other by good reason was fitter to succeed then he that had
been his chief supporter. Against whom Ali durst not once open his mouth to
reply, because Eubocar himself was a ^an of great power and also his kinsmen
Omar and Ozmen took part with him, which were men valiant and factious,
whose words would be heard and whose commandments before his, would be
obeyed. Who forasmuch as by good right they judged the kingdom to appertain
unto them, being Coadiutours to Mahomet in the exployte of all his affairs,
had leifer have Eubocar succeed, being old and their nere Kinsman then Ali
being young and in his lusty years, who might perchance reign so long, that
no hope ever to enjoy the Kingdom by the order and course of nature should be
left to them, and also for that he was nothing of kin unto any of them.
Wherefore Eubocar was made high Bisshoppe of Mahomet his Sect: who immediately
after his creation, departinge out of his own Territories with a great Army,
discomfited the Roman Garrisons, and retourning into Arabie with victory,
dyed, not without some suspicion of poison, when he had reigned not fullye
three years, and without any princely funeralles buried near to Mahomet.
After him succeeded Homar, who (as we before showed) was his Kinsman. Hesubdued
Bosra the chief city of all Arabie with many mo, and conquered all the country
as far as Gabata. At which success of the Saracens, the Emperor Heraclius
greatly storming sent his Brother Theodorus with a great army against them. Who
encountering in a bloody battle with Homar, was overcome and fledto Emessa.
Heraclius hearing tidings of this heavy chance, furnished out Baanes with a
greater power against them, who encamped himself nere Emessa. Where the
Saracens settinge upon him with great force and violence, were by him
vanquished, insomuch that they were feign to trudge into the borders of
Damasco, and lodging their camp by the bank side of the river Bardanes made
such outrageous roades and incursions into the Countraye adioynynge, that no
man was hable to repress their furye nor withstand their invasion. Wherefore
Heraclius mistrustinge any good success in the pursuit of further wars, and
having great diffidence in his own power, fearing also his own life and
safety if he should any longer stay within that Province and Country (for
he was at that time in Jerusalem, out of which, since the League and
composition made with Persia he had not departed) took away with him all the
precious Shrines and snmptuous Ornaments of the Temple of Jerusalem, least
the barbarous Enemies should despoyle them, and returned again to
Constantinople.

The next year, the Saracenes laid siege to the City Damasco, wherewith
Baanes (who defended the City with the said Emperors Garrisons) being greatly
moved, desired Theodorus Sacellarius (Lieutenaunt for the Emperors Majesty in
Assyria) to come to aid and assist him. Which he making have to do, was by
the way surprised by the Saracenes and discomfited.

The Soldiers under Baanes, not willing to serve under a Captain of small
credit and countenance, but rather desirous to have a Governor of most high
power and aucthorytie, saluted him their Emperor. But they which came with
Sacellarius and escaped the hands of the Saracenes in their last bickeringe,
willing to keep their true allegiaunce to Heraclius, departed thence, and
would not in any wise consent to the deprivation and deposing of their lawful
Prince and Emperor. The number of Baanes his Soldiers was 4000. And
Sacellarius had almost as many.

The Saracenes having intelligence of this variance and division among the
Roman Soldiers, discamped from the place where they were lodged, and set
upon them. The bickering was sore on both sides for a while, but (the Wind
blowyng full in the faces of the Roman Host which in that dry and sandye
Country raised up the dust) they neither could see their Enemies, nor skantly
fetch their breath. Which oportunytie the Saracenes not neglectinge, but
takeyng the same to their most advantage and commodity, put the Emperials to
flight, in which chase, they fleeinge through thick and thin by dangerous
ways and sleep places did almost all perish and were drowned in the River
Ermeta.

Which luckie victory so puffed up the haultie minds of the proud Saracenes
that they advanced their Army against Damasco, Damasens won by Saracenes
and winning that City, subdued and brought al Phoenicia under their
subjection. Then they made preparation to go into Egipte, which hearing the
Romans, who were Lords and possessours of that Province, appointed Cyrus
Bishop of Alexandria to be Chieuetayne: who sendyng a solemn Ambassade to
the Saracenes for peace, obtained it upon condition that he should pay unto
them yearly a Tribute of.200000. Crounes. And so for the space of three years
they were quiet and received no kind of molestation at their hands.

But the Emperor Heraclius understanding this gear and thinkyng this
composition greatly sounded to his dishonor, sent for Cyrus home again to
Constantinople, and in his steed made Emanuel an Armenian, ruler over EGYPT,
who flatlye and playnelye denied the payment of any money, before by Cyrus
promised to the Saracenes.

Wherefore in great displeasure they invaded Egypt with a buyge power, and
Emanuel with a small compaignie for his sauetie went to Alexandria. But
Heraclius to late now, and to his cost being taught, that promise and faith
ought to be kept and performed even to the Enemies, when he well saw that
he had not strength enough, to match in battle against such mighty foes,
sent Cyrus again to the (...) common supplications should be made during the
whole month of September, and after the same ended, the whole volume of
Mahomet his law should be openly read to the people.

He was tall of stature, broune colored, balde headed, thin bearded and the
same some what enclining to whitenes, and was buried near to Mahomet. But
before he dyed, feeling himself so sore wounded that he despaired of
recovery, he appointed for his Successor Ozmen: who also had been a great
furtherer and favorer to Mahomet in all matters, and had twyse been his Son
in Law. For he married his two daughters, which both deceassed without
children, in the life time of Mahomet, which dignity he chiefly attained
through gifts and briberie. For receiving at the hands of Homars Treasurer
all his money and goods, he frankely distributed both it and all that he
himself had left unto him by his Parents among his Soldiers.

Ozmen therefore being invested the third Bishop after Mahomet, sent the
next year following a huyge army under the conducte of Hucba into Africa,
against the Lord Gregory, chief and supreme governor of all that Province.
He being overcome in battle, and Carthage also subverted, he united all that
Province to his other Saracenicall Dominions. But fearyng to be surprised and
taken nappyng with some sudden Alarm out of Europa, if they should lie long
in Carthage, they dislodged thence and removed to Tunice, a City standing
within the Baye of Golet, and there rousting themselves for a season, greatly
enlarged the same.

But afterward receiving a commandment from Ozmen that they should not
dwell in any Port town or other places upon the Sea Coaste, (because he had
taken such agreement and order with the Emperor, they departed six and
thirty miles from the Sea and about a hundredth from Tunice where they builded
themselves a City called Cairoan.

After this, in the third year of this man's raygne, Muauias (who was we
showed before was Lieutenant of Egypt) with a Navy of a thousand and seven
hundredth (or as some say) with seven hundredth Ships only, arrived in
Cypres, and taking by force the noble City Constantia, spoiled the whole
Islande. But being certefyed that Carcozir one of the Emperor Constans his
Capitaynes, was coming against him with a great fleet, for fear of further
harm, he departed thence and planted his Siege before another City in the
same Islande named Aradum, where he nothing prevailed. Seeing therefore his
purpose to quayle, he brought back his Hoaste to Winter in Damasco.

In the mean while Ozmen caused the odd papers and Schedules of Mahomet
(before by Homars procurement collected together) to be brought into a better
order and to be divided into Chapters, making of them a Book which is called
the Alcorane, wherein all the opinions and Institutions of Mahomettes Sect are
contained and at large specifyed.

The next Spring after, Muauias with a greater Navy then before, arrived in
Cypres, and assaulted the City of Aradum, which at length after many battryes
he wanne: and permitting the Inhabitants to go whither they would without
hurt or bodily harm, he rased the City to the ground and laid all the
Islande waste and left it dispeopled. At the same time also, an other army of
Saracens under the conducte of Busurre, invaded Isauria and spoiled the whole
Country with fire and sword, and returned home from thence with five
thousand Prisoners.

After these so many overthrows and miserable discomfitures received,
Constance Caesar desired a truce for.ij. years of Muauias: which being not
obtained, while Muauias prepared a great Nauye at Tripolis a City of Syria, to
invade the Provinces and Territories belonging to the Roman Empire, his
purpose by the worthynesse and valiant demeanure of two Brothers was for a
little while frustrate. A valaunt enterprise.
Who breaking open the prisons, wherein a great number of Christians were, set
them al at lybertye: insomuch that they suddenly giving an onset on the
Saracens, killed a marvelous number of them, and putting the rest to flight,
with victory ran to their ships, and taking so many of them as would serve
to transport them, they set the rest on fire, and came save into Thracia.

But Muauias nothing dismayed with this mischance and overthrow, A lamentable
slaughter.
prepared a greater na^y, and furnished the same with all habilimentes and
Municions necessary, with whom he landed at Phoenice a Haven of Lycia, where
Constance with his Navy lay: and giving the charge upon him, made such a
slaughter of the Romans, that the Sea was red with the blood of them that were
slain. Constance disguising himself in the habit and apparel of a poor
man, fled in a Small ship with a few others in his company to Constantinople:
Which victory set Muauias in such a hoygh and conceit, that he thought nothing
invincible, or able to withstand him. Where upon he took Rhodes, and pulled
down the huge Image of the Sun called Colossus Solis, which Chares was in
making (as Pliny says).xij. years, Of our english money that Sum a mounteth
to, 40000 li.
and the charges thereof drew to three hundredth Talentes. The brass of this
Image being bought by a certain Jew of Emessa, was so much as nine hundred Camels
could carry

The Saracenes carried away thence not only this Image which was in height.70.
Cubits: but innumerable others. For Pliny writes that in that I Will there were
beside this Colosse of the Sun.73 thousand Statues or Images, and a hundredth
less Colosses. Having spoiled Rhodes, they cut their course alonge by the Sea
Agaeum, and plagued the Cyclades with like calamity. At this time also laid
General of an other army of Saracenes, entered into the borders of Armenia, and
wasted al, far and near till he came to Mount Caucasus.

And Muauias retourning from Rhodes, furnished a Nauye with all things
necessary to invade Sicile, which wasted and ruynated the Country with Sword
and fire without mercy, till Olimpius the Exarche of Italy (for so was he that
had the governance over Italy at yt time for the Emperor of Constantinople
called) encountringe with them in a bloudye Conflicte, with much effusion of
Christian blood discomfited and expelled them. In which battle he so eagrely
fought, and was so fore wearied that he tell sick and shortly after dyed.

Muauias himself leuying an Army by land, conducted them into Cappadocia to
besiege Coesarea the head City of that Province. But before he could atchieue
any notable exploite worthy to be remembered, hearing that Ozmen the Caliph was
dead, in hope to be his Successor, retyered with his Host back again. This
Ozmene in ye twelfth year of his Pontifical dignytie being in his own house
beset and besieged with a company of Saracenes which would have had Ali to be
Caliph, slew himself, because he would not fall into their hands. He by
chance lost the Ring of Mahomet, which all the Caliphes before him wore: and
caused an other to be made of Silver, wherein by his commandment were
engraven these words: O PERTINACES, O POENITENTES. He was white of color,
grave and courteous of visage, a long Beard and of a mean stature highlye and
dearelye beloved was he of the common people, both before and after he embraced
this Sect, and got very great wealth by Marchaundize.

Notwithstanding he was always very lyberall, yea rather magnificent and
honorable, and (as we have showed) disbursed and gave bribes largelye to the
Soldiers that he might obtain the Pontificate. He lived.lxxxvij. years and
was buried in the night without any Funeral pomp because he slew himself.

Therefore after his death there arose great contention among the Saracenes,
about the election of a new Bishop. Some would have Ali to succeed him,
some Muamad son to Ozmen, and some Muauias. But Ali raised wars against
Muamad, and prevailed against him, so that he was installed and made Bishop
by all men's consent: saving only Muauias. Who reposinge great trust and
confidence in the Aegiptian and Assyrian Soldiers, (whose prowess and
magnanymytie he had sufficientlye tried aforetime in so many Battayles) made
sharp wars against him, colourablye pretendynge that he took the same in
hand only to revenge the death of Ozmen.

When both the Armies were come to the River Euphrates, Muauias having more
skyll in warlyke pollices, and also having old beaten Soldiers under him,
so fortyfied and entrenched his Camp near to the River side, and the City
Babylon, that neither could he be enforced by his aduersarye to fight unless
he would himself, and also his Army should not be destitute of water,
(whereof in that Region there is great scarsitye) nor yet be unprovided of
victayles, and moreover needed not to fear any Alarmes behind at their
backs. Whereas in the mean while Ali his Army, was extremely pinched for
lack of water. And so for the space of eleven Months keeping his Soldiers
within the Trenches of his Camp, he weryed his Enemy and lyngered the time
only now and then with Skirmishes, till at length by the intercession of
certain Priests and others skillful in the Law of Mahomet, order was taken
between them, that the whole cause should be decided by the judgment and
awarde of two old men.

On Ali his side was chosen Alascates, and for Muauias part Alascius. These
two coming to a Town called Algendel, to sit upon this weighty matter of
both their tytles, the one thought it necessary that Ali should be disgraded
and deposed from his pontifical dignity, and the other stiflye held opinion
that he was a man most worthy for the office. Thus pleading to and froe,
neither absolutely determyninge nor fully concludinge any atonement, Ali and
Muauias returned again either of them to his own Camp. And never ceased
with often Skirmishing to molest and kill one an other, spoylynge and wasting
one an others Countries till at length Ali in a certain Temple near Cufa a
City of Arabie was by the insidious driftes and Ambushes of Muauias slain,
and in the same buried, for which cause the place at this day is called
Massadale which is as much to say, as the house of Ali. In his Ringe he had
this inscription: Cord syncero Deum Dominum veneror. He was short and low
of Stature, his Bearde was side and long, his Arms and Legs full of hair,
and in his going never lyfted up his Eyes.

After Ali was dead, the Citizens of Cufa and Aratha created Alhaccem (his
eldest Son by his wife Fatema, the Daughter of Mahomet) Bysshope: a man in
all poynctes of bodily feacture and comelye shape, resembling his Graundfather
Mahomet. He with an army, marched against Muauias, but when both the Hosts
were ordered in battle araie ready to give the onset, and the voward of the
one standing full against the front of the other, whether it were because he
feared the doubtful hazard of battle or else (as some do write) that he was
overcome with the goodness and integrite of nature, unwilling that so great
effusion of blood and destruction of men should be made for his sake, he
voluntarily went and submitted himself to Muauias, acknowledging him to be
his Superior. Being thus reconciled one to the other, they went both together
to Cufa, and there finding great store of money and treasure, they departed
thence to Ietrib, where Muauias with his own hands crowned Alhaccem with the
royal Diadem and called him King, because he well knew that he should not
live long. For within six months after his Coronation he dyed being poisoned
by the same Muauias. His Poesy engraven in his Signet was: Solus Deus potens
est. Thus Muauias having now dispatched and rid out of the way all his
adversaries, reigned alone. Having thus set his affairs in order, he invaded
the frontiers of ye Roman Empire. But Constantius sendyng unto him for peace,
had the same granted, condicionally that Constantius should pay unto him
every day ten pounds of gold, Peace dearly bought.
and a Slave with a Horse. At this time Damascus was the chief Seat and
Metropolitan City of the Saracenicall Empire. But in this their so great
success and felicity, there arose dissensions among themselves for their
religion, by reason of the variety and repugnance of Mahomettes scrowles and
Schedules. The Persians, being (as we have showed) now made Saracens, held
opinions much differing from them that followed Homars Alcorane in Syria.
Wherefore Muauias with his power speeding him into Persia, suppressed that Sect
and established his own faction, which bore all the swaie in Syria, and
appointed an order, Lusty allowa^ce, only to allure men to his Sect. Ambitious
Traitor.
that the Soldiers of his Sect should have allowance of two hundredth pence
by the day, whereas the Persians had but only thirty. Then inuading Cilicia, he
spoiled all the Country with sword and fire.

And when he was returned to Damascus, Sapor Praetor of all such places in
Persia as yet acknowledged the Roman Empire, now traitorously reuolting from
the Emperor, sent unto Muauias, one Sergius master of the horsemen, with
request, that he would aid him to the Empire of Constantinople. Who being
now come to Muauias his presence and showing the effect of his Commission for
which he was sent, behold, there came also an Ambassador from the Emperor to
Muauias, whose name was Andrew, promising unto him in Caesar's behalf large and
ample rewards, so that he would not aid nor further the proceedinges of
Sapor. Muauias hearing both their errandes and their offers, answered: that
for as much as he accounted both of them for no better then his enemies, He yt
has most money shall have most friendship.
he would aid and take part with him that would give most. And so Sergius
giving more then Andrew would, Muauias entered into a league with him. Andrew
taking his leave, in his way homewarde intercepted Sergius as he was
retourning into Persia and hanged him on a gybet: hoping and persuading
himself, that now the party to who^ the promise was made being rid out of
the way, Muauias with a safe conscience (retaining and keeping still the
rewards already to him given) might and would dodge and find cauillations
with Sapor yt he was discharged of his promise. But there was more constancy
and faithfulness in the barbarous Infidel, then the Greeks wit could conceive
or forsee. For Muauias, meaning to keep touch and promise inuiolably, sent a
band of Arabians to aid him under the conducte of Fadala, who being killed by
a fall from his horse, he appointed in his steed his Son Iazid Captain for
that expedition: by which power and army, Chalcedonia was miserably afflicted
and Armaria a City of Phrygia taken: and leauyng in it a garryson of five
thousand Saracens (because Winter approached) they returned with their Host
into Syria.

In this mean season the Emperor although Winter were now at hand and all
places covered with Snow sent Andrew with a small crew of Soldiers to expulse
the garrysons of the Saracens and to recover Armaria. The Greeques therefore
suddenly skaled the walls and brake into the City without any resistaunce,
and to revenge their many overthrows and discomfitures before time received
slew all the Saracens within, who suspecting no such thing, kept within their
houses, cowring over the fire in that extreme cold weather. After this
victory gotten by the Imperialles, Constantius being now come into Italy out
of Grecia, took his progress straight toward Rome, where he taking a
diligent view of all things, fell to the spoil, and carried away with him all
such ancient monumentes and works as were of Marble or brass, Rome spoiled.
and generally whatsoever might delyght and content the eye, and lading his
Ships therewith, sent it first unto Naples and from thence to the City
Syracuse in Sicilie. So that he took away from the City more ornaments in
seven days space, then so many barbarous Nations had done in.CClviij. years
before, for there were so many since the first inclination of the Roman
Empire. During his abode there, leadyng his life effeminately and libidinously
and looking to receive the subsidy and tribute that he had with much rigor
and cruelty exacted and assessed the Cities and Islandes of Italy to pay,
Emperor murdered.
in so much that many were spoiled not only of their goods but also of their
wives and children, he was by his own people slain and murdered. After who^
succeeded in the Empire his Son Constantine, whom the Saracens perceiving to
be a Coward and unwarlike person, privily made preparation for a navy to
invade Thracia and Greece, if any tumult or seditious uproar should fortune to
kindle in Constantinople. But because al things were there quiet, they sailed
into Sicilie, wherein the late spoils of Rome and of all Italy were laid and
hoorded up: and with sudden force took the city Syracuse which was not
defended nor kept with any garrison. And when they could not roust there in
safety by reason of the neerenes of Italy, they shipped all the ornaments
and treasure that was in Syracuse, and with incredible richesse returned into
Egypt. Albeit there be some which write that Constantine hearing of the death
and murder of his father Constanoius, sailed into Sycilie and carried the
Spoils from thence with him to Constantinople.

After this, an other populous army of Saracens entering into Africa, had
such success that they destroyed and wasted all the Country near the Sea
coasts (for a great part of the maine land and middle soil was already in
their subjection) and haryed away with them into slavery and thraldom.800000.
Prisoners. And on an other side Muauias furnished out a huige Host under the
conduct of Muamades and Caises, which subdued Lydia and Cilicia two other of
the Roman Provinces. And within a while after, to the intent he might conquer
and subiugate Constantinople, he sent another army after the other, whereof
Saeuus was General, which being joined to y^ other, marched both directly
toward ye city Constantinople and girded it about with a terrible stege.
Constantinople besseged seven years.
And for there more strength, he appointed a navy to help the^, which stopped
all the passages and places from the West promontorie of Hebdomum to Cyglobium.
With all this force they oftentimes gave terrible assaults to the city, but
their attempts were all in vain. This siege lasted from ye month of April
till September.

(...) fleet left, which then vexed Crete, under the guydaunce and conduct of
Fadall and Cadall. Through these good fortunes and prosperous successes, the
Majesty of the Roman Empire seemed eftsoon to flourish, and somewhat to
revive and recover his pristinate glory. But Muauias having thus concluded a
peace and league, which to the Christians was most pernicious (because the
Saracens being now weak and without force might have been utterly oppressed
and easly vanquished if Caesar had not more delighted in present Idleness and
quiet rest then studying for the long tranquillytie of his Common wealth,
which by no means is made more longer of continuance and safer with barbarous
nations then by perfect victory) turned his power and made his quarrel against
the Mardaites, and dispossessing them from their high descrying places in ye
Mountains which before they enjoyed, he studied and bent his mind to appease
certain controversies and Sects newly sprung up about his religion. Therefore
he called a general Counsel or Synod of his sect, unto whom by public
proclamation he commanded all the learned men of his Empire, and such as had
any writing or Schedule either of Mahomet or of any his predecessors,
Bishops before him, to come and bring the same writings with them. This
Tartarical Synod was holden and celebrated at Damasco, where (when as nothing
could be determined by reason of the contrariety of repugnaunt sentences) he
commanded six of the wisest in ye company by the common consent of them al to
be picked out, and so there were chosen Mulcine, Boari, Buor, Anoeci, Atermind
and David. These six being shut up together into one house, with all such
writings as were thither brought, he gave straight charge that they should
lay their heads together and out of these writings gather into one volume
such acts and sayings of Mahomet as should some to have any likelihod of truth.
And when they had made six volumes, ye residue of the writings be caused to be
thrown into a river, which were so many that 200. Camels were laden with the
carriage of them away. Then he apoincted by a law a grievous pain and
punishment to as many as in thought, By whom Alcoran was clouted together.
word or deed believed otherwise then in those six Alcoranes was prescribed.
Of the which six volumes, afterward proceeded and spronge up sour Sects of
Saracens: which are called Melicians; Asafians, Alambelians and Buanifians. The
Aphrycans were Melicians: the Arabians and Damascenes, Asafians: the Armenians
and Persians, Alambelians: the Alexandrians and Assyrians were Buanifians. In
Cayre the greatest City of Egypt, all these Sects (no man agaynsaying) are
used and embraced. When Muauias had finished and taken this order in his
matters at Damasco which was ye head seat of his Empire, he died and was there
buried. He was the first of the Saracen Capitaines yt with Ozmen (during Homars
reign) entered into the Roman provinces with an host, and was the first yt
enlarged and amplyfied the limits of the Saracenicall Empire as far as Aegipt
and Aphrica westward, into Mesopotamia Eastward, and into Asia northward, and
was the first yt constituted a certain seat royal at Damasco: which city for
the fertility of the soil and pleasantnes of the air far excels any
other. He used first of his race, to have Slaves and Eunuchs after a princely
state and guise to stand bare headed before him: for he was a man altogether
marcial and warlike, and in the atchiuing of his devises prudent and wise. His
color was white, his face pleasant and grave, his eyes of diverse colors,
his stature mean, his Bearde always black, for ever as it began to wax
graye, he dyed it and conserved it in his former state. He lived lxxvij.
years, and reigned twenty and four. His Signet which he carried about with
him, had in it this Posie engraven: O Deus ignosce mihi.

Of learning he was altogether ignorant, in so much that he could not write
his own name: whereas otherwise he had by nature a very profound wit.
Wherefore it is reported that Mahomet on a time, making his prayers at a banquet
in presence of many (as his custom was) said these words: O God teach Muauias
to write and to number, and defend him from all dangers. By which words, that
crafty Pseudoprophete who knew the nature of Muauias to be fierce and prompt
withal, showed and signified two things. First, that he, if he had the aid of
any learning, might greatly help and further his Sect. For they which can
write, can also read and thereby become wyser. Then because he saw him to be
of such a fierce courage that he was like to adventure and object himself to
many perilles and hazardes, he desired of God to teach him the Art of
numbering, whereby he might skanne and observe due times and tempestiuities, and
to have the skill to take the occasions that should be fittest for the
exployting of his affairs when they fell: and for the same cause he desired of
God to protect and deliver him from all dangers. But he being a man crafty
enough of himself and naturally given to policy needed not these helps.

After that Muauias was dead, immediately his son Iezid was saluted Bishop
and King, who achieved no notable act in his time worthy of remembrance.
For he was a man altogether given to sloth, idleness and riot, and moreover was
sickly and of a body nothing lusty: saving that he put many of the nobility
of Arabie to death. He loved his own Sister lividinously, and was greatly
delited in learning and Poetry, and made many verses, a most spightfull
contemner of Mahomets Law and every other Religion. During this man's reign,
Mutar whom he had made President over the Province of Persia, perceiving his
drowsy sluggishnes and desire of eas^ openly protested himself to be a
Prophet, and practiced tyranny therein: and of the line of this Mutar, the
Kings of Persia which at this day are called Sophi, are descended. Iezid his
Poesy was: DEVS EST MEVS DOMINVS. He reigned three years, and dyed at Arrane,
being of the age of forty years, when the Citizens of Cufa had called home
Hocem the Son of Ali, entending to create him Bishop: but Abdalam the Son
of Iezid in the fields of Carball near Cufa, treacherously lying in wait,
slew him, and there was he buried. In remembrance of which thing, there was at
his grave and Sepulcher afterward builded a City called Carbala, called so of
the name of the field wherein the fact was done. Hocem left twelve Sons
behind him when he dyed, that is to say, Zeinal Abadine, Zeinal Muamedes,
Baguer Muamedes, Giafar Cadeneg, Giafar Musa, Cazine Musa, Hali Muceratius,
All, Muamedes Taguin, Muamedes Halinaguin, All Haceme Asquerine, Haceme
Muamedes Mahadine: which were in diverse places buried, that is to wit, some
near to their great Graundfathers father Mahomet, some at Bagadat, and some at
Herine: but as for Muamedes Mahadine, Doting belief of Persians.
the Persians do affirm not to be yet dead, and do hold opinion, that he
shall come mounted on horseback to declare and show the law to all Nations,
and shall convert all people, and that all this shall first begin in the city
of Massadale where ye body of his grau^dfather Ali lies buried. And therefore
they have always in that city a horse ready to receive him, whom, after the
end of their prayers and orisons, they lead with Torche light to the Church:
and upon one certain day which is among them kept most festival and solemn
they bring this horse to the Temple where Ali is buried with as much pomp as
may be, beseechyng and making petition unto the same Ali, that he would as
speedily as may be, send unto them this his Nephew whom they look for. Unto
the which feast, there is resort of people from di- (...) together with the
opinion that was conceived of him and his Sect, so incensed and swelled his
ambitious mind, that he first of all others took upon him the name of a
Miralmumine, which word in the Arabian language signifies the Prince of all
believers: which name afterward our Historiographers depraved and corruptly
called Miramuline. He also builded the large and most e noble city of Marocco
near to the foot of Mount Atlas, Marocco builded.
and appointed it to be the chief Keye and Metropolytane City of all his
Kingdom: Notwithstanding many do affirm that it was built by Iosippus the
Son of Tesfine, and some say by an other. Against them Abdimelick (partlye
for that he saw him to procure no hurt nor attempt any hinderaunce to his
proceedinges) and partly because he was wrapped in heaps of troubles elsewhere
and had more yrons in the fire then he could well temper, attempted nothing. For
although he had supplanted Dadack with all his faction and adherentes and with
victory returned to Damascus, yet could he not long enjoy that victory nor
brook it quietlye, because there began such a plague and pestilenciall
mortalytie that had almost quite destroyed all the Saracenicall Nation.

Beside this plague, the people were greatly pinched with famine in all his
Countries. And the Mardaites gettyng again the possession of Mount Libanus,
enlarged their limits as far as Jerusalem: and morouer the principalytie of
Persia, usurped by Mutar, much disquieted his troubled mind. Abdimelick
weltringe in the surges of this froward Fortune, and fearing to be overwhelmed
with some greater mischaunce, sent a solemn Ambassade to Justinian then
Emperor, being of the age of sixteen years, for a confirmation of the peace
and League that Muauias struck with Constantine, and farther to request him
that the Mardaites might be dispossessed and driven out of Libanus, which
thing if the rour would grant, he promised that he would every day give unto
the Romans in the name of a Tribute, ten pounds of Gold, a Slave and a
goodly fair Horse. And moreover in consideration of the confirmation of this
peace which he so earnestly desired, Tribute of Saracenes
(to thend that Caesar might the better expulse and rid the Mardaites which
now were not above.xij. thousand in number out of Libanus) he gave and
granted unto him the one half of his yearly Tributes of Cyprus, Armenia and
Iberia. This peace being confirmed and he delivered out of the fear of the
Mardaites (a fierce and outrageous people) he sent Ciafa with a great Army
against Mutar, who under the pretext and color of Religion practiced tyranny
and extort regiment in Persia. Which expedition and voyage had very unlucky
end: for Mutar with an Host marching to meet him, vanquished him and
discomfited al his power, whereby he wanne a greater estimation and credit
then ever he had before.

Abdimelick to the intent he might from a nearer place surueigh and behold how
matters prospered in Persia, goes into Mesopotamia: where he was again with
many calamities and adverse bruntes sore crushed. For ye Emperor Justinian (ye
Sclauoys partli yielding themselves unto his mercy and partly tamed by dent of
Sword) picking out of the stoutest Gallantes in all that Nation, a crewe
of.30000. or there about, mustred and took up Soldiers apace for his
wars: and so trustinge to their valiant service, brake the League lately
made: making for the color of his quarrel, ye the money payable for his
yearly Tribute had not the Roman stamp, but was of a new Arabian coigne.
Sending therefore his Lieutenaunt Leontius with this new levied army into Asia,
subdued and brought under his subjection Iberia, Abania, Hircania and Media,
which Regions were under the Saracenes Empire.

At the same time also one Said reised sedition and rebelled against
Abdimelick: against whom Abdimelick speedyng himself with an Army, so dismayed
and terrified him, that he fell down on his Marybones and craved forgiveness.
Whom Abdimelick with dissimuling countenance pardoned and seemed to forgive:
but within awhile after he commanded him priuelie to be slain. At this same
time also there arose an other tyrantie among the Saracenes, named Abdala
Zubir, who sent his Brother Musub into Persia against Mutar: and of him Mutar
was both vanquished and slain: albeit he enjoyed not the fruit of his victory
long. For Abdimelick withal his power igoynge against him, overcame and
discomfited him and all his Host: and from thence holding on his way into
Persia, brought all that Province under his subjection. Abdalas Zubir
discouraged with the good success of his adversary, fled unto Mecca, after
whom, Abdimelick sent Cagian with a great Army to pursue and take him, who by
force winning the City Mecca, slew Zubir, and set the auntientest Idol of
that city with the Temple also on fire.

And thus, Abdimelick having recovered Persia, and dispatched out of the way
his adversaries, and being alone in possession of the Saracenicall
Sovereignty, (after he had oftentimes in vain, besought the Roman Emperor
that he would not infringe the League between them concluded,) at length bent
all his power against the Greeques which inferred war upon him against the
Laws both of God and man, and over his army he appointed for General one
Muamates. Who findinge the Greeques at Sebastonople, hanged the Tables of the
League upon a Spear point, and caused the same to be borne before him like an
Ensign. And calling upon God to revenge the breaking and violation thereof
(which were so sole^nelie made and confirmed by taking his holy name ^o
witness) he in good order of battle gave the charge upon them. Albeit first
he had corrupted the Sclauoy^ with money. Of whom as soon as the battle was
once begun neerehand xx.M. revolted from the Emperor and went to the
Saracenes: which thing so appauled the Greeques, that they were easily
overcome and put to flight, and in the chase were killed almost every mothers
son. The Emperor Justinian (for he was present himself at this conflict)
dishonorably and shamfully by flight saving himself with a few others in his
company, Christians instly plaged.
as soon as he came to Leucas, caused all the remnaunt of ye new band of
sclauonoys to be put to death and their dead carkesses to be cast into the
Sea, Whereupon, the saracenes afterward, without any damage not only recovered
their own Territories before lost, but also invaded the residue of the Roman
Provinces. Sabatius also a noble Senator, and Praetor of Armenia, understanding
of the wrecks and ouerthrows of the Romans, revolted to the Saracens and
betrayed into their hands the whole country of Armenia. Nether did they yet
cease to ouerrun the whole East, and to lead away the christians into
servitude: for y^ part also of Persia, which yet acknowledged the Roman Empire
was subdued by Cagian, and Muamates, with help of those Sclauonoy tourning to
his side, and entering into the Province of Thracia, spoiled it with Sweard and
fire pitifully: the Roman Empire being in the mean season with civil discords
and intestine hatred so disseuered and torn asunder, that no man durst set in
foot to withstand this outrage.

The Lord Leoutius having exiled Justinian into ye I Will Cherson, usurped ye
empire: and straitwaies sent a Lord of his country named John, with a navy to
inhibite and stop the violent irruption of the Aphricane saracenes, which not
content with the middle land yt was granted unto them by league for their
habitation, invaded a fresh the Country near about the Sea Coasts.

This man vanquishing the Saracenes in battle, drove them out of the Roman
Territories. But for as much as their power and wealth was dreadful and
terrible in Syria and all the East, and news brought by sundry rumors that
there was more aid coming from Abdimelik, to the aid of these Saracens in
Africa, John thinking his power unable to defend and keep the possession of
ye province, went to Constantinople to fetch more aid from Leontius, leaving
his host behind him in Africa. But while these things were to slowly
purueighed and prepared by Leontius, Abdimelik understanding ye state of his
subjects in Africa, and sore moved with the late loss by them there
sustained, furnished out a great Navy to recover the Province again. With
who^ the Roman fleet (thinking themselves not hable to make their part good)
departed thence, into Crete. Where ye Chieuetaines and Princes consulting
together, thought it much sou^ded to their shame and dishonor to return home,
having thus lost Africa and left the same open to their enemies: and partly
moved with displeasure toward the Emperor which did so dreamingly provide for
the furniture and supply of warlicke affairs, egged the Mariners to reuolte,
and to salute Absimar Emperor, The Emperor shamefully abused by his own
subjects.
whom they also called Tybarius. He in all have speeding himself toward
Constantinople with an army, and finding Leontius unprovided, without any stop
wanne the City, and taking Leontius, cut of his nose and cast him into prison.
The Saracens forciblie enjoyed all Africa, and drove out all the Roman
garrisons. The most part of them that then inhabited the places of Africa
near the Sea, were of the Goths line.

This Tyberius immediately after he was enthronyzed and made Emperor, sent his
brother Heraclius with a huige army into Asia against the Saracenes. Who
inuading Syria pierced into the country as far as Samosata and wasting all the places near therabout, slew neerehand of them two hundredth thousand,
Slaughter of Saracens.
and taking there many prisoners and great booties, brought all the Country in
great fear of him. And at the same time the Princes of Armenia, in a sedition
killed all the Saracenes, which were in Armenia: and sending Ambassadors to
Absimar, received the Romans again into their Province. Muamates netteled
with these dealinges, with a great power set upon them, brought them again
under the Saracenicall obeysaunce, and burned the chi^fe Princes and leaders of
the people alive. Then he also invaded Cilicia, spoiling and ruynating it
every where piteously but he escaped not himself scotfree. For Heraclius
encountering with him, discomfited a great part of his host and took the rest
prisoners, whom he sent bound to Constantinople to the Emperor. At which time
Abdimelik dyed, in the.xxi. year of his reign. We showed before, that one
Abedramon (descended of the Mauronion stock) conveyed himself into Mauritania
in the beginning of Abdimelik his Pontificate, and was there in such
estimacion among his people and Sectaries, that all the Saracens dwelling in
that Province reverenced him as an other Caliph or rather as one greater then a
Caliph, but for as much as he entermedled not with any bellicall insurrections
and also was far of, Abdimelik did not persecute him so as he did others. But
yet notwithstanding his name was great in Arabia. He dying, left a son behind
him, named Vlite, who succeeded Abdimelik in the Pontificate, and was called
the Muralmumine, in the year after the incarnation of Christ.708. During whose
reign Armenia was once again brought under the Roman subjection, and the
Saracens thence expulsed. The Arabians making an irruption into ye Roman
Provinces, took by force ye city Mista with many Castles and fortified towns
and with great booties and prays returned home. Then again under the conduct
of Abatius they invaded Galatia and sacked it miserably: and the Emperor
Justinian being again restored to the Empire by Trebellius king of Bulgaria,
the Saracens taking occasion by reason of these new tumultes and commotions,
issued out of Aegipt with a greater preparation and power the^ they did before,
and debellad all Lybia to the Ocean Sea. I call it now Lybia, because I have
already showed yt Africa was before by the^ taken, which is a part of Lybia:
to the end you may understand yt I do not speak of a part only, which was
already conquered, but of ye whole region. For whereas Lybia or ye whole
country of Africa being almost on every side compassed about with water like
an Island, is on ye North environed with our Sea, on the West and South with
the Atlantique Ocean, on ye East with the East, red and Arabian Sea, and is
joined to Asia by a little narow part of dry land lying between the uttermost
end of the. Arabia^ Gulf and our Sea: yet Egypt (which Province extends from
the Cataractes and fludgates of the river Nilus to the mouth of the same)
together with Aethiopia (which lies above it) of many old writers, yea of late
Authors also, is not reckened into Africa. And as ye river Nilus parts the
East part of this half Isle, that is to wit, Egypt and Aethiopia, where the
large and mighty dominions of Presbiter John lie: so ye river Nigir, springing
(as many write) from the same fountain, and having (as the other has his
course from the South into the North) so this from the East into the Weast, and
falling into the Athlantique Ocean, parts and separateth the most wealthy
Kingdoms of the Nigrites from it, So that, the Lybia which we here mean, is
contained within the bounds of Nilus and Nigir the Athlantique Ocean and our
Sea. All which as far as it stretches from the Weast into the East, the
buyge Mount Athlas cutteth and seuereth a sunder: being at this day divided
into three parts, Barbaria, Numidia and Lybia. Lybia which in the Arabian
tongue is called Sarra, that is to say Desert, is bound on the Southe with the
kingdoms of the Nigrites, on the North with ye mount Athlas, on the East with
the river Nilus and on the west with the Ocea^. Numidia called in ye Arabia^
tongue Biledulgerid, (which is to say, a Country wherein grows great store
of dates) stretching from the borders of Egypt to the Ocea^, lies South from
the mou^tain Athlas. Barbary from the East to ye West (contained within ye
same limittes and borders) comprehe^deth all yt which lies between Athlas and
our Sea. And this is also divided into four Provinces: Mauritania Tingintana,
which contains the Kingdoms of Marrocco and Feze: Caesariensis, wherein is ye
king dome of Telensine: and ye.iii. part both in thold time and now is properly
called Africa, wherein in ancient time ye Carthaginians flourished, containing
now at this day ye City Africa, Tunice and Tripolis. After this follows
Cirenes, which is comprehended in ye kingdom of Bugia. At the first inuasio^
and irruptio^ made into this Province during the reign of Ozmen, ye Saracens
swarming out of Egypt wan Cyrenaica and Africa. But making peace afterward
with ye Emperor, they were commanded to depart from all the places near to
the Sea coasts, and so they removed further into the Confines of Numidia and
Lybia, and in the reign of Muauias they again entering into ye Territories of
ye Carthaginians, subdued the country of Africa, all about the Sea coasts.
And now auauncing forward their Standards they invaded both ye Mauritaines,
and appointed for ye limits of their Empire the Ocea^ and the river Nigir.
Over which province Vlite the^ chief Bishop of the Mahumetane sect, made Mucas
high deputee, and appointed unto him a strong power. But yet ye part of
Tingintana that lies toward the straictes of Marrocke was under the rule of
Roderike Visigotte king of Spain. For the Goths expulsing all the Roman
garrisons were lords of the whole country of spain, from 300. years almost
passed, acknowledgyng for their King none but this Rodericke: who was not only
King of both the Spaynes, the nearer and further, but also possessed all that
lay toward the straict Sea in Mauritania Tingintana. The Straictes in Africa,
has three Promontories, making two Bays or Elbowes into the landwarde: and in
Spain as many Promontories with so many bosoms or Elbowes of the Sea. The
famous and noble Cities by the Sea, in Spain, were Carteia situate by the
Promontorie Calpe, which afterward was called Tarifa: in Aphrica, Tingis, of
whom Mauritania Tingintana has his name, standing by the Promontorie Abyle:
and Cepta, called of Ptolomaeus, Essilissa.

The Romans divided all Spain into two Provinces, and sent into them two
Proconsulles, or Propretors: whereof the one governed the nearer and the other
the further. But these parts were not always of one greatness: for when as
they had not yet the whole possession of all Spain, the hither Spain was
contained within the river Iberus and the Pyrenee Mountains: and all beyond
Iberus was of the further Spain, which belonged to the Carthaginians. But
after that they had driven out the Punique Garrysons out of every quarter of
the Countraie, and had got the possession of all Spain, they called that which
on the East and south is environed almost Ilandwise wtour Sea, on the West with
the Athlantique Ocean, on ye North with the Sea Cantabricum and the Pyrenee
Mountains (exceptinge Lusitania and Betica) by the name of the nearer Spain:
and those parts which be divided by the river Anas and compassed about with the
Ocean as far as to ye Asturians, they called ye further Spain, calling yt
which marches upon ye straicts, Betica, which now contains Vandalusia and
the Kingdom of Granado, and ye which extends from ye river Anas to the river
Duria they called Lusitanie and all the hither part, Tarraconensis. Which
tripartite division Geographers in their descriptions have observed. Over these
three Provinces and also over the Asturians and Cantabrians which be on this
side the Pyrenees, by the North ocean, and also over the Province called
Narbonensis so far as the River of Rhone, which was then called Gallia
Gottica, this Roderike Visigot was (as we have said king and governor at that
time, when the Saracenes extended the limits of their Dominyon in Aphrica to
the ocean, which was in the year of our Lord.712.

This Rodericke made Iuliane Earl of Cepta (descended of the blood of
Visigottes, a man of great power and wealth in Spain and chief ruler over a
certain Island now called Viridis, lying in the narow Sea, and many other
places as well in Spain as in Tingintana) his high Deputy and warden in Betica
and all other such places as were under his rule in Tingintana. Unto him he
committed the whole charge, to defend Spain on that side from the invasions of
the Saracenes, Beautye of a Woman. causes much mischief.
and to keep the narow Seas. This Iulyan had a Daughter named Caba, a
beautyfull young Lady, insomuch that for her parsonage she was no less
pernicious to Spain, then fair Helena was to the Troyanes. For Rodericke
falling in love with her, whether it were by force or by fraud (for it is
reported both ways) made a breach into her virgynitie. Which unprincely trick
she (as soon as she conveniently could) uttered and discovered unto her
Father. Who dissimuling as though he had known nothing of this injury done to
him in his Daughter, and keepyng to himself the desire of just revenge till a
time for his purpose convenient, desired leave of the King to depart the
Courtand to go to Cepta, because being there (as he said) he could much better
defeat the Saracens intended enterprises. Which request obtained, he trussed up
al his furniture of household and with his wife went to Cepta. When he was come
thither, fayning an excuse yt his wife was sore sick, he desired ye king to
give Caba, his daughter leave to come home and see her languishing mother, who
was never like to see her any more. For Caba with other Princes and Lords
daughters (as the manner was) at that time waited in the Court. Having by this
means received home his Daughter, he went to Mucas who was (as before we
showed) the head ruler of all Lybya under Vlite, and unto him he opened from
point to point the whole cause of his coming away from the Court, and
promysing to make him Lord of all Spain if he would give the adventure and
take the enterprise in hand. Mucas showed the whole matter unto Vlite, because
he durst not deal in such a waightye case, without his will and pleasure
first known. Of whom he received this answer, that the matter propounded was
of great importance and difficulty, and that it were not best in such a
doubtful matter to give rash credit to a subtyle person, and one altogether
estraunged from their Religion. Notwithstanding, to try the trust and
faithfulness of the Earl, he was resolved, that the matter might be best
assayed, by delivering unto him a small crewe of Soldiers at the first: and
if he sped well and had good success at the beginning, afterward more aid and
greater power might be sent. Mucas although he were throughlye persuaded by the
Earls talk and motion, that althings would sort to good effect, yet durst he
not pass nor go beyond the contents of his Commission, prescribed by vlite.
Wherefore he delivered unto Iulyan, one of his Capitaynes named Tarife
Auenzarca with a hundred Horsemen and 400. footeme^. Who were all transported in
four Ships, into a little I Will lyinge in that Elbow of Sea that the Promontorie
Calpe makes, which I Will was afterward of this Captain Tarife, called Gelriza
Tarif. Unto this place Iulyan called and by gentle means allured all his
friends, and kinsfolks, recomptinge unto them from poynct to point the
commodities and plesures which by his labor, industry and perilles the King
had received, for recompense whereof, he forgot not to tell them the Kings
ingratitude, and the spightfull dishonor done unto his house by the rauishing
and deflowryng of his Daughter, telling them further, that the King did
unjustly vsurp that kingdom, which by rightful succession of inheritance
belonged to the Sons of Vitiza. For which causes he desired their helping
hands in this so good and just quarrel to assiste him, tellyng them that the
next year he would come with a convenient army to perform as much as he then
spoke. He so much persuaded them with these and such like words, that they
promised him when time should serve their best service and furtheraunce: and
there upon returned home every man to his own house. Julian because he would
make a beginning of his purposed war, invaded the I Will Gades liing in the
utter part of the ocean, near to the narrow sea, which I Will was afterward
named Alzira Dalfrada: which with Sword and fire he spoiled, caryinge the
Inhabitants away with him Prisoners, and after that showed the like courtesy
to Lusitania and Betica, and being laden with abundance of spoils and
booties returned into Aphrica.

Mucas seeing this good success and thinkyng it a beginning good enough,
delivered unto him twelve thowsande Saracenes beside them before, under the
conducte of the same Tarife. With whom he arrived at the foot of the
Promontorie Calpe, which Mountain was thereof afterward called Gabel Traife,
which is as much to say as the Mount of Traif, and now it is called Gibel, and
setting his Soldiers on land, took by force the city Carceia, which
afterward even till our time was called Tarifa.

The rumor of this great co^motion being spread throughout all Spain, the
kinsfolks of Earl Julian gathering together all the power that they were
able, and feigning that they went to repulse this Saracenicall inuasio^, went
straight ways thither and joined themselves with him. And so all their powers
being linked in one, they wasted and haryed all the coast about the River Betis
now named Guadolouir, and commonly called Andalusia or of the Vandales,
Vandalusia. Roderike in the mean season, with as much speed as he could,
gathered a very great Army, and appointing his Cosen German Ignicus to be
Chieuetaine thereof, sent him against his enemies. Who making many conflictes
and skirmishes with them was at length with all his Army discomfited and
overthrown. The Saracens having made great pyllage and desolation in the
Country, and laden with foyson of many booties, and carrying a great multitude
of Prisoners with them returned into Africa. At which time, Vlite being in
Asia, and making preparation to war with Constantinople, dyed, after whom
Zulciminie the Son of Abdimelik was made high Bishop, during whose reign the
Saracens the second time besieged Constantinople. For immediately after his
creation, he sent Malsana with an army by land, and Aumar with an other by
Sea against Constantinople, and he himself with a great power followed after.
But this his strong and terrible purpose was for a while defeated by Leo the
Praetor of Armenia: who^ they (seeking means to entrap and deceive) were
themselves by him entrapped and deceived: for he stopping the passages and
convenient places through which they must needs go, hindered their reckening.

Whilst these things were in doing, Mucas coming out of Africa, to
congratulate and do his duty to Zulciminie the new Bishop, declares unto
him the state of their affairs in Spain: whereupon he being marvelous
desirous to enlarge the limittes of his Empire, gave him in commandment, to
send Tarife again into that Province with a mightier army then any he had
before. Mucas therefore retourning into Africa, the next year following
transfreted with a buige army into Spain, keeping with him as a pledge or
hostage, Richila Count of Tingis, and cosen to Julian, whom he half
mistrusted. Which army being once landed on the next coast, Roderike speedely
gathered the powers of the Provinces near about. And so with ye aid of ye
people of Gottalonia (now called Catalonia and in tholde time Lacetani) the
inhabitauntes of Iberia now called Tarracon or Aragon:) the Cantabrians being
at this day in the Kingdom of Navarre: and the people of Gallia Gottica,
wherein are the Cities Tolosa and Nimes unto the River Rhone, he suddenly and
unlooked for, encountered with them at the River Bedalaces which of tholde
writers was called Betis, near to a town called xerez. The Saracenes at that
time had encamped them selves on that side of the River where Andalusia
stands: and the King with his battle on the other side, wherein the
Kingdom of Castile is. For the River Betis springing out of mount Ortospeda in
the borders of Aragon, and runnyng into the Ocean next to the Streightes,
divides Andalusia and the Kingdom of Granado from Castile: and runs
through the myddle of Betica, which is bounded with the river Anas, sprynging
out of the same Mountain. Lusitanie lying West from Tarracon, by a straight
course reaches from the mouth or entrance of Anas forth right to the river
Duria: and the river Pisguerra seperateth the Castulonians from the Asturians.
In this place, the.iij. of September being Sunday, in the year after the
incarnation. 714. he advanced his Standerd and committed his fortune good or
bad, to the hazard of battle. The fight was most fierce and deadly for the
passage of the River, whilst the one part would needs pass over, and the
other would not suffer them. This continued a good while in such equal match,
that hard it was to discern to whether party the victory would incline:
which was much to be merueiled at, considering how sore Spain had for two
years last before, been afflicted with dearth of victualles and the
Pestilential plague. Whereby the soldiers had not the strength and courage
that they had before, and the men, who in a hundredth and fifty years space
had not been trained up in any wars, cockered and effeminated with ease, had
lost in a manner all warlike discipline and right use of handling their
weapons, and were moreover without harnysse armor or habilimentes meet for
the wars: because Vitiza, Roderike his Predecessor, a most cruel and
bloody Tyrant, had caused all weapons to be taken away from the people and to
be broken. A most blodie battle continuing a whole week.
This battle continued not only that day, but during all the whole week
till the Sundaie following, there were daily sharp and terrible conflictes. And
on the eight day which was the.xi. of September the two Sons of King Vitiza
having the night before indented and conspired with Tarife, (who promised them
their fathers Kingdom,) drew back and privily conueighed themselves with
their retinue out of the battle, by means whereof Mucas with little a do
brought al his army over the River, and then was the Goths array quickly
broken and they themselves vanquished. Roderike the first day of the battle,
observing the ancient guise of his country, How kings in those days came
into ye field, with what apparel, and for what cause.
came into the field, apparailled in a gown of beaten Gold, having also on
his head a Crown of gold and golden Shoes, and all his other apparaile set with
rich pearls and precious stones, ryding in a horselitter of Iuorie drawn by
two goodly horses. Which order the Goths used always in battles for this
consideration, ye the Soldiers well knowing their king could not escape away
by flight from them, should be assured that there was none other way, but either
to die together in that place or else to win the victory. For it had been a
thing most shameful and reproachful to forsake their Prince and anointed
Sovereign. Which custom and manner, many free confederate cities of Italy
following, trimmed and adorned for the wars, a certain Chair of estate,
called Carocio) wherein were set the Penons and Ensigns of all the
confederates. This Chair in battle was drawn by many Oxen, whereby the whole
host was given to understand, ye they could not with any honesty fly, by
reason of the slow pace and vnweldinesse of those heavy Beasts. In this sort
was king Roderike pompously carried in his horselitter during the battles
foughten in seven days space. But on the eight day, seeing things brought to
the last pushe and to stand upon six and seven, of or on, he him self with
others determined to fight it out valiantly: and therefore mounted upon an
excellent courageous courser, called Orell, and animating his Soldiers with a
most vehement and pithie Oration boldly gave the charge upon his enemies. But
when he saw the front of his battle to shrink, he departed aside unto a
little hill hard by and stripped himself out of all his royal Robes: and from
thence beholding the merciless slaughter of his men on every side, moved with
repentance, because he knew himself to be the cause and occasioner of all this
mishap, changed himself into another weed and fled into a deserte of
Lusitanie, where he found a certain holy man, living solitary, with whom he
passed the rest of his life.

Now whereas it is reported and written that he followed a Star or a messanger
of God which conducted and guided him in his way: it may be so, and the same
has also happened to others. But it may as well also be understood of a
certain secret Star moving and directing his will.

And whereas they say he was put by that holy man into a Cave or hoale and a
Serpent with him that had two heads, which in two days space gnawed all the
flesh of his body from the bones this being simply taken and understood,
has no likelihood of any truth. For what sanctity, what Religyon, or what
piety, commands to kill a penitent person, and one that seeks comfort of
his afflicted mind by amendent of life, with such horrible torments and
strange punishment? Wherefore I would rather think it to be spoken
mysticallye, and that the Serpent with two heads signifies his sinful and
gylty conscience, which tormenteth and disquieteth those that have perpetrated
any heinous offense, as though it were the Furies of hell, as the Poets have
feygned of Orestes and others. There therefore in that place he died, and
certain years after, his Sepulcher or Tomb was found at Viseo in Portugal
with this Epitaph or superscription upon it.

HEre lies the Corpse of Roderick, late King
Of Goths, accursed and fraught with fury dire*
Whose sensual reign brought dule and deadly sting
To Spanish soil: because of Iulians ire,
Which would not be appeasde till he had wrought
The Toil of strife, and brought all things to naught.
All mad with rage and spightfull rancours mood
By deuilish fate incensde, Gods heastes despisde,
His faith renounced, religion eke withstoode,
A foe to frindes, his Countries wrack deuisde:
Unto his Lord an arrant traytrous Elfe,
A murthrous wight, and cruel toward himself.
Embrued with guylt, for sheading Christen blood
Which by his driftes were brought to fatal end,
An Homycide, of mangling Butchers brood
Did ruin to his native soil pretend.
His memory shall dye with men for aye,
His name shall rotte, as does his Corpse in clay.
In this battle all the men of Arms and Gentlemen of the Goths were slain
and the whole power of Spain utterly overthrown. Of the Gothicall Army there
slain, the number was infinite, but of the Saracenes only twenty thousand:
which happened because the factious rout of Julian which had all the Armor and
defense of the Realm of Spain took part with them. And the multitude of
them was very great: but they which fought on the Kings side were in a manner
all unarmed and naked men. A few escaping by flight ran whither fortune lead
them and saved themselves. They which were coming out of foreign provinces to
aid the King, hearing of this lamentable discomfiture, joined sides with them
that were fled to Egicia, and embattayling themselves against the Saracenes
which followed the chase, and pursued the poor vanquished fleers, set upon
them with a fierce recharge: fighting (like eigre Lions robbed and bereft of
their whelps) and manfully discomfited the vauntgard of their Enemies Army.
But being not hable to sustain the force of Iulians battle which were
strong men and well armed, they were feign to retire into the City. Tarife
encampinge himself there, where now at this day the Well of Tarif is, and
thence geeuing assault to the City, with little a do wanne it. Which done, by
the counsel of Julian, he divided his host into many branches, assignynge
unto every part such Capitaines as he thought fittest: ymagining yea not
doubtyng but the Christians before they could take any counsel what way were
best to follow or be able to gather any more power, might be oppressed and all
at once dispercled whersoeuer they could be found. They Sons of Vitiza and
Bishop Opasius were appointed Capitaynes over them. One Host addressed
themselves toward the conquest of Malacca (now called Malega) a Port or haven
of Betica by the midland sea, which to be speedely taken, was much for their
behoof and advantage. An other marched to sack Corduba, over whom was
Chieuetaine, a certain christian having a little before renounced his
Christianity and Saracenyzed, whose name was Mageitar. And the third was
conducted by Tarife himself, which took the way to the City Mentesia,
adjoining to that part of Aquitania, which lies hard by the Pyrenees and is
called Guienne or Gascoigne. And subuertyng that City (which chose rather to
be utterly ruynated then to be come vassal under Saracenicall slavery, he
discamped to Toledo, wanne it, and after that, Gaudalagiar and Medina Almeide,
which City was so named of a pretty big Table made all of one green precious
stone like an Emeraulde, found in it. Then he took the strong city of Amaia,
wherein was kept at ye tresure for ye wars.

After this he invaded the Region called Gottici Campi, took by surrendrie the
Cities Asturica and Gigion (whereof Mugnuza a Gothian was Captain) and
subiugated Gatalonia, being aided by Mugnoces Prince of Cerdania, who also was
a Gothian borne. Wherefore the Saracenes made him Ruler of all the places
confininge to Cerdania. An other Army, having won Granado, marched to subdue
Nurtia and Horihuela, where there was a bloody battle foughten between the
Christians and the Saracenes in the plain Fields which are to this day thereof
called sangonarij: in which conflict (the Saracenes gettinge the vpperhand) the
city yielded. After this, the same host removed to Valentia, and discomfiting
ye Valentians yssuing out of the town to fight when they saw the city
strongly fortefied and rampiered with walls and diches they took it by
surrendrie, with this condition, that the Christians should be permitted to
have in it one Temple to inhabit, which was Saint Basil his College, now at
this day called Saint Barptolomewes. All the rest they dedicated to that
Idolatrous verlet, their Prophet Mahomet, saving only that Temple, which
stood in the Fig market, where holy Vincent was martyred, which was
afterward an Hospital of christians. The city was pestered and peopled with
Moors, albeit the Jews were suffered to remain still in it, and a few
christians, which dwelt in S. Basilles college. Which ye inhabitants of
Puigum, a town of Enesa, hearing, where there was an other college of S.
Basil, left their homes and fled, burying their great Bell and a certain
Marble Image in yt church in hope one day of a return. Whither the saracenes
sent people of their own to inhabit under the conduct of Cebola: whereof the
same town Puigum was afterward called Cebole: who also builded an other little
town of the same name. And thus Valentia, Sogorbes, Tortosa, Lerida, Barcinon
and Sarragoza with all Spain, was brought under the power and jurisdiction of
the Saracenes. But Tarracon because it long resisted and stoutlye stood at
defiance with them, they utterly subverted and rased, which was afterward new
builded by Bernhard Metropolytane of Toledo, at ye commandment of Urban ye
second of ye name pope of Rome, in ye year 1090. By this means, al spain in
ye space of.xiiij Months was subdued: All Spain conquered by Saracenes.
which was a thing easy to be done, considering yt ye people were clean
without armor, weapon, munition or Captain, and Opasius Metropolitan of
Syuile ever exhortinge them to yield, promysing unto them ye they should
quietly enjoy their religion and laws as they had before done, which
promise was not observed, nor kept saving in a few places, as at Valencia,
Siuile, and Toledo, in which they left certain temples for the Christians to
inhabit.

Whereupon yet to this day, in the chiefest Cathedral Church of the City,
the Rites and divine service among them celebrated, is Mozarabicall, that is to
say, mingled with Arabian: which was allowed and confirmed by the Bishops of
that time, according to the order and institution of Saint Leandre.

After these victories, the number of the Saracens daily increased in Spain,
in so much that the Spanyardes then changed not only their religion and
manners, but corrupted their language, and the names of their Cities, Towns,
Hills, Ryuers and all other places were likewise altered. Albeit many of them
fled into France, England, Italy and Grecia, to crave aid of other Christian
Princes. Some others planted themselves in that part of the Pyrenees that lies
out into Asturia and reaches within the Aquitanicall Ocean. And they which
remained still with the Saracens, had in every place, their Prelates and
Pastors, me^ devout and holy. But the first recovery and help of Spain,
sprang up among ye Asturians. Which Country not only remained safe and
vndemnified of that Barbarous Nation, but also was the first that stopped their
lewd invasions, and there was the ancient and native language of Spain
conserved. Which thing that it may the better be understood by what means
it happened, we must briefly describe the whole tracte and situation of the
Pyrenees. We said before that Spain was in form of a Cherronese or almost as
a Islande. environed with Sea on every side, saving only in one place. The
North part whereof, joins to France by a narowe portion of land that
lies between two Seas, and the Pyrenee Mountains lying a long from the Sun
rising in Winter, to the setting of the same in So^mer, enuiron it about like a
wall. The breadth of the Isthmos or narow trench of land lying between the two
Seas, being one distant but a little from the other is about CClxx. Miles. But
the Pyrenee mountains stretch in length a great way further. For when they
come to the angle and as it were into a Baye of the Cantabrique Ocean, which
lies on the North side of Spain, they stretch out in length a great way
into the Equinoctial West: and keeping of the Sea Cantabricum from the North
part of Spain, stretches even into the plain Ocean, that hemmeth in all the
West part of Spain. That part of these Mountains that lies toward France,
is altogether barraine and unfruitful: but that part which is next Spain, is
full of trees, and well peopled with many towns and villages. We will therefore
begin our description of them, at the Ocean, where they join in Spain to
the region called Guipuzque, but in France they border upon the confines of
the Vasconians. On the side of Spain there is Stephans vallay, above the which
are Besaca and Guciutha, towns of the Vardulians, confinyng upon the region of
Navarre and contains Cantabria and Asturia: then are there other smaller
hills lying out from the Pyrenees, within which are contained Basse and Squa,
which do make the vallayes Rocida or Ronus: on France side, near to the
confines of the Vasconians, is Iean Pedeportesburie, a strong and well
fortefied place. Near to the valley Rocida, ye arm which before we talked
of, is from them let into the Ocean, reaching and extending to the main Sea
through Gallicia or the Gallecians and the Asturians. But from the valley of
Rocida, Eastwarde, they make ye valley called Salazar, wherein stands a town
called Ociogauia: then Ronceuall wherein is Isaua: and the frontiers of the
King domes of Tarraconensis and Navarre which was once called Nagiera. Next
France are ye towns of Bierne. Now follows the hill of Camfrank: whereunto
in France is near joining the country of Peiraner and Vrdos, in Spain Villa
noua, an ancient and noble City, Iaca, Saint Christinsburie, and Iean
Pigniasburie: and in the same tract, lower is ye Mount Aragon. Hosca, and from
them, the Occetanes and Caesaraugusta now at this day called Saragoza. Out of
the Mount that lies over Saint Christines springs the River Aragon: and
because out of the mountains of Ronceuall there springs an other little
River of the same name, called the less Aragon or Subordam, therefore this is
called the greater Aragon: and the whole region lying between them, was of
them called Aragonia. There follows in the Pyrenees a hill named Gauas,
abutting on France side, upon Larount a country of the Bigorians, and on
Spaynes side, on the country of Tenia. In which Country are the towns
Salent, Saint Helens, and Biesca. Out of the hill Gauas, springs a River
named Gallecus, which having his course through the valley Tenia, falls into
Iber near to the City Saragoza. Then is there next, the Cragge of Horca, the
stiepest and roughest of them all, on which, on France side confyneth the
Country of Arne, and on that side toward Spain the same valley Tenia, then
the Cliues of Tarla, from whom springs the river Ara, which afterward
runs into the river Cinca near to the town Iuza, having on Spaines side
the valleys of Brote, and on France Voteia a valley of Guyenne. In the valley
of Brote are these towns following: Torla, Brotum, Oto, Linares, Faulum, Bresse,
Sarbise, Aierue, Laresitalla, Scartinum and Giasa. Then follows the craggie
mount of Bielsa, from which a part of the River Cinca spryngeth, and the valley
of Bio: and below, in this same very tract is the region Sobarbria: then in
the Pyrenees, the vale Gistau, out of whose Hills springs an other Branch
of the river Cinca, which having his course through Sobarbria, is augmented by
receiving into it the river Segre near to a town called Scarpe, and then
falls into Iber near Meschinentz.

The chiefest towns of fame in the valley Gistau are these: Gistaine, Senias,
Serbetum, Iean Carauelsburie, Plannium, Poma, Gistaina, Cerquetum, Lamian,
Catalauigna, Badaine. Then is there moreover in the Pyrenees the valley
Bonasia, and the long region of Ribagorge: wherein are Gabaleria, Grausium,
Benauarre, Peralt and Paniello. Then are the Hills of Castrum Leonis, under
whom is the valley Aran or Fiscalia, which has in it these towns: Biolla in
Fiscalia, Lardies, Vorastrium, Saint Iustus, Ligarre, Aretiza, Sciabierre,
Saint Olalia, Acortum, Tricase, Abese, Planiell, Saint Foelix, Sason, Silues,
Spierle, Ascase, and beneath it, is the valley named Solana. Again in the
Pyrenees, there follow Petrae Blaniae, Altalauaccae, where there is a passage
through, the Hills of Torre, and of the County Pimorent and Pallasium. Under
these, is the valley of Henui, wherein stands the City Valentia, and
Palasia: then the Clyues of Andoria, where there is a passage out of Spain,
into France, with a valley of the same name, over against which, in France is
Arachsium in Aquitanie. Hitherto the places of Navarre.

Then a long Cerdania is the Mount Bellamir, the valley Bibesia, the Mount
Liuia and the pitche of Persa. Then they enter within the Country of Rocilion,
over against the towns of Puigiualed, Caudiese, Arotonie, Galamij Fanum,
Perapertuza, Eitor and Leocata, where their precinctes and bounds end by the
Mediterranean Sea. In the end whereof, in Spain there stands Salses a Castle
impregnable, having with in it a most plentiful fountain: where in tymespaste
stood the City Gerunda or Girona, and over against it, in France is Te^plu^
Veneris now called Cap de Creux. Directly on ye other side in Gottalonia, other
hills do answer unto it, which may be called ye less Pyrenees or
Antipyrenees.

(...) throw of Rodericke, and what have the Saracenes used in the pursuit of
their victory, took his Sister with him and departed to Gigion, supposing yt
place to be surer for his securytie. But when Mugnuza duke of Gigion, contrary
to his hope and expectation had entered into league and was assistaunt to the
Saracenes in their exploytes, Pelagius dissimulyng what he inwardly thought,
and for the time bearyng two faces under one hood, remained still with the same
Duke, until Mugnuza falling sore in love with his said Sister, and deuisinge
which way to frame his plat to enjoy his desired lust, sent her Brother
Pelagius to Corduba, to consult and entreat about certain affairs with the
Saracen Princes. In whose absence, (bearyng her in hand that he would mary her)
he had the spoil of her maydenhead. Whereof Pelagius at his return being by
his Sister certefied, departed thence with her, into the higher Country til a
time fitter to bring that to pass which he purposed.

Mugnuza greatly moved with his departure, told Tarifa that Pelagius intended
somewhat against the Majesty of the Saracenicall Empire. The great dangers and
adventures of Pelagius.
Wherefore Tarifa sent one of his Captains with a band of Soldiers (if it
were possible) to apprehend Pelagius. And now the Soldiers were come to
Brette, (in which town Pelagius was then resiaunt) who being priuelie
advertised by a Christian, (one that was with them and knew all their
counsels) took his Horse, and ridinge all upon the Spur till he came to
the great river Pionia, took the water and swamme over. Which they that
pursued him, not daryng to do for dread of drownyng, he escaped their
clutches, and came with heavy cheer into the Vale of Canica. Where by the
providence of God he met with the Magistrates and Peers of many Cities of
Cantabria and Asturia, which were going to surrender and yield themselves and
their Cities to the Saracenes. And when he understood the errand and cause of
their journey, it is reported that he made unto them an oration in these words
followyng.

Truly I cannot but greatly bewail the calamity of these times: His pithye
Oration to his Countrymen.
and if it were not ungodly so to do, I would extreemly pour out heaps of
accusations against the sates and destynies, which have differred my natyuytie
till these days, thus to see such slaughter and lamentable manquellyng of my
dear Countrymen and (which is more) such despite and contempt of God and his
divine Laws. For of whom Gods honor and glory is now adays more contempned
and deryded, I cannot easelye judge: whether of yonder barbarous Helhoundes the
Saracenes, who lyuinge in the foggie mistes of diuelyshe darkness, (cast
before the eyes of their minds by that damned soul Mahomet) not knowing the
true God nor the honor due to his holy name, do profane the holy Temples.
Wherein his praise and kacred word was wont to be preached, trayning up young
Babes and Infantes whom Christ commanded to be brought unto him, with their
impious rites and diabolical relygion: and nouselyng them in the filthye
suddes of their detestable traditions: do perforce ravish and like deuilles
pollute infinite Christian Women and Virgins yt acknowledge the true and
sincere relygion of the ^mnipotent God. Oppressing so many as they may once get
into their h^ds with most horrible and unspeakable slauerye, disp^ylyng them
not only of their temperal goods, wives and Children, but also taking away
from them their faith the rock of their salvation, and finally dim the glory
of God with a patched doctrine of most Idolatrous blasphemy, bringgynge them to
everlasting perdition both of body and soul. Or else rather may I judge the
same of you, who (despayringe of the goodness and mighty power of God, whom
you know to have shed his most precious blood for your redemption, by whom
you know that eternal salvation is puchased and freely given to you and
through whose bounteous gift you have so many sure helps at your most need,
putting you in an undoubted hope of victory over your blasphemous enemies (yet
will seem thus shamefully and dastardly unasked and of your own accord to put
your necks into the halter, as though there were no more hope of help and
better fortune, as though you had no God of whom redress and aid in
adversity were to be hoped and craved, or as though you had no fortefied
towns and strong places of defense to repulse this present hostility. As
though it were not a great deal better (valiauntly fighting in Gods quarrel
under the banner of Christian faith) to change this short and transitory
life with an everlasting and glorious life, then to suffer these things before
recited. And now behold, you which sometime were hable to encounter with the
Romans being Lords and Conquerours of the whole earth you which could not be
vanquished and subdued by them that were the warlickest and stoutest men in the
world to whom Germany, Britayne, France, Spain, Grecia, yea Italy also the
Queen and maistresse of all the world, all Europa, all Africa and Asia
obeyed: you which in no wise could be brought to live under the laws and
iurisdi^tion of that very well governed Empire: you who alone remained
unconquered of the Goths, the fiercest wasters and crushers of the same
Empire: you I say (the power of all Europa being yet whole, and nothing thereof
lost but the open places of Spain only, which also myscaryed partly by
treason and partly by the foolish wilfulnes of King Roderike, whose sinistre
fate brought him to a destruction and end agreeable to his vicious life, who
not tarying for that aid which was coming hable to have scourged and
discomfited those that were the enemies of our Country unadvisedly joined
battle with his foes, and being disloyally circumuented by his own traitorous
subjects, received the reward and hyre due for such rashness and wickedness,
which wilful dealing of him being the head, must needs redound to the
general harm of all the inferior members of the common wealth) will now
wilfully enthrall and make your selves bond slaves to bear the intolerable
yoke a people of al others most vile, most abject, most dastardly and wicked.
If God for our manifold sins and offenses were so highly displeased and so
much turned away from us, that he would not admit our humble prayers and
requests (which I will never be persuaded to believe: for he is wont never to
forsake such as be unfeignedly penitent, and turn unto him with true
contrition of heart and newness of life.) Or if all the rest of the whole
world were obedient to the Saracens Laws, and that we had no sure places or
walled towns for refuge and succor left to resort unto: yet were it much
better valiauntly to die upon them then to see and suffer those things, which
perforce we should suffer at their hands. Brute Creatures and savage Beasts,
if their whelps be taken from them, most egerly and impotuously fly in the
faces of them that have taken them: whom if they may find and overtake, they
object themselves into the extremity of any peril, contemnyng the sharp
edges of naked Swords, yea death it self, for the rescue of their sely young
ones. And you which are men, to whom nature has given not only the
procreation of children and a care to bring them up, which she has given to
other Creatures as well as to you, but also has entirely committed to your
charge a special regard to their education, who ought so to instruct and
train them in the true fear and honor of Almighty God, yt they may be
enfraunchysed and made heirs of life everlasting in the Kingdom of heaven,
will now (alas the while) humble and subject your selves willingly and
wilfully unto the obeysaunce of them which ere it be long will seduce and
violently pull away your Babes and children from you and pluck the fear of
God clean out of their hearts. Where is now that ancient faith, godly zeal
and devout religion that was wont to be, when young children not yet passing
the age of.xvj. years, and holy Virgins had leifer to suffer all kind of
Martyrdom and punishment then to worship those false putatiue Gods, whom
(notwithstanding) most stout and wise nations worshipped and reverenced? Where
be they, which have adventured their lives in so many main battayles for
their liberty and freedom? Hot sournesses, glowing Plates, terrible
Rackings, sharp Swords, bloody Axes, all the sorts of tortures and pains
that could be devised, in times passed were not able to terrefie and turn
Children from the true religion and worshipping of God, to Idols and other
fantastical trumperies of Satan's invention: and now men of grown and ripe
years, men of all others most stout and valiant, yea the chief Princes of
cities, upon whom the light of the sacred Gospel of Jesus Christ has shyned
and been opened, tremble and shake for fear of a lousie rabble of Saracenes,
and are going to submit and prostrate themselves before them, without either
hearing or seeing any weapon, or receiving sommonce of any war. But
peradventure you hope to speed the better, and that they will show more
clemency to you if you voluntarily yield your selves, and that all your
Religion and Laws shall remain safe and in such force as they did before,
and that your Wives and Children shall not be constuprated, harmed nor
discourteously handled. For with such fair glosing promyses these cutthroates
and villainous Traitors to their Country use commonly to deceive and enueigle
the simple people: as though there could be any faith in them which have
betrayed their Lords, their Country, their friends, and kinsfolks, yea God
himself their Lord and maker. Did not Valentia a most strong, maritimall, and
famous City ye^elde unto them upon this promise? and yet as soon as they
were entered and had possession of the same, they either cast out all the
inhabitauntes, or killed them, or else by compulsion enforced them unto their
Sect. Did not Toledo the very same, and Siuyle and a great many of other
noble Cities, which being deceived with this hope and bewitched with these
flattering charms yielded themselves unto them? These domestical examples are
sufficient to teach you, that it is a great deal better, valiauntly to dye
together like men, and so much the more, for that as yet things are not so
far spent but that they may be recured and helped. You have high Craggie
Mountains for refuge, and in them some places inaccessible, you have some
Towns most strongly fortefied, upon trust whereof many times a small number
has discomfited populous armies. And you are a sort of tall men, whom the
nature of the heaven and earth has made stout and valiant, acquainted with
labors, and hitherto invincible. Also there live a great sortevnder the
Saracenes, which (I put you out of all doubt) will come from all parts and
join them selves to you if they once saw you peep up and auaunce your selves
in this your so just quarrel. Behind at our backs is France, a Region at
this day most flourishing both in Chyualrie and skillful Capitaynes, from
whence (no doubt) we shall have aid and succor. For the French will not
any longer suffer this cowardly nation which has already encroched as far
as the Mediterranean Sea beyond the Pyrenees, so saucely and malapertly to
play these cruel Pageauntes and furious prankes against the borders of their
Kingdom, in such sort as they have done to others.

And God himself (if we will turn unto him with amendment of life) wyllayde
and strengthen us, who being on our side, every one of us needs not to fear
a hundred thousand of these blasphemous Grynneagods and lewd vyllaynes.

This oration sank so deeply into their brains that being persuaded with the
pithy force thereof (for Pelagius was vehement and very earneste in his matter,
and for his wisdom and sanctytie of life highly esteemed among those people)
they returned every man to his home and calling their neighbors together,
told unto them the causes of their return: to wit, how that Pelagius
(whose virtue and unspotted life was well known unto them all, because as
before we have showed, he dwelled long among them, myraculouslye delivered out
of the cruel hands of bloody tyrants) met them as though he had been some
messanger sent down from heaven, who showed unto them what an heinous offense
they should commit, and what a pernicious act they had purposed to do.
Wherefore not ceassing as well in open Sermons, as in private talk to persuade
the people to constancye and godliness, he was by common assent of all the
people created King of Cantabria and Asturia in the year after Christ. 717
Which done, they all got them to mou^ Anseua. When the fame of this matter was
blaset^-broad and known throughoute Spain, all the Goths that could any way
escape or by any means shyft themselves out of the hands of that barbarous
nation, conceying great hope of lyberty and good luck, took them to their
Weapons and joined side with him, and such as could not do the same out of
hand, with all care and dillygence sought opportunity and occasion how to flee
to him.

Tarifa sent against him Abraem Alcamack with a great Army, and with him Bishop
Opasius Son of the king of Egica, and Metropolitan of Syuyle, who (as before
has been told) adhered to the faction of Julian and other traitors of their
Country. Pelagius hearing what great preparation was made against him, and
seeing himself not of equal power to repulse so great a multitude, entered with
a few of his company (but of the valiauntest among his whole band) into a
certain Den within ye Mount Anseua, appointing the rest to defend ye narow
passages and Straight ways. Whither when ye Saracens were come, Opasius went
about with many glosing terms to persuade them that kept the Streictes, to
yield them selves unto the Moors, but when he saw his labor was all in
vain, there began a cruel and a bloody bickering. The Saracenes shot so
many Arrows and Darts into the den, that they seemed to rain from Heaven
as fast as drops of water in a stormy shower, and to light among them as
thick as Hailestones. But God myraculously making their darts to rebutte
against the same persons that shot them, A miracle of God in delivering yt
Christians.
there were so many of them either slain or wounded that they were forced to
recule and give back. Then the Christians undoubtedly knowing ye God was with
them and fought for the^, yielded most hearty thanks upon their knees unto his
divine Majesty, yt it had pleased him, thus to relieve and visit his poor
afflicted people: which done, they boldly issued out, and utterly repulsed all
ye residue. There were slain of ye Saracens in this conflict about.xx. M. and
of the Christians very few or none at all: for writers make no mention thereof.
Those Saracens which escaped from the battle, fled into ye top of the hill:
which by divine miracle being shaken with a terrible earthquake, and falling
down into the River Iua, running by the foot of the same hill, they were all
cast away and perished. Traitors cannot prosper long.
Opasius and Mugnuza two Archtraitours, as they were fleeing (for they went not
up with their fellows unto the hill) were taken: and Mugnuza in a place called
Olaglias was straightwayes by the Asturians put to death, and the City Gigion
utterly ruynated to the perpetual ignominy and shameful reproach of the said
Mugnuza Prince thereof. What was done with Opasius, Authors make no mention.

When Mucas heard hereof, suspecting that Julian and others of the same
conspiracy, were privy to the counsels of Pelagius, he straightwayes
commanded Julian and Sisibertus and Ebasius the sons of king Vitiza to be
put to death, and thus in the end they received a just reward of their
treason. Which example so terrefied many of Iulians retinue and faction, that
they revolted from Mucas and went to the Asturians: and those which lived
under the tyranny of the Saracens, daily by stelth and privily flying to
Pelagius, his power within short space was so increased, that they which a
little before were scantly able to defend their own, now recovered many of
those Regions and Cities which the Saracens before had brought under their
subjection. For the City Legio (at this day called Leon) was immediately to
them surrendered: so also was Rota, Mansilia, Canicas (commonly called Cangas)
Tineum and many other towns of that Country.

The Second Book.
Containing the declination of the Saracenicall Empire, till the beginning of
the Turks.
THe Saracens in the East being in a great frenzy that their Siege certain
years passed laid to Constantinople was frustrate, Constantinople again
beseiged.
and hearing that ( Leo by whose only means their attempt was repelled) was
now Emperor, leuyed a mighty army again and dividing the same into two
parties took in hand the same enterprise afreshe, purposing then or never to
bring their desires to a final effect and conclusion. Malsamas the General of
the one army, transfreting with his company into Thracia, spoiled a great part
of that Province and giving a sharp assault unto the chief city and
Imperial Seat thereof, encamped himself on ye West side of ye same City near
to ye walls, where there is an Isthmos or narow portion of land having Sea on
either side, and on that part he laid battrie. Zulciminie the chief Bishop,
lay before the city on the Sea with a navy of three thousand Sail, as many
do affirm. For the city Constantinople being both very huige and beautiful
and as well by nature as Art most strong and impregnable, stands at the mouth
of the Thracian Sea Bosphorus, (where Asia and Europa do almost join together,
having no more but one small streit Sea to part them) by which it is emptyed
and has issue into ye Sea Propontis: where there stretches out a little Cape
or elbow of Sea full of wyndings and turnings in, as though they were Havens.
For which cause the place is called by the name of a Horn, because by reason
of the seven hills of the City hanging out into it, it has as it were many
boughs or branches like ye horns of a Heart. Along between this Cape and
Propontis, there runs a certain hill, in form like a Cherronese or half
I Will, being on every side almost environed with water, containing in length from
the west into the East about thyrty furlonges, howbeit it rises not greatly
in any height, but the ridges and clyues thereof do run still a long
Propontis. On the North side, where his form is like a Horn (which a little
before we termed a Cape or Elbow) it has seven Hills annexed unto it, of
the which four, do hang out into the Cape, and that which is washed with
Bosphorus, is the greatest and makes the base of a Triangle: for the form of
this City and country being almost a perfect I Will is three cornerde. This has
two Promontories, one lyinge toward Propontis, west of Hebdomum, the other
Northward, which defends the mouth of the Baye from the injury of wyndes,
and is called Chrysoceras. From which if a streigth line be drawn to the
seventh and innermost Hill of all (which also defends the Bay from the west
wind) you must needs include ye plain champaine of Pera (now called Galata)
within the compass of the Arche, made by reason of the continual ridge and
cliffe of the Cherronese. The length of that Cape or Bay is about lx. furlonges
in the innermost part whereof, are the mouths of the Rivers Cydrus and
Barbysa: the latitude or breadth thereof is diverse and not in all places alyke:
where it is most, it passes not six furlonges, and where it is lest, not
above three. The streicts of it ar very narrow. For on the north part, wherein
the town Pera stands, there hangs out a Promontory into the South named
Metopicum and Cyclobium: and likewise an other on Asia side, direct lie
abutting upon the middle Streictes of the Baye, named Damalicum. This
Cherronese on the west side, where the main Land of Thracia lies, does
separate this Elbow or Bay from Propontis with a narowe portion of land lying
between the two Seas.

The breadth of that same Isthmos or narrow share of Land, where it touches
the seventh Hill and inner corner of the City, is fifty paces: and further
beyond, it is greater. Thus in this plot of ground being a perfect I Will on all
sides saving one, is situate the noble City of Constantinople, once called
Bizantium, over against whom, on the other shore side of the Streict, stands
the town Pera, once called Galata, whichalso makes promo^tories into ye
Horned Bay. And in Asia there is directly over against it, the City Chalcedon.
The entries of this Creek or Haven in the narowest places are enclosed and
fast shut up with a great Cheyne, which reachynge from the Tower Pharea to the
Promontorie Chrysoceras is extended and drawn in length over to the Metopique
Promontorie of Galata, where there is also an other strong fortress or
Blockhouse. The City it self is fenced and fortyfied with three strong
walls, two very broad and deep ditches, and many Towers and Bullwarkes
beside. It has on every side a plain prospect. The middle part of the City
ryseth up a little in height, Constantinople is in compass xiii. miles.
by reason of the Hills whereon it stands. The whole circuit or compass of
the City is about xiii. miles.

This so noble, and flourishing City, Constantine in the place where before
Byzantium stood (unadvisedly enough as the sequel proved) builded, and
translated the Imperial Seat with all the rich Ornaments of the City of
Rome thither. For although the soil where it stands seemed to be a place
most fit for an Imperial city, yet ye disposition of the air and destenie
would not suffer this city to be ye head seat and keye of the Roman empire.
For as not only every Country but also every city have their proper fates,
manners, fashions and rites: so they may not safelye be translated or removed
into an other place, no although the very same persons and Laws be
translated and removed thither with them.

For the disposition and temperature of the air alters men's manners, which
being altered their destinies and Fortunes are also changed. Which to be true,
the end proved apparantlie. For the Empire being translated almost into the
borders of Asia, the Emperors themselves and the Roman Legions were afterward
chosen out of that Province, who being infected with their Greekishe lightness
and ambition, seditiously practiced sundry factions among themselves, and
effeminated with the nyce wantonness of Asia, were not of power to repel the
incursions of foraine Barbaryans: when as in ye mean season, Italy and Rome,
the Maistresse and Castle of the whole earth, lacking a head and having lost
the right use of warlyke discipline was made an open pray for all nations to
invade. And thus that Empire which (like a good tree) in his own soil bare
very good fruict, being transplanted into a strange air and ground, within
short time perished and came to ruin.

But to return again to our purposed narration. Malsamas advanced his power
to besiege by land, that part which we said stood in the Isthmos or streict
piece of ground, between the Horn and Propontis, which could be oppugned
none other way but only by land. He because his purpose was, utterly to
disapoynt the Citizens that no victual should be conueighed unto them, and
for that his desire was to encroche as near to the walls as could be, so
politiquely lodged his Garrisons and Host on every side that the front of his
Army, was as though it had been a Horhe next to ye walls, and thence as the
Feelds farther of from the narrow land, stretch out in breadth and scope, raught
out along about the Cape or Bay unto the mouths of the rivers which we said
had their yssu es and falling into the same. For this Host was merueilous
populous, and formydable, and therefore required greatground and elbow room.
From thence making many roades into the country adioigning, he lamentably
distressed the same, and threatening utter subversion to the City laid battrye
and siege to it with Mines, Bastiles and all kind of Engynes that might any
way further his pretense. On the other side, Zulciminie with his Nauye on the Sea
environed the whole City, on that side toward Propontis and Bosphorus from
the narowe land to the Promontorye Metopick, insomuche that to them that
looked out of the City, ye Seas Propontis and Bosphorus seemed all over to be
covered with wodde like a Forest. He slept no more in his business then
Malsamas did: but with sea skalyng ladders and such Gunnes as then were in use,
assaulted the city and most fiercely shook it.

But the besieged Citizens were so vigilaunt and so hardy withal, that all
their attemptes and deuoyres were wholly frustrate. Wherefore seeing they could
not this way prevail, they thought to win their purpose by long siege and
tract of time. But Zulciminie in ye mean season died in his own Camp,
whereby there arose a seditious tumult among the Saracenes for the chosinge of
a new bishop, and for that cause the siege was for a time intermitted. At
length Aumar the son of Abdimazid was created Bishop in the dead man's
place, in the year 721. The winter was then so extreemly cold, that all the
rivers were hard frosen over with ice. And also they had victual daily brought
into their Camp out of Egypt, yet because the number of the men and Beasts
was exceedyng great and the winter extremely cold, a great sort of them
dyed, some with cold, some for famyne and some of diseases, and a great
rablement of them thinking to get some booty abroad, issued out of their own
Camps and made incursions into the frontiers of Bulgaria, where they were of
the Bulgarians incountred withal, and in manner all slain, as they were about
their pyllage. At which time, there were (as some affirm) of them slain xxx.
thousand. Leo the Emperor also was with them to bring, by an artificial
devise of fireworke, wrought by a Glass, Burning Glasses.
as Archymedes of Syracuse aforetime did. By means of which Glass he set on
fire the fleet of the Saracenes and so spoiled them that few of them escaped
unburned and they which escaped were taken of the Greeks, by reason that the
Captains of them for fear of the fire, yielded themselves and fled for
succor unto the Greeks. This fine invention ^ounde out by a certain cunning
Architect, merueilously appauled their spirits: for ye very Sea about the
Ships seemed to be al on a light fire. Such another kind of burning glass as
this, we reads was at Alexandria in Egypt in the watch Tower named Pharus,
wherewith the inhabitauntes when they lysted, holding the same full against the
Sun Beams, set the Ships of their enemies on fire a great way of.

During this while, Mucas and Tarifa having subdued Spain, began to be had in
suspicion by Aumar. Whereupon they came both together to salute their new Bishop
and to clear themselves from all suspicious crimes that could be objected
against them. Where Tarifa accused Mucas of extortion and laid to his charge
that he had purloyned the Princes treasure during his regiment in Spain: of
which crime he being attainted and found guilty against the high Bishop, took
such inward grief that he dyed. In whose place, Aumar preferred Gizid to the
Lieutenauntship of Africa, and Tarifa he appointed Regent of all Spain.
Wherefore Gizid with a well appointed Navy of three hundredth and sixty Sail,
with the supply of the other Legions and victual, made his course directly
toward Constantinople: but hearing by the way tidings, how the
Constantinopolitanes had consumed the most part of the Saracenes Ships with
fire, he durst not adventure any further, but stayed upon the coasts of
Bithynia, robbyng and making spoil of the Country round about: In which place
he had but a cold welcome geeuen him by the Roman Legions being there in
Garrisons, who setting fiercely upon him, killed many of his people and so
skarred ye residue that they were glad to retire. Yet nevertheless the
terrestrial army under the conduct of Malsamas, Loathsome famyne among Saracenes
desisted not their Siege before the City, and yet they were so sore pinched
with famine and hungre, that they were feign to eat the dead Carrion of any
manner of Beast: yea they eat dried ordure and dung, and are reported also, to
be so nere driven that for very need they eat their own fellows flesh
being dead, such an exceeding desire had they to conquer that Imperial Seat
and City royal of all the Roman Empire oriental.

Constantinople in the mean season escaped not free, Great plague in
Constantinople.
but was plagued with as great mortalytie an other way. For the pestilentiall
plague consumed well near. CCC. thousand persons. When tydinges of these so
great and so many overthrows and unfortunate calamyties was brought to Aumar,
he was therewith so dismayed that he immediately addressed his letters to
Malsamas, with commandment forthwith upon the receipt thereof to return
home with all his Army left alive. Whereupon Malsamas shipped his Soldiers
and departed. But there suddenly arose such a vehement tempest and boisterous
wynd, Shipwreck
that all their Ships (saving only ten) perished in the Sea, whereof five
were taken by the Romans, the residue returned home to bring news of this
their heavy chance and mysfortune. But Abdeluzite the Nephieu of Mucas, whom
Mucas at his departure out of Spain appointed his Deputy, marying ye Queen
Egilona late wife of Rodericke, by her counsel proclaimed, himself king of
Syuyle. Whereat the Saracenes greatly fumyng and chafyng, killed both him and
his wife, and in his room substituted an other of Mucas his kinsmen named
Aiub, till such time as their high Bishop should take order for lendinge some
other. This Aiub repaired and reedified the City Bilbilis (wherein the noble
Poet Martial was long before borne) ruinated and much defaced durying those
wars, and many other Cities in Spaigne: and named it by his own name
Calataiub, which is now called Calacaiud. But he could not perform his
purpose so fullye about the rest, because there was diverse in sundry parts
of Spain, which (vsurpyng the Kingdom) were obstacles in his way. For
whereas Corduba was the head City and Seats royal of all Spain, and the
Captainshippes or governance of all the other Cities and Provinces were
distributed and bestowed upon the noble men of the Country, every one
imitating the fact of Abdeluzite, called themselves Kings of those places
where their authority and Jurisdiction lay. Whereby Spain was divided into
many Kingdoms, as the Kingdom of Syuyle, Granado Giaen, Murtia. Denia,
Sciatiua (which was once called Setaba) Valentia, Tortosia, Lerida, Fraga,
Saragoza and mani other les places not of so great fame as these. which Kings
so long as they agreed among themselves, oftentimes afflicted Christendom with
great overthrows and oppressions: but after that they fell at discord and
intestine variaunce among themselves, they gave occasion to the Christians, to
recover Spain again into their own rightful possession. Which thing was
first attempted (as before we have showed) by Pelagius, who vsinge his
valiantness, wisdom and miracles to his best commodity, and happelye
taking occasion by this dissension and discord of his Enemies among
themselves, wanne again many cities and delivered sundry towns out of the
miserable thraldom of their tyranny. With him did Alphonsus the son of
Peter Duke of Calabria join and take part, being descended of the ancient
line of Richared King of Goths, unto whom Pelagius gave his Daughter
Orismunda in marriage: and they two atchiued many notable victories over the
Miscreaunte Moors.

In the East, after the discease of Aumar the Caliph, Gizide the Son of
Abdimelik succeeded and was installed in the pontificate in the year of our
Lord 722. In whose reign, there stepped up an other Caliph and Gizid in
Persia, whose name was Moalabs. Against whom was sent with a great army
Masabnak, who vanquished him in battle and subdued all Persia: and thus Gizid
the son of Abdimelick, was the only Caliph of all the Saracenes, who reigned
three years and then died. After whom, his Son Euelide was created Caliph,
who entered the Roman Provinces in Asia and Europa with a huge power: but
within a short while, without perpetrating any notable exployte worthy of
remembrance, he gave himself altogether to idleness, sloth and
voluptuousness. Notwithstanding, in the second year of his Empire he sent
Malsamas with an Host again into Cappadocia, who took the City Caesarea and
Euelite he sent by an other way into Thracia, who having wasted and spoiled it,
returned into Syria.

About this time near the Sea coasts of the less Asia, the earth in the
bottom of the sea burned, in such sort, that at the first there appeared
nothing but smoke, but within awhile after such incredible store of hot
burning Pumise stones (as though they had been little hills in the Sea) swam
above water, that with the same Pumyses, all the shoares of less Asia, Lesbos,
Abydos and Macedonia were full, and ye Sea it self seemed all covered over, and
a certain Island at that time appeared and was discovered near the holy Isle.
After this, Euelide sent one Muauias and Amer with an Hoaste of.90000.
Saracenes to besiege Nicaea a City of Bithynia: which being most fiercely and
strongly with all art and policy by them assailed, the Christians most
valiauntly defending, and beating them always back with great slaughter and
effusion of blood, at length they raised their Siege and returned home without
any harm doing, saving yt in their return they took a little Town called
Ateum. Afterward ye Prince of Gazaria, son to Cagan king of Bulgaria, warred
upon the Saracens in the borders of Armenia: and ( Gradack the Praetor of
Armenia and Media a Saracene borne, being in battle vanquished and slain,)
he brought those two Provinces again under the subjection of the Roman
Empire. And in the year. 730. Malsamas with a huige power entered into the
Streightes of Caucasus, and gave battle unto the Turks (who at those days
were called the Hunnes Teutazites which is to say, Gentile) a fierre and
terrible people dwelling within those Mountains. This blouddy battle
continued a whole day, and many slain on both sides, till night came and brake
of their fight, uncertain as yet to whether side the victory would incline.
But Malsamas retired into Armenia, for he had now concluded a peace with ye
son of King Cagan.

During all this while, Pelagius having good success in his Spanishe affairs
against the Saracenes, the Tarraconians living in the mountains, by the
example of the Asturians created Garcias Scimenecius their King in the den of
Iean Pignia, called Panouio. And within a while after Pelagius when he had
reigned.xiiij. years dyed, in the year of our Lord. 732. After whom his son
Fafila succeeded, who in the second year of his reign was in a wodde devoured
of wild Bears, leaving no children behind him. These kings appointed the
chief City of their Kingdom at Legio which is now called Leon, The Arms of
the kingdom of Lion.
and bare in their Coat Armor, a Lion purple in a Shield Argent. Not because
of the name of the city where their Seat royal was, which has his name not
of a Lion but of a Legion of Soldiers which Cocceius Nerua placed there: but
because they fought so courageously and eigrely for the sauegard and liberty
of their country, as though they had been most fierce Lions. In the reign of
this Fafila, the Saracenes passed into France by that part of the Pyrenees
that was in their possession by the Mediterranean Sea. France was then
possessed of the Frankes a people of Germany, who about 400. years after the
incarnation, departing out of their native Country to seek some other place
where to plant themselves, had that part of high Bourgoyne next to Germany
given unto them to inhabit, by Aetius a Roman Senator who then was Praetor of
the Province of Gaul, because he would have some strong garrison and defense
against the Hunnes (who were then issued in great plumpes out of their own
Country, and under the conduct of Attila, spoiled and wasted Europa) if they
should fortune to invade Gaul, which Realm is yet of their name called
France. How France was first named.
For the Frankes were the warlikest and stoutest people in all Germany,
inhabiting (as I think) that region or portion thereof which is yet called
Franconia or Frankland: who afterward by little and little enlarging their
dition, obtained at length the regiment and Empire of all France, in so much
that the name of the Frankes extended very far. But when the Frank or
French Kings addicted themselves to an idle and voluptuous life and
degenerated from the former stoutnes and valiaunce of their Progenitors, not
executing the administration of their affairs in their own proper persons but
exployted the same by under officers of their Court and Graund masters of
their Household, Pipine the first of that name Son of Arnolph Duke of Bauaria
first attained this honor and dignity by subduing and getting the vpperhand
of ye Lieutenau^ts and Captains of the kings Provinces, who seeing the King to
be a weak and unwarlike man, tyrannically ruled the Country according to
their own sensual lusts and for their private commodities.

Then in the reign of Theodoricus the second, the excellent dexterity and
worthy virtue of Charles Martellus second Son to this Pipine was in that
office very conspicuous and renoumed throughout all the land of France, in so
much that he was accounted and taken as the Prince of all the people. At the
same time, was King of Aquitanie (the^ called Gallia Gottica) one Eudo a
Gothian borne, whom king Roderik made ruler of ye Province, but hearing of ye
discomfiture of ye King his Liege Lord, he made himself king thereof. This
Eudo while Charles Martellus was busied with other wars in Germany, began to
surmise certain quarelles, which brake out into open war with the French
Capitaines of the places near adjoining to the limittes of his Territories,
whom (going about to defend their titles and rightes) he afflicted with many
overthrows. Wherefore Martellus took the matter in hand and warred against
him. And at the same time the Saracens passing the Pyrenees, had taken Narbon,
and in it showed all kind of outrageous cruelty, because they would by that
example make the country afraid any more to withstand the^. Wherefore Eudo
considering with himself that he was unable to war at one time both with ye
Frankes and the Saracens, and for ye Mugnoces a man in great favor and
estimation with ye Saracens was his Son in law, he thought it better for him
to make a league and amity with ye Saracens the^ with ye Christians. Which
after he had by Mugnoces means and friendship brought to pass, looking big
upon the matter and bearing himself stout by reason of the aid and succor,
which they sent to him, he inferred much harm to the Frank Nation. But when
he perceived, that the Saracens fortified with their own garrisons, and kept
to their own uses, al such Cities and towns as they entered into, he began
when it was to late to beshrew himself and wish that he had never attempted
any such enterprise. For they kept Nimes, Mountpelier, and Auinion with all the
places thereabout in their own possession. Whereupon Eudo gathering all his
power together to profligate and drive them out, gave unto them battle,
wherein he was discomfited. Mugnoces by whose means and procurement the league
and amity was concluded, greatly complained of the injurious dealing of Eudo
in falsefying his faith and infringing his promise accordingly as he had
vndertake^ for him. Whereupon Abderama king of Gottalonia marching with an host
against him, besieged him in ye Castle of Cerdania: out whereof, Mugnoces for
scarcity of water escaping, and fleeing into thickets and hillish places, fell
into ye hands of another company of Saracens, who took him prisoner and
beastly slew him and sent his head and his wives (ye daughter of Eudo) to
Abderama: and thus all ye traitors of their Country within short space, came
to a miserable end and confusion. Then Abderama having dispatched and rid out
of ye way all enemies yt were to be feared on his back, returned into France,
passed the river of Rhone, and destroyed many places yt belonged to the
Christians: and made such a slaughter at Arle, that a heap then made of the
bones of the dead carcasses remains there yet to this day in a place called
Alies Campi. The^ went he with his army against Eudo who began again to gather
more strength and make a new commocio^. He besieged Tolose the chief City of
Gallia Gottica: France invaded by Saracens.
in which siege, (for that the city was very well rampyered and fortified with
Ditches and walls, and also well stored with Engines and munitions of war and
with all sorts of weapons beside a convenient Garrison of soldiers with all
other things necessary the^e planted for defense) the Saracenes received
great loss and were well paid home, especially by means of certain Engyns,
devised by skylfull art of ingenious Architectes and by diverse other
Stratagemes of warlyke policy. Notwithstanding, Bordeaux was then taken and
sacked of the Saracenes, and all the Inhabitauntes therein both man woman and
child unmercifully slain and manquelled, Bordeaux taken and diverse other
Cities and Towns.
and the Temples razed and laid even with the ground. Thence by the confines
of Perigot beyond the river Geronde, they made inroades into the Country of
Xantongue and destroyed Angolisme and Blaye: From thence through Limosin and
Poytiers they russhed into the Country of Tours, Where they spoiled the
Church of Saint Martine, wherein was great foyson and plenty of gifts and
offeringes that had been given and bequeathed unto it, and afterward set it on
fire.

Eudo being sore afflicted with these unmannerly dealyngs, and driven to great
extremytie by the Saracenes, entered into league with Marcellus, and they two
(with both their powers joined in one) gave battle unto Abderama before the
City of Tours, Great slaughter.
wherein they discomfited him and all his host. In this battle there were
slain CCC. lxxv thousand Saracenes, and of the French no more but.xv C. And if
the night had not come upon them ere the battle was fully ended, the whole
route of the Saracenes had been at that time utterly destroyed. For Abderama in
the night season, perceiuinge how the game went, and what a mortal overthrow
he had received, had no lust to tarry and expect the hazard of the next day:
but trudged as fast as he could, by long iourneyes, with those few of his
company that were left and hable to follow him, to the Pyrenees, entendinge
from thence to return into Spain, leaving behind him in his Tents all his
carriage and stuff for a pray to his Enemies. But the Nauarrians having
stopped the straight passages where their journey lay, killed them every one.
The next day as soon as the Son was up, Martellus in good order marshalled
his army and took the Feeld, awaiting the coming of his enemies. But when he
perfectlye understood that they were fled, his Soldiers fell to the spoil,
which they found in the Saracenes Camp most abundant and plentiful.

After the death of Eudo, Martellus added that part of Eudo his Kingdom, to
his Empire. For which cause Hunold and Vaifar the sons of Eudo, incensinge
that part of Gaul called Narbonensis Prouincia (containing the Countries of
Sauoye, Dolphinie, Prouance and Languedock) to take part with them, renewed
the war afresh with Martellus. And passinge over the river of Rhone, with
most barbarus cruelty destroyed, burnt and killed man and beast, making hauock
of all Towns, Villages, and Feelds yt was in their way, without sparing either
age or Sex. The chief burnt of which lamentable storm and furious immanitie,
that part of the Allobroges (now called Dolphinie) specially felt, before
Martellus could provide or prepare sufficient power to go against them. But
when he was come, Visigot departed into the wast desert and wilderness which
he himself had so made, and concluding a league with ye Saracenes more
advisedly and warely then Eudo before had done, that is to wit, by giving and
receiving hostages on both parties, he eftsoons procured them to come again
into France: who now not with an Host of bold and tymorous, warlike and
vnwarlyke, armed and naked persons, one mingled with an other as before, but
with army of lustye Seruitors and picked Soldiers thoroughly tried by Sea and
Land, well appointed and furnished with victual and all things necessary for
such an enterprise wherefore was chief Captain one Atine, entered into the
Province. And taking Auignion by treason of Maurice Captain thereof, they
appointed that City and Narbon to be the principal holds and fortresses of
their martial proceedings. Whom as they were boldly swarming and straying
abroad ye Country, as men fearing no danger, Childebrand (sent for that
purpose by Martellus with a great power against them) immediately at his first
coming compelled to keep within the walls of Auignion. Auignion is a City
standinge by the river Rhone, and was at that time stronglye walled, and well
fortyfied with many Bulwarks, Castles and Pyles, insomuche that Atine
valyauntly and polytiquely defendinge it, Two balyaunt and sailfull Capytaynes
compared together, Atine the saracen and Martellus ye French.
(as he was a man both courageous and stout and also skillful in the art of
Cheualrye) thought it to be inexpugnable and not able to be won. For he had
placed his Garrisons on every side where he thought most expedient, and had
planted the walls, Bulwarks and Castles full of weapons, Darts and Engines to
throw stones into the throng of his Enemies, beside wyld fire and matches to
kindle Torches and brands to cast in their faces when so ever they should assay
to enter. He had also manned the same with hardy Soldiers, and saw sure watch
and ward to be kept at the Gates, neither lackyng stoare of victual nor any
thing else that for the defense thereof was needful and requisite. Every
Captain, Centurion and decurion had their places and offices appointed unto
them accordingly. He himself in person went about and viewed the watches, for
fear least any thing by negligence or oversight of his officers were amiss, a
man that could well away with labor, watching and hunger, and such a one as
kept his soldiers in due order and duty by his own example, rather then for
fear of punishment, anymatyng and encouraging them valiant enterprises, and
martial adventures. Childebrand lodging his camp nearer to the city, gave
assault thereunto: whom Atine not only repulsed but also enforced to discampe
and remove his Army further of.

But when Martellus with his retinue and train was come and both the hosts
joined in one, after he had surueied and taken view of ye situation and
strength of the city and thoroughly understood of ye valiant courage of ye
defenders within, he speedely and with undaunted courage setting forward his
matters, not only drove the^ as they issued out of the town within the walls
again, but also wan to the place where his army had before pight, and there
stronglye encamped he himself. For Martellus being a man singulerly well
skilled in warlike affairs, had under him in his army such capitaines and
soldiers as had been in many bloody battles experienced and in sundry
wars under him practiced: furthermore very precise obseruers of martial
discipline wherein he himself had trained and instructed them. Who whether ye
Army were to be lodged and embattailed or ye camp to be removed, or themselves
to be ra^ked and set in array ready for ye fight, knew every man his office,
place and service only with a beck or a sign given them by their General. When
their camp should be fortified for fear of being suddenly surprised by ye
enemy, immediately a man should have seen some, with al dillygence busied in
perusing and surueiyng ye place ye their General had assigned, some to see
soldiers in good order, some to entrench the camp, some to pitch their
tents, some to place ye watch and assign them their standinges, some ready
marshalled without the Trench ready to repulse the Enemy if he should make any
sudden irruption upon the laborers. If case stood, for the Camp to be
removed, every man semblablye knew his office and duty. If they marched out
to fight, every one knew at his Fingers end, where and in what Rank or place
he should stand so that the form and fashion were told them by their
Chieuetane, how he would have the battle ordered and appointed, and look
where they stood and set their foot in the fight, there would they rather
have dyed then to have left it or shronke one foot back, so desirous were
they to win praise and glory. If they should besiege any town, some brought
the scaling ladders, some Turrettes, some Bastyles and clymling bridges
surmounting the height of the Town walls, striving who should first go up
and mount upon the walls. When they had got the Town, they never brake their
array for any pyllage or spoil, nor for any greedines of booty and pray, they
never ceased to occupy their blades and lay about them with their falchions,
till they had thoroughly overcome all such of their enemies as would not deliver
their weapons.

With such a goodly trained host, Martellus aduauncing his Standard and
approaching his enemies, while the anger of his Soldiers was hoate and the
courage of their minds yet fresh and vnappaulled, as one that well knew the
nature of his Countrymen, who at the first brunt as long as an injury is
fresh in memory and their minds with venturous anymositie and hope of
victory, googled are most fierce and hardy: but within a short while if the
war continue any thing long, their former hot forwardnes will be
straightwayes abated and turned into such keye cold quietness that whereas
asore they seemed Lions, then would they be as meek and tractable as Lambs,
giving therefore no time of rest to his Soldiers, but only so much as needs
must be had to refreshe their bodies, with meat, drink and sleep, he sou^ded
the bloody blast to the battle, and gave them a sign courageously to give
the onset but first he whetted them and stirred up their stomachs with this
Oration following.

If your valiant hearts (most loving Soldiers and fellows in Arms) were not
sufficiently already to me known by the manifold adventures and perilles in
my company to your perpetual praise exployted, A pleasante and comfortable
Oration of Martellus to his Soldiers.
or if our enemy were unto us strange and unknown then would I go about with
many words to incense and prick you forward: but since I have experimented
and tried you in so many battayles invincible, and that of late years you
easily vanquished this very same enemy, (few of them left a live) at what time
they invaded the whole Realm of France with a far greater army then they
have now, in hope to have enjoyed the Empire and Dominion thereof to
themselves: I well see that I have no need to stand long in putting you in
hope of victory, which I perfectly know to be already most certain in your
hands, whereof the manifold examples of so many famous battles happily and
victoriously under our leading and conduct by you achieved, may put you in an
undoubted assurance. Unless peradventure some will think it to be a harder
matter for us now to overcome these few (which like fearful Hares) hyde and
include themselves within walls: then it was for us heretofore in the Country
of Tours, to discomfite the whole power almost of all the Orient. Or as though
Walls were of more force in Wars, then four hundredth thousand fighting
men, whose swords and armor if they had been laid together in one heap, had
been hable to have compassed this City about with a higher and thicker
bulwark then these Walls which you see are. Men (believe me) seek their
defense not in Walls but in their weapons. Whereas they which put their trust
in Walls, when they be driven to that pushe that they see themselves overcome,
their hearts fail them, they run away like the fearful Dear, either
casting down their weapons, or else stand stone still dismaide and amazed like
sheep. Address your selves therefore to the assault like men, assuring your
selves to find such great plenty of spoil therein, that you shall fare the
better all the days of your lives. Daunt and oppress yonder odious and vile
generation ye are included in hoales and dens like birds in a cage. Take
your former vigor and accustomed stomachs unto you, and know ye ye I am he,
which (over and beside their share and booty of ye spoil) will amply with my
own hands reward all them yt in this assault shall behave themselves
valiauntly. I my self will not start one foot from you, but will help you
not only with my advise and policy, but also with doughtie blows given with mine
own arm as I am wont always at a pinch to do where I see need. I will be (I
say) both the witness bearer and the Judge of your valiau^ce on every side,
and will see you to suffer no worse extremity, and wrong, the^ I my self will be
content to participate with you. Auau^ce I say once again, mount up lively
upon yonder wall, (which done) you shall be sure to be celebrated and renowned
of all men, as they that twyse, have delivered and protected their Country of
France out of thraldom of a blasphemous True of cursed Sathanistes.

When he had made an end, the Soldiers al together gave a great shoute, and
then began the assault, the walls were courageously shaken and battered,
ladders, turreties and bridges set up, the assault given in three several
places and the whole army divided into iij parts, whereof one was lead by
Childebra^d, another by Charlemaine the son of Martellus, and the third by
Martellus himself. The Saracens rowlling down great stones which they had for
the same purpose prepared, tumbled down ye scaling ladders and brake them a
sunder, shot arrows among the Assaylaunts as fast as hail, and threw pots of
scalding pitch upon them that approached any thing near, finally no kind of
weapon was unoccupied. Atine himself going about every corner, cheering up his
Soldiers on every side, and diligently looking ye nothing were amiss, played
ye part both of a skillful Captain and also of a valiant soldier: many,
which of a high and hautie courage first skaled the walls, felt ye smart and
reward of venturous audacitie, and were slain. Martellus seeing that his
scaling ladders were partly by his enemies and partly by the weight of his own
soldiers climming up thick and threefold broken almost all in pieces,
purposing to detrude and drive ye defendauntes from some part of the wall,
erected a Tower of wood, out of which, he shot with certain devised Engynes,
great weighty stones at the^ that stood upon the wall and in it he had placed
a great sort of Archers, which with arows kept ye Oppidanes so streict, yt they
durst not stand to their tacklings, nor abide upon the walls. This Turret had
a bridge which with a certain devise in it, might both be hoised up on high and
let down low, up into the which none could ascend yt stood on the ground.
This Engine was covered all over with raw Ox hides and leather, that no fire
could do it hurt. This being with strength of me^ set hard by the walls (for it
went upon wheels) ye Bridge was set to the top of ye walls, and so within a
little while, the wall was full on yt side with French soldiers. The^ the
bickering being so sore and terrible on both parts, yt it was hard to decerne
who should have the victory, at length fine force and puissaunt ma^hod of the
Frankes got the better and prevailed, who making a great shout, went
throughstitch with their enterprise, some asce^ding and mounting upon ye walls
by ladders, which covered and saved themselves from harm by holding their
Targets close over their heads, till they were gotten up, killing or else
throwing down the defendau^ts, that resisted. The rest being without all hope
of remedy and victory, privily shifted every man for himself. Atine with the
head men and chief officers of his company, embarked themselves in Ships
ready in the river Rhone for ye same intent, and sailed away with the stream in
safety. Many of them were slain in the chase, many crushed to death with
falling one upon an other, and many swimmyng after the Ships that were now
departing and going away, were drowned and overwhelmed with sourges. Atine
with his Ships taking the sea, made his course directly to Narbon, a wealthy
City and well fortified, standing very commodiouslie to receive into it aid
from the Sea, wherein was planted an other Garrison of Saracenes. Whereof
hearing Martellus went also to oppugn and besiege it. So that now there was
no less bickering and contention on both parties for the oppugnation and
propugnation of Narbon: the one side meaning to win the city, the other not
intendyng so toloose it.

At which time Amorreus, an other Saracen King bringynge a band of new aid
to succor the besieeged Narbonians, was encountered by Martellus, at the river
Illiberis. Where between them was fought a sharp and bloody battle: but in
the end the victory fell to Martellus, and Amorreus valiantly fightyng in the
vawarde was slain with all his company, insomuch that not one was left alive
to carye any news home of their universal mishappe and calamytie. When Atine
understood of this discomfiture, he and as many as were with him at Narbon
shipped themselves and departed out of the French Province and Country.

At this time, when the Moors were thus driven out of all Aquitanie, nine of
the chief Peers of Martellus his Host, valiant men and hardye, warred upon
the Saracenes in Gotalonia: and Martellus dyed in whose room his second Son
Pipine succeeded. In the orient Malsamas spoylyng and depopulating ye borders
of Thracia (which now is called Romania) took a strong Town of Cappadocia
named Cursianum. From thence making an other viage with an Army unto the
Streicts of Caucasus, found the same so well defended and fortified by the Vnnes
or Turks, that not daring to meddle with them, he retired back again. And two
years after, an other army of Saracenes whereof was General one Euelit the
Son of Maunias inauaded again the Borders of Thracia, where after he had
made great spoil, he returned again into Syria. In which Province many
thousands of Saracenes dyed of sundry diseases. Nevertheless they abstained
nothing the more from making invasions into the Territoryes yt belonged to the
Roman Empire. For Zulciminie with a huyge power the third time pilfered and
haryed Armenia and Thracia and took the town called Syderonium: afterward he
went into Cappadocia with 60000. men, and at the very same time Melike and Batal
with a hundredth thousand Saracens brake the fourth time into Thracia. But Leo
then Emperor, marchyng with an Host against them that wasted Thracia,
destroyed and slew them almost every one. About this time died Euelid, in whose
place was created Bishop Gizit the second, in the year of our Lord 744. Who
for that he saw the Roman Empire to be divided intofactions, because
Constantine Copronymus ye Son of Leo contended with Artabasdus for the Garland,
addicted and bent his whole mind to dispose and set order in the Saracenicall
Empire. And because ye I Will of Ciprus being then well peopled, brued seditious
motions and ruflynge disturbaunces, he sent the whole people thereof into Syria
and left the Island without Inhabitants. And when he had reigned one year, he
deceased. After him, Ices obtained the pontificate, who also dying within less
then a year, Maruane was installed and made high Bishop.

Pipine the second bearing all thesway and rulynge all the roast in the Realm
of France, the Saracenes eftsoons passinge the Pyrenees were by him surprysed
and taken tardy, and paid so dearly for their lustiness, that so long as he
lived, the never durst any more attempt any invasion or pillage toward his
land, Territory or domynion, for which valyance and magnanimity, the
Frenchmen, by the assent of Zachary then Pope of Rome deposed Childerick to
whom the crown of France by lineall descent of inheritance belonged, and
made Pipine their King: and with him anointed as heir Apparaunt to the
Crown, his Son Charles, who was after surnamed the Great. Whom (afterward
doing many things of his own proper will and authority contrary to his
Fathers mind and contentment, Charles
as though he had been already very King and in real possession of the Regal
Diadem) King Pipine his Father exiled out of his sight and commanded to
depart out of all the limytes and bounds of his Domynion and kingdom.
Wherefore he not darynge to disobey the king his Fathers decree and judgment,
took with him many of the French Nobilytie which followed him, and went to
Galasie King of Toledo, a Saracene borne. Which Galasie used his help,
advise and aid in the war which then he had against Marsilius King of
Saragoza, a Saracene also as well as he. In which wars Charles, being
Chieuetayne of all the King of Toledo his army, behaved him self like a
worthy Knight, and many ways endamaged King Marsilius.

Afterward falling in love with Galiana Daughter to the king his Master,
adventured and achieved many worthy enterprises and notorious Acts for her
sake, namely against Bramantes, an other Saracen King. Who because he would
have had Galiana to his wife, maugre her Parents good will, besieged Toledo,
and discomfited the Soldiers both French and Saracene which served under the
king of Toledo, till Charles yssuing out to recharge upon him, coaped with him
and slew him with his own hands. This hot love continewinge for a time, at
length brake out so far, yt upon a certain time as yt damsel for her disport and
solace was walkyng in the gardens or baynes by the bankside of the river Tagus
without the walls of the city Toledo (which are at this day called the
Palaces of Galiana) Charles no longer hable to qualefye his amorous passion,
stole her away and fled with her to Bordeaux, where he builded for her a
sumpteus palace, as like in all points to the pattern and situation of the
princely Court of Toledo, as he could guess, which palace is yet extant, and
called also by the name of Galiana her Palace.

Maruane ruling in Syria, many sedicious mutines and factious partakings
chanced among the Saracenes, and many Tyraunts rebelliously reuoulted,
pretendynge title to the pontificate. Whose names were Tebid, Dadack, and
Zulciminie. Whom Maruane as traitors to him pursued, and took Tebid and put
him to death: Zulciminie having an overthrow, fled into Persia. But fortune
smiled and favored Dadack better then either of ye other twain, for he joining
battle with the Son of Maruane, vanquished him and discomfited his whole
Host. Albeit he could not long enjoy the fruicts of this victory, for wtin
awhile after, encountering with Maruane, himself in a cruel battle was overcome
and slain. Constantine Copronymus taking occasion and conceyuing hope of
future good luck by means of ye Saracens domestical sedition, inferred war
upon Syria, and wanne a great part of that Province. Wherefore Maruane having
now already gotten the vpperhand of Dadack with all his Adherentes: turned his
conquerous Arms to regayne Syria, and it recovered to ye great slaughter and
smart of ye Christians. The same year, a little before ye Christians received
this great overthrow and discomfiture at the hands of Maruane, the Country
Syria, Palestina, almost al Asia, Thracia, Grecia and Italy with many other
Regions were terriblye shaken with a dreadful Earthquake.

After this, more ruffling and commotion kindled in Persia. For Asmuline Prince
and kingleader of yt Sect (first reised and excited by Mutar, of whom we have
before made mention who affirmed Ali to be greater then Mahomet) dwelling and
living among the Corasenes, a people of Persia, through ye counsel and
instinct of one Cataban, incensed and moved all the Slaves and Peyzants of the
Country either privily or apertly, by secret conspiracy or by open force, to
quell and murder their Masters. With whose wealth, the Slaves being enriched
and made of great power, were divided into two factions, whereof the one were
called the Caismores, and the other the Lamonites. Now, Asmuline being Captain
of the Lamonites, subdued and clean dispercled the Caismores. Then being
accompanied with his Lamonites and his Counselor Cataban, marched forth into
Persia: over which Province was Lieutenaunt for Maruane one Ibline, who with an
host of one C. thousand good fighting men and well appointed, resisted and
gave to Asmuline battle. In which conflict, the Lamonites although they were
a great deal fewer in number, yet having an indubitate confidence in the
promises of Asmuline and in Cataban, whom they esteemed as men holy and
replenished with Prophetical inspiration, fought most valiantly, in so much
that they discomfited Ibline and put him to flight. Being then animated with so
many victories, gloriously and happily achieved, they were not afraid to
offer battle unto Maruane who had in his army iij. hundredth thousand fighting
Soldiers ready appointed in the field, near to the River Zaban, whom also
with all his army they discomfited. Maruane with four thousand only of his
company fled into Egypt, cutting down the bridge where he passed over, that
his enemies should not pursue and chase after him. But Saline the Son of
Asmuline persecuted and followed after him at his heels and in Egypt in a
blouddy battle overcame him, and thus was all the Maraunian Lynage and
Pedagrew expulsed. The remnauntes of whose line and Progeny which had
flourished and reigned so many years were dispersed and scattered abroad,
some fled into Mauritania where being wearied, they planted themselves, and
some went into Spain. From this Asmuline afterward that house and family which
now at this day reigns in Persia, called Sophi is lineally descended.

After the death of Asmuline and Cataban, one Abubalan surnamed Muamat was
Prince of Syria and Persia: and Saline of Egypt: and here began the first
Empire of the Sultanes or Souldanes of Egypt, which have their imperial Seat
at Cayre. For by that name the Aegiptian Caliphes would be called: which name (
Sultan) by interpretation signifies ye highest Sovereign Prince and King of
Kings.

About the same time, dyed Pipine King of France, and Charles his son
began his reign in his fathers steed. And among the Asturians, Alphonsus
the son in Law of Pelagius, and surnamed Catholicus succeeded Fafila. This
King recovered from the Saracenes in Gallicia, Lucus, Tui and Asturica, in the
Country called Campi, all that lies within the Ryuers Stola, Carrion,
Pisquerra, and Duerro: in Castulonia, Simancas, Duengas, Amaia, Caniciares,
Alesanium, Transinera, Supuerta and Carracia: in Lusitanie, Bracha, Viseum and
Portum, (of whom and Gallicians compounded together, which are a people of the
same Province) all Lusitanie is at this day called Portugal. He fortefied
many places, as Alaba, Ordugina, in Cantabria, which Country is now called
Biskaie: in Nauarra, Rueonia, Sarracecasium and diverse other places as far
as the Pyrence Mountains. And when he had reigned eyghteene ^eeres he dyed,
after whom his Son Froila was saluted and crowned king. This man gave an
overthrow to the Saracens which had invaded Gallicia, wherein he slew their
Captain Omar with fifty thousand others of his company, and compelled Joseph
king of Corduba to flee: and brought all the region of Gallicia into his own
rule and jurisdiction. He being afterward by his own Subjects murdered,
Aurelius his brothers son obtained the kingdom, of whom we read no notable
exploite done against the Saracens, and he also dying within short space after
his Coronation, his brother Silo was made king. Against him the Gallicians
rebelled, wherefore because he might ye better subdue and bring the^ to
reasonable conformity, he concluded a peace with the Saracens. He reigned
eight years and the^ dyed. After who^, succeeded Alphonsus the second, son
of Froila, surnamed Castus, which was in the year of our Lord God.780. Against
him, by the counsel and persuasio^ of his uncle Mauregate, the Saracens made
war. This Mauregate had promised unto them, that if he might by their means
and help obtain the Kingdom of Lion, which his Predecessors and Ancestors
before him had enjoyed, he would pay unto them yearly in the name of a
tribute fyftie persons of noble race, and as many Virgins of baser birthe, with
many other execrable and impious things. Whereupon, by the aid of the
Saracenes which furthered his pretense and quarrel, with all their might and
power, he forciblie got Lion with the whole Kingdom thereof and it intrusiuely
usurped by the space of five years. After whose death, Vermudeces, Son to
his brother Vimaran succeeded: who after two years, voluntarily and of his
own freewyll restored the Kingdom to Alphonsus. Which when the Saracenes
understood, they sent a great army against him, under the leadyng of Mucas:
between whom, near to a Town named Lutum or Ledum was fought a terrible and
sharp battle, but in the end the Saracenes were overcome, and of them were
slain.lxx. thousand, beside a great number which were taken Prisoners.

While these garboyles were in doing in Spain, the Saracenes in the Orient
were divided among themselves by intestine sedicion and civil tumulte. For
Abubalan ruling in Syria, many commotions and vprores were raised against him
in Arabia, by the faction of dead Maruane, affirmyng and proclayming abroad
that Maruane was not yet dead, and that therefore they put on Armor to
restore him again into his rightful estate and regal dignity. By reason of
which rebellious stir, many were slain on both sides, and great depopulation
committed.

After the death of Abubalan, his brother Abedela succeeded, who was
traitorously and insidiouslye murdered by an other Abedela, which aspyred to
the Byshopprike, hopyng to enjoy it after his decease as he did in deed.
During whose Reign and Empire, the Turkishe brood and Nation breaking cat of
the Streictes of Caucasus about the year of our Lord.800. made roades and
incursions into Armenia, and when they had piteously spoiled and sacked it,
they returned into their own Country. And the year following, they issued
out in great Plumpes, and fought with the Saracenes so long, till many being
slain on both parties, the night made them to surceasse and make an end of
their battle. Abedela the second of that name, in the eightenth year of his
raygne dyed, in whose place succeeded his Son Madi. Who without any notable
thing in all his time atchiued, dyed, when he had reigned ix. years, leauyng
behind him for his Heir and successor, his son Moses. Who in the second
year of his reign dyed: and in his room was created Caliph one Aaron. But
now to return to the affairs of the Occident.

Ibnabala King of Saragoza, being expulsed and driven out of his Country by
the other Princes of the Saracenes in Spain, Charles the Great.
came into France to King Charles, to implore and desire aid of him, to
revenge the injury unto him done: and at the same time also, Ambassadors came
to the same Charles from Alphonsus surnamed Castus, King of Asturians, to
incense and move him to war upon the Saracenes in Spain and to set the
Country in good order, and by his prowess to deliver it out of the clutches of
Tyrannical usurpers. Charles therefore gathering together not only the power
of his own kingdom but also having a supplye of foreign aid, among whom
were certain young Gentlemen of the Danes (which proffered their service to
accompaignie him, partly for a desire that they had to bellicall affairs, and
partly to show their prowess and courageous stomachs) with an Host not very
huyge and populous in number, but yet competent enough and such as were skilful
Soldiers and expert Capitaines, passed over the Pyrenees by Ronceuall without
resistaunce or stop of any man. And entering within the frontiers and borders
of Navarre, pight his Pauilions before Pompelon, the head City of the Kingdom
of the Cantabrians. Which City the saracenes had strongly fortified with a
mighty Garrison. And for that they had been already sufficiently schooled in
the ancient tricks and feats of Spain, they would no more commit the event
of their good or ill Fortune to ye hazard of one entire battle as they had
before done, but determined to protract and linger out the war with delays,
tergiuersacions and sKirmishes where they might epsy their best advantage.
Charles dispatched and sent an Herald at arms to sommon the Town, and to
know whether they would yield or else abide ye doubtful hazard of war. They
first, asked a time to consult among themselves what were best to do, ere they
would resolutelye answer to ye So^maunce. Unto whom was granted the space of
one day, wherein they demanded and entreated that they might have space
granted to send to their kings Friends and Confederates, and give them to
understand of their distress, so that if they were not rescued and the siege
raised within xv. days, then they would wyllingly yield themselves and their
City into his hands. Alleadgyng, that it should be much for the avail and
commodytie of ye French, to conquer and win the City, being vnperyshed and
neither by the Conqueror in his ragynge mood defaced, nor by the conquered
defendaunt, through desperation blemished and disfigured. Neither that this
taryaunce should in any poyncte hinder his Proceedinges, but rather be greatly
beneficial for him. For why, though he bent all the force he was able to make
against the City, yet was it able to hold him out for so many days as they
craved. And furthermore that the French, if their Fortune were to get the
vpperhande in fight of their Friends that came to succor them, should with a
word only command the Portecullesses and strong grated Gates of ye City to
be broken down and ope^ned for them quietly to enter, which should be much
for the honor, Dignity, and profit of both parties: least otherwise, those
innocent Cities that have committed no fault, for whose delivery and
regaignynge the French protested themselves to be come, should suffer such
ruthful and injurious examples of war on both sides, as the nature and
insolency of a Siege necessarilye brings.

Charles prudently perceiving all these protestations and surmises of the
Saracenes to be subtly and craftelye devised for none other intent, but only
to abate the heat and courage of his Soldiers (being now most sharply set to
have their purpose) by protracting the time and geuyng longer day, would in no
wise agree to grant them any respite to make any further preperation and
purueighaunce for war, which might peradventure turn him to greater
inconvenience afterward, but immediatlye sends defiaunce against them, and
commands his Soldiers to provide and make ready such things as to the
battrie and siege of the City were requisite.

The Siege of this City continued many days, and diverse assaults fiercely
given. The Assaylauntes were not so busy without, but the Defendaunts were as
dylygent within many times yssuinge out of their Gates, not after the Arabian
guyse, but according to the Spanish manner, armed with Sword and fire, quick,
swift, nymble and sudden, deluding their enemies, with many stratagemes and
subtle policies, facinge and shifting from place to place, pretermittinge no
occasion that made for their purpose, dealing every where and at all times so
deceiueablye, that when the other party thought themselves surest of their
purpose, they were fardest of, and when their desires were likest (as they
thought) to sort to effect, then were they soonest beguiled and lykely
themselves to fall into the lapps of their enemies: so secret and speedy, that
they were many times in the midst of their enemies flashing among them before
any man suspected their coming, killing them and setting fire in their tents
and gone again out of sight, ere any resistaunce could be made or any time to
go against them. They skirmished and ruffled with their enemies, in a manner
within their own tents. And although there was a band appointed at ye gates of
the City to keep them from coming out, yet (notwithstanding) they could not
be so pent in, nor debarred from their purposes, but with like bouldenesse as
before, they would often set upon them, and by no means would be brought to
keep wtin ye walls of the city, til ye same were thoroughly entrenched and
rampired, and all their works within, finished to their mind. The^ did they
stand at defiaunce valiauntly, not as men defending their manhood with walls,
but keepyng and defending their walls with manhood. This Siege contynuing
somewhat long, the other kings which were daily looked for to reyse the siege,
came in deed, albeit furnished with any host, able to fight a maine battle,
but ever as they espied any advantage or occasion, they would make out
Dimilaunces and light Horsemen by known paths and ways, to annoy King
Charles. Which Horsemen oftener by night then by day alitle disquieted his
Camp, and made some disturbance and Outcries therein. An other crewe of them
killyng the watchme^ and perforce making way through their enemies Bulwarks
and Fortifications, entered the city, and greatly relieved them within,
whereby they conceived great hope of future success. Charles with a courage
vnappauled and invincible exhorting his men, told them that the victory was to
be obtained with pains taking and vigilancie, that martial prowess appears
not only in the encountrie and conflict, but a great deal rather in good
discipline and observance of martial orders, not to be lulled in ease and
securytie, bestowing the greatest part of the night in sleep and bodily rest,
but in study and devise for the atchiueaunce of their waightye business, and
in the day time incessantly to be busied, abstaining from riot and libidinous
lusts and evermore abandoning werines and lingering of time. Giving them
further to understand, yt ye cages and walls wherein those Sathanistes had
enclosed themselves for their sauegard, must either perforce be broken in pieces
and beaten down about their ears, or else ye enemies themselves to be tamed
and brought under awful obedience. Wherefore he had them to advance their
standards and with banners displaid, to march against the^, and not suffer them
to rest. Then was there made fortificatio^s and habiliments, to serve each way
and on every side, whereby their Camp was kept both before, behind and on either
side.

Then they that fisked and raunged out as they did before, were feign to hyde
their heads within their Fortress, or else were shamfully compelled to retire,
and so the matter was brought to a perfect Siege. Then began there a sharp
and terrible battrye which continued day and night without intermission, fresh
Soldiers ever coming in the places of ye weary, and fighting by course one
after an other round about, with all kind of devises Engines, Ordinance,
Ladders, Bridges, policy and valyauntnes, in so much that ye Saracenes courage
being well cooled, were now dismayed and at their wits end, not hable to hold out
any longer, but on every side (do what they could) were by the valyant French
Assaylaunts thrown down from the walls or else slain out of hand. Within the
City also there was a great slaughter of them, until the King had made
proclamation that as many as were unarmed and without weapon should be spared.

Then lo, the Saracenes, ever before that time, choosing and accustomed rather
to die then to yield as long as they had weapon and Armure, King Charles
cooled the saracens courage
threw down their weapons, and upon their knees holdyng up their unarmed
hands be sought pardon. Then were the walls rased and the city sacked. From
thence the Camp removed and went to Saragoza the head City of the Province
Taraconensis: which being terryfied and feared by the example before,
straightway condiscended and agreed to accept the offers and conditions
propounded unto them, which was that they should admit and receive into
their City such as preached the glad tydinges of the Gospel of God, and
receive again Ibnabala their King, and him to acknowledge and obey as their
Sovereign Lord. After this, he went into Gottalonia, and compelled the two
kings of ye Province (which were accused to have expulsed Ibnabala but of his
kingdom) Abu^am and Deui^feze to come into his Paullion with Gifts and
Presents, and condescend to become Tributaries. Thus his name was had in fear
and awe throughout all Spain. But when he was returned home again into
France, some write that there came out of Aphrica, one Aigoland, sent from the
high Duke of the Aphrican Saracens, who kept his Seat royal at Marrocco) with
a mighty army, to recover all such Towns and places as Charles had taken in
Spain: with whom there were many other Princes, Potentats and valiant
personages. And that Charles (after many combats, darraigned and foughten with
him hand to hand being thereunto by him challenged and provoked) fought a
bloody battle with him at Baion, a City of Vasconia, wherein were slain
400000. Christians, and among them Miles Anglere Father to Rouland, a stout
Gentleman and a hardy, who had the leadinge and was General of the whole Army.
Notwithstanding, all was regained by the puyssance and prowess of Charles, and
other fresh aid that then came even in the nicke out of Italy to succor the
Frenchman in that distress. Insomuch that Aegoland priuyly fled and conueighed
himself away.

But not long after, having repaired his army with a supply of more
Soldiers, Aegoland again provoked Charles into Vasconia, and besieged the
City Gennum now called Baion the space of seven Months, and departing thence
was in the borders of Xantongue in a cruel battle overthrown, after which
discomfiture he fled back again into Spain. And how that Charles (because he
would at length bring his Spanish wars to an end) with a greater army then any
before, entered into Spain, where after many light skirmishes, he slew Aegola^d
in a notable battle: after which victory he brought under his subjection and
rule almost all Spain: with many more forged reports and mere fables of some
aduoutched, all which, for the untruth and vnlykelyhood thereof we do hear
pretermit. But if any be desirous to see them, let them read Turpine Bishop
of Rhemes, to whom also I do refer you, for the truth of this which we have
here last recited. For we do not find in any of those credible and approved
writers which we follow, that Charles made any more voyages against the
Saracenes into Spain but one, nor that they ever entered into France during
his Reign. But this is manifest, that Alphonsus King of Asturia, moved with
the famous renown of his noble Acts and invincible valiaunce, and for the
common weal of his Kingdom and Subjects, because he had no Children of his
own, and saw that the power of that only Region was far unable so bear
out and maintain continual wars with the Saracens, offered unto him
secretly by trusty Messengers and Ambassadors the Kingdom of Lion, so that
he would aid him against the King of Corduba, with whom he had then waged
War. Charles accepting this offer and condition, sent aid unto him. Which
composition when the Nobles and Peers of the Realm of Lion understood, they
were soore displeased and took the matter grievously, spighting (as commonly in
like cases it falls out) to have a Nation hard under their noses to be
rulers over them, and thereupon they compelled their King to starte from his
Bargain and undo his League. And not so contented to leave, purposed also and
devised which way to dispatch and destroy King Charles and all his Army:
fearing, least he seeing himself thus deluded and mocked would, revenge this
injury done unto him. Therefore gathering and assembling all the power of the
Asturians and Cantabrians together, and sendyng also for aid to the Saracenes
(in secret wise preventing Charles) took and kept the narow Streights of the
Mountains where the passage and way lies into Spain by Ronceuall. For
Charles was returned into France, and was now again in his way going into
Spain, to revenge this wrongful dealing. The Army of King Charles was the^
at the foot of the Pyrence Mountains on that side next France, in the valley
(yet called Hospita) when there came news unto them, that the Spaniardes were
coming in warlike manner against him along by the valley called at this day
Charles Valley, which was a fair plain Cha^paine. Therefore dividing his host
into three Battles, by the fraudulent and traitorous counsel of Galero^ (or
as some call him Gane) who^ the enemies had corrupted with money, he appointed
Rouland his Nephew by his Sister, (commonly called of ye vulgar sort Orland)
Duke of little Britain, a valiant Gentleman and a hardy, to lead ye
Vauwarde, wherein he placed all the noble States and Peers of France: in ye
second battle, he placed innumerable Gentlemen and noble Personages: and he
himself with ye third (wherein was the traitor Galero^) tarried still in ye
camp, commanding Orland with the vauntgard to advance himself forward. The
Spanish army was embattailed in Ronceuall, expecting their coming. Upon, who^
the front of the French host giving the onset, was at ye first brunt so
handled (for the Spanyardes had gotten the upper ground and al ye strait
passages) yt they were in worse case which escaped their hands, the^ they which
were slain outright in fighting: for they dyed and were quickly out of pain,
but the other ^leeing through thick and thin among ye stones and craggy
Cliues and falling down from high Rocks, had their limbs broken, and so
continued for a longer season in extreme tormente and agonies. Thus, Rouland
and all his train being wearied, what with climing up the hill, and what with
the weight of their armor were easily killed and brought to confusion. xii.
Peers of France.
After the same manner also was ye second battle handled, wherein were ye. 12.
Peers of France, in whose power it is to create the king and decide al
weighty causes of the Realm.

Charles still abode in the Valleye, which for this cause is to this day called
Charles Valley, whyther he had removed his Camp out of Hospita. Who
understanding of the great overthrow and loss of his Men, retired with all
speed again into France. Alphonsus excused himself by Ambassadors unto
him, that all these things were attempted and done without his consent and
knowledge, with whom Charles renewed the former amytie and league between them
stricken and concluded. Then deuisinge in his mind to procure an atonement and
universal peace to the whole world, sent his Ambassadors into Syria and
Egypt, to conclude an amytie and peace with ye Princes and Chief Rulers of
the Infideles, to the end that they should the better use and entreat ye
Christians living under their subjection. Which he obtained, insomuch that
Aaron the high Caliph of Persia and Arabia) who not long before, rufflingly
inuadyng the Provinces of Asia that were under the Constantinopolitane Empire
with CCC.M. men, had enforced and by compulsion driven Nicephorus the emperor
to redeem and (as it were) to fer^^e peace at his hands, by paying yearly an
annual fee in gold) from thenceforth not only not infested and vexed ye
Christians, but also gave yearly a great Mass and sum of money to the
relief of those poor Captives that lived under his rule, and also sent his
Ambassadors with great rewards to King Charles. For when Aaron had with many
overthrows and pillages miserably afflicted and frusshed the Roman empire,
surpryzed and taken Tyana where he erected and dedicated a temple unto Mahomet
and an infinite number of towns more: Nicephorus seeinge his matters go to
wrecke, and distrustinge any better fortune, sent his Letters to the Arabian to
obtain and request a peace according to the tenor folowinge.

Why tho^ should thus unjustly war against me and my dominions sythens I
have not wronged nor offended thee, or who they be that counsel thee thereunto
I know not, neither do I se any cause reasonable to move thee, unless it be
peradventure, because thou have a delight and pleasure in murder, robbery and
rapine. For that thou do it for religion sake, thou can not pretend a ny
excuse, since Machomet thy high Prophet, commands you to use and accoumpt
al Christians as Brothers. Do thou think that Almighty God the creator of
all things and the stay of both the People, whom he has created and made
after his own similitude and lykenes, is delighted with effusion and sheeding
of innocent blood? God forbid. For your Prophet Mahomet did not command you to
offer unto him any such sacrifice or satisfactorie exp^ation. Or else
perchance do thou invade ye territories and provinces belonginge to other
men, for some need and want of Silver, Gold and such other things? But alas,
there is no such store of these things with us? yea all precious iewelles and
wares that are rare and hard to be gotten, are among you in great plenty. But
if there be any thing in our Countries yt may do thee pleasure, why do thou
not ask it freendly, and we will bestow the same upon the without delay most
lovingly. If thou care not for man nor any force ye mortal man can annoye thee
with all, yet know thou that there is a God, which sees and remembers right
and wrong. For sythens we be mortal, it is not comely nor fit for us to
bear immortal grudge and endless enemitie one toward an other, and in that
poinct to resemble and imitate the Devil, which ever spighteth at man's
felicity and soulehealth and is at perpetual war with all mankind.

With these lettres, sent not without rewards and sumptuous presents Aaron
being appeased, sent again many presents and gifts to Nicephorus, and
concluded a peace with him upon a condition, that the Emperor should pay
yearly unto him xxx.M. Crowns, and three for his own head, and as many for
his Son and that he should not reedifie nor repair such Towns as were rased
and wasted by the saracenes. But in the perfourmance of this agreement, there
was les faith in ye Greek then in the Barbarian. For Nicephorus after the
departure of the Saracenes out of those towns, immediately reedified and
fortyfied them. Which dealyng when Aaron understood, he furnished out an other
Army into Grecia, which took Thebes: and sendinge a Navy into Cyprus,
subverted the Churches and expulsed the Cyprians. And when Aaron had reigned
xxiij. years he paid his debte to Nature, after whom succeeded in the
Pontificate his Son Muamat. Who falling at mortal debate with his Brother
Halad, and with him coapynge in conflicte wherein his side went to wrack
(Fortune more favoring his Brothers part) grew to a composition with him, yt they
twain should jointly with egal authoryty (having both one and the same title or
style) enjoy the Empire. Then there were created four Tyrauntes whereof one had
for his share Spain, an other Aphrica, the third Aegipt and the fourth Syria
and Palestina. Whereupon, the Saracenical power began to decline, and for
awhile ye affairs of ye Orient were indyfferently quiet among the Saracenes.
And Muamat the Caliph of Syria would not now have his imperial Seat at
Damasco, but builded a new city near where old Babylon once stood, and
called it Bagadat, and it constituted the Pontifical Sea of Syria and all the
Orient: For the Persians were yet under his rule and jurisdiction. The
Aegiptian kept his residence at his Metropolitan City of Cayre: which was
(as before we have showed) builded near the place where old Memphis erst
stood. Which after the Sea royal was in it appoyncted and kept, so increased,
that at this day it is thought to be one of the greatest Cities in the whole
World: the chief Sea of Aphrica was accounted by Elagleb to be at Caioran,
which City was builte in Africa when Ottmen had the regiment and governance
of the Empire, and is distaunte from the City of Tunice about an hundredth
Miles, and from the Sea thyrtie and six.

Spaigne although it obeyed and had in it many kings, yet they all acknowledged
the Bishop of Marrocco for their Diocesan: which is a City of Mauritanie
Tingitana. He that gouourned Assyria was called the Caliph, which name
signyfieth a successoure: because he boasted and bragged himself to be the
Successoure of Mahomet. The Aegiptian Bishop was called the Sultane, and he
of Caioran, (like as the Assyrian did) named himself a Caliph: and he of
Marrocco by the ancient name of the Founder and buylder of that City, was
named a Miralmumine. Under these, there also arose certain other less
Kingdoms in Africa: as the Kingdom of Tunice, of Tripolis, of Algeria, of
Oran, of Fess: and an innumerable sort more, less then these. For as every
one was Ruler over any City or Province. So he called himself King of the
same, and possessinge the Style and name thereof, as due by inheritance, left
and delivered the same as it were by hand to his Succession and posterytie.

But yet notwithstanding all these Kings agnized and acknowledged some of
these forenamed Bishops: and as every one favored this Bishop or that, so
in his quarrel did he make War with the Kings of the other faction. Which
sedicious discordes and multitude of Tyrants so appaired and weakened the
power of the Saracenes that after the regiment of the aforesaid Bishops,
they so decreased and their force so was enfeebled, that at length the name of
Saracenes gave place and was almost clean eaten up of the Turks: and the
state of their Empire was at this time through the perturbation and burlyburly
about the sovereignty, so obscured and unknown, that no certainty in the
succession of their Empire can be had, no not among their own writers.
Nevertheless, we observing the due order of times, will as briefly as may
be, comprehend all such things as are confusedly written by diverse Authors,
concerning the acts and gestes by them achieved.

In the time that this Muamat the Son of Aaron ruled Assyria, and Michael the
Son in law of Nicephorus (expulser of Leo out of Armenia) was Emperor of
Constantinople, one Thomas brued a great garboyle and commotion. Thomas a rank
sedicious traitor and filthy villain.
Of whom the report and fame is told after two ways. Some say he came of a
very poor and base Parentage, and that he lived long time in much poverty and
indigence, feign to get his living with his handie labor, and sometime with
servile drudgerie. Afterward, abandoning his native Country and coming to
Constantinople, was retained in the service of an Alderman of the City where
the graceless verlet so much abused himself with carnal lust and vicious
life, that he committed adultrie with his Mistress, and dubbed the Alderman
his master, Knight of the common Hall. Which lewd pranke being detected and
come to light, Thomas partly for stark shame and ignominy and partly for
fear of the pains and punishment appointed by Law for such as he was, fled
to the Saracenes: for whose Diuelishe devises he was as fit an Organe and
Instrument as any in the world: with whom, he was had in a great credit,
specially after that his conversation and behavior a long time continued and
showed among them (for he had now dwelled among them.xxv. years) had given
sufficient testimony and put them in an assured opinion of his fidelity
toward them. Insomuch that renouncing and apostating his Christianity and
abiuring the holy Religion of the Christians, he embraced the horrible doctrine
of Mahometicall Religion. And being by them appointed Capitane of a competent
Crew of warlike Soldiers was sent against the Christians. For he had promised
unto them, that if they would furnishe him out with some competent power, he
would undertake to subdue the Roman Empire into their hands. And least the
Christians should have any mistrust and diffidence in him thus working and
contriuing the Toil of their confusion, or peradventure taking him as a
stranger and forayner give no credit to his words, he named himself
Constantine, the son of Irene. Which Constantine in very deed (for his
crabbed nature and perverse manners) his mother long before had bereft of both
his eyes and of the Empire also, and was then dead.

Some others there be, which do affirm that this Thomas was whilome in the
house of one Bardanius surnamed Turcus, together with Michael and Leo. At what
time soiourning at a place called Philomelium, and seeking by all means how to
make himself Emperor, he discovered his counsel and opened the very bottom
of his stomach to a certain Monk skillful in the prediction of fortunes and
things to come, to which devise and plat he made Leo Armenus privy. Unto whom
the Monk told, that if he first aspired to the Empire, he should loose both
his eyes and his worldly dignity: but of them, that brought him his horse, the
first and second should enjoy the Diadem, and the third should be proclaimed
Emperor: but not hable to compass and thoroughly bring about, his desired
purpose, he should shortly perish and be brought to confusion.

The first was Leo, the second Michael, and the third this Thomas whom Leo the
Emperor made Colonel over the Band of his Confederates. Which Leo, when
Thomas understood to be slain by Michael, he partly to revenge the death of
him through whose benevolence and goodwill he had been promoted to diverse
dignities, and partly to ease his own Stomach and bring about the effect of
his malicious mind (for Michael and he could never agree but maligned one an
other even from their Adolescencie) raised war against Michael, and first
found the means to inueigle and raise up the Oriental power (among whom he
lived) to take part with him. Thus he gathered together an army not of
weaklings and inexpert Soldiers, or of a few in number, but huyge, Populous
and hardy, of Saracenes, Moors, Indians, Medes, Persians, Assyrians,
Armenians, Chaldees, Iberians, Zigians, Cabirians and diverse other Nations. Of
whom, some by compulsion accompanied him in that War, some for good will,
some in hope of spoil, and some for a rooted malice and hatred against
Michael, who for his froward nature and perverse manners was generally hated of
all men. For Thomas although he was lame on one of his feet, and a Barbarian
borne, yet for his gray hears and ancient age he was reputed among them
venerable and worshipful, in famylier talk and conference very courteous and
affable (which are the things that most of all wynneth the hearts of
Soldiers) and for bodily strength not inferior to any.

He thus furnished with an army of Saracenes, to whom he had promised the
Constantinopolitane Empire, and also with a great power of Christians which
ventured life limme and goods with him, violently invaded and forcibly got the
possession of the Orient. And bringing under his obedience the exacters of
public tributes with great statelynesse of mind, followed the chase of good
fortune now serving his turn and smyling upon him, Within a while, of a low
Haskerd became a great Ruler and of a weak mungrell Pezaunt a mighty
Potentate, by whom all Asia was with spoiling and pillage miserably afflicted.
Some Cities for fear ioygned side with him, and conformed themselves to his
humor. Some because they would not reuolte from their true Liege the Emperor,
were spoiled and the inhabitauntes carried away Captyue. So that there were
none in all Asia but only the Opsicians and Armenians which continued in their
true allegiance. For which gratuitie and constant obedience, the Emperor
released and frankly remitted unto the^ their public tribute called Fumariu^.
But Thomas was so puffed up with this success, yt he presumptuously took upon
him ye name of Emperor: and was crowned with ye Diadem at Antioche, by Job
Pastor or Bishop at that time of the Antiochene Congregation: whom he (to
requite one good turn for another) adopted for his Son, and made as his
fellow and Coadiutour in the administration of the Empire, and then changing
his own name called himself Constantine the Son of Irene the Empress.

The Emperor knowing of this new stir and commotion made preparation for
war: and sent one of his Lords with an Army nothing equal (God wot) nor of
power to match and encounter with his enemies: which was by Thomas discomfited
and clean overthrown. After this, meeting with the Roman Fleet, took ye
same, and with.lxxx.M. men took his way to Abydus, which is a City of Asia
the less, standing upon the Sea side, spoiling and destroying all where he
went, and burning to ashes not only poor vpla^dish villages, but goodly towns
and strong Cities. And from thence in a very dark night transfreted into
Thracia, where many of the Emperors Soldiers reuoulted and fled daily unto
him. He put to flight and drove down all the Emperors power sent against him.
Whereof were chief Capitaines Olbian and Catacella, and (like a ragyng Stream,
violently runnyng down from a Hill) profligated both by Sea and Land and bore
down before him, an other well appointed Navy, manned out likewise by ye
emperor against him. He burst asunder the iron chain that went overthwart the
Haven and so laid siege to the city both by Sea and land. But preuailyng
nothing that way, he determined to win his purpose by long siege, and
fortifiyng his Camp in very good order, sent part of his army to subdue ye
Towns lying by ye Coast of Euxine. This done, with the rest of his power
(which was very great) he on every side beclipped the city with a mighty
oppugnation and gave thereto a terrible battery. But by the valiant courage of
the Defendauntes, all his attemptes were frustrate. And his Navy on ye Sea by
force of tempest was dispersed and disseuered, so that he was feign to bring
his host back again into Asia till the winter were passed.

The Spring following, he again returned to the same siege: but Michael being
now better furnished and provided then he was before both with a Navy of tall
Ships to scowre the Coasts and keep the Seas, and also with an army of
lusty soldiers by land, first assaied by diverse slights to undermine Thomas
his soldiers and to solicit them to renownce and forsake their Captain
but al was in vain. Wherefore setting all the Gates of ye city open, he
suddenly with all his company issued out and set upon Thomas suspectyng no such
pretense and matter, and him there discomfited, and his whole Fleet on the Sea
also.

There was one Gregory, Cosen to Leo late Emperor, who with a crew of good
fighting Soldiers aided Thomas, but now seeinge the world thus turned,
separated forthwith his Soldiers aparte from the residue, in hope thereby to win the Emperors favor and set upon Thomas behind. Which when Thomas
espied, being nothing therewith discouraged, nor yet therefore remoouing his
stronglye lodged Camp from the City, set upon Gregory with part of his Army
and him discomfited, who for his sauegard flying away, he caught in the chase
and put to death. Then speeding himself into his Camp again, he addressed his
letters abroad into all quarters, untruly making report that he had gotten the
vpperhand against Michael in battle: and sent for the Navy that lay at
Berytum, wherein were of Gallayes and Hulkes to the number of CCC.L. Sail,
with all expedition to come unto him, as though the matter should forthwith be
tried likewise by Sea. Which drifte and commandment when the Admyralles and
Capitaines of the Roman Navy understood and knew, they set upon them at
unawares by night in the road, when they lay at Anchor, and with their sudden
coming, so scarred and affrayed the Mariners that they were at their wits
end and knew not how upon such a sudden to defend themselves: so yt there
many of them were by ye Imperials taken, and many burnt, and very few escaped,
which being quick of sail got away and joined themselves to the other Army
that was on the land.

While this terrestrial army lay before Constantinople, without any notable
battle saving only manylight skirmishes, and small bickeringes, wherein
sometimes Fortune smyled and sometime frowned upon either part, the same and
report thereof was spread and bruted throughout the World. In somuche that
Mortago King of Bulgarie, (notwithstanding the Emperor for greediness and
miserable sparing of his money as he was by nature most covetous and a near
Prince, thankyng him for his good will, had before refused his aid offering to
assist him, saying that he had no need thereof) partlye because he was
desirous of War and spoil of his enemies, and partly to confirm the former
three years League made with Leo Armenus, marched with an Army against
Thomas, and him in a place called Cedocto, not far from Constantinople where
the two armies met, in Battle overcame and vanquished, wherein many a man was
slain, and after the end thereof returned home with many Prisoners and rich
Booties.

When the Nauye that Thomas had left at the Siege heard of this notable
discomfiture and overthrow, they all reuoulted from Thomas and submitted
themselves to the Emperor. Thomas gatheringe together the remnaunt of his
Army that escaped vnkylled at the last conflict with Mortago, conducted them
into a plain Feelde called Diabasis, distaunt certain Furlonges from the
City, a place very commodious and fit for excursions, and for plenty of
water very profitable. Where he anew encamped. From thence making vagaries
and roades, he wasted and despoyled all the Emperors sumptuous buyldings and
banqueting houses of pleasure standing in the Suburbs of the City. The
Emperor having his Army every day more and more increased, struck up
Alarm and gave the charge upon him in three several parts, whereby he
thoroughly put al Thomas his Army to flight. For Thomas before had given
commandment to his men, that at the first onsette, they should retire and
make a show as though they fled, and afterward upon the sudden turn again
and recharge upon their enemies. After this discomfiture many of his men fled
to the Emperor. Thomas with a few of his adherents came in safety to
Adrianople and his adoptiue Son Anastasius escaping also by flight, took for
his sauegarde the Castle of Byzia. After whom the Emperor without delay making
pursuit, went first to Adrianople where Thomas was. And least the Scythians
dwelling thereabout, should learn the knowledge of such engyns and Arrtyllerie
as serve for Battery and oppugnation of Cities, he determined by famine to
drive them to surrender and yield, and so beclipped it round about with a
strong Siege.

The City was well walled and beside that, surely entrenched and fortefied
with Bulwarks. But they were so pinched with Famine, that all their victualles
being spent, they secretly had conference with Michael and being at a poyncte
and composition with him for pardon of this their rebellyous conspiracy,
delivered Thomas into his hands. The Emperor now having in his possession
his deadly enemy, End of Traitors
observing ye ancient custom of other Emperors in like cases, first made him
to prostrate himself upon the Pauement and Stones, which done, he set his
feet upon his neck, and trodde upon him.

Then he caused his Feet and hands to be cut of, and so setting him upon an
Ass, commanded him to be carried about the Camp, for every man to wonder at.
Whereat the miserable caytife said in howling sort these words: Have mercy and
compassion upon me you yt art ye true King. And when he was about, upon ye
Emperors interrogatories and motions to have bewraied and accused certain of
his famyliers, as pryuie and of counsel with him in this ruffling rebellion,
the Emperor being advised by Exambulius one of his Nobles, that no credit
ought in such cases to be given to a professed enemy, accusing the approved
friends of his Majesty, would not hear him. And so giving order for his
execution, caused him, (long languishing in terrible forments) to be put to
death.

They that fled to Byzia, following the example of the Adrianopolitanes, took
Anastasius and delivered him bound to the Emperor, who also was put to
execution. This end had Thomas, whose history (although he were no Saracen) we
thought good not here to omit, because he chiefly achieved and perpetrated
the same by the aid and power of the Saracens, insomuch that he might right
well seem to have been the Emperor and Ringleader of the Saracens.

While these things were in doing in the Orient, the Saracens in Spain, most
arrogantly by their Ambassadors demanded of Ramire King of Asturians (who
succeeded Alphonsus Castus) ye Tribute which king Mauregat was wont to pay.
Unto whom Ramire by the advice of his privy Counsel answered, that he had
leifer dye a hundredth deaths then so to do. And forthwith leuying an army
marched against them wasting and destroying their Territories and Countries,
as far as Nagiera. Between whom and the Saracens was fought at Aluelda a sore
battle, and sorer had been if the night had not made an end of the same for
that day, wherein forasmuch as the Saracenes were lyker to have the victory:
Ramire by night with his company retired unto a certain hill near Clauigium:
and there greatly fearing the doom of Fortune the next day, and what would
befyde on him and his, after so unlucky a beginning, sought his only refuge
at Gods hands, bestowing (both he and all his retinue) the whole night almost
in watching and prayer to Almighty God for his assistaunce in that their
grievous extremity. Then and there (as some do say) Saint James the Apostle
seemed personally to appear unto him, promysing him his help and
furtheraunce, whereupon Ramire the next day coming into the field in good array
of battle, against his enemies, with an assured confidence of Divine help
and assistance, the said holy Apostle Saint James was seen in the battle,
sitting upon a white horse and bearing in his hand a red Cross, and that in
the same Battle were slain of Saracenes. lxx. thousand. Then were Albaida,
Clauigium, Calagurra, and many other towns thereabout regained by the
Christians: In token and remembrance of which victory by the Divine assistance
of Celestial presence achieved, By whom and whereupon ye Knights of ye order
of S. James were first instituted.
the Noble order of the Knights of Saint James was by the King instituted.

The Saracenes inhabyting the West part of Spain where Valentia stands,
pestred with multitude of people, and considering that ye Country which was
unto the^ for their habitation allotted, was neither fruitful nor wealthye,
desired their high Prince of Marrocco in Mauritania Tingitania whose name was
Amerumen, to permit and lycense them to seek some other place of dwelling,
where they might more commodiously rouste: and whyther they might carry their
people, and famylie and plant themselves more to their co^tentacions. Whose
requests their Prince, as one desirous of new alterations and chaunges of the
world granted: and furnishing them out of hand with a Hauie of Brigandines
and Gallayes, partlye because he would staunch their greedy appetites with
other men's goods, and partly because he would by this means try and seek
out whether there were any fruitful Soil and fertile Island, whereinto he
might conveniently deryue a Colonie of his own people, sent them to the Isles
of the Orient. They landed first in Corsica, but thence they were repulsed and
driven away by Abdemar, whom Pipine the Son of Charles the Great King of
Italy, had sent with the Genaway fleet against them. In which conflicte,
Abdemar most valiauntly and manfully fighting was slain. From thence saylyng
to the Isles of Grecia (which were spoiled and disfurnished of the Hauie
appointed to keep them, through the means of the Garrison that took part
with Thomas) they sacked and robbed almost every one of them unmercifully.
Among all the rest, lyking Creta best, both for fertility of the Country, and
holesomenes of Air, they laded their Ships with pillage and returned for
that year home again, and in the Spring following, with.xl. tall Ships well
manned and appointed for the Wars, they having a prosperous gale of wind
came straight again to Creta. And setting their men on land at a Promontorie
called ever after Carax, set their Ships on fire, and there pitching their
Tents, strongly entrenched them selves, calling the place by the name of
Caudax. Against whom, the Emperor with all expedicion sent a power under the
conduct of Photinus Liuetenaunt of the Orient, and one Damianus who in a
certain skirmish against them, was slain, whose death so much, astonned and
discouraged the residue, that they trusted to then legs and ran away. Then
there came unto them a certain Monk out of the mountains of that Island, who
told them that the place which they had chosen to build a City upon, was
nothing fit for such a purpose: and withal, showed unto them a place, named
Candaces, in all poinctes far more commodious.

Where they builded a City, which should be as the Castle and fortress of the
whole Isle, and called it Candie. Out of which they made Roades and invasions
into the whole Isle, insomuch that within a short space they brought the same
wholly into their subjection, dispossessing the inhabitauntes and carrying the
Citizens away into Captivity. At which time, Cyrillus Bishop of Gortyne,
suffered Martyrdom for the profession and testimony of Jesus Christ, our only
Savior. An other navy of the^ about the same time, attempted once again ye
winning of Sardinia and Corsica: the which was encou^tred and vanquished about
Sardinia by the power of Charles, the brother of Pipine, being under ye conduct
of the County Bucharede, and v. M. of the saracens slain, and all the rest of
them afterward by him clean driven out of Corsica.

Pipine having wars with the Venetians, the Saracens in Spain, taking
occasion by the discord and dissensions of the Christians to bring their own
matters to desired effect, suddenly invaded Sardinia, from whence not long
before, they had been repulsed with a notable slaughter and loss of their
people. But staying not long there, they suddenly departed thence: cutting
their course directly to Corsica. And sacking ye City Aleria, beside ye Bishop
and a few other old me^, all the other multitude and common sort they carried
thence away with them. The Emperor Michael, sent out another Navy whereof was
Captain Craterus the Lieutenant of Cyberetes, against the Saracenes which
rousted and nestled in Crete. Who with.lxx. Sail of his own and an infinite
number of Galleys of other Islandes, well manned and appointed, courageously
landed in Crete: where he found the Saracens never a whit abashed of his
arrival, neither refusing by dent of sword and stroke of battle to darraigne
their quarrel. Whereupon, they met together in a place meet for such a
purpose: where between the^ was fought a sharp and cruel Battle, lasting
from the dawning of the day till Noone, in such doubtful fortune that hard it
was to judge, whether part in the end would carry away the victory. But at length
toward Evening the Saracens were overcome and fled: whereof many were slain in
the field but more, throwing away their weapons were taken: insomuch that yt
day their City was like to have been taken and won, if it had not been so
near night. Which night and victory was the destruction and overthrow of ye
Greeks as afterward shall appear. For being now in their iolitie and pride,
hopyng the next day following with small labor or none at all, to bring those
few of their enemies yet left a live into their power) gave themselves to
bi^ynge, riot and bellychere as though they had not been in their enemies
precinct and danger but at home in their own houses, taking no regard to set
heir watch kept, or any other expedient order observed: Insomuch that minding
no other thing but sleep, ease and stouth (the utter ouerthrowers of al
goodness) they were set upon in the dead time of the night, Dronkenes the cause
of a general mishap and slaughter.
snortinge with their dronken nowles, by the Saracenes (who espied the
advantage and oportunytie) and were slain every Mothers son, not so much as a
Messenger left alive to carry home news of their ill speed. Only Craterus
the Captain, embarkinge himself in a Merchants Craer, sought to save his
life. But when the Chieuetayne of the Saracenicall Army after long seekinge
and tumblinge among the dead Carcasses and Prisoners could not find him,
knowing him then to be escaped and fled, sent in all post have to pursue and
hunt him out. Who being taken and apprehended in the I Will of Coo, was hanged
upon a Gibbet.

The Emperor Michael hearing these news commanded Orypha a wiseman and very
skillful in Martial affairs to gather together the Praetorian Legion (which
because every soldier of that Legion had for his wages xl. Crowns was then
called Quadragenaria) and with them he spedde himself against the saracenes,
whom he greatly endamaged, sometimes killinge them as they raunged licentiously
and excursiuely abroad into other Islands for spoil, partly breaking out upon
them out of Stales and Ambushes, laid for the nonce to entrap them; and partly
by open conflictes and pitched battles. He also cooled the courage and abated
the pride, and ^^moderate audacitie of them that usurped the Country of Crete.

At this time, there was one Euphemius, Captain of a certain Band of
Soldiers in Sicilie who not hable to master the lascivious passions of
inordinate love, perforce took a virgin out of the Cloister where she was
professed Nun, and had vowed chastytie from her tender age, Inferiors take
example of their Superiors
and her by the example of his Lord and Master the emperor (who also had
aforetime perpetrated ye like enormity) ravished and carnally knew against her
consent and will. For which impyous act, her Brothers made complaynt to the
Emperor with humble request ye this detestable example might not escape ye
penalty and punishment due for such a villanye. Whereupon the Emperor sent
Commandment to the Regent of Sicilie, that if this were true) he should
slitte and cut of Euphemius his nose. Euphemius understanding what sentence and
judgment the emperor had given against him, entered into a conspiracy with his
own Soldiers and other Capitaynes besides, and they altogether fled to
Ambulak Bishop of the Saracenes in Mauritania. Promysing unto him that if he
might by his help and means be proclaimed Emperor of Romans, he would
deliver and bring all Sycile in subjection under him, and would moreover pay
unto him a great Tribute. Which offer and condition Ambulak not refusing,
invested him with the title of Roman Emperor, and furnished him with a great
Army, by means whereof he wan the possession of Sicile: but Euphemius making
his progress and walks about Sicile in the habit and stately gesture of
Emperor, was at the City of Syracuse slain.

Then began the Saracens to set foot into Calabria and diverse other parts of
Italye, making therein great hauock and spoil: of whom, one Navy perished and
was cast away about the Coasts of Sardinia, the other (for there were two sent
out) in fleeinge wise returned home. Which caused Ambulak to conclude a peace
with the french King.

But within a while after, Bernard the Son of Pipine reigning in Italy, ye
Saracens despising and rejecting the peace that Ambulak had made, invaded
Corsica: who in their return homwarde being laden and full fraught with
booties and great store of Pyllage, were in the main Sea encountered by one
Ermengarius, a man of great power in ye greater of ye Baleare Islands, and to ye
behoof of ye king of Italy maintained a garrison there, by whose prowess the
Saracenes at the first onset were clean discomfited and put to flight, and
diverse of their Shipes intercepced and taken, beside 500. Christian Prisoners
in them, which were rescued and saved. Notwithstanding all this misfortune and
discomfiture, the Saracens would rest, but coasting about Italy with their
Fleet sodaynely landed and surprised a town, in the Coast of Hetruria, named
Centumcel, which now is called the old City. Which being so taken, they
sacked and with Sword and Fire defaced most rufully. From thence holding on
their vioage toward Narbon they destroyed, haryed and spoiled the Country al
about, and that done invaded Sardinia where they practiced all kind of wast
and robbery. But as they fetched their vagaries and licencious roades,
Ermengarius again with the power of the I Will by him assembled, upon a sudden
gave the charge upon them, put them to flight, and with great slaughter on
their side, drove them to the Sea, where for have as they thick and threefolde
striued, who might first get a boorde they were killed down right at the
pleasure and full desire of their Enemies. Being thus grievously afflicted and
having lost a great part of their Navy, they waighed up their Ankers and
sailed into Africa. And they which were in Sycile, hearing that the Venetians
(to gratyfie the Constantinopolitan Emperor) unto whom that I Will was subject)
purposed to send a Navy against them, filled their Bags and stuffed their
powches with such spoil and pray as they lyked and went their way.

After this, Haido whom Jews King of France and the Emperor had made Ruler
of Aquitanie by treacherye and guylefull dealinge surprysed and ruffled the
City Ausonia, and because he was not of power himself to keep the same, he
procured aid from the Spanish Saracens, by whose help he spoiled far and
near both Aquitanie and the hither part of Spain. Whose purpose and pretense,
Jews within short space repressed. And Alphonsis surnamed Magnus, King of
Asturia and Lion, near to the river Duerro vanquished two Armies of the
Saracenicall King of Toleto, which were thither sent to besiege and oppugn
the City of Lion. Moreover he raised the Siege that the Saracenes had bent
against Coimbra, and set the same free from their dreadful oppugnation.

And when he was in buyldinge the City of Zamorra, the same Saracenes under
the conducte and leadinge of a Prophet of theirs, named Alchama, came against
him, whom he vanquished, and of them slew a great number, and among the rest
their Captain Alchama: and took Abboaline prisoner, A Church buylt with the
money ye a Saracen paid for his ransom.
a Captain of great fame ann estimation among them, who raunsomed himself
for two C.M. Ducates and so was delivered. With which money the King new
builded the famous Temple of S. James in Ouiedo of Marble, which was before
but of Brick.

But in Italy the Saracens had taken Palermo the most famous and noble City
in all Sicile, neither was there any man that would take upon him to resist
their furious attemptes or once go about to prevent or repress their
malycious deuoyres, saving only Boniface Countee of Corsica, who
accompaignied with his Brother Beatrius and a few other of the Barons and
Lords of Hetruria sailed into Aphrica and landynge between Vtica and Carthage
slew so many of his Enemies in four cruel Battayles, that like as the
Carthaginians whilome were enforced to call home Anniball out of Italy, so the
Saracenes were feign to call home their people that were then in Sicile: and so
Sicile was delivered from the pestiferous oppression and extreme danger of
Saracenicall Hostility. After which victories gloriously by Boniface
achieved, he with great foyson and plenty of pray and rich booties returned
home with his victorious Navy out of Africa. But the Saracens could not in any
sauce abide to be long quiet, but within a while, with a greater power and
puyssaunce then at any time before, they invaded Italy, and again took the
City Centumcell. Rome spoiled by the Saracens.
From thence in post have with a running Camp they spedde them toward Rome,
and with little labor got the possession of Vaticanum, and after they had
spoiled the goodly Church of S. Peter (which stands in that place) and taken
away the Doors of Silver which it had, of price and value inestimable, they
profaned it with fire and sword most sacrilegiously. And tarying there
certain days they were fully bent to have laid Siege to the City, but
hearing that an army was leuyed and in coming against them out of Lumbardie
they departed and ruthfully wasted all the Suburbs and villages near the City
that lay between the two ways Appia and Latina. They spoiled and robbed the
Cathedral Church of S. Paul in the way called Via Ostiensis, and consumed the
most part of it with fire: from thence turning into Latina Via, they spoylingly
rushed into the precinct and Chase of Cassinum, and robbed the Temple of
Cassinum of all the holy Ornaments, Vestures, Relics, and Gifts whereof it
had marvelous great store, and utterly ruynated a great part thereof. Then
keeping their way by the right side of the river Leire, they spedde them apace
toward the Sea, in such populous Plumpes, that they were like unto a violent
swifte storm or terrible whirlewinde: and fraughting their Ships with their
spoils and booties, which lay there ready, they hoysed up their Sails and
launched into the maine Sea.

And in Hispaine, Abduramen King of Corduba entering into the borders of
Biskaye, fought most valiauntly and fiercely the space of a whole day with the
Armies and power of Ordonius King of Lion and Gartias and Ignigenius of
Biskaye: and fortune seeming for that day to dispose and enclyne the victory
to neither party, departed the Battle. Ordonius meaning to requite and pay
home Abduramen, entered into his Country, and subverted the Town of Cintilia,
which is now called Santiliana. But in Asia, Imprael ye Caliph of Syria,
succeeding Muamat, with a huige power brake into the confines and limittes of
the Roman Empire. Against whom, the Emperor Theophilus marched with his
royal Army, and having in his company two most valiant Capitaynes Theophobus
and Manuel, in whose prowess and dexterity in arms he reposed his whole
trust and confidence, was fully resolved and determined to give unto him
battle: of whose approach and coming, Imprael being certefied whether he
did it upon an arrogance and disdain, or that he feared the event and fortune
of Battle, leaving behind him one Abuzachar with.lxxx. thousand good
fighting and well appointed men to try the quarrel by stroke of mortal
conflicte, departed and went his way with part of his Army. The battle
being joined and clasped together, and the Saracenes getting the vpperhande,
Theophilus with his Praetorian band and two.M. Persians and Theophobus,
escaped and attained into the top of a little Hill, which being fiercely
assailed and beset with Saracenes, whose only desire was to take the Roman
Emperor Prisoner, the Roman Soldiers most valiauntly fighting for the
sauegarde and incolumitie of their Lord and Master the Emperors sacred
Majesty, defended. The conflicte continued, sharply and desperately foughten
on both sides till the Evening. But as soon as night was come, Theophobus by a
pretty fleight and Stratageme deluded the Saracenes and brought themselves out
of that present danger and extremity. For he commanded his Soldiers, as
loud as they could to shoute and make a noise, and to sound their Trumpettes
and play upon their Harpes and musical Instruments, as though there had come
some fresh aid and succor to relieve and rescue them at that present pynche
of distress. Which devise fell out according to his first imaginacion. For the
Saracenes surely thinking that more aid was come, and fearing least they
should be entrapped and on every side enclosed by their enemies, discamped and
removed six Miles further of, and so the Emperor with all his retinewe and
Host being delivered out of danger, came safe to the residue of his Army,
which saved themselves by flight at the last conflicte. For which politic
Stratageme and wise shifte, the Emperor made Theophobus chief General and
Lieutenaunt of the whole Army. And the year following, making another voyage
and expedition against the Saracenes, vanquished them in a notable Battle at
Charsianum, and so with twenty and five thousand Prisoners he returned home.

Again, the third year he leuyed his power and marched against them and
joining Battle with them was so circumuented and beset with his enemies that
he had almost fallen into their hands. Which danger of the Emperor, Manuel
chief Captain of the Army under him perceiving, encouraged and incensed the
minds of his Soldiers with a vehement Oration and made a way perforce to the
place where the Emperor was distressed, A pitiful state.
and him (being now wearied and utterly dispayring of any escape or remedy,
yet mynding to abide the uttermost hazard, rather then he would dismaye and
leave his Soldiers comfortless through his departure, saying that he would
not by flight betray the lives of his poor vassalles into the mercylesse
talauntes of that wicked generation) delivered and brought out of that danger,
not without, threats and menaces that he would kill him unless he would
consent to follow him openyng the way and passage for him to escape. And the
fourth time, both the Armies with all their powers coming into the field
without any notable thing done worthy of remembrance, returned home. The
fifte year, Theophilus leadyng his Army far within Syria, wasting and
spoiling all the Country in his way, wanne and Conquered Zozopetra the
Country and Seat of Impraell, which so nettled and chaufed Imprael, that he
assembled all the power he was hable to make with intent to invade Amorium the
Country of Theophilus. His Army met all together at Tharsus: whither when
Imprael himself was come, he sent his Son with part of his Army before, to
skirmishe and dallye (as it were in the way of an assaye) with the Roman
Hoaste, which was lodged and emcaped at Dorylaeum three days journey from
Amorium. And unto him he appointed ten thousand Turks and all the power of
Armenia. Who being thus furnished and appointed with men and armor and
encamped at Drazymenum, Theophilus went against him and lodged his Hoaste in a
place called Auzin, purposing before he would join any Battle to epsy and
discover the multitude and number of his enemies.

(...) Army (for that the Saracenes as though they had been afraid, kept
their heads within the walls of their city) was lulled in security, geuynge
no regard to orderly behavior, nor to the good keeping of their watch, the
Saracenes all in armure upon the third day after the Siege was planted, when
al ye Roman Soldiers were assembled and congregated together to here divine
service (for it was upon a Sundaye) setting open their Gates and issuing out
sodaynlye, killed and manquelled the Romans on every side: insomuch that the
Emperor himself had much a do to escape, loosing and leauyng behind him
all his carriage and provision. And again within two years next after, the
Saracenes entered within the di^ion and lymites of the Roman Empire with xxx.M.
men, wherefore Michael meaning to win his Spurs again and to be even with
the saracens for ye foil lately taken at their hands, levied an Army of
xlv.M. Thracians and Macedonians, and marched against them. Which when they
knew, by dangerous iourneyes and compendious paths they prevented his
purpose, settinge upon him suddenly and at unawares being in his iournay and
out of order. Whereby he was discomfited and compelled to flee. And at that
time, they say that Michael had fallen into the hands of his Enemies, if
Manuel had not venturously entered and violentlye broken into the breast of the
Enemies Army and disturbinge their araie delivered him from danger.

Two years after this, Mamume the Son of Imprael being Caliph of Syria, the
Saracenes with an Army of xl. thousand men spoiled and ouerrunne Armenia and
all the Sea coasts cruelly. At which time, the Caliph is reported to have
done as Xerxes long before did, commanding the Sea to be whipped and beaten
with Scourges, because it stopped his intent, that he could not have his will
to go any further. Michael who could not with pacient mind brook and digest
these injuries, sent his Uncle Petrona (Lieutenaunt of Thracia) with a great
power against Mamume. Who encamped himself in a certain place called
Lalacaeon, and settinge Stales and Ambushes on every side to surprise and
entrappe his foes when advantage should be offered, provoked Mamume to the
encountrie and battle. Mamume being thus beset, and on every side
circumuented by his Enemies, like unto a Byrd in a Cage, or a Dear in a
Buckstall, was at his wits end, not knowing how to escape or shift himself
out of that imminent peril. And demanding of one of the Roman captives (whom
he had taken Prisoner) the name of that Country and place wherein he had pight
his Pauilyons and Camp, and by what name the river there hard by, was called,
answer was made by the Prisoner, that the Country was called Lalacaeon, the
place Ptoson, and the river Gyris.

Whereby he presaged and by the appellacions of the same places (for he was a
man well seen in the Greeque and Latyne Tongues, and earnestlye given to ye
study of Philosophy) immediately coniectured ye those names portended his
confusion and some notable overthrow of his people, and signified that he and
his retynew should be on every side beset and caught like Fishes in a Net by
the Romans. Notwithstanding, he encouraged his men not to quayle and
despair, but to stand lustily to their tackelynge and to determyne with
themselves to withstand their Enemies.

Therefore the next morning, as soon as the day appeared, well perceiving
himself to be hemmed in on every side, he determined to seek a way and
egresse by that part and place which Petrona guarded, and thereupon giving unto
his men a watchword and token to give aloude shout^ all at once, A Saracen
Prince and all his host slain.
there set upon his enemies. But seeing his attempt and purpose to be all in
vain, he a little retired, and after a small breathing, gave a sharp and
fresh onset again, and using this order sundry times by startes geuyng a blow
and away again, at length desperately with a vehement violence and force rushed
into the mids of his enemies, and was there slain, both he and all his Host
utterly.

His Son whom he had sent on rouing and spoiling with part of his Army,
hearing of his Fathers death and confusion, retired in have to Melitena. But
he was pursued and taken by ye Captain of ye Charsian streicts, and presented
to Petrona. This Mamume was surerly a man garnished and endued with many
excelent qualities and notable virtues. An example of great love and
liberality toward learning in a saracene.
For being himself singulerlie well learned, he cherised and entyerlye loved
all them that were learned, esteemyng and entertayning them very honorable, as
by that example following shall appear, which for the worthynesse and
commendacion thereof, I have thought good here to disciphere.

There was in Constantinople (sometime called Byzance) a certain Philosopher
named Leo, sometime bishop of Thesalonica, and now deprived from the Pr^lacie
and Bysshoprich thereof by reason of a division and controuers^e touching the
having and worshipping of Images, which at that time merueilouslye frushed and
disturbed the Latin and the Greek Church. Being for this cause thence
exiled, he came to Constantinople, where he hyered a poor Cotage, and set up
a Schole, professing to train and instruct such Scholars as resorted to him,
in what Art soever every one was best disposed to learn. Insomuch that out of
his pryuate School there came many notable Clerks, very skillful in the
studies of Arts and Philosophy, and among the rest, it so chanced about this
time that a certain young man one of his Scholars, having by his Masters
industrious labor and diligence attained to an exact knowledge and skyll of
Geometry, was taken Prisoner in the wars by the Saracens, and chanced into
ye service or rather servitude of a noble man of great estemacion and name
among them. Whom Mamume by report and common brute hearing to be well seen
in the Mathematical Disciplines commanded to be brought before him. And
causinge him in a disputation to be thoroughly apposed, found, that he so far
passed and surmounted the Arabian Geometricians, that of those things whereof
they alone thought themselves to have the use and experience, he was well hable
to allege and bring the proper reasons and causes.

Mamume greatly wondering at his precise and profound knowledge (for he had
thought that no nation had had the skill of that Art but the Arabians only)
asked him of whom he had learned his Art, and whether his master were yet
living. The young man answered, that his Masters name was Leo, a poor man,
and as yet unlucky to the worldly goods of Fortunes gifts and disposicion,
but given altogether to his Book and Study. Whereupon Mamume straightwaies
addressed his Letters to Leo in effect as follows.

Even as the Tree is known by his fruict, so we by the Scholar do well know
the exelencie of the Master. These therefore shall be to request thee, that
(forasmuch as God has blessed thee with a gift so incomperable, and sithence
thou lyuest there in poor estate, unknown or at least unregarded of thy
Citezens and Countrymen, reapyng no fruicte of thy rare wisdom and
supernatural speculation) thou would daigne to come unto us, and make us
pertakers of thy admirable learning. This doing, make thy sure accoumpt, that
all the Saracenicall nation shall submit themselves unto thee and be ready at
thy hest and commandment, and thou shall be enryched with such rewards,
richesse and revenues, as never yet any man has been. These letters he
delivered unto the young man to carry to Constantinople, setting him free at
liberty and rewarding him most honorably.

When Leo had received these letters, he opened and told the whole matter to
certain of the Emperors familiers. And by this means be became known to
the Emperor, who appointing unto him a competent stipend and pencion
commanded him to teach publikly. Mamume dispairing of Leo his coming, sent
unto him certain Geometrical and Astronomicall questions and some of the
other Sciences, desiring him therein to have his resolution. The which being
cunningly by Leo assoyled he sent back again to Mamume, whereunto he had also
annexed certain tokens and Signs touching the prediction of future things.
Which Letters when Mamume had read, it is said, that he was ravished with
such an ardent desire and zeal toward Leo, that he exclaymed in this sort: O
happy and thrice happy are they I say, (O Divine Leo) which have the
compaignie and fruition of thy presence. Then forthwith he sent a solemn
Ambassade with great rewards and rich presents unto the Emperor, and wrate
his Letters also unto him as follows: I was fully determined (as it becomes
an unfeigned friend) to have come my self unto thee: but since the weighty
affairs of our Empire and the governance of a most fierce and wild people,
by God committed unto my charge (from whom all power and superiority flows)
will not so permit: I am feign in my steed to send unto thee my Ambassadors
with request, that it may please thee to send unto me Leo, a man endued with
great singularity in the knowledge of Philosophy and other Sciences,
soiourning and making his abode within thy City of Constantinople. That he
dwelling a while with me, may give me instructions and make me partaker of
his doctrine, (...) fervently enamoured and as it were (...). Do not (I pray
thee) defer the (...) my request because of any diversity (...) or for any
unkind dealings between (...) deal with me herein like a friend. For (...)
and courtesy we will give unto thee a.M. It in (...) and will enter into an
infringible league and perpetual amity with thee and al thy Dominions.

Which request the Emperor would not grant, least the Sciences (for which the
Romans were renowned and had in admiration among al Nations) should be
communicated and discovered to the Barbarous people. Wherein he being a Greeque
and a Christian, might full well have learned at the hands of a barbarous
person and Idolatrous Infidel to reverence and condignely esteem verrue: which
thing would God, Princes and noble men in this age, admonished by this goodly
example would do. For ever afterward, he had Leo in great honor, and promoted
him to great wealth and dignity, and restored him again to his See and
Byshopprike of Thessalonica, where he was highly honored and of al men
reverenced for that through his forecasting wit and surpassing knowledge he
converted and brought the land and ground of Thessalonica from barainnesse and
sterilitie, to fruitfulnes and fertility. But now it is time for us to
return to discourse of Occidentall matters.

The Saracenes of Mauritania, transfreting out of Sicile (wherein they had
taken and of long time usurped many Towns) into Italy, under the guyding
and conducte of Saba, besieged Taren^o.

The Greek and Venetian Nauies joining in one, arrived in Calabria, to reise
the Siege and to rescew the City. Wherefore hearing Saba, seyning as though he
had been afraid, to the intent he might the rather allure and provoke the
enemy to coape with him, raised his Siege and discamped, and like as though he
had been loath to meddle, retired into the region of Crotona: where being
afterward assailed and set upon, at the first brunt he discomfited and put to
flight the Greeks, Victory of saracens, over the Greeks and Venetians.
and the^ the whole puyssaunce of the Saracens was all bent and turned against
the Venetians fighting and defending themselves manfully: and a few of them in
number being by a Navy so strong and mighty circumue^ted, were partly slain,
partly drowned, but the Venetians in that conflict perished and were brought to
confusion euerichone, which victory set Saba so a flote and ingenerated in him
such haultinesse and pride, that spedely coasting over the Ionian Sea, he
arrived in the coast of Illyria, practicing therein along the provincial
borders great pillage and robbery, and hearing that the Venetian fleet was
retourning homeward, laden with Wares out of Syria, be brought about his Navy
with all expedicion into the Bay of Trieste, and from thence insidiously and
suddenly setting upon them, spoiled and killed the Merchants and Mariners,
and all the Rowers, their rooted hatred and spightfull rancour toward ye
Venetia^ name was so unappeasable. Lewsing thence, he cut his course toward
Aucon a noble City of Picene, where there is a goodly haue^, and it forcibly
took and being taken, sacked and last of all consumed it with fire, and a few
of the Oppidanes or Townsmen which tarried still, were taken. For the rest
being brought into sudden fear and amazednes through this violent irruption
were fled almost all into the main land and mediterranean region.

Within a little while after, an other Navy of Saracens landed in the coast of
Hetruria, with purpose and full intent to besiege and take the City of Rome.
Whose sudden arrival and terrible approach filled all the City with terror
and dread. Wherefore Pope Leo the fourth of that name assembled the people
together, and unto the^ made this Oration following.

What is the matter my Children whereof you are so much affraide? Oration of
Pope Leo the fourth, to encorage his Romans against the saracens.
or why are your minds thus troubled and appaulled? Certes there happens
nothing unto us without the providence and will of the almightye God, neither
is it sent unto us vndeseruedlye on our parts. Then ought we to fear and
dread their tyranny, when we fall at civil strife and go together by the
ears among our selves, when one Brother conspireth his Brothers death and
destruction. For all they which do believe and confess Christ to be their
Savior and Redeemer, are Brothers. Then I say when the Brands of these
mischiefs are kindled among us, we ought to fear, least God being highly
displeased with us therefore, should send these or rather worse plagues upon
us. For if you think that these impious and barbarous people are sent unto us
without the will and pleasure of almighty God, you are far deceived. For holy
Scriptures do in many places testif^e and daily examples every where teach and
confirm the same. God saying by his own mouth, that he will use the wicked
blasphemers and the enemies of his sacred name as whippes to scourge, and
means to pursue his unfaithful, wylfull and disobedient Children. And we do
know, that the civil discord and flagitious dissolutenes of the Greeks gave
first occasion to this pestiferous and diabolical nation, to extend their rage
and practice their first cruel invasion upon the Christians. Did not the lewd
lying of the Goths and King Rodirick, allure them to set foot into Hispaine.
Whom although these bellish Impes discomfited and condinglye punished, yet
when they once converted their force and moved war against good and godly
men, they were repulsed, put to flight and slaigne even of a few. What? do we
fear this most dastardly rabble and lows^e nation more then we do Almightye
God? for we doubt not awhit, every hour and every mynute of an hour to
offend his Divine Majesty, to provoke his wrath and anger against us, to
revile and blaspheme his holy name: to show our selves wilful, disobedient
and stubbourne to the lore of his sweet word and commaundment and by our own
fantastical devises to heap unto over selves the grievous sentence of his
heavy displeasure: but at the only hearing of this reprobate generation, we
tremble and quake for fear, as though humane force and mortal Arms were more
to be feared, then everlasting pains and eternal damnation. Where is the
ancient puyssance and knightly prowes that was wont to be in the undaunted
Romans? What is become of their valiauntnes, paynfulnesse, travail and
courage that in all extremytie and adversity was ever invincible? Our
Ancestors and forefathers, before Christianity was embraced, or Christ to the
world notyfied and believed on, being yet blinded and noseled in Idolatrye and
supersticious Religion, feared no force, no violence, no multitude of Enemies,
but oftentimes with a small handful and power, vanquished the mighty and
populous armies of their Enemies. The Gauls and French, being a people and
nation most fierce and at that time by reason of the huygenes of their bodies
formidable and dreadful (the limytes of the Roman Empire being yet but
streict and narrow, and the City nothing so great as now it is, men's courages
also through the sudden irruption and coming of such a firce and big nation
marueilouslie abbashed) took in deed (I cannot deny) this City, having in it
at that time no forte of defense nor co^modius place made by art for
resistance: but yet the Capitol, they were never hable to take. And not
suffered long there to roust, were by the valiaunce of one banished Roman
thence repulsed and driven away with notable slaughter of a great maigny of
their people. And behold, the Roman empire was not of such power and strength
at that time as it is now. For the limytes of ye empire extended no further but
to the Roman Terrytory. Now whereas the greatest part of Italy is subject to
the Roman State, and the City with people well replenished, having now not
the Capitol only for your fortress, but a whole Town also by our industry
and procurement annexed and united to your City, fortyfied and strengthened
with all manner of Artificial devise and policy, having (I say) so many noble
Personages and approved Capitaines both for skill and courage renowned, and the
Sea of the most Catholic Relygion here resiaunt, you now stand in dread and
fear not of the Gauls, which be a worthy and noble nation not of the huyge
and populous armies of the Goths, nor yet of the Hunnes the Subuerters and
destroyers of many most flourishyng and noble cities: but of the most cowardly
and rogish nation of all Asia, a pilfring rabble of Mauritanian, thieues and
Vagarantes. The Man's head that was found in the ground where the Capitol
stands, gave such a destiny and fate thereunto, that no nation should be
hable by conquest and force to take it. Do you think that ye Capitol was
erst more safe and holy* being the Seat of Saturn, then it is now, being
employed to a Castle of sincere and true religion? Believe me, believe me,
neither the Saracenes nor any other wicked Nation which are the professed
Enemies of Christ's name and Relygion shall ever build their Bower and plant
themselves in this City. Rome was builded under such a lucky Constellacion,
that the Empire thereof shall never quayle but continue perpetuallye: and under
this same destenie is this Town thereunto annexed and adjoined that it should
be the Sea of Religion, which thing the most imperial and Cathedral Church of
him that is chief of the Apostles assuredly promises. But peradventure you
think, that God being provoked and moved to wrath by reason of our manyfold
sins and offenses, has given them leave thus to extend and show their
villainous rage against us. I grant, we have demerited these and far greater
Plagues, and that this ruffling stir is sent upon us not without the special
foresight and providence of God, that taking warning and occasion by these
adversities and oppressions, to amend our naughty lives, we may the better
renounce our former haunt of licentious lusts, and with penitent hearts turn
unto him. And so long shall they have power over us, as we persist and wilfully
wallow in the stinking puddle of our ungracious ways. But if we truly repent
and implore his mercy, this wicked Nation shall straightwayes give place and
flee before us like sheep, whom we shall kill and flea down right before us,
and revenge the injuries that they the years passed have done unto us and unto
the Majesty of Almighty God, whose Temples and consecrated houses, they have
wickedly polluted and most horribly profaned. Hereof may you make your full
accoumpt, unless peradventure you think that the Asturians, the Cantabrians
and French (who have oftentimes vanquished and with notorious calamities
discomfited them) to have been better and more valiaunter me^ then you your
selves be. But they were not (believe me) and God is no less merciful to the
present state and inward minds of me^ nowadayes, then he was in the age and
life passed. For at the godly Sermons and zealous admonitions of Pelagius and
other holy men, they renounced their vic^ous ways and turning unto God
besought his help to assist and deliver them out of thraldom. He is so
merciful, and so ready to hear the peticions of the faithful that he never
forsakes nor leaves destitute and comfortless them, that unfeignedly and
heartily crave aid at his hands. Amend your lives therefore, and well think
with your selves that you must with tooth and nail, so endeavor your selves,
that you may not in any wise for godlynes and faith give place to any Nation in
the world. Call to memory the pristiuate valiaunce, of the Roman name,
courageously advance forward, handle your weapons manfully and deal your
puyssaunt blows doughtily among yonder miscreaunt people, I my self will be
your Captain and go before you, and participate with you what event soever
Fortune sends. I do assure you, the victory is most certainly in your
hands, if you will do as before I have directed you. They whose chance shall
be to dye in this most godly quarrel and Battle, shall not only win in
this world, a glorious fame and renoumed praise, but shall be afterward
transported into the Kingdom of everlasting life and have their names
registered in the Book, of life among the elect of God for ever.;]

After he had made an end, as many as were hable and fit for warfare, took
weapon in hand, and followed him to Ostia. There meaning to receive at pushe of
the Pyke, the enemy, so soon as he should set any foot on land. When they
evidently descryed the enemies approach, and in sight perused their order, the
Bishop eftsoons commanding his Soldiers to bow the knees of their
hearts and earnestly to pray unto God, implored the divine assistaunce and
merciful aid of him that is the geuer of all victory, whose words and
Prayer were in effect as follows.

O almighty and most merciful father which against the victory unto Gedeon
with a small number over the huyge multitude of his enemies, A prayer.
then which never yet (...) But perceuing that the same was not possible to be
taken but by long Siege, he thence discamped and passed the river Euphrates by
a bridge of Ships. And spoiling the the Country and places there aboutes,
assaultynge and battering many strong holds, whereof some he took by
surrender, he returned again to ye city. Where he rested not long, but again
making a warlyke voyage and expedition into Siria against the Saracens, bent
his whole force to win Germanicia and wanne it. From thence he removed to
the City Adata, which he fiercely besieged and burnt the Suburbs. Which
City albeit the Citizenes and Inhabitants defended very slackly and
negligently, yet could not he win and take it. Basilius wondering to see them
so secure and negligent in such iminent danger, demanded of them the cause
thereof, unto whom an ancient man of the City answered: that it was decreed
by destynie that he should never win their City maugre all his force and
battary, notwithstanding there should come one of his lygne and race called
Constantine which should obtain the same by conquest, but it should not be his
Son Constantine, who was with him in his camp at that present.

At which answer Basilius so stormed and fumed that he gave the assault
far more fiercely, and violently then at any time before he had done. But
when he saw he could nothing prevail, he raised his Siege and went his way,
but before his departure, he commanded all his Prisoners to be slain, least
they should stir up some disturbaunce and commotion and also because he would
be out of fear and not need to appoynte keepers unto them. Shortly after,
the Saracens of Tharsus infesting the Roman Provinces, he sent one Andrew
surnamed Scytha against them, who acquiting and behauing himself against them
very honorably and knightly, their courage was alaid and their malicious
attempts well bridled. Whereat the King of Tharsus so stamped and stared, that
in most horrible and blasphemous terms he belched out words full of threats
and spightfull contumelies against God, A reuilinge Blasphemer.
in his Letters addressed and sent unto Andrew: Wherein be wrate, ye if he had
invaded and come in person against him, it was not the Son of Mary that
should have helped or delivered him.

But it was not long before he felt the deserved smarte and due guerdon of his
odible myscreauncye. For coming himself with more aid to his Host, Andrew
on the other side in good order marshalled his Camp and gave unto him
battle: Where between them was fought a cruel conflict, but in the end the
Saracenes turned these backs and fled, in which Chase, most of them were
slain, and among the rest the King himself, was there bereft of life and
limme.

It chanced within awhile after, that by the sinister means and envious
rancour of some backfrindes which spighted at his good success and valiant
prowess, this Andrew was accused to the Emperor his master, that when he
well might, he would not take and win the City of Tharsus: unto which
surmised accusation, such credit was given, that Audrew was discharged of his
generalshippe, and one Stypiota placed in his Room The Saracens which
fors^owed no time nor ocasion that might further their Affairs and
proceedings, perceiving and understanding ye through this privy gruge and new
change, the watch was nothing at al looked unto, in the night time set upon
them and slew of them very many, and the rest put to flight. On the other side,
the Affricane Saracens besieging Ragusium (which is a City standinge in the
borders and coasts of Illyria) and the Ragusines sending to the Emperor for
aid and rescue, Basilius furnished out a hundredth tall Ships of War for
their relief and sauetie. Whereof the Saracenes having intelligence, raised
their Siege and took their journey into Italy, and taking the City of Barry,
most lamentably afflicted and in a manner universally destroyed with fire
murder and rapine the Calabrians, Apuliana Lucanes and Salentines. And being
now in mind to divide Rome and the Empire of all Italy, share and share like
among themselves, behold Pope John, greatly moved with pity and compassion
to see his Countreye in such extreme peril, employed aid and besought
Alberick (whose power was great in all Hetruria) to assist and join side with
him, for the repulse of this dangerous invasion. Which Alberick with a mighty
army that he had levied in his own Country and partly also mustered and
taken up in and about Rome, Italians discomfired the Saracenes.
encountered them, after they had set foot within the Roman Terrytorie: and at
the first not far from the City, in Battle them vanquished: but afterward
at the river of Leyre about the City Minturne he so notably discomfited them,
that they were now resolved, and fully purposed altogether to depart quight out
of Italy. Wherefore burning all alonge the Sea coaste as they went, they
departed into Apulia, and buyldinge a Castle upon Mount Gargan. and under the
rydge of the same Mount a Town strongly fenced and fortyfied for the wars,
they continued there for many years, sore infesting and spoiling Italye. Then
they took Beneuent and it ransacked and after fiered. Which terrible example
so amazed and astonned the other cities adioining, that without resistaunce,
they received the Garrisons of that nation within their walls. But aid being
sent by the Pope, the barbarous Mawmettes doing all rather with pyllage and
robbery, then with any just war, departed without any battle out of the
Roman limits and dominions. And an other fleet of the same nation coming
out of Africa, after long and cruel Siege took the city of Geane, and at
their first entree slew all the defendants, but the Maydenes, Damoselles,
Matrones and young boys they shipped and carried away with them into Africa.
But Dandulus Venetus writes, ye al of the Male sex returned afterward home
again into their Country, but how and by what means that came to pass, is
by none declared nor written. Geane was won and taken in the year after the
incarnacion 935. And the Saracenes being first dispossessed of the Castle of
Mount Gargan by the Dalmatians, Geane taken
and afterward in many overthrows weakened and vanquished by the Pannonians,
were lastly by Otho Emperor of Germans in the year of our Lord 969.
quight expulsed and driven out of Italy. The Greeks, do here make their
auaunt, that Italy was delivered and rid out of the servitude and dreadful
oppression of ye Saracens through the aid and help of their
Constantinopolytane Emperor, in that the French succored and relieved them,
for the good will and friendship that they bare to their Emperor. For they
say, that the Italyans hearing Rhagusium to be rescued and delivered from the
Siege by the Greekish Navy, submitted themselves under the obeisaunce of the
Empire, and requested aid also for themselves. Whereupon, Basilius by his
Letters directed and addressed unto ye Frenth King, treated with him to aid
them, and by him was the Sultane taken and brought to Capua: who afterward by
the favorable means of the Commons of Capua (with whom he had conspired
against the) King was set at liberty, and the King being thence expulsed, he
inferred war upon the Capuans, but by the aid of the Greeks which came
against him, he packed and went away. This French King of whom they surmise
this talk and Historye, I think should be Carolus Crassus the fifte Emperor
of Germans, but for the truth thereof, I refer you to my Authors the
Greeks, whom I will, shall shifte for themseues touching the credit of the
premises.

(...) a most noble victory. He wasted and subverted Berraea al saving the
Castle, where he found great store of riches and treasure, and taking
innumerable of them prisoners delivered many Christians out of thraldom
Afterward this Nicephorus Phocas being aduau^ced to the Empire, Duke Manuel,
the Bastard son of Leo, was sent with a mighty Navy against the Saracens
into Sicile, where through negligence and want of skill he with all his host
was slain. And at the very same time, John Zimisca (afterward Emperor) being
sent into Cilicia, had the vpperhand of the Saracens at ye City of Adana. The^
Nicephorus himself in person, with a great power entered into Cilicia and took
Anabarza, Rosa and Adana three proper Cities of that Province, with many other
strong holds and Castles: which done, he returned into Cappadocia and there
wintered. In the beginning of the next Spring he went thither again, and sent
his brother Leo with a part of his army to Tharsus, and himself laid siege to
Mopsihestia, through the middle whereof, there ran a river named Sarus. While
the Emperor laid hard siege and sore distressed the one side thereof, the
Saracens seeing no remedy set fire in that part, and departed unto the other
part, which being also conquered and won he slew of them every man. When the
Tharsians heard thereof, they submitted themselves to the Emperoures grace.
And within three days after, a Navy was sent out of Egypt to aid the
Tharsians, which could not attain to land, and in their return homeward, what
with force of weather and blustering winds, and what with incursions of the
Roman Gallayes, they were for the most part all lost and cast away. When the
Emperor was returned home to Constantinople, he caused the brazen gates which
he had brought from the winning of Tharsus and Mopsihestia, of excellent
workmanship and curious art, to be set on the East and West side of the Castle
with other new ornaments and garnishments of his own cost added thereto. Then he
invaded Syria and having partly beaten down and partly wasted the Cities about
Libanus and the Sea coast, he came before Antioch, which City stands upon
the river Orontes. But the Antiochians standing at resistaunce, and also
victual in his Camp waxing very scant beside such continual rain, that the
ground was all overflowed and covered with water, he was feign to build a
Bastyle on the Mount Taurus, which is at this day is called Maurus, leaving
there behind him to infest and skirmish with ye Antiochians, Michael Burze whom
he had aduau^ced to be one of his chief Nobility, and invested with the title
of the Captain of Mount Taurus. And appointed one of his Eunuchs named
Peter, a valiant, constant and skilful warrior, master of his Tents and
Pauilions to see order taken and provided for the wintering of hs host in
Cilicia, after which order ^o taken, he returned to Constantinople. Burzes with
many venturous R^ades and excursions laid sore to the charge of the Antiochian
Saracens, and them greatly molested, studying by all means to win honor and
glory by deeds of Arms and to take the City. Upon a time he privily
measured out the altitude and height of the Tower of the same, and preparing
scaling Ladders equal in height therewyth, in a very dark and snowye Winter
night, he came secretly and without making any noise under the walls of the
City: Antioche taken.
where setting up his Ladders, with. CCC. men that he had brought thither with
him for the same purpose, he mounted up, and killed the watchmen and keepers of
the Tower and as many as he could meet withal: and straightwayes dispatched
a Currour to the Master of the Tents and Pauilions to aduertyze him, how the
case stood and what he purposed to do, willing him speedily to come with more
power to aid him and be partaker of that glorious and noble enterprise.

The Antiochians knowing their chief Tower to be taken, ran couragiouslye to
repel and dispossess the Romans out of the same.

Now the Master of the Tents had in charge from the Emperor, that he should
not in any wise invade Antioch, because the common brute went, that the
captivity of that City did portende within awhile after, the Emperors
confusion, which bred in him such doubtful cares, that he knew not what to
do in that case, nor which way to take. Nevertheless loath, that so many
valiant men should through his default perysh, and thinkyng it no point of
humanytie to see them thus fall into the lapse for want of a small aid,
marched with all his power and invaded Antioche: at whose coming the Saracenes
were so dismayde that their hearts fainted and their stomachs immediately
quayled. Burzes and his company which before dispayred of any help or remedy,
looking for nothing but present death, took new heart agrace and were revived,
and bursting open the Gates with his battle Axe, made free passage and
ingresse for the ma^ster of the Tents and his train to enter.

Thus was Antioche one of the noblest Cities in the world, brought into the
power of the Romans, which shortly after, in the time of the Emperor John
Zimisca, the Saracenes with all their joint powers and forces both of the
Orient and occident attempted to recover. And so under the conduct of the
Caliph of Cairoan in Africa, (because the power of the Caliph of Syria was now
sore weakened and brought to a low ebb) they planted their Siege about it.
Whose invasions and malice the Citezins and Inhabitauntes manfullye and
constantlye withstoode, till the Emperor might hereof be certyfied. Who having
intelligence of this general conspiracy of the Gentiles, commanded his
Provost of Mesopotamia to aid his besieged Friends and Subjects. Who
according to his charge and commission in a pitched battle (wherein the
Saracenes were in number far more then the Romans) them disparcled, chased
and discomfited.

Now because I see the empire of the Saracens to draw apace toward an end and
final ruin, we must before we proceed any further, briefelye and
compendiouslie write of the remnauntes and relics of them that yet lurked in
Africa and Spain: and first we will speak of Spain, then afterward of
Africa.

In Spain therefore Ramire King of Lion in the year of our Savior Christ
901. making war upon the Saracenes, destroyed a Town of theirs named Madrite
and put them to flight near unto Osma and made Benaiam King of Saragoza
Tributary unto him. Whom (afterward rebelliouslye ioyninge in league with
Abduramen King of Corduba and tourning to his old vomit again) Ramire
eftsoons vanquished and took Prisoner in battle near to a Town called
Syn^ncas, wherein there were slain of the Saracenes thyrtye thousand, and
many other annoyances and harms did he unto them: Afterward lying at the
Siege of Talau^ra, he overcame the Toletane Saracenes which came to reyse the
Siege and to rescue the City, of whom. vii.M. were taken and xii.M. slain.
After this Sancius king of Lion being deprived and driven out of his kingdom
by his own people came to Abduramen king of Corduba to be cured of a certain
disease by the help of his Phisicions, whom for conning and knowledge he had
heard to be the expertest and skilfullest that were then in all the world. Whom
the king of Corduba did not only cause to be healed, but also with his power
and help (maugre all his foes) restored him to his Room and dignity. But
after that he was dead, the Saracenes wanne Symancas, Duengas Sepulueda and
Gormas, Towns belonginge to the kingdom of Lion and rased Zamorra. And within
awhile after, destroyed and euerted Portugal the head of all Lusitanie and
Compostella. After the death of Abduramen, Alliagib his Successoure in that
kingdom, naming him self Almansor (which is as much to say) as the
Protectoure of king Mansor his Lord and master, because be hoped thereby ye
rather to allure the peoples goodwils, and under that color to insinuate
himself into their favors (for at that time Mansor reigned at Marrocco.
Which City (as we have before showed) was the Seat royal of all the Saracenes
Empire Occidentall, under whose jurisdiction and rule all the inferior kings
of the Saracenicall nation in Spain lived) gathered a mighty power and invaded
the Territories of the Castulonians, Lion and B^^kaye.

The City of Lion he almost utterly defaced, the Towers and Bulwarks thereof,
which were all of Marble, he rased and heat down to the grownde, leauinge
only one, untouched and unblemished, to the intent that the memory of the
beautye and gorgeousnes of that City might appear and remain to posterytie.
He took Asturia and Coiaca which is now called Valen^ja (not that Valentia
which stands upon the midland Sea, but an other in the kingdom of Leon by
the Pyrenes) and Sansagnium with many other Towns. And in the Precinct of the
Castulonians, he destroyed Osma, Alcobetla, Berlanga and Atienza: and of the
Gallycian Towns, he took S. James, and commanded the Belles to be carried
away thence to Corduba, where he used them in steed of Lamps in his profane
Temples, and in this sort he continued outraging and keeping sharp wars for
the space of twelve years. Till at length Bermudes King of Lion with the
powers of the Castulonians, the Byskayes and his own bad unto him battle in
a place called Calataicor. This battle was fiercely foughten on both sides
for the space of a whole day, where were slain of the Saracenes many
thousands, and in the end Almansor with all his retinew and Adherents fled and
shortly after died for sorrow of his overthrow. The Spaniardes ruffling and
spoiling their camp, found therein great booties and prays which they at their
flight had left behind them. Abdimelick greatly moved with his fathers
misfortune, and purposing to recover and have amends for the same, was also
vanquished. But afterward in the reign of Alphonsus the Son of Bermudes, ye
Saracenes again inuading ye borders and frontiers of ye Castulonians,
destroyed Auila and took Ormetum with any other towns. And Alphonsus
reedifled the city of Lion. After all this, there sprang up civil wars among
the Spanish Saracenicall Kings and Princes, whereby the power of the
Christians in that province daily increased, Granado won from the Saracenes
and Infideles by King Ferdinando Granfather to Charles the fifth Anno D. 1492.
insomuch that Mahomet Enas^r Bishop of Marrocco being vanquished in Gottalonia
near to Valentia and ix.M. Saracenes slain with him in the year of our
redemption 1150. the Christians within xxx. years following, recovered
Valentia, Deuia, Alicante, Muria, new Carthage, Corduba, Syuile, Iaen and
Vbeda, and ye Saracenes had no more in their possession but only the Kingdom
of Granado, from whence at length they were utterly expulsed and driven out by
Ferdinando the last king of the Tarracomans, (or Aragon) Grandfather by the
Mothers side to Charles the fifth late Emperor.

In Africa a new Prophet vaunting himself to be one of ye right ligne and race
of Mahomet whose name was E^mahelis, a man both borne and brought up in ye
Mountains, about the year of our Lord 1000 brued a new broyle and set abroch
certain quaynte fashions about Religion. He expulsed out of their Kingdoms,
the high Bishop of Cairoan (which City before we showed was not far of from
Carthage, and was ye head City in the main land of Africa) l also Abraem ye
king of Marocco: which done, he subdued both the Mauritanies, all Africa, all
Numidia, and Lybia unto the borders of the Negroes and Egypt, constituting his
royal and Pontifical Seat at Marocco. The King of Marocco, fleeing from
Habdulmumen who pursued after him with part of Elmahelis Army, arrived and came
to Oranum, a City situate upon the midland Sea in Mauritania Caesariensis. But
the Citizens not receiving him, the poor wretched King being comfortless and
without all hope of better fortune, A miserable king deposed from his kingdom,
by desperation brake his own neck and his wives.
with his wife, who for want of better store road behind him (both on one
horse) went up into the top of a very high mountain lying into the Sea and
there dashing the Spurs into the horse sides, cast himself, his wife and
horse down headlong from a Eraggie rock, and so al three dyed together at one
instant, and were found in the Shore all bruised and dismembered. And
Habdulmumen retourning back to Marocco, found Elmahelis dead, and was creafed
King and Bishop in his place. Whose posterity and Successors, that is to wit
Iosippus his Son, Mansor his Nephieu and Machomet Enasir, of whom we made
mention before, his Nephieus son, enjoyed and possessed that Kingdom. But
when the ten Sons after the death of Mahomet their father, co^tended and
bickered among themselves for the Garlande, the house of the Marines popped
into the Kingdom of Fess, and the Habduluadean family invaded the Kingdom of
Telensine, and displacing there the Tunetane Magistrate, created and made there
a King. And all the other Kings and Princes of Africa renounced their homage
and revolted from the Kings of Maroco: whereby the power of the Saracens
decreased in Africa as well as in other places and the name of their Empire
utterly extinct.

The Third Book.
Wherein is expressed and plainly declared the euersion of the Saracenicall
Empire and the original beginning, continuance and increase of the Turkishe
domination, till the first year of the reign of Ottomanne, from whom, louius
and diverse others both Greek and Latin Turcographers begin their Histories:
also the first original of the Tartarians, Mamalukes, Assassines, and
Sophians: Containing a true and perfect discourse of Turkishe Affairs for
three hundredth years space before Ottomanne, for pleasure and variety very
delectable.
But now must I proceed in a new kind of order, Saracenes were as the right
children of Mahomet and Turks in comparison but Bastardes.
and discourse upon matters most worthy to be remembered: for we have already so
orderly and successively treated of Saracenicall affairs, that now we be come
by order of History, to speak of those times, wherein (the ancient and true
Saracene Empire decaying and as it were the lawful Stock and offspring of
Mahomet excluded and dispossessed) Bastards and vpstartes of an other ligne
stepped in and usurped the principality, A people (I say) shuffling in for
the best game, and bearing themselves, not (as the other) under a painled show
and coulorable gloss of gaie Religion and holiness, but planted themselves in a
more firm and hard Empire, mainteining and amplifying the same by force of
Arms and violence. Whose State differs as much from the former Empire, as
the hardness of Iron from the softness of Lead. For albeit the huygenes of
the Saracenicall dominion were great and mighty, (insomuch that under the
patched cloak and pretense of false doctrine and diabolical Religion, it
ouerflowed and almost drowned the whole world) yet the violent rage thereof was
by the valiant encountrie of courageous Soldiers and Martial knights from
time to time either brydled and repressed, or at least, brought under such awe,
that many times they were feign to keep bill under wing, and to be pent within
narrower room then they were before. Yea many times, such flames of civil
discord among themselves burst out, that ye same being dispersed into sundry
parts, and far disseuered from the fire where it was first forged about
Babylon and Arabie, waxed in process of time so keyecold and frostbitte^, ye
they were not able to wagge and bestirre themselves as they did before.

And so being distract and pulled from the whole Mass, and consequently made
weaker, were either clean vanished and buried in the pit of Oblivion, or else
with an other Fire in some other place newly kindled, were consumed and quite
burnt even with their own flame: which thing happened unto this aforenamed
Forge, till such time that new and stronger Smithes took yt office in hand,
and forged a harder metal upon the Anuill, to harden and stre^gthe^ ye
softnes of this Lead, and thoroughly to bear out ye dignity of ye Shop. For
although (as it evidently appears by ye which has been already declared in
the two first Books) our Ancestors and Predecessors have continually warred
with the Saracens welnigh 400 years space, with diverse fortune and doubtful
victory, in so much that although their power even from their first beginning
were very mighty and great, and Christendom all that time never quiet, but
continually floted in civil discord, beside the often incursions of Barbarous
Nations, the Emperors of Constantinople showing themselves (that while) no
better then Meycockes and effeminate persons: yet did they oftentimes plague
them with many great overthrows, and recovered out of their possessions
sometime Syria, sometime Armenia, now a part of Persia and now some other
Provinces: but yet always and still they kept in their possession all Europa,
saving a piece of Spain only, Asia the less, Media, and the Kingdoms of
Parthia Bithynia and Cappadocia with many other Realms and Kingdoms. But the
power of the Turks encroching and wynning upon us now almost for the space
of.600. years, they never could repress, neither hinder the course and
proceeding of their Empire, neither yet expel and drive them out of such places
as they had once gotten. Of such force is warlike discipline and so much
differs the fiercenes of the Northre^ people from the tenderness and
effeminacie of the Southren. How, whereof and by what occasion, they brake out,
we shall now declare.

Basilius Porphyrogenitus being Emperor of Constantinople about the year of
our Lord 1000. many Tyrannes wrestled for ye Garla^d and divided among them,
the Empire of Saracens, as before in the last Book was showed, whereof four
always contending for ye Supremacy, and keeping deadly wars one with another
for ye trial of their titles, there began great division and hartburning
between Mahomet Prince of Persians, Corasmiorians and of diverse other people
on the one part, and the Caliph of Syria whose royal Seat and Metropolitan
Sea was at Bagadet. Antioche taken.
In which wars, Mahomet being put to ye wors and by ye Babilonian (through
help and aid of Sclerus and ye Roman captives) vanquished, sent to ye Turks
for aid, whose help and furtheraunce at a pinche (as before has been
specified, the Saracenes for certain years passed were accustomed in their
Wars too use and ioygne unto them, and the rather because they professed and
embraced even at the first eruptions, (...) swaded that they were begotten and
did come of the wild Faunes.

But the Turks and Tussagetes discendynge of their race and inhabityng the
Northside of Mount Caucasus as before we have showed, differed much from them
as well in life, as manners and Laws: being (notwithstanding) so like among
themselves and so lynked together in League one with an other, that they were
taken and accounted for one People, and peradventure they were all one, and
were so called and named (as profane Persons) by the Armenians their
Neighbors, from whom they received their Rites, and which were called Sagae
(as much to say) as holy. For this word Teutazites (as in the Second Book
was showed) signifies in their language Gentiles or a profane People. For
these names are of many Writers so mingled and taken together, that the one
seems to be their name, the other their Surname.

Procopius says, these People were nothing near to the other Hunnes, neither
had any thing to do with them: but that they brodered upon the North parts
of Persia, that is to wit Armenia. For Armenia was ever lyghtlye subject to
the Crown of Persia. Neither were they Wanderers from place to place, (as
having no habitation saving there, where their Cattayle stayed and grazed, as
the other Hunnes or Scythians were): but had in their Possession and inhabyted
the best Plottes and most fertil^ Regyon that was among the Dounes and
Mountains round about, and among the Hunnes, they only were white of
complexion and color, and not so ouglye nor so stern visaged, neither living
so sauagelye and beastlye as the others did: but like true Subjects lived
orderly in due obedience and humble subjection under one Prince, whom they
accepted as their head and King: having also a well ordered Common wealth, with
due execution and imbracynge of Justice and other political Laws, both at
home among themselves, and abroad with other foreign Nations borderynge
upon them, as the Greeques, Romans and diverse other civil and well governed
Nations did also.

The chief City of all their Kingdom was called Gorga. The noblest sort and
wealthyest persons among them, had contynuallye seiourninge at their Houses
as Gestes, twenty or more of their famylier Friends, accordinglye as their
Substance and Richesse extended, with whom, both wealth, authority and power
was in common: as the same Procopius shows, and as their institution and
manner of lyuinge to this day witnesses.

Some there be, which refer the first original of the Turks, to those
ten Tribes of Israel: which (as we read in Josephus) were translated into
Media. For proof and Testimonye whereof, they allege the likeness and
similitude of their manners and conversation.

Some refer their pedagrew to Gog and Magog, of whom there is mention made
in the holy Scriptures: from whom, we rather be of opynion that the Tartarians
yea and peradventure also the Goths be lineallye descended. And some there be
which do derive the ofspringe and Progeny of them: from the ancient
Trojans. Whose several opinions by way of Argument, either to confirm and
allow or confute and disprooue, is no part of our purpose and intent in this
place, sythince our only meaning is not to reason upon probabilities, but to
bring such certainelye known truths, as are in the histories and
Chronologies of ancient writers as well of Greeks and Thracians as of the
Turks themselves and other Nations confining unto them, published and
mentioned which is even so as before we have declared.

Muchumet therefore desired aid of their Prince in his wars against the
Caliph of Babylon, through whose help and valiaunce (sent unto him under the
conducte of Tangrolipix Mucalet,) he encountered with Pisasire the Babylonian
Caliph, and him with little labor and less danger discomfited, by reason that
the Arabians were not hable to abide the thick shot of the Turkishe Arrows.
Being from this war returned home with victory, he minded also to use the
aid of ye same Turks in his Wars against the Indians. At which season the
Turks weary of that service, desired leave of Muchumet, not only to return
home, but also that a garr^son might be appointed to wafte them in safety over
^^e bridge that stood upon the River Araxes. Which request he took in such
disdain and impacience yt with frowning look he charged them from thenceforth
not to urge him any more with that suit. The Turks had no other way in their
return homeward, but must needs pass the said River Araxes, which is ye
limite and Border of the kingdom of Persia: over the which there was no other
Bridge but only this, which was on both sides merueylous strongly guarded and
fortified with Blockehouses, Turrettes and Garrisons. The Turks dreading
further danger privily shranke away and as closely as they could, departed
into the desert of Carbonitis. For considering their number was not above three
thousand men, they durst not adventure to fight and buckle with such a great
multitude. Being in those deserts, they made many vagaries into the Saracenes
Territories, and wasted their Country terriblye. Whereat Muchumet merueilously
stomacking and storming, sent an Army of 30000. men against them, committing
the charge and conducting of the whole Army unto ten Tribunes of ye noblest,
stoutest and wisest in his train. They being come near to their enemies,
would not adventure to enter into the desert, for fear they should be
distressed for lack of water and victual, but encamped themselves even in the
very entrance into the same desert.

The Captain of the Turks, having intelligence by his Espialles, of the
Persians approach, called his Soldiers together, and making them privy to his
devise, purposed suddenly to set upon them and unawares to surprise, both the
Saracenes and Persians, while they were yet secure and mistrusted nothing. And
speeding apace toward them by great iournayes, within two days was come near
unto them, The third night he set upon them being in their Tents careless
and quiet, suspecting nothing less then any such matter: whom he put to flight
even at the first onset. After this discomfiture of his enemies, he fell to
spoil and ransacke their Tents, where finding great store of Wagons, Horses,
and Money, lived no longer by Robbery and Theft like a Vagabonde or fugitive
(as before) but from thence forth pitched his Tents and encamped himself
abroad in the open plain. When the report of his victory and good fortune
was blown abroad, there resorted unto him from all quarters thereaboute, all
such Cutthroates and Villains as for their ungracious demerites feared
punishment, with a great route of Slaves and pylfering Roges living of the
spoil of others, insomuch that within a while his Army grew to the number of
50000. Tyra^nye of Muchumet toward his own men.
men. Muchumet stormyng marueilouslye at this overthrow and discomfiture of
his Hoaste, caused the eyes of those ten whom he had appointed Capitaines to
be pulled out, and threatened the rest of the Soldiers which fled out of
the Battle, that so soon as he had vanquished his fees, he would cloathe
them all, in woman's apparel, and lead them as gazing stocks in Triumph
before him. This done he himself in person marches against his Enemies. His
men, who before had been vanquished of the Turks, considering the threats and
shameful handling that was meant toward them, revolted from Muchumet and
fled to Tangrolipix. Who now having his Army increased with such a warlike
Crewe of fresh Soldiers, with all his whole power together, came against
Muchumet, by dinte of mortal battle to try and finally determine the cause
of controversy between them.

Muchumet with his power of Saracenes, Persians, Arabians and Cabirians well
appointed and armed, to the number of five hundredth thousand, and a hundredth
Elephantes with Towers on their backs, met his Enemy at a place called
Aspacha: where between them was fought a cruel and bloody Battle and many
slain on both parts. In this conflicte, Muchumet, as he rode vnheedely from
rank to rank, cheeryng his Soldiers and exhorting them to do valiauntly,
by means of the foltering and stumbling of his horse, fell down and brake his
neck. He being once dead, his Army fell to a Parley and composition with
the Turks, and so with one consent and will of all sides, Tangrolipix was
proclaimed King of Persians. Who immediately opened a way and passage for his
people into Persia. Of whom a great multitude went thither, and oppressing the
Persians and Saracenes, What a Souldane signifies.
perforce possessed all the Country of Persia. They also honored Tangrolipix
by the style or title of Sultane, which is as much to say as a most Sovereign
Emperor or King of Kings. He displaced the Inhabitauntes of the Country out
of their Offices, Rooms and Dignities, and placed his own Nation and people
in the same, and among them (empouerishing and utterly oppressing the Country
borne persons) divided and parted the whole Region of Persia.

Also Daber, Prince of Egypt, being in League and amity with the Romans,
falsefyed his oath and promise which before he had condiscended unto, and
destroyed the Temple at Jerusalem wherein was the Sepulcher of our Savior
Christ, and all the other holy places in the same. For Jerusalem at that time
was under his obedience and dominion. And within a while after, he sent a
Navy into the Isles called Cyclades to try some maistries there: which Navy
was encountered and met wythall, by the Duke of Samos, who took.xii. of them
as Pryzes with all the men and Capitaines therein, and the rest to his high
laud and glory dispersed and scattered.

After this, Argyropylus being Emperor of Constantinople, the Arabians wanne
all such Cities as Nicephorus and John Zimisca had taken in Syria and slew
the Garrysons that were left to keep them. And the Prince of Chalep with
continual incursions infested Antioche and diverse other Cities and Countries
confyning upon Syria, that were subject to the Roman Empire. By whom also
the Captain of Antioche (Constantine being yet alive) was shamefullye
vanquished, and hardly escaped with the loss of many of his men. In whose
office and room the Emperor appoyntyng another, went himself with a
competent number of well furnished Soldiers to snaffle the pretenced outrage
and insolent demeanure of the same Prince of Chalep.

The Chalepians having understanding of his approach, sent Ambassadors with
gifts and rewards to meet him on the way and to desire pardon for their
former temerytie and undutiful behauiours toward him, offering again to
submit themselves and from thencefoorth to become his true Vassalles and liege
people. Which submission and peace, although many of his Lords and
Capitaines exhorted him to accept, yet he hoping easily to subdue the
Saracenes and thereby to purchase unto himself a great name and glory, would
needs march on, and continue his voyage into Syria. And when he had strongly
encamped himself near to Chalep, the Arabians being bold and nimble
fellows, and naked, with good swift Horses under them, like Dimylaunces,
planted themselves in every corner in Ambushes. So yt if any of their enemies
went out on forraging or to fetch water they suddenly brake out and either slew
or took the^ prisoners. By reason whereof both the Soldiers and their Horses
fainted for thirste and were not hable to do any service.

Thus they being better acquainted and enured with these incursions and
skirmishes took heart a grace, accusing the Romans of Sloth and cowardyse,
and sheweing themselves in great plumpes, desce^ding suddenly from the Hills
with great shoutes and cries, so terryfied and dismayed the Roman Host,
Emperor in great danger.
that they turned their backs and fled. The emperor himself being there in
great danger of his life and forsaken of his Pretorian Soldiers which for
fear shifted for themselves and left him alone, had fallen in the Lapse and
been taken Prisoner, if one of his company had not set him upon his Horse and
advised him to save him self by flight. The Saracenes supposinge this their
fleeinge to be done but for a policy and for the nonce pursued not the chase,
but entered into the Emperors Tents, where taking a few noble personages and
spoylinge his rych Pauilion wherein was great foyson of Treasure and princely
furniture, departed thence and retired back lading their Horses with as much as
they could carry away.

In their return back they overcame the country of Mesopotamia. And ye
Aegiptian Fleet wasted the coast of Illyricum, but they could not go clear
away. For the Greekish Fleet encountered with them and burnt many of them, the
rest which escaped by flight, by tempest were drowned in the Sicillian Sea.
Also an other Navy of a thousand Sail or there about, being sent out of
Aphrica, spoiled many Islandes and places bordering upon the sea Coasts. But
the Roman gallayes chaunceing upon them took certain, sonke many, and sent
500. of them prisoners to the Emperor. And George Maniaces, provost of all the
Cities along the River Euphrates, lying at Samosata, conquered and rased a
city called Edessa, where he finding an Epistle of our Savior Jesus Christ
written with his own hand, he sent the same unto the Emperor. This City
afterward in the Empire and reign of Michael Paphlagon was besieged by the
Arabians, and had been won if Constantine Captain of Antioch, and Brother
to the Emperor had not succored and relieved the poor Defendauntes that were
within it.

After that the Prince of Egypt was dead, the Queen his wife being a
Christian and her son concluded a truce with the Romans, to endure for xxx.
years, and caused the Temple and other holy places at Jerusalem to be
restored and new reedified. About this time two Brothers both Saracenes,
iounctlie and with equal authorytie reigning in Sycilie, fell at discord and
variaunce between themselves, whereupon the one of them desired aid and
assistance of the Emperor. Who immediately sent George Maniaces a noble
Counsaillour and expert Warrior with a tall company of Men to aid him.

But before he could come into Sycile, the two Brothers were reconcyled and
made Friends and ioyninge both their powers together to repulse, Maniaces
from landing in the Islandes, sent also for aid to Carthage. But when both the
armies were clasped together in battle, the victory fell unto the Romans,
who gave unto the Saracenes a notable overthrow and slew of them a great
number. Which done, the General rased and destroyed xiii Cities: and from
thence marching still forward, recovered and restored again all Sycile to the
Roman Empire.

But in the Orient, it was a fair hap, that the City of Edessa had not been
surprised by the Saracenes. A policy of the Saracens to have taken the city
Edessa*
For twelve of the chief Princes or Nobles of them brought five hundredth
Camelles to Edessa, every one laden with two Chestes a piece, and in every
Chest an armed soldier, pretending and saying that their coming was, to
present the Emperor with certain rewards and gifts. Their intent was, if
they might have been let in, the next night with their armed Soldiers in the
Chestes to have taken the City. But their subtle stratageme and crafty
conueighance missed of hoped effect by this means.

There was a certain Beggar, A Beggar saved the City.
an Armenian borne, which could well understand and speak the Arabian
language. This poor Armenian begging the charitable alms of the Arabians
which lodged abroad without the City, chanced to hear one of them in the
Chestes asking an other of his fellows where they were, and immediatlye
departinge from them went into the City, and discovered this treacherous train
to the Prouoste. Who by this means having ynckeling and intelligence thereof,
left the Princes of the Arabians banquetynge and making good cheer in the
City, and with a convenient number of Citezens issued out of the Gates, and
openinge the Chestes, killed all the armed men in the same. And coming back
again into the City, killed also all the Princes and Capitaines of them,
saving only one, whose two hands he chopped off, and curtaylyng his nose and
ears, sent him away packinge with a Flea in his ear, to carry news home of
their good speed and adventure.

On the other side, when the Caliph of Cairoan in Aphrica understood of the
loss and destruction of his Armies, he went himself in person with a greater
Army into Sycile. Against whom, Maniaces came with a maine power, commanding
the Admyrall of his Navy dilygently to look to his charge and so narowly to
scour the Coasts and keep the Sea, that the vanquished Carthaginians should
by no means escape. And then both the Armies grapeled together in a terrible
and most sharp conflicte, wherein were slain so many of the Saracenes, that
they could by no means be numbered. But their Prince escaping out of the
Feelde, embarked himself with all speed possible in a Brigandine and
returned home in safety.

Now, Tangrolipix King of Persia having set all the affairs of his Kingdom
in good stay and order, made War upon Pisasirye chief Governor of Babylon
and overcame him in many battayles and last of al flewe him.

And so the Babylonians being subdued and annexed to his Domynions, he sent
Cutlume his Nepheu with an Army against Carbese King of Arabie.

Of whom Cutlume being overcome, desired by his Ambassadors of Stephan Regent
of Media (which country is now called Baas Prachan) to give him leave with his
people to pass through the borders of his Country and jurisdiction. Which
request, Stephan did not only flatly deny, but also armed himself and went
against him. Notwithstanding he left many of his men, and was himself taken
Prisoner. And so Cutlume retourning home to Tangrolipix, recompted unto him his
success in the Median war, and highly extolled the fertility and
fruitfulnes of that region, affyrming that the same was very easy to be
won. But Tangrolipix being sore offended with him for his late discomfiture,
went himself against the Arabians. Cutlume for fear fled away with his
company, and taking a City of the Chorasmiorians named Pasar, revolted from
the Sultan. But the Sultane winking at this matter and letting it slip for a
while, held on his voyage with his whole Host against the Arabians, by whom
he also was put to flight, and so coming home with more loss then gain, with
the greatest part of his Host besieged Cutlume. But Cutlume reposing great
trust and assurance in the natural situation and strength of the place, long
time resisted him. In the mean season, Tangrolipix sent Asan his other Nephew
surnamed Surdus with.xx. M. well appointed Soldiers into Media. Turks go to
wrake.
Who rushing with his inuasiue power into the Province, and joining Battle
with the Romans was with his whole Host (excepting a very few) slain. The
Sultan understanding thereof, and minding to win his honor again for so
notable a loss and overthrow, sent one Alim Abramie with a hundredth thousand
fighting men into the same Province again. The Regent of the Country sent to
the Emperor for aid, and thought it best for him not to fight with the Turks
till Liparites, Provost of a part of Iberia were come with his Iberians to aid
him. The Romans kept themselves within their fortes and strong Holds,
wherefore Alim, seeing that they minded not to try matter with him by force of
battle, assaulted a small unwalled village called Arzen, where innumerable
wealthy Merchauntes dwelled, supposing the same would have been got and
surrendered unto him at the first brunt, and in a manner without resistance. But
it happened not altogether according to his expectation. For the Townsmen
stopped his ways and passages, with great Timber logges and threw darts and
other weapons at them from the tops of their houses, and slew many of them.
Alim after that he had given the assault unto it by ye space of six continual
days, and saw the stout hearts of the Citizens in defending, and yt he could
not conveniently lie any longer at the Siege thereof, threw wild fire into the
houses, which flamed, and in every place so raged that the Inhabitants to laue
their lives, fled. And by this means the Turks wanne the village, wherein
they found much Gold and store of richesse which the fire had not consumed.
From thence they discamped and sped them toward the Roman Army, unto whose
aid Liparites was now come with the power of Iberia.

Both the Battayles ioygnyng together a little before night, the Turks were
discomfited and put to flight, whom the Romans chased and pursued till far
in the night. Albeit in this conflicte Liparites (who led the one wing of the
Battle) was taken Prisoner and brought to the Sultan. For whose ransom and
redeliuerie the Emperor sent a great mass of money and other rewards to the
Sultan, desiring him also that a peace and league might be concluded between
them.

But the Sultan sending back all the money and Gifts, frankely delivered
Liparites without any panie: aduising him after that time, never to bear
armor against the Turks. And beside this, he sent an Ambassador unto the
Emperor, one of the worthyest in degree in all his Court called Seriphes:
which Dignity is so high among them, that after the death of the Caliph, the
Seriphes succeeds in his room. For the Turks even at the first, embracing
the doctrine of Mahomet, reverenced and had in great honor and estimation
their Caliphas as Priests and Bishops of their Law: notwithstanding they
debarred them from wearing the Imperial Crown or entermedling with any
iuridicall power in profane matters within their Empire. This stately
Ambassador, coming to Constantinople was brought before the Emperor, before
whom he proudely showed his Commission, which was, to demand a Tribute to be
paid by the Emperor to the Sultane. But he was feign to return without
speeding his errand. Wherefore the Sultane taking Pepper in the Nose, made
War and went himself against the Romans. And when he was come as far as
Comium a City of Iberia, because the Inhabitauntes of the Country had
included themselves and their goods with all things necessary in Holds and
Castles (whereof the number at that time in Iberia was great) and hearing that
the Romans mustered and assembled a great power about Caesarea, to come
against him, he retired without doing any notable exployte, worthy of
remembrance back again into Media: where likewise fynding all places walled
and Bulwarked, his full determination was to win his purpose by Siege.

And first of all he attempted the wynning of Mantzichierte, a City standing
in the plain champion Country, vaumured and strengthened with three strong
Walls, having within it many Fountaynes and lively Springes of Water, which
City by the foresight and provision of the Townsmen was very well
victualled. And encampyng himself near to the Walls, gave an assault unto
the same.xxx. continual days without any ceassing, with all kind of Engynes
and Warlike Instruments. But in the end, perceiving his attempt to be in
vain, and having no hope of better success, raised his Siege and departed
with the loss of many of his people. Then he pursued his Nephewe Abramie, who
was now confederate and took part with his Cosen Cutlume, and him in
Battle near to the City of Pasaris overcame and slew.

But Cutlume with sire thousand in his company, (among whom was Melech the
Son of Abramie, saved himself by flighte, and by his Ambassadors sued to
the Emperor Constantine Ducas to be received into his favor and protection,
and that a League might be confyrmed between them: staying for an answer in
Persarmenia at the City Charse. But because the Sultane following at his
heels, was coming with a power into Iberia, Cutlume fled into Arabia
Foelix. The Sultane spoiled and wasted all as he went in Iberia: but hearing
that Michael was coming with an Army against him, and thinking it much
dishonorable for him to deal with the Emperors Servant, retired again into
his own Territories, leauyng behind him, one of his Captains named Samuch, a
man of base parentage and low hyrthe, but in Martial affairs a right
excellent Captain. This Samuch remaining still hehynde, with 3000. men,
coasted and strayed about the plain Country of the greater Armenia, and with
many sudden incursions infested the frontiers of the Roman Empyr^.

After this Diogenes being Roman Emperor the Sultan again with a great power
entered within ye precinct and limytes of the Roman dominions: But the Emperor
coming with an Army against him, hes retired back: and dividing his Host
into two parts, sent the one into South Asia and ye other into north Asia,
which spoiled all as they went, and suddenly surprising the city of new
Cesaria: sacked it and being full laden with booty and pray departed thence.
But the Emperor when he heard of it, taking with him a Band of lustier and
nimbeler Soldiers, coasting the nearest way over hill and dale, through thick
and thin, to get between his enemies and home, so vigoriouslye and suddenly
set upon them and therewitall so teryfied and dismayed them that they trustinge
to their Legs, lea^t all their pray and carriage behind them. Notwithstanding
their was no great number of them flaine, because the Romans (being with their
long iournaie weared) were not hable to follow the chase far, but they
rescued and delivered many Prisoners which before had been taken. From thence
making his voyage into Syria, where he sent out part of his Army to Melitena,
he brought home from Chalep great Booties both of men and beasts, and took
Hierapolis in Syria by surrendrie.

After this, the Emperor (lying at Hierapolis) hearing news yt the Turks had
vanquished part of the Roman Armies, sped himself thitherward in all have to
succoure his distressed Soldiers and afflicted Subjects. The Captain of
Chalep, hearing of this overthrow given to the Romans, renounced his
allegiaunce and fled with all his train to the Turks. And when the Enemies
had environed the Roman Camp round about, the emperor without giving any
knowledge to them that he would fight, brought ought his Army and without
the sound either of Trumpet or other manifest token, gave the charge and onset
upon them, and put them to flight ere they had warning or time to resist. Then
he buylte and erected a Castle at Hierapolis, and after he had taken many other
Towns, he came to Alexandria a city of Cilicia. And taking order for the
winteringe of his Host, where they should not be pynched with famyne nor
scarcity of victual returned home to Constantinople.

In the beginning of ye next spring, ye Emperor making an other voyage to
Caesarea, was certainly informed yt a great company of Turks forraged and
spoiled that province: whom after he had either slain or taken, he took his
iournay to Euphrates: and there leaving part of his Army, under the conduct of
Philaretus, he himself went northward. The Turks putting Philaretus his
Souldyours in great fear and ieoperdie, got all their trinketes and carriage,
and marching forward into Cappadocia (wasting and making havoc as they went)
came to Iconium. a City at that time most flourishinge and renowned.

The Emperor having intelligence hereof at Sebastia, spedde him thitherward.
But hearing by the way, that his Enemies had destroyed and rased the City, and
upon the brute and report of his coming and approach to be departed, he
delivered part of the Roman Legions to Cathagurio Captain of Antioch,
commanding him forthwith to repair to Mopsihestia, where the Turks should
pass, and there to set upon them. But ere they could come so far, the Turks
were bid to a cold breakefast by the Armenians in the plain of Tharsus, and
distrussed in a manner of all they had: and hearing further that the Romans
were planted at Mopsihestia to receive them, if they passed that way, fled by
night.

After this, in the beginning of the Spring, the Turks ^ftsoones inuadinge and
infestinge the Roman Provinces, were vaunted and overcome by Mychael Comnenus,
General and Chieftaine for the Emperor: and within awhile after, the same
Michael being sent by the Emperor into Syria with a less power, for certain
spite and hartburning borne against him, was vanquished and taken of the
Turks. After this the Emperor in person with a great power went into the
oriental Provinces, and entamping at a place called Criapega, in a battle
which he fought with his Enemies (where the Scythians that were in his Army
forsook him and fled to the Turks) most manfully fightinge was taken and
brought before the Sultane whose name then was Axan, Emperor taken Prisoner.
for Tangrolipix was now dead. This Axan as he was a most precise man and of
great moderation and prudence, when he certainlye knew that it was ye Emperor
(for he would not believe it was he, till the Ambassadors, (unto him before
sent,) affirmed it was he indeed, and certain Greek Capitaines which he
had in Prison (being brought before him) fell down and prostrated themselves at
his feet) courteously lifted him up from the ground, lying prostrate and knee
lynge at his Feet, as the custom and manner is for them that acknowledge
themselves vanquished: Great cur^esse of the Sultane.
and so louinglye embraced him as though he had been his own Brother,
speakinge unto him these comfortable words following.

I would not wish you (most noble Emperor) to lament and sorrow for this your
present chance and misery. For such is the state and course of this world,
that the fortune of War sometime allotteth victory to one, sometime to an
other, humbles one and aduaunceth an other. Your Majesty has most
puissauntlye quitte your self in many notable Battayles, your valiant courage
and invincible prowess in warlyke affairs shall ever be renowned and spoken
of, if you now show your self to be no less pacient and stout in adversity
then you were prudent and wise in prosperity. Albeit at my hands you shall
not be used as a Captive and prisoner, but like an Emperor and as is most
sitting for one of your estate.

And immediately he appointed unto him a most Princelye and rych Tabernacle, with
servants to await and give attendaunce upon his Person, and all other
furniture meet for an Emperor. And caused him to sit at his own table next
unto himself, and for his sake set at liberty as many Prisoners as he would
demand. Which Princely courtesy argued that he had regard to humane
mutabilitie and fickle state, considering the same missehappe might as well
have happened unto him. Thus these two mighty Princes keeping company famylyerly
together for certain days, and talking most freendly one to an other, at last
established and concluded a perpetual and infringible peace for ever to
continue between them, and upon promise of affinity by Marriage between their
Children to be solempnised, he frankly delivered and freely dismissed
Diogenes with a great train of honorable Personages awaighting upon him, and
gave unto him a rich suit of Princelye Apparaile.

But after that Diogenes was at Constantinople murdered by his own People,
Axan the Sultane hearing thereof and greatly lamentinge his death, for
revenge thereof sent out his Armies, not now to pylfer and rob as before, but
to subdue and utterly to reduce the same under his subjection. Against whom,
Michael Ducas the Emperor, sent Isaac Comnenus with a great power, who was
overcome and taken of the Turks and paid a great Sum of Money for his
Ransom. After this, Cutlume Nepheiu to Tangrolipix (as before has been
declared) leuyinge agreat Power (...) some the City of Jerusalem and some
with much labor and effusion of blood regained other Cities and there
constituted a Christian Kingdom. Now, this while, the Emperor of
Constantinople was in league with the other Sultan of the Turks, was Lord of
ye Provinces confyning and bordering next unto Constantinople: for we showed
before, how that those Provinces were allotted and given to Cutlume, the which
his Heirs after him enjoyed, and Tangrolipix his Successors had the regiment
over the Persians and Babylonians: and in Egypt there were yet remaining the
remnauntes and residue of the Saracenes.

But after the death of Cutlume and his Son ( Sultanes of the Occident and
Lords of all Cappadocia) one Tanismanye succeeded. Of these Christian
Capitaines when they were arrived in safety in Asia, the Turks gave a great
overthrow unto Raymund, watching him at a vauntage, when he was entered into
the Country about Nice unadvisedly without search, and him compelled to fly
unto a poor desert town called Exorgum: where after he had bin a certain
space besieged and thoroughly wearied, with a sewe others yielded to his enemies.
The rest which would not yield and submit themselves, after long Siege, were
partly consumed in skirmishes and partly perished by famyne: and such as were
taken alive, were slain every one. So many as were lest, departed first to
Nicomedia, and from thence removed to Nice a City of Bithynia. Which City
while they fiercely assaulted, Tanismany or Solomon with. lx. thousand Turks,
issued out and bent his full force against that part of the Christian Camp
which was led by ye Bishop of Podie: but the French, stood so stoutly at
the receipt, that the enemies were easily repulsed, and so at length the City
of Nice was taken. After this there was a sharp bickering and conflict with
Solomon, at the fourth Tent pitch from Nicaea. For he had gathered together the
power of the whole Orient, and had procured as much aid from else where as he
could. The^ ^conium a City standing by Mount Taurus, the Seat Royal and
Metropolitan City of Solomon, (which at this day is called Cogni) and the
Palace of the Princes of Phrygia (now called Caramania) and Heraclea were
won. Afterward Baldwyne dividing his Army into two parts turned into
Cilicia, and took Tharsus, Edessa and Manussa: the greater Hoaste wynning
Armenia, delivered the regiment and rule thereof to Palmurus an Armenian.

After this good success, they took Cappadocia, Caesarea Sororgia and Sura in
the Straicts of Mount Taurus. When they had passed the Mount Taurus, ye Turks
advanced themselves in a fair plain, but they were easily and with little
ado discomfited and put to flight by the Latins, and from thence marched
straight to Antioch, a noble and strong City in Phaenicia, by which the river
Orontes runs (for there is another of the same name in Pamphilia, near unto
Seleucia) and took the same by surrendre, by reason that the Turks were before
vanquished in battle and yielded themselves. In which battle were slain of
the Tu^ks a hundredth thousand, and xv.M. Camelles taken.

During these broils, the Venetian Fleet being CC. sail and sent to aid
the Latynes, wanne a City in the Coast of Ionia called Smyrna: and the Latins
after they had taken Antioch, wanne Rugia and Albaria and there Wintered.

In the Spryng following, departing thence, they laid Siege first to Tortosa
and Tripolis. The king of Tripolis submitting himself was received under
Protection, but Tortosa was very stoutely defended by the Inhabitants.
Wherefore raising their Siege and passing over the Rivers of Zebul, Zabar and
Brai, they came by privy ways and unhaunted places before Berytus a City
standing upon the Sea coast, and from Berytus to Sagitta, and from thence the
tenth day after, they came to Caesarea, afterward to Rama and so at length they
pitched their Tents and planted their Siege before the noble City of
Jerusalem, which with most cruel bloudsheading and incredible labor was
won, about ye year of our redemption one thousand and one hundredth, and
Godfroye crowned King thereof. The streates in this assault stood full of
congeled blood ye thicknes of a foot. But the Turks and Aegiptia^s leuying a
fresh power, renewed war. Against whom, Godfrey with his Christian army
marched, and finding them encamped at Ascalon, gave them battle and slew of
them 100000 (or as some say) 50000 and discomfited all the rest. But before
that Jerusalem was taken, the Venetian Navy coastinge alonge Lycia,,
Pamphylia, Cilicia and Syria, lay at Road in the Haven of Ioppa, being then in
the French Hoastes subjection, because they might help the Christians with
victual and necessary provision: and waighing up their Ankers they departed
thence, and took Ascalon, Porphyria (a City near to Ptolemai^ (...)
Tyberias, Cities standing upon the Sea side.

After the death of Godfroye who departed this life within the City of
Jerusalem, his Brother Baldwine was made King, and the rest of the Princes
returned home. He through the aid and help of the Venetians, Genoways and
Boemund King of Antioch took Ptolemais, with Sydon and Bery^us cities of
Phaenicla. But when that Boemund was dead and Tancrede his Brother suceeded in
the Crown and Kingdom of Antioch, (the Turks and Egyptians again inuading
the frontiers of the Ierosolymitane Kingdom, Balwine sent for Tancrede so
come and aid him, and then gave unto them battle, but the Turks discomfited
him and all his Host, whereupon with great loss of his men he retired to
Jerusalem and Tancrede to Antioch: and the Turks got into their hands the
possession of Mount Sinai. Within a while after Baldwine dyed, and in his
stead an other Baldwine surnamed Burgensis was made King.

Afterward in the reign and Empire of Alexius Emperor of Constantinople, An
other voyage to Jerusalem.
because Baldwine the second, sent for aid to the Latins to withstand the
malignaunt enterprices of the Turkish Rakehelles, an other voyage was made into
Syria. Therein went VVylliam duke of Aquitanye, Hugh the Great, Brother to
Philip the French King, Stephen Earl of Chartiers (lately returned home from
ye other expedition before) Stephen earl of Burgundy, and Toulouse. The
Venetians also sent thither a great Nauye. The Christian Champions and Latin
Capitaines with their Host after many afflictions, labors and sharp storms
sustained by the miscreaunts, insomuche that they were almost dispearsed and
scattered, came at length to Jerusalem. But Baldwine inconsideratelie
fightinge with the Turks before the coming of the other christians, was taken
prisoner, his Host discomfited, and he himself brought to Carras, and after a
time, payinge his Ransom was delivered and set at liberty.

But the Venetian Nauye encountringe with 700. Sail that belonged to the
Caliph of Aegipt, which lay at the Siege of Ioppa, overcame them and took
the City of Tire. During the time that they lay before that City giving
sundry Battries and assaults there unto, there was a Dove seen, flyinge over
their Camp and Tents (for the Venetians had set part of their men on shore)
carrying the Letters of the King of Damasco tied about her neck, the contents
whereof was, that he with a great power, would shortly come to rescue them. The
Soldiers seeing her flying over their heads toward the City, Polycie.
at one instant all together, showted and cried, which shout so divided and cut
the Air, that the Dove fell down to the ground. Then ye Venetian Capitaynes
perusing and reading over the letters, forged others, like unto them in
preportion and wrighting, but clean contrary in effect and meaning, the tenor
whereof was, that the besieged parties should shift for their sauegarde as well
as they could, and only trust to themselves: for of him the could have no
aid nor rescue. Whereupon they immediatelye surrendered themselves and their
City to the Christians.

At this time, The first beginning of the Assassines.
there reigned among the Saracenes or Turks a certain kind or Sect of men
called Assassines: which killing who^soeuer they lifted (like thieves and
Murderers) wrought much skath and harm to the Christians in Syria. And hereof
it came, that afterward among ye Italians, al thieves and murderers were
called by ye name Assassines. Which Sect first sprung up (as it is reported) in
this sort. One Aloadine a Saracenist reigned in that part of Persia, which
lies next the River Indus, not far from the borders of the Province of
Arriana, under the Mount Caucasus (which Region at this day is called Mulehet.
In the which in times past the Asacenes inhabited, of whom Arrianus speaks in
his history of the Acts of Alexander the great, placing them between the
rivers of Cophe and Indus: which Cophe (as I think) is that, which is called
of Josephus in his Judicial Antiquities Cuthus, and that into this Region
those ten Tribes of Israel were translated.

This Aloadine having an intent to inueigle and persuade his people, that he
was hable to bring all such to the fruition of a blessed life, as observed and
kept his Laws and commandments, had trimmed and planted in a right pleasant
valley between two very high Hills most goodlye Gardaines of solace,
replennished with all kind of fragraunt Flowers and beautiful Trees yielding
smell and fruit most delectable, which gardains, were most finely contrived,
and on every side environed with notable gorgeous buildinges, garnished with
Gold and other colors, and stored with precious furniture and rich householde
stuff of value inestimable. In diverse places of the same, were Fountains and
rivers of Milk, Honey, Wine and sweet waters. Within the same, also were fine
Damoselles and beautiful Pucelles, which with Melodies, Songs, musical
Instruments, mincing daunces, and all other allurementes of Femynine
flattereies, delighted and fed the tender ears of such as were brought
thither. Moreover there were other she Servants and housewifelie Trulles,
which being kept close within doors, dressed all things yt could be devised or
thought necessary as well for meat and drink as for the pleasure and
delectacion of the Ghestes and Strangers therein. All the place without was
most curiously strengthened both by nature and art. When this delightful
Gardaine of pleasure was fully ended and made perfect, Aloadine preached and
professed himself to those downish people to be the fellow and Mate of Mahomet,
and that he had power given unto him, to dispose and bestow the benefit and
fruition of Paradise and blessed life upon such as should be to his laws and
hestes obeysaunt. And of them he chose out certain young Stripelinges about
the age of twelve or fourteen years, such as seemed to be of the best
towardness and disposition for Wars in time to come, whom he brought up in
his Hall or Court.

And because they should with the more willing minds obey his commandments
and stir at his beck, his fashion was with some co^fectioned Potion to bring
them into a dead sleep: which done, his custom was then to transport and
carye them into ye place or Gardaine: where being awaked, they solaced
themselves and had the fruicion of all kind of pleasures for two or three days
space, and then again being with the same drinks brought on sleep, (as
before they had been) were carried out, themselves knowing nothing at all
thereof. And by this means it came to pass, that afterward they refused
neither perils nor Dangers to fulfill his mind and commaundemetes, but were
willing and ready to slay and kill whom he would command, yea though they
dwelled in places distant far of. And the number of them which he had there,
were about lx. thousand. Whereby his power and his Successors after him (called
Sexmountes) grew and in such sort increased, that he instituted the same order
also in Syria, and had a Lieutenaunt under him at Damasco. For there was of
them as it were a certain order of Knights, whereof the chief President and
Master was called Sexmount, and had diverse officers of the order of this
Knighthode in sundry other places. The Castle wherein these Gardaines were, was
named Tigad.

These Cutthroate Soldiers, with murders and robberies, made every place in
Asia dangerous and impassable to the Christians. But this Castle being
afterward assaulted and besieged full seven years space by the Tartarians, was
in the end by them taken, and they within utterly destroyed. This is the
History of them, whom some by mistaking do call Essenes, and some Arsacidas,
as we have found in the most credible and approved Authors.

After the death of Tanismanye, the Occidentall Turkishe Empire began to be
divided. For one Muchumet succeeded Tanismanye, between who^ and Masute
President of Iconium, was kindled certain displeasure and privy heartburning.
But the Emperor John Comnenus entered into league and linked in amity with
Masute, whose both powers joined together went against Muchumet. At length for
spite borne to the Emperor there was means found for a reconciliation and
agreement between the two Turkishe Potentates, Masute, and Muchumet: which
being brought about and concluded, Masute abiured his former league and
revolted from the Emperor. Notwithstanding, the Emperor rased two noble
Cities of Pontus in the Turks possession, the one called Castamon and the
other Gangre. But within a while after, Muchumet recovered them again, and
subdued Iberia also, with sundry places in Mesopotamia. And Masute wanne
Iconium with other places in Syria. But making an enroade into Thracia, he was
talked wythall to his cost, and put to flight by Manuel Comnenus. The Emperor
glad above measure for this victory, laid Siege to Iconium, but the Turks
set their Stales so covertly, and brake out of an Ambushe so suddenly, that
they discomfited his Host, and he hymfelfe escaped very hardly.

The Christians in Jerusalem being sore distressed by the Miscreauntes, A
third voyage toward the holy land.
there was a third Voyage and expedition made thither, whereof was chief
Captain and leader Conrade Duke of Franconia, who with a great Army of
Germans, Italians and Frenchmen relieved the^: and meeting with the Turks
(with whom the Greeques had also conspired) near by the River Meander gave
unto them Battle. In which terrible conflicte there was a merueylous great
slaughter of Turks.

After that Masute was dead, his three Sons parted the Kingdom among them,
and afterward Iagupasanes and the Sultane of Iconium fell together by the ears
for their moyties. In the end Iagupasanes got the victory, and the Sultane
fled for succor to the Emperor, who carried him to Constantinople with him,
for a Triumph. And here by the way, I may not omyt to declare a pretty Jest
of a Sarracene Icarus. One yt: took upon him to fly in the air.
This merry fellow, attending upon the Sultane, and bearing the countenance of
a Iuggeler, at a certain solemn Iustes or Tyltrunnyng, voluntarily went up to
the top of a Turret standing in the Tyltyeard at Constantinople, under ye
which Turret was the Tylte it self, where the Horse^ took their races and
courses, and above, were those four courageous and prau^sing gilt Coursers
which now stand on the top of the Church of S. Mark in Venice, directly
opposite, and standing full but one against another. He standing on the top of
this Turret craked and bragged that he would fly in the Air ye space of a
furlong. And having on, a large white garment, down to his foot, full of
plaites, knotted and gathered round to hoouer in the air withal, he stood
fluttering for wind with his hands in steed of wings, and having (as he
thought) sored long enough, at length committed his body to the courtesy of the
wind, but falling down headlong on the ground, he bruised and brake all his
bones with the fall, and there like a vain Cockscombe yielded up the Ghost and
dyed.

Now, Manuel to the intent he would be reputed and thought of the Sultane to
be a Prince liberal, magnificent and mighty, dismissed and sent him away not
without honorable rewards, beside a huyge Mass of money and other most
precious Wares: upon condition, that he should redeliuer and restore unto
him the City of Sebastia, with the Suburbs of the same. But when the Sultane
was returned to Iconium with his money he returned to his former vomit, What
trust is in ye promise of a Turk.
spoiling Sebastia and all the places near about it, and took upon him the
chief Sovereignty and pre-eminence of all that Territory: and dryuing his
other brother Dadune out of the Country, and getting by force the City of
Caesarea, he went about also to supplant and overthrow Iagupasan.

Dadune got into his possession the Country of Amasia being without any
possessour: but it was not long ere he was again expulsed and driven out by
Clizastlan the Sultane, who bore all the swaye in Cappadocia. A good Child.
This Clizastlan albeit he called the Empeperour, father: yet he ever incroched
upon his Provinces and spoiled his Countries. Whereupon, within a while
after, a new garboyle and hatred was kindled between them: for that the
Sultane likewise charged the Emperor with breach of promise, in sundry
Articles and couenauntes before condiscended unto.

The Emperor purposing with all his might to be avenged of his Adversaries,
and already conceyuing in his mind the destruction and utter subuertion of
the Turkishe Nation, leuyed together al his old beaten Soldiers, mustered
new Legions, and procured all the forayne aid that he could from any place,
made a firm League with Baldwine King of Jerusalem, and retained in wages the
Scythians confyning upon the River Ister, and thus having a mighty and
populous Army, with all things in good order and readiness decently purueighed,
(after he had made his prayers to Almighty God the gyuer of all victory for
his divine assistaunce) marched forth in good order against them: His journey
lay through Phrigia and Laodicaea Chonas S. Archangel, Lampis and Celenas where
the head Spring of the great Meander is, into which the River (...) rashly
then advisedly, chopped hardilye into the same streicts having his battle
appointed in this order following. The Voward was led by the two Suns of Angelus
Constantine whose names were John and Andronicus, with Macroduca Constantine
and Lapardus Andronicus, with their Ensigns and Bands, and was marshalled in
Lunare ranks or Mooned array. The right wing^ was led by Baldwine King of
Jerusalem, and the left by Maurozomes Theodorus. After them followed the
Drudges, Skullions, Woodcarters, Carts and all the other bagage and Trinketrie
of the Host. After them came the Emperor himself with the maine Battle,
where in was a valiant Crew of chosen fellows. The Rerewarde was conducted by
Andronicus Contostephanus.

As Soon as they were entered within the Streights, where there was no starting
hoales nor yet elbowroome for the Host, and the Bands of Angelus Macroduca,
and Lapard ordering themselves into a three square battle, (small before and
thick behind like unto a wedge) gave the charge upon the barbarous Turks and
by fine force drove them back from the Hills and higher places where they
fought, into the Mountains, and so perforce, A lamentable slaughter of
Christians by negligence.
made for themselves a through passage without any hurt or danger. But the
residue of the Legions, followed after them nothing courageously: neither did
they set their Archers in the flanks of their Battle to gall and keep of
the Turkish force as they should have done, neither held they their Targetts
close together over their heads like a vault, to bear of their shot and
blows. Wherefore the Turks in thick plumps and with great violence brake out
on every side upon them from the higher places into the lower ground and from
the banks where before they sought, into the plain, and boldly encroched,
still more and more upon the Romans till they had pierced and broken their
array. And first put^inge Baldwine his winge to flight, wounded and flew many.
Which when Baldwine perceued, with an intent to rescue and aid his men in that
distress, taking with him a picked Troop of expert Horsemen, rushed in among
the thickest of his Enemies. Of whom he was so beset and on every side
circumuented that he himself was there slain, and all his men most
valyauntlye fighting, likewise there dyed. This good success set the Turks
on such a glorious hoigh, that they stopped all the ways where the Romans
should pass, meaning that day so to plague the Christians, that they should
never after he hable to attempt the like enterprise against them: for now being
enclosed in those perilous Streightes, and one hindering an other, they were not
hable to endamage nor hurt their Enemies by any kind of means, but rather
hindered and disturbed one an other, and were cause of one an others slaughter
and lamentable destruction. So extreemely cooped in and pounded were they, that
they neither could have any help of the Emperor neither yet of the Rerewarde,
neither could they go back or decline on any side, because the Carts and
carriage that were placed in the middle like a Bulwark or Rampire, let
them. Their Horses and men were killed like Sheep, and with Turks Falchions
gored and foyned through. The Vallayes lay full of dead Corses, the ways
stenched with grisly sightes of slain persons, the Downs covered over with
dismembered bodies, the waters of the Rivers were colored and ran with blood
of Men and Beasts mingled together: and to be short, such lachrimable
slaughter was in this place made upon the poor Christians, that the woefulness
thereof cannot with Pen accordinglye be expressed.

And beside all other outrages and unspeakable calamities, the Turks pitched
the head of Andronicus Bataza the Emperors Nephew (which had levied an Army
out of Paphlagonia and Heraclea Pontica and was sent against the Amasene Turks
in Amasia) upon a Spear point, and carried it before them for a mockage in
derision. Which heavy spectacle and dangerous plight so vexed and inwardly
grieved Manuel, that his mind was wonderfully perplexed, insomuch that he was
eue^ at his wits end and wist not what to do nor which way to turn him.

But the Roman Legions in the Voward, (as before was declared) having passed
those pykes and deadly trappes held themselves close together and for their
sauegarde senced in their Camp, upon the top of a little Hill very
convenient and commodious (as the time then fell out) for their purpose. The
Turks with might and maine striued to ouerrunne and bear down the Emperors
battle, because it they might once thoroughly disperse and subdue the
greatest and strongest part of the Army, they thought the residue would easily
and with small ado be vanquished, like as a Serpent when the head is bruysed
and crushed to powder, all the other parts of the body (which before by
themselves moved, being clean cut of) do straightwayes die. The Emperor
fought valiauntly that day and oftentimes assailed the Turks fiercely to drive
them out of the Staightes and to open the way for his men to pass through,
but perceiving the power and force of the Turks (which fought from the higher
ground) still to increase, and making his full accoumpt, that whether he tarried
or went forward, there was none other way for him and his company but present
death, he exhorted his men first of all to repose all their hope in Almighty,
God and next in their weapons and hands, and that they should either save
their lives by hardy blows and valiant deeds or else by honest and glorious
death win to themselves perpetual fame and renoume: for he plainly told
them that he saw none other way for the^ to escape clear and harmless, but
by such a famous adventure. And ye God would not utterly forsake nor leave
succourlesse them that bear armor and fight in the quarrel of his holy
Catholic Religion, for ye advancement of his glorious name, against the
impious contemners and blasphemers of all religion, godliness, virtue and
honesty, so that they would prostrate themselves before him and with devout
minds (craving his divine assistance) valiantly use ye courage and power which
his divine Majesty gave, and inspired into their stomachs. And although their
chance were then to be slain, yet should they (having a most just cause and
quarrel) for this their short and transitory life, gain and win a double
life: ye one, everlasting and most blessed in the heavenly kingdom, promised
and prepared by our Lord and Savior Christ for all such true Christians as
sincerely worship and unfeignedly believe on his name, but namely and specially
for such as spend their blood and life for the love of his holy word and
setting forth of his glory. And y^ other is, a perpetual fame and a worthy
memorial in this world among all posterity, which would most assuredly for
ever extol and celebrate this their prowess and constancy. But such as threw
away their weapons, should for ever be ill reported of and reviled in the
mouths and speeches of al men, as fugitives, forsakers, and Traitors, of
their Liege Emperor and as villains unthankful and unmindful of God his
benefits, and which is more, should by God his own mouth be accursed and
adjudged to endless pains and sempiternal tortures. Wherefore he advised the^
to pluck up their hearts, and by his example, every one to make for himself a
way and passage with his sword. When he had finished these his speeches with
those few that he had left, be made straight into the midst of his enemies,
and after many wounds given and taken on either side, Valiauntnes of the
Emperor.
breaking through the Turks araie, and being so slashed and hewn in all his
body that thirty Arrows or the rabout, stacke fast in his Target, and not
able to take up his own Bassenet or headpeece that was stricken of, yet (maugre
their heads) he escaped and went through the thickest crowde of them. The
other Legions were on every side slain and brought to their bane, and trodden
down one of another. Such as escaped alive and were passed these perilous
Streictes in safety, were nevertheless slain and quelled by their enemies in
the other vallay, beyond. For the passage in that place was divided into.vij.
deep vallayes near one to another: and being at the first entrance somewhat
broad and roumye, was (the further a man went in) streicter and narrower. All
which places ye Turks had fortified and planted with their Ambushme^tes and
garrisons. Moreover, there suddenly arose such a terrible gale of blusterous
and tempestuous winds, which tossed and raised up such habundance of Sand
(whereof those places are full) yt both the Armies most fiercely clasping
together, bickered in the dark, as though it had been at midnight, and killed
all such as came in their reach without any respect whether they were friends
or foes. And in ye same place, (were they Turks or Romans, horses or other
cattle) it skilled not, for they dyed in heaps together one with another. And
ye valley where this co^flicte was, seemed to be nothing else but a common and
a large Sepulcher or burial place for them all.

But yet at this time, there died more of ye Romans the^ of the Turks, and
specially of ye nobler sort and such as were the Emperors near Cosens and
kinsmen. And many being there left half alive, lay so buried and covered over
with heaps of dead Carcasses ye they were not hable by any means by struggling
to get themselves out: neither was there any at hand to help them, for every
one had enough ado to labor and sweat for his own life and saluetie. In
this ougly sort, they long languishing in that kind of horrible and loathsome
torment, were in the end enforced there to give up ye Ghost by a death most
stinking, loathsome and lamentable. The Emperor himself panting and out of
breath, was got al alone under a wild Pear tree to take air and recover his
faint powers, having with him neither Page, Henxma^, yeman of his Guard nor
keeper. Whom a poor common Soldier or horsema^ of his own troop (being
likewise thither escaped out of the battle) finding in such miserable plight,
breathless and comfortless, dutifully pitied and bewailed: and offering in yt
his calamity, A friend at need.
to minister unto his Majesty the best service that he was able, raught him
up his Helmet and buckeled on his other Armor yt lay here and there dangling
about him. Which while he was in doing, a certain Turk ran hastily unto
him, and seeing no man there to defend nor rescue him, took ye Emperors horse
by ye bridle, meaning likewise to have carried away ye Emperor himself as
prisoner. Whom the Emperor with a piece of his broken Spear yt he had yet
left, so blessed and humbasted about the pate, yt he laid him there on the
ground to sleep. Then ran the other Turks fiercely upon him, to have taken
him alive. Which he seeing, took the same horsemans Spear of who^ before we
spoke, and with the same run one of his enemies clean through: while ye said
Soldier with his naked sword, dubbed another of the^ shorter by ye head, and so
repulsed and kept the^ of, at ye swords point, till ten other of ye Roman
soldiers came running to assist them. Then was he very desirous to have joined
himself to ye other Legions, and most coragiously gave the adventure through
his enemies: but the heaps as well of dead Carcasses as of Turks encountering with
him in every corner as he went, much hindered and prejudiced his pretense.
(...) Horse in such a pace as he was hable. Him had fifty Turks espied, and
on each side enclosed to have taken, but he no more stirred nor amended his pace
for them, then if no man at all had pursued him. When they were clustered about
him, he drew his sword, and slyced one of them so clean in the middle, from
the head down to his back, together with the Sadle of the Horse also, that
the residue for fear to be served with the same sauce kept aloof and durst
not meddle. Friderick drowned.
And after that this Frederick was drowned in a river, the Germans returned
home again.

About this time there sprung up great discord and sedition among the Turks.
For Clizastlan the mighty Sultan of Iconium, when he dyed, left four Sons
behind him, Masute, Coppatine, Rucratine and Chaichosroes. Unto Masute he
bequeathed the principality of Amasia, Ancira, Dorylaeum and certain other
cities of Pontus. Unto Coppatine, he gave Melitene, Caesarea and the Colonie
now called Taxara. Unto Rucratine, he allotted Amisa, Docea and the other
Cities upon the sea Coasts. Chaichosroes possessed Iconium, the regal seat of
the Sultans, and with it Lycaonia and Pamphylia and all as far as Cottyanium.
Coppatine being dead, Rucratine and Masute fell together by the ears and
strove for his Segniorie and enheritance. But Rucratine for that he was a
witty and skillful man in martial affairs, got the victory and wyped Masute
his nose clean from all ye principality of Coppatine their late Brother. And
being now all in his iolytie and ruff for this his good success and victory,
and having a months mind to catch into his hands Iconium also, denounced open
war and sent his deffaunce unto his Brother Chaichosroes whose Mother was a
Christian, unless he would resign his Crown and give place unto him over
all his Sovereignty. Whereupon Chaichosroes fled for his refuge and aid to the
emperor Alexius Angelus as his father had done before him, albeit not with so
good Fortune and speed as his father, for he was sent home again thence
without his purpose. He was scantly come to Iconium, but he was expulsed by
Rucratine and driven to fly to Lebune king of Armenia: of whom he was
friendly received and courteously entertained: but as for relief and aid he
got none, wherefore he returned to Constantinople and there in poor estate
passed out the rest of his days.

During the Empire of this Alexius Angelus, the Venetians took Constantinople
and Angelus being thence disthronyzed, the Greeks in Asia created Theodorus
Lascaris his Son in Law, Emperor, who had under his Empire and obedience
not only Bythinia and the Regions along the Sea, Emperonte deposed by his
Son in law.
but also extended the Lymittes of his Dominions very far into the maine
Land, and had under him all from Caria and the river Meander Southwarde, to
the Sea Galaticum and Cappadocia Northward, and co^stituted his Imperial Seat
at Nice. Which so tickeled and fretted Alexius, that he passing the Sea Aegaeum
entered into Asia, and privily went to Iathine the Son of Rucratine (being now
Sultane) in pitiful plight and poor raiment: before who^ he in suppliant
words opened his state and fortune, and humbly besought him of aid and succor
to restore him to his lawful Empire and Crown, unjustly by an usurper detained
and withholden: not forgetting to put him in remembrance of the former
friendship which before time he had showed and horn to him while he was in
prosperity, and further promised him great Sums of money. Insomuch that
Iathine taking compassion upon him and moved greatly with his large promises,
forth with dispatched Ambassadors to Theodorus, threatening war and destruction
unto him, unless he gave place to his father in law and suffered him quietly to
enjoy his rightful Diadem and Imperial authority.

(...) them out of that poor plot and beggarly region, which affronteth Persia
and the Caspia^ Sea (almost Islandwise) and is environed on each side with the
Scythian Ocean, and joins unto Asia by one only Isthmus or narrow portion of
land lying between the two Seas, the which is compassed and enclosed with the
high and inaccessible Mountains called Riphaei as it were with a Wall or
Rampire: the waves of the Sea (says Hayton the Armenian) going back, and
making way for them to pass between the Mountains and the Sea. And therefore
all those Scythians afterward, of yt Tribe whereof their first Emperor was
descended, were called Tartarians: whose ancient desce^t and beginning many
(as before we have said of the Turks) do refer unto the ten Tribes of
Israel, whose opinion I do not see how it stands with reason nor whereupon
it is grounded. This am I persuaded and this seems unto me most like and
probable, that the Scythians be descended of Magog the son of Iapetus, of
whom the Scripture in many places makes mention: and that those ten Tribes
were by the King of Persia translated not into Scythia but into Media. But
howsoever the matter goes, the Tartarians in such sort as we have declared,
yssuyng and in great companyes departing from the Hyperboreans under the
conduct of Cangio, (whom for honors sake they called Cham, which is as much
to say as a most high and Sovereign Emperor) took their way down along to
the Sea Caspium.

In the mean season, Cangio the Cham departing this life, his Son Hoccota
succeeded in his place, a man right wise and valiant, and the eldest of twelve
brothers. He sendyng out Gebesabada with a huyge power to subdue and conquer
the regions of the Occident, and himself in person passing the Caspian
Streictes, Sogdiana, Bactrian, Oxo and the river Sogdus (which is increased
with many and the same great Springes flowing and running into it) wyntered at
the foot of Mount Taurus, solacing himself and enjoying the fruictfulnesse of
that region and such booty as he had before taken. This Mount Taurus is the
greatest Mountain in all the world, whose ridge and top hanging still together
without any particion, has his beginning Westward near the Sea Aegaeum and
stretching a long to the Ocean Oriental, divides all Asia into two parts.
This Hill is also called Caucasus. The next Spring when the ground was new
clothed and decked with the fresh attire of green grass and pleasant flowers,
they discamped from ye foot of Caucasus, and like an innumerable sort of
Sheep, mounted to the top of the Mountains, inuading the Countries
underneath them: and after they had there, made great pillage and taken their
pleasure, they pierced into India, all about the Banks of the noble river
Indus on either side: Cambalu a noble city of India.
constituting the Ocean, for the limitte of their Empire. And there building a
Princely City called Cambalu most beautiful sumptuous and large, and for all
pleasure of man the most delectable and pleasauntest City in all Asia,
appointed it to be their chief Palace and Seat Royal. Afterward, exployting
his wars by Deputies and Lieutenauntes whom he made Chieftaines and
Generalles over his Armies, choosing thereto such as were either his brothers or
else of the blood Royal: some of them went Northwarde, some Westwarde, and
some Southwarde: and after they had subdued the Arachosians Caramanians and
sundry other Nations, won Persia and thence expulsed the Turks: they then
came to the Chaldees and Arabians. From thence they marched against the
Babylonians, and Assyrians and conquering Mesopotamia, brought under their
subjection the Persians, Parthians and Medians.

After this, going up by the greater Armenia, with incredible celeritie they
overcame Colchis northward, and Iberia that confineth hard upon it, insomuch
that their state surmounted, and flourished in same and honor exceedinglye.
Now, this mighty Tartarian Prince was purposed to make the Sea on every side
the limits and bounds of his Empire, but the pleasant delicacies and amyable
soil of the Country of India, so mollified and effeminated his mind, that
being loath to depart thence, he settled and stayed there, and distributed the
Provinces, Cities, Houses, fat Farms and Tenements among his soldiers and
people, and received the Rites, Ceremonies and Customs of the Assyrians,
Persians and Chaldees.

Therefore as soon as these Tartarians having passed the Caspian Mountains,
had suddenly and forciblie surprised Alexandria, a city standing near ye
Streicts now called the Iron Gates: the Imperial Sultane of the Turks greatly
terrified and dismayed with this sudden irruption of a new and most fierce
people and fearing lest if he should be driven and enforced to enter into
Wars with the Tartarians, his old Enemies the Romans would be ready to set
on him behind at his back, sent his Ambassadors with full authority and
commission to the Emperor, to confirm and strike an unity and peace between
them: which thing the Emperor as being encoumbred with Europian Wars) was
very glad of, and willinglye thereunto condescended, because the Turks should
be as a strong Rampire and Wall in Asia for him, against the invasion of the
Tartarians. This League therefore with the Turks was of al hands gladly
embraced, and to the Greekish Empire most conducible. For whereas men (being so
long time afflicted with the lamentable calamyties of long Wars) bad neither
occupied tillage, nor bred up Cattayle, it fell out in the end (as needs must)
that great dearth and scarsitie was in all the country, and their Treasuries
also with the charges and costs of so long continuance were in manner emtied
and clean exhausted.

Wheresore being now by this new atonement and League rid out of the same
and brought to quietness, Peace brings plenty.
he bent his whole mind an other while to the feats of peace, the sweet Nource
and Storehouse of plentifulnesse and abundance. And because he would by his
example provoke and stir up the rest of his subjects to do semblablit, he
(like a good Householder and one fit to be a Prince among ye people) undertook
to procure and cause so much of the unhusbanded ground as was neither fit to
bear corn nor good to plant Vines, to be turned up and tylled: and manured
so much thereof, as he thought would be sufficient for the expenses of his
own Table, and for the maintenance of all them whom of his mere liberality
and bountiful goodness he had retained and taken into his charge to keep and
see cherished, that is to wit, the poor, diseased, and impotent people, unto
whom he assigned houses and Hospitalles, and appointed also certain Granaters
and ouerseeers such as were trained up and had the skill of Tillage and Vine
planting. The good example of the Prince does much good in a Realm.
Which officers laid up yearly in his Storehouses and Graners great provision
and store of the overplus of the corn. He also had abundantly store himself
with Oxen, Kyne, Horses, Sheep Swine and with diverse kinds of same Birds, by
whom he yearly received great increase and profit. This not only did he
himself, but also by his example, occasioned others of the Peers and
Nobilyty, his Cosins and Allies to do the like, so that every one, having of
his own competentlie whereon to live, the Communaltie should not be oppressed,
nor the inferior sort by sorce and extortion of the richer impouerished, with
any intolerable Tributes, Assessements and Paymentes.

By this means, the Roman weal public was scowred and clean purged from
all notable exactions, and bribing pyllages insomuch that within few years
space, every man had his Barnes and Cellers full stored and stuffed with Corn
and Wine: and such increase of cattle Hens and other homish Fowls, that the
high ways and strets, Stables and Sheep cotes, Houses and Gardens were uneath
hable to hold them.

This golden state and blessed felicity was hereby also the more augmented, A
blessed plenty of al things caused through peace and good government.
for that the Turks were within themselves marvelously pinched and afflicted
with great hunger, dearth and penury of Corn, whereby it came to pass, that
all their Gold, Silver, Iuelles and precious Wares through this godly
forcaste and divine wisdom of the Emperor, came into the hands and
possession of the Romans, for then might a man have seen them feign to choppe
and change their rich Wares for a little bread Corn, to sustain themselves
withal: and every Bird, Ox, Cow or Kidde was sold at an excessive price.
All the ways were pestered full of Turkysh Women and Children of the Turkish
Nation coming to and going from the Roman Provinces.

The Empress also of the overplus of Hens eggs (for they were not possible
to be all spent in her house and Famylie) at that time sold at a very high
price daily to the Turks, I Crown Imperial for the Empress boght with the
money that was had of the Turks for Eggs in the time of dearth.
had got together in short space such an incredible Mass of Money as was
sufficyent to pay for a most rych Crown of Goulde set full of orient Pearls
and precious Stones, which for that cause the Emperors called and termed
Ouata, because it was bought with Egg Money and so in short time the Emperor
enriched himself and all his Subjects with Wealth exceedingly.

During this while, the Tartarians under the leadinge of their Captain Baydo,
marching and making impressions into the frountiers of the Turkishe countries,
the Sultan of Iconium, leuying as great a power as he was able of all Nations
(for he had then with him of Greeks and Latins, that is to wit, of Italians,
Germans and Frenchmen, two Cohortes or Bands. Over the Greekish band was
Captain one John Liuitnada a Cyprian borne (or as some say, one Paleologus)
who erst had revolted from the Emperor: and over the Latins was Boniface
Moline one of the nobility of Venice) every man being brave in apparel and
well appointed with Penons and flages of their own Arms. With these courageous
personages, marching against the Tartarians, he met with them in a place near to
the City Arscor in the great Armenia called Cosdrach. The Tartarians so sone
as the espied this straung Army apparailed contrary to the guise and fashion
of that country, supposing some greater aid and succor had been sent unto
them, were merueilously dismayed and astonished, and if one of ye Sultane his
Kinsmen, for an old gruge, had not in the beginning of the battle fled unto
their side with a great crew of pertakers, they would have turned their backs
and fled, But the occasion thereof was the cause at that time of the Turks
ruin and overthrow, and afterward almost brought al their kingdom and
principalytie in subjection to ye Tartarians. For ye Tartarians obtaining the
vpperhand and victory in this conflict, neglected not the opportunity and good
chance that Fortune now offered them, but passed ye river Euphrates and
subdued Syria as far as Palestina and Arabia. Where after they had assessed
yearly tributes upon ye remnaunts of ye Syrians, Arabians, and Phaenicians,
they laded themselves with many rich booties and spoils, and returned again
into ye orient. But the next year following, they passing Euphrates again
took their way Northwarde into Cappadocia, and went as far as the river
Thermodoon: and taking Iconium the chief City that belenged to the Turks,
Azatine the Sultane being banished with his Brother Melecke fled for succor
to the Emperor Michael Paleologus, whom not long before (in like case and
respect fleeing unto him for comfort and aid) he had pleasured honorably and
entertained with all poinctes of princely courtesy. And putting him in
remembrance of his former freendship showed unto him in his need and
distress, and unfolding before him the pitiful plight of this his present
state and calamity, instantly requested him, either to aid him against his
Capital foes the Tartarians, or else to assign him some piece of ground or
odd corner (as it were a colonie) where he and his people might repose
themselves in some more ease and security: for he had brought with him his
Wives and Children and many Servants, with much wealth and Richesse. The
Emperor, for that he was on every side encombred and wrapped in Wars, would
in no wise diminishe any part of his own power, Pollice in Princes.
and as for the assignement of any part of his Country, to such a great
Potentate as had been a mighty Monarch and Prince over many Provinces, and
also from his tender age ever brought up in Princely pomp and stately
pre-eminence, he judged a thing very dangerous. For he considered, and wisely
imagined that the Lords and nobility which were under his rule and
authority, would seek their Lord and Master where ever he should be, and
that his people being scattered and dispersed in diverse places, like the
wandering Planetes in the night, would flock together and concur to him that
goes before them with a Link and leads the way. So would they come running
to their King, and so perchance in the end, work unto the Romans some myckle
woe and disturbaunce. And therefore ^ooding him out with fair words and
noseling him in good hope, he kept him at a doubtful stay, without giving any
resolute answer to his requests. Azatine, for that his Parents were
Christians and he himself also Christened and washed in the Sacrament of holy
Baptism in his infancy, resorted daily with the Emperor to Sermons and hard
ye holy Scriptures, daily preached and remained so long with the Emperor, till
at length by the means and help of the Europia^ Scythians, he made an escape
and fled with his Sun Melecke out of ye town Aenum and passed the river Ister
and within a while after dyed, and Melecke by Sea passed into Asia to ye
Tartarians, and of them obtained the Kingdom of the Turkish Nation, as his
fathers enheritance. But a certain Duke named Amurie with a Warlike power him
encountered and overthrew, so that he was feign to fly unto Heraclea, a City
of Pontus: and wtin a while after again returning to his native Cuntry and
recovering his fathers kingdom, wtin short space was traitorously murdered.

Thus was the Turkishe Empire subverted and brought to final ruin, and from a
State of well ordered discipline and magnificence, fell to utter decay and
extreme confusion: the cause whereof was, for that, not only the Nobility
and higher Powers dyuided the Kingdom into many sections and parts, but many
also of baser degree and obscurer Parentage, (associatyng unto them the rascal
Peazauntes and vulgar sort) practiced pylfering and robbery, carrying nothing
with the^ but their Bow and Quiver of Arrows: and taking up their Rowst in
the Streictes of the Mountains, made many roades into the Countries about, and
the Cities belonging to the Roman Empire. For it happened a little before,
that the garrisons defending the Castles and fortresses of the Empire, for want
of payment of their feees, and yearly stipendes at the Emperors hands,
would serve no longer but departed thence, which being at the first (as a
thing of small weight and moment) neglected, was in the end the cause, that
the Roman Empire sustained and incurred most grievous dangers and calamities.
For when the Turks were displaced and expulsed by the Tartarians, they
displaced and expulsed the Greeks, and look how weak they were in
comparison of the Tartarians, so strong were they against the Greeks:
insomuch that at length the matter was decided with open war and dent of
Sword. For the Emperor understanding that a great power of Turks were up in
Paphlagonia, leuyed a very competent Army, to repress and (as much as might
he) to inhibite their violent insolency, least if they should be still
suffered impunely to raunge and spoil without resistaunce, it might breed
further danger and inconvenience. And therefore when be had assembled his
power together, he sent the same being well appointed against them, who
encountering ye Turks, had of them the victory. But whilst they disorderly and
ouerfarre in chase beyond the river pursued them, they fell into the bands of
an Ambushe which the Turks ye night before had there laid for them. By means
whereof they being on the one side beset with an Haost of fresh Soldiers well
appointed in battle array, and on the other side pent in and enclosed with the
river, they were slain almost every man. The Turks triumphing for this
success and victory, enroaded afterward within the Roman Territories, and
came as far as the river Sangarius, and subiugated under their obesaunce.,
all from the Pontique Sea and Galatia to the Sea Lycium and Carium and the
river of Eurymedon.

At this time also, Mamalukea.
the Mamalukes (which word by interpretation signifies Servants or Slaves)
obtained the Kingdom in Egypt, and advanced the limittes of their Empire
into Aphrica and Lybia as far as Gades: and subdued Phaenicia and Syria and
all the Country joining upon the Sea coasts.

Now, how this came to pass, we will declare. The Caliphes and all the
Saracenes, lulled in case and noseled in effeminate nycenesse, (engendered by
the delicious and tender allurementes of that pleasant Clime and region)
became so slothful, that although they possessed a most wealthy and fertile
kingdom, yet were they easy to be vanquished and subdued by any: and the
Caliphes being all given to lust, Sensuality and pleasures, took no care to
any thing, neither attempted any enterpryses themselves, but executed and
administered all their Affairs by a Vicegerente which was called an Admyrall.
Therefore when as Baldwine King of Jerusalem had made ye Kingdom of Egypt
tributarie unto him (which tribute Almericke his brother and Successor claymed
as due and payable unto him, and the Egyptians flatly denying the same:)
Almericke with an Army entered into Aegype and in the deserie vanquished in
battle Dargan the Admiral of the Kingdom with all his power, and compelled
him to fly for his sauegarde into the City Bilbis. This was about that time
of the year, when the river Nile, by course had his yearly incremente and
ouerflowed his Banks, whose Dammes and Scluses ye Egyptians of purpose brake
down, because they would stop Almericke from further pursuit and
victoryewherefore laden with spoil and rich boofyes of his enemies he
retired back again into his own Country and Kingdom, for fear least he
with his whole Host if they had longer raryed, should have been drowned and
swallowed by with the mercylesse water.

This overthrow and adverse fortune of Dargan, gave occasion to Sanar (whom the
same Dargan a little before perforce had displaced and put out of the office
and dignity of Admyrallship, and caused to fly for succor to the Arabians,
his Tribe fellows) to go to Norandine the Son of Sanguin ye most mighty King
of Damasco, by him to be shrouded from the malice of his adversary. (...) that
Realm and Country, eftsoons invaded Aegipt and took by force the City
Bilbis, shewinge much cruelty with fire and Sword to all sorts of people,
sparing neither age nor Sex. Wherefore Sanar desired aid of Norandme, and upon
promise of great Sums of money, so long stayed and repressed the impetuous
course of Almerick his victory, till such time that his aid came, of whose
coming when Almerick had understanding, he raised his Camp and departed out
of Egypt. Therefore Syracon who had the leading and conduct of Norandines men
finding Egypt without any foraine aid or succor marched straight to Cayr the
chief and royal City of the whole realm, and slew Sanar coming out to parle
and confer with him. And when he had got the possession of the City he went to
do his duty and exhibit honor to the Caliph, of whom he was created Admiral
of the Land, which dignity he enjoyed a year and then died: leauing^ behind
him for his Successoure Saladine his Brothers Son, a man of a surpassing and
polytique wit, stout, valiant, Egypt when it first came into the possession
of the Turks.
and of nature most franck and lyberall. Who immediately murdered the Caliph
with all his bloud^ and Progeny, to the intent he might alone have both the
Authorities and rooms. Thus was that most wealthye Kingdom brought under the
obedience of the Turks in the year of our Lord. 1150.

Afterward Saladine (as he was a man very prudent and wise) perceiving how
tenderly and effeminately the Egiptians lived, insomuch that when any invasion
of foreyne hostelitie approached or were like to grow, ye kings were ever glad
and feign to crave foreygne aid to support and help them, determined with
himself to institute some kind or order of warfare and to train up a troop
of such Soldiers as should be hable at al brunts and assayes to be as a
rampire, or strong Bulwark to the whole kingdom. Perceiving therefore that
the people bred and borne in the Northren quarters were both a pter and also
stouter for the Wars then the Southern borne were, entered into League with
certain people inhabiting about Maeotis and Pontus, called Circassians (of
Pliny and old writers, Zigians) and bartered with them for an intercourse of
Merchaindize between them and him, namely that they should serve him of Boys
and young Striplinges at a certain price. Who being brought into Egypt and
from their youth trained up in feats of chieualrie and warlyke discipline,
should do nothing but handsomely practice the handeling of their wepons and
artilery, and when time required serve in wars and should have the ordering
of all honors and dignities bellicall. For the Zigians are a people of nature
very fierce, accustomed even from the Cradle to abide all manner of labor,
hardness and travel, inhabitinge that parts of Pontus and Meotis which is about
the river Phasis which river is the bounder and mere of Colchis, and the mouth
of Tanais, which Country or region contains welneere 500. miles.

These people dwell not in Cities and Towns, These people were after called
Mamalukes.
but wander and are dispearced here and there without any certain habitation
from Village to Village. Christians they are by their profession and religion,
albeit they use many rites unlike unto ours: their Infants as soon as they are
borne (yea though it he in the midst of winter) they carry unto a river and
there wash them. They are for the most part fair of complexion and of comely
stature, the country is fenny and full of reeds, whereof they do make
Houelles and Cotages to dwell in, they be at continual Wars with the
Tartarians and other Nations about them.

The Nobles and Gentlemen among them never go but in Armor and Coats of
Fence, and always ride (...) Lieuetenaunt and chief Captain under the
Emperor of Tartarians him overcame and took Prisoner in the year of our
Lord God. 1258. and caused Mustacene Munibila (who at that time had that
office and dignity, among the huyge and inestimable heaps of treasure and
riches which he had hoorded up and miserably scraped together) to be famyshed.
After this, almost for. 200. years space the Saracenes had no high Bishop,
till at length in Persia the lynage and ofspringe of Mahomet began again to
raygne in the year. 1480. which how and by what sort it came to pass,
rests here to be showed and described.

There was a certain Prince among the Persians, Lord of a Town called
Ardenel, and his name was Sophi who greatly gloried, and bore himself very
lofty and high for that he was as he said descended of the rac^ and Pedagrewe
of Ali the Son in law of Mahomet by Musa Cazine his Nephewe, of whom we
spoke in the first Book. This fellow now seeing the Babylonian Caliphe to be
slain, and the contrary faction which the Turks maynteyned and kept to be
depressed and tryumphed over by the Tartarians, began frankely and boldly to
utter his mind and opynion concerning Religion. And because Hoceme the Son
of Ali from whom he made his auaunt to be lineally descended, had.xij. Sons,
therefore he willing to give some difference and token whereby his Sectaries
might be discerned and known from all others, commanded and ordained that so
many as would embrace and follow his Lore and Doctrine should wear a purple
Rybon or Labell hanging down from their wreathed Veyle which all Turks wear
as well as they upon their heads, called Tulibante, and the same in the middle
to be raised up into.xij. tops or heightes without the Tulibante.

After he was dead, his son Guines succeeded in his room, who for learning
and sanctity got such estimation and fame throughout the whole Orient, that
the most mighty Emperor of the Parthians, named Tamburlane (even he which
took Ba^azete the King of Turks Prisoner) leading his Army and passing
through Persia, daygned to turn out of his way and to visit as a man of most
holy life and unspotted sanctity. At the request of which Guines, the same
Tamburlane freely delivered out of his captivity.xxx. M. Prisoners which he
had taken in his Wars and as then had with him in his Camp: whom afterward
Guines instructed and trained up in his Sect and discipline, whoseseruice and
help Secaidar his Son in his wars afterward used. For he after ye death of
his father Guines, reposing his special trust and chief strength in them,
warred upon the Georgians a people of Scythia being Christians bordering upon
his Countries, and by their help afflicted and put them to many foyles,
overthrows, and distresses.

There raygned in Persia a certain Turk named Mirza Geunda, who warred with
Hacembecke (whom some do call Assambey) King of the greater Armenia which is
of them called Diarbeck, being also a Turk as well as he: in which Wars
Acembeck got the vpperhande, and stewe his enemy Mirza in Battle, and
having won Persia, because he was but of a base stock and obscure family
and without Kinsmen and Allies, he meant to make and establishe the state of
his Kingdom the surer by linking in affinylie with some puyssaunt house and
thereuppon gave his daughter which he begat upon his wife the Emperor of
Trapezunte his daughter (who was a Christian) in marriage unto Secaidar. Beg in
the Turkishe language signifies a Lord.
After the death of Hacembeck, succeeded Jacob Beg, which word signifies a
Lord.

This Jacob fearinge the great power of his Brother in law Secaidar (partlye
gotten by his new Sect, and partlye by his Wars with the Georgians) privily
sent aid to his Enemies, and caused him to be slain. But his two sons
Ismahel and Solomon, he committed in charge to one of his famylyer and assured
Friends to carye and conueyghe a far of, unto Mansor Deporna, Constable of
the City of Siracia: willing and streightlie charging him to keep them in
sure ward and custody within the strong Castle of Zalgah, which stands
upon a high and inaccessible Rock, till such time as by express certificate
he should otherwise countremaunde him. But Mansor taking remorse and pity on
them, for the honor of Ali (of whose ancient blood they were derived) kept
them like Princes and used them most honorably, causing them to be trained up
and instructed in learning with his own Children.

And after certain years, An example of pity toward them that were
fatherless.
falling into a grievous sickness and malady, insomuch that he saw himself
not like any longer to live, and fearing least his Son Caceme being a young
man, would after the death of him, deliver these young Orphans and fatherless
Children to Rocene (which reigned after his Father Jacob) furnished them with
money, Horse and Guides needful for their journey, and sent them home again
to their Mother and Kinsfolks.

These Orphans being informed of their state and noble birth, and by what
means they had been preserved (which thing before that present they knew
nothing of) their Kinsmen, Adherents and favorers, for their fathers sake
flocking in from every part unto them. Ismael the elder of the twain, whose
wit was both more pregnant and deeper then his Brothers, (drawn thereto by
destiny and natural zeal) openly before his friends protested that he would
never rest, till he had revenged the murder and death of his father, and after
he had made certain roades into the Marches and Precinctes of the Georgians
(his power also daily increasing) he named himself Protectoure of Ali his
doctrine and defendour of all his authorities; and therwithall denounced open
War upon Rocene King of Persia and all his pertakers. And because he had xij
Brothers, which contended with him for the succession of the Crown, he flew
him and all the rest, saving only Marabeck.

This Marabeck fled to Solomon Prince of Turks, and requested his aid,
whereupon ensued much trouble and great Wars between the Othomannians and
Sophians. But before he had obtained any aid of the Turks to succor him,
Ismael had won not only al Persia, but also achieved and won many notable
victories of the Tartarians. The kings of Persia be right saracenes.
And thus the Saracenes expulsing the Turks, began again to reign in Persia,
in the year after the nativity of our Savior Christ 1500. and there do
reign till this day.

And the Turks with all their powers together having conquered all the Roman
Provinces in Asia as far as the Sea, distributed and cast lottes for the same
among themselves, in which distribution and Lotterie, the maigne country of
Phrygia as far as Philadelphia, and near to Antioch (situate upon the river
Meander) fell unto Carman Alisure, whereof the Country was afterward named
Caramania. All from thence to Smyrna and the inner Coast of Ionia, happened
unto one Sarcane.

Magnesia, Priene and Ephesus were allotted unto Sasan. From Lydya and Aetolia
to Mysia situate by Hellespont, Calames and his Son Cerasus enjoyed. From the
river Sangar to Paphlagonia, the Sons of Armurius parted among them. All
within Olympus and the whole Country of Bythinia, fell unto Atman, otherwise
named Othoman, (of whose race the Emperors of Turks which ever since and now
at this day reign in Turkye and lineally descended) in the year of our
salvation 1300. Albert the first of that name, descended of the house of
Austrich being then Caesar and Emperor of Germany. And from this Othoman,
Laonicus Chalcondyla an Athenian, Paulus Iouius and other both Greek and
Latin Turcographers do begin their Histories: wherefore to avoid tediousnes,
least after Homere, we should seem to write an other Ilias, here we make an
end.

FINIS.
A Summarie or brief Chronicle of Saracens and Turks, continued from the
birthe of Mahomet, their first peevish Prophet and Founder, till this present
year. 1575
MAhomet the Son of Abedela and Emma, of the ligne of Ismael, was borne at
Itraripe in Arabia, in the time that Maurice was Emperor and Gregory the
first, Pope of Rome.

Mahomet patched together his Alcorane, (a Book containing John of Antioch and
Sergius of Italy. And therewith seducing the light brayned Arabians and other
fickle minded people of Asia, called them Saracens.

At the age of xl. years he dyed, and was burried in Mecha Persia.

Jerusalem after it had been besteged by the Saracens the full space of two
years, was taken and spoiled.

All Syria ouerrunne and wasted by the Saracenes.

The Saracenes revolted from the Emperor of Romans.

Antioch destroyed by Saracenes, Damascus taken, Phaenicia invaded, and Egypt
subdued.

The Saracenes wanne the greatest part of Africa and laid it to their Empire.

The most Noble I Will of Rhodes invaded by the Saracenes and taken: out of
which they carried away was in height. 110. foot. The Brass thereof being
sold to the Jews, was as much as 900 Camelles could carye away.

They practyzed outrageous Pyracie on ye Aegean Sea, and did much harm to the
Isles called Cyclades.

The Saracens discomfited Olympius the Exarch of Italy Sicilie.

Constantine the fourth, entered into league with Muchamed King of Saracens upon
condition that the Saracens should pay a great Sum of Gold to the Romans,
with a goodly Horse and a Child of noble birth.

Saracens rushed into Sicilie, and after they had taken Syracuse and wasted the
whole Country, they returned back to Alexandria.

Constantinople was besieged by the Saracens, unto which, they gave sundry
assaults but al in vain: wherefore they shipped themselves entending to have
returned home, but the greater part of them through Shipwreck perished by the
way.

Romans overcame the Saracens, and slew of them. 30000.

Peace the second time was made between ye Romans Romans. 3000. li. of Gold,
50. noble Prisoners and as many Horses.

Saracens in the reign of their King Ammirath, invaded Africa and Lybia, and
carried away many spoils.

Constantine, the Emperor Justinian entered into league with the Saracens upon
these conditions, that they should restore unto the Empire, Africa and Lybia,
and pay every day for the space of ten years, a thousand Crowns, a Horse,
and a Child of noble birth, in the name of a Tribute.

Justinian breaking this League, and joining battle with the Saracens,
received at their hands much harm and great overthrows.

The Saracens putting the Romans to flight, greatly Romans thereby greatly
decayed.

Abimelech King of Saracens, inuading Africa, enjoyed

The Romans spoiling Syria, discomfited. 200000. Saracenes.

While Justinian and Leontius were striving for the Empire, the Saracens again
inuader (...)

The Saracens sailing out of Lybia, thus year set first Spain, wasting
Aragon, Betica and Lusitanie.

The Saracens of Asia, landed at Constantinople with Bulgaria there were
slain. 22000. Saracens.

Zulcemo^ King of Saracens, dyed in his Camp before Constantinople, in whose
place succeeded Amirath.

During this Siege of Constantinople, many of ye Saracens Gallicia.

Abidimar Captain of the Saracens in Africa, sacked Bordeaux a City of
France, and remoouing thence to Poytiers, was met withal and repressed by
Charles Martellus. Their Captain and Prince Abidimar being slain, the
Saracens for a while were quiet and meddled not with any more wars.



Charles King of France, by his valiant Knyghthood delivered out of the
hands of the Saracens, the noble City of Auinion, which they had before
guilefully surprised.

Charles restored many other Cities to peace and liberty, expulsing out the
Saracens: slaying Amorrheus one of their Captains, and putting Athine another
of their Guydes to flight.

Charles by help of Luitprand King of Lumbardie, drove and expulsed all the
Saracens out of France.

Emperor of Constantinople furnished out a Navy against the Saracenes in
Egypt.

Romans and laid it to their own Empire, by means that the Romans disagreed
among themselves, and bent themselves only against the French Kings.

Charles the Great, had a noble victory against the Saracenes in Spain.
Rowlande in combat overcame a Saracen that often challenged the Christians.
Through which Victory and vpperhande, he made the way the easyer for the rest
of his friends and Countrymen to win the victory.

Leo the fourth Emperor made a voyage against the Saracens in Syria.

Aaron Prince of Saracens with 300000 light Horsemen Nicephorus Emperor of
Constantinople, and made him glad to become Tributarie, and to accept such
offers as greatly mislyked and diseased him, but there was no remedy.

Sardinia and Corsica two Islandes, were spoited by the

The Saracens wanne the I Will of Crete, and overcame

The Saracens of Asia rushed into Palestina, and they Africa into Sicilie.

Boniface Countee of Corsica, having no help of the Africa: and in four
Battayles, between Carthage and Vtica, had of them the Victory and vpperhand,
and so feared the Saracenes with the terror of his only name, that they were
feign to depart out of Sicilie, and get them home to defend their own.

Many Countries received great damage at the hands of the Saracenes, and
many Cities for fear,

Saba King of Moors and Captain of the Saracenes wasted Sicilie and all the
Country about Crotona, Tarento: against whom, Theophilus the Emperor and the
Venetian fleet stood at resiststaunce, but all in vain.

The Saracenes inuadyng Hetruria and Latium, Rome: but before their return
home, the greatest part of them perished by Shypwrecke.

Having wasted Illyrium and Dalmatia, they coasted Adrian Sea, and burned
Ancona a City of Picene, after they had taken the spoil thereof.

Rome, compelled the residue of the Saracens to pack out of the Haven of
Ostia, and strengthened all the Country beyond Tyber against them.

The Saracens again (only for booty and spoil) Italy, and wasted with fire
and sword all the Country about Beneuent by the Samnytes. But by King
Ludouick and King Lotharius they were put to flight.

Persians: The Persians through the help of the Turkish Souldyours (at that
time the Turks inhabited Mount Caucasus and were called Tartarians) overcame
them. Ever after from that time, the Turks never left Asia, and not only
encroched upon the Domynions of the Saracens, but also were called by the same
name as they were.

Sicilie xlvii. years, they were thence clean expulsed.

Charles surnamed the Thick, repulsed the Saracens breaking into Italy.

Nicetes one of the Capitaines of the Constantinopolitane Emperor, had a
notable victory over the Saracens

Puell and Calabria.

Lyris a river of Campania, the Saracens as they were spoylynge the Cities
belonginge to the Romans, were overcome.

Fraxinete, came as far as Aquisgrane where encountringe with the Inhabytantes,
they were utterly destroyed and Sagitus their Captain slain.

Geane a City of Liguria, and with great booties returned into Afryca.

Italy wanne Fraxinete, and burned the Navy of the Saracens.

Ramyre King of Gallyce, discomfited a great Army Spain.

The Saracenes committing many murders and firyngs in Calabria, Puell and
Lucania, by the Knightlye Alberick Marquess of Hetruria were repressed, and
near to Minturne in Campania by the River Lyris vanquished. There intentes
were to have come to Rome.

The Saracenes by force keeping the Mount Garganus made out of it many Roades
into the Country near adioyninge, Beneuent.

Otho the first, Emperor of Germans, drove the Saracenes Italy, and
dispossessed them clean out of their hold in Mount Garganus.

The Saracenes recovered Consentia, out of the which Hungarians.

The I Will of Crete taken from the Saracenes.

Otho the second, received a great overthrow at the Calabria the Ides of
Iulie, with whom the Greeks had stricken a League and joined powers. His
stoutest soldiers and Capitaines being in this conflict slain, he himself
had much a do by flight to save himself.

Alphonsus King of Spain, besiedging a strong hold Viseum, was wounded with
an Arrowe and thereof dyed.

The Saracens deuidinge their host into two parts, Italy, took Capua and
besieged Barum.

The Saracenes of Asia took Jerusalem.

Henry the second Emperor of Germans, drove the Capua, and persecuted with
grievous War certain Capitaines which favored their side.

The Egiptian Caliph, through ye aid of an army of Saracens Persia) spoiled the
Temple of our Lord at Jerusalem.

(...) Baldwyne after.xviij. months Imprisonment, deceived his keepers and
escaping out of Prison, returned to his own people.

Dominicus Michael Duke of Venice with a well furnished Navy, greatly annoyed
the Saracenes in Syria. To the Venetians for their worthy service and
valiauntnes were granted sundry great Privileges.



Syria the Christians discomfited the Saracens in two notable overthrows: in
ye first conflict 2500 of them were slain. In the other, although both Armies
were afflicted, yet the Christians obtained the victory.

Ascalon was by Baldwine repressed, and the king of Damascus in three battles
overcome.

Baldwine the third king of Jerusalem, Fulco was made the fourth king.

Tripolis by treason was slain, king Fulco was put to flight by his Enemies
and condiscended to very hard conditions, to be clearly delivered from siege.

Egyptians and were superiors.

Ascalon was recovered by the Christians.

Fulco the fourth king of Jerusalem in hunting ye Hare and ryding fast after
the game, through a fall from his horse dyed: after whom succeeded his Son
Baldwine who was the fifth king.

Edessa and almost all Mesopotamia was won by the Saracens and Alaph Captain
of ye Turks, which now were of great name and power in the East: where they
killed without all mercy a wonderful number of Christians, rauishing men's
wives in the Church of Saint John Baptiste, and in despite of Christianity
even upon the Alter.

Baldwine the third of that name, and the fifte king of Jerusalem, conquered
Gaza and Ascalon and cast out all the Saracens. And at Hierico he overcame and
put to flight Norandine Master of the Chiualry of Damascus and slew 5000. of
his enemies.

Manuel Emperor of Constantinople with much

Roger King of Sicilie and Normannes, made the Africane

This year Conrade the second, Emperor, leuyed a

Lewys King of France, assembled a mighty Army to go against the Infideles.

Out of England, Flaunders and Loraine were furnished

This year Conrade the Emperor passing over Bosphorus without any
resistaunce, came near to his enemies: but for want of victuals and (as some
say) his corn being corrupted and mingled with lyme and plaster, he was glad
to stay himself and go no further and to bring back his Army. The Saracens
understanding hereof, set upon them behind and slew of them certain thousands.

The same year the French king came to the Emperor to aid him: but by reason
that his Army was greatly distressed and pynched with famine, he could bring no
notable atchieuaunce to pass. The same time, the Venetians with a well
furnished Navy went into Asia, to aid the Emperor against the Saracens.

Almaria and Tortosa, two goodly embattailed Cities.

The same year, Damascus was besieged by the Syrians, Frenchmen, and
Hierosolymitanes, and the Vamures thereof defaced. And when they were even at
the point to have won the City and subdued the Saracenes, the chief Princes
and Capitaines disagreyng and falling out among themselves, called their own
Soldiers every man together, and departed thence, leaving the siege.

Raymund King of Antioch with his whole Host was discomfyted by the Saracens,
who spoiled all his Country. Antioch it self by the King of Jerusalem was
hardly rescued and saved.

Baldwine King of Jerusalem, discomfited the Aegiptians and Babilonians.

Almaria.

Baldwine set at liberty and restored many Cities, expulsing thence the
Saracens.

Baldwine dyed, and in his steed reigned his brother Almericke, the fixed king
of Jerusalem.

Almericke in Egypt obtained a noble victory.

Damiata: but in the end he agreed to a peace upon conditions neither
honorable nor profitable.

The Saracenes of Africa made many Roades into Spain.

Almericke King of Jerusalem dyed of an Ague: And his son Baldwine was
anointed the seventh king.

Baldwine in two battles vanquished Saladine King of Egypt, and brought much
treasure into Jerusalem.

Pagane, was taken prisoner on the Sea, by the King of Sicilie, in her voyage
and journey homewarde to her husband.

This year, the Christians in Jerusalem were overcome.

Mausamunth king of the Saracens with great costs and charges repaired
Carthage.

Baldwine the.vij. king of Jerusalem, being infected Baldwine, his Sisters
son was elected king after him, but by frouning destenies he was kept back
from his dignity. After whom succeeded the.viij. king Guye of Lesingham.

Between this Guye king of Jerusalem and Raymund Earl of Tripolis, there
arose dissension and hartburning which was the cause, that the Christians were
brought into extreme danger.

The Christians joining battle with the Army of Saladine, had a lamentable
overthrow. In this battle Guye was taken Prisoner, and the Earl of Tripolis,
dyed suddenly.

Jerusalem having now been enjoyed and possessed by the Christians.lxxxbiij.
was this year by surrendrie delivered

This year all Jury was won from the Christians by the Saracens: the Cities
of Tire, Tripolis and Antioche being with much a do and hardly kept.

Fridericke Emperor of Romans with his son Fridericke, Philip king of
France, Richard king of England with many other Princes and Nobles,
assembling their Parliamentes, decreed and thoroughly determined to aid the
Christians in Jury. Great preparation was made for this voyage. Fridericke
leadyng his Army into Syria, and wynning the less Armenia, went in the hoate
time of Summer, into the River Selephus to bathe and wash himself, where by
misfortune he was drowned. (...)



Damiata a populous city and curiouslye embatteyled.

Faramia was taken prisoner by the Saracens, with his two brethren Charles and
Alphonse. Whereupon Damiata was redeliuered into the hands of the Saracens,
whereby he saved his own life and his friends, and was delivered out of
Prison. This king was taken the fifte day of April.

Baleares, which the Duke of Aragon subdued.

Spain falling at variaunce and discord, the one brother fled into France to
crave aid, the other into Africa to desire assistaunce of the Saracens against
his own brother, whereby they wrought much scath both to themselves and to
their country.

Venetians and the Genoways, whereby the Christians inhabyting Ptolomais and
Tire were grievously afflicted.

Siria.

Antioch was sacked by Bodegar the Sultane.

Africa against the Saracens with a great power. Where by his knightly prowess
he had the victory of them and besieged Carthage: but by reason of the
unwholesome country and change of air, the pestilence infected his Host,
whereof the king himself dyed, and his son John also, and then brake up the
siege.

Armenians and Scythians at Gamala a city of Jury were destroyed by the
Saracens, with the city also.

Tripolis was taken and fiered by the Sultan of Aegipt, and the Christians in
most cruel wise slain, or else carried away captive.

The cities of Tire, Sydon, Tripolis and Bericus, by Sultan, were fiered and
rased even with ye ground. Ptolomais also being before a place of refuge for the
dispearsed christians, was taken without any resistance and destroyed, and the
very foundations dug up. The christians which fled away and for sooke the
city, in their way toward Crete perished by shipwreck and were drowned. And
thus were the Christians utterly chased out of syria 190 years after they wan
it under Godfrey of Bolleine.

The kingdom of Turks.
OThoman a man of obscure birth and very ambicious, Bythinia and other
countries about the Euxine Sea, whose generation since, has wrought much
mischief to Christendom.

The I Will of Rhodes was won from ye Sar. by ye hospitelers.

Alphonse King of Castile in a notable conflict overcame

Othoman king of Turks dyed and after him succeeded Orchanes his Son, the
second king of that Nation.

While Cantacuzen and Paleologus contended for the Constantinople, Orchanes by
force wan the most noble city of Prusia.

Orchanes in a battle against the Tartarians (for so ar Scythians called)
lost the feeld and was with many of his army slain. After him succeeded
Amurathes the third king of Turks.

Amurathes through the covetousness and treason of the Genowais (lending their
ships unto him) passed ye streicts of Hellespont to Abydus, where he conquered
ye cities of Philippople and Hadrianople unto his subjection.

Ammurathes invaded Seruia and Bulgaria, conquered them from the Christians,
and at the same time took and slew Lazarus King of Seruia.

Ammurathes inuading the higher Mysia, was thrust into the flank with a
Dagger, by one that was a faithful servant to the above named King Lazarus,
(whose pretense was to revenge his masters death) of the which wound he dyed.
After Ammurathes thus slain, Baiazeth his son, obtained the kingdom, and
was the fourth king of Turks, and slew his own brother.

Mark Cratenique king of Bulgaria, with all the nobility of his realm, was
vanquished in battle by Baiazeth.

Bosna Croacia, Illyria, Albania and VValachia, kyllyng many thousands of
Christians, being partly slain and partly carried into captivity.

Constantinople was afflicted and besieged fully.viij. years by this
unmerciful Tyrant the Turkish king.

Africa against the Saracenes and compelled them to restore and set at liberty
the Christian Prisoners living among them, and to pay 10000 Crowns.



Nicopolis, upon the. 28 day of September. But the victory fell to Baiazeth
who had there 300000. stout fighting men well appointed, whereof 60000 were
horsemen. The Army of the Christians (being French and Hungarians) was not
above. lxxx. thousand, among whom there were about.xx. M. Horsemen. The French
Capitaines were in a manner all taken Prisoners, Sigismund the king of Hungary
himself escaped hardly by flight. In this battle were slain of Christians
20000. and of Turks 60000. This lamentable overthrow happened through the
discord of the Christian Host among themselves, by reason that one while the
French and another while the Hungarians claimed the first onset and the
leading of the Vauntgard. After this battle the Turk retired back to the
siege of Constantinople.

Tamburlane King of Scythia, a man of obscure birth Asia with an innumerable
multitude of armed Soldiers, in the confynes of Gallitia and Bithynia, near
to Mount Stella, gave to the Turk a sore battle, in the which, he slew of
them two hundredth thousand. He took Baiazeth the Great Turk Prisoner, and
kept him in a Cage, tied and bound with golden Chains. When so ever he
took Horse, he caused the said Baiazeth to be brought out of his Cage, and
used his neck as a Styrrope: and in this sort carried him throughout all Asia
in mockage and derysion. He vanquished the Persians, overcame the Medians,
subdued the Armenians, and spoiled all Egypt. He built a City and called it
Marchantum, wherein he kept all his Prisoners, and enriched the same with the
spoils of all such Cities as he conquered. It is reported in Histories, that
in his host he had an incredible number of thousands, he used commonly to have
xij. hundredth thousand under him in Camp. When he came in sight of his enemies,
his custom was to set up three sorts of Pauylions or Tents: the first, was
white, signifying thereby to his Enemies, that if at that show, they would
yield, there was hope of grace and mercy at his hands: the next was read,
whereby he signified blood and flame: and lastly black, which betokened utter
subversion and merciless havoc of all things for their contempt.

The same year Walachia, Transyluania, Moldauia and all the Region beyond the
river of Danowe, by procurement of Stephan Vaiuoda their Captain, sediciously
mutyned and stirred vprores, against Sigismund. Whereby all men might perceive
and understand, that the same Vaiuoda was the very Author of the late
discomfiture, in procuring the Turks to come thither.

Cyriscelebes (whom some do call Calepine) after yt the Great Turk his father
was taken prisoner and his Host vanquished by Tamburlane the Scythian King,
saved himself by flight, and took upon him to be king of Turks, being the
fyst from Othoman.

Cyriscelebes.

Cyriscelebes the king, this year dyed, leaving behind him two Sons,
Orcannes and Mahomet.

Orcannes through the great favor of the Nobles of Thracia, was appointed
Successor to the Crown, being yet a very young man: but in a conflict at
Gazar, not far from the river Hebrus he was slain chiefly by the villainy of
his own uncle Moses.

Mahomet the sixte King of Turks, when his brother was thus rydde out of the
way, enjoyed the Crown alone.

Seruia, Walachia, and a great part of Sclauonie.

Sigismund king of Hungary, in a battle against the Turks foughten in the
fields of Salumbeze (which were sometimes called Philadelphia) was put to ye
worse, and fled.

Mahomet imposed grievous and intolerable tributes upon the Walachians. He
translated the Seat royal or chief City of his Empire out of Bythinia into
Thracia, and gave prerogative to Adrianople, preferring it before Prusia. He
was the first king of that race that passed the river of Danowe, he subdued
Macedonie, and came as far as the Ionian Sea.

Ammurathes the seventh King of Turks, vanquishing Mustapha ye son of
Baiazeth by force of Arms, obtained his fathers kingdom.

This Turk made his first voyage against George the king of Seruia, otherwise
called Rascia, from whom Newmound and Scopia, and myserably afflicted
Synderouia. The kings ij. sons whom he took in battle, he berest of their
eyes and cut of their privy members. But he married and took to wife his
daughter for her rare beauty and comely personage.

Thessalonica a famous City belonging to the Seigniorie Venice was won by the
Turks, who left there no kind of villainy and spightfull dealing against the
Christians vnpractyzed.

Amurathes besieging Belgrade in Hungary, lost

John Huniades encountered with the Turks spoiling Hungary, and them
discomfited.

Ladislaus king of Polonie and Hungary, sending out John Huniades had over
the^ a noble victory in the fields of Haemus, and drove ye Turk to such a
streict, that he was feign to condescend to a peace.

This peace made with the Turk, (contrary to league Eugenius, which breach
to the Chrystians was very pernicious and hurtful. For first, ye Christians in
the Streicts of Hellespont lost lxx. Gallyes. Afterward in a battle foughte^
at the feeld, above xxx. thousand of them slain, beli^de a great number
drowned in the Bogges. In that battle was slain Julian Caesarine a Cardinal
and Legate for the pope, who came thither to procure and incense the Princes to
violacion of their League and Oath, and warranted them from danger: ye king
Vladislaus himself was there slain who was merueilous desirous to enterprise
this War. Huniades with much adoo escaped by flight and saved himself. The
Turk could not have brought his Navy through the Streictes of Bosphorus in
Thracia to do this mischief, had not the covetous Genowayes winked at the
matter and suffered them, having in bribe and reward, for every Turk, a piece
of Gold paid unto them.

Ammurathes wanne the Isthmos of Corynth, and vanquished the Greekish
Garrysons, together with the emperors Brother of Constantinople, and overcame
with pitiful spoil all Peloponesus.

Turks as they invaded Hungary, and obtained the victory. The Turks desirous
of revenge, assembled a huige power afresh, and renewed War. Wherein both
parties were lamentably damnyfied, loosing welneere 800000 men between them.
Notwithstanding, the number of ye Turks there slain, was far greater then of
the Christians. But the General of the Christian Army was there slain and
his head brought to the King of Turks. In the same battle also was slain
the son of the said King of Turks.

Huniades to the number of 600000 entered into the Turks Countries, and joining
battle with them, at the first conflict, they had the victory: but in the
second, they were slain in manner every one, except 1000. or there about which
by flight saved themselves.

The great Turk besieged Croia a city of Aemathia, Scanderbeg, he was
defeated from his purpose, and with loss of many of his men was sent away
packing with a Flea in his ear.

Amurathes Emperor of Turks dyed, bequeathing Mahomet his Son, the 8. King
of Turks. Who (least his Father should be buried alone without company) slew
at his first entrance, his own Brother, and commanded them to be buried both
in one grave.

The first War that this Mahomet took in hand, Scanderbeg. Besieginge Croia
with lxxx. thousand men, but he departed away without his purpose to his great
shame and reproach, leaving behind him at the said Siege Ballabano one of his
chief Bassaes.

The famous and renowned City of Athens, the University Pyruaem and Munychia
was also most furiously rased to the ground.

This Tyrant the xxix. day of May, after a continual Constantinople, to the
unspeakable hindraunce of all Christendom and high advancement of the Turks
Domynion.

At the taking of this city, most horyble prophanacion of the Temples was
used. As for Imags which the Turks themselves cannot abide, in great scorn and
contempt were thrown down. Among others, Mahomet himself laughing at the
supersticious Citezens, in great be rysion gaped and laughed at the Crucifix,
and caused it in scornful manner to be carried about the Streets with
Trumpettes, and wrat upon the head of the said Picture these words Hic est
Christianorum Deus. This is the God of the Christians.

Three days together he gave leave to his outrageous Soldiers, to kill
spoil and rauishe both Wives, Matrons and Maids without any reverence of
nature. The citizens some they murdered, some they roasted upon Spits, some
they steyed the skins, and afterward hanged them up to consume with fainyne,
of others they put Salt into their wounds the more to increase their pain,
contending among themselves who could devise most straungest kind of new
torment, insomuch that the City was no City, but rather a Slaughter House or
Shambles of Christian bodies. The Emperor himself being there slain, his
head was pitched upon a spear and carried about. At every dinner and Supper,
some of the Emperors Cosens and Nobles of the Country were put to death, so
long as any remained of that ligne. Of the inferior sort, no day passed
wherein he caused not to be put to execution above CCC. persons, the residue he
gave to his Sauldiours.

The exceeding cruelty that they used at the winninge of this City, toward
al sort^ of Men, Women and Children, and their spightfull demeanor toward
Christian religion, it would me any man's heart to hear or read of.

Mahomet besieged Belgrad (of some called Alba Greca) with a hundred and fiftye
thousand men. The Christians assembling their powers together, at the
exhortation of John Capistrane, Huniades their chief Captain and Ringleader
slew above xl. thousand of his Enemies and put to shamfull flight all the
rest of them, in which encountre Mahomet himself was wounded with an Arrowe.
This battle was fought upon the 22. day of July.

This Turk ioyninge battle with Assimbey king of Persia, who^ they call by ye
name of Vsuncassane (signifiing Euphrates, lost x.M. men, but in ye second he
obtained the victory.

Corynth was taken by Mahomet.

The Turk wan from the Christians the Empire of Trapezunce, beheading David
the Emperor thereof and beside the said Empire and Constantinople also, he
took from ye christians xii. kingdoms and conquered 200. cities.

The I Will of Malta conquered by Turks.

The Venetians furnished out a great navy well appointed into Grecia, to recover
Corynth, but they returned

The same year the king of Hungary recovered Geisa a city of Bosnia, the
which the Turk had now the second time besieged, and hearing of the approach of
the Christians, he cast 4. great Gunnes or Cannons into the river Drina, and
fled trusting better to his legs then to his hands.

Mahomet requiringe the Prince of Mysia to come to speak with him under
coulorable speeches and pretense of peace, when he had him within his danger,
he fleyed

The Turk wan a very strong hold in Epyre.

George Castriot (otherwise surnamed Scanderbeg) Epyre, discomfited and put to
notable foyles ye Turks in sundry skirmishes. It is testified of this
Scanderbeg ye being provoked, he never denied to fight, and in fighting never
turned his back, neither yet was he ever wounded but once with an Arrow in the
foot, neither did he ever set upon ye Turks with more then 6000 horsemen and
3000 footmen. He is constantly said to have slain with his own hands of
Turks 2000 whom with such violence he struck, that many of them he clefte a
sunder from the head to the middle.

Mahomet discomfited the Syrians and Egyptians, took the Cities of Narrantana
and Scandolora and fiered them, killing all the Inhabitants most rufully, and
throwing down the Nobles and Gentlemen from the tops of Turrettes and high
places to break their necks.

The same year he entered into League with Cisime King of India, to who^ he
gave in marriage a noble Damsel, out of his own brothelhouse or Nurserie, with
royal gifts and noble magnificence.

Mahomet was put to many afterdeales by the power of King Vsuncassane.

The same year Nicolas Canalis, Admyrall of the Vetian fleet, gave a mighty
overthrow to Mahomet on the Sea, and slew two thousand Turks.

At the same time many Christians were taken and led into captivity by the
Turks out of diverse quarters.

Euboea under the leading of Omar one of his Bassaes, in which enterprise and
invasion he lost almost 40000 of his men: notwithstanding, after xxx. days he
took it, pytching the Italian Soldiers upon Poales and stakes, and showing
all kind of horrible cruelty and violent rape upon the Inhabitauntes.

The same year the Turks army entered into Hungary spoiling and robbing as
far as Zagabria, and carried away with them. 10000. Prisoners.

In the same year also they invaded Dalmatia, Foriulij, and Styria, and haried
great booties of men and Cattle.

Portugal, passing the Gaditane Sea, recovered many Cities in the borders of
Mauritania from the Turk, and laid them to his own dominions.

Vsuncassane having the vpperhand of ye Turks, won from them sundry Cities,
whereby he purchased to himself a perpetual fame over all the East.

Nicholas Throne the same year joined the Venetian fleet with the Army of
the King of Parthia against the Turk.

Vsuncassane in a skirmish vanquished and put to flight

The same year ye Turk entering into Hungary with a maine power, spoiled all the Cities near the water side.

The Persian king and the Turk joining battle near to the River Euphrates:
the Turk had the victory, and took of his Enemies 6800 of whom in his
return homewarde at every staying place and Tent pitching, he commanded
every day five hundredth to be cut in pieces with a sword, and then cast them
out (like dogs) unburied, filling all the Country of Armenia with this
loathsome spectacle of dead Carcasses.

In a part of the Country that lies by the river Ister Muldauia and Walachia,
the Turks had an overthrow and were slain by Stephan the Palatine of Muldauia,
Four Turkishe Bassaes were here taken and xxxvj. Ensigns.

Matthias king of Hungary, at the River of Save wan

The same year Capha, a Colonie of the Genowayes in the coast of the Sea
Euxine, was by treason delivered up to the Turk.

This year dyed King Vsuncassane, who had under

The same year the Turks practyzed much Pyracie in Nicosia, to the great
blemishing and detriment of that City.

Mysia.

The Venetians made league with the Turk: Chalcis was by force of Arms
subdued, and Scodra by subtle practyze gotten and persuaded to yield. They
promised to pay him, yearly 8000 Crowns, condicionally that their Navigations
and traffic over Pontus might be open for their Merchants as before it had
been.

Mahomet sent a great Navy into Puell, and he himself went with an Army into
Hungary, and brought out of both places a great multitude of Christian
Prisoners. And afterward by force subdued the Isles Leucadia, Neritus,
Cephalenia and Zacynth.

Mahomet went with an Army into Egypt to co^quere Alexandria and at home made
preparation for all things needful for his expedition to Rhodes, which he
now mindedout of hand to besiege, and had framed his plat which way to
attempt it.

Mahomet by Mesich his General (a Bassa) besieged Rhodes, and beat the same
with iiij. Nauyes most terribly. But the same was so manfully defended, that
he was feign to his great reproach and shame to depart and leave his Siege,
which he had there continued lxxxix. days, in which while he lost of his men
which were slain out of hand ix. thousand beside.xv. thousand which were
wounded. The Master of the Rhodes at this Siege for the Christians was the
valiant Peter Dabuson.

The same year the Turk with a great Navy invaded Puell and by Acomate one
of his Capitaines, wanne Otronto, a goodly large and populous City standing
upon the Sea, and put all the Inhabitauntes to the Sword.

In this year also 6000 Turks were slain at the City Mantinea in the
kingdom of Lacedemon.

In this year also, this raging Helhounde Mahomet the Great Turk, first of
all others took upon him the name of Emperor. He wanne from the Christians
two flourishing and Noble Empyres, Constantinople, and Trapezunce, twelve
Christian Kingdoms, and CC. cities. After which sundry conquestes he yielded
up his blasphemous soul, and paid his debt to nature, to the great relaycing
as well of his enemies as of his own people, because of the horrible and
unspeakable iorueltie, without respect as well to friends as foes, most
rigorouslye showed.

Baiazeth the viij. Emperor of Turks, appeasing all Zizime out of all Turki^,
and was himself enstalled in the Empire.

The same year Ferdinando King of Naples, sent his Son Alphonse with an
Army, who recovered from the Turks the City Otronto, before won by Mahomet.

Also this year John Castriotte the Son of Scanderbeg assembled a power and
recovered his enheritaunce that was by force taken from his father by Mahomet.

The same year also Stephan Vamoda and King Matthias, wanne from the Turk the
higher country of Mysia, which now is called Bosna.

Baiazeth often joining battle with the Sultan of Egypt had the worse, and
in the end was glad to make a

The Turks invaded and wanne Walachia.

(...) Brother to this Baiazeth the Great Turk Rhodes whither he fled for
scare of ye said Turk his brother,) was this year sent to Rome to Pope
Innocent the viii. And after a certain time of abode there, was poisoned
together with Alexander the Pope his Son.

Ferdinando king of Spain with x.M. Horsemen and fifty thousand footmen, wan
from the Saracen Moors, the kingdom of Granado, and chased them utterly out
of that Country beyond the Sea.

Baiazeth with a great power both by Sea and Land invaded the Inhabitaunts of
the Hills in Greece called Ceraunij, and all the free Corporacions of Epyre, and
them subdued to his Turkish Empire.

The same year Matthias King of Hungary, conquered a strong Hold from the
Turks called Sabatrum, whereby his Country lived in more quietness and out
of ^eare.

Hungary under the leading of Cadume Bassa, by whom were slain vii.M.
Hungarians: and for testimony of this spoil and overthrow geeuen to the
Christians, they sent many Christian men's Heads with their noses cut of and in
lothsom^ wise disfigured, to Constantinople.

Turks rushing into Croacia, were put to flight by Maximilian.

Turk warred against the Venetians, spoylinge with fire and Sword the Country
Dalma^ia, ^ ^aryed away with him great prays. In Foriulij also he commanded
above 4000. men to be beheaded, because he could not carry them away with him
by reason of a great deluge of the river there. The City of Venice for dread
of him was in great perplexity and fear.

Turks wanne this year, Modona and Corona, two cities of Peloponese.

Methon was by the Turks won from the Venetians upon S. Laurence day.
Baiazeth commanded the Bishop of that place to be beheaded in his sight, and
killed the Townsmen every one, and for the most part consumed all the Houses
with fire. By like misfortune also, the said Venetians lost Naupactum and
Dyrrhachium.

Certain Kings and Princes of Christendom, friends Venetian state, joined
their Nauye with the Venetian Fleet (over the which Benedict Pisaure was
Admiral) and spoiled the Isles of Aegina and Zacynth, invaded Leucas and
Cephalenia, took the I Will of Neritus (at this day called Saint Maures Island)
and reskued Nauplia.

The Turk greatly fearing his own state, by reason Elias the Prophet of
Persia, commanded above CC. Houses in Constantinople with all the
Inhabitauntes therein to be burnte. This Prophet was in such credit and
estimation among the People, that above CL. thousand men leaned to his Sect
and followed after him in Camp. His Tents were exceeding rich and gorgeous,
and all things among them were common.

The same year, the Turk entered into League and concluded peace with the king
of Hungary and the Duke of Venice.

The King of Spain in Mauritania Caesariensis, wan

The Sophie of Persia, vanquished, chased, and slew the Turks in Asia.

Grane a populous and wealthy city of Africa this year Spaniardes.

The Spaniardes by force of Arms conquered Bugia Africa.

Zelime youngest Son to Baiazeth the great Turk and by a certain Jew, whom
for that intent he had hired, he caused his said father to be poisoned.

Zelime by the factious election of his disordered doultiours and affectionate
Rakehelles, was chosen and anointed the ix. Emperor of Turks.

Acomathes the brother of Zelime, being aided by the Persians, warred against
his Brother, but Fortune so frowned on him, that he was strangled.

Zelime concluding a peace and renewinge League with the Venetians and
Hungarians, made sharp War upon Ismael ye king of Persia, and him near to
a town called Chalderan, vanquished and put to flight: And took Taurum the
chief City of his kingdom (sometime called Artaxata) without any resistaunce
or bloodshed.

Aladule King of Cappadocia, and taking his chief Captain in the chase, cut
him shorter by the head, and sent his head to Venice for a Trophee or sign of
his victory.

Zelime discomfited Campsor the Sultane of Egypt with all his power, and slew
the Sultane himself in the chase. And following his good fortune and prosperous
success in this battle, conquered and annexed to his Empire, Alkaire, and
Alexandria two goodly embatteled Cities, and all Aegipt beside. He also wanne
Damascus, the large and renowned City of Syria.

Nilus, to the intent he might pursue and coape with Tomombey the new Sultan
of Aegipt. Whom by treason he took and after all kinds of most cruel
torments and spightfull contumelies, commanded him to be hanged.

Charles King of Spain drove out of his Realm the Marranes, which were a
remnaunt of the Saracens and slew welneere of the Barbarians.40000.

Zelime the Great Turk was this year (as he had well deserved) murdered in
that place, where before he had most unnaturally and rebelliouslye persecuted
his Father. After him succeeded his Son Solomon, the xii. Emperor of Turks.

This Solomon conquered the City Belgrade, a most Hungary.

He also besieged the I Will of Rhodes with a Nauye of four hundredth Sail and a
mighty multitude of June, and took it upon Christmas day next following to ye
great shame and dishonor of al christian Princes. The knights of ye same I Will
valyauntly a great while defended it, and often skirmisshed with him, but in
the end after many notable overthrows for want of aid and power they yielded.

Lewys King of Hungary desired by his Ambassadors, Germany, against the
Turk inuading his Country and Kingdom, which they appointed to send, but
it came to late. For the Turk was already come, wherefore king Lewys in his
own person, leading his whole power against him, encountered with him in
battle, wherein hes was overcome, and thinking to have saved himself by
^light, was drowned in certain Bogges or Fennes both Horse and Man. Many
worthy Gentlemen in this Battle were slain to the great weakeninge of that
noble Kingdom. The chief City of the Realm called Buda, was sacked and
spoiled: and the noble Library, of King Matthias utterly consumed with fire.

The Knights of the Rhodes planted themselves against Turks in the I Will of
Malta.

The same year Solomon came again into Hungary, besieged the second time the
strong fortress of Bude, but seeing he could not according to his mind by
force win it, he persuaded the Defendauntes by certain offers and conditions
to yield it into his hands. From thence he marched to Vienna a noble City of
Austrich, and upon the xxij day of September gyrded the same about with a most
terrible Siege, beat it with Ordinance and shook the walls with most hydeous
noise of roaring Canons. But through the courage of the defendauntes, he lost
many of his Soldiers, and being brought into a utter despair of any good
success, he trussed up his trinkets and in flying manner trudged away toward
his own Country with all speed that could be, fearing least the Emperor
and other Princes had followed at heels after him. During this siege, he haried
great booties out of ye Country thereabout, and carried away many thousand
Prisoners. He cast out young Virgins and ancient Matrones stark naked, and
pitched little Children upon stakes and poales. In his Army he had a hundredth
and fortye thousand men: whereof (partly in this Siege of Vienna and partly in
their flight) perished for famine and cold, the number of.lxxx. thousand. The
City was most valiantly defended by Philip of Bauary Earl Palatine of the
Rhine brother to the Palsgraue; a young Gentleman in years but of noble
courage, with the Lord William Rogendorf and Nicolas Earl of Salme and with
them only xx.M. Almeynes and two M. horsemen. In his journey, through
Austrich, the Turk used unspeakable cruelty, of some he cut of their noses,
some he put out their eyes, of some he cut of their privy members, of women
they cut their pappes, Virgins they ravished, and of women great with child
they rypped their bellyes and brent the children: beside this, all along as
they went, they brent Corn, Trees, Houses and all that was combustible, to
make the country desolate.

Solomon with CC.M. armed soldiers assaulted the Castle of Guntz in Hungary,
giving thereto.xii^. terririble assaults. Which Castle was valiauntly defended
by a noble Gentleman named Nicolas Iuryze. At length it was surre^dred unto
him, not as won by force, but as yielded by composition. The great T^rke
himself hearing that the Emperor Charles was coming against him with. lxxx.
thousand footmen and.30000. well appointed horsemen, of Germans, Italians
and Spanyardes, beside the Horsemen of Hungary, thought the Country would
be too hoate for him to stay any longer, and therevppon fled homewarde
through the Hillishe Downs of Norica and with great booties returned home,
without dooyng any thing worthy of memory.

Solomon yet again meant to have an other flinge at Hungary, and to scourge
the Kingdoms of Africa. Whereupon he sent one Corradine Barbarossa Captain
of his Navy into Africa against the King of Tunice. Whom he drove out of his
Kingdom, and deposed from his Crown. And into Hungary he sent Lewys Gritte,
Bastard son of Andrew Grytte Duke of Venyce, to expulse and drive out thence
Vaiuode. But Meilane Vaiuode wynninge the City of Medeuisch, which the said
Lewys Grytte before had got into his possession, slew both him and all his
Army: And cut his Children into pieces, before their fathers eyes.

Charles the fifte with a great Navy sailed into Africa, Tunice to his Crown
again, and delivered out of miserable captivity about the number of.xx.
thousand Christian Prisoners.

The same year Taurus a City of Persia was taken by the Turk. Where the
Turkishe Soldiers living in careless security, were suddenly set upon by
Tahames king of Persia, and.xx. thousand of them slain. The Persians carried
thence many spoils and the Great Turks Concubines, to the great shame and
reproach of their Enemies.

Solomon assembled out of the Countries of Pontus and Propontis, C l. Gallyes.
lxxx. Brigandines, and Foystes, and CC. lxx other vessels of diverse sorts
wherewith he invaded Corsica an I Will belonging to the Seigniorie of Venice, and
it besieged the space of.x. days. Then setting the Suburbs on fire, and
making great spoil of the country beside killing or else taking Prisoners,
many of the Inhabitauntes, he departed thence, and wasted the I Will of Zacynth
and Cythera. He conquered and laid even with the ground, the I Will of Aegina,
subdued Paros, and make Naxos Tributarie. He sent into Puell, the greater and
better part of his Navy, which were in number ten thousand picked footmen and
M M. of his stoutest Horsemen, which haryed and spoiled all the Coast of the
Tyrrhene Sea. The fleet of the Emperor, the Pope, and Venetians joining
together at the first, through discord and ambition of the Captains among
themselves were disseuered and scattered a sunder.

Styria by the Martyloys, a rude sort of Peyzauntly Lurdens, altogether given
to Pylfery and Theft: but by the valiantness of the Country Inhabitauntes
they were repulsed.

The same year through Treason of Duke Calcian the Christians had an
overthrow at the hands of the Turks in Sauia.

Neapolis and Maluasia in the borders of Macedonia.

Dalmatia (wherein was a Garryson of Spanyshe and German Soldiers) was this
year conquered and sacked by the Turks and all the Inhabitauntes and
Soldiers therein (according to their usual custom) put to the Sword. The
Venetians all this while wynked at the matter, in whom it lay to have helped
this outrage.

After the death of John Vaiuoda, who committed the oversight and tutorship of
his young Son to his Cosen Georgius Monachus, it chanced ye Ferdinando
levied an Army to recover his Lands and right in Hungary. Who^ Monachus in
the behalf of the Infant resisted. At length the matter between them being
brought to a Parle and conuention, for the quieting of all strife, it happened
among Ferdinando his men, suddenly a Dagge to be hard go of, which by the
hea^e of the day (as it is thought) discharged of it own accord. But
Monachus judging that it was shot at him, charged Ferdinando with great
injury, saying that from that time, he would never believe the promyses of
Christians. And upon this rash suspicion, sent to the Turk, desiring him to
come into Hungary with his power to aid him, who glad to have this occasion,
came speedely with a great Army and discharging the Hoaste of Ferdinando from
the Siege of Buda, seyzed the City into his own hands and to his own use,
commaundyng the young Infant and his mother to follow after his Camp. Then
entered he himself and took possession of the Castle, and wanne also Pestum a
City right over against Buda, well stored with Ordinance and Munition. At the
same time he also won Stridon, and the Town called Quinquecclesiae or
Fynffenkyrken he rased and made l^auell with the ground.

At the winning of Buda, two Ensigns yeeldinge themselves to the Turk upon
promise of life and limme, were first by him commanded to put of their Armor,
the^ to put it on again, and to rank themselves in battle array, after the
Christian fashion which they readily acco^plishing according to his
co^mau^dment, and he riding about the banks to view and behold them, at length
hadd them put of their Armure again: which done, certain of the tallest and
strongest he picked out, the residue he commanded his Soldiers coming
behind, to hew in pieces with their Swords. Of the other which he had chosen
out, some he set for Marks, or Buttes to be shot at: and some he appointed to
his two Sons to slashe with their Falchions, and to try their strength,
whether of them could give the deeper wound, or (as they termed it) strike
the fayrer blow, that most blood might flow and gush out of their bodies.

Ioachim Marquis of Brandeburge Prince Electour, was appointed with a great
power to go into Hungary to recover Buda and other pieces from the Turk. At
the first, he seemed so forward and courageous, as though he would have
conquered the whole World. But his great heat in short space so slaked that
he was full glad to be discharged of his office again, before any wrong were
offered him, and with shame enough returned home again. Whose cowardice the
Turks perceiving, thought to show him some cast of their office before his
departure, and set upon the right Winge of his Army, and thence took 500.
Duchmen prisoners. Whom in derision they horriblye mangled and disfigured: and
so sent them through Grecia to be witnesses of their victory. The kind of
their punishment was this: first, they thrust them clean through the right
Arm, with an iron read hot, to make them ever after unable to labor and
warfare, secondly their heads were shaven to the very Sculles like Monks or
Friars, and thirdlye their pryuye members were cut of, to make them unfruitful
for propagacion of Children. Notwithstanding Maurice Duke of Saxony in his
expedition, showed himself a gentleman of haultye courage and was like to have
been taken prisoner.

This year the Emperor Charles, speeding himself Mauritania Caesariensis
against Barbarossa to recover Argiers, and staying (as some say) somewhat long
at Luke, to co^ferre with the Pope, by force of tempest and contrary Winds,
suffered a lamentable Shipwreck, and lost a great number of his goodly Ships
with the Ordinance and Habyliments of War that were within them. The
Emperor himself by force of weather was cast upon the Baleare Islands. In
this expedition the Germans valyantly quitte themselves in skirmysh against
the Barbarians in the Emperors behalf, but the Italyans recuyled and fled
back.

Truce was for a certain time taken with the Turk

Sigismund King of Poleland, by Breuitz one of his Turk had buylt near to the
Marches of his Realm and Kingdom.

Mustapha the Turks eldest Son, thought he tarried Egiptians to take part
with him, and stirred up the Persians to make sharp War upon Solomon his
father.

Solomon the Turk with a huge army, marched against Tolcha* King of Persia,
where the Turk in battle had a great overthrow and lost many of his men in
Persia. The Tartarians which were coming to join their powers with him for
his defense, were slain and spoiled in the less Armenia.

The same year, one Curculey a Turkishe Pyrate with twenty Galleyes and
Foystes, contrary to the League and truce practiced much Pyracie and rouerye
about the Coasts of Sicilie and Campania, sodaynlye surprisinge the
Inhabytantes, and thence carried away incredible spoil.

Barbaria bruynge new sedicious vprores, were by the valiantness of Sestian
and Albane two of the Emperors Capitaines repressed: who also delivered
Portugal and Spain from their malicious invasion.

Persians: and first, he inuyted his Soldiers by augmenting their wages, and
afterward, by his Ambassadors, insinuated himself to all his confederates and
confirmed such Leagues as were between them. But he lost of this is very well
appointed Army in this journey by famine and plague a great multitude. The
plague also being very hoate and raiginge in Constantinople (which City in
his absence, he had strengthened with a Garrison of a hundredth Galleyes)
consumed well near lxx, thousand persons.

Iubylie) Solomon was reported (but vntruelye) to be dead: which merciless
Tyrant sore afflicted the people of God, the space of xxx. years.

The same year the Emperor Charles the fifte, by the Viceroy of Sicile,
conquered and wan the City Africa, from whence he brought 8000 prisoners, and
drove out the Archpyrate Dragute, King thereof, who fled to the Turk.

Malta, took the City of Tripolis a Port of Barbary.

Solomon at this time caused his eldest Son Mustapha to be strangled with a
Bowstringe, by his dumb men ministers of Murder a vizured, he himself being
present and looking on, for suspicion of treason laid to his charge. And there
was a truce taken between him and Ferdinando king of Romans.

After which act committed, he would have given to an other of his sons
named Gianger, the Treasure, horse, Armur Ornament and Province of his slain
Brother: but Gianger for very sorrow of his Brothers death raging against his
Father, calling him wicked dog, traytoure and murderer, and bidding pby upon
him, refused his offers and drawinge out his own Dagger presently thrust
himself through the body and dyed.

The Turks Army came into Styria, and wanne the Coppa, Capenisuar, and Baboza.
And atempting to win Sigetum, they could not with all their power bring it to
pass. Whereupon they departed homewarde, but first, they fyered Baboza,
Sanmartine, Gerosgall, Selia, San Laurence and Caliange.

Philip King of Spaigne furnished out an Nauye to Tripolis, or the I Will Gerbe:
which Fleet aryuing in Gerbe and ioyninge battle with the Turks, was put to
a shrewde afterdeale and overthrow. For there were slain of them out of hand
to the number of xviii. thousand persons. The Turks in this conflicte took
xxvii. Galleyes, one Foyst of force, and fouretene great Hulkes.

In the beginning of the same year the Turks wanne a strong Hold in Hungary
named Filech: and afterward a Truce was taken between the Emperor Ferdinando
and Solomon the great Turk so long as Ferdinando lived.

The great Turk, sent his Ambassador to Ferdinando, who from the great Turk
his Master presented unto the said Emperor a goodly Ienet richlye trapped and
4. Camelles with sundry Christian Prisoners.

Maximilyan now Emperor, by the Lord Lazarus his General, conquered and
beat down a strong hold and Fort called Tochay, belonging to John Vaiuoda
which was eigerly defended by the Turks.

Garzias Captain of his Gallyes and Admyrall of those Seas with a goodly.
Navy to win a strong Castle belonging to the Turks called Del Peuol di
Velez, standing upon the coast of Africa, from whence Turkish Pirates were
often wont to infest the Spanishe Seas and take such as traueiled that way.
Which in.vj. ^ayes they took, for that ye Turks defending it, in the still
time of the night fled away.

Solomon besieged the I Will of Malta, won the Castle of S. Helm, but not able
to win the rest, he left all and departed with great loss of his men.

Solomon with a huige power entered into Hungary, and besieged Sigeth and Iula.
And there dyed, the iiij. of September, leaving behind him for Heir to all
his dominions and Kingdoms, his son Selyme, now Emperor of Turks. Whose
tyranny and rage God for his mercyes sake, inhibite and qualefie, that he use
not his power to the destruction and overthrow of Christendom, which with
civil discord within it self is at this present piteously rent asunder and
most daungerously dismembered. In this Siege the rather to allure his Soldiers
to valiant enterprises, he made Proclamation, that whosoever, brought to him
or to his Son in law Mechmet Bassa the head of a Sygethian Soldier should
have in reward.x. Duckattes, and after that rate accordingly for so many heads
as they brought. Beside diverse other causes ye vehemently moved him to
conquer this strong Piece, this was one, and none of the least, for one of
the Turks Captains named Begen coming out of Turkey toward Fynfenkyrken or
Quinquecclesiae into Hungary with.1000. fresh Horsemen, was encountered by the
Earl Seryne Captain of Sygeth in the night, who took from him 8 Camels 50
Moyles 60 Horses, and fire Wagons laden with Treasure and also got ij. read
Guydons, with a whole piece of rich clothe of Gold, and a goodly Jewel. This
Captains Horse was betrapped most richly. The Pomell of the Sadle and back
part was covered over with plate of fine Arabicke work, and the rest of the
sadle beside the sitting place was plated with Silver and gylt. The Seat of
the Sadle was covered with purple Velvet, the Trappers and bridle beset with
small Turkeys and Rubyes. Which horse and furniture, was sent by Earl Seryne
to the Emperor to Vienna. The Captain Begen (although the Earl Serine would
feign have saved him and taken him alive, yet because the Ianitzaries fought so
eigerly to deliver him, he was forced to kill both him and them. From this
Begen, the Earl got.xv. thousand Turkishe and Hungarish Duckates, which should
have paid the Turkishe Soldiers in Fynfenkyrken.

This valiant Gentleman at the Siege of this Fortress was slain, whose death
greatly discoraged all his company. The Turk himself although he dyed in the
Camp at this Siege, certain days before the fortress were taken, yet by the
subtyle policy and wonderful silence of Mechmet Bassa his Son in law, his
death was kept secret and unknown till the Hold was taken for discoraging his
Soldiers. Insomuch that the said Mechmet Bassa, privily caused Solymans
Doctor of Physic to be executed and put to death, least he should have
blabbed out his death. At this Siege were slain three or four Bassaes and
18000. Turks.

The Arabians and certain other Countries began Selyme to rebel against him,
whom he quickly appeased and brought under obedience. And made a league with
the King of Persia.

After this, although the Turk had entered in league Cypres, he sent his
Ambassador to Venice stately and malapertly to demand surrendry of the same
unto him. Which saucy request being not granted, he contrary to league, oath,
and promise, first sent out Hali Bassa with 80 Gallyes thither to transport
Soldiers, Munition, fresh victual and other necessaryes. Then were
appointed as chief Generalles two Lords of his Privy Council, Mustapha
Bassa, and Piali Bassa, which with their main power landing in Cypres first
won the City Nicosia but not without great slaughter and effusion of blood
on both parts.

Famagosta was most terrible besieged and six times cruelly assaulted and
right valiauntly by the Christians defended so long as their power, victual,
powder and Shot remained. But the want of these things and the state of their
Vaymures being by Canon shot beaten down and perished, caused the right
valiant and honorable Sig. Bragadino Lord Governor of the City and others of
ye Venetian Nobility there, to yield up themselves and ye City upon some
honorable conditions. That is to wit, that they might depart with their lives
Armor and goods, five pieces of Ordinance, three of their best Horses and
safe passage from thence to Candye with their own Gallyes: and last of all that
the Grecians inhabiting in that Island, might dwell there quietly and enjoy
their goods and possessions peaceably and still reteyne their Christian
Religion without either burt or contradiction. Al these requests and Articles,
Mustapha the Turkish General granted and subscribed unto with his own hand,
but the cursed Caytif spoke one thing with mouth and thought an other in heart,
for the 15 of August, the said Sig. Bragadino (upon trust of this Bassa his
promise) accompanied with sundry other Lords Gentlemen and Soldiers came
forth of their Hold and went unto the Pauilion of Mustapha, with the keys of
the City: of whom at the first they were courteously enterteyned and caused to
sit down by him, discoursing with them of sundry matters and drawing them
from one tale to another, till at length picking a surmysed quarrel and
specially to Sig. Bragadino suddenly commanded them all to be pynyoned and to
be laid bound one by one in the market place, and in his presence there to be
hewn in pieces. As for Sig. Bragadino, he first commanded his ears to be cut
of, and most vilely to be stretched a long upon the ground, while Mustapha
talked and blasphemously demanded of him, where his Christ was that he helped
him no better. Then he led him to all the breaches of the City, making him to
carry at once two baskettes of rubbish and earth, the one on his back and
the other in his hand slauelyke to every sundry battry, being enforced also and
commanded to kiss the ground as often as he passed by him. After this, he
was led to the Sea side where being set in a Chair, he was wynched up and
fastened to the maineyard of a Galley, and hoysed up with a Crane so high that
all the Christian Soldiers and Slaves in the Haven already shipped might
behold, and was afterward let down again, and upon the Pyllorie in the market
place most cruelly fleyed quick. After which most savage tyra^nie, his skin
was stuffed with Straw and hanged upon the Bowsprit of a foyst to be carried
along the coasts of Syria, that al ye Port towns might behold and understand
who he was. The Turkish Army at this Siege of all sorts were in number 200
thousand persons. In 79 days (all which time the Battry still continued) 140
thousand iron pellettes were shot into the City, numbered and seen.

The Christian Navy being in number 207 Gallyes, 6. Galeazes beside a great
number of Pynnesses and other Ships, and 20. thousand ^all Soldiers, of
Spain, Italy and Germany beside the Laborers and Rowers, whereof was chief
General Don John de Austria took the Sea at Messana from thence sailing to
Coreyra, and so to Cephalenia seeking the Turks: where being out of Candy
informed of the miserable taking and cruel dealyng at Famagosta, were further
given to understand, that the Turks lay at Anchor in the Gulf of Velapan^t.
Speeding themselves thytherward, the Turks were in a ioly ruff, marueilyng
that the Christians curste so fondly hazard themselves unto certain death, and
making full reckenyng so to afflict and crush the Christian power at that time,
that they should never be able afterward to withstand the^ more. But they
reckened before their Host, and God gave the victory. For there were taken,
burnt, and sunk of the Turkish Gallyes, Galiots and Brygandines 230. There were
slain of the Turks 30. thousand, beside a great number taken prisoners: and
about xiiii. thousand Christians that had been kept in loathsome captyuitie,
were set at liberty, breaking their chains to be revenged of their extreme
slavery, to help the Christians when the Turkishe side began to go to wreck.
The chief brunt of this conflict was upon the 6. day of October, and lasted
four hours, but the slaughter and chase continued all day from morning till
night, insomuch that the Sea seemed redd with blood: for none escaped thence
alive saving 40. Gallyes which fled at the first beginning. The Christians lost
seven Gallyes and were slain between the number of vi. or vii. thousand.

The wind and Sun was on the backs of the Christians, and full in the faces
of the Turks, which greatly helped them at this pinch, and furthermore the
Stemmes of the Turks Galleys were so high, that they ouershotte our men, which
made them to vasten to grappling and there beside a great sort of Ianyzaries
and common Turks, their Bassa was slain.

Don John De Austria with 105 Gallyes and 40. great Ships was sent by Phylip
King of Spain to take and set order in the kingdom of Tunice, where was great
ruffling and hurly burly for the State. He therefore taking Ship at Iauagnana,
had the wynd so favorable, that by noone the next day he arrived at Goletta.
Afterward there followed and came to him Marcellus Auria with 29. well trimmed
Foysts, and the Duke of Sessia with 14. of the Popes gallyes. The Turks in
Tunice for dread of his puissaunce (whom to their cost not long before they had
tried) fled out of Tunice, some to Carauana and 400. of them to Bisana,
sometime called Vtica: whom the Bisanes would not receive nor succor: whereupon
after many hot words on either party, they fell together by the ears among
themselves. The Bisanes (to be the stronger in that byckeringe) vnclogged and
vnchayned 150. Christian Prisoners whom the Turks had used for Gallye Slaves,
and them furnished with Weapon and armure. By whose help and mean specially,
the Bisanes got the vpperhande and slew many of the Turks. Which done, Don
John (having the goodwyl of the Townsmen) sent thither Sig. Salazara the
Spaniarde, to take possession of the Town, and to swear the A^^habitauntes to
be true obedient Subjects to King Philip. Then landing his Army within four
miles of Tunice, he sent 2500. Footmen to the city, where they found no body
to resist them but only 200 Moors in the Castle, who said that they kept the
same to the use of Amidas their King. Whom Don John sent Prisoner with his
Wife and Children into Sicile, because he had been cause of great discord and
faction in that Country, and (dispossessing the lawful heirs thereof) had
violentlye usurped the same and procured the Turks to come thither. In whose
room be appointed young Muleasses, who swear to be true Vassal unto King
Phylip and to hold his Crown of him by Homage, whom the Citezins with a
goodly peale of Ordinance received and gladlye seemed to admit for their
Sovereign. Over the Castle or chief Fort of the City he appointed. Sig.
Serbellane Captain.

Sig. Serbellan, joining also unto the^ for help 4000 Moors, issued out of
their. Fort and encountered with 1500 Turks and 3000 Arabians, which robbed and
spoiled the goods of the Tunicians and grievously molested them. In which
conflict, the false hearted Moors reuolting and refusing to fight, there was
taken 150 Christians and two Gunnes.

Still the Turks stamping and staring for rage to see the Spanyardes bear
rule and authority in those quarters, privily in the night the 21 of February
surpryzed Canisum, killing therein and slaying above a thousand persons, and
after they had utterly burnt the town even to the Castle gate, they retired
back whence they came. The Garrison in the Castle to their great grief all
this while beholding this outrageous dealing, and durst not once adventure to
coape with them for frare of loosing all, because they were in number far
fewer their they.

This year the Venetians entered into league with Selyme the Great Turk, for
confirmation whereof, they sent Sig. Francesco Barbero to Constantinople, ye
conditions whereof were, yt either party should still keep and enjoy so much as
they had already in their several possessions, saving that the Venetians
promised the delivery of Sapotum and resignation of all their title in the
Forte of xemenicum into the Turks hands: and again, ye Turk resigned and
granted unto them, two miles every way about the Territory of Zara and other
their Jurisdictions therabout, and that the Venetians for Dalmatia and certain
other pieces about Zara, should yearly answer on certain tribute to the said
Turk.

In March this year the Moors whom Don John de Austria permitted upon their
humble suit still to inhabit in Tunyce, by the egging and procurement of
Radamane Viceroy of Algiera, entered into conspyracie and devise, how to
surprise and win the new Fort that the Spaniardes had there lately made,
against whom Salazara was commanded by Sig. Serbellane to go with a thousand
footmen, which put the Moorish Drudges to flight, and slew of them 1200.

Three Ships were sent to Charles the ix. King of France, laden with great
Horses, Lions, Lyberds, and other Presents. Which colorable courtesy under
the cloak of glosing flattery, it is thought the Turk used, the rather to
obtain the Kings goodwyll and consent that he might winter his Gallyes in the
Port Tolonensis. But hearing that the King was departed this life before their
coming, one of them returned to Constantinople with speed, to intimate to
the Turk their Master, the French Kings death, and further to know his
pleasure what they should do.

In June the Emperor and the Turk concluded a peace for five years to come.

In Iul^e, 300 Turks landing in Calabria to fetch

Upon the Seas about Tunyce were seen 350 Sail of the Turks, whose intent
and meaning was (as very shortly after they brought it to pass) to recover and
win the new Fort which Sarraglion builded, together with Goletta and other
Pieces there. With whom also a mighty rablement of traitorous Moors about
Algiera, Tripolis and Zerbite joined side: which dispossessed thence the
Spanish garrisons, to the great furtherance of their deuelish purposes and to
the lamentable grief of all Christendom, considering what a small way they
have from thence into Spain and so into the rest of other Christian Realms,
unless the good and gracious providence of our God quales^e and as with a
Snaffle reine this raging Beast and bloody Tyrant, the common robber of all
the world from further invasion, which he graciously grant for his mercy sake
through the mediation of his Son Christ our Lord and only Savior Amen.

FINIS.
IMPRINTED AT London by William How, for Abraham Veale, dwelling in Paul's
Churchyard, at the sign of the Lamb. 1575.


