A SERMON PREACHED BEfore the Kings Majesty at White Hall, On Monday the 25.
of December, Being Christmas day, ANNO 1609. By the Bishop of Elie His
Majesty's Almoner.

Imprinted at London by Robert Barker, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty.

A SERMON PREACHED BEfore the Kings Majesty at Whitehall, on Christmas day.
ANNO 1609.
GALAT. 4. verse. 4, 5. When the fullness of time was come, God sent his Son,
made of a woman, made under the Law.

That, He might redeem, them that were under the Law, that we might receive
the Adoption of sons.


IF when the fullness of time comes, God sent his Son: then, When God sent
his Son, is the fullness of time come. And as this day, God sent his Son.
This day therefore, (so often as by the revolution of the year it comes about)
is to us a yearly representation of the fullness of time. So it is: and a
special honor it is to the Feast, that so it is. And we our selves seem so
to esteem of it. For we allow for every month a day, (Look how many months
so many days) to this Feast; as if it were, and we so thought it to be, the
full recapitulation of the whole year.

This honor it has, from Christ, who is the substance of this, and all other
Solemnities. Peculiarly, a Christi missa, from Christ's sending. (For, they that
read the ancient writers of the Latin Church, Tertullian, and Cyprian know that
Missa, and Missio, and Remissa and Remissio, with them are taken for one. So
that Christi missa, is the sending of Christ.) And when then has this Text
place so fit, as Now? Or what time so seasonable to entreat of it, as This? Of
the sending of his Son; as, when God sent his Son: Of the fullness of time;
as, on the yearly return and memorial of it.

To entreat of it then. The Heads are two^ 1. Of the fullness of time. 2. And
of that, wherewith it is filled. 1. Times fullness, in these, when the fullness
of time came. 2 Times filling in the rest, God sent his Son, made of a woman,
made under the Law, etc.

(Quando venit plenitudo temporis,) there be four points. 1. Plenitudo
temporis, That, time has a fullness; or, that there is a fullness of time. 2.
Venit plenitudo. That, that fullness comes, by steps and degrees, not all a^
once. 3. Quando venit. That, it has a Quando, (That is,) there is a time, when
time thus comes to this fullness. 4. And, when that When is? And that is,
When God sent his Son. And so pass we over to the other part, in the same
Verse, Mi^it Deus; God sent his Son.

For the other part, (touching the filling of) There be Texts, the right way to
consider of them, is to take them in pieces. And this is of that kind. And if
we take it in sunder, we shall see; as it is of fullness, so a kind of
fullness there is in it: every word, more full then other: every word, a step
in it, whereby it rises still higher, till by seven several degree^ it
comes to the top, and so the measure is full. 1. God sent, the first. 2. Sent
his Son, the second. 3. His Son made, the third. 4. And that twice made,
made of a woman the fourth. 5. Made under the Law, the fifth, every one fuller
then other, still.

And all this, for some persons, and some pur^ose. Vt nos, that we. The
purpose, ^eciperemus, that we might receive. Nay, (if you mark it) there be
two Vt's, vt ille, vt nos, that He might, and, that we might. He might redeem:
^^d we might receive, that is, He, pay for it, and, we reap the benefit. 6.
A double benefit, of Redemption first from the state of persons cast and
condemned, under the Law, which is the sixth. 7 And then, of translation into
the state of adopted children of God, which is the seventh; and the very
filling up of the measure.

Al which, we may reduce to a double fullness. Gods, as much as He can send.
Ours, as much as we can desire. Gods, in the five first. 1. God sent. 2. Sent
his Son. 3. His Son made. 4 Made of a Woman. 5. Made under the Law. And
Ours in the two latter, 6. We are redeemed, the sixth 7. We receive adoption,
the seventh.

In that of Gods, every point is full; The thing sent, full. The sending, and
the manner of sending full. The making, and the two manners of making Of a woman,
and, under the Law, both full. And our fullness in the two latter, the effects
of these two Acts, or makings of a woman under the Law, Redemption, and
Adoption, which mak^ up all. That, when we were strangers from the Adoption;
and not that only, but lay under the Law, as men whom sentence had passed on
From this latter, we are redeemed, (He vnd^^ the Law, that we from under the
Law) Tha^ (being so redeemed) we might further recei^^ the adoption of
children, (and as He the Son^^ of man: So we might be made the sons of God.)
Which two are as much as we can wish. And this is Our fullness.

And to these, I will crave leave to add another fullness o^ Ours, rising out
of these, and to make a motion, for it. That, as it is the time, when we from
God, receive the fulness^ ^f his bounty: so it might be the time also, when He
from us, may likewise receive the fullness of our duty. The time, of His
Bounty fullness, and the time, of our Thanke-fulnesse: That it may be Plenitudo
temporis, qua ad illum, qua ad nos; downward, and upward; from Him to us, and
from us to Him again: and so be both ways, The fullness of time.

Quando venit plenitudo temporis.
FIRST, there is a fullness in Time. The term, Plenitudo tempor^^
Fullness, carries our conceit to measure straight, fromwhence it is borrowed:
which, is then said to be full, when it has as much, Sap. 11.17.
as it can hold. Now, God has made all things in measure: and if all things,
then Time. Ephesians. 4.13.
Yea, Time it self is by the Apostle called, Mensura temporis, The measure of
time. As then, all other measures have theirs; so the measure of Time also has
his fullness, when it receives so much, as the capacity will contain no
more. So, Time is a measure: it has a capacity: that has a fullness. That,
there is such a thing as, as the fullness of time.

Venit pleni^udo.
B^^, nothing is full at first: no more is Time by and by. Venit plenitudo, it
comes, not at once, or straightwayes, but by steps and paces, nearer and
nearer: Fill's, first a quarter, and then half, till at last it come to the
brim. And degrees there be, Alcuin.
by which it comes. Ecce palmares posuisti dies meos, Psalm. 39.6. From which
word palmares, it is an observation of one of the Fathers, a man may read his
time. In his own hand, visibly there is an ascent, the fingers rise still,
till they come to the top of the middle finger; and when they be come thither^
down again by like descent, till they come to the little, which is the lowest
of all: So is i^ in our time; It rises still by degrees, till we com^ to the
full pitch of our Age, and then declinet^ again, till we grow to the lower end
of ou^ days. But, howsoever it may be (as it often fallen out) the descent is
sudden, we go down^ headlong without degrees, go away in a mo^ment; yet,
ever this holds, to our fullness we come not, but by degrees.

Now thirdly, Quando venit.
this coming has a Quando venit, a time, when it comes thither. As a time
there is a great while, Ioh. 7.6.
when we may say, Nondum venit hora, the time is not yet come, while the
measure is yet but in filling: So at the last, a time too, that we may say,
Ioh. 12.23.
Venit hora, the time is now come, when the measure is full: That is, A time
there is, when time comes to the full: As in the day, when the Sun comes
to the Meridian Line: in the month, when it comes to the point of opposition
with the Moon: in the year, when to the Solstice: In man, when he comes to
his full years: for that is the fullness of time the Apostle alleges, in the
three verses before.

And, when is that When, that time thus comes to his fullness? Quando misit
Deus, Quando.
when God sends it: for, Time receives his filling from God. Of it self, time
is but an empty measure, has nothing in it: Many days and months ^unne over
our heads, Dies inanes, says the Psalmist. Menses vacui, says Job: Empty
days, Psalm. 78.33. Void months, without any thing to fill them, Job 7.3.

That which fills time, is some memorable thing of Gods pouring into it, or
(as it is in the Text) of his sending, to fill it withal. Mi^it Deus is it:
and so comes Time to be more or less full; thereafter as that is, which God
sends to fill it.

Now, many memorable mission's did God make before this here; whereby in some
measure, he filled up certain times of the year under Moses, and the
Prophets: all which, may well be termed, The implements of Time.

But, for all them, the measure was not yet full^filled perhaps to a certain
degree, but not full to the brimme: full it was not (seeing it might be still
fuller) till God sent That, then which, ^ more full could not be sent.

And, That He sent, when He sent his Son, a fuller then whom, He could not
send, nor Time could not receive. Therefore, with the sending Him, when that
was, Time was at the top, that was the Quando venit, then it was plenitud^
temporis, indeed.

Time, be called the fullness of Time. For when he was sent into the world,
Col. 2.9.
Ioh. 3.34.
in whom the fulness of the Godhead dwel^ bodily: In whom the Spirit was not by
measure^ In whom was the fullness of grace and truth. Ioh. 1.14. Ioh. 1.16.
Of whose fullness we all receive, when He was sent, that was thus full, then
was Time at the full.

And well also might it be called the fullness of Time, in another regard. For,
till then all was but in promise, in shadows, and figures, and prophecies
only, which fill not, God knows. But when the performance of those promises,
the body of those shadows, the substance of those figures, the fulfilling or
filling full of all those Prophecies came, then came the fullness of Time,
truly so called. Till then, it came not: then it came.

And well might it be called the fullness of time, in a third respect. For,
then the Heir, (that is the world) was come to his full age: and so, that the
fittest time, for him to be sent. For to that, compares the Apostle their
estate then; that, the former times under Moses and the Prophets were as the
Nonage of the world; sub Paedagogo, in the 3. Chapter, ver. 24. (...), at their
A.B.C. or rudiments, (as in the very last words before these) Their estate
then, as of Children in their minority, little differing from servants. For,
all this while, nondum venit, the fullness of time was not yet come. But a time
there was, as for man; so for mankind to come to his full years: That time,
came with Christ's coming, and Christ's coming with it, and never till then,
was the fullness of time; but then it was.

And let this be enough, for this point; more there is not in the Text. But if
any shall further ask, why then, at that age of the world, the world was at
his full age, just then, and neither sooner nor later? I know, many heads have
been full of devices, to satisfy men's curiosity in that point. But, I hold it
safest,, to rest with the Apostle (in the second verse) on Gods (...). Let that
content us. Then was the time, for that was Tempus praefinitum a Patre, the
time appointed of the Father. For, even among men, (though the Father being
dead) the Law sets a time, for the Son to come to his heritage: yet the
Father living, no time can be prefixed, but only when it likes Him to
appoint; and the Father here lives; Acts 1.7.
and therefore let his (...) stay us. The times and seasons, He has put in his
own power, it is not for us to know them. This is for us to know, that, with
his appointment, we^ must come to a full point. So does the Apostle^ and so let
us, and not busy our selves much with it Time is but the measure or caske,
that wherewith it is filled, does more concern us. To that therefore let us
come.

The degrees are seven (as I said.) To take Misit Deus. God sent. God sent.
That stands first; and, at it, let our first stay be. first degree. For,
even this, that God sent at all, Ipsum mittere Dei, this very sending it self,
is a degree. It is so; and so we would reckon of it, if we knew the Sender,
and who he is; the Majesty of his presence how great it is, and how glorious,
how far surpassing all we can see on earth.

For Him, for such an one as He, to condescend, but to send; is sure a degree.
For, enough it had been, and more then enough, for Him, to be sent to; and not
to send, Himself. To have sit still, and been content, that we might send to
him, and have our message and petition admitted, and not, he send to us. That
had been as much as we could ^ooke for, and well, if we might have ^ene
vouchsafed but that. But it was he that sent, not we to him first, nay, not we
to him at ^ll, but, he to us.

He to us? And what were we, that He to us? Us, Ephesians. 2.12.
(as elsewhere he terms us) mere Aliens from Him, and His Household; Not that
only, but Us, in case of men, whom the Law had passed upon. (So is our estate
described in the end of the Text:) for Him, to send to Us, so great as He, to
such as we; to think us, tanti, so much worth, as to make any mission, or
motion, or to disease any about us; This, may well be the first. Be it then so;
that to us, or for us, or concerning us, God would trouble himself, to make
any sending. A fullness, there is in this. Full he was; a fullness there was in
him, (even the fullness of compassion in His bowels over our estate,) else such
a Sender, would never once have sent.

His Son.
God sent; Sent, and sent his Son. That, (I second. Other^ He might have
sent; and whosoever it had been He had sent, it might well have served ou^
turns. If, sent by the hand of any his Servants, any Patriarch, Prophet, any
ordinary messenger, it had been enough. So hitherto had been his Sending. So,
and no otherwise^ ever till now.

Then, if to send by any may seem sufficient^ to send his Son, must needs
seem full. For^ ever the more excellent the Person sent^ the more honorable
the sending: the greater He, the fuller it. Now, greater there is not, then his
son, Colos. 2.9.
His first, His only begotten Son, in whom the fulness of the Godhead dwelt;
In sending him, He sent the greatest, the best, the fullest thing He had.

To heap the measure up yet more, with the cause of his sending, in the word
(...); It was voluntary. He sent him not for need: but for mere love to us,
and nothing else. There was no absolute necessity, that He should have sent
him. He might have done what He intended by the means and ministry of some
besides. God could have enabled a Creature; a Creature enabled by God, and the
power of his might, could soon have troad down Satan under our feet. But,
if it had been any other He had sent, his love and regard to us, had not
showed so full. It had bin ostendit Deus charitatem, but not, Ecce quantam
charitatem ostendit Deus. 1. John. 3.1
Whomsoever He had sent besides, his love had not been full, at least not so
full, as it should have been, if He had sent his Son. That therefore it
might be full, and so appear to us for full, Misit Deus filium suum. Enough it
was, in compassion of our estate, to have relieved us, by any: Men that are in
need to be relieved, care not, who they be that do it. Enough then for
compassion: but not enough, to manifest the fullness of his love, unless to
relieve us, He se^ his own Son.

Made.
This is full, one would think: Yet, the Manner of his sending him, is fuller
still. Misi^ Flium; Filium factum. Sent his Son; His Son made. Sent Him,
and sent Him made. This is a third. For, if He would have sent Him, He should
not have sen^ Him, made: but as He was, neither made (...) created, but like
himself, in his own estate, as was meet for the Son of God, to be sent.
To make Him any thing, is to mar^^ Him, be it what it will be. To send Hi^
made, is to send him marred, and no better. Therefore, I make not doubt,
Christ's sending is one degree, His making is another: So (...) send, as
withal to make, are two distinct measures, of this filling. As He is, He is a
Maker, a Creator: If God make Him any things He must be a thing made, a
Creature; and that is a great disparagement. So that, howsoeue^ the Time is the
fuller, for this; He is the ^mptier: (...), The fullness of Time, is his
emptiness; The exalting of that, his abasing. And, Phil. 2.7.
this very Exinaniuit seipsum, emptying Himself, for our sake, is a pressing
down the measure: and so, even by that, still the measure is more full.

Yea, the very manner of this making, has his increase too, adds to it still.
In the word (...) which is not every making, but making it his nature. To have
made Him a body, and taken it upon him for a time, till He had performed his
Embassage, and then laid it off again, that, had been much: But so to be made,
as once made and ever made: so to take it, as never lay it of more, but,
continue so still, (...), it to become his very nature; so to be made, is to be
made indeed, so to to be made is to make the union full. And to make the union
with us full, He was content, not to be sent alone, but to be made, and that
(...), to be made so, as never unmade more. Our manhood becoming his nature,
no less then the Godhead it self: This is Filium factum indeed.

Made, and twice made, (for so it is in the verse) factum ex, and factum sub,
made of and made under. Of a woman; under, the Law. So two makings there be,
either of them of it self, a filling to the measure, but, both of them, makes
it perfectly full.

Made of a woman.
Made, first of a woman: that, I take clearly ^o be one. For, it He, if the
Son of God must be made a Creature; it were meet, He should be made, the
best creature of all. And if made of any thing, (if any one thing, better then
another) of that: made some glorious Spirit, Some of the orders of the Angels.
John 1.14.
Nay, made, but made no Spirit, Heb. 2.16.
Verbum caro factum est, The word became flesh: made, but made no Angel^
Nusquam Angelos: He in no wise took the Angels nature upon Him.

But made man, First I will ask with David, Domine, ^sal. 144.3.
quid est homo? Lord, what is man? And then, tell you his answer: Homo quasi
res nihili. Man is like a thing of naught. And this he was made, this he
became, made man, made of a woman; did not abhor the Virgin^ womb, (as we
sing daily, to the high praise o^ the fullness of his humility, to which his
Lou^ brought Him for our sakes.) For, whatsoeue^ else He had bin made, it would
have done us no good. In this then, was the fulness of his Loue^ as before of
his Fathers, that He would be made, and was made, not what was fittest for
Him, but what was best, for us: not, what was most for his glory, but what was
most, for our benefit and behoof.

Made of a woman. For man He might have bin made, and yet have had a body
framed for Him in heaven, and not made of a woman. But when he says, Factum ex
muliere, it is evident, He passed not through Her, as water through a Conduite
Pipe, (as, fondly dreameth the Anabaptist.) Made of, Factum ex: Ex, dicit
materiam. Made of her; She ministered the matter, Flesh of her flesh. Genesis 3.15.
Semen mulieris. The seed, and Semen intimum substantiae, that is the
principal and very inward chief part of the substance. Made of that, made of
her very substance.

And so have we here now in one, both twain his Natures. God sent his Son,
There his Divine: made of a woman, Here his humane Nature, That, from the
bosom of his Father, before all worlds: this, from the womb of his mother, in
the world. So that, as from eternity, God his Father might say, that verse of
the Psalm. Psalm. 2.7.
Filius meus es tu, hodie genui te: Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten
thee. So, in the fullness of time, might the Virgin his mother, no less
truly say, Filius meus es tu, hodie peperite: Thou art my Son, this day have
I brought thee into the world.

And here now, at this word, made of a woman, He begins to concern us
somewhat. There grows an alliance between us: For we also are made of a
woman. And our hope is, as, He will not be confounded, to be counted
inte^^natos mulierum: Heb. 2.11.
No more will He be, (says the Apostle) to say in medio fratrum; Romans 8.29.
to acknowledge us, his Brethren. And so by this Time H^ grows, somewhat
near us.

Made under the Law.
This now, is full for the union with our nature, to be made of a woman. But so
to be made (...) a woman, without He be also made under the is not near enough
yet. For, if he be out (...) the compass of the Law, that the Law cannon take
hold of Him, factum ex muliere will do (...) small pleasure. And He was so
borne, so made (...) a woman: As the verity, of His conception, is (...) this
factum ex muliere: So, the purity, is in thi^ that it is but ex muliere, and
no more; Of the virgin alone, by the power of the Holy Ghos^ without mixture of
fleshly generation. B^ virtue whereof, no original soil was i^ Him; 1. Tim.
1.9.
Just borne He was, and Iusto non (...) lex posita, No law for the Just, no law
could touch him. And so we, never the better, for factum ex muliere.

For, if one be in debt and danger of the Law, to have a Brother, of the same
blood, made of the same woman, both (as we say) lying in one belly; will little
avail him, except He will also come under the Law, that is, become his Surety,
and undertake for him. And such was our estate. As Debtors we were, Col. 2.14.
by virtue of Chirographum contra nos, The hand writing that was against us.
Which was our Bond, and we had forfeited it. And so, factus ex muliere, to us,
without factus sub lege, would have been to small purpose.

No remedy therefore, He must be new made, made again once more. And so He
was, cast in a new mould, and at his second making, made under the Law, under
which if He had not been made, we had been marred: even quite undone for ever,
if this had not been done for us too. Therefore, He became bound for us also,
entered Bond anew, took on Him, not only our nature, but our Debt; our Nature,
and Condition both Nature, as men: Condition, as sinful men; expressed in the
words following; [ Them that were under the lawe] for that was our Condition.
There had indeed been no captivity in him, to do this, if the former had not
gone before, factum ex muliere; if He had not been, as we, made of a woman, but
the former was for this; Made of a woman He was, that he might be mad^ under
the law: Being ex muliere, He might the^ become sub lege, which before He could
not, but then he might and did: And so, this still is the fuller.

And when did He this? when was He mad^ under the law? Gal. 5.3.
Even then, when he was circumcised. For this does S. Paul testify, in the
third of the next Chapter, Behold, I Paul testifi^ unto you, whosoever is
circumcised, factus est debtor vniuersae legis. He becomes a debtor to the
whole law. At His Circumcision then, He entered Bond anewe with us, and in
sign that so H^ did, He shed then a few drops of his blood whereby He signed
the Bond (as it were) and gave those few drops then, tanquan arrham vniuersi
sanguinis effundendi, as a pledge or earnest, that when the fullness of time
came, He would be ready to shed all the rest, as He did For, I would not have
you mistake, though we speak of this, sub lege, being under the law, in the
terms of a Debt sometimes: yet, the truth is, this debt of ours was no money
debt, we were not sub lege pecuniaria, but Capitali: and the debt of a Capital
law, is death: and under that, under Death He went, and that the worst death
law had to inflict, even the Death of the Cross, the most bitter, reproachful,
cursed death of the Cross. So that upon the matter, factus sub lege, and
factus in Cruce, come both to one; one amounts to as much, as the other. Well,
this He did undertake for us, at His Circumcision: and therefore then, and not
till then, He had his n^me given him, Luke. 2.21.
the name of Jesus a Savior. ^^r then, took He on him the Obligation to save
us. And look, what then at his Circumcision He undertook, at his Passion he
paid, even to the full, Col. 2.14.
and having paid it, deleuit Chirographum, cancelled the sentence of the law,
that till then, was of record, and stood in full force against us.

Howbeit all this, was but one part of the law, But He was made sub lege
vniuersa, under the whole law, and that, not by his death only, but by his
life too. The one half of the law, (that is, the Directive part) He was made
under that, and satisfied it, by the Innocence of his life, without breaking
so much, as one jot or title of the law: and so, answered that part (as it
might be, the Principal.) The other half of the law, which is the Penalty,
He was under that part also, and satisfied it, by suffering a wrongful death,
no way deserved, or due by him, and so answered that (as it might be the
forfeiture.^ So, He was made under both, under the whol^ law. Satisfying the
Principal, there was no reason, He should be liable to the forfeiture, an^
penalty: yet, vener that He was also. And al^ (...) the whole law might be
satisfied fully, b^ (...) being under both parts, and so, no part (...) it
light upon us.

These two then, 1 Made of a woman. (...) Made under the law, ye see, are two
several (...) kings, and both very requisite. Therefore, E^^ther has a
several Feast, they divide this S^^lemnitie between them. Six days a piece,
(...) Either; as the several moities of this fullness (...) time. Ioh. 1.14.
This day, Verbum caro factum, The Wo^^ made flesh: That day, Him that knew no
Sinn^ He made Sin, 2. Cor. 5.21
(that is) made him vnderta^^ to be handled as a Sinner, to be under the la^
and to endure what the law could lay upon Him. And so now, the thing sent is
full: an^ fully sent, because made: and fully made, because made once and twice
over: fully made ours, because fully united to us: Made of a woman as well as
we. Made under the Law as deep as we, Both ex muliere, and sub lege. So of our
nature ( of a woman,) that of our condition also ( under the law:) So, fully
united to us in nature, and condition both.

3. And so we are come, to the full measure of His sending. And, that we are
come to the full, ye shall plainly see, Verse 5.
by the ouerflowing, by that which we receive from this fullness, which is the
latter part of the verse, and is our fullness, even the fullness, of all that
we can desire. For, if we come now to ask, For whom, is all this ado This
Sending, This making, over and over again? it is for us. So is the conclusion,
vt nos, that we might from this fullness, receive the full of our wish. For in
these two behind, Redemption, and Adoption; to be redeemed, and to be adopted,
are the full of all, we can wish our selves.

The transcendent Division, of Good and Evil, is it, that comprehends all.
And here it is. Our desire can extend it self no further then to be rid of
all evil, and to attain all, that good is. By these two, (being redeemed, and
being adopted) we are made partakers of them both. To be redeemed from under
the law, is to be quit of all evil. To receive the Adoption of children, is to
be stated in all that is Good. For, all Evil is in being under the law, from
whence we are redeemed, and, all Good, in being invested, in the heavenly
Inheritance, whereunto we are adopted. Thus stood the case with us: Eph^. 2.12.
Aliens we^ were from God His Covenant, and his kingdom: More then that,
Prisoners we were fast laid up under the Law. From this latter we are freed:
of the former, we are Seized: And what would we more?

Only, this you shall observe, that in the Idiom of the Scriptures, it is
usual; two point^ being set down, when they are resumed again, to begin
with the latter, and so end with the former. So is it here, At the first mad^
of a woman, made under the Law. At the resuming, He begins with the latter,
made vnde^ the Law, That He might redeem them, tha^ were under the Law. And
then comes to the former, made of a woman, made the Son o^ man, That we by
adoption might be made the Son^ of God. But this we are to mark, it is He that
i^ at all the cost and pain: and we, that have the benefit by it. At the
redeeming it is, v^ ^ille^ At the receiving it is, vt nos.

Briefly of either: That he might redeem them that were under the Law.
And first, of our Redeeming. Redeeming (as the word gives it) is a second
buying, or buying back of a thing, before aliened or sold. Ever, a former sale
is presupposed before it. And such a thing there had gone alienation, had
formerly been, whereby we had made away our selves, (for a sale I cannot call
it, it was for such a trifle) our nature aliened in Adam, for the forbidden
fruit; a matter of no moment. Our Persons likewise, daily we our selves alien
them, for some trifling pleasure, or profit, matters not much more worth. And,
when we have thus passed our selves away, by this Selling our selves under
sin, Romans 7.14.
the Law seizes on us, and under it we are (...) Cap. 3.23. even locked up, as
it were in a Dungeon, tied fast with the cords of our sins, Prou. 5.22: the
sentence passed on us, and we waiting but for execution. What evil is there
not, in this estate, and on every soul that is in it? Well then, the first vt,
the first end is, To get us rid, from under this estate.

He did it: not by way of entreaty, step in and beg our pardon: That would not
serve; Sold we were, and bought we must be. A price must be laid down for us:
To get us from under the Law, it was not a matter of Intercession^ to sue ^or
it, and have it. No, He must purchase it, and pay for it. It was a matter of
Redemption.

And, in Redemption or a Purchase, we look to the Price. For, if it be at any
easy rate, it is so much the beter. But with an high price, He Purchased us;
it cost Him dear to bring it about^ Non auro, nec argento. 1. Pet. 1.18 19.
Neither of them would serve, at an higher rate it was, even pretioso
sa^^guine. His precious blood, was the price, w^ stood him in. Which he paid,
when He ga^^ his life a ransom for many. Mat. 20.28


It stood thus, between Him and us, in the point of Redemption. Here are
certain mal^ factors, under the Law, to suffer, to be execute^ What say you
to them? Why, I will becom^ under the Law, suffer that they should, take v^^on
me their execution, upon condition, the^ may be quit: In effect so much, at his
Pass^^^ He said, Si ergo me quaeritis Io. 18.6. If youl^ hold on me, if I must
discharge all, Sinite (...) abire, Let these go their way, Let the price pay
be their Redemption: and so it was. And, so we come, to be redeemed from
under the Law.

And this is to be marked, that Them that were under the Law, and, We that are
to receive, are but one, one and the same persons both: But being so redeemed,
then we are our selves. Till then, the Apostle speaks of us, in the third
person, Them, that were under the Law, as of some strangers, as of men of
another world, none of our own: But now being redeemed, the style changes. He
speaks of us, in the first person vt nos, that we: for till now we were not
our own, we were not our selves, but now we are: till this, it was the old
year still with us, but with the new year, comes our new estate.

Being thus redeemed, That we might receive the Adoption of Children
we are got from under the Law: and that is much. Till a party come to be once
under it, and feel the weight of it, he shall never understand this aright;
but then he shall. And if any have been under it, benefit to be got thence.
But is this all? No, He leaves us not here; but to make the measure complete,
yea, even to flow over, He gives us not over, when he had rid us out of this
wretched estate, till He have brought us to an estate, as good, as He himself
is in. After our Redemption, we stood, but as Prisoners enlarged; that was all:
But, still we were as strangers, no part, nor portion in God, or his kingdom:
nor, no reason, we should hope for any. He now goes one step further, which is
the highest and furthe^t step of all. For further then it, He cannot go.

That we might receive the Adoption, (that is) from the estate of Prisoners
condemned, be translated into the estate of Children Adopted. Of Adopted: for,
of natural, we could not: That is His peculiar alone, and He therein only
about us, but else, fully to the joint fruition, of all that He has, which is
fully as much, as we could desire. And this is our Fieri out of His Factum ex
muliere. We made the Sons of God, as He the Son of man; 2. Pet. 1.4.
We made partakers of his Diuine^ as He of our humane nature. To purchase our
pardon, to free us from death, and the laws sentence, this seemed a small thing
to Him: 2 Samuel 7.19.
ye^ this is Lex hominis. Man's goodness goes no farther; and gracious is the
Prince, that dot^ but so much. For who ever heard of a condemned man, Adopted
afterward; or that thought i^ not enough and enough, if He did but scape^ with
his life? So far then to exalt his bounty, to that fullness; as pardon, and
Adopt both, Non est lex hominis haec. No such measure among men, Zelus Domini
Exercituum, The zeal of the Lord of Hosts, was to perform this: Es. 9.7^
The fullness of the Godhead, dwelt in Him, that brought this to pass.

For (to speak of adopting:) We see it daily; No father adopts, unless He be
orb, have no child; or i^ He have one, for some deep dislike, have cast him
of. Heb. 1.3^
But God had a Son, The brightness of his Glory; The true character of his
Substance: Mat. 17.5.
and no displeasure there was; No, In quo complacitum est, In whom He was
absolutely well pleased: yet, would He by adoption, for all that, Heb. ^.10.
bring many Sons to Glory. Is not this full on his part?

We see again, no Heir will endure to hear of Adoption, nay, nor divide his
Inheritance, no not with his natural Brethren. Then, that the Heir of all
things, Heb. 1.2.
should admit joint Heirs to the Kingdom he was borne to; Romans 8.17.
and that admit them, not out of such, as were near him, but from such as were
strangers, yea such as had been condemned men under the Law, Is not this full
on his part? To purchase us, and to purchase for us, both at once? And not to
do this for us alone but to assure it to us: For, as his Father, in this
verse, sends Him: So, in the next verse, He sends the Spirit of his Son, to
give us sei^in of this our Adoption: whereby we now call him, the Jews Abba,
the Gentiles Pa^ter, as Children all, and He our Father, which is the
privilege of the Adoption, we hee^ receive.

And now, are we come to the fulness indeed^ For this Adoption, is the fullness
of our optio^^ We cannot extend; we our wish: or He (...) love and goodness
any further. For, what can w^ ask, or He give more, seeing in giving this,
(...) gives all He is worth? By this time, it is (...) Sea. Ezekiel. 47.3, 4, 5.
All the Banckes are filled. It is now, as E^^^kiels waters, that he saw
flow, from under (...) threshold of the Temple^ that took him to (...) ancles
first, then to the knees, after to (...) loins, at last, so high risen, there
was no mo^^ passage.

1. From the fullness of his Compassion, (...) sent to release us: 2. from the
fullness of (...) love, He sent his Son: 3. In the fullness (...) Humility,
He sent him made: 4. Made (...) Woman, to make a full union with our nature^
Made under the Law, to make the union yet more perfectly full with our sinful
condition: 6. That we might obtain a full deliverance, from all Evil, by
being redeemed: 7. and a full estate, of all the joy and Glory of his heavenly
inheritance, by being adopted. So, there is fulness, of all hands. And so much,
for the fulness of the Benefit, we receive.

Now, for the fulness of the duty, we are to perform this day. For, in the
fulness of time, all things are to be full. Plenitudo temporis, tempus
plenitudinis. And, seeing God has suffered us to live, to see the year run
about, to this plenitudo temporis: if it be so, on Gods part; meet also, it be
so on Ours: and that we, be not empty, in thi^ fulness of time. It is not fit,
if He be at the brincke, that we be at the bottom. But as we be willing, to
yield Him of ours again; of our duty (I mean:) that it, to him, in a
measure, and proportion be like full; as his Bounty, has ^eene full above
measure, toward us. That so from us. and on our parts, it may be plenitudo
temporis, or tempus plenitudinis, the fullness of time, or time of fulness,
choose you whether.

1. And, a time of fulness it will be, (I know) in a sense: of fulness of Bread,
of fulness of bravery, of fulness of sport, and pastime: and this it may be. And
it has been ever, a joyful time in appearance, for it should be so: with the
joy (says Esaias a verse or two before, Puer natus est nobis, unto us a Child
is borne) that men rejoice with, in harvest. Esa. 9.3.
Not to go from our Text here, with the joy of men that are come out of
prison, have escaped the Law, with the joy of men, that hau^ got the reuersio^,
of a goodly heritage. Only, tha^ we forget not the principal, that this outwa^^
joy, eat not up, euacuate not our spiritual io^^ proper to the Feast: that we
have in mind, (...) the midst of our mirth, the cause of it, Christ^ sending,
and the benefits that come thereby And, it shall be a good sign unto us, if we
c^^ thus rejoice, if this our joy can be full, if we ca^ make a spiritual
blessing, the object of o^^ mirth. Psalm. 89.15.
Beatus populus, qui scit iubilationem. Blessed is the people, that can rejoice
on this manner.

our ioy-fulnesse, or fullness of joy, o^ fulness of thanks, or thank-fulnesse,
is to ensue for, with that fullness, we are to celebrate it likewise. Our minds
first, and then our mouths, t^ be filled with blessing, and praise, and
thanks t^ Him that has made our times, not to fall into those empty ages of
the world, but to fall within this fullness of time, Luke 10.24.
which so many Kings and Prophets desired to have lived in, but ^ell short of;
And lived then, when the times were full of shadows, and promises, and nothing
else. How instantly they longed, to have held such a Feast, Psalm 144.5.
to have kept a Christmasse, it is evident, by David's Inclina caelos, Esa. 64 1.
by Esays Vtinam disrumpas Caelos, Bow the Heavens, and Break the Heavens: How
much (I say) they longed for it: and therefore, that we make not light account
of it.

To render our thanks then, and to remember to do it fully, To forget none:
To Him that was sent, and to Him, that Sent; Sent his Son, in this; the
Spirit of his Son, in the next verse. To begin wi^h Osculamini filium,
Psalm. 2.12.
it is the first duty enjoined us this day, to kiss the Babe newborn, that
when his Father would send Him, Psalm. 40.7.
said, Ecce venio, so readily: and when he would make Him, was content with
Corpus aptasti mihi, to have a body made him, meet for him to suffer in: who
willingly yielded to be our Shilo; Genesis 49.10
to this (...) here; yea to be not only Christ, but an Apostle for us, Heb.
3.1. even ^he Apostle of our profession.

And not to Him that was sent and made alone: but, to the Father that sent Him,
and to the Holy Ghost that made Him, (as by whom He was conceived.) To the
Father, for his mission; The Son, for his Redemption; the Holy Ghost, for his
Adoption; For by him it is wrought^ He that made Him the Son of man, does
likewise regenerate us, to the state of the Sons (...) God. And this for our
thankfulness.

3 And, to these two, (to make the measure full) to join, the fullness of
duty, even whatsoever duetifull minded persons, may yield (...) a bountiful
minded, and a bountiful handed Benefactor. And with this to begin, to
consecra^^ this first day of this fullness of time: even wi^^ our service to
Him at the full; which, is then^ the full, when no part is missing: when all o^
duties, of preaching, and praying, of Hymns, (...) offering, of Sacrament,
and al, meet together. N^^ fulness there is of our Liturgy, or public so^lemne
service, without the Sacrament. Some part; yea, the chief part is wanting, if
that (...) wanting. But our thanks are surely not full, with^out the Holy
Eucharist, which is by interpre^^^tion, Thanksgiving it self. Psalm. 116.12.13.
Fully we cannot say Quid retribuam Domino? but we must answer^ Calicem
salutaris accipiam, we will take the cup of salvation, and with it in our hands
give thanks to Him; render Him our true Eucharist, or ^eall Thanksgiving
indeed. In which cup is the blood, not only of our redemption of the Covenant,
that freeth us from the Law, and makes the Destroyer pass eouer us: Mat.
26.28.
but of our Adoption of the new Testament also, which intitles us, and conueyes
unto us ( Testament-wise, or by way of Legacy) the estate we have in the joy
and bliss of his heavenly kingdom, whereto we are adopted. We are then made
partakers of Him, and with Him of both these His benefits. We there are made to
drink of the Spirit, 1. Cor. 12.13.
by which we are sealed, Ephe. 4.30.
to the day of our redemption, and adoption both. So that, our freeing from
under the law, our inuestiture into our new adopted state, are not fully
consummate without it.

And what? Shall this be all? No, when this is done, there is allowance of 12.
days more, for this fullness of time: that, we shrink not up our duty then
into this day alone, but in the rest also remember, to redeem some part of the
day, to adopt some hour at the least, to bethink our selves of the duty,
the time calls to us for: that so, we have not Jobs dies vacuos, no day quite
empty in this fullness of time. Hereof assuring our selves, that what we do
in this fullness of time, will have full acceptance at His hands. It is the
time of his birth, which is ever a time as accepted, 2. Cor. 6.2.
so of accepting, wherein, what i^ done, will be acceptebly taken to the full:
fully accepted, and fully rewarded by Him, of whose fullness we all receive:
Ioh. 1.16.
with this condition, of grace for grace, ever one grace for an other.

And so, growing from grace to grace, finally from this fulness, we shall come
to be partakers of another yet behind, to which we aspire. For all this, is
but the fullness of time^ but that, the fullness of eternity, when time shall
be runn^ out, Apo. 10.6.
and his glass empty, Et tempus non erit amplius; which is, at His next
sending. For y^^ once more shall God send him, and He come again. At which
coming, we shall then indeed receive the fuln^sse of our redemption, not from
the Law (that we have already) bu^ from Corruption, to which our bodies are
ye^ subject; and receive the full fruition of the Inheritance, whereto we are
here but adopted. And then it will be perfect, complete, absolute fullness
indeed, when we shall all be filled with the fullness of him that fills all
in all. Ephe. 1.23.
For, so shall a^^ be when nothing shall be wanting in any: for God shall be
all, 1. Cor. 15.28.
in all. Not as here He is, something, and but something in every one; but
then omnia in omnibus. And then the measure shall be so full, as it cannot
enter into us, we cannot hold it: Mat. 25.21.
we must enter into it; Intra in gaudium Domini tui.

To this we aspire, and to this in the fullness appointed of every one of our
times, Almighty God bring us, by Him, and for His sake, that in this fullness
of time, was sent to work it for us, in his person: and work it in us, by the
operation of his blessed Spirit.

To whom^ etc.

