A SERMON PREACHED BEfore the Kings Majesty at Hampton Court, Concerning the
Right and Power of calling Assemblies. On Sunday the 28. of September. ANNO
1606. By the Bishop of Chichester.

Imprinted at London by Robert Barker, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty.

NVM. 10. verse 1, 2. 1. Then God spoke to Moses, saying,

2. Make thee two Trumpets of silver, of one whole piece shall thou make them.
(...)
And thou shall have them (or they shall be for thee) to assemble (or, (...)
to call together) the Congregation, and to remove the Camp.


AMong diverse and sundry Commissions granted in the Law, A Grant.
for the benefit and better order of Gods people; this (which I have read) is
one. Given (as we see) per Ipsum Deum, From God.
by God himself: and that viuae vocis Oraculo, by express warrant from his
own mouth, Then God spoke to Moses, saying.

And it is a grant of the Right and Power of the trumpets, Of the power of
calling Assemblies.
and with them, of assembling the people of God. A Right and Power not to be
lightly accounted of, The Grant of this Power, a matter of importance.
or to be heard of with slight attention: It is a matter of great weight and
consequence, The calling of Assemblies. There is yearly a solemn Feast holden
in memory of it, and that by Gods own appointment, no less then of the
Passover, or of the Law it self, Cap. 29.1.
Even the Feast of the trumpets, much about this time of the year, the latter
Aequinoctiall. And God appoynteth no Feast but in remembrance of some special
benefit. It is therefore one of his special benefits, and high favors
vouchsafed them and to be regarded accordingly.

In whose hands this Power was before.
This Power hitherto, ever since they came out of Egypt, and that God adopted
them for his people, unto this very day and place had God kept in his own
hands, as to him alone of right properly belonging. For unto this very day, and
place, the people of God, as they had assembled many times and often: so it was
ever (they be the very last words of the last Chapter which serve for an
introduction to these of ours) ever, Cap. ^. v. 18, 20, 23.
all their meetings and remouings were, by immediate warrant from God himself.
But here now, God no longer intending, thus to warn them still by special
direction from his own self, but to set over this power, once for all: Here
he does it. This is the primary passing it from GOD, and deriuing it to Moses,
Exodus 19.13.
who was the first that ever held it by force of the Law written. For, to this
place they came by the sound of Gods; and from this place they dislodged, by
the sound of Moses Trumpet.

The time and place of the Granting.
And it is a point very considerable what day and place this was; for it
appears, they were yet at Sinai, by the 12. verse: yet, at the very Mount of
GOD, by the 33. of this Chapter, even then, when this Commission came forth; So
that this power is as ancient as the Law. At no other place, nor no other time
delivered, then even the Law it self: when the two Tables were given, the two
Trumpets were given: and Moses that was made keeper of both the Tables, made
likewise keeper of both the Trumpets; both at Sinai: both at one time: As if
there were some near alliance between the Law and Assemblies. And so there
is: Assemblies being ever a special means to revive the Law, (as occasions
serve) and to keep it in life; As, if the Law it self therefore lacked yet
something, and were not perfect and full without them: So, till this Grant was
passed, they stayed still at Sinai, and so soon as ever this was passed they
presently removed.

To entreat then of this power. The story of the Bible would serve our turn to
show us, who have had the exercise of it in their hands, from time to time, if
that were enough. But that is not enough; For the errors first and last, about
this point, from hence they seem to grow, that men look not back enough;
have not an eye to this, Matthew. 19.4.
how it was in the beginning, by the very law of GOD. Being therefore to search
for the Original warrant, by which the Assemblies of Gods people are called,
This the Original Grant of it.
and kept: this place of Numbers is generally agreed to be it: That here, it is
first found, and here it is first founded; even in the Law, the best ground
for a Power that may be.

In Lege quid scriptumest? Luc. 10.16.
quomodo legis? (says our Savior) What is written in the Law? how read you
there? as if he should say: If it be to be read there, it is well: then must it
needs be yielded to: there is no excepting to it then, unless you will except
to Law, and Lawgiuer, to God and all. Let us then come to this Commission.

The parts of the Grant.
The points of it be three: First, two trumpets of silver, to be made out of one
whole piece, both: Secondly, with these trumpets, the Congregation to be
called, and the Camp removed: Thirdly, Moses to make these Trumpets, and,
being made, to use them to these ends.
These three: The Instrument: The end for which: The party to whom. Now, (to
marshal these in their right order,) 1. The end is to be first: Sapiens semper
incipit a sine (says the Philosopher.) A wise man begins ever at the end: for
that indeed, is Causa causarum (as Logique teaches us:) The cause of all the
causes; the cause that sets them all on working. 2. Then next, the Instrument,
which applies this power to this end. 3. And so last, the Agent, who is to
guide the Instrument, and to whomeboth Instrument and Power is committed.


1. The end for which this Power is conveyed, is double; as the subject is
double, whereon it has his operation: The Camp, and the Congregation. On
either of these, a special act exercised: To remove the Camp: to call
together the Congregation: One for War, the other for Peace.

That of the Camp, has no longer use, then while it is war. God forbid that
should be long: nay, God forbid it should be at all. The best removing of the
Camp, is the removing of it quite and clean away. But if it be not possible,
if it lie not in us to have peace with all men, Romans 12.18.
if war must be, here is order for it. But the calling of the Congregation,
that is it: that is to continue, and therefore, that, which we to deal with.

The calling of the Congregation, (as in the two next verses) either in whole,
or in part; either of all the Tribes, or but of the chief and principal men in
them. A power for both these: And (in a word) a power general, for calling
Assemblies: Assemblies in war: Assemblies in peace: Assemblies of the whole:
Assemblies of each, or any part.

2. This Power, to be executed by instruments; The Instruments to be Trumpets:
Two in number: Those to be of silver, and both of one entire piece of silver.

3. This power, and the executing of it by these Instruments, committed to
Moses: First; he to have the making of these Trumpets: Factibi: Then, he to
have the right to them being made: Eterunt tibi: Then, he to use them to call
the Congregation, and, if need be, to remove the Camp. None to make any
Trumpet but he. None to have any Trumpet but he. None to meddle with the
calling of the Congregation, or remoouing the Camp with them but he, or by his
leave and appointment.

Wherein as we find the Grant full; so are we further to search and see, Whether
this Grant took place or no? Whether as these Trumpets were made and given to
call the Congregation, so the Congregation from time to time,

So have we two subjects: The Camp, and the Congregation. Two acts: to
Assemble, and to Remove. Two Instruments: the two silver Trumpets. Two Powers,
to make them: To owe them being made, for the two acts or ends before
specified: First, for calling the Assembly, and then for dislodging the Camp.
And all these committed to Moses. The sum of all is: the establishing in
Moses, the Prerogative and Power, of calling and dissoluing Assemblies about
public affairs.

Then God spoke to Moses, etc.
Assembling, a motion extraordinary.
IF we be to begin with the end: the end is Assembling. Assembling, is reduced
to Motion. Not to every motion: but to the very chiefest of all: as that which
draws together all; and so at once moves all. For as in the Soul, when the
mind summoneth all the powers and faculties together: Or in the body, when all
the sinews join their forces together, it is vltimum potentiae: So, in the
body politic, when all the Estates are drawn together into one; it is nixus
rather then motus, a maine sway, rather then a motion: Or, if a motion, it is
motus Magnus, no common and ordinary, but an extraordinary great motion. Such
a motion is Assembling, and such is the nature of it.

Yet necessary.
Yet, even this, (great and extraordinary as it is) such, and so urgent
occasions may, and do daily arise, as, very requisite it is, such meetings
there should be: very requisite (I say) both in War and in Peace, both for
the Camp and for the Congregation. The ground whereof seems to be; That,
Power dispersed may do many things: but to do some, it must be united. United
in consultation: For, that which one eye cannot discern, many may. United in
action: For, many hands may discharge that by parts, which in whole, were too
troublesome for any. But, Action is more proper to war: For the Camp.
That is the Assembly of fortitude: And, Consultation rather for Peace: For the
Congregation.
That is the Assembly of Prudence. And in Peace, chiefly, for making of Laws:
For that, every man is more willing to submit himself to that, whereof all do
agree. The whole Camp, Then, when it is assembled, will be the more surely
fortified: And, the whole Congregation, when it is Assembled, will be the more
soundly advised. And, hereby it comes to pass, that there ever has, and
ever will be, great use of calling Assemblies.

Let me add yet one thing further, to bring it home to our selves. There is no
people under heaven, Especially for this land of Britain.
may better speak for the use of Assemblies, then we: There was nothing that
did our Ancestors the Britains more hurt, Nec aliud aduersus validissimas
gentes, pro nobis vtilius, quam quod in commune non consulunt. Rarus ad
propulsandum commune periculum conuentus, Ita dum singuli pugnant, vniuersi
vincu^tur. Invita Agric.
(says Tacitus of them) nothing that turned them to greater prejudice, then
this one, That they met not, they consulted not in common: but every man ran a
course by himself of his own head: And, this was the greatest advantage the
Roman had of them; they were not so wise, as to know what good there was in
public conuentions. Therefore, great use of Assemblies; may we say of all
others.

Now, if they be neeedfull for the Camp, and for the Congregation, Nessesarie
for the Church.
as it is a Civil body; I doubt not, but I may add also, every way as
needful for the Congregation properly so called (that is) the Church. The
Church has her wars to fight: The Church has her Laws to make.

Wars with heresies: wherein experience teaches us, it is matter of less
difficulty to raze a good Fort, then to cast down a strong imagination; and
more easy to drive out of the field a good army of men, then to chase out of
men's minds a heap of fond opinions, having once taken head. Now, heresies have
ever bin best put to flight by the Churchs Assemblies, (that is) Councels, as
it were by the Armies of Gods Angels (as Eusebius calls them) yea it is well
known, De vita Const^ntiu^, lib 3. Cap. 6.
some heresies could never be thoroughly mastred, or conquered but so.

Then for the Churches Laws (which we call Canons and Rules) made to restrain
or redress abuses, they have always likewise been made at her Assemblies in
Councels, and not elsewher. So that, as requisite are Assemblies for the
Congregation, in this sense as in any other. By this then that has been said,
it appears that Gods Fac tibi here, is no more then needs; but that meet it
is, the Trumpets be put to making. And so I pass over to the Instruments,
which is the second part.

Organice (that is) by Instrument: So an Instrument we must have, Instruments.
wherewithal to stir up, or to begin this Motion.

1. That Instrument to be the Trumpet. Trumpets.
It is the sound, 1. Cor. 15.52.
In tuba nouissima, by the sound of the last Trumpe. And he holds on, or
continues one and the same Instrument, to show, it is one and the same Power,
that continues still: that whether an Angelblow it, as at Sinai; or whether
Moses, as ever after, it is one sound, even Gods sound, Gods voice, we hear in
both.

2. They are to be twain, for the two Assemblies, Two.
that follow in the two next verses; either of the whole tribes, Coagmentatiue:
or of the chief and choice persons of them only, Repraesentatiue. And for the
two Tables, also. For even this very month, the first day, they are used to a
Ciuel end: the tenth day to a Holy, for the day of Expiation: of which this
later belongs to the first; that former, to the second Table.

3 They are to be of silver: 3 Of silver.
(not to seek after speculations) only, for the Metals sake, which has the
shrillest and cleerest sound of all others.

4. They are to be of one whole piece both of them, 4 Of one entire piece.
not of two diverse: and that must needs have a meaning: it cannot be for
nothing: For unless it were for some meaning, what skilled it else, though they
had bin made of two several plates? but only to show, that both assemblies are
vnius iuris, both of one and the same right: as the trumpets are wrought, and
beaten out, both of one entire piece of Bullion.

3. But it will be to small purpose, to stand much upon the Instrument: I make
way therefore to the third point: how they shall be bestowed, whoshal have the
dealing with them For on them depends, and with the^ goes the the Power of
calling Assemblies.

First, to whom these Trumpets, 1. To whom committed. 2.
to whom this Power was granted, to call the Congregation: And then, whether
the Congregation were ever after so called, by this Power, and these Trumpets.

not to all.
1. Where first, it will be soon agreed (I trust) that every body must not be
allowed to be a maker of Trumpets: nor, when they be made, that they hang,
where who that list may blow them: (that is,) that eueryman, hand over head is
not to be in case, to drawmultitudes together: There will be (says S. Luke)
Turbatio non minima, Act. 19.23.
no small ado, if that may be suffered. If Demetrius getting together his
fellow craftesmen, they may of their own heads, rush into the common Hal, and
there keep a showting and crying two hours together; not knowing most of
them, why they came thither, and yet thither they came. There is not so much
good, in public meetings, but there is thrice as much hurt, in such as this:
No Commonwealth, no not popular Estates could ever endure them: Nay (...), (say
both Scripture and Nature) Let all be done in order: Act. 19.36.
let us have (...), Lawful orderly Assemblies, or else none at all. Away then
with this confusion (to begin with) away with Demetrius Assemblies.

But some.
To avoid then this confusion, some must have this Power, for, and in the name
of the rest. Shall it be one, or more? (for that is next.) Nay, but one, (says
God) in saying, Tibi. Where I wish you mark this; Some, not many, but one.
That as at the first he took this Power into his own hands, and called them
still together himself: So here he deriueth this Power immedatly from
himself, unto one: without first settling it, in any body collectiue at all.

It is from our purpose to enter the question, Whether the Power were in the
whole body originally, seeing though it were, it is now by the positive
ordinance of God otherwise disposed: The reason may seem to be; Partly,
necessity of expedition: The trumpets may need to be blown sometimes,
suddenly, sooner, then diverse can well meet, and agree upon it too: Partly,
avoiding of distraction: The two Trumpets may be blown, two diverse ways, if
they be in two hands; and so shall the Trumpet give an uncertain sound, 1.
Corin. 14.8. and how shall the Congregation know, wither to assemble? Nay (a
worse matter yet then all that:) so may we have Assembly against against
Assembly: and rather then so, better no Assembly at all.

Therefore, as God would have them, both made of one piece: so will he have
them both made over to one Person, for tibi implies one. Who is that one? It
is to Moses God speaks, to him is this tibi directed: Him does God nominate,
1 That one, Moses.
and of his Person make choice, first, to make these trumpets. No man to make,
Moses to be maker of them.
no man to have the hammering of any trumpet but he.

And, there is no question, but for Aaron, and his sons the Priests: they are
to call the Levites, to call the people together to their Assemblies; How shall
they warn them together, unless they may make a trumpet too? But, if there be
any question about this; Gods proceeding here, will put all out of question:
For, to whom gives he this charge? Not to Aaron, is this spoken; but to Moses:
Aaron receives no charge to make any Trumpet: Never a fac tibi, to him;
neither in this, nor in any other place. To Moses is this charge given. And to
Moses: Not, Make thee one, (one for secular affairs; that, they would allow
him,) but fac tibi duas: Make thee two, Make both.

2. Well, the making is not it. One may make, and another may have: Sic vos non
vobis: You know the old Verse; When they be made, and done; then who shall owe
them? It is expressed that, (...)
too; Et erunt tibi: They shall be for thee. And owner of them.
They shall be, not one for thee, and another for Aaron: but Erunt tibi, They
shall be both for thee: They shall be both thine. A third, if they can find,
they may lay claim to that; But both these are for Moses.

We have then the delivery of them to Moses to make, which is a kind of seizin,
or a Ceremony inuesting him with the right of them. We have beside, plain
words, to lead their possession; and those words operative, Erunt tibi: That as
none to make them; so none to own them being made, but Moses. And what would
we have more to show us, Cuius sunt Tubae, whose the trumpets be; or, whose is
the right of calling Assemblies? It is Moses certainly, and he by virtue of
these, stands seized of it.

That power to continue after Moses.
To go yet further: But, was not all this to Moses for his time only; and as it
begun in him, so to take end with him? Was it not one of these same Priuilegia
personalia, quae non trahuntur i^ exemplum, A privilege peculiar to him, and
so no precedent to be made of it? No: for if your look but a little forward to
the 8. Verse following, there you shall see, That this power which God here
conueyeth; this Law of the silver Tru^pets, is a Law to last for ever, even
throughout all their generations, not that generation only. And there is great
reason it should be so, That seeing the use should never cease, the Power
likewise should never determine.

Moses received it as chief Magistrate.
Being then not to determine, but to continue, it must descend to those that
hold Moses place. I demand then, what place did Moses hold? Sure it is, that
Aaron was now the high Priest, anointed and fully invested in all the rights of
it, ever since the 8. Chap. of the last Book. Moses had in him now, no other
Right, but that of the chief Magistrate. Therefore, as in that Right, and no
other, he received and held them: So he was made Custos vtriusque Tabulae: So,
he is made Custos vtriusque Tubae. But who can tell us better then he himself,
in what right he held them? He does it in the 5. verse of Deuteronomy. 33. (read it
which way you will:) Erat in Iishrune Rex, or, (...).
in rectissimo Rex, or, in rectitudine Rex, or, in recto Regis, dum congregaret
Principes populi, and Tribus Israel: all come to this; that, though in strict
propriety of speech, Moses were no King; yet, in this, he was in rectitudine
Rex, or, in recto Regis, (that is) in this, had (as we say) Ius regale, that he
might and did assemble the Tribes, and chief men of the Tribes, at his
pleasure. Herein he was, Rex in rectitudine. For this was rectitudo Regis, A
power Regal. And so it was holden in Egypt before Moses, even in the law of
Nature: that without Pharao, Genesis 41.44.
no man might lift up hand or foot in all the land of Egypt: (suppose, to no
public or principal motion,) and so has it been holden in all Nations, as a
special Power belonging to Dominion. Which makes it seem strange, that those
men, which in no cause are so fervent as when they plead, that Churchmen
should not (...), that is, have Dominion; do yet hold this Power, which has
ever been reputed most proper to Dominion, should belong to none, but to them
only. Our Savior Christ's, Matt. 20.26.
vos autem non sic; may (I am sure) be said to them here in a truer sense, then
as they commonly use to apply it.

The chief Magistrate to succeed in it.
To conclude then this point, If Moses as in the right of chief Magistrate held
this Power, it was from him to descend to the chief Magistrates after him over
the people of God, and they to succeed him, as in his place, so in this right,
it being by God himself settled in Moses and annexed to his place, lege
perpetua, by an estate indefeizible, by a perpetual Law, throughout all their
generations. Therefore, ever after by Gods express order, from year to year,
every year on the first day of the seventh month, were they blown by Moses
first; and after by them that held his place, and the feast of the trumpets
solemnly holden, as to put them in mind of the benefit thereby coming to
them, so withal to keep alive and fresh still in the knowledge of all, That
this power belonged to their place, that so none might ever be ignorant to
who^ it did of right appertain, to call Asse^blies.

Aarons Assemblies, how called.
And how then shall Aarons Assemblies be called? with what trumpet, they? God
himself has provided for that in the 10. ver. following, that with no other
the^ these. (There is in all the Law no order for calling an Assembly, to what
end, or for what cause soever, but this, and only this: No order for making any
third trumpet: under these two therefore all are comprised:) This order there
God takes, Verse 10.
that Moses shall permit Aarons sons to have the use of these trumpets. But
the use, not the property, They must take them from Moses, as in the 31. Chap.
Number. 31.6.
of this Book Phinees does, But Erunt tibi; (Gods own words, Erunt tibi) must
still be remembered: His they be, for all that: Moses the owner still, the
right remains in him: Their sounding of them depriues not him of his interest,
alters not the property: Erunt tibi, must still be true: that right must still
be preserved. It may be, if we communicate with flesh and blood, we may
think it more convenient (as some do) that God had delivered Moses and Aaron
either of them one. But when we see Gods will by Gods word what it is, that
Moses is to have them both; we will let that pass as a Revelation of flesh and
blood, and think that which God thinks, to be most convenient.

Now then if the Trumpets belong to Moses; (...)
and that to this end, (...)
that with them he may call the congregation, The two duties.
These two things do follow: First, that if he call, the congregation must
not refuse to come: Secondly, that unless he call,
Briefly thus: the congregation must come when it is called: and it must be
called yet it come. These are the two duties we owe to the two trumpets, and
both these have Gods people ever duly performed.

And yet not so, but that this Right has bin called in question, yea, even in
Moses own time, (that we marvel not, if it be so now) and both these duties
denied him, even by those who were alive and present then, when God gave him
the trumpets. But mark by whom, and what became of them.

The first duty is, To come when they be called: and this was denied (in the
16. Chap. following 12. ver.) by Core, Dathan and their crew: 1. To come when
they be called.
Moses sounded his trumpet, sent to call them: they answer flatly, and that
not once, but once and again, Non veniemus, They would not come, not once
stir for him or his trumpet, they. A plain contradiction indeed: neither is
there in all that Chapter any contradiction very nominis, true and properly so
to be called, but only that. You know what became of them; they went quick to
hell for it: and woe be to them, even under the Gospel (says S. Jude) that
perish in the same contradiction, Jude 11.
the contradiction of Core.

The second duty is, To be called yer they come: this likewise denied, 2. To
be called yer they come.
even Moses himself (that they in his place may not think strange of it) In
the 20. Chapter of this very book: Water waxing skant, a company of them grew
mutinous, and in tumultuous manner, without any sound of the Trumpet, assembled
of themselves. But these are branded too: The water they got, is called the
water of Meriba: And what followed you know; Cap. 20.13.
None of them that drunk of it, came into the Land of Promise. God swore they
should not enter into his rest.

Now, as both these are bad: so of the twain, this later is the worse: Called,
and came not.
The former (that came not, being called) do but sit still, as if they were
somewhat thick of hearing: But these later that come, Came uncalled.
being not called; either, they make themselves a trumpet, without ever a fac
tibi: or else they offer to wring Moses trumpet out of his hands, and take it
into their own. Take heed of this later: it is said there to be aduersus
Mosen, even against Moses himself. It is the very next forerunner to it: it
pricks fast upon it. For they that meet against Moses will, when they have
once thoroughly learned that lesson, will quickly perhaps grow capable of
another; even to meet against Moses himself, as these did. Acts 19.40.
Periclitamur argui seditionis (says the Towne-clearke,) We have done more
then we can well answer: We may be indicted of treason for this days work,
for coming together without a trumpet: and yet it was for Diana, that is, for
a matter of Religion.

You see then whose the Right is, and what the duties be to it, and in whose
steps they tread, that deny them. Sure they have been baptized or made to
drink of the same water (the water of Meriba) that ever shall offer, to do the
like, to draw together without Moses Call.

And now to our Savior Christ's question: In the Law how is it written? How
read you? Our answer is: There it is thus written: and thus we read: That
Moses has the Right of the Trumpets: that they to go ever with him and his
successors: and that to them belongs the power of calling the public
Assemblies.

Agreeable to the Law of Nature.
This is the Law of God; and that no judicial Law, peculiar to that people
alone, but agreeable to the Law of Nature and Nations; (two Laws of force
through the whole world) For even in the little Empire of the body natural,
Principium motus, the beginning of al motion, is in, and from the head. There,
all the knots, or (as they call them) all the coniugations of sinews have
their head, by which all the body is moved. And as the Law of Nature, by secret
instinct by the light of the Creation, To the Law of Nations.
annexeth the organe to the chiefest part: even so does the Law of Nations, by
the light of reason, to the chiefest person: and both fall just with the Law
here written; Where, (by Erunt tibi) the same organ and power is committed to
Moses the principal person, in that common wealth. The Law of Nations in this
point, (both before the Law written, and since, where the Law written was not
known,) might easily appear, if time would suffer, both in their general
order for co^uentions so to be called; and in their general opposing to all
conuenticles called otherwise.

Verily the Heathen laws made all such Assemblies unlawful, which the highest
authority did not cause to meet, yea, though they were (...), say Solons
Laws: yea, though sub praetextu Religionis, say the Roman Laws. Neither did
the Christian Emperors think good to abate anything of that Right. Nay, they
took more straight order: for besides the exiling of the person, which was the
Law before, they proscribed the place, where, under pretense of Religion any
such meetings should be. But I let them pass, and stand only on the written
Law, the Law of God.

WE have Law then for us, That Moses is ever to call the Congregation. But
though we have Law, Mos vincit Legem; Custom ouerruleth Law. And the Custom
or practice may go another way; and it is practice that ever best bewrays a
Power. How then has the practice gone? It is a necessary question this, and
pertinent to the Text it self. For, here is a Power granted: and in vain is
that Power that never comes into act. Came then this Power into act? It is a
Power to call the Congregation together; Were the Congregations called together
by it? A grant there is, That Erunt tibi; So it should be: Did it take place?
was it so? Erantne illi? Had he it? Did he enjoy it? Let us look into that
another while, what became of this Grant; what place it took. And we shall not
offend Moses in so doing. It is his advise, The practice or use of this Power
among the Jews. Deuteronomy. 4.32.
and desire both; that we should enquire into the days past, that were before
us, and ask, even from one end of Heaven to the other; to see how matters have
bin carried. So that, as our Savior Christ sends us to the Law by this, In
Lege quid scriptum est? so does Moses direct us to the use and practice by his
Interroga de diebus antiquis. I do ask then, These trumpets here given, this
power to call together the Congregation, how has it been used? Has the
Congregation been called accordingly in this, and no other manner? by this, and
no other Power? It has (as shall appear) and I will deal with no Assemblies,
but only for matters of Religion.

Of Moses, By Moses.
first there is no question: It is yielded that he called them, and dismissed
them: and even so did Iosue after him, Joshua. Josh. 1.17.
no less then he; and they obeyed him in that Power, no less then Moses. And
as for that which is objected concerning Moses, that he for a time dealt in
matters of the Priests Office, it has no color in Iosue, and those that
succeeded him.

The Covenant, and the renewing of the Covenant, are matters merely spiritual:
yet, in that case did Joshua* ( Joshua, not Eleazar) assemble all the Tribes,
Leui and all, to Sichem, Ios. 24. called the Assembly at the first verse:
dislolued it at the 28. For, Josh. 24.18.
if Joshua may call, he may dissolve too: Law, Reason, Sense, teach, That, Cuius
est nolle, eius est and velle. That calling, and discharging, belong both to
one power. Nay, Demetrius assembly, though they had come together disorderly,
yet when the Towne-clearke (that should have called them together) did
discharge them; they added not one fault to another, but went their ways,
every man quietly, Demetrius himself and all: that, they are worse then
Demetrius, that deny this.

But, I pass to the Kings, (that Estate fitteth us better) There, David.
does David call together the Priests and other persons Ecclesiastical, and
that, even with these trumpets. And for what matters? Secular? Nay: but first,
1. Chro. 15.4.
when the Arc was to be removed: And again, when the Offices of the Temple
were to be set in order: 1. Chro. 23.2.3.6.
things merely pertaining to Religion; And as he calls them, 1. Chron. 15.4.
So he dismisseth them, 1. Chron. 16.43.

The like did Solomon, Solomon.
when the Temple was to be dedicated; called the Assembly, 2. Chron. 5.2.
dissolved the Assembly in the 10. verse of the 7. Chap. following. The like did
Asa: 2. Chro. 15.14. Asa.
when Religion was to be restored, and a solemn oath of Association to be taken
for the maintayning of it; with the sound of these trumpets did he it.

Iehoshaphat used them when a public Fast to be proclaimed. Iehu used them,
Iehoshaphat. 2. Chro. 20.3. Iehu. 2. Reg. 10.20. Ioas. 2. Chro. 24.5.
when a solemn Sacrifice to be performed. Ioas in a case of Dilapidations of
the Temple, a matter merely Ecclesiastical. Josias, Josias. 2. Chron.
34.29.30.
when the Temple to be purified, and a mass of superstitions to be removed.

In all these cases did all these Kings call all these Conuentions, of Priests
and Levites, for matters of Religion. I insist only on the fact of Ezekias.
Ezekias. 2. Chr. 29.15.
He was a King; he gave forth his precept for the Priests and all their
brethren to assemble: wherefore? Ad res Iehouae, for the affairs of the
service of God, yea, God himself. There are 14. chief me^ of the Priests set
down there by name, that by virtue of that precept of the Kings, came together
themselves, they and their brethren, all, expraecepto Regis, ad res Iehouae, by
the Kings authority, for matters merely of the Church. I know not what can be
more plain: the matters spiritual: the persons assembled spiritual: and yet
called by the Kings trumpet.

Thus, till the Captivity. In the Captivity, there have we Mordochee (when he
came in place of authority) appointing the days of Purim, Mordocheus. Hester
9.17.
and calling all the Jews in the Province together, to the celebrating of them.

After the Captivity, Nehemias. Nehe. 7.64.
Nehemias kept the Trumpet still: and by it, first called the Priests to show
their right to their places, by their genealogies, and after reduced them also
to their places again, Nehe. 13.11.
when they were all shrunk away in time of his absence.

These lead the practice till you come to the Maccabees: The Maccabees.
and there it is but too evident: they profess there expressly to Simeon, made
then their ruler, That it should not be lawful for any (...): 1. Mac 14.44*
to call any assembly in the Land, (...) without him. A plain evidence, that
so had ever gone the course of their government: Else, how should it come to
pass, that the altering of Religion is still termed the deed of the King?
that his disposition, godly, or otherwise, did always accordingly change the
public face of Religion? which thing the Priests by themselves never did,
neither could at any time hinder from being done. Had the Priests, without him,
been possessed of this power of Assembling, how had any Act concerning
Religion passed without them? In them it had been to stop it at any time, if
they had (of themselves) had this power of Assembling themselves, to set order
in matters of Religion.

Thus, from Moses to the Maccabees, we see in whose hands this power was. And
what should I say more? There was in all Gods people no one religious King, but
this Power he practiced: And there was of all Gods Prophets no one, that ever
interposed any prohibition against it.

Would Esaias (shall we once imagine) have endured Ezekias, him to call, or the
Priests to come together, only by his precept, adres Iehouae; and not lift up
his voice like a trumpet against it, Esaias 58.1.
if it had not been (in his knowledge) the Kings right, to command, and their
duty to obey? Never certainly.

What shall we say then? were all these wrong? shall we condemn them all?
Take heed. In all that government, God has no other children, Psalm. 73.15.
but these: if we condemn these, we condemn the whole generation of his
children. Yet, to this we are come now; that either we must condemn them all,
one after another; the Kings as usurpers, for taking on them, to use more
Power, then ever orderly they received; and the Prophets, for soothers of them,
in that their unjust claim: or else confess they did no more, then they
might; and exceeded not therein, the bounds of their calling. And indeed, that
we must confess; for that is the truth.

This then may serve, for the custom of Gods own elect people. But they were
Jews* and we would be loath, to Iudaize: and it may be, this was one of the
clauses of the Law o^ commandments, consisting of Ordinances which Christ
came to abrogate. Ephesians. 2.15.


I demand therefore, When Christ came how was it then? will the like appear in
the assembles since Christ? The practice or use of this Power among Christians.
The very like, every way, as consonaut to that of the old Testament, as may
be. For Christ Matthew. 18. gives a promise of his assistance to such meetings:
but sets no new order for calling of them, other then had been taken in the
old. Therefore the same order to be kept still.

A time there was (you know) after Christ, when they were Infidels; Kings and
Kingdoms both. A time there followed; when Kings received Religion; and no
sooner received they it, but they received this Power of the Trumpets with it.
This, to be made manifest, 1. By General Councels. 2. By National and
Prouincial Councels; that have been assembled. 3. under Emperors, 4. and under
Kings, by the space of many hundred years.


1. And for General Councels, this first: In general Councels.
(to begin with;) that if those Assemblies be not rightly called, that by this
Power are called; we have lost all our general Councels at one blow. The
Church of Christ has to this day, never a General Council: vna Litura, with
one wipe, we dash them out all: we leave never a one, no not one. For all that
ever have been, have been thus called and kept. Yea, those four first, which
all Christians have ever had in so great reverence, and high estimation; not
one of them a lawful Council, if this new assertion take place. This is a
perilous inconvenience: yet this we must yield to, and more then this; if we
seek to disable Assemblies, so holden. For sure it is, all the General
Councels were thus Assembled; all; all seven (for more are not to be
reckoned:) the eight was only for a private business. The rest were only of
the West Church alone, and so not general: The East and West together, make a
general: The East and West together never met, but in one of those seven, for
public affairs: unless it were once after, in that of Ferrara. And it is
well known, that was in hope of help, on the East Churches part, which they
never had; and so the Council never kept, but broken, even as soon as it was
broken up.

Briefly then to survey those seven. And I will not therein allege the reports
of Stories, (they write things they saw not, many times, and so frame matters
to their own conceits: and many times are taynted with a partial humor) but
only out of authentical Records in them, and out of the very acts of the
Councels themselves, best able to testify and tell, by whose authority they
came together. And it is happy for the Church of Christ, there are so many of
them extant as there are, to guide us to the truth in this point, that so the
right may appear.

First then, for the great Nicene Council, (...).
(the holy Emperor Constantine gathering them together out of diverse Cities
and Prouinees.) The whole Letter is extant upon record in Socr. 1.9. and
Theodoret. 1.9. Give me leave to make here a little stand: For here, at this
Council, was the pale first broken, and the right (if any such were) here, it
went first away. At Nice there were then together, 318. Bishops, totius orbis
lumina (as Victorinus well terms them) the lights of the whole world; the
chiefest and choicest men for holiness, learning, virtue, and valor, that the
Christian Religion ever had before or since; men that had laid down their
lives for the testimony of the truth. Did any of them refuse to come, being
called by him, as not called aright? Or, coming, was there any one of them
that did protest against it? or pleaded the Churches interest, to meet or
themselves? Not one.

What was it then? want of skill, in so many famous men, that knew not their
own rights? Or want of valor, that knowing it for such, would not so much as
speak a word for it, but sit still, and say nothing all the while? There were
then and there present, Spyridion, Paphnutius Potamon, and diverse besides, (but
these I name) that had not long before, for their constancy, had their right
eyes bored out, their right hame-strings, and the strings of their
right-armpits cut in sunder. Did these want courage, think we? Were they
become so saint hearted, that they durst not open their mouth, for their own
due?

Verily, that Council of Nice, (which is and ever has been so much admired
by all Christians,) cannot be excused before God or men; if they thus conspired
all, to betray the Churches right, and suffered it, contrary to all equity, to
be carried away; leaving a dangerous precedent therein, for all Councels ever
after, to the worlds end. But, no such right there was: If there had been,
they neither wanted wit to discern it, nor courage to claim it. But, they
knew whose the Trumpets were: To whom (Erunt tibi) was spoken: and therefore
never offered to lay hold on either of them, and say; This is ours.

And yet (to say the truth,) There is no man of reason, but will think it
reasonable, if this were the Churches own peculiar, if appropriat unto it,
(and so known to them to be) there ought to have been plain dealing, now at
the very first Council of all; that if Constantine would embrace Religion, he
must needs resign up one of his Trumpets, and forbear from thence to meddle
with their Assemblies. Was there so? No such thing. Why was there not? Belike,
because none were there, that had ever been present at any Assembly, holden
under persecution, to know the Churches order, and manner of meeting then. Yes,
there was Hosuis Bishop of Cordoua, who had held the Council of Eluira in
Spain, even in the time of persecution. Conc Eliberit. Tom. 1.600.
Hosius for the West. And for the East, there was Eustathius Bishop of Antioch,
Council. Ancyra. Tom. 1.446.
had held the like at Ancyra then too: (both the Councels yet extant to be
seen) and these two, Presidents of them. Yet were these twain, two that came
first, and sat foremost at the Council of Nice; and neither of them pleaded or
knew of any such right: but that their Power then ceased; and that Constantines
Trumpet now took place. Sure, if but this first Council be well considered,
it is able to move much. And the example of this first was of great
consequence; for all the rest followed it; and as this went, so went they. And
this for the first.

2. The second General Council at Constantinople; Who called that
Congregation? (...).
Their own letter to the. Emperor is to be seen, professing they were
thither assembled by his Writ.

3. For the third at Ephesus; let the Acts of the Counsel (now set out in
Greek) be looked on; Four several times they acknowledge, they were thither
summoned by the Emperors (...).
Oracle, (...).
Beck, (...).
Charge, and (...). Tom. 2.129. Conueniente Concilio secund. sacravi
praeceptinonem.
Commandment.

4. For the fourth at Chalcedon, look but upon the very front of the Council;
it proclaims it self, to be there assembled, Facta est Synodus, exdecreto
Pijssimorum, and fidelissimorum Imperatorum, Valentiniani, and Martiani. And it
is well known, it was first called at Nice; and then recalled from thence, and
removed to Chalcedon, all wholly by the disposing of the Emperor.

5. So says the fifth at Constantinople, Tom. 2.579.2.666. Imperator Imstin.
quintam oecumenicam Synodum Episcopis Ecclesiarum e^ocatis, coegit. Tom.
3.2.37.244. Sceundum pijssiman iussionem mansuetudinis vestrae. Iis quae per
mansuctissimae fortitudinis vestrae Sacram dudum praecepta sunt efficaciter
promp^am obedientiam exhibere.
Iuxta pium iussum a Christo amati, and a Deocustoditi Iustiniani Imperatoris.
They be their own words.

6. And so the sixth at Constantinople, Secundu Imperialem sanctionem
congregata est; And, pro obedientia quam debuimus. They be the express words
of Agatho Bishop of Rome in the same Council.

7. Tom. 3.453.
And even so the seventh at Nice, Quae per pium Imperatorum decretum,
congregata est, (meaning Constantine and Irene.)

And these be all the General. In all which he force of the truth presents
it self so learely, that De Council. lib 1 cap. 13.
Bellarmine is even dazelled with ^t: For, as one dazeled, he sets down diverse
reasons, why the Emperors were to call them in that very place, where he takes
upon him to prove the Emperors were not to call them.

2. But it may be, General Councels have a fashion by themselves: Those
Congregations may be called, In National and Prouinci^l from Constantine to
Instinian.
thus, But National, or Prouincial, (such as ours,) How? Even so too and no
otherwise. Constantine began with them first, before he proceeded to the
General at Nice. Eusebius. 10.5.
His Tractoria, or Writ, is extan^ to be seen. Eusebius. 10.5. whereby he called
the first Prouincial Council in France. For sure, by no Canon could the Bishop
of Syracuse in Sicile, or Restitutus Bishop of London in Britayne, be lawfully
summoned, to Synod in France, (which they were,) but ((...) it was in deed) by
the Emperors Writ only* But this he did at the beginning of his reign
perhaps, while he was yet an imperfect Christian. Nay, even first and last, he
did the same as at the beginning he called this; so, in the end of his Reign,
the thirtieth year, the yea^ before his death, called he the Council (...)
Tire, and from thence, removed it to Jerusalem and from thence, called them to
appear before himself in Constantinople. The letters are to be seen, by
which they were called, Socrat. 1.34.
Socr. 1.34. The like after him, did Theodor. 2.8.
Constans at Sardice, Sozom. 6.7.
p Valentinian at Lampsacus, Tom. 1.7 18.
Theodosius at Aquileia, (...) 45
Gratian at Thessalonica.

It is too tedious to go through them all: Only for that of Aquileia, thus
much. Saint Ambrose, a man of as much spirit, and as high a courage, as ever
the Church had, and one that stood as much as ever did any, for the Churches
right; he was there present, and President both. Thus writteth he from the
Council to the Emperor in his own name, and in the name of all the rest: Qui
ad remouendas altercationes co^gregare studuist is Sacerdotale Concilium. Tom.
1.718.
Iuxta mansuetudinis vestrae statuta conuenimus: Hither we are assembled, by
the appointment of your Clemency; and there is no one Council more plain, then
that of S. Ambrose for this purpose. Yea, I add this, (which is a point to be
considered,) that even then, when the emperors were professed Arrians; even
then did the Bishops acknowledge their Power, ^o call Councels: came to them
being called: sued to them, that they might be called. Came ^o them, as Hosius,
to that of Tom. 1.680.
to that of Socrat. 2.24.
and that of Seleucia; Sued for them, as Iucifer. oper.
Liberius to Constantius: as Leo. Epist. 9.
Leo to Theodosius, for the second Ephesin Council; Innocentius to Arcadius:
And sometimes they sped, as Leo: and sometime not as Liberius, and Innocentius:
and yet when they sped not, they held themselves quiet, and never presumed to
draw together of their own heads.

But it may be, this was some Imperial power, Under Kings from Justinian to
Charles the Great.
and that Emperors had in this point more inrisdiction then Kings. Nor that
neither: For about 500. years after Christ, when the Empire fell in pieces,
and these Western parts came into the hands of Kings, those Kings had held,
Synodus ex praecepto gloriosi ssimil egis Theo sorici congregata.
inioyed, and practiced the same power. In Italy, Theodoric at Tom. 2.470.
Rome: Alaric at Tom. 2.504.
Agatha: In France, Clowys (the first Christian King there) Childebert,
Theodebert, and Cherebert: At Tom. 2.5.11.
Orleance the first, Tom. 2.558.
Auuerne, Tom. 2.551.
the second Tom. 2.817.
Tours. And after that again by Gunthramn, Clowys Carloman, and Pepin: At Tom.
2.840.
Mascon first and Tom. 2.857.
second, Tom. 3 208.
Chalons: That which is called Tom. 3.437.
Fra^cica, and that which is in Tom. 3.439.
Vernis. Twenti^ of them at the least in France.

In Spain by ten several kings: in two Councels at Tom. 2.825.812.
Braccara, and in Tom. 2.547.859. Tom. 3.67.79.87.181.184.204 216.374.
ten at Toledo, by the space of three hundredth years together. And how? under
what terms? Peruse the Councels themselves: their very Acts speak, ex Tom.
2.270. Tom. 2.551.
Praecepto, Tom. 3.67.
Imperio, Tom. 3 184.
Iussu, Tom. 3.237.
Sanctione, Tom. 3.391.
Nutu, Tom. 3.391.
Decreto, ex Tom. 3.84.
Euocatione, Tom. 2.857.
Dispositione, Tom. 3.208.
Ordinatione Regis: One says, Tom. 2.504.
Potestas permissa est nobis: Another, Tom. 3.216.
Facultas data est nobis: A third, Tom. 3.682.
Iniunctum est nobis a Rege. See their several styles: nothing can be more
pregnant. And now we are gone, 800. years after Christ.

Then arose there a kind of Empire here in the West, Under Charles the Great:
From Charles the Greatto Arnulphus.
and did not he then take the Trumpets as his own, and use them six several
times in calling six several Councels at Tom. 3.640.
Frankeford, Tom. 3.679.
Arles, Tom. 3.682.
Toures, Tom. 3.986.
Chalons, Tom. 3.693.
Mentz, and Tom. 3.700.
Rhemes? And what says he in them? Rhemes I named last, take that: In
conuentu more priscorum Imperatorum congregato a pijssimo Domino nostro Carolo.
That he called that Conuention by no other right then as the manner of the
ancient Emperors had been to do. Expressing under one, both what his was:
and what the usage had ever been before him.

The like after him did Ludouicus Pius, Lotharius, Ludouicus Balbus, Carolus
Caluus, Carolus Crassus, and Arnulphus, at the several Councels holden at Tom.
3.703.
Aken, Tom. 3.832.
Mentz, p Tom. 3.866.
Melden, Tom. 3.977.
Worms, q Tom. 4.17.
Colein, and Tom. 4.28.
Tribur; and so held it till 900. years: For about that year (a year or two
under or over) was holden the Council of Tribur in Germany, Cum Concilium
sacrum continuari decreuisset: and Tom. 4.41.
Praesidente pio Principe Arnulpho, By the Emperor Arnulphus Decree, himself
then President of it.

And if it be excepted; There are of the Councels which carry in their acts no
mention how they were called: For them, we are to understand, that after the
decrees of the first Nicen. Can. 5.
Nicene Council were by Constantines Edict confirmed, wherein, (as likewise in
the Council of Chalced. Can. 18.
Chalcedon,) it was ordered, each Province should yearly hold their Synods
twice* but specially, after Authent. 131.
Justinian had made the decrees of the four first general Councels to have
the nature and force of Imperial Laws (a Law being thus passed for them,) we
are to conceive, the Emperors authority was in al^ afterward, habitually at
the least: that is, i^ not (as in the other) by express and formal consent:
yet by way of implied allowance, as passed by a former Grant.

Well, thus far the Trumpet gives a certain sound. Now after this, there is
a great silence in the Volumes of the Councels, in a manner for the space of
200. years, until the year 1180. or thereabout, when the Tom. 4.101.
Council of Lateran was: and then indeed the case was altered. By that time
had the Bishop of Rome by his skill and practice, One of the Trumpets gotten
away.
got one of the Trumpets away, and carried it with him to Rome: so, leaving
Princes but one: But so long they held it.

Truly, three times so much time as we are allowed, would not serve for this
one point of the Councels; but even barely to recite them, and to cite them,
they are so many. You remember how Abraham dealt with God for the saving of the
five Cities, how he went down from fifty to ten: I might well take a course
the other way, and rise from ten to fifty, nay sixty, nay seventy, nay eighty,
not so few, of Councels General, National, Provincial, called by Emperors,
by Kings: Emperors of the East, of the West: Kings of Italy, France, Spain,
Germany, (as before from Moses to the Maccabees: So he (...) from Constantine
to Arnulphus) for so many hundred years together, extant all, to be showed and
seen, all clear and evident, all full and forcible for this Power: as indeed
it is a cause that labors rather of plenty, then penury of proof. And this
was the course that of old was well thought of in the Christian world. Thus was
the Congregation so long called; neither is there yet brought any thing to
force us to swerve from the way wherein so many and so holy ages have gone
before us.

Yes, something: For what say you to the 300. years before Constantine? How in
the time of persecution for 300. years before Constantine.
How went A^semblies then? who called them, all the while? For diverse were
holden that while In Palestine, about Faster: At Carthage, abo^ Heretics
baptism; at Rome, about Nou^tus; at Antioch, about Paulus Samosaten^ How
assembled these?

1. As in Egypt.
Truly, even as this people here, of the Jews, did before in Egypt, under the
tyrant^ of Pharao: they were then a Church vnd^ persecution, until Moses was
raised up by God, a lawful Magistrate over them. The cases are like for all
the world. No Magistrate did assemble them in Egypt. And good reason: they had
then none to do it. Pharao (we may be sure) would not offer to do it: Not for
any conscience (I trust) or fear, to encroch upon the Churches right: but,
because he hated both Assembly and Congregation, and sought by all means to
extinguish both. But this was no bar; but that when Moses arose, authorized
by God, and had the Trumpets here, by God delivered him; he might take them,
keep them, and use them, to that end, for which God gave them; to call the
Congregation. And none then but he could do it, because to none, but him then,
was this Power conueighed. They could not say to him now, as before one of them
did in Egypt, Who made you a Commander over us, Exodus 2.14.
to call us together? nor plead in bar of the Trumpets, and say: Nay, but
we will meet still, of our selves, even as we did before in Egypt; we will
still keep our old manner of conuentions. No: for God had now taken another
order: God I say, had now done it: And God shall (I trust) be allowed, to
trauslate this Power to the principal member of the body, and to dispose of
it, as it best pleases him.

2. As under the captivity.
The very same case fell out again after in the captivity of Babylon, and
again after that, in the persecution under Antiochus. And these three, 3. As
under Antiochus.
are all the paternes we have in the old Testament. As before in Egypt; so the
they had meetings: but they were all l^ stealth: yet meetings, then they had.
For Moses ceasing, and his right with him, the Power deuolued to the body, to
gather it self (as i^ usual in such cases.) But then when Neb^mias after the
Captivity, and Simeon Maccabeus after the fury of Antiochus, were rays^ them
by God; when God had set them i^ Moses place, they might lawfully do, as M^ses
before had done; and take the silver Trumpets into their hands again: So soon
as the^ had a lawful Governor, the right return^^ to him straight: And the
Congregation none of them might then plead, Nay: but (...) we did in Babylon,
or as we did under Ant^chus; So, and no otherwise, will we Assemble still. No,
we see the contrary rather: Eu^ of themselves, 1. Macc. 14.44.
they profess to Simeon pla^ly: now, they have a lawful Governor, (...)
meeting should be from thence forth in the land, without him, his priuitie
and permission.

And even as these two, Nehemias and Simeon: even by the same right
Constantine: So before Constantine.
by Moses right, all, all by the Commission here penned. By it did Constantine
resume the Trumpet, and enjoy and exercise the Power of calling the
Congregation: (For even Moses pattern and practice five sundry times at least
does Eusebius allege, in the life of Constantine to justify his proceedings
still by Moses example.) True it is therefore, that before Constantines time,
they met together as they durst, and took such order as they could, They must
venture then: there was no Moses; they had no Trumpet: and if they had, they
durst not have blown it. But when Constantine came in place, in Moses place,
it was lawful for him to do as Moses did: And so he did; and they never said
to him, Nay, spare your Trumpet: look how we have done hitherto, we will do
so even still: meet no otherwise now, then in former times we have; by our own
agreement. As before it was said, this had been plain dealing: Thus (if
rightly they might) they should have done: Did they so? No: But to him they
went, as to Moses for their meetings; at his hands they sought them; without
his leave or liking they would not attempt them: yea (I dare say) they blessed
God from their hearts, that they had lived to see the day, they might now
assemble by the sound of the Trumpet.

To conclude this point then. These two times or estates of the Church are not
to be confounded: There is a plain difference between them, and a diverse
respect to be had of each. If the succession of Magistrate be interrupted, in
such case of necessity, the Church of her self makes supply, because then
Gods Order cease. But, God grau^ting a Constantine to them again, Gods
former positive order returns, and the coun^ is to proceed and go on, as
before. When the Magistrate and his authority was at any tim^ wanting to the
Church, forced she was to deal with her own affairs, within her self: so
then was the Church wholly divided from Princes, and they from it. But when
this wa^ of partition is pulled down, shall Moses hat^ no more to do then
Pharaoh, or Constanti^^ then Nero? Congregations were so called under them:
must they be so still under these too? No: no more then their manner of meeting
in Egypt, (for all the world like this of the Primitive Church persecuted) was
to be a rule, and to over rule these Trumpets here (in the text) either God
for giving them, or Moses for taking them at his hands. This rather: If ever
the Church fall into such bloody times, they must meet as they may, and come
together as they can: They have no Moses, no Trumpet to call them. The times of
Pharaoh and Nero are then their pattern. But, if it be so happy as to find the
days of peace, Moses and Constantine are paternes for the days of peace: they
have a Moses then: from that time forward they must give ear to the Trumpet.
In a word, none can seek to have the Congregation so called (as before
Constantine) but they must secretly, and by implication confess, They are a
persecuted Church, as that then was, without a Moses, without a Constantine.

The times then before Constantine are no bar, no kind of impeachment to
Constantines, no more then the times in Egypt were to Moses Right. And indeed
no more they were for Constantine and his Successors had them, and held them
till a thousand years after Christ, and then one of them (by what means we
all know) was let go by them, or gotten away from them: It was then gotten
away and carried to Rome. But that getting has hitherto been holden a plain
usurping; and an usurping (not upon the Congregation, but) upon Princes and
their Right; and that they in their own wrong, suffered it to be wrung from
them* And why? Because not to Aaron, but to Moses it was said, Et erunt tibi.

The recovery of the Trumpets.
1. To draw to an end, It was then gotten away, and with some ado it was
recouere^ not long since: and what? shall we no^ let it go, and destroy so
soon that which so lately we built again? You may please to remember, there
was not long since a Clerg^ in place, that was wholly ad oppositum, and would
never have yielded to reform ought* Nothing they would do, and (in eye of
law* without them, nothing could then be done* they had incroched the power of
Assembling into their own hands. How then? how shall we do for an Assembly?
Then Erunt tibi was a good text: it must needs be meant of the Prince: He had
this Power and to him of right it belonged. This was then good Divinity (and
what writer is there extant of those times, but it may be turned to, in him?
Now sought to be gotten away.
) And was it good Divinity then, and is it now no longer so? 1. By the
Presbytery.
Was the King but licensed for a while, to hold this power, till another
Clergy were in; and must he then be deprived of it again? Was it then
usurped from Princes; and are now Princes usurpers of it themselves? And is
this all the difference in the matter of Assemblies; and calling of them: that
there must be only a change, and that in stead of a foreign, they shall have
a domestical, and instead of one, many: and no remedy now, but one of these
two they must needs admit of? Is this now become good Divinity? Nay (I trust)
if Erunt tibi were once true, it is so still: and if (Tibi) were then Moses, it
is so still: That we will be better advised, and not thus go against our
selves, and let truth be no longer truth, then it will serve our turns.

2. By the people themselves, Penry, Barrow, etc.
2 And this calls to my mind the like dealing of a sort of men, not long
since here among us. A while they plied Prince and Parliament, with
Admonitions, Supplicat^ons, Motions, and Petitions. An in them it was: their
duty, their right, to frame all thing to their new invented plot: And this,
(...) long as any hope blew out of that coast. Bu^ when, that way they saw it
would not b^ Then took they up a new Tenet, streight^ They needed neither
Magistrate, nor Trumpet, they: The godly among the people might do it of
themselves. For confusion to the wise and mighty; the poor and simple must
take this work in hand, and so by the means the Trumpet prove their right, in
the end: and so come by deuolution to Demetri^ and the craftsmen. Now, if not
for lou^ of the truth; yet, for very shame of these shifting absurdities; let
these fantasies, be abandoned: and (that which Gods own mouth has here
spoken,) let it be for once, and fo^euer true: That which once we truly held
o^ maintained for tureth, let us do so still: tha^ we be not like evil
servants, Luc. 19.22.
judged (Ex ^proprio) out of their own mouths.

Let me not over weary you; let this rathe^ suffice. The Conclusion.
1. We have done as our Sauiou^ Christ willed us, resorted to the Law, and
found what there is written: (The Grant of this Power to Moses, to call the
Congregation:) 2. We have followed Moses advise; inquired of the days before
us, even from one end of heaven to the other; and found the practice of this
Grant in Moses successors; and the Congregation so by them called: it
remains, that as God by his Law has taken this order, and his people in
former ages have kept this order; that we do so too: that we say as God says,
Erunt tibi, this Power pertains to Moses: And that neither with Core we say,
Non veniemus: Nor with Demetrius run together of our selves, and think to
carry it away with crying, Great is Diana. But, as we see the Power is of God;
so truly to acknowledge it, and duetifully to yield it: that so they whose it
is, may quietly hold it, and laudably use it, to his glory that gave it, and
their good for whom it was given: Which God Almighty grant, etc.


The Edition of the Councels here alleged, is that of Venice, by Dominicus
Nicolinus in five Tomes.


