THE Care of a Christian Conscience. Ten Sermons on the 25. Psalm, preached in
Tewkesburie in the County of Gloucester, By Richard Curtis.

framed printer's device of Simon Stafford, featuring the personification of
Opportunity standing on a wheel which floats in the sea (McKerrow 281) NVNC AVT
NVNQVAM.


Imprinted at London by Simon Stafford, dwelling on Adling hill, near Carter
lane. 1600.

TO THE HONORABLE AND Virtuous Lady, the Lady Dorothee Stafford widow, one of
the Ladies of her Majesty's bedchamber, Simon Stafford wishes all honor and
happiness in this life, and in the life to come, perpetual glory and rest.
THE straight and dutiful consideration of so many great favors, with which
your Honorable disposition has vouchsafed to grace me, unworthy the least of
them, has compelled me thus presumptuously to dedicate these Christian models
(albeit the talent of another man's zealous invention, yet as the tithe of my
poor Printing-presse) unto your honorable patronage; hoping, that in regard
of their worth, and not of my deserts, you will likewise peruse them at
convenient seasons. The utility of them I need not rippe up, seeing that your
own deepe-grounded wisdom will hereafter by experienced perusal find out the
same far better, then either my simple mind can imagine, or my pen lay down.
Only this I humbly crave of your Honor, that my good devotion herein be
acceptable unto you: for our Savior Christ preferred the poor widows mite,
before the golden offerings of the rich. And is it not written, that Artaxerxes
a Pagan King, daigned to receive a cup-full of cold water at the hand of poor
Synetes? Whose president I imitating, am emboldened to register your Heroical
name in the forefront of this book, entitled, The Care of a Christian
Conscience, nothing doubting at all, but that your Honors name is registered in
the Book of life, for the Christian Care which you have exte^ded to many of
the poor distressed members of Jesus Christ. Thus ceasing, I beseech the Lord
to continue you in your godly course, and endue you with all blessings which
either this earth affords, or heaven contains.

From London, April 20. 1600. Your Honors most bounden, Simon Stafford.

The first Sermon upon the 25. Psalm, 1.2. and 3. verses.
1 Unto thee, O Lord, lift I up my soul.
THe sense is, Many are the slanders, and great are ye injuries, which the
wicked (O Lord my God, the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, three persons
and one eternal God) do raise up against me thy humble, and obedient servant,
being upright (as thou know) and innocent of that great offense, to seek
the destruction of thine anointed Saul, (which whosoever does, shall never be
guiltless in thy sight) as I now am: and for as much as thou know, that to
be delivered from lying lips, and flaunderous toungs, I earnestly desire,
that mine integrity and vprightnes being known unto thy majesty, may also
unto me^ appear, I put not my trust, as worldlings do, in any worldly thing,
but my trust being fully fixed in the only one God, I humbly, and heartily, in
the name, and by the mediation of thy dearly beloved son Jesus Christ, the
Messiah which is to come, beseech thee to deliver me; so shall I praise thy
name all the days of my life.

1. Doct. In all our afflictions we must lift up our hearts to God only, by
Prayer. The reason is. It is the hand wherewith the Lord from heaven reaches
his benefits unto us. Use. Let us exercise it at all times. For even as the
birds and fowls of the air, that they may escape the nets and snares of
the fowlers, fly up on high: so we, to avoid the infinite snares of our
enemies, and innumerable temptations, must lift up our selves from the
corruptions, lying vanities, and deceitful sleights of the world, by earnest
and hearty prayer. When the sacred Scriptures mention the honoring of God, the
chiefest point which it sets down to us, is prayer; and had this been
observed as it ought to be, the manner thereof had been much more esteemed
among men, so as they would not have so swarued one way, nor other, but have
followed that which the holy Scripture teaches. But now, men regard not
profitably to pray, they respect not in what manner they pray, that their prayer
might be accepted of God: but most men rush in, and step to it, like blind
Bayard, and come not dutifully, and reverently, as they ought, to the Lord.
From whence proceeds this vnreuerent behauior? Even from hence: Because men
account not of it, to be of so great importance as it is: for if we took it
for the chief point of the service of God, as it is, it is certain we would
more heartily, zealously, and reverently take it in hand.

2. Doct. 1. verse. Unto thee, O Lord. Use. Let us therefore not pray unto
Saints departed: for we ought not to pray to the^. 2. They pray not for us.
3. They understand not our Prayers. The Papists assertion is, that Saints
departed are with great profit and piety called upon, and prayed unto, R. 1.
Tim 2. sect. 4. B. cap. 19 lib. 1. De sanctoru^ beatit.
and that it is not only lawful, but godly so to do. Arg. 1. They say, they
pray not to Saints, as authors of any benefit or grace, but as Intercessors
only: neither do they make them immediate intercessors, but only through
Christ, concluding all their prayers, Per Christum Dominum nostrum. Ans. 1. It
is false, that they pray unto them as intercessors only: for they desire them
not only to pray for them, but to have mercy upon them: For thus they pray,
O blessed Lady, have mercy upon us, preserve thy servants, let the merits of
S. Mary bring us to the kingdom of heaven. Answ. 2. It is also false, that
they make them not immediate intercessors, but conclude their prayers, Per
Christum Dominum nostrum: for in that blasphemous prayer, Tu per Thomae
sanguinem, quem pro nobis impendit, fac, nos Christ, scandere, quo Christus
ascendit. By the blood of Thomas, O Christ, which he shed for us, make us to
clime whither he ascended. There they ask life eternal of Christ, by the blood
of Thomas of Canterbury. How then is it true, which the Rhemists affirm, ye
Christ alone by his merits procures all grace and mercy toward mankind?
Prayers are made to S. Mary, S. Osmo^d, S. Anne, S. Katherine, and none of them
concludes, Per Christum Dominum nostrum. Likewise An. 1551. in Scotland it was
as good doctrine amongst the Papists, that it was lawful to say the Pater
noster to Saints, that we may call them our fathers, and say, Hallowed be your
names, because God has made their names holy: and, that their kingdom may
come, because the kingdom of heaven is theirs by possession; and further, that
their will may be done, seeing their will is Gods will: and so of the other
petitions. Whereby it appears, that they would have prayers made unto Saints
properly, eue^ as unto God. Arg. 2. Exodus 32.13. Moses thus prays, Remember
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob thy servants. Moses hops here, to have his prayers
heard by the merits of these holy men. Ans. Moses rehearses here only the
covenant, which the Lord made with these holy men, and their seed, as the words
following do show: To whom thou swarest by thine own self, and said unto
them, I will multiply your seed. Moses therefore pleads not the merits of
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, but urges and presses the promises of God, and
covenant made with them. That prayer is only to be made unto God, and to no
creature at all, as being an especial part of the worship of GOD, which we
ought not to give to any other, thus it is proved by the word of God. Arg. 1.
Romans 10.14. How shall they call upon him, in whom they have not believed? But
we must believe only in God, and therefore we ought only to pray to him.
Auns. The. It is true: no more can we pray to our Lady, nor any Saint in
heaven, unless we believe they can help us. Auns. The sacred Scriptures every
where teach us, that we must believe in God, and that they are cursed, that put
any confidence in man, Ier. 17.5. Again they can have none assurance to settle
their consciences, but out of ye Scriptures: They have a vain persuasio^ of
the ability of Saints to help the^: but they have no ground of any such belief
out of the Scriptures. We see then, yt we ought to pray to God only, in ye name
of our Lord Jesus Christ. We must not only in adversity, but in prosperity do
it: we must do it ordinarily, seeing yt we cannot live one minute of an hour,
without the gracious help, and merciful assistance of our good and gracious
God. And the favor which we look for at his hands, consists not only in
delivering us from death, when we are at the pits brim, (as ye ignorant
imagine) but also in daily preserving us, and in turning away all evil from us.
For we see, that we are in this life continually besieged with an hundred
dangers, and the miseries whereunto we are subject, are without number. You
see the^ that we ought to call upon God, not only when he touches us, and
smites, as though he laid hard strokes upon us, but even when we be at peace
and rest, perceive, and ever do expect dangers toward us: even then it
behooves us to consider, to how many miseries our life is subject unto, yt
being persuaded yt we cannot escape, except God help us, we may fly unto him
and say, Alas Lord, consider our miseries, keep us under the shadow of thy
wings, eue^ under the protection, and by thy providence make us able to pass
through al dangers, which enuiron and hem us in round about. This must be done
both morning, noone, and night, abroad and at home, but especially, morning and
evening. Moreover, let us consider, that Satan with sundry and manifold
temptations does daily assault us: Therefore let us pray unto God daily and
howrely to deliver us by his power.

The 2. part of the first Sermon.
Psalm. 25.2. My God, I trust in thee, let me not be confounded, let not mine
enemies rejoice over me.
AS if the prophet had said, O my God, my hope is only fixed on thee, let me
not be confounded and put to shame, and so be derided of mine enemies. 1.
Doctrine. Our hope ought to be fixed only in the Lord. The Reason is: for that
of him comes our salvation. 2. Reason. Our help stands in the name of the
Lord, who has made heaven and earth, our fathers hoped in thee, they trusted
in thee, and were not confounded. Job 14.14. If a man die, shall he live
again? all the days of mine appointed time (or warfare) will I wait, until
my changing come. Our hope must persevere.
Which saying is worthy to be well marked. For if we be tossed with never so
many troubles, it is not enough, upon some good motion and affection to say,
Now must we trust in God: for that is nothing, except we hold out even in the
midst of all our encou^ters. First therefore let us mark, that Hope is not a
days bird, or a months bird, but must continue to the end. And doubtless,
when we be fully settled on Gods promises, he holds us still in the same, to
the end we may not quail every day, but that when we have ouerpassed some
time, we may always be established more and more, until God has performed
the things which as yet he has delaied until another time. You see then,
that it booteth not to have had some good affection, or to have trusted in God,
except we continue so throughout. And Job has expressed it plainly, under the
name of travail or battle. Why so? He means not, that we go to our God at
our ease. As long as we suffer nothing, we can find in our hearts to live still
in this world, and to prolong our life double if it were possible. Our desire
is then, that God should handle us without greeuing us, and please us in all
respects, and obey us in all our desires. See how easily we would pass the
time, if we might go but our own pase, if we might have no temptation, and yt
there might be no heaviness nor fear. But it is said, that we must give
attendance all our life long, yea even with wrestling. In these words (all the
days) we are taught, that if the time linger, and seem long to us, we must
not take it for an excuse to do evil, and to be grieved, and to give over all
in the midst of our journey, but we must continue to the end. Under this
word battle or fighting, is expressed unto us the state of this present life,
which is, that being but warfarre in this world, we must be feign to fight, to
be besieged on all sides, to be in continual peril, to be tempted sometimes
with cares, sometimes with adversities, and sometimes with some dangers.
Therefore let us think upon it, Job 13.15. Lo, though he slay me, yet will I
put my trust in him, and I will reprove my ways in his sight. Psalm. 17.8.
Keep me as the apple of the eye, hide me under the shadow of thy wings.
Psalm. 57.1, 2. Have mercy upon me, O God, have mercy upon me: for my soul
trusts in thee, and in the shadow of thy wings will I trust, till these
afflictions ouerpasse. verse. 2. I will call unto the most high God, even to
the God that performs his promise toward me. Simil. Augustini.
We fasten now our hope in the holy land (of heaven) as an anchor, lest in the
sea (of this world) we being troubled should make a shipwreck. Even as
therefore of a ship that is at anchor, we say, Well, now it is at the land,
although being in the Sea, the waves beat against it, yet after a certain
manner it is brought to land against winds and tempests: even so, against the
temptations of this our pilgrimage, our hope being fownded in that celestial
Jerusalem, makes us as it were to be turned into stones. Laur. Iustinianus
Patriarcha. Sim.
Hope is as it were a pillar, which holds up the spiritual building; which
failing, the building ruineth, and into the pit of despair falls. Heb. 6.19.
Which hope we have as an anchor of the soul, both sure, and it enters into
that which is within the veil. Psalm. 52.2. My God, I trust in thee, let me
not be confounded.

1. Doct. Whosoever have a strong confidence in God, will also join prayer to
God only with their trust in him, that their enemies may not prevail against
them to their confusion. 1. Reason is, Prayer is a strengthening of our hope in
God, and a means whereby we are delivered from confusion. Psalm. 50.15. Call
upon me (says God) in the day of thy trouble, and I will hear thee, and thou
shall glorify me. Whosoever prays not to God, to be delivered from confusion,
which his enemies would bring him unto, does not only oftentimes fall into it,
as many examples in the holy word are showed, but is destitute of the hope of a
Christian; and so by consequence, is void from all comfort in his affliction,
seeing in trouble nothing comfort the afflicted, but his hope, and confidence
in God, ^^w
for his delivery. Let not mine enemies rejoice over me. The property of the
wicked is to rejoice at the confusion of the godly. Reason. Because they hate
nothing, neither any persons so much, as the truth, and the professors thereof.
Lam. 2.16. All thine enemies do open their mouth against thee, they hiss and
gnash their teeth, saying, We have devoured it, certainly, this is the day we
looked for, we have found and seen it. He says not, enemy, but enemies. 2.
Doct. The wicked will join together to vex the godly, although otherwise they
agree not among themselves. Psalm. 2.2. The kings of the earth band themselves,
and the Princes are assembled together against the Lord, and against his
Christ. Example. Luk 23.12. And the same day Pilate and Herod were made
friends together: for before they were enemies one to another. is, that we
beware, lest we be spotted with that fault. 3. Doct. The wicked be often so
enflamed with malice against the godly, that nothing will satisfy them, but
their life. Prou. 1.11. If they say, Come, we will lay wait for blood, and lie
privily for the innocent without a cause: 12. we will swallow them up alive
like a grave, even whole as those that go down into the pittes: 13. we shall
find all precious riches, and fill our houses with spoil: 14. Cast in thy lot
among us, we will have but one purse. Ps. 79.2. The dead bodies of thy Saints
have they given to the fowls of the heaven, and the flesh of thy Saints unto
the beasts of the earth. verse. 3. Their blood have they shed like water round
about Jerusalem, and there is none to bury them. verse. 4. We are a reproach to
our neighbors, eue^ a scorn and derision to them that are round about us. The
Reason is, They think to flourish without controlment, and to be reverenced,
and to have rest when they are dead, which during their life, they think and
know that they shall not have, as they expected. Esth. 3.5. And when Haman saw
that Mordecai bowed not the knee unto him, nor did reverence unto him, then he
was full of wrath. First, that bloody cruelty being the property of the wicked,
that we labor with our selves that it be far from us. 2. Use. To look for
all mischief from the wicked, that they can accomplish against us. Psalm.
25.2. Let not mine enemies rejoice. Though the wicked do always hate the
godly, yet they will often dissemble friendship, and show forth their malice,
only when they have opportunity thereunto. Psalm. 5.9. For there is no constancy
in their mouths, within they are vain corruption, their throat is an open
sepulcher, and they flatter with their tongue. Amos 1.9. Thus says the Lord,
For three transgressions of Tyrus, and for four, I will not turn to it,
because they have shut up the whole captivity in Edom, and have not remembered
the brotherly covenant. The Reason is, Because they are wise in their own
generation, Luke 16. and can wait their best advantage. The use is, To teach
us, First, never to trust the fair words of a profane man, but so to behave
our selves, that we shall beware of him. Text. Let not mine enemies rejoice
over me.

5. Doct. If we fall, and our enemies rejoice over us, it is the Lords doing.
The 1. Reason, He is almighty, and does all things (although evil be of
Satan and man.) The 2. Reason. He has the dominion of all creatures. The Use
is, to teach us, First, to learn to fear him, and obey him, especially in
whose favor nothing can hurt us. Secondly, that in all afflictions we look
up, and lift our souls to him that strikes, and examine our selves what cause
we have given him. Thirdly, to seek reconciliation with him by prayer and
repentance: so shall the means that are against us, be employed for us, as
Hamans galowes for Mordecai, which God changed, that he himself was hanged
thereon, and his 10. Sons, Esth. 10. Goliahs sword cut off his own head, 1.
Sam. 17. Text, verse. 3. So all that hope in thee, shall not be ashamed: but let
them be confounded that transgress without cause. (Paraphr.) And surely thou will not suffer them that depend upon thee, to be put to shame: but rather must
these faithless persons that persecute the innocent, be brought thereunto.

1. Doct. An assured hope of deliverance grounded upon Gods promise, is the
only cause of the patience and humility of Gods children in their troubles.
The Reason is, First, because ye corruption of man's nature being of it self
wayward, cannot take afflictions patiently, without supernatural help:
therefore we say, Without Hope the heart would break. Secondly, where there is
no hope, there is no faith; where there is no faith, there is no patience.
Thirdly, else the damned might have patience; which they have not, as appears
by their gnashing of teeth. The Use is, To teach us to be careful, to use the
means of obtaining hope, and growing in it, praising God for such means we
have, and mourning for that we want.

Psalm. 25.3. So all that hope in thee, shall not be ashamed: but let them be
part of confounded, that transgress without a cause. The 3. part of the first
Sermon.

TWo branches; a Consolation: an Imprecation.

1. Doct. God preserves from shame all that hope in him. The Reason is, Because
he has promised so to do. Psalm. 91.14. Because he has loved me, therefore
will I deliver him. Secondly, he has always in greatest extremities delivered
his people. Psalm. 22.4. Our fathers trusted in thee: they trusted, and thou
did deliver them. verse 5. They called upon thee, and were delivered: they
trusted in thee, and were not confounded. The use is, That as we believe the
promises of God in general, so we must believe them to appertain to our
selves especially: otherwise our hope and faith differs not from the hope and
faith of the Devils: for they believe and tremble.

2. Doct. God confounds often in this life, Cain, Babilo. Philistia^s
Egiptia^s, Haman, Daniels, Sydracs, Misachs and Abednagoes enemies.
always (without true conversion to God) in the life to come, all those, that
by persecuting the godly without cause, do transgress his laws. The Reason
is, That by persecuting them, they persecute Christ himself. Act. 9.4. And
Saul fell to the earth, and heard a voice saying unto him, Saul, Saul, why
persecutest thou me? verse 5. And he said, Who art thou, Lord? And the Lord
said, I am Jesus, whom thou persecutest: it is hard for thee to kick against
pricks. Zachar. 2.8. He that touches them, touches the apple of his eye.
is, First, to walk in the fear of God, and as members of the body of Christ,
seeing he has so great care of us. The 2. use, Not to be discouraged, although
our afflictions by the wicked are long, in the end he will burn the rod.
The 3. use is, Let us pray to God to endue us with his spirit, rather to be
persecuted, then to persecute the members of Christ, seeing their end is so
miserable. Job 5.3. I have seen the foolish well rooted, and suddenly I cursed
his habitation, saying, verse. 4. His children shall be far from salvation, and
they shall be destroyed in the gate, and none shall deliver them. verse. 5. The
hungry shall eat up his harvest, yea, they shall take it from among the
thorns, and the thirsty shall drink up their substance.

Simil. Like as a tree thoroughly well settled and deeply rooted, stands
fast, although it be shaken with wind: eue^ so it seems, that after God has
once planted the wicked, their reign is for ever.
But forasmuch as oftentimes the kickers against GOD do prosper, and are well at
their ease, here is mention made of their estate, notwithstanding that men
esteem them happy to the worldward. Eliphas says, that when he saw a foolish
man in prosperity, he judged not, as men commonly do, which is: This man is
happy, he is blessed of GOD: but knew by and by, that the end of him shall be
evil, and that he shall be punished even in his offspring. God does oftentimes
utter such kind of sayings, to turn us from the false opinion which we may
conceive, when we see them not punished out of hand, that run into such
excess of wickedness, but rather to our seeming are favored of God. I know
what the common opinion is; for we esteem of things as they may be seen by
the eye, and our mind wadeth no further. If God lift up his hand, and execute
any Justice that may be seen, scarcely will men vouchsafe to regard it. But if
he wink at things, and tarry patiently for the sinners, we think him to be
asleep, and that he governs not the world, but lets all things go at
random, without any mind to remedy them. See how blockish we be. But God
shows us, that the wicked persecutors cease not to be cursed even in the
midst of their prosperity, and that we need not to spite them for their happy
success, as they term it: For they must be doubly punished: so that it were
far better for them that they were miserable, because they shall pay
ouer-deere for their pleasures.

And behold also why I said, that it behooves us to mark well these sentences,
both of my text, which is, They shall be confounded that without cause persecute
the Saints of God: as also, I have seen the foolish well rooted, and
immediately or suddenly I cursed his habitation. Because both contain a
profitable lesson, and because the Prophet David, in this his prayer to God,
says, Let them be confounded, that transgress without a cause. In which
words he cursed his persecutors; not so much for that they were his enemies,
but in persecuting him, they foolishly kicked against the pricks, that is,
against Christ himself. And Eliphaz calls the^ Fools, that are wicked,
though they have taken root: and presently, He has cursed his habitation:
which both are to be understood in one sense. I purpose (God willing) the
longer to persist in this necessary point, both to consider, in what sense the
wicked persecutours, although flourishing in this world for a time, may be said
to be fools, as also, how cursing of them may not disagree to the
commandment of our Savior Christ, Bless, Math. 5.
I say, and curse not. For the first: That we may the better profit our selves
by the doctrine herein contained: First, it behooves us to note, that this
word, Fool is here, Iere. 5. Mat. 23. Gal. 3.1.
and in diverse other places of the sacred Scriptures, put for those, that in
their prosperity and persecuting regard not GOD. For although the world
accompteth them wise me^, which can skill well to deal for their own profit,
and can shift their matters cunningly (as they say) the holy Scriptures tell
us, there is none other wisdom, then the fear of the Lord. Then, if we lift
up our souls, and cast up our eyes fast fixed on GOD in the heavens, so as we
direct our life according to his will, and put our whole trust in him, as David
in this and diverse other Psalms, diversely protested he did, to have by Prayer
recourse to him for succor, behold, the same is our true wisdom. And here
we see why Saint Paul says, that such as are learned in the Gospel, are
perfectly wise. Col. 1.28. Whom, that is, Christ Jesus, we preach,
admonishing every man, and teaching every man in all wisdom, that we may
present every man perfect in Christ Jesus. Therefore the glorious Gospel of
Jesus Christ our Savior, is called wisdom, for that there we find, how to
order our whole life without missing or erring.

Although then that men be full of subtilty and fine conueyance, and suppose
themselves to be very wise, yet must we hold us to that, which the Scriptures
teach us, how it is in every whit of it, but folly and vanity: for, for their
folly in persecuting the Saints without cause, they shall be confounded, seeing
that the fear of GOD is not in them. I have, says Eliphaz, seen the Fool
taking root, and immediately I have cursed his house. Whereas he speaks of
taking root, he means, that it seemed likely, that his prosperity should
be continual, firm, stable, and immovable, like mount Sion, that cannot be
removed, but stands fast for ever.

If Eliphaz had said, I have seen the fool advanced aloft to great dignity,
he had not expressed so much as he does. For he says, yt he is planted, Simil.
Nabuchadnezzar, and Pharaoh.
he has taken deep root, because the despisers of God, haters and
persecutors of his Saints, hope to have prosperity always in their sleeue. And
like as a tree that is thoroughly well settled, and deeply rooted in the
ground, stands fast, though it be shaken with winds and storms: even so it
seems, that after God has once advanced the wicked, they shall reign
continually, and their triumphs shall never have an end. But David and
Eliphaz, when they saw this likelihood, forbear not to curse the wicked, out
of hand, or immediately, as Eliphaz says: meaning, that they tarried not till
there came a change, as we commonly do, who at the first blush, when we see
the despisers of GOD to be in their chief ruff, and to have the wind at
their stearne (as they say) do linger the time, and are, as it were astonished,
saying, What will this matter prove to? If we perceive them to fall into
decay, then we change our mind: but so long as we see them floorish, then we
know not what to say, we be at our wits end. Contrariwise, Eliphaz tells
us, that he was not abashed one whit at the matter, but spoke his mind
according to Gods holy word. For David and Eliphazes judgments and
condemnations here of the wicked, are not of their own heads, or after their
own fancy, but they declare, that according as God shows us, that the
wicked shall be confounded in the end, so they grounded themselves thereupon, and
were not shaken therefrom by any temptation. But although they had seen the
wicked fly so high a pitch, yet they held still at one stay, saying, They
shall come to naught, even to confusion. For even as trees, Simil.
though they seem firmly rooted, when great and mighty storms have risen,
they have been cast down and pulled up by the roots, yea, the roots turned
vpwardes, yea, utterly consumed and burnt to ashes: Even so the wicked,
although they seem by their friends, riches, alliances and assistances, to
be so firm as mount Sion, yet the Lord in his Justice, that no flesh should
glory in her own strength and power, has sent the storms and winds of his
displeasure and indignation, has cast down, ouerturned, and utterly consumed
the wicked. Now we see in effect what David means, whereas he says in his
prayer to God, Let them be confounded that transgress without a cause. And let
us apply this lesson to our own use, that we may know how agreeable it is
unto us. True it is, that we have not to do with condemning of other men:
Mat. 7.1
for it stands every man in hand, rather to look into himself, and that is
the thing whereunto every one of us must apply his endeavor: for they that so
rashly judge others, forget themselves, and GOD will not spare them, though
they flatter themselves; they must be feign to come before their Judge, who
will handle them rigorously, because they ouerslippe themselves so much in
their own faults. Let us note then, that our minds must not gadde here, and
there, to seek out the evil that is in others: but every man must enter into
himself, and examine his own state and life, and when we find any fault in
our selves, we must condemn it.

Furthermore, where David cursed his persecutors, in saying, Let them be
confounded that transgress without a cause, who are wicked and despisers of
God: it is not to yield such aucthority or preeminence to us, as of our selves.
How is it then? First of all, if the wicked persecute or trouble us, so as they
do us any annoyance or wrong, we imagine that GOD has given us over, and
that he cares no more for us; and hereupon we be tempted to conceive a
grief, as though we had lost our time by walking in singleness and
uprightness, saying, How now? I looked that God would have succored me at my
need: yea, I have served him, and I have put my trust in him, and yet he
suffers me to be tormented to the uttermost: I find not relief when I pray
unto him, he seems as though he were deaf.

We see here a very troublesome temptation, when GOD seems to make none
account of succouring us, at such time as men misintreat and persecute us. And
therefore to comfort our selves withal, we must practice this lesson in all
our troubles and encombrances, which is, that although the wicked be in their
triumph to day, so as they set their foot upon our throat; it is not for that
God has forgotten us, or for that he will not send us remedy for it in the
end: But let us wait with patience, and we shall find the issue to be such as
God has promised; that is to wit, that he will regard us with mercy. Now,
when we see what profit redou^deth unto us by cursing, that is, by marking by
the Scriptures, how God curses the wicked, we shall perceive, that there is
nothing but unhappiness in their state throughout. But let us proceed yet
further. Psalm. 73.
When we see the wicked to have a better time then the good men, the dear
children of God, when we see them crafty and politic, when we see them
triumph, when they seem to be exempted from the common miseries of this
earthly life; Psalm. 37.
I say, when we see this, we be vexed, and know not what to say, nor what to
think: for it seems, that it were better for us to give our selves to
lewdness, then to good, forasmuch as to our seeming, God sets no better
order in ye matters of this world. But to the intent we be not provoked to do
amiss, we must take this for a Conclusion, that is, that when the despisers of
God, the persecuters of his saints, seem to be kings and princes, so as they
take their pleasure, and glory in their estate, yet they cease not to be
accursed. True it is, that this accursednesse appears not at the first day;
for it is secret, but it must have leisure and time to show it self. And on
the other side, we must behold the thing, although it cannot be seen with
our eyes, yet we must behold it with our faith: because God has spoken it
already with his own mouth, we must stick unto it which he says. It is the
self same matter that the Psalm. 37. and 73. do entreat of.

The second Sermon upon the 25. Psalm, the 4, 5, and 6. verses.
4. Show me thy ways, O Lord, and teach me thy paths.
The Paraphrase, that is:

GRant, O Lord, that I may understand in these so great perplexities and
extremities, what way thou appointest thine to walk, and what paths thou
appointest me to tread.

1. Doct. The Saints of God, having most knowledge of the will of God, and of
his laws, yet have most desire to be instructed therein. The first reason is,
They only see their own wantes and ignorance. The second Reason is, They
only long for the performance thereof. The third Reason is, Unto them it is
sweeter then the honey, Psalm. 19.
yea, then the honey comb: for they only have by the spirit of GOD, the
taste of the sweetness thereof. As for the wicked, no marvel though they
desire not the knowledge of the ways of God; for unto them it is a burden
heavy to bear. For as a burden laid upon the shoulders of an unwilling man,
Simil.
is therefore grievous unto him, because he with an unwilling mind bears the
same, yet the same burden, laid upon the shoulders of a willing man, is to him
not heavy, but light: even so, the Laws, ways, and paths of GOD, are to the
children of God easy, but to the wicked heavy: for they bridle the lusts of
the flesh, they teach mortification, Gods anger against sin, and whatsoever
is contrary to the corrupt will of flesh and blood. The Use is, that we use
all the means which GOD affords us for the attainment of the knowledge
thereof: as the hearing, reading, and meditating therein day and night.

The cause that moved the good Prophet and king David, Psalm. 1.2. thus to pray
to God, To teach him his paths and ways, that he might walk in the^, may be
gathered, to proceed from a desire that he had to expostulate with God, why he,
serving God day and night, and that not without cares, should be in such great
miseries; as persecutions by outward enemies, sickness, inward temptations, and
such like: whereas the wicked were freed from these miseries oftentimes,
although not always. He upon better consideration perceived, that it proceeded
from ignorance of Gods laws, paths and will: and therefore he prays for
understanding of his way. Then, do we lack wisdom? Iam. 1.
Let us crave it of him which is the welspring of it, and gives it without
vpbraiding. For God deals not nigardly with us, as men do, who when their
goods are diminished, are grieved if they be much called upon. It is not so
with GOD: for he never cease to do us good. Therefore let us learn to offer
our selves to him when we want wisdom, and let us not doubt, but he will give
us as much as is necessary for us, if we hear, read, meditate and practice
his holy word. And this doctrine is exceeding necessary for our behoof. For
what has been the cause of so much corruptions in Christendom, but for that
the ways, paths, laws, will, and word of our good God have been perverted
and embased, wrested, and mingled with the filthy dung of man's wisdom? but
because men have been desirous to be ouerwise, as though God had not been well
advised, but they must set him to school to them? When me^ presume to put
forth their own inventions, and to say in the service of God, This must be
good; and, That must be done; and, Such a thing must be remedied: After what
sort? After their own fa^cy. And had not GOD foreseen it? How comes it to
pass, that he did it not before? We see what God says and thereunto must we
hold us. He will have us to hold all things for good and holy, which he
speaks. And mark, men will step in. And why? They could not find in their
hearts to do him so much wrong, as to say, he is scarce well advised, and that
they themselves are wiser then he.

But we shall know this matter, by taking of a matter that is easy to be
understood, which is, that the Pope has gone about to divide those things
which GOD has joined together, that is to wit, he has hereft the people of
the Cup in the Lords Supper, and taught them, that they must content themselves
with one kind, namely, with the host, as they call it, and that the Cup served
but for the Priests to sing Mass withal. And what are his allegations? Oh,
there would be many inconveniences. True it is, that all those inconveniences
are grounded upon beastly superstitions, to make men believe, that wine is no
more wine, but that it is turned into ye blood of our Lord Jesus Christ. Then
mark here his allegatio^. O (says he) there would be many inco^uenie^ces, if
the Cup should be given to all the people, it were better that ye Priest should
drink in the behalf of all the whole company. To be short, it is all one, as
if he said, We be wiser the^ God, we see things yt he saw not, and therefore we
must provide for the^. After what manner? By putting away the ordinance of Jesus
Christ. Behold, our Lord Jesus Christ says, Mat. 26.27. Mar. 14 13.
Drink ye all of this Cup. He says expressly, Drink ye all. Behold, the Pope
comes, and cutteth of that word, saying, It is true, that that was the
ordinance of Jesus Christ. But we have not taken away the wine without great
reason; it is to provide for inconveniences. I have thought it good to have it
so. And what shall we say of the Son of God, who is the infinite wisdom it
self, and the light of the world? Did he see nothing in making this
institution? We see then, that me^ ouershoot them without al measure, when they
consider not, that the works of God are brought about by infinite righteousness
and wisdom. Then let us hold us there, and follow the way and paths he
shows us, and appoints us to walk in, and not fear that we shall err,
if he once show us his will, and we suffer our selves to be governed quietly
by it.

Psalm. 25.5. Lead me forth in thy truth, and teach me: for thou art the God of
my salvation, in thee do I trust all the day. The 2. part of the second Sermon.

The Paraphrase.

THe se^ce is, Guide my steps, O Lord, in the truth of thy promises, which
never fail: teach me patience in this and all other mine afflictions: Guide
me, that I desire no revenge, that I practice no unlawful means to escape
out of danger: for thou art he alone, O my God, of whom I daily and
continually look for my deliverance.

The 1. Doctrine. It is the property of the godly, in their afflictions, to
pray to God to guide them in the truth of his promises. The Reason is, Without
the assurance of them they murmr, nay, use sinister practices to escape out
of danger. The 2. Reason is, By them they are stayed and comforted, patiently
to bear the rod of Gods correction. The Use is, That we always call the
promises of GOD to mind which are taught us in the word, so shall we be quiet,
when others rage; so shall we not revenge, when others seek reuengement; so
shall we with patience possess our souls, when others shall despair; so
shall we trust in God, when others make flesh their arm; so shall we seek
for lawful means to escape, when others shall unlawfully, and therefore
unprofitably shall seek to law to avoid danger.

We must hold therefore a general rule, that our trust must be upon the
promises of God. And now let us consider what God promises. God says, Ps.
118.1, 2, 3, 4.
that if he has thought upon us to day to favor us, he will not forget us to
morrow, but we shall be helped by his hand all our life long. Psalm. 89, 28.
My mercy will I keep (says God) for him, that is, David, for evermore, and my
covenant shall stand fast with him. Behold what his promise is. Then may we
well assure our selves, that GOD will always keep us, and that by means
thereof we shall not be in danger of falling into decay. Psalm. 23.
But yet herewithall we must make our account, to be subject to fall into many
inconveniences. For our gracious and loving father says not, that he will
keep us, as it were shut up in a mewe, that we should see none adversity,
nor be acquainted with any trouble, but be in continual joy and felicity; he
promises us no such matter: but only, that he will aid and succor us in all
our necessities. Wherefore it behooves us to understand, that God will exercise
us with many adversities, and that we are subject to the common afflictions of
this present life: and that in the mean season it ought to suffice us, that
we shall be aided by him, and that we shall not be utterly forsaken. Seeing the
case so stands, let us not sleep when we be in prosperity, as though this
state were everlasting, so as nothing could change it. And therefore in
presuming so far, we step beyond our bounds. Why so? Our loving good Father
tells us, that we may peradventure suffer many adversities, but he will
help us continually.

Now then, in the mean while we shall fight, yea, and be assailed at all
assaies. And they that pass their bounds, shall be punished for their
ouerhardines: yea, the faithful may ever look for strokes, and yet never cease
to be quiet, to possess their souls in patience. How so? when we consider
the chaunges and turmoylings of this world, we must needs be careful, and
every one of us must prepare himself to receive blows, when it pleases God
to smite him. But yet herewithall we know, that in our falling we cannot but
light upon our feet, because we be held up by the hand of God: nor be utterly
oppressed, because he relieueth us. We see then, how we cannot be vexed with
exceeding great unquietness, and yet we may be sore grieved in our heaviness,
not to withdraw our selves from God, and to make none account of calling upon
him, but to have our recourse unto him. Ps. 25.5. Lead me forth in thy truth,
and teach me: Text.
for thou art the God of my salvation: in thee do I trust all the day.

2. Doct. It is the duty of us all, men and women, in our afflictions to pray
unto the Lord, that whatsoever shall come unto us by his permission and
appointment, that he would not suffer us to fall away from his will, or to be
drawn away, either through contumacy, or by any other wicked desire, but
rather by the truth of his holy word, he would stay us quieted under his holy
obedience. The Reason is, Our own experience does teach, that when as
adversities have darkened our senses, how hard a thing it is, in that darkness to
discern what we should follow and take in hand. And if this demonstration was
so necessary for David, so holy and worthy a Prophet, endewed with so excellent
a light of the knowledge of Gods word and holy will: what shall become of us,
unless the Lord drive away that great and palpable darkness which we have in
our afflictions, lest yt it darken the sight of his light? The Use. Let us
therefore always pray unto the Lord, so often as any temptation does trouble
us, that his truth may shine before us, lest we taking evil courses, run astray
from his will. Wherefore let us shut our eyes, when things go contrary to our
liking, and let us only settle our selves upon this point, to say, O Lord, thou
art righteous, and I will by the assistance of thy holy spirit, be contented
with thy righteousness, for so the truth of thy holy word teaches me, until you
make me to enter into thy sanctuary and there perceive why thou orderest the
state of mankind after ye sort. Truly if I should follow mine own fancy, as it
is in these mine afflictions, being daseled therewith, I should murmr; yea,
and repine against thee, to see how things are confounded here. O Lord, teach
me and instruct me with thy truth, that thou gouernest the whole world in
wisdom and righteousness; let me confess the same, although I know no reason
thereof.

Thou art the God of my salvation. Text.
The Reason is. It is not only his usual custom, but his nature so to do:
For, for this cause he undertakes the delivery of his servants, and
relieueth their necessities, that he might still continue his grace toward
them. Let us therefore know, that whom the Lord loves, he loves to the end.
So long as we know not whether the Lord loves us or no, we must needs fear,
and with Adam shun his presence, as much as is possible: So as you see, in what
case the wretched creatures are, which have no taste of Gods goodness to trust
in him, that they might comfort themselves. Therefore let us mark well, that
it behooves us to be persuaded of Gods love toward us, that thereby we may
conceive such trust, as we may present our selves unto him, and be well
assured, that our sovereign good is to answer him, that is, not to hide our
selves from his sight, but to be always willing to be guided by his hand, so
as we desire nothing, but to be under his hand, and at his direction. Psalm.
95.67.
Let us consider, that we are the works of his hands. For the thing wherein
we may settle our trust, that we be acceptable unto God, is, that he has
created us, and that we be his people, and the sheep of his pasture. Then must
we not pretend to be loved at Gods hand for any deserts of our own, but
because he sees that we are his workemanshippe, and his people and sheep.
Thus in Esaias and the Psalms. Psa. 131 8. Esaias. 64.8.
Lord, thou will not despise the work of thy hands, thou will not forsake that
which thou have begun, without finishing it. How be it, we must not look
only to our first creation; for the hope that we shall have thereby, will be
very sclender, because the Image of God by Adams sin, is, as it were, blotted
out in us. But for as much as God, of his infinite mercy has renewed us, and
in Jesus Christ our Lord has adopted us to be his children, and imprinted his
Image again in us: therein also chiefly we be his workmanship, and may
boldly with reverence call upon him, and assure our selves that he will not
shake us off, but that we shall be welcome to him. It follows: Text.
In thee do I trust all the day.

And because it is expedient, that our trust should be answerable to his
goodness therefore the Prophet says, that his hope was continually in him. 4.
Doct. The goodness of God toward us, must cause us continually to trust in
him. And this is the property of faith: among our greatest troubles to have
respect to GOD, to trust in him for our delivery, and not to seek sinister
means for it, and, as it were, with a still and calm quietness to rest our
selves in his promised help and assistaunce. Moreover, that the remembrance
of his benefits might the better feed and sustain our hope, let us learn to
call to mind his former benefits bestowed upon us. When we be heavy and
sorrowful, the only remembrance of Gods benefits must cheer us, or at the
leastwise assuage our miseries and griefs, so, as if any adversity pinch us,
and we bethink our selves of the great number of benefits that God has
bestowed upon us, the same must assway our sorrow. And seeing the case stands
so, no afflictions ought to make us to forget the knowledge which we have of
Gods benefits and graces: For whatsoever miseries we endure, yet ought we to
acknowledge for a great mercy of God, that we are made reasonable creatures,
that we bear the Image of God, that we are cherished and maintained, to the
end we may know God to be our Father. David says, Psalm. 22.10.
Lord, thou did draw me out of my mothers womb, thou have showed thy self
to be my GOD, before I could know thee or call upon thee. David did set this
before him, purposely to render thanks unto GOD, to trust in him, and to sing
unto his name in the midst of his sorrows; afterward he established
himself, in good hope for the time to come, not doubting but God regarded him
still with compassion, considering, that diverse times, yea, at all times
before, he had showed him so gracious and pitiful toward him. Let us lift up
our minds aloft to yield him his worthy praise: and moreover, let his
benefits serve for spurs unto us to trust in him, not doubting, but that he
will show himself the same hereafter, whom we have felt him heretofore.

Psalm. 25.6. Remember, O Lord, thy tender mercies, and thy loving kindness:
For they have been for ever. The 3. part of the second Sermon.

THe sense is: So many, great and grievous are mine afflictions, that thou
appearest to me, as though thou had utterly forgotten thy former tender
mercies, and loving kindness, which not only of long time, but for ever before
time have been. Wherefore, O Lord, I beseech thee of thy goodness remember
them, so that I may feel them, in delivering me from all my miseries which now
I suffer. Doct. Remember. When afflictions lie heavy on the shoulders of the
children of God, they cause them many times to think, that the Lord has
utterly forgotten them. The Reason is: For that no man's faith is so firm at
all times, Psalm. 77.
but in afflictions sometimes he shall have such motions, seeing that no man
has perfection of regeneration, nor at al times fullness of faith. The Use is,
to teach us to strive with our selves against this temptation, and assure our
selves, that although the Lord seems as though he were asleep, Math. 8.
yet he that keeps Israel, does neither slumber nor sleep. Esaias.
Although a mother should forget her own child, yet will the Lord never
forget those that are his.

Text.
Remember, O Lord, thy tender mercies and loving kindness. Doct. The godly
neither can, nor will look to escape destruction by any other means, then
only by the mercies of the Lord. The Reason is. 1. King. 20. Benhadad. 31.
Kings with their train.
Vain is the help of man, or any other means whatsoever. The Use is. First,
to fear and tremble, that we fall not into Gods displeasure, but to seek
especially for his mercy, esteeming it above our lives, or any earthly thing
that we can desire. 2. Use. To acknowledge, that it is of Gods mere mercy
and abundant kindness, that we live; and to praise him daily for it. Doct.
The tender mercies and loving kindness of the Lord are sufficient to deliver
his children from all the punishments that they can fall into. 1. Reason. They
are infinite, as his majesty is. 2. Reason. Else none should be saved, seeing
there is none other means of salvation. The Use is: First, to take away from
our minds the vain confidence in any creature; as Angels, men, horses, or any
other thing whatsoever. 2. Use. Confutation of Popery, which stands upon
works for deliverance (at the least) from the punishment of sin. Secondly,
it confirms us from despair, Heb. 6.19. Text.
seeing the Lords mercies are an anchor both sure and steadfast.

For they have been for ever.

Doct. Although by our afflictions which we suffer, God seems to forget us,
yet seeing he has showed mercy toward our selves and others, and that for
ever, before time, so must we still be persuaded, that he will never forsake
those that are his. The 1. Reason. For he is not as man is, that is,
changeable: but GOD is immutable. The 2. Reason. His gifts are without
Repentance. The Use is, to teach us, although the goodness of God lies, as it
were, buried, yet it is not extinguished; although it show not at self, but
seems, as it were covered in the ashes, yet in time it will show it self:
And therefore let us in all our miseries and afflictions beseech his majesty,
of his tender mercy, and immutable goodness, so to remember us, that we may
be delivered from all inconveniences, and promise and purpose amendment of our
lives, with further praises of his holy Name for his mercies.

The third Sermon upon the 25. Psalm, the 7, and 8. verses.
7 Remember not the sins of my youth, nor my rebellions, but according to thy
kindness remember me, even for thy goodness sake, O Lord.
The sense is.

O Lord my God, although mine enemies, maliciously and without cause, vex and
persecute me, yet I acknowledge, that both the sins which in my youth I have
committed against thee, as also the sins and rebellions, which ever since to
this day I have done against thy divine majesty, are the cause of this mine
affliction; which I humbly pray thee, of thy kindness and goodness sake to
forgive me; then shall I be delivered from this great misery and affliction:
for thou have promised to save all them that call upon thy name for the
remission of their sins.

Remember not the sins.

1. Doct. In vain do we pray to God, to be delivered from our afflictions,
except we pray for the remission of our sins, both of our youth and all other
afterward committed by us. The 1. Reason is. There is no hope for us to obtain
grace, except the Lord be merciful unto us: and how does he love us, except we
be first reconciled to him, and that by our Savior Christ Jesus, and our
confession and repentance of our sins? The Use is therefore, to teach us, in
all our afflictions to acknowledge our sins to GOD only, seeing he is
gracious and favorable to all his.

2. Doct. It is necessary for Gods people, in their prayers to God, to make
unto him only a free confession of their sins. Psalm. 32.5. Then I
acknowledged my sin unto thee, neither hid I mine iniquities: for I
thought, I will confess against my self my wickedness unto the Lord; and thou
forgauest the punishment of my sin. Selah. Dan. 9.5. We have sinned, and have
committed iniquity, and have done wickedly: yea, we have rebelled, and have
departed from thy precepts and from thy judgments. Nehem. 1.6. I pray thee,
let thine ears be attent, and thine eyes open, to hear the prayer of thy
servant, which I pray before thee day and night, for the children of Israel thy
servants, and confess the sins of the children of Israel, which we have
sinned against thee. The 1. Reason is: Else we obtain no forgiveness.
Secondly, Else we have no assurance that we have repented, seeing confession
does always accompany repentance. Thirdly, Otherwise we cannot rightly and
thoroughly condemn our selves, and clear the Lord for punishing us. Fourthly,
By the confession of our sins we are the more humbled, and the better
prepared to prayer. The Use is: First, to reprove all them that justify
themselves, like the proud Pharise, and offer up their own works, as the
Papists do. Secondly, to reprove them that will not bear sharp rebuke for
their sins, nor be contented to be censured by those means, that God has
prescribed by his word for the same purpose. Thirdly, it teaches us to love
them that admonish us often, and reprove us sharply when we have offended,
esteeming them our dearest friends, and avoiding them that flatter us; Leuit.
19.17. Thou shall not hate thy brother in thine heart, but thou shall plainly
rebuke thy neighbor, and suffer him not to sin. Math. 18.18. Whatsoever you
bind in earth, etc. seeing it is the means to bring us to this confession,
which is so necessary.

Text.
Remember not the transgressions of my youth, nor my rebellions.

3. Doct. True repentance works in us earnest and hearty prayer. The Reason
is. First, In it we see our miseries in our selves, and what need we have to
seek to GOD for help. Secondly, It assures us of Gods love to us, and
readiness to hear us. Thirdly, It encourages us to call on the name of the
Lord, who in our conversion has given us experience of his unspeakable
mercies. The Use is, to teach us, to be as diligent to perform this prayer
aright, as we are desirous to prove to our own hearts that our repentance is
unfeigned.

4. Doct. All our prayers are to be made to God alone. Psa. 50.15. Call upon
me, etc. Romans 10.14. How shall they call upon him, of whom they have not
heard? The 1. Reason. It is he only that can grant us our request. Secondly,
We are not commanded in the holy Scripture to call upon any other; and
therefore if we do, it is not of faith, and consequently it is sin. The Use
is: First, to reprove the dotage of the heathen, that prayed to the Sun,
Moon, and Stars; and of the Papists, that pray to Angels and Saints.
Secondly, to teach us to make all our prayers to GOD alone, in the name of his
Son Christ, for such things as he has promised in his word, and in such
manner as he has prescribed.

Nor my rebellions. Text.


5. Doct. It is rebellion against the Lord, to despise any of his laws,
although all humane laws should approve us therein. The 1. Reason. Reu. 19.16.
God is King of Kings, and will be served without exception. Secondly, Else God
should yield unto men. Thirdly, We are to obey men only in the Lord, and no
further. The Use is: First, to reprove rulers, that require obedience of their
subjects to all their own decrees, not regarding whether God be disobeyed
thereby or no. Secondly, to reprove them that pretend man's laws, to excuse
themselves in their sins: as in the breach of the Sabbath, contentedness
with the dumb Ministry, putting of money to usury. Thirdly, it teaches us
always to hold this both in judgment and practice: It is better to obey God,
then man, Act. 5.29.

6. Doct. It is our duty, so often as the Lord shall terrify us with his
judgments, not only to mourn, sigh, and lament, but to repent us, not only
for our former sins committed in our youth, but all other sins since, which
we can either call to mind, hidden, or unknown. The Reason is. The Lord may
lay them all to our charge. The Use is, that we never flatter or stroke our
selves in our vices, but narrowly prye into them; not into others as hypocrites
do, but into our own; not to epsy a moate in our brothers eye, to cloak our
hypocrisy; but to pull out of our own eyes, not only the beams, but even
the very moates therein.

But according to thy kindness remember me, even for thy goodness sake, Text.
O Lord.

7. Doct. The children of God expect remission of their sins from none, but
from the mercy of God only. The Reason. Sin provoke Gods anger, which is
infinite, and cannot be satisfied by any that is no more then a creature.
Secondly, The Scriptures make the Lords mercy the first part of our
righteousness. Psalm. 32.1. Blessed is he whose wickedness is forgiven, and
whose sin is covered. The Use is, To confute them, that think they have it
in their own freewil to be saved. Secondly, To confute them, that think to
obtain heaven by their merits. Thirdly, To reprove them that seek for the
Popes pardons and Indulgences, seeing it is the Lord, of his mere mercy, that
does pardon us our sins.

Psalm. 25.8. Gracious and righteous is the Lord, therefore will he teach
sinners in the way.
The sense is.

The 2. part of the 3. Sermon.
I Doubt not at all of the remission of my sins, neither yet hereafter to
lead an holy and innocent life, seeing I consider and weigh the great
goodness and gracious bounty of the living Lord, as also his righteousness in
performing his promises, which among others are, that he will pardon the sins
of the penitent, and direct the way of the ignorant that desire to lead an
holy and godly life. Gracious and righteous is the Lord, being no prayer, as
also the other two verses following, but a meditation between the prayer in
the verse before, and the verses next after them, we have to learn generally
this profitable doctrine.

1. Doct. It is the duty of all that pray to GOD, seeing the malice of Satan,
who seeks to make us quail in them, as also the weakness of our corrupt
nature for perseuering fervently and zealously in it, to use all the good means
that possibly we can, Simil. Even as fire had need of wood or the like matter
to maintain it: as a torch requires wax to continue it. Eue^ so meditation in
the mercy and righteousness of God, is necessary to stay our Zeal in Prayer.
but especially to meditate upon the goodness and righteousness of the Lord, in
keeping his loving promises, that thereby our prayers may be more zealous and
fervent.

The 1. Reason: Our experience teaches us, that it is an hard and difficult
matter, to hold on zealously therein.

The faithful perceive in themselves, except they be stirred up with new
pricks, that they shall languish in their Prayers; so corrupt is our nature,
so weak in good things, so malicious is our enemy Satan also, to cause, if
it be possible, our prayers not to be fervent. The use is: When we feel our
selves so weak in Prayer, that we begin to languish, that we presently
meditate on the goodness and righteousness of God: so shall we come the better
prepared to Prayer, as David was.

Gracious and righteous is the Lord, therefore he will teach sinners in the
way.

The 2. Doctrine. God teaches sinners in the way of godly life. 1. Reason. He
is gracious; for he has mercy on whom he will, Romans 9. 2. Reason. The Lord is
righteous: he keeps his promises. The use is, To teach us to acknowledge, yt
our regeneration, sanctification, repentance, mortification of the flesh,
vivification of the spirit, conversion, humility, love, patience, and all
other gifts, are not of our selves, but are proceeding from the goodness,
love, and mercy of God toward us.

2. Use: It confuteth the Papists distinction of Gratia operans, and
Cooperans. Gratia opera^s and coopera^s.
Bellarmine Cap. 2. thus does define and distinguish them. Gratia operans est,
quae facit vt velimus: that is, It is the working grace, which makes us to will
that which is good. Gratia cooperans, quae facit, vt quae voluerimus impleamus:
that is, Helping grace, or grace working together with us, is that, which
causes us to fulfill or do, that which we will or desire. This then is his
mind, that God only works the beginning of every good action, that is, the
consent of the will; but the acco^plishme^t of the action is not only of God,
but he works together with man. The Jesuit would illustrate his matter with
this similitude. As if it were expedient for a man to sail into the East
countries, and yet he is unwilling: his friend comes, and persuades with
him, and provides things needful for the nauigatio^, as money, victuals and
such like: though his friend may say, I only was the cause that he took this
navigations in hand, yet can he not say, that I only carried him to that place,
but helped him only. So (says he) God only works the beginning of any
actio^, by persuading the will, but he is helping only and assistant to man in
the finishing thereof, Lib. 1. de gratia, cap. 14. 1. Reason. This similitude
is very insufficient, and the things here compared together, are altogether
unlike: for what presumption is it, to match the works of man, with the power
of God? First, man draws only by persuasion, he has no power over another
heart: but God is greater then our heart: he does not only apply persuasion
unto it, but bends and turns it, as August. de correptione and gratia, cap.
14. Deus magis habet in potestate hominum voluntates, quam ipsi, suas. GOD has
greater power over the wills of men, then they have themselves. Secondly, all
the helps that man provides or ministers for any action, are external. But
God is aiding, and assisting every where by his power, and works mightily in
the inward man. We see then the insufficie^cy of this similitude. Secondly,
although it were a meet and fit comparison, yet we know that similitudes prove
not; no more does this: it needs not therefore any large confutation.

Gratia opera^s et coopera^s vel adinuans.
This Distinction of Grace, that it should be sometimes the principal, chief,
and only working cause in man, and another while, but aiding, and assisting
only, and that man should be joined with God as a fellow worker in any good
action, is a blasphemous doctrine. That the will of man works together with
Grace, as it is Causa phisica, a natural cause of such actions as are wrought
by man, not respecting the quality and goodness of them, but the work only,
we deny not: but the grace of God only is Causa moralis, the moral cause of
every good action. As they are but actions and operations, so they proceed from
the will of man: but as they are good or comme^dable, so they are the works of
God. God works the will and the deed, Phil. 2.13. As he works the will, so
also he works the deed. The will God only works. Ergo: Again, 1. Cor.
15.28.
That God may be all in all. But God should not be al in all in every action,
if man should be joined as a fellow worker. S. James says, Iam. 1.17.
Every good and perfect gift is from above. Ergo, no good gift nor work is
from below, that is, of man, either in part, or in whole. Our Savior Christ
says, Without me you can do nothing. Of which words Augustine writes thus.
Non ait, August. co^tra Epistolam Pelagii lib. 2. cap. 8.
Sine me difficile potestis facere: aut, Sine me nihil potestis efficere: sed,
Ne facere quidem. He says not, Without me you can hardly do any thing: or,
Without me you cannot finish any thing. But, You are not able to do it at all.
But if so that in any good actio^ God should work part and man part, then
might man work somewhat, yt is, his part without Gods help. As, if God do but
help to work, what is that else, but to give power more easily only to work?
As though man without that help, although more hardly of himself might do it.
But all this is contrary to that doctrine of our Savior, Without me you can do
nothing.

The fourth Sermon upon the 25. Psalm, the 9. and 10. verses.
9 Them that be meek, will he guide in Judgment, and teach the humble his
ways.
The sense is.

THey that are truly humbled in themselves, and repose their whole trust and
confidence in the Lord, they shall taste and feel, how gracious a father he is
to his children. Therefore Judgment and way, signify none other thing, then
the government, whereby he shows himself as an excellent good father to his
children.

The 1. Doct. The poor in Spirit only are directed by the Lord, to have a
right judgment in all things that concern the glory of God, and the salvation
of their souls. The Reason is. God resists ye proud, 1. Pet. 5.5.
and such as are wise in their own conceit. Deck your selves inwardly in
lowliness of mind: for God resists the proud, and gives grace to the
humble. Math. 13.11. And he answered and said, Because it is given to you, to
know the secrets of the kingdom of God. The use is: That we pray to God, to
give us his spirit of judgment of the works of the Lord. And first of his
word. Let us consider how gracious the Lord is to them that are meek: to them
he will open his judgments, which to the proud are secret and unknown, as
to the Papists and many others. A foolishnes of self estimation, of
self-weening of our selves yt we are of some value, is so rooted in man,
possessed with ye spirit of pride, that it is very hard to bring the^, even us
regenerate, to a right understanding of our own wa^ts, so as we might be
clear from all pride and presumption. Concerning the doctrine of Election and
Reprobation. Whereas the Apostle knew, that flesh and blood would dispute, Why
should God elect some, and refuse other some? Romans 9.20. he answers, But O
man, what art thou which pleadest against God? Shall the thing formed, say to
him that formed it, Why have thou made me thus? verse. 21. Has not the potter
power of the clay, to make of the same lu^pe, one vessel to honor, and
another to dishonor? And this he sets down, after that he had alleged the
objections, wherein men think themselves to have a fair color to dispute
against God, and to demand, why he should destroy those whom he has created,
and why he should put difference between one and another, without knowing any
causes, so that the one should be loved, the other refused? Therefore whensoever
any such temptation has taken hold on us, let us pray unto GOD, to make us
lowly and poor in Spirit: then shall we have a right judgment of his secret
mysteries and wonderful works. When we treat of Gods word, every man almost
falls to it at adventure, and every one shootes out his verdit, as though
they reasoned but of moonshine in the water; so irreverently we speak
thereof. The things therein contained, be such as pass all man's understanding:
and yet notwithstanding it is manifest, that some are bold to treat of Gods
high mysteries without reverence; which ought to ravish our wits to wonder at
them; which with all fear and trembling we ought to honor. I say, we are
bolder to babble of them, then if a man spoke of a matter but of 5. shillings
value, or of some trifle, I know not what. And what is the cause thereof? but
that men have not considered, how God hides and ouercasteth his own secret
determinatio^s, and has in his holy Scriptures uttered unto us his will,
whereunto it behooves us to be subject. We see on ye one side how the Papists
blaspheme God, wresting, falsifying, marring, and corrupting the whole holy
Scripture, so that they spare not to scorn God and his word. And why: They
never knew what it is, to have a right judgment in Gods will and word, they
are possessed with the spirit of pride: the spirit of sound judgment is far
from the^; they scorn at our answer, when to their demand, Who shall judge of
the true meaning and sense of the Scriptures, we say, The holy spirit shall, and
does lead not only the whole Church, but every particular and singular member
of the Church, into all truth. Campianan ratione Sophismat. Also there are
drunkards, which could find in their hearts to subdue God in their fantastical
mind. If they were the wisest men in the world, and the best seen in the holy
Scriptures, yet shall they be feign to stowpe to this point, that Gods purposes
are above our reach. But they are utterly dull, and brutish; there is neither
skill nor reason in them; the wine ouer-mastereth the^; they are worse then
swine, and yet will needs be Divines, and will control things in such sort,
that if a man should now believe them, he should be driven to forge and frame a
new Gospel. Let us always know, that whenever we speak of God, of his
works, or of his word, they are high matters. On ye other side, what is it,
that we ca^ bring forth of our selves, except we be truly humbled? what is
that little that we can conceive in our understanding? Even words without
knowledge. Let men put themselves into the balance, and they shall be found
lighter then vanity it self, as it is said in the Psalm. Psalm. 62.10.
So much the more it behooves us to mark this doctrine, that there is neither
skill, aptness, nor judgment in us, to entreat of Gods works or his word,
except he vouchsafe by his blessed Spirit to direct us.

Let us therefore pray unto his divine Majesty, to vouchsafe, of his
unspeakable mercy and goodness, to power down his holy Spirit into our
hearts, that whereas by the fall of our first parents, our Judgments
concerning Gods mysteries, his works and word, are corrupted, and therefore
have need of direction, that by the same Spirit of truth and judgment, we
may be led into all truth and judgment; so shall we judge according to his
holy will.

Let us also mislike our selves, to the end we may resort unto him, to find
the goodness there, which wants in our selves; that thereupon it may please
him so to govern us by his holy Spirit, that being replenished with his
glory, we may have wherewith to glory, not in our selves, but only in him.

And teach the humble his way. Text.


2. Doct. The Lord will surely teach ye humble the way of his gracious favor.
The Reason is: Unto him that has, it shall be given by him. As the Lord has
given him humility, which is a spiritual gift and grace, bestowed upon the
elect only, whom he especially loves, as a father, Psalm. 103. much more will
he cause him to taste of his providence, which extends it self in respect of
sustentatio^, not only to the wicked, but to every living creature, be it
never so base.

The Use is: That we magnify the glorious name of our good and gracious
Father, who so mercifully causes us the children of wrath, to become his
children by adoption, and assures us without all doubting, of the continuance
of his favor toward us.

This doctrine of Gods favor toward the humble his children, is comfortable
to our conscience, and therefore the longer to be urged and taught. Every man
naturally seeks to comfort himself: some by voluptuousness, some by worldly
wealth, some by honors and reputations among men, which all are vain. We see
after what sort men comfort themselves: namely, by forgetting God. For it
seems to them, to be a melancholy matter to think upon him. And in sooth, how
many are there that will say stoutly enough, We are good Christians? and yet
notwithstanding, when they entend to be merry, they drive away all thought of
God and eternal life, and not only so, but also offend God of set purpose.
After what manner? They cannot be merry, dut in doing evil. Seeing then that the
nature of men is such, and that we be attainted with that disease, let us
look well to our selves, and be sure that our mirth shall not be blessed from
above, except we be assured of the remission of our sins. Therefore if we have
Gods favor, and pray to him, therein consists true gladness, which is
approved of God, is eternal, and will bring us to everlasting salvation. But so
long as we know not in what case we are in with our God, nor seek to be
reconciled to him, but lie rowting still in our own filthiness, the more we
desire to be merry, the more we kindle Gods vengeance against us, the more we
increase still the fire of his wrath, and we plunge our selves the deeper into
his bottomless pittes. We see then, that it is more the^ needful, that it
should be showed us, how much it stands us in hand, to be well assured of
Gods mercifulness toward us. And that also is the cause why the holy
Scripture, when it treats of giving joy and comfort to us, does always set
before us the favor of God. Isa. 49.13. Rejoice, O heavens, and be joyful, O
earth, brast forth into praise, O mountains: for God has comforted his
people, and will have mercy upon his afflicted. Isa. 44.23. Rejoice, ye
heavens: for the Lord has done it: showte, ye lower parts of the earth, brast
forth into praises, ye mountains, O forest, and every tree therein: for the
Lord has redeemed Iaakob, and will be glorified in Israel. Isa. 52.1. Arise,
arise, put on thy strength, O Sion, put on the garments of thy beauty, O
Jerusalem the holy one: for he^ceforth there shall no more come into thee the
uncircumcised and the unclean. Isa. 60.1.2 3. etc. thoroughout Luc. 2.10, 11.
to the end of the Chapt. Zach. 9.9. Rejoice greatly, O daughter Sio^: showt
for joy, O daughter Jerusalem: behold, thy King comes to thee, he is just,
and saves himself, poor, and riding on an Ass, and upon a colt, the foale
of an Ass.

Hereby we are taught, that we must needs be in trouble and unquietness, so long
as we know not whether we be in Gods favor. True it is, that the wicked will
seek means enough to make themselves merry, they ruffle it out, you see, in
despising God: but howsoever the world go with them, yet he sends them such
prickings, and torments of minds, so as they be grievously distressed; and if
they dau^ce, it is as Moses says, namely, that yet nevertheless sin lies at
the door: that is, tormenteth their consciences, and there waits for them
like a dog that waits for his master.

Ye see then, that the wicked may ruffle it out, but yet can they not go out
of their doors without gnawing of their consciences, and GOD must still hold
them at that bay.

Therefore so much the more ought we to think upon this doctrine, that we
turn not our back unto God, nor bury our sins when we would have peace,
but that we always have some promise of GOD to comfort us. And when we see
that GOD allureth us to salvation, let us be glad thereof: for then shall our
gladness be blessed. And if we have the taste, that GOD is our loving Father,
it will sweeten, yea, it will sanctify all our joys: but without it we must
needs quayle, and there is no other means for us truly and in deed to
rejoice: Mark this. Also let us consider, that the only grace of God ought to
suffice us, although we have never so many sorrows mixed with it, according as
God will exercise us. For he in this our frail life will not send us full joy,
so as we may laugh with open mouth, as they say: yet not withstanding, it
behooves us to rejoice in this certainty, that we have him to our good and
loving father, and that we shall find mercy with him. Then, if we have this
grace to call upon God, and can assure our selves that the gate is open to us,
and that we in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ shall have access unto him: I
say, if we can have that boldness (not through our own, rashness, but that
he has vouchsafed to open his holy mouth to witness his love to us, which
thing he does, when to us his holy Gospel is preached) then notwithstanding,
that many and infinite were our temptations and afflictions, yet he will
comfort us, and she we himself as a kind, comfortable, and loving father unto
us.

Psalm. 25.10. All the paths of the Lord are mercy and truth, unto such as
keep his covenant and his testimonies. The 2. part of the 4. Sermon.

The sense is.

THe faithful, the children of GOD, which only keep his covenant and
testimonies, shall surely taste and feel in this life, and in that to come,
both his eternal and sweet mercy, and his perpetual and constant truth of
his promises.

1. Doct. They only which remain in, and observe the covenants and
testimonies of God, shall taste and feel, that all the paths of the Lord are
mercy and truth to them. The Reason is, God has so promised. Psalm. 50.23. To
him that disposes his way, will I show the salvation of God. That we never can
assure our selves of Gods mercy and his promises of favor, except we endeavor
to keep his covenant and testimonies, which his law contains, consisting of
two tables: The first, concerning our duty toward GOD immediately, which I
have oftentimes heretofore handled: and the second concerning our neighbors.
And that I may the better comfort you with assurance of Gods mercy and truth,
which GOD grants to none, but to them that lead a godly and charitable
life; and that except you do good works, you cannot assure your selves of
Gods mercy; I purpose the rather to insist upon this necessary use of the
doctrine, that I might thereby exhort you to good works, that you may feel
the favor and goodness of GOD thereby toward you.

Our Savior Christ in the 25. of S. Math, sets down a Catalogue of good
works, among which he accompteth, To feed the hungry, To give drink to the
thirsty, To cloth the naked, To visit the sick and prisoners, To lodge the
barbourlesse, Genesis 18.1, 2, 3.
To entertain strangers and waifaring men, not the least. This did good
Abraham well understand and practice, who sat in his tent door in the heat of
the day, of purpose to inuit and call in strangers and wayfaring men, to
relieve them. And therefore when the Angels came to him in the form of men, he
is noted by the holy Ghost, to have entreated them, yea, to have (as it were)
compelled them to eat meat in his house. Good Lot followed his steps, waiting
in his doors or gates, to harbor poor strangers: and therefore when the
Angels came into Sodom, Genesis 19.1, 2, 3.
like strangers and pilgrims, he compelled them in some sort, to enter into
his house, and to take such lodging and entertainment, as his state was able to
afforde. And hereby some (as the Apostle notes) have received Angels into
their houses unawares. Heb. 13.1.
But nowadayes there are many, that are so far off from this liberality,
that they will shut up their gates, even in this great time of scarcity. The
like has not (as I suppose) of so long continuance been in this Realm of
England in many ages, when many hundreds are ready through want of food (a
lamentable case to be considered) which for our sins, for which GOD is so
highly displeased with this land (especially, our contempt of the holy
Religion, the breach of the Sabbath, the blaspheming of the holy name of God,
uncharitableness, with infinite more) the Lord does inflict upon them and us, in
the time of refection. And which is more detestable, so hard are the hearts of
many, that they have not only not relieved them, but rated them. Is that the
worst? No. They have, which will make a good heart even to melt, and as the
Prophet Jeremy says, Lam. 2.
his eyes fail with tears, his bowels swell, his liver to be powered forth
upon the earth, to think of their cruelty, even to whip them away from their
gates. Again, other some of great revenues, because they will not keep
hospitality, nor relieve the poor at home, they give up house, and either
soiourne and table with some friends, or else take a chamber in some City or
Town, where they will keep no house at all, but with a man and a boy, and
that seldom, live both meanly, basely, and obscurely, to the blemishing and
slayning of their credit and worship for ever. Even they, whose lands and
possessions are worth peradventure five hundred pound, yea, it may be, a
thousand pound yearly, whose parents and ancestors kept twenty or forty men
(I allow not of Idleness, but I commend maintaining them) in a Liuerie,
maintained great hospitality, to the great relief of all the poor Country
about them, even they (I say) do so. And yet will al their revenues scarce
serve to maintain their small port withal, notwithstanding that they so rack
their lands, raise their rents, and exact such fines and incomes, as they make
two fold so much more of their livings now, as their forefathers did in times
past.

Now it may profitably be demanded, how they, carrying so low a sail, can
spend so great revenues, which before times maintained so many score, and
relieved so many thousands of poor? I answer first, Gods curse is upon all
they have: and then, how can it be otherwise? Secondly, they spend it for the
most part either in sumptuous apparel, gorgeous buildings (both which are too
rife at this day in England) or else in feasting and banqueting, in ryoting and
gurmandizing, besides other chamber-workes, which I blush to name. For as the
Apostle says, It is a shame once to name those things, which are done of them
in secret. God turn their hearts, and give them grace to contain themselves
within themselves, to maintain hospitality, for the relief of the poor, and
to uphold that port, worship, and credit, which their forefathers did. Our
Savior Christ says, Mat. 10.42. That a cup of cold water given in his name,
shall not be left unrewarded. And the Apostle Paul calls it, Phil. 4.18.
an Odor that smells sweet, a sacrifice acceptable, and pleasant to God.
Alas, consider wherefore did God give you such great store of riches, and large
possessions in this life, above your brethren; was it not, to do good with
them, and to help them that have need? Know you, they were not lent you to
spend in riot and excess, in pride, or gluttony, drunkenness or chambering,
no, nor in hawking, nor hunting, nor in any such kind of vanity. No, No: it
will not at the great day of account, the day of judgment, go for payment,
when it shall be said, Luke 16.
Give an account of thy stewardship: for thou must no longer be steward. I
counsel you therefore, to learn of ye unjust steward, to make you friends of ye
wicked Mammon. And to bend my speech to all generally, I counsel you to study,
to be more careful in relieuing the poor distressed members of Jesus Christ,
every one, according to that portion which the Lord has bestowed upon you,
that so you may be counted ye Lords faithful stewards, meet to inherit that
kingdom, which ye Lord has purchased for all them that walk in his paths,
and keep his covenant and testimonies.

verse 10. All the paths of the Lord, are mercy and truth, to them that keep
his covenant and his testimonies. Text.

The Exposition.

By paths in this place, the Prophet understands the whole regiment of God,
wherewith he rules all things that he has created.

The sense is: Whatsoever the Lord does toward them that keep his covenant
and testimonies, whether it be that he afflict them, or whether he suffer them
to fall into sin, he thereby shows mercy, and keeps ye truth of his promise
toward them. Temptations, wherewith Satan assaulteth us, are not ye least
afflictions, which God, as with a salve does eure our souls with. When God
gives him power to wound the children of GOD, he permits it to humble them;
to the end, that when they be so grievously tormented, and do yet still resist
the assaults that are made upon them, they should understand, Simil.
that that comes not of themselves, but that they be vpheld otherwise, that
is to wit, by the grace of GOD, and by the power of his holy spirit.

To this purpose it is, that the Apostle Paul in the 8. Chapter to the Romans 28.
verse says, Also we know, that al things work for the best unto them that
love God, even to them that are called of his purpose.

So then, when God gives Satan leave to tempt the faithful, ordinarily it is
to serve the^ as it were with a Even as an wholesome medicine, although biting
and grievous to the flesh, does cure the diseases of the body: even so
temptations of Gods children do cure their souls.
medicine. And herein we see the unspeakable and wonderful mercy and
goodness of our gracious God, in turning evil into good. For what can Satan
and sin bring, but rank poison and venim? Yea, he has nothing but death:
for he is called the Prince of death. So then, whatsoever Satan can effect, it
turns altogether to man's destruction, and to the drowning of them in endless
damnation. And yet notwithstanding, God finds means, whereby the evil that
is in Satan and in our selves, are turned to our good. And here we see, how S.
Paul was cured, as it were, Heb. 2.14.
with a medicine, as he himself confesses, after he had spoken of those high
Revelations which God gave him. 2. Cor. 12.1. 2. Co. 12 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8,
9.
It is not expedient for me, no doubt, to rejoice: for I will come to visions
and revelations of the Lord. ver. 2. I know a man in Christ; above fourteen
years agone, (whether he were in the both, I cannot tell, or out of the
body, I cannot tell, God knows) which was taken up into the third heaven.
ver. 3. And I know such a man, whether in the body, or out of the body, I
cannot tell, God knows, ver. 4. How that he was taken up into Paradise, and
heard words which cannot be spoken, which are not possible for man to utter.
ver. 5. Or such a man will I rejoice, of my self will I not rejoice, except it
be of mine infirmities. ver. 6. For though I would rejoice, I should not be a
fool, For I will say the truth, but I refrain, lest any man should think of
me above that he sees in me, or that he hears of me, etc. to the end of
the ninth verse. God has provided for me, that I should not exalt my self too
much. Lo here a good preuision, and very profitable for him. For we know that
pride is ready to throw us headlong into hell, and there is nothing that more
provoke Gods displeasure, then it: For he must of necessity show himself
an enemy to the proud, and to such as presume above their own strength,
after what manner so ever it be. And S. Paul was in the same danger, if God
had not remedied it. In what sort did he it? It was (says Paul) by sending me
the messenger of Satan to buffet me.

See how Satan works in S. Paul, eue^ by Gods permission. And what was the
issue? Questionless, he meant utterly to have overwhelmed him, and his intent
was to have drawn him into wickedness, to the end that he would have him
have given over the service of God, and by little and little to have withdrawn
himself from Christianity, by reason of the wearisome miseries and troubles,
which he endured without ceasing.

Behold here Satan's purpose. Notwithstanding this, God purposed another end
to bind his dear servant, that he should not forget himself, and so exalt
himself to the great displeasure of God. For this cause he was buffetted. The
Apostle does purposely choose the phrase of buffetting. God used him not as a
man of arms that fights in the field, to give him a glorious victory; but
buffetted him like a boy, to his shame and reproach. Thus the holy Apostle,
whom God had endued with so excellent gifts of the holy Ghost, was so far
made an underling to Satan, that he (as it were) spit in his face, and wrought
him many other villainies.

We see then, how God turns the evil into good, when he makes all Satan's
stings to serve us as medicines, whereby he purges us of the vices that Satan
hid in us. And therefore we have cause to praise God in all respects, yea, eue^
although at the first sight, his judgment seems to our imaginations
ouer-boysterous, and that by our fleshly understanding we cannot understand
them. When we have well considered all these and many more of these his
mercies, we shall ever have wherewith to glorify and magnify our good God and
father.

To be yet better confirmed in this truth, let us consider how afflictions
serve for our profit and salvation. First, for as much as the relics of sin
abide still, even in the perfectest in this life, which makes them hardened in
their sins, Fruit to awake us out of our sins. Romans 12.1.
and inclined to offend GOD, we have need of helps to be awaked, to be
humbled, and drawn from our sins, to keep us in the time to come, and so to
dispose us to a perfect obedience, holy and acceptable to God. And to this end
tend the afflictions of them, which keep the covenant and testimonies of God,
his dear children; which for this cause are called chasticements, corrections,
and medicines of our selves. Joseph's brethren. Genesis 42, 21.
The children of Jacob, having committed a detestable crime, in selling their
brother Joseph, never thought of it, until they being in Egypt, oppressed with
reproaches and imprisonment, called to mind their sin, saying one to another,
Surely we have sinned against our brother: for we saw the anguish of his
soul, when he besought us, and we would not hear him, therefore is this
trouble come to us.

Manasses king of Judah, Manasses
having set up Idolatry, persecuted those that would have purely served the
Lord, 2. Chro. 33.
so that Jerusalem was full of blood: and having shut his ears to the
admonitions of the Lord, in the end was taken by the army of the king of the
Assyrians, bound with manacles, fettered in chains, and carried prisoner into
Babylon. Then being in afflictions, he was exceedingly humbled before God, he
prayed to the Lord, and was heard, and carried back unto Jerusalem.

The fifth Sermon upon the 25. Psalm, the 11, and 12. verses.
11 For thy name sake, O Lord, be merciful to mine iniquity: for it is great.
THis is a prayer of the holy Prophet and king, David, after his holy
meditation of the unspeakable mercy and eternal truth of God, in keeping his
promises to them that truly worship him, and obey his holy laws. Two special
branches it contains. The first, an earnest and zealous prayer to GOD, for
his name sake, not for his merits, to pardon his sin. Secondly, is a deep
search of them, without soothing, excusing, or hiding them. Text.
For it is great. The form that the Prophet observes in joining this prayer,
to his former meditation of the mercy and truth of GOD toward them that obey
him, is this: When he had thoroughly meditated with himself, that God was good
and gracious toward his servants, he considered himself, acknowledging, that
except the Lord, of his great mercy would pardon his great and grievous
sins, he should be none of them. Therefore he prays (as the like he did at
another time before, when he spoke of the reward which God lays up for the
faithful that keep his holy Law, Psalm. 19.10. Psalm. 19.10, 11, 12.
And more to be desired (meaning the holy laws of God) the^ gold, yea, then
much fine gold, sweeter also then the honey, and the honey co^be. verse 11.
Moreover by them is thy servant made circumspect, and in keeping of the^ there
is great reward. verse. 12. Who can understand his faults cleanse me from my
secret faults.) that GOD for his name sake would pardon him.

The sense is briefly this: My sins, O Lord, as a great burden, sore
oppress me; for whose sake (except thou pardon them of thy mercy) I am
excluded from being in the number of them, that keeping thy covenant and
Testimonies, receive thy great mercies and true promises. Therefore, O Lord,
seeing I see how far I am from keeping the same, by heaping up daily and
howrely so many and grievous sins, I humbly, even for thy glorious name, and
not for my deserts sake, beseech thee to pardon and forgive them all; so shall
all thy paths, be mercy and truth to me.

1. Doctrine. Whosoever desires, that all things that the Lord does to his
Church, proceeding of his mercy and truth, should turn to his good, that he
may be not only a member of it, but also with it to be partaker of his
mercies, must fervently, zealously, and earnestly pray unto God, that for his
names sake, he would vouchsafe to pardon him al his sins.

The 1. Reason is. Except our sins be pardoned (which without our prayer to
GOD shall never be) all that the Lord does to us, shall (even our meat,
drink, hearing the holy word, receiving the holy Sacraments, temptations,
afflictions, prosperities, and what else soever we receive from his hand)
redound from him, not of his mercy, and so he a blessing, but from his wrath,
and so be a curse against us.

The use thereof is: First, let us strive against that temptation, which
persuades us to cease praying to God for remission of our sins. Satan our
adversary tempts us on the right hand, and on the left, that is, by adversity
and prosperity: By adversity to distrust in God, as he tempted our Savior when
he was hungry, to diffidence and distrust in the providence of God: when he
perceived that by adversity he could not prevail to overcome him, he tempts
him by his confidence: Math. 4. Luke 4.
That seeing he trusted in Gods protection, that therefore, if he cast
himself down from the pinnacle of the Temple, he should be protected of the
Lord, by the ministry of his holy Angels. Lo, we see, that by his confidence
he would have him to tempt God: Even so he tempts us: if he perceive that we
have no faith, he will persuade, not to pray for it: if he see that we are
persuaded that the Lord loves us, he will persuade us, that we need not pray
to him for that which we already have: for although we are in our consciences,
to the great comfort thereof in all afflictions, persuaded, that the Lord
loves us, yet notwithstanding, we must continually pray to his majesty for the
fame, and the forgiveness of our sins: else we keep not his testimonies, and
so by consequence, it is but a vain persuasion that we have, that God
favors us, which may proceed from an opinion thereof only, which the
infidels may have: but as for a true faith, they only that have the Spirit of
Prayer, and exercise the same, have it; and so by consequence, they only shall
receive remission of their sins. Let us therefore resist this temptation. Let
us use this holy exercise: for thereby we both increase in godliness, and all
things that the Lord does to us, even temptations and afflictions shall redound
to our good, and from the Lords mercy.

Text.
For thy names sake be merciful to my sins.

2. Doct. We must be persuaded, that God, when he forgiueth sins, does for
his own sake, and not for any other cause whatsoever, pardon the same. The
reason is: He is good and gracious of himself.

The use is: That we acknowledge, that there is none other name given under
heaven, whereby we are saved, that our sins are forgiven us, without the
which there is no salvation, but only the name of our Lord Jesus: none other
means, none ability, power, authority in any, neither in man or Angel, but
in the Lord only. Similit. Even as an horseman, holding the reins of his
horse, guides him as he will: eue^ so the Lord holds us, to guide us at his
pleasure, either not to pardon, or to forgive us our sins. Act. 10.
God holds the reins in his hands, to guide men at his pleasure: and if it
please him to punish our sins, we have nothing to reply why he should not
condemn us: and if it please him of his great mercy wholly to pardon us, who
shall resist him? who shall let him to show us favor? True it is, that this is
strange to man's understanding at the first sight. For seeing that God accepts
not the persons of men, we ask, wherefore he forgiueth some, and forgiueth not
othersome? wherefore tolerateth he ye wicked, seeing him so disorderly? Then may
we trouble our heads, to be curious to know, wherefore does the lord so deal?
But what co^clusio^ must we make? Eue^ only to refer al things to his wisdom
and purpose, knowing yt it is not in us to rule him, and we cannot comprehend
those things that are above our reach. And if it please God to forgive us, let
us understand, that it is not for our deserts, but of his free mercy, through
Jesus Christ only. And this must be well marked, because the matter that I
have already spoken of, coming naturally into men's imaginations, has been
the cause, that false and wicked doctrines have ouerflowed in Christendom.

Psalm. 25.12. What man is he that fears the Lord? Him will he teach the way
that he shall choose. The 2. part of the fifth Sermon.

12. What man, etc. The sense is.

ALthough we know not of our selves what is right, acceptable, and pleasant to
the Almighty; and what we might to Gods approving, and our own profiting
elect and choose; so that we fear the Lord, in suffering our selves to be
directed by him to a godly life, we shall always find him a sure and holy
guide unto us.

1. Doct. Whosoever does fear the Lord, shall by his holy Spirit be directed how
to frame his life. The reason is: Job 1.1.
Job by fearing God, is said to eschew evil, was an upright man, and a just
man.

The use is: That we pray fervently unto the Lord our God, to give us his holy
Spirit, that we thereby may lead our lives in holiness and righteousness
before him all the days of our life. Luke 1.
The fear of GOD is not a slavish fear, Romans 8.
but filial, yea, it is a reverence and an honor which we owe and perform
unto the Lord our God, seeing he is our good and gracious God, merciful
master, and loving father. Have we then the fear of God before our eyes? Then
without all doubt, all other things we esteem not in comparion of doing him
homage, service and honor, and then we will wholly addict our selves to his
service. It also comprehends the knowledge of our good God. Do we know him?
Then we do it in such manner as he has uttered, and made himself to be
known, and not otherwise: that is, that he is our maker, our maintainer, and
one that has showed such fatherly goodness toward us, that we of duty
ought to be obedient children toward him, if we will not be utterly
unthankful. The true fear of God also comprehends an acknowledging of his
sovereignty, rule, dominion, and superiority over us, to the end that every
one of us yielding him his due honor, may learn to please him in all things.
Thus ye see, that under this fear of GOD, is comprehended all Religion, all
the service and honor which man a creature, owes to GOD the Creator. There
are also here, you see, two things to be considered: the fear of the Lord,
and an holy life. He whom GOD blesses with the one, shall by his holy Spirit
be directed to the other. Both which are the gracious gift of GOD, which he
gives to none, but to them that are his. The means for the attainment both of
the one and the other, is Prayer to our God; and all these go together: for
when by reason of our sins we are turned aside from the fear of GOD and
holy life, and from praying unto his divine Majesty, all our wisdom is but
folly, all our shows of godliness are but hypocrisy, all our knowledge is
but ignorance, all are but a wind to make us break, painted sepulchers, full
of dead men's bones, fair without, but foul within.

Again, Fear imports as much, as that our life must be ruled according to
the will of God. For what becomes of me^, when they know not, acknowledge
not, yea, are not subject, and obedient to the Lord their Maker? They like wild
Colts, brute beasts, and untamed heyfers, rush forth: and as the Prophet
Hosea says, like a great river, Hoshea 4.
which before has been stayed and dammed up, the sluices set open, and the
da^me pulled down, breaks forth into all lewdnes, abomination, and wickedness.
We know or should know, what our lusts are, how untamed and unruly they are.
Therefore if the fear of God reign in us, we must, and will acknowledge, that
the Lord has not set and placed us in ye world, to live as we list, but
reserueth his whole interest, title and right over us, and he expects
obedience at our hands. Again Fear imports, that God requires of us, to
learn to direct our whole life to his will. It has pleased him of his great
mercy and unspeakable goodness, to give us his whole laws and holy word, whereby
as a scholmaster teaches his scholar, and as by the stern the master of the
ship guides it: even so by the same he directs, guides and teaches us
what to do, what to leave undone, how to discern between that which is good,
and that which is evil: Then we must here begin. Solomon says, The fear of
the Lord is the beginning of knowledge, Prou. 1.7. Yet notwithstanding, nothing
can further us in the fear of God, but only the guiding, governance and
direction of Gods holy Spirit. For is there any goodness in the holiest and
vprightest of us all? Are we given to any thing, but to all evil and
wickedness? And if we lay Gods law, to men's lives, we shall soon see as great
a deadly battle between them, as between fire and water, yea even our whole
nature; and that there is nothing more contrary to the righteousness of God,
then the affections of our flesh. For as the Apostle S. Paul in the 8. to the
Romans verse. 7. They are, he says not, enemies, but enmity to God. Seeing it is
so, let us pray unto the Almighty: and forasmuch as we are wholly given unto
wickedness, and are altogether carried away unto evil, let us zealously and
earnestly beseech the Lord our God, to lay his holy hand upon us, to direct and
guide us, to vouchsafe us his holy and blessed spirit to rule and govern us
in such wise, as we may freely and with single hearts lead an holy and godly
life, cleave unto his righteousness, be obedient unto his holy precepts, and
that of his loving kindness, he will not suffer the temptations of Satan, to
turn us away from doing good: that it would please him of his goodness to
forgive us our sins, and be always merciful and loving toward us.

Prayer ought to be joined with the fear of God, that by his blessed Spirit
we might be guided in the way that we should choose. For it suffices us not to
be taught what we should do, what God requires at our hands, and what is our
duty, but we must repair to him; let us have our whole recourse to him, let
us seek of him those things that we want; for he has all things in store for
his children: and being sick in our souls, let us run to him our careful
and loving Physician. This is a profitable Doctrine, and therefore I purpose
the longer to insist hereupon, knowing that this being well learned, we have
profited well in one forenoone in the School of Christ. You come oftentimes to
the Sermons: what profits that, if we have not the fear of the Lord (whereof
many are far from) and live not a godly life, and pray not to him to guide us
by his holy spirit? We do but wa^der, if we bring not these things, and hear
not diligently: for wherefore is our coming and resorting hither? To know our
duty, what the Lord requires at our hands, how we ought to walk, differing
from them yt are more like beasts than men. God allows nothing, but obedience
to his laws. For all the devices of men's brains are mere vanities, and
stark folly. Mark how ye papists torment themselves what gain they by their
fond devices? For all their doings are but their own devices; the law of the
Lord is, as though it were buried among them. So then, let us take heed we
deceive not our selves: but let our coming to ye Sermons, be an attainment to
a certainty, wherein we may not fail: which thing will then come to pass, when
we allow of and admit nothing but only Gods will to rule and govern our whole
life. Howbeit that is not all that is to be done. For it is in vain for men to
beat their ears with preaching: which is, This you may do, this God co^ma^deth
you to do; until such time as we have learned, yt it is he only that gives
us the fear of God, yt it is he only, that by his holy spirit having given
the first Grace, does also to the^ give a second, that it is he only, that
imprinteth his Law in our hearts, and ingraueth it in our bowels, yt it is he
only that gives us power to cleave to his co^mandeme^ts, yt it is he only
which by his holy Spirit gives force and efficacy to the heavenly doctrine,
that it is he only which of his great goodness and tender mercy accepts us and
forgiueth us our sins: I say, it is al to no purpose, until we have learned
these things, and pray unto him for all things we stand in need of. Furthermore
our faith always enge^dreth in us a desire to praise God, and to pray unto
him. When the holy Minister preaches unto you, and says that our loving Lord
and sweet savior Jesus Christ has of his mercies, not of your merits (for
you have none) reconciled you to God his father, and to wash and cleanse you,
has shed his precious blood, that he has paid the price of your ransom,
that by his righteousness you might be acquitted, and by this means become
holy and acceptable to GOD our heavenly father: the knowledge of these things
is, to the end we should thoroughly cleave unto him, and say, What means have
we to be saved by, but only by ye free grace of God, seeing that our Lord Jesus
Christ has of his infinite goodness made full and sufficient satisfaction for
us, and to the end that our faith should rest thereupon? But, may we lie still,
and sleep like Swine? No. No. We must awake, we must repair by Prayer to God,
and say, Wherein is our welfare? Even in the death and passion of our Lord and
savior Christ Jesus. Therefore we must seek it there: for we shall never
find it elsewhere, neither with men nor Angels. And how must we seek it, but
by Prayers and supplications?

Then let us pray unto him, and say, O Lord, seeing thou see us far from all
goodness, give us the true fear of thee, send down thy holy Spirit into our
hearts, to reform, renew and direct us in our ways. True it is, we are
wretched sinners: but forasmuch as we are members of the mystical body of thy
dear son our savior Christ Jesus, we pray thee, make us righteous through
him. True it is, that we are polluted, and full of spots; but his precious
blood can cleanse us: we are guilty of everlasting death, and in bondage to it:
but our sweet Savior and Lord Jesus Christ has set us free from it.
Wherefore, O gracious God, fill thou us with thy holy and sweet spirit, that
by his strength, we in our paths and ways that we have chosen, may be led,
and conducted; suffer us not, for any temptation, to fall from thee.

What man is he that fears the Lord? Him will he direct in the way that he
shall choose. Text.


The reason is. For although the most men seem to pray, and the greatest
number freque^ting ye assemblies where the word is preached, (as for others,
they evidently and openly profess themselves, that there is no fear of GOD
before their eyes) seem many times like painted Sepulchers, fair without, and
foul within; like Copper, which resembles Gold, when it is not it; like
stage-plaiers, that seem to be Kings and Princes, when in deed they are
stark and very beggars, when they seem as if they repented, when their lives
and conuersations do evidently show, that they are not in substance that which
thy seem in show. Therefore most rare is the fear of God to be found: whereby
it comes to pass, that justly and upon great cause the Lord depriueth the
wretched and miserable worldlings, of the Spirit of counsel and wisdom.

The use is, That we pray unto God to give us his holy and blessed spirit,
that we seem not to fear the Lord, when we are far from it: but that he
will sanctify our hearts with sincerity, that all hypocrisy being removed
far from us, we may be so directed by the same spirit in our way, that other
seeing our good works, may glorify our father which is in heaven.

And forasmuch as hypocrisy is so great and grievous a sin, as that it not
only deceyueth men, but so displeases the Lord, as he many times (although
not always, nor al such persons) plagueth and punishes them in this life, but
much more in that to come, Apo. 21.
who shall have their parts with the fearful and Adulterers, in the lake that
burns with fire and brimstone, which is the second death: I think it
convenient to handle this point, seeing that the most are such, that they seeing
how odious it is in the sight of GOD, may not only detest it, but also utterly
fly from it, as a most mortal and deadly enemy.

Even as the fowler, A similitude of a painted Ox, to take the silly birds.
which with a painted Ox, which is not an Ox, but under the shape and
likeness thereof, lies in wait for the poor birds, that he might take
them and kill them: So he, which with a counterfaited and feigned holiness will
color and cover impiety, wicked purposes, or whatsoever is against the will
and word of God, has not the fear of God, but under the color and shape of
godliness and honesty, seeking the praise and glory of the world, he casts
in his head, and works by degrees, the ruin, decay, and undoing of others,
that he may compass their goods, lands, and possessions, and gain some
honor, and dignity among men: 2. Tim. 3 5.
Such men have a show of godliness, but, as the Apostle says, have denied
the power thereof. And although some hypocrites will sometimes seem to forsake
their riches, and lend some to their neighbors, and bestow some upon the
poor, yet still the mark and level they shoot at, is to augment and
increase them.

A similitude of the soaring hawke, for the silly bird
For even as the swift hawke, entending to take the bird that flies, does not
presently, when she sees her, seyse upon her, but rather at the first, with
fetching a compass, seems to forsake her, but at the second or third flight,
she goes toward her with a wonderful force, and incredible swiftness, to
take her in the air, and to rend her in pieces; Right so do hypocrites: for at
the first sight they will seem, not to regard neither thee nor thine, but to
continue the riches and promotions of the world: but then they come and
counterfeit a simplicity, fowling for a greater matter then they presently see,
and reaching at some greater promotion and higher dignity, then the present
time and occasion does offer: but at the second or third flight, when all
things answer their expectation, thou shall perceive, that with all speed
and greediness they will lay hold on those things, which thou supposedst they
had contemned.

These are doubleharted men, they have wicked lips, and hands that work
iniquity; these are sinners that go two ways, and eternal woe is their
reward. The hypocrite goes two manner of ways; when he lays up one thing
close in his heart, the other he shows in his actions, speaks one thing, and
does another.

Such an one was Herod, Math. 2.
pretending a great devotion toward Christ, and that he would worship him,
when he was whetting his sword to destroy him.

True Christians lead their lives (although not in perfection) according to
their profession, and as S. James says, do show their faith by their works.
All hypocrites, whatsoever they would seem to be, do so far differ from true
Christianity, as the dross of gold differs from the right gold it self.

The sixth Sermon upon the 25. Psalm, the 13. and 14. verses.
13 His soul shall dwell at ease, and his seed shall inherit the land.
The sense thereof is this.

THey that zealously, sincerely, and truly fear and worship the Lord, are not
only spiritually and eternally, but even in this vale of misery, although they
be subject to many and grievous afflictions, not only themselves, but even
their posterity after the^, for their sakes surely blessed.

The reason is. God in his holy word by the pen of the Apostle Paul, 1. Tim.
4.8. has promised blessings in this life, to them that are good and godly: The
words are: Godliness is profitable to all things, which has promise of the
life present, and of that that is to come.



and grievous affliction, being thoroughly persuaded that the Lord is
mercifully present with them, in this haven of Consolation they rest themselves.

True it is, that all the miseries both of the godly and wicked proceed from
one fountain: for both break off ye course of Gods blessing by their sins:
yet notwithstanding, his favor in this great, as it were, confusion, shines
in such sort, that the state of the Saints is far better, who although they
are not for the most part filled with good things, they notwithstanding daily
taste Gods fatherly favor and care toward them. In this sense I understand,
the soul of the godly shall dwell at ease: that is, a mediocritie does content
them more, then great abundance does the wicked.

The use of the doctrine is. Let us al, seeing we would be in peace and dwell at
ease, and desire that our souls may enjoy that which is good indeed, walk in
the fear of the Lord: Let us seek peace, and ensue it.

This ease and rest, that God gives unto his children, is of diverse sorts.
For the faithful have that rest, that the holy Scriptures speak of, which is:
they lean unto GOD, put their trust in his goodness, and doubt not but that
he governs them: hereupon they may sleep at their ease, as the Prophet
Michah says chapter 4. verse 4. They shall sit every man under his vine, and
under his fig tree, and none shall make them afraid. Psalm. 4. verse 8. I
will lay me down in peace, and take my rest, for thou, Lord, only make me
dwell in safety. And this peace is the fruit of faith, as Paul says to the
Romans Chap. 5. verse 1.

We see then, that the chief rest which men have, or can enjoy, is to
commit themselves to Gods providence, and that in respect of his fatherly
care over them, they can say, My good gracious GOD, and loving Father, I
commend my soul, my body, life, and all that I have, unto thy favorable
protection: they are in thy gracious hand, order and dispose them according to
thy good pleasure and will; and I, by the assistance of thy good Spirit,
purpose to walk in my vocation, to glorify thee, to finish my course, and to
keep the faith.

Secondly, But besides this also, there is another rest and ease, not that
which the dear Saints and children of God do enjoy, but a rest and quietness,
which God sometimes grants to the wicked: For many times the Lord spares,
and afflicts not the wicked outwardly, although he within torment them with
the biting and bitter gnawing of their consciences, as Isaiah the Prophet
says. Is. 48.22 and 57.20, 21.
But the wicked are like the raging Sea that cannot rest, whose waters cast up
mire and dirt. verse 21. There is no peace, says my God, to the wicked.

For although it be said, that their thoughts are like waves beating one
against another, yea, and as a sink that is filthy within, (because infidelity
does always bring unquietness) yet notwithstanding, God casts them into a
sleep, because he punishes them not immediately.

So that, although that God deferreth and prolongeth the punishment of the
wicked, let us not be ouerhasty. For nothing is gotten by pleading against God,
saying, Wherefore delayeth he the punishment of the wicked? That were as much
as to trouble those, whom God for a time will have be at rest. And therefore
let us learn to submit our selves patiently to Gods will, and beware that we
run not an head after that sort. For it becomes not the children of God, to
make trouble, where God will have quietness. And therewithal let us understand,
that it is to no purpose to have bodily prosperity, except we have Gods
favor with it, that the feeling thereof may make us quiet in our hearts.

Again, if we have not this quietness, let us pray to God to give it us. For it
is he only that can give it us. For if, as Isaiah says in the person of God,
Is. 45.7. God only gives us quietness and peace, which to obtain, we must
pray to him for.
I form the light, and create darkness, I make peace, and make evil: that
is, if peace and war be in his hands, and that in this vale of misery he can
and will give trouble and ease, when it seems good to his heavenly wisdom,
much more has he the spiritual rest, which is far greater and excellenter.

Then let us consider, that it lies not in us, to quiet our selves when we
are in trouble, but we must resort unto God: for it is a singular and
inestimable treasure that comes from him, to hold us so in quiet, as we may
always in the midst of the turmoiles of this world, abide still upon our
feet; and that being tossed, as it were, with great storms and tempests, yet
nevertheless we have our anchor still fastened in him to hold fast our own.
This is a singular privilege which God gives his children.

Now therefore, are we in poverty? have we anguish, trouble and perplexity?
Let us frame our selves to take hold of this settled quietness, seeing the Lord
gives it to us his dear children, that it might, to our comfort, abide within
us.

True it is, that we must always seek the means that God offers us, to
keep us to it, and to endeavor to attain it; but howsoever it be, let us be
fully resolved of this, that it is God only that gives it, and delivers us
from all unquietness. Therefore let us not storm, nor frette against the
Lord, although it please him to turmoile us: For we are not taught in the word,
that God will so handle us in this world, that we shall not be tossed to and
fro; we have no such promise: yet let us cleave unto God, and cast our anchor
on him: so shall we not be overcome of temptations, although they be many and
grievous.

Text.
And his seed shall inherit the land.

2. Doct. Gods favor and mercy extend unto the children of the faithful; both
while they live, and after their decease.

The reason is: If the wicked fare the better for the godlies sake, how much
more shall the children of the godly, walking in their fathers steps, fare
the better in inheriting the land? And there is no certainer inheritance,
wherein our children may succeed us, then when GOD with us, receiving them into
his fatherly favor, does make them partakers with us of his blessings.

The use of this Doctrine is: That as we tender our offspring, so to be the
more careful to walk in the fear of the Lord.

Psalm. 25.14. The secret of the Lord is revealed to them that fear him, and
his covenant to give them understanding. The 2. part of the sixth Sermon.

The sense thereof is:

ALthough secret, hid, unknown, The se^ce and Doctrine.
and above the reach and capacity of man's brain, is the holy covenant of the
most high and mighty God, yet whosoever, in the fear of the Lord, that is, in
humble sort by prayer to his Majesty, seek to know it, shall, by the direction
of Gods holy Spirit, attain to that high and heavenly wisdom, which for
their salvation in the sacred Scriptures is there recorded.

The reason is: God has disappointed no man of the knowledge thereof, that
has sincerely sought it.

By the word Secret, the Prophet understands the excellency of Doctrine,
which is contained in the holy law of God. Howsoever profane me^, by their
lofty pride despise Moses and the prophets, yet ye faithful acknowledge, yt in
the Doctrine thereof, the secrets of the kingdom of heaven are thereby opened,
which far exceedingly excel man's wisdom.

The first use is, That in reading the Law of God, and the sacred Scriptures,
we be of a modest and humble Spirit, that in trusting to our weak wits and
diligence, we take heed we attempt not to break in the secret mysteries
thereof; the knowledge whereof is the singular gift of God, as David in the
111. Ps. verse 10. says, The beginning of wisdom is the fear of the Lord,
all they that observe them, have good understanding, his praise endures for
ever.

The second use is: That forasmuch as the Lord our God, of his great mercy, not
of merit, gives his Spirit to many that are not teachers, as to them that
instruct the Church; that therefore being endued with the Spirit of truth, and
having the fear of God, humility, the desire to believe, and to live according
to the prescript rules which in the sacred scriptures are contained, he will
give understanding to them, and open the secret mysteries thereof unto them.
And therefore, most injurious to the common people is the Edict of the Pope and
his followers, which prohibit the reading of them unto the people. They hold,
that the Scriptures are most hard, difficult and obscure. They do not only
affirm, that some things are so, but that all are hard, doubtful, and
uncertain, and compare the^ therefore to a leaden rule, which may be turned
every way, Petrus a Soto. And to a nose of wax, Lindan a Papist, ex Tilmanno,
de verbo Dei, error. 5.

Our Rhemistes affirm, that it is all one to affirm in a writer some things
to be hard, and the writer to be hard. So they conclude, that the sacred
Scriptures are, both in respect of the matter and manner, very hard, and
therefore dangerous for the ignorant to read them. The. objection 2. Pet. 3.16
A Dicto secu^dum quod ad dictum simpl. Answer.
Rhem, annot. 2. Pet. 3. verse 16. they object that place, whereas the Apostle
says, speaking of S. Paul's Epistles, that many things therein contained, are
hard: Therefore the Epistles of S. Paul are hard, and so the Scriptures. B. R.

We answer: First, he says not, that Paul's Epistles are hard, but many things
he entreats of.

Secondly, they are hard, not to all but to the unstable, who do pervert them.

Thirdly, we deny not, but that some places in the Scriptures are obscure, and
have need of interpretation: but it follows not, that therefore the whole
Scriptures are obscure, and because of some hard places, that the people should
be forbidden the reading of all.

2. Object. The scriptures are obscure, both in respect of matter and manner.
First, the matter is high and mystical, as of the Trinity, of the incarnation
of the word, of ye nature of Angels, and such like.



First, in their own nature: so are they hard in deed, for by humane reason we
cannot attain to the depth of them.

Secondly, in respect of us; so must they needs be obscure, if men be not
contented with the knowledge in the word, but curiously search further.

Luther, therefore does aptly distinguish. Res Dei, says he, the things of
GOD are obscure, the depth of his mysteries cannot be comprehended of us: but
Res Scripturae, the things that are opened in the Scriptures, are plain, if
we will content our selves with that knowledge.

Bellar. says, The manner of handling is hard and obscure: there are many
Tropes, Metaphors, Allegories, and Hebraismes, which cannot easily be
understood.



Secondly, although the phrase of the Scripture may seem hard at the first,
yet by further traueile therein, it may become easy and plain: for all
things are not at the first understood.

Thirdly, we deny not, but that some places are obscure and had need to be
opened.

3. Objection. If the Scriptures were not hard, what need so many Commentaries
and expositions? R. B.



Secondly, Expositions are needful for the understanding of dark places: but
many things are plain enough without expositions, and may be understood of
the simple. We hold not, that the Scripture is every where so plain and
evident, that it need no Interpretation, as our adversaries do slander us: and
therefore herein they fight with their own shadow, B. l. 3. de Verbo Cap. 1.
We confess, that the Lord in the Scriptures has tempered hard things and
easy together, that we might be exercised in the Scriptures, and might knock
by prayer, and study for the opening of the sense; and that there might be
order kept in the Church, some to be teachers and expou^ders, and some to be
hearers: by which teachers and expounders, through their diligent search and
travel, the harder places may be opened to the people. But this we affirm
against our adversaries. First, that al points of faith necessary to salvation,
are plainly setforth in the holy Scriptures. Secondly, that they may with great
profit be read of the simple and unlearned, notwithstanding the hardness of
some places, which in time also using the means, they come to the
understanding thereof.

1. Arg. First, our judgments are evidently approved by the Scriptures, Deuteronomy.
30.11. For this commandment which I command thee, is not hid from thee,
neither is it far of. verse 12. It is not in heaven, that thou should say,
Who shall go up for us to heaven, and bring it us, and cause us to hear it,
that we may do it? verse 13. Neither is it beyond the sea, that thou should
say, Who shall go over the sea for us, and bring it us, and cause us to hear
it, that we may do it? verse 14. But the word is very neree unto thee, even in
thy mouth and in thine heart to do it. Therefore the Scriptures are plain.

Unto this Argument, first it is answered, that it is meant only of the
Decalogue or 10. Commandments, that they are easy, not of the whole
Scriptures.

Replication. As though, if the Commandments be easy, the rest of the
Scriptures be not likewise: as the Prophets and historical Books, being but
Commentaries and expositions of the Decalogue. S. Paul Romans 10.6. understands
this place of the whole doctrine of faith.

Again the prophet David says, Ps. 119.105.
Thy word is a lantern to my feet, and a light to my path. Which is not to
be understood only of the commandments, and precepts in the Scriptures, but
of the whole word of GOD, as Augustine expounds it. Quod ait, Lucernae
pedibus verbum tuum, verbum est, quod Scripturis omnibus sanctis continetur.
Where he says, Thy word is a lantern to my feet, he understands the word
of God, which is contained in all the holy Scriptures.

The 2. Argument. 2. Cor. 4.3. If our Gospel be then hid, it is hidden to
the^ that are lost. Therefore the Scriptures are plain to the faithful.
Bellar. answers, S. Paul speaks of the knowledge of Christ, not of the
Scriptures.

Reply. First, it is manifest out of the next verse (being the 4. whereas the
Apostle says, In whom the God of this world has blinded the minds, that is,
of ye Infidels, that the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ, which is the
image of God, should not shine unto them) that S. Paul speaks of that
Gospel, which he preached to the Corinthians, which is the same he wrote unto
them. Wherefore, if the Gospel preached, were easy and plain, why is not the
Gospel written by him, I mean, the doctrine of faith, being the same which
he preached?

Secondly, if they grant, (as by this answer it appears they do) we ask
no more: for this is that which we say, that the Doctrine of faith and
salvation, is plainly expressed in the sacred scripture.

3. Arg. This is ye difference between the new testament and the old: The old
is compared to a clasped book, Is. 29.11. The new, to a book opened, Apoc.
5.1. and 6.1. The knowledge of Christians far exceeds the knowledge of the
Jews: it was lawful for them to read the Scriptures, much more for us
Christians. Bellar. answers, that our knowledge is greater then theirs, not
in all Scriptures, but in the mysteries of our Redemption only.

Our Reply is, This is all we desire: for if the mystery of salvation and
redemption, be plainly opened in the Scripture, why should not the people be
admitted to the reading of the word, to be confirmed in the knowledge of their
redemption?

I conclude therefore this point, with the sayings of our savior Christ, John
5. Search the Scriptures: for in them you think to have eternal life, and
they do testify of me. Likewise S. Paul to the Colossians 3.16. Let the word
of Christ dwell in you plenteously, in all wisdom.

The seventh Sermon upon the 25. Psalm, the 15, and 16. verses.
15 Mine eyes are ever toward the Lord: for he will bring my feet out of the
net.
The sense thereof is.

FOrasmuch as the Lord, of his great mercy has promised, never to leave them
destitute of his assistance, which fearing and always trusting in him, are in
great afflictions, perils and dangers: I therefore, not in prosperity only,
but in adversity also, even at all times, lift up the eyes of mine heart and
affections, by faith and sure confidence toward him, seeing it is he only, and
none other, that either can, or will deliver me out of the net of troubles.

1. Doct. Afflictions and troubles are always incident to the dear Saints and
Church of Christ. 2. Tim. 3.12. All that will live godly in Christ, must suffer
persecution. Examples: Abel, Joseph, the Israelites in Egypt, and in the
captivity seventy years, the Prophets, Christ, his Apostles, Christians and
Martyrs in the Primitive time, and also of late years.

The causes thereof moving God thereunto, are: First, that he might daily
declare himself the disposer and governor of al things. 1. Sam. 2 7.
The Lord makes poor, and makes rich, brings low, and exalts.

Secondly, to take from us (that do naturally settle our affections on the
earth) all occasion of promising our selves prosperity in this life.

The use is: First, to prepare our selves to all conditions, whether the Lord
send prosperity or adversity, health or sickness, according to the example
of the Apostle Paul, Phil. 4.11, 12.
who says, I have learned, in whatsoever state I am, to be content. verse 12.
And I can be abased, and I can abound, every where in all things I am
instructed, both to be full, and to be hungry, and to abound, and to have want.
For otherwise it is certain, that affliction coming upon us, will be most
grievous and intolerable.

Secondly, to teach us, to settle our affections upon heaven, and the things
that lead thither, which is a most certain anchor-hold, and will never fail us,
as this world will do in the most excellent things thereof.

And forasmuch as no Doctrine in the sacred Scriptures, is in my judgment more
necessary then this, concerning the use and benefits of afflictions, I
purpose, by Gods assistance, the longer to persist herein.

Even as the man that has a son, A similitude.
which is in good and perfect health, and a servant that is exceeding sick,
deals more roughly and severely with his Son, then with his servant, not
because he loves his servant more then his Son; but because he would
restore his sick servant to his former health, but his Son whom he loves
most dearly he reprooueth, checketh, taunteth, and corrects: Even so our
good gracious GOD and loving father, sometimes afflicts his dear children,
whom he tenderly loves, and suffers the^ to be exercised with weepings,
wailings, and want, with sighs and sorrowful sobbes, with hunger and cold,
with nakedness and want of harbor, with heaviness of heart, and vexation of
spirit, with sickness of body, and restraint of liberty, and with a thousand
other calamities and cares; and in the mean time suffers the wicked and
ungodly ones of the world to want nothing, he gives them health, wealth and
liberty, worldly honor, and dignity, and what not? meaning and purposing by
these means (if the fault be not in themselves) to bring them to know, fear,
honor, and serve him, by whose providence and appointment they have and do
enjoy all those good blessings, and so be cured and healed of the sores and
sickness of their souls. A similitude.
As the skillful Gemmarie, and cunning Lapidarie, does willingly suffer the
Indian Diamond or Adamant, to be smitten with great and weighty blows, because
he knows well, that the hammer and Anuile will sooner be bruised, then the
Diamond or Adamant will be broken: so our most wise God, yea, wisdom it
self, suffers men of excellent virtues, of unquenchable charity, and
invincible constancy, as David, to fall into diverse temptations, and to be
plunged deep into manifold miseries, because he will have their inward graces
to show forth, and so shine before men, that they seeing the constancy of his
Saints, may glorify God which is in heaven: For he is sure that they are
constant, and that nothing can separate them from the love of God. Joseph was
imprisoned in Egypt: Jeremy in Judea: Ezechiel in Chaldea, and John Baptist in
Israel by wicked Herod: and yet all these and infinite others did never
shrink from God: but as they lived in him, so they died in him, and are
exalted up on high, and shall dwell in his tabernacle, and rest in the hill of
his holiness for ever. And even so, if we will be as they were, we shall be as
they are.

True it is, that God being just, does never afflict us unjustly: which thing
we ought always to think and confess, to humble our selves and glorify God.
Nevertheless, God does not always take occasion of our sins to punish us,
but oftentimes he shows this favor to his children, to dispose it for their
benefit.

Text.
Mine eyes are ever toward the Lord: for he will bring my feet out of the
net. 2. Doct. The continual lifting up of David's eyes to the Lord, teaches
this Doctrine; whosoever will pray aright, that the Lord might accept them,
must lift up continually their affections to the Lord: for by the eye, which of
the senses is the sharpest, and draws the whole man to himself, he means
all the affections of man.

The Prophet, no doubt also, by the eyes means his corporal eyes, which, as
by an instrument, did draw up his affections to the Lord.

The reason is: All good things whatsoever we have, GOD is the author thereof,
of whom, in lifting up our hearts, we desire the same.

Example of lifting up of the eyes in prayer, is our Lord and savior Jesus
Christ, both when he prayed with thanksgiving to his Father, when he raised up
Lazarus from death, who four days lay buried in his grave; as also when he
prayed to his father, not only for his Disciples, but for all that shall
believe in him, John 11.41. and John 17.1. Therefore they took away the stone,
where he was laid that was dead: and Jesus lifted up his eyes and said, Father,
I thank thee, that thou have heard me. This is a token of a mind well framed
to prayer: for to the end a man may rightly call upon GOD, he must be joined
with him, which cannot be, unless being lifted up above the earth, he ascend
up above the heavens. This is not done with the eye only, seeing that
hypocrites, who are drowned in the deep filth and dregs of their flesh,
seem with their stern countenance to draw heaven unto them: but the children
of GOD must sincerely perform that, which hypocrites do but feign.

Neither yet must he that lifts up his eyes toward Heaven, there include
GOD in his cogitation, who is every where, and fills heaven and earth. But
because men's minds can neither escape from, nor acquit themselves of gross
inventions, but when they be lifted up above the world, the sacred Scripture
called us thither, and testifies, that heaven is Gods seat.

As touching the lifting up of eyes, it is no continual ceremony which
lawful Prayer cannot want: For the Publican, that prays with his countenance
toward the earth, does nevertheless pearce the heavens with his faith. Yet
that is a profitable exercise, whereby men awake, and stir up themselves to
seek the Lord; yea, the feruentnesse of prayer does so affect and move the
body sometimes, that besides meditation, it does willingly follow the mind.
Certainly it is without all doubt, that when Christ and David lifted up their
eyes toward heaven, they were carried thither with singular vehemence.

The use is, that in our prayer, we lifting up our eyes to the Lord, should not
do it, as the hypocrites, without the affections of our minds: but that both
the eyes and the affections of our minds, being lifted up to him together, we
may be assured that he will hear us. If we be in dangers, he will deliver
us; if in poverty, he will relieve us; if in sickness, he will cure us; if in
sorrow, he will solace us. John 17.1. These things spoke Jesus, and he lifted up
his eyes toward heaven.

In that John said, that Christ lifted up his eyes toward heaven, it was no
small sign of zeal and feruentnes. For Christ testified in deed by this
gesture, that he was rather in heaven by the affection of his mind, then in
earth, that he might talk familiarly with God. He looked up toward heaven,
not that God is shut up there, who does also fill the earth, Ierem. 23. but
because his majesty appears there chiefly: and secondly, because the
beholding of heaven does admonish us, that the power of GOD far passes all
creatures. To the same purpose served the lifting up of his hands, when he
prayed: for seeing that men are slack and slow by nature, and their earthly
nature does bend them downward, they have need to be stirred up, thus yea,
they have need of chariots to carry them up to God.

But if we desire to imitate Christ and David truly, we must take diligent
heed, that our ceremonies express no more then is in the mind, but let the
inward affection move both hands, eyes, tongue, feet, and whatsoever we have.

Whereas the Publican, Luke 18.13. did rightly pray unto God, casting down his
eyes, it is not contrary to this both of David and Christ. For although, being
co^fou^ded with his sins, he did cast down himself, yet did not that
humility hinder him, but that he craved pardon with boldness. It was meet for
Christ to pray after another sort, who had nothing whereof he needed to be
ashamed.

For he will bring my feet out of the net. Text.
3. Doct. In that David says, God will pluck his feet, etc. we have to
learn this doctrine: That when we pray to the Lord in our miseries, we must
without all doubting, be fully assured, that the Lord does hear us, and at his
good time he will surely deliver us.

Ergo we need none other Mediators then Christ.
The reason is: He has so promised to us, Psalm. 50.15. Call upon me in the day
of thy trouble, and I will hear thee, and thou shall glorify me.

Secondly, who does not so, shall be frustrated of his desire, Iam. 1.6. But let
him ask in faith, and waver not: Faith without doubting
for he that wauereth, is like a wave of the sea, tossed of the wind, and carried
away. verse 7. Neither let that man think, that he shall receive any thing of
the Lord.

Objection. The Apostle means nothing else, but that the asker of lawful
things may not either distrust Gods power, and ability, or be in diffidence or
despair of his mercy: but that our doubt be only in our own unworthiness, or
undue asking.

Solution.We prove, that men must pray for nothing, but according to Gods will
and promise, and not to doubt of Gods truth, in performing his promise. But in
respect of our own worthiness (whereof al me^ are void) we oght to ask
nothing. Oecumenius upon this text says, If he has faith, let him ask; but
if he doubt, let him not ask: for he shall not receive, which distrusteth yt
he shall receive. When you ask any thing of God, dout not at al, saying with
thy self, How can I ask, and receive of ye Lord anything, which have sinned
so often against him? Think not of these things, but be converted unto the
Lord with thy whole heart, and ask of him without all doubting, and thou shall
know the multitude of his mercies.

The use is: That we detest the doctrine of the Papists. That in respect of
our unworthiness we should doubt of our prayers to be heard of the Lord: but
let us believe the sacred Scriptures, that teach us, If we pray unto God,
according to his holy will, he will surely hear us, if we pray in faith
without all wavering and doubting.

Let us put the case, that a man had al things else that could be imagined, and
yet wanted this trust and faith in his prayer: surely all the rest were nothing
worth, but shall be turned into his bane.

What if a man laugh, what if he live in joy and pleasure, what if he have
goods enough, and too much, what if all men honor him; and to be short, what
if he seem to be a pety-God here below, as in a Paradise? Yet if he have not
this privilege of resorting unto God, with constant and full belief, that his
coming to him shall not be in vain, but that his requests shall be granted;
all that ever he can have besides, shall be but a curse unto him, and an increase
of his decay. Then let us mark well, that it is not without fruit, that David
brings us here to the principal point of our whole life, in the respect of
the weal that we can wish, which is, that God should be at hand with us, and
that we should resort unto him, that he should hear us, and that we should
obtain our requests, and be helped and aided at his hand, according to our
necessity, and as he knows to be convenient for our welfare. And this is
not taught here only, but if we look upon the whole doctrine of the holy
Scriptures, we shall see, that men are always unhappy, if GOD look not upon
them, and be ready to hear them.

True it is, that by reason of our great dullness we conceive not so much; but
without all doubt, if we had but one spark of sound understanding, there is
none of us but should comfortably perceive, that this Doctrine is very true.

So then, let us open our eyes, and learn to enjoy this happiness, and know,
whereupon the same is chiefly grounded, so as we may understand, that if we
have not God so favorable to us, as we may resort unto him with sure trust and
certainty, yt in necessity he will be ready to help us, we be too too wretched
and miserable.

And furthermore, if we be qualified with so excellent a gift and grace of
Gods holy Spirit, as to pray unto him; neither sickness, poverty, imprisonment,
banishment, persecution, reproaches, slanders, no, not death it self can
hinder our happiness: For behold, the remedy that suffices for all our
miseries, is, that God promises to hold us up, when we are beaten down, to
deliver us, when we are in prison, to loose our feet out of the net, when our
enemies have caught us, to deliver us in time convenient, yea, and to turn all
our miseries to our welfare, and salvation, so as they shall be as many
furtherances to help us forward to everlasting life, and he will make us
perceive, that he sent not us any thing, which is not convenient and profitable
for us. Such promises serve to assuage our sorrows, and every one of us may
glory in the^, as S. Paul says, Romans 5.1. Then being justified by faith, we
have peace toward God through our Lord Jesus Christ. verse 2. By whom we have
also access through faith, unto this grace wherein we stand, and rejoice under
the hope of the glory of God. verse 3. Neither do we so only, but we rejoice
in tribulations, knowing, etc.

We can have no peace with God, except we be assured of his love, so as the
gate by it be opened for us, to have access to him. When we have that once
(says S. Paul) we be sure, and fully persuaded, that we are the children of
God, whereby we may glory of that eternal inheritance which he has promised
us.

Job 27.9 Will God hear the cry of the hypocrite when trouble comes upon
him?
how it comes to pass, that God refuses a man that calls upon him, seeing
he has promised that he will be always inclined to succor us? yea, yt he will
not tarry until he be entreated, but will prevent our suit; or at the least
we are sure, yt as soon as we open our mouth, God will be ready to help us, as
by the prophet Esai he promises us. But in Jobs words we see a threat
altogether contrary, which is, that although the wicked have their recourse
unto God, and desire him to have pity upon them, yet he will not hear them.

Psalm. 145.18. The Lord is near to all that call upon him, yea, to all that
call upon him in truth. There the Prophet shows, that many seek God, howbeit
fainedly. By reason whereof we be convinced, that there is none other means
to rid us of our miseries, but only that God should take us to his mercy, and
be pitiful unto us. The very infidels call upon him, without regard of him,
notwithstanding that they scorn at religion, and at all things that are spoken
to us in the sacred Scriptures concerning Gods providence, his mercy, and
grace, which we must look for at his hands. Therefore if they be pinched with
adversity, they cry, Alas, my God. And what compels them thereunto? Even
their mother wit.

So the hypocrites and despisers of God, may have some form or likeness of
praying, not only to speak (but to speak properly, they cannot pray in deed:
for they are destitute of the Spirit thereof) from their teeth outward, whiles
their minds are otherwise busied, but oftentimes (as men may perceive) even
with some hearty affection (for they are forced thereunto) but yet is it not in
truth. For they have not the knowledge to say, My God calls and allureth me
unto him, I shall not therefore lose my labor in coming to him. Seeing it is
his good pleasure to reckon and account me in the number of his deerly beloved
children, I will go to him, not on a foolish rashness and presumption, but with
obedience unto the voice of my GOD, trusting to his promise. The hypocrites
cannot speak this language, therefore they have no truth in them. For they
must have faith: and faith depends on the promises of God, which the wicked
have not, yea, never tasted of.

Again, we must have a feeling of our miseries; so that when we approach unto
God, we must be abashed of our selves, we must be sorry for our sins, we must
hate our selves, and we must acknowledge our selves to be exceeding miserable.
But the wicked, and hypocrites have none of all these. Although then their
mouths are open to call upon God, yet do they but blaspheme, and unhallow his
holy name, because their minds are not sound and upright. Herba solaris. A
similitude.
Heliotropium, the herb of the Sun, so called, because it windeth it self
about with the Sun; in the morning very early, it does (as it were) behold
the rising thereof, and all the day it follows the course of the Sun, ever
turning the leaves toward the same, but the root it never changes,
stirs, nor moves, but has that still fast fixed in the earth? Even so,
many will turn up their eyes and hands to the son of righteousness, but it
is only in ceremony and outward gestures: for their roots their hearts, are
far and fast within the earth (how can they then be lifted up to heaven?)
where in deed their treasure is, according to the words of our savior Christ,
Math. 6. Where your treasure is, there will your hearts be also. Such men will
lift up their hands, eyes, and voices, toward heaven to GOD, and with such
goodly green leaves will make a fair flourish, and beautiful show, but their
hearts and affections are surely set upon earthly, vain, vile, and
transitory things, and are as far from GOD, as heaven and earth are distant
the one from the other. How then can they possibly in faith call upon the Lord,
that their prayers should be heard? And therefore they fulfill the saying of
the Prophet Esaias chap. 29.13. This people draws near to me with their
lips, but their hearts are far from me.

So then, let us mark well, that when God says, that he will hear the
prayers of all them that call upon him, he means, that their prayers must
proceed from faith, and we must bethink our selves well beforehand of his
promises, thereby to be encouraged to come unto him; yet we must also
acknowledge our selves to be, as we surely are, of our selves forlorn,
damnable, and destitute of all goodness: and this we must be thoroughly persuaded
of, to the end that we may resort to the fountain of his goodness and grace.

Now we see, there is no cause, why we should think it strange, that God
puts hypocrites, and wicked men back when they come to him. For they come not
with a willing mind, nor a pure affection: but they would willingly shun and
avoid his hand, if it were possible. Howbeit, seeing that they, by no means
possible that they can devise, can shift themselves from him, they come to him
by compulsion.

A similitude.
For even as a thief, a murderer, or any other great malefactor, being shut up
in prison, would not willingly appear before the Judge, but would wish in his
heart, that rather there were none at all; but seeing they are and must be,
full sore against their wills, that sin might be punished and virtue
rewarded, they then humbly entreat him to show mercy to them. Even so, the
wicked and hypocrites wish in their heart there were no God: but seeing he is
and will be, they repair to him, not as being persuaded of him, as of a loving
and merciful father, but as a severe Judge: but what profits that?

Therefore when we pray unto God, let us offer unto him free hearted sacrifices,
let us have access to him with willing minds, assuring our selves, that
without him we are destitute of al things we want, and of all that appertain
to our good. Moreover let us not doubt of his favor toward us, seeing he has
promised it unto us: but let us always believe that he is ready to receive us,
and will not be deaf to our desires, when we come to crave them at his hands.

True it is, that God every minute shows his goodness toward us; and although
we presently perceive it not, yet does he preserve us from the miseries that
hang over our head, and puts his loving hand between us and them. So then,
we cannot but be experienced of his grace in the time of prosperity, and know
that we are maintained by the same: but yet have we not so certain and
manifest experience of his favor and help in prosperity, as in adversity. For
whenever misery pincheth us, and death threateneth us, we can discern that
we are wretched forlorn creatures, if God should not step before us to rescue
us.

And to speak the truth more largely: How great and grievous were the
sorrows, troubles, anguish and grief of our souls, if we had not this
sweet consideration?

Ye see then an evident Demonstration, that God has had, and now has mercy
and compassion upon us. We see therefore, that affliction is that, wherein God
chiefly shows himself to be our savior.

Here we see, wherefore God says in the Psalm. 50.15. Call upon me in the day
of thy trouble, and I will hear thee, and thou shall glorify me. But shall
we therefore infer, that we need not but in necessity to call upon God? No:
Then should we be too rechles, if we should not call upon him but
constraynedly. Therefore it behooves us to call upon him at all times, as more
largely shall be showed. Yet the Lord provoke us by his whippes: and in so
doing he corrects our slouthfulnes, and quickneth us to come unto him.

It is expressly said, that that is the time to call upon him, and that that is
the due and very convenient season, as in the Psalm. 32.6. Therefore shall
every one that is godly, make his prayer unto thee, in a time when thou may
be found: surely in a flood of great waters they shall not come near him. In
the time, that is, when adversity presses them. Not yt we have not occasion to
do so continually, but our occasion then is greater the^ at any other time of
prosperity.

And hereby we are taught, that when soever poverty pincheth us, persecution
afflicts us to the uttermost, so that we can endure no more, let us not
faint; but rather be encouraged to come to our gracious God, and loving father,
knowing, that not only by his work, but by his word he allureth us, and that
as a loving mother, when she sees that her child cannot stand, but by means
of his weakness is ready to fall flat to the ground, reaches out her kind hand
to stay him from falling: even so our good and gracious father does not only
reach us his merciful hand, and wills us to take it, but also, as it were by
force, draws us by reason of our great sluggishnes we have, to come to him.

Also here withal let us understand, ye fruit of our faith what it is. This it
is. In all our adversities we are happy, and all the curses that God turns
upon me^ for their sins, are by the means thereof turned to our good and
profit, when we pray unto God, and have our recourse to him. Wherefore? for in
the midst of our troubles he shows himself our Savior, and causes us to
feel, that he is near at hand with us.

Let us therefore, with the good Prophet David, assure our selves, if our feet
be in the nets of our adversaries, if we lift up our eyes and affections to
God in our fervent prayers, that he will, when he sees it fit in his wisdom,
deliver us out of them all: for he never fails them that trust in him.

Psalm. 25. verse 16. Turn thy face unto me, and have mercy upon me: for I am
desolate and poor. The 2. part of the 7. Sermon.

The sense thereof is:

SO great is the malice of mine enemies, O Lord my GOD, who like Bees
compassing, and like the fat Bulls of Basan enclosing me on every side, have so
greatly prevailed against me, that I am desolate without dwelling, poor
without possessing of such things, as I in my calling stand in need of, whereby
thou seem as though thou regardest not thy servant: I humbly, even for the
Messiah thy dearly beloved son Jesus Christ's sake, beseech thee, to show
thy loving countenance and care toward me, in extending thy mercies toward
me, in delivering me from the hands of mine enemies; by which means my
dwelling shall be restored, and my poverty redressed: so shall I magnify thy
great mercies all the days of my life.

1. Doctr. God hides his face from us, when he afflicts us either by our
enemies or sickness, desolation, poverty, imprisonment, banishment, persecution
or the like; when things seem strange unto us, when we know not the reason
why he works after that sort.

What is the face or countenance of God? It is not a shape, like unto a man's
visage, which has nose, eyes, and mouth: but the face of God, is the favor of
God, the care that he has of his dear children, the record that he gives
when we know his will. God therefore shows us his face, when he tells and
shows us why he does this or that thing: as wherefore he afflicts his, and
spares them that are none of his, it is all one, as if we saw him before our
eyes. Therefore when God holds us in ignorance of his will, it is an hiding
of his face from us.

The Use of this doctrine is. Let us mark, that whenever it shall please GOD
to show himself unto us, it behooves us to know him, and to consider his
works, as he teaches us them, and to be attentive to mark the reason why
he does so. And when he works after a strange fashion unknown unto us, let
us reverence such secrets, acknowledging nevertheless that he is righteous
howsoever the world go. Let us dwell continually in that belief, and hold us
quiet and contented, waiting patiently, until he show us more fully those
things that are hidden from us, assuring our selves, that during this life, our
knowledge must be only in part.

Do we then see the state of the world so troubled, that we know not what to
say? It is all one, as if GOD should hide his face from us. And in this case
what have we else to do, but to humble our selves? we are hereby exhorted to
modesty and sobriety, because our wits are too rude and gross to comprehend
the secrets of GOD: and moreover, the Lord purposes to humble us, when he
withdraws himself from us.

If odious and detestable sins be committed, as if quarrelling, and brawling
arises, and if snares be laid by the wicked, so that by them the godly are
desolated and impouerished, so that they know not how to escape: then does GOD,
as it were, turn his face from us.

True it is, that he is never the farther from us, nor has the less care of
us, howbeit we can neither see nor perceive it. On the other side, when we
cannot consider what is done, it seems to us, that GOD regards us not: we
see nothing but darkness, the light that should guide us, shines not unto us.

Now the^, what must we do, but shrink down our heads, close our mouths, and
wait Gods leisure patie^tly, until he remedy the inco^uenie^ces that trouble
us? Also, let us always be at this point never to enquire farther then it is
lawful for us. We must be well persuaded that God does nothing without great
causes; let us enter rather into the consideration of our sins: for if we
curiously enquire the secrets of God, and his incomprehensible determinations,
it is a pride that will utterly overthrow us. And therefore let us learn not
to be ouerwise, knowing that God sometimes leads us like poor blind souls.

And whereas good David was, by his enemies the wicked, oppressed, let us
learn, that although it be a sore temptation, to see the wicked flourish and
triumph over the children of God, and to see that might overcomes right, so
that a man knows not whither to go for refuge, verily it is a very hard
cross to overcome: nevertheless, the holy Ghost purposes to set it before
us, to the intent we should be armed against it.

So then, has unrighteousness gotten full scope? Are the wicked grown so
headstrong and lusty, that they confou^d all things? Do they handle so
corruptly their matters, that there seems there can be no redress nor
remedy to be had, to deliver the dear children of GOD out of their trappes
and nets which they have laid to entrappe and entangle them? The Spirit of God
aduertiseth us, that it is Gods will to hide his face after that manner, to the
end that thereby he might try our obedience. Therefore let us stay until he
enlighten us, and then shall we understand, that not without cause has he
sent these troubles unto us. The faithful, as David, desire of God to show and
lift up his countenance toward them. Psalm. 80.20 Turn us again, O Lord God
of hosts, cause thy face to shine, and we shall be saved: for that is it,
wherein all our joy, blessedness, and welfare consists.

What is therefore most to be desired of us? the face and countenance of God:
even as contrariwise, when he turns his back upon us, and hides himself
from us, we must of necessity be discouraged, miserable, forlorn, and out of
heart: for there is nothing wherein a man may find rest, but only in knowing
that God has a care of us.

So long then, as God vouchsafes to cast his favorable face upon us, we have
cause to rejoice and be glad; for we are assured that he will maintain us,
that we shall have no cause nor need to dread or fear any thing. But if GOD
forget us, and turn away his face from us, we are at our wits end, and that
not without great cause. For then we are as it were, left open to satan to
pray upon us, and an hundred thousand deaths beset us round about without
recovery.

We see then, yt Gods face is a thing to be prayed for, which we shall have,
especially, if we come to him by prayer in all humbleness, with a desire, true
and full purpose and intent to cleave unto him. But if we look aloft, and have
foreheads of brass, and be puffed up with the Pharise, to vaunt our selves
before God, as it were in despite of him, then must he be feign to look upon
us with another manner of countenance, which shall not comfortably cheer us, but
utterly destroy us. Then one look of God can rid all men quite and clean out
of the world, when they cast a proud look against him. Wherefore with David let
us hold down our heads, and let us go unto God, to do him service and
obedience; let us pray unto him to enlighten our eyes, that we may seek him as
our good father; let us beseech him of his great goodness and unspeakable
mercy, that he would look upon us in such wise, that thereby we may have al
perfection of joy and contentation to rest upon.

Turn thy face, O Lord, etc.

2. Doct. The only refuge in distress, is to fly to the Lord by faith and
fervent prayer.

1. Reason. Because it is he that smites, and none else can heal. Job. 5.18.

Secondly, He has promised to hear and deliver us, calling upon him in the
day of our troubles, Psalm. 50.15.

The use is: first to reprove them that repine against God, wax impatient, or
use unlawful means to wind themselves out of their troubles.

Secondly, to teach us, in all our distresses to labor our own hearts, that
we may pray unto the Lord for his grace to deliver us, and in the mean while
for strength to support us.

Text.
For I am desolate and poor.

3. Doct. The miseries inflicted on Gods children by ye wicked, being alleged
in prayer to the Lord, is a forcible reason to move him to hear and relieve
the^.

1. Reason. The Lord pitieth the miseries of his servants.

Secondly, the Lord loves them with an everlasting love.

Thirdly, the wicked afflict them for their profession and religions sake.

The use is, to allege it in our prayers, when we desire to be freed from
such miseries.

Secondly with patience to wait the Lords leisure, being assured that in good
time he will rescue his servants from all the wrongs that they can suffer of
the wicked for well doing.

The eighth Sermon upon the 25. Psalm. 17. and 18. verses.
17. The sorrows of my heart are enlarged, draw me out of my troubles.
The sense is.

SO great, O Lord my God, is the heap and increasing multitude of the sorrows
of my heart and mind, which for my sins thou have inflicted upon me, which
(as a dammed up river rushing and ouerflowing a whole country) possess,
every part and parcel (as I may say) of my soul, that except thou be good
and gracious unto me, in drawing me, as it were forcibly, out of them, I should
surely be overwhelmed with them: wherefore, seeing none can redress them but
only thou, O Lord my God, and seeing that thou have pity of the afflictions
of the minds (which of all others are the grieuousest and greatest) of thy
dear children, that trust in thy mercy, and call upon thy majesty, I humbly
entreat and beseech thee of thine accustomed clemency, to draw me out of
those terrible troubles which now I am in, and pardon my sins: so shall I
praise and glorify thee, O Lord, for thine unspeakable goodness toward me.

The sorrows of my heart, etc. 1. Doct. The Lord, for our sins, inwardly so
afflicts his dear children, that they have neither rest nor quietness within
them.

The Reason is, they are so many and odious in his sight.

The use is: that we anoyd sin always, as that which procures us the
greatest hurt both in this life, and in that life to come. We must therefore,
to avoid Gods indignation, use the means to eschew evil, fear God, and be
upright in heart.

First, let us pray to the Lord our God, to give us sound and upright hearts,
that we may not have an heart and an heart, that is, be double-hearted
hypocrites; yt we serve not God in outward appearance only, with our feet,
hands, and eyes; but that our hearts march before, and that we have a pure and
single meaning, to give our selves over to God, to be wholly his, and to abhor
al hypocrisies.

At this point we must begin, if we would be delivered from sorrows, if we
would have our life well ruled and approved of the Lord, we must show
outwardly what lies within us, so yt if the root be good, it shall presently
bring forth good fruits, yt our works may witness, that our show of serving
God, and our assurance of all things needful, which we shall receive at his
bountiful hands, are not in vain. And this consists in two things, that we
deal with uprightness and equity amongst our neighbors. Also yt we have
religion in us, to serve God, asscribing al goodness to him, the author and
fountain thereof.

We may not then do as the most do, regard, and be lovers of themselves,
seeking not them, but theirs, which are their neighbors: but forasmuch as the
Lord in one body has bound us, we ought to be careful to benefit our
brethren, and profit our neighbors, to maintain brotherly communion and
equity: not to do that to others, which we would not to be done unto our
selves.

2. Doct. In all our troubles and tribulations, when the sorrows of our hearts
are enlarged, let us come to God by prayer, humbly beseeching him to draw us
and deliver us from them all: then shall our troubles (when it seems meet to
his heavenly wisdom) have an end.

The Reason is, first it is his property: for he is a gracious and loving
father: Psalm. 130. As a father has pity upon his children: so is the Lord
merciful to them that fear him.

Secondly, he has promised to hear the prayers of his Church, and of every
particular member thereof. Psalm. 50.15. Call upon me in the day of trouble,
and I will hear thee, and thou shall glorify me.

The use is: that we exercise prayer at all times, but especially in
adversity, seeing that it is the greatest means to attain to comfort in
affliction. David did unfeignedly power forth his complaints and sorrows unto
God. He was not benumbed as infidels and incredulous (which among the
Christians, like an huge stream, lamentable it is to consider thereof, do
ouerflow Christendom, this Land, yea, this Town) are. If God handle them any
thing roughly, they think, yea, many times they say, See this misfortune that
is happened unto me: they look no further. David did not so. But he knew, and
was fully resolved, that it behooued him to impute these things unto God. Had
we learned this lesson, we had profited well for one day: I mean, if we had
practiced it thoroughly, as we ought to do. For most can well enough confess,
that diseases, deaths, and other miseries, as wars, plagues, famines, and all
such things come of God: but if it come to the proof, we are amazed, and not
able to make this sound conclusion within our selves: Well, seeing that God
visits and comes home unto us, it behooves us now to return unto him.

Hitherto we have like loose colts (as it were) flung into the air, we have
wilfully run astray from him, and now with a rough bitte he rayneth us, he
shakes his rod at us, yea, he makes us to feel it; therefore we must
learn to stoop under his hand.

But contrariwise, how deal we in that behalf? If a man be afflicted any
way, either in the loss of his goods, of his liberty, of his life, or be
grieved in spirit, what will he else do, but chafe and grind his teeth in
grudging against God? Wherefore, no doubt, if a man tell him, he has offended
GOD, he will easily grant it to be true: but he has no true remorse to
restrain himself. Wherefore? Because we have but a confused conceit thereof.

Hereby it is euedent, that few they are, and small is the number of persons,
that have this lesson well printed in their hearts: That all afflictions are
Gods Archers: and that he is guarded with them, to show himself to be our
Judge.

As much is to be said of the ordinary adversities, that GOD commonly
inflicteth. If people, or a whole country be touched with war; when
pollings, extortions, and other outrages are there done: how many people are
there that think upon the Lord?

We see, that all is out of order to our seeming, yet we consider not that
God guides the stern. When we see such turmoylings, we are admonished to
mark and not so much the more the sacred Scriptures, wherein GOD shows us,
as in a looking glass, or rather as in a lively picture, that on what side
soever man be afflicted, it becomes him to acknowledge the same to be the
hand of GOD: and especially, if an whole country be plagued, it must be
acknowledged to be Gods visitation.

Wherefore, when any such thing comes, let us follow the example of David, to
desire our good and gracious GOD to extend his holy hand, and power forth his
bowels of compassion upon us. When we are scourged, yt we can (to our thinking)
bear no more his heavy hand in afflicting us, let us fly to our good God for
succor. And if we weep before him, so it be with true lowliness, surely
there shall not one tear drop from our eyes, which shall not come to be
accounted of in his presence. For every one of them are sacrifices, according
as it is said in the Psalm. 51.11. That a sorrowful heart, or an heart cast
down, is a pleasant sacrifice to God.

If our tears, sighs, pantings and gronings tend to this end, and be as
witnesses of our flying unto God with all lowliness, acknowledging, that for
as much as his hand is against us, and that our only remedy is to beseech him
to be merciful unto us, it is certain he will greatly account of them.
Whosoever is wise, will ponder these things, and he shall understand the loving
kindness of the Lord.

The sorrows of my heart are enlarged. Text.
3. Doct. As our sins, even so shall our sorrows increase.

1. Reason. New sins must have new afflictions. Examples are many in the
sacred Scriptures. Pharaoh and the Egyptians, as they hardened their hearts, in
not suffering the Israelites to go into the wilderness to sacrifice to the Lord,
Exo. 7.8, 9.10.
so GOD sent plagues upon plagues upon them.

The ten Tribes, Amos 4.6. And therefore have I (for your perverting of Justice
and your idolatry) sent unto you cleanness of teeth in all your cities, and
scarceness of bread in all your places, yet have you not returned unto me,
says the Lord. verse. 7. Also I have withholden the rain from you, when there
was 3. months to the harvest, and I caused it to rain upon one city, and
have not caused it to rain upon another city, etc.

Thus did the Lord by Moses presage; Leuiticus 26. from the 14. verse to the
40. Deuteronomy. 28.15. to the end.

The use is, that as we desire our sorrows to be mitigated, even so we cease
increasing and heaping up sin upon sin. When we shall see the whole world
corrupted, so that we are, as it were among briars, and can see nothing but
evil examples, let us resist all such things.

Wherefore? If we be so lazy, as to make excuse, that because the world is
wicked and froward, we may well do as others do, that is fond and foolish:
for Lot, Job, and Joshua are set before us to condemn us.

For if Lot were so just, that he not only abstained from the gross sins,
(excepting drunkenness and incest, which he committed) as pride, fullness of
bread, abundance of Idleness and unmercifulness, and that namelesse sin
which they committed, but that for their sins his soul was vexed from day to
day, in seeing their abominations; If just Joseph abstained from that sin of
whoredom, whereunto his mistress (not without promise of great preferment (as
it is probable) did allure and tempt him; If Job the just abstained from evil;
If Joshua, whatsoever others would, yet he and his household would serve the
Lord; ought not we then in these dangerous days to do the like, especially,
seeing the Lord gives us warning, that we cannot live holy without great
battles?

The Lord of his unspeakable goodness gives us power and grace, to overcome
all Satan's assaults, in such sort, as there is none excuse for us, if we do
not as they did. For they lived not in times when all things were well ordered,
or when men were as Angels. No, they lived among Idolaters, abundance of
wickedness reigned in their time, there was as great store of vice that
reigned in the world then, as there is at this day. Yet notwithstanding, they
followed not the bent of other men's bows, as the Proverb is, but they retired
to them selves, being well assured, that they ought to serve God.

So then, let none of us in these days (wherein wickedness has gotten the
upper hand) allege the corruption of the time, in that all goodness is
turned topsi-turuy, but rather let us consider, that God by the means thereof
provoke us to be so much the more careful, by all possible means to shun
and avoid those things, that may any way infect us. For seeing that we
plainly perceive that vices are, as it were, an evil air, we must fly from
them: as if a man should tell me, if I travel such a way, thieves lie in wait
for me, I shall be robbed; my meat is poisoned; I shall be slain, if I escape
not another way.

Wherefore then are we not careful, seeing that the Lord himself shows us,
that all the vices in the world, are as badde as deadly plagues? And seeing
that the Lord, of his great mercy had given them his spirit, to abstain even
from, not only evil, but from the appearance of evil: let us not doubt, but
if we by fervent and devout prayer repair unto him, that at this day he will
assist us with like power.

The second part of the eight Sermon.
Psalm. 25.18. Look upon mine affliction and my travail, and forgive me all my
sin.
The sense thereof is.

MAny and grievous are the travails, troubles, and afflictions, which I thy
dutiful servant, and obedient son, do suffer, in such sort, as though thou
had no regard thereof; I most humbly beseech thee, O Lord my God, for the
Messiahs thy dearly beloved sons sake, to behold and look upon the^, that
thou might power forth thy bowels of mercy and compassion upon me, in
ridding and delivering me out of them: and because I am not (O Lord) only
outwardly afflicted, but inwardly tormented; the cause of all, I most humbly
and sorrowfully confess, unto thine unspeakable goodness, to be the huge and
odious multitude of my sins, which for filthiness do stincke in thy nostrils,
for whose sake thou layest this heavy burden, both of outward and inward
griefs, upon me: I humbly beseech thee to bury them in the pit of oblivion,
that they never come into thy remembrance, to cast them into the bottom of the
sea, that thou never see them, and to remitte and forgive them al, through the
means and mediation of the Messiah thy dearly beloved son Christ Jesus, who
shall, when the fullness of time is come, take upon him our nature, and suffer
the most bitter death and passion on the cross, for the redemption of all that
believe in him, both of them that lived before his incarnation, in whose
number, and in which time I am one, as also after his incarnation to the worlds
end.

Text.
Look upon mine affliction. 1. Doctr. Generally out of the whole verse. The
principal desire of the godly is, that the Lord would weigh their woeful
estate.

The reason is. Because, first they know him to be a righteous judge, ever
dealing favorably with his people.

Secondly, their consciences do tell the^, that notwithstanding they are
grievous sinners against the Lord, yet their enemies abuse them for the truths
sake.

The Use is, to teach us, in all our miseries unfeignedly to repent us of all
our sins against the Lord, so may we with good consciences come unto him
with complaints in all our miseries.

Chastiseme^ts, we see, are profitable: for they cause the godly afflicted to
come to God by prayer, to confess and crave pardon for their iniquities,
transgressions and sins.

But yet notwithstanding, we daily and hourly see, that these said
chastisements profit not all men; also that he gives not all men the grace
to return unto him. For it is not enough for God to strike us with his hand,
except he touch us within also by his holy spirit.

If God soften not the hardness of our hearts, it will be with us, as it was with
Pharaoh. Similitude.
For men are like unto stithies or Anuiles: the beating upon them is not able
to change their nature: for we see how they beat back the blows again.

Even so then, until God have touched us to ye quick within, it is certain,
we shall in our afflictions do nothing but kick against him, and gather rancour
more and more: and whenever he chastises us, we shall gnash our teeth at
him, and until regeneration always storm at him.

And without all doubt, the wickedness of men is so mischeeuous, so headstrong,
and so desperate, that the more that God chastises them, the more do they
vomit up their blasphemies, and show themselves to be utterly past amendment,
so that there is no way to bring them unto reason.

Let us learn then, until God has touched us with his holy spirit, that it
is impossible, that his chastisements should serve to bring us to repentance,
but rather to make us worse and worse: yet can it not be said, that God is not
righteous in so doing; for thereby men are convinced, even so much, as if God
held them not at a bay in such sort, by punishing their sins, they might
plead ignorance, that they never knew of it, and that they had ouer-shot
themselves, because God had not provoked them to acknowledge their faults: but
when they have felt the hand of God so, as they have been feign to perceive
his judgments in despite of their teeth, and have been, as it were, summoned,
and yet notwithstanding, have not only gone forward, from evil to worse, but
also bin puffed up, with open rebellion against God.

Hereby we see, they have their mouths stopped, and that they have not any
more to say for themselves.

You see then, how God shows his justice, as often as he punishes men,
notwithstanding it be not a correction for their amendment.





You see then, that many men are touched with Gods hand, which notwithstanding
are accursed. For they begin their hell in this world, as we have examples of
all them, that amend not their wicked life, when God sends afflictions upon
them: but a man shall see them take a corner, and stand barking, like dogs,
and although they can do no more, yet they cease not to show continual
madness, or else they are like horse and mule, like restie Iades; or finally,
Psalm. 32.9.
they are altogether ouer-sotted so, that they know not their own harm or
misery, I mean, as to consider the hand that strikes: they will cry out,
Alas, and they feel the blows: yet they think never the more upon Gods hand,
neither know they, how it is he that visits them.

We see then before our eyes, that many men are the more unhappy for being
chastised at Gods hand, because they profit not in his school, nor yet take
any good by his corrections.

Let us assure our selves, that when God makes us to feel his hand, so as we
are humbled under it, he gives us a special benefit, and it is a privilege
that he gives to none, but to his own children.

When we feel the corrections which he sends us, and also are thereby
taught to mislike of our selves for our offenses, to sigh and groan for them
before him, and to fly to his mercy for refuge, it is a token that he has
wrought in our hearts by his holy Spirit. For it is too high a point of
wisdom to grow in the mind of man, it must proceed of the free goodness of our
God; the holy Ghost must first have softened that cursed hardness and
stubbornes, whereunto we are inclined of nature, ever since the transgression
of our first parents Adam and Eve.

Let us mark then out of this branch of David's prayer, In his great
afflictions and travel, vexations both of body and Spirit; which inward
griefs proceeded from the remorse of sin, wherewith he was grieved and
tormented, that Gods children are not stubborn under his hand, but are
ouermastered and tamed by the working of the holy Ghost, to the intent they
should not strive against the afflictions which he sent unto them.

But yet will this saying seem strange after the opinion of the flesh: for
whatsoever afflictions or tribulations fall out otherwise then we would have
them, we term them adversities.

When we suffer any hunger, thirst, cold, or heat, we say that every one of
these is an adversity. Why so? The reason is, because we would willingly have
our own appetites and desires fulfilled in all things.

And in good sooth, this manner of speech, to say, (that the afflictions and
tribulations that GOD sends upon us, are adversities, that is to say, things
against us) is not without reason. Nevertheless we must understand the end of
them: namely, that Gods scourging of us, is because of our sins. And
therefore by flattering our selves, let us not beguile our selves.

Furthermore, I have already preached unto you, not only that it is requisite
for us to consider, that Gods scourging of us, is, because he hates sin, and
that his summoning of us before him, is to make us to feel him to be our
Judge: but also, that we had need of him, to reach out his arms unto us, and
to show us, that he is ready to be at one with us, whenever we shall come to
him by true repentance.

So then, we perceive that they, whom God chasteneth, are happy,
notwithstanding that we shun adversity as much as we possibly can. Also we
shall never consent to this doctrine, to receive it with our hearts, until
that faith has made us to behold the goodness of God, which he uses toward
his servants, when he draws them back to himself.

And that we may the better comprehend this, let us mark what becomes of
men, when God leaves them to themselves, and makes none account of clensing
them from their sins.

Look upon a man that is given to al evil; for example, a despiser of God. If
God permit him, and chastise him not, you shall see him harden himself, and
the Devil shall carry him still farther and farther; and therefore it had been
much better for him that he had been chastised sooner. And so, the greatest
hurt that can light upon us, is God to suffer us to welter in our own
wickedness: for then must we needs rotte away in it in the end.

Look upon mine afflictions. Text.
2. Doctr. This example of David's teaches us, that in all our miseries we must
seek relief only at Gods hands.

The Reason is: Because, first, he has so commanded, Psalm. 50.15.

Secondly, all power to help, is only in his hands, 2. Chron. 20.6. And
Iehoshaphat said, O Lord God of our fathers, art not thou God in heaven? and
raignest not thou over all the kingdoms of the heathen? and in thine hand is
power and might, and none is able to withstand thee.

The use is first, In all our distresses to seek only to the Lord, and that
alone by such lawful means, as he has warranted in his word.

Secondly, to reprove them that seek to be relieved by Saints, Angels, or any
other in heaven, then God alone. Also them that seem to seek only to the true
God, but use unlawful means to have his help, as by Coniurers, Witches, or
such like.

The holy Scriptures forbid all seeking to Sorcerers, Witches, Astrologers,
Enchanters, Wisards, Fortunetellers, and such like. All which, and each seekers
unto them, and all that any thing trust in the^, are abominable before the Lord.

These unlawful arts hinder the kingdom of heaven. They are of diverse
sorts: all which may most fitly be referred to two heads.

The first, are soothsaiers, diuiners, wizzards, iuglers, gessers before, what
shall come after, and witches, by which all unlawful arts are forbidden,
Michah. 5.2. And I will cut off thine enchaunters out of thine hand, and thou
shall have no more soothsayers.

In the Hebrew, they are called Ceschaphim and Megnonemin.

They are called Ceschaphim, Iuglers or Couzeners, such as with Legerdemain
deceive and delude the eie-sight: but principally, in this place the Prophet
means such, which by witchcraft, yt is, by Magical arts do hold and bewitch
the sights of me^, that they seem to do those things, which in deed they do
not; or if they be done, by the workings of Satan they are wrought.

Of this sort were ye sorcerers of Egypt. Exodus 7.10. Then went Moses and Aaron
unto Pharaoh, and did as the Lord commanded: and Aaron cast forth his rod
before Pharaoh, and before his servants, and it was turned into a Serpent.
verse. 11. Then Pharaoh called for the wiseme^ and It seems that these were
Iannes and Iambres. 2. Tim. 3 8. So ever the wicked maliciously resist the
truth of God.
sorcerers, and those charmers also of Egypt did in like manner with their
enchantments. verse. 12. For they cast down every man his rod, and they were
turned into serpents: but Aarons rod devoured their rod. Exodus 8.7. And the
sorcerers also did likewise with their sorceries, and brought frogs upon the
land of Egypt.

And of this sort was Simon Magus of Samaria, of whom Luke in the 8. chapter
of the Acts records.

And of this sort, are all Enchanters and Coniurers, which use the service and
work of the Devil, to bring their matters to pass; and as many as under the
pretense of Religion, with false doctrine deceive the minds of men, that the
truth they cannot see nor discern, or that by unlawful means apply and
minister their medicines and Physic, while they use Exorcismes, or do hang
about the necks of the sick, enchaunted herbs, or roots, or any other thing
of the like sort.

August. de Doctrina Christiana. lib. 2. cap. 20.
This beastly superstition, the wisest of the heathen did, as it appears,
greatly dislike and abhor.

Theophrastus (as Plutarch writes) noted Pericles, who being sick, showed
(unto a friend of his, who came to visit him) certain enchantments, which by
certain women were tied about his neck, and by that he judged him to be of as
badde a mind, as a man could be, seeing that such madness he regarded. Yet at
this day, such as use manifest impiety, and such as abuse the sacred name of
God in their deuilish sorceries, among Christians, (O lamentable) are suffered
unpunished.

The other sort are called Megnonenim: whom we call Diuiners.

The Etimon of the word, is of diverse significations among the Hebrews.

Some derive the word of Gnanah, to answer, to speak, to testify. Isa.
3.9.26.5. Deuter. 19.18. And this they think they are called, because being
asked, they give answers, as Apollos Interpreters used to do.

Some deduce the root thereof of Gnanan, a cloud, Ezech. 1.4. who are so
called, because they prophecy of things to come by the celestial influences,
or by the positions or situations of the Stars.

Some called them so of the root Gnanah, which signifies a determinate and
appointed time. Whereupon they are called Gnonemin, which make computations of
times and hours, and of certain signs do gather what at sometime can be
begun, when event of things (as they say) shall be.

Notwithstanding, herein they all agree, that the Prophet speaks of Diuiners,
which curiously enquire to know things both secret and to come, by exercising
curious and unlawful Arts.

Vain curiosity and heady rashness have found out many arts of
prophecyings; whose names argue the vanity, and incredible boldness of man's
wit.

Of which sort are Necroma^tia, Necromantia.
which is Divination by calling of Spirits.

Hydromantia.
Hydromantia, Divination by calling Spirits out of the waters.

Pyroma^iia.
Pyromantia, Divination by fire.

Coscinomantia.
Coscinomantia, Divination made by a sieve.

Geomantia.
Geomantia, working in sorcery by circles and pricks in the earth.

Cataptromantia.
Cataptromantia, Divination which is made by a glass: and diverse others, which
are so called by the instruments that they use.

Aruspices.
Of this sort are Bowelgazers to foretell things to come, and Exorcists, whom
the Devil does easily draw, to be ministers of his impiety, whereby he may the
more easily draw men away from God and his holy word.

And although these Arts were in a manner odious among the wise and studious,
yet they gave themselves many of them to the study of Astrology, whereby they
by the stars foretelling things to come, got unto themselves a great name to
be accounted wisemen. But let us observe and mark, that these arts are of
that sort, that if we use them, they will hinder us for entering into the
kingdom of heaven. Leuiticus 20.6. If any turn after such as work with
Spirits, and after soothsayers, to go a whoring after them, then will I set
my face against that person, and will cut him off from among his people. Leuit.
19.26. You shall not use witchcraft, nor observe times. Leuit. 19.31. Ye shall
not regard them that work with Spirits, neither Soothsayers: ye shall not
seek to them, to be defiled by the^: I am the Lord your God. Deuteronomy. 18.9. When
thou shall come into the land which the Lord thy GOD gives thee, thou shall
not learn to do after the abominations of those nations. verse 10. Let none
be found among you, that makes his son, or his daughters to go through the
fire, or that uses witchcraft, or a regarder of times, or a marker of the
flying of fowls, or a Sorcerer, verse 11. Or a charmer, or that counsels
with spirits, or a soothsayer, or that asks counsel at the dead. verse 12.
For all that do such things, are abomination to the Lord, and because of these
abominations the Lord thy God does cast them out before thee.

The causes of Gods severity against such great and grievous sinners, are
weighty. For first it is an inexcusable rashness and presumption, to search out
the knowledge of those things which the Lord will not have to be known.

This rash presumption is condemned by our Savior Christ himself, in the Acts
1.7, when he answered to his Disciples, asking him, Lord, will thou at this
time restore the kingdom to Israel? And he said unto them, It is not for you
to know the time or the seasons, which the Father has put in his own power.

Secondly, it derogateth from the goodness and glory of God, as though that
the Lord had not faithfully taught all things in the sacred Scriptures, which
were necessary to be known of us.

Thirdly, it takes from Christ that honor which is due to him, which of God
is given a Doctor and teacher unto us, and in whom all the treasures of
wisdom and knowledge are hid, as Paul teaches.

To conclude therefore this point, let us not seek unto them, but unto our God
in our afflictions: then will he help us, and deliver us out of our miseries:
for he is a God of power, and therefore is able; a God of mercy, and
therefore is willing to deliver us out of trouble: for as a father has pity
upon his children, so is the Lord merciful to those that trust in him.

The ninth Sermon upon the 25. Psalm. verses 19, 20.
19. Behold mine enemies, for they are many, and they hate me with cruel
hatred.
The sense is:

O Lord my God, although I have bin thy servant, yet satan has raised up many
adversaries and mortal enemies against me, who deadly, cruelly, and most
tyrannously detest and hate me; so that except thou be good and gracious unto
me, to protect and defend me, I shall surely perish.

1. Doct. God is accustomed to whip his children for their sins, by the
multitude of Infidels that hate the truth. Isai. 10.5. O Asshur (says the Lord
by the Prophet) the rod of my wrath, and the staff in their hands is mine
indignation. verse 6. I will send him to a dissembling nation, and I will give
him a charge against the people of my wrath, to take the spoil, and to take
the pray, and to tread them under feet like the mire in the streets. Jeremy.
25.9. Behold, I will send and take to me all the families of the North, says
the Lord, and Nabuchadnezzar the king of Babel my servant, and will bring them
against this land, and against the inhabitants thereof, and against all these
Nations round about, and will destroy them, and make them an astonishment, and
an hissing, and a continual desolation. Exodus 1.13. Wherefore the Egyptians
by cruelty caused the children of Israel to serve. verse. 14. Thus they made
them weary of their lives, by sore labor in clay and in brick, and in all
works in the field, with all manner of bondage, which they laid upon them
most cruelly.

Examples of their cruelties are many in all ages.

The Reason is, because first they will not do that work of God negligently:
and so shall we be the more afflicted with it, and the better humbled.

Secondly, God will thereby keep his people from familiarity with the wicked.

Thirdly, that his love to us may the better appear, in burning the rod upon
our repentance.

The use is, to teach us, first, that it is the lot of the godly, to be
punished by the wicked: so was Christ: so were the Apostles and Prophets: then
let us look for it, and not murmur at it, nor shrink from the truth of it.

Secondly, that sin is a most ugly thing in Gods sight, that causes him to
deal so severely with his dearest children.

Thirdly, that we take heed of being in league with the wicked: for they are
our enemies, and must scourge us.

If men do hate us and despise us, let it put us in mind, that we have not
loved our GOD, and therefore it is good reason that we should receive such
reward of hatred upon our heads.

God then entendeth to try our lowliness and patience in this behalf, by our
meek receiving of the injuries that men do to us, without stomaking the^. For
this delicate bringing us up in ease, without enemies, at our pleasures,
causes us to be impatient, so as we cannot bear any thing; so as if a man
do but pass by us with a frowning countenance, it greeueth us, yea, it is such
a corosiue unto us, that we know not which way to turn us.

Then if the Lord our God inure us to the suffering of enmities, wrongs, and
reproaches, let us learn, that therein he procures our welfare and profit,
to the intent that we should be all whole and sound, as they say.

And this is the cause that S. Paul says, 2. Cor. 6.7.
that it behooves us to be armed on both sides, yt we may pass through
enmity, shame, and reproach, as through amity, glory, and honor.

If men hate and detest us, let us nevertheless take all patiently,
considering, that we have heretofore not walked in the ways of God, although
that now we do. For this is a most true saying, and worthy of al men to be
received and learned, that no affliction comes upon us, but for our sins,
and if he now afflict us, and we walk in his ways, he does it, that we may
not be overcome of the same, seeing he now gives us power to bear it.

And thereupon it behooves every one of us, to bethink himself advisedly;
and as soon as any man shall hate and persecute any of us, we must learn to
acknowledge, that God puts us in mind, to make our own accusation.

Even the heathen Philosophers would say, that our deadly enemies do many
times profit us more then our friends. Wherefore? Our friends bear with us
oftentimes, which causes us to feed our own vices. For although their intent
be not to flatter us, yet notwithstanding, the gentleness (or rather the
cruelty) that they use in bearing with us, is a cause that we think not upon
our imperfections, to amend them. But our enemies do pray upon us, and seek
all the means that may be, to lay open all the faults that are in us.

Therefore, when any man hates or finds fault with us, it behooves us to
think thus: I see, that God here cites me to make mine own process, and to
accuse my self, that I may be mine own Judge, to condemn my self, that by
so doing my shame may be covered and buried.

And if we know that such as hate us, have cause so to do, although they do
it of malice: yet notwithstanding, let us not reply to say, that this man is
led by Satan to revenge, (although it be true) let us not look on any
such things: but let us plead guilty, and pray unto GOD, in the name of Jesus
Christ, to blot out all our offenses, to the end we may be quitte both before
GOD and the world. Yea, although we know not any reason why our enemies should
hate us in that behalf; yet let us acknowledge, that although we be not
guilty in that point whereof we are blamed, yet have we many other vices,
whereof we are guilty, but our good God spares us, and will not have them
come to the knowledge of men. If it pleased him to stir abroad all our
filthiness, what a stink would there be?

Let us consider, that by that means God inte^deth, to set secretly before our
eyes, the sin which we would have cast behind our backs, and that is to make
us to hate the evil that is in us, without any flattering of our selves.

If men do blame us for executing of our offices and duties faithfully, for
following Gods word zealously and sincerely, let us assure our selves, that
Gods will is, that our receiving of such a reward, shall be, to the end that
we should look for a better at his hand.

And if we see no cause at all, but are utterly abashed in our selves, let us
not therefore cease to say, O Lord, thou art righteous, whatsoever come of it.

And herewithall let us endeavor to profit our selves, by all the
chastisements which God sends us from day to day, and let us understand, that
thereby God intends to fashion us to praise and glorify him, even when we
see good men hated and persecuted. For as every one of us ought to be
patient, and by his patience to praise God for all things that he suffers,
so also must we not blame him, but rather as David here does, pray unto him,
when we see him suffer good men to be hated and persecuted: wherefore, let
us not be too much grieved, when we see them so hardly used. We see David's
estate: he was a pattern of al holiness, a man after Gods own heart; and yet
notwithstanding, we see him in such misery by the hatred of his enemies, that
he seems to be utterly past recovery.

Can we blame God in this behalf? Nay rather, when we see such afflictions
come upon others, or our selves, let us humble our selves. And although the
reason why God does so, be not apparent unto us: yet notwithstanding, let us
assure our selves, that GOD does it not without cause; and therefore we ought
to glorify him in all his judgments, although they be incomprehensible to us.

Psalm. 25.20. Keep my soul, and deliver me, let me not be confounded; for I
trust in thee. The second part of the ninth Sermon.

The sense is:

FOrasmuch (O Lord my God) as all my whole trust and confidence I repose in thy
mercy, and none in flesh, blood, nor any other means whatsoever, to be
delivered from peril and danger, which mine enemies, to the loss of my life,
yea, to my utter confusion, do lie in wait to inflict upon me: and forasmuch
as thou art a God of power, and therefore art able to deliver, a God of
compassion, and therefore regardest the afflictions of thy dear children,
trusting and calling upon thee in their afflictions and adversities; I humbly
beseech thee, for Jesus Christ's sake the Messiah to come, to keep and preserve
my foul from destruction, and my body from the tortures which mine enemies
would lay upon it: so shall I glorify thy name among thy Saints in the great
congregation, and after this life sing praises with the Saints and Angels in
thy kingdom, to thy glorious name for ever.

1. Doct. Whosoever trusts in the Lord in the time of persecution by his enemies,
will fly to him to preserve his soul and his body by prayer.

The Reason is: Where hope in God is, there is also prayer to God, seeing it
springs necessarily from it, as the fruit does from the tree.

The use is, That as we would be assured that we hope in God, so also that we
exercise prayer, seeing that we cannot assure our selves of the cause, without
the effect. Let us therefore according to his commandment, in our
afflictions and necessities, seek to GOD in the name of Jesus Christ for
succor, by continual prayer, and calling upon his name. Let us call upon him
in the day time, and in the night season: let us power out our complaints
before him daily and hourly: let us make our prayers unto him, although we
feel our selves nothing released, but oftentimes worse and worse, which makes
us oftentimes, almost to doubt of his goodness. Psa. 77. that he does reject,
and gives no heed unto them: whereby we almost think it in vain to pray,
seeing that we find no release. But this is our weakness, and frailty of
our flesh, which will not willingly be subdued to the spirit: Which let us
beseech the Lord to forgive us, for he sees our conflicts, and looks upon
our continual sighs and petitions, but he deferreth and prolongeth his help
the longer, and does not at the first help us; to this end, that we may see
fully our own weakness, learn by little and little to subdue our rebellions
to his gracious will, who knows better what is meet for us, then we for our
selves.

Therefore let us beseech him to strengthen us by his holy spirit, that we
may still persevere and continue in prayer, and with longing desires patiently
wait for him, being fully assured, that although it presently appear not, yet
he is always present with us, and hears our sighs and complaints, and
will, when he sees his time, declare himself manifestly, in keeping our
souls, and delivering our bodies; in preserving us from confusion, and in
renewing our hearts with spiritual joy.

Let us earnestly entreat him, to stir up our dull and sluggish nature to
call upon him continually, appoynting him neither the time, nor the means of
our deliverance; but leaving al to his good will and pleasure, we may in the
mean time never cease by continual prayer to call for his merciful help and
assistance, until such time it shall please his goodness to send us full
deliverance.

Although we feel our selves through the malice of Satan, very unwilling to
prayer, seeing that we do not fully perceive them to be heard, but go on
still languishing in our sorrows, as though GOD had no care of us. Yet this
our dullness let us entreat our merciful father to pardon in us, and grant
that we may be raised up, and pray for aid and relief of him continually:
and although we should see no sign of favor, yet that we may continue still
with the faithful woman of Canaan, and never cease in heart, mind, and mouth,
till he grant our requests at his appointed time, when he knows it shall be
most meet for our behoof and his glory: And that when the Lord shall
mercifully look upon us, we then fully with our whole hearts acknowledge his
goodness toward us; and let it never slip out of our hearts, but continue
thankful for the same all the days of our lives, whereby his glory in us may
be declared, and our souls relieved.

The tenth Sermon upon the 25. Psalm. verses, 21.22.
21. Let mine vprightnes and equity preserve me: for my hope is in thee.
The sense is:

O Lord my God, whereas mine adversaries persecute me, thou know that they
have no just cause so to do, seeing that thou have given me integrity,
uprightness, and justice, and seeing that it is not sufficient to be of a
sound and upright conscience to be delivered from dangers, but to trust to thy
sweet promises, therefore my safety (O Lord) I commit to thy protection.

1. Doct. The best way to stay us in the time of our trouble, and to keep our
patience inviolable, is to look in for a good conscience, and see yt we be
falsely accused: which if we find, the^ al goes well, and we are joyful at
home, howsoever the world shall say or do abroad; for we may say with
Solomon, See the root thereof, Leu. 16.17.
Prou. 28.1. Every wicked man flies, when none pursues: but the just are
like a young Lion, which is courageous.

This holy Proverb teaches, that wickedness makes the wicked very
fearful, and that righteousness makes the innocent secure and bold.

In it first, the wicked man is resembled to a bird, or some such timorous
creature, which betaketh it self to flight, when no cause is offered. For the
guilty person, after he has committed some abominable act, (as theft or
murder, imagines that some lie in wait for him, and doubts he shall be
taken: the reason is, for ye although none is near to pursue him, yet the
sound of terror is in his ears, as the Aramites are for example, who ca^ping
about Samaria, 2. Kin. 6.7. The Lord had caused the camp of the Aramites to
hear a noise of chariots, and a noise of horses, and a noise of a great army,
so that they said one to another, Behold, the kind of Israel has hired against
us the kings of the Hittites, and the kings of the Egyptians, to come upon us.
verse. 7. Wherefore they arose, and fled in the twylight, and left their tents,
and their horses, and their asses, even the camp as it was, and fled for their
lives. The sting of conscience will not suffer him to be quiet in any place.
But the just, as is affirmed in the second place, are like a young Lion, which
is courageous. For he goes on his way boldly and swiftly, without returning
back for fear of any.

The reason is. For that being at peace with God, and having a good cause, and
a sound conscience, he dreadeth no objection nor danger.

This same Integrity therefore, is like Noah's Arc, wherein he was preserved,
when others, that were without, perished. It is like the red thread, which the
spies of Joshua gave to Rahab, which was as a charter, whereby she claimed her
life, when the rest were destroyed which had not the like.

So is this vprightnes of small reckoning (I confess) with men of this world,
which think that there is none other heaven, but earth: But as Rahabs thread
was better to her, then all her goods and substance, when the sword came: so
vprightnes is better to Gods children, then all the world, when death comes.
If they have this within they care not, nay, they need not care what can come
without.

If Satan's buffetting come, this is an helmet of proof; if Satan's darts
fly, this is a shield to quench them, if floods of troubles come to carry us
away, this is a ship to bear us up; if all the world cast mire and filth in
our faces, we are not a whitte the more deformed, but still beautiful: For
the Kings daughter is all beautiful within, Psalm. 45.13.

Let us have regard to a good conscience, and because it is so precious a
jewel, I wish all persons, that as yet never labored to get a good
conscience, now to begin. Reasons to induce men thereunto, are sound and good.

First, you seek day and night, from year to year, for honors, riches and
pleasures, which you must leave behind you, much more ought you to seek for
this vprightnes, considering that conscience will be with you in this life, in
death, at the last judgment, and for ever.

2. Reason. He which wants a conscience purged in the blood of Christ, can
never have any true and lasting comfort in this life.

Suppose a man were arraied in cloth of tissue, set in a chair of estate,
before him a table furnished with all dainty provision, his servants,
monarchs and Princes; his riches ye chiefest treasures and kingdoms of the
world, but withal, suppose one standing by with a naked sword to cut his
throat, or a wild beast ready immediately to pull him in pieces: now, what can
we say of this man's estate, but that all his happiness is nothing but woe and
misery?

And such is the estate of all men, that abounding with riches, honors and
pleasures, carry about them an evil conscience, which is as a sword to slay
the soul, or as a rauinous beast, ready to suck the blood of the soul, and
to rend it in pieces.

3. Reason. He which wants a good conscience, can do nothing but sin, his
very eating and drinking, his sleeping and waking, and all that he does turns
to sin the conscience must first be good, before the action can be good: if
the root be corrupt, the fruits are answerable. 4. Reason. An evil
conscience is the greatest enemy that a man can have, because it does execute
all the parts of judgment against him.

It is the Lords Sergeant: God needs not to send out process by any of his
creatures for man, the conscience within a man will arrest him, and bring him
before God. It is the Jailer, to keep man in prison, in boltes and irons, that
he may be forth coming at the day of judgment. It is the witness to accuse
him, the judge to condemn him, the hangman to execute him, and the flashings
of the fire of hell to torment him.

Again, it makes a man to be an enemy to God, because it accuses him to God,
and makes him fly from God, as Adam did when he sinned.

Also, it makes a man to be his own enemy, in that it does cause him to lay
violent hands upon himself, and become his own hangman, or his own
cutthroate.

And on the contrary, a good conscience is a man's best friend: when all me^
entreat him hardly, it will speak fair and comfort him: it is a continual
feast and a Paradise upon the earth.

5. Reason. The sacred scripture shows, that they which never seek for good
consciences, have terrible ends. For either they die blocks, as Nabal did, or
desperate, as Cain Saul, Achithophel, and Judas.

6. Reason. We must consider often the terrible day of judgment, in which
every man must receive according to his works: and that we may be then the
better absolved, the best way is, to seek for a good conscience: for if our
conscience be evil, and condemn us in this life, God will much more condemn
us.

And whereas we must pass through three judgments, the judgment of men, the
judgment of our consciences, and the last judgment of God; we shall never be
strengthened against them, and cleared in them all, but by the seeking of
integrity and a good conscience.

Psalm. 25.22. Deliver Israel, O God, out of all his troubles. The 2. part of
the tenth Sermon.

THe Prophet by this clause, shows, what manner of adversaries they were,
against whom he complained to God.

Domestical enemies it is probable they were, which as a disease enclosed in
the bowels of a man tormented and vexed the people of God For by the word
Deliver, or Redeem, we gather, that the Church of God was with great servitude
grievously oppressed.

Therefore I doubt not, but the Prophet, in praying to be delivered both
himself particularly, and the Church generally from their troubles, prays to
be delivered from the hands of Saul and other tyrants, that were for this
purpose to torment and persecute, not only the Prophet, but the whole Church
under his tyrannical government.

The sense is: O Lord, our God, I humbly beseech thee for Christ's sake, to
redeem, not only me thine unworthy servant, but also thy whole Church, which
is greatly vexed, and miserably kept in servitude by Saul and other tyrants. O
Lord, we are thy servants, and the sheep of thy pasture, and thou art our
Shepherd; thou art our father, and we thy children: therefore we beseech
thee, extend thy fatherly compassion to deliver us thy dear children, out of
our miseries; so shall we both in this life, and that to come, glorify thy
holy name world without end.

The Doctrine is: We must in all our troubles pray to GOD, not only for our
selves, but for all the whole Church, to be delivered from our miseries.

The Reason is: If one member suffer, other must needs suffer, 1. Corinthians. 12.

The Use. Let us therefore perform this duty toward the whole Church, that
she may also do the like for us: then shall we be assured, that the Lord
will deliver us, when he sees it meet for his glory and our good, seeing he
has promised to grant the requests of his spouse the Church.

This grace the Lord grant us all for his mercies sake: to whom with the
Son, and the holy Ghost, be all glory, wisdom, thanks, honor, power, and
might, both now and for ever. Amen.

Soli Deo gloria.

