CALTHA Poetarum: Or The Bumble Be. Composed by T. Cutvvode Esquyre.

Non inferiora sequutus.



LONDON Printed by Thomas Creed, for Richard Olive. 1599.

TO THE CONCEITED Poets of our age.
SCribimus indocti doctique poemata passim. Pardon me Gentlemen and others that
delight to write, if out of my own humor and knowledge of my self, I deliver
this conceit before my book, that all we write is but conceit. And nothing
pleases conceited me^ more then to have partners or acquaintances with their
conceits. Scire tuum nihil est nisi, quod scis hoc sciat alter. Be it learned
or not, yet the contriuing pleases the humor, so the subject be drawn out of
the sweet impressio^ of content. Being contrived, partiality breeds either
such pity, that the hours spent to our pleasure, should be blotted with
oblivion, or such hopes, that what we write, may meet with like affected
humors, which may receive it with some liking, as we die if we offer not the
world our conceits. The end is to our vvritings that are unlearned, al one, as
to the learned Poems that are. For Homer, who immitated none, and
Archilocus, who is compared with Homer, because they only finished their works
in their life. And Virgil, the curious Ape of Homer. Ovid the Amorous, Martial
the lycentious, Horace, the mixed betwixt modest and Satirique vain. The flower
of our age, sweet pleasing Sidney. Tasso the grave. Pollished Daniel the
Historick. Spencer the Truths Faith. All these have this only usury of their
pains, they please others and themselves. In like manner, as we please our
selves, so some are pleased with us. For as these are admired and deified
almost by the wisest, the lernedst, and the deepest sighted into great matters,
the ignorant not being able to attain unto the^. So we are held among the
inferior spirits, and are the little Penates, to country, homely and low
reaching wits, admired by such, and religiously read, though never taken into
the others hands. Are they then known? So are we. Are they not known to all?
No more are we. Do they carp and jest at us, if by chance we fall into their
fingers? We will cry quittance, for we will not understand them in some
things, and touch them with an Ironicall Adage; Quae supra nos nihil ad nos.
Gentlemen and others, I pray you let us hold together for the preservation of
our reputation, and maintain the prescription of our low subjects, least
Apollos music do quite drown poor Pan, and the country Hornpipe be laid
aside. Alas, if the woods, the poor brooks, and the dales of the country,
sound not sometime in our ears, as well as the Prince of Rivers, let the
lasses give over laaking in the green, and dancing about the Maypole. It were
great pity the little Cupids Altars should be altogether defaced, from whose
ever renewing influence, so many pleasing subjects do flow into our brains.
For whilst he co^tinues honored in the world, we must once a year bring him
upon the stage, either da^cing, kissing, laughing, or angry, or dallying with
his darlings, leaping into their eyes, seating himself in their breasts,
commanding more then imperiously all the gods; or crying for childish
peeuishnes; or metamorphosed into many cha^geable shapes; or playing in a
garden as I do at this time; weeping, and again stung with a Be. There is a
secret (but, I may not reveal the counsels and secrets of our state of love)
which makes this young god, be to all men the plain song to their descant of
their In Nomines. It cannot be youth alone, for then old men could not dote,
and young men might only claim privilege of love from the the God. What
should it then be? Surely, if not a secret influence in the beloved, I cannot
divine the reason. For if aged Trees were not succored with the Sun as well as
young plants, their decay would be sudden. All sorts do offer sacrifice to him.
Let all sorts then be retained, devoutly in the opinion of devotion. For the
aged no sooner laughed the young man to scorn for loving, but straightly he
doated. Let me I pray you abruptly thus end, least I speak too much, when I
doubt my speech will only please my own conceit.

Yours T. Cutwode.

G. S. in commendation of the Author.
Lyte has by skillful proof revealed to our sight,
The virtue of each Plant; his hurt full harm or good*
Wherein the busy Be, approues her pure delight,
Selecting thence essential sweet pleasing food:
For us, as for her self, as none but Lyte and she,
In Natures sacred school, so learned seem to be.
So Cutwode Lyte, like proves, in cunning with the Be,
From love and bewties force youths blossoms in his prime:
To search and try the sweet from age, also does he,
Taste what is good or bad, a virtue or a crime,
Without offense or fault, by Flower, Plant, or Tree,
Persons of good worth are meant, conceal thus does he.
Often aiming at the Nymph the object of his mind,
Whom Caltha or Marygold, he calls himself a Be:
To some her coy conceit, to him how she is kind,
He shows by wit divine and pure conceit we see:
How youth does age disdain and cu^ningly beguile,
Which whilst his Nymph beholds, she cannot choose but smile.
And ye who erst to sing of love her pleasant lays,
Busied have been, from forth Minerua her breast:
The sweet to taste by rare devise your fame to raise,
Admire his skill and choice conceit most purely pressed,
From homebred soil and Nature he it hither brings,
By birth from noble progeny (lo) thus be sings.
Caltha Poetarum.
1
MY Herball book in Folio I unfold,
I pipe of Plants, I sing of so^mer flowers,
But chiefly on the Maiden Marygold,
and of the Daisie, both brave Belamours:
Trophies for Kings, Imprese for Emperors,
Garlands to bear upon the brave Ensigns
Of Knights, of Peers, of princely Palladines.
2.
Then ( Flora) come thou flourishing fair Queen, oh child of Maia thou must be
my Muse,
To gird my temples with thy gaudy green,
and with thy fuming flowers my front infuse
With Koses, Paunsyes, Pinks, as Poets use
With Laurel Bay, and Baucis never old,
For to attend my Virgin Mary-gold.
3
Lend me thy Purple and the Pall depainted,
thy fair enameld mantle thou did wear,
When first thou came Idolatryz'd and sainted,
installed by the beauty of the year:
Oh lend to me that garment and that gear,
So that my verses they may sweetly smell,
And I above all siuet may excel:
4.
And you (fair damsels) you who danced that day
when heavenly Flora first was holified,
That mighty mistres, this same child of May,
come hither sweetings, come sit by my side:
Tune to my song and see what will bety de,
Bring timbrils, pipe and harp, and he are me play,
And lie thee a while, and listen to my lay.
5.
There is a City lying near the North.
By name yeleaped Nycol heretofore,
Where ancient Lacyes, men of mickle worth,
were Rulers many a hundredth years of yore,
And domineerd with dignity and power.
Thy Earldome (Nycol) the^ did bear great sway,
But Earldoms, Earls and Counties now decay.
6.
This City it is seated on a hill,
whereas the faithless jews did sacrifice,
And did the corpse of young sir Hugo kill,
wherefore the Christians him did canonise,
And built a Temple in most sumptuous wise,
Where Hugo lies interred in a shrine,
For to be seen at this same present time.
7.
This Temple takes his name of good sir Hugh,
and with his lofty pinacles does look,
And does his famous running River view,
where fair Tarenta Lady of that brook,
Does glyde into each Angle, and each nooke:
And with a silver snakie twine she runs,
To father Humber, whylom king of Huns.
8.
But soft and fair this fitteth not my vain
Of Chroniks craft I have but little skill,
Unto my Herbadge I will go again,
for that draws best acquaintance to my quill:
Therefore you fair sweet Virgins sit you still.
For in this City which I did rehearse,
Does dwell the very subject of my verse.
9.
There planted is a Garden (not by Art)
nor any cunning of the Craftsmans skill,
But even by Nature, who has played her part,
to be our chief and special worker still:
Whose essence takes she from the makers will,
That frames all things by his mighty power,
Both trees and Plants, and every pretty flower.
10.
Here is no talk of the for bidden Tree,
(as was in Edoms Orchard at the first)
Nor Serpent hissing with his subtletie:
when as the simple man became accursed:
And from that Garden into thraldom thrust,
Here is no spirit with a flaming sword,
As Gardener to some great and mighty Lord.
11.
Both Earth and Firmament does favor it,
Bedabling with the dew of heavenly drops
The rays of Sun does sweetly savor it,
making it sprout with tall and tender tops:
Of many kinds of smelling knubs and knobs*
When as the sheading of our April showers
Do break their bunches forth to leaves and flowers.
12.
There springs the princely redrose and the white
as Chaires of State and high imperial place,
where they two famous houses do unite:
whence comes our kings and queens of Regal race,
Under the Gods that do protect their grace
Whose stirp and stock from beds of Roses breed,
Borne and begotien of that sweet fair seed.
13.
Next to the Roses, grows the Flower-deluce,
the flower of ancient Lewis Lord of France,
Whose golden leaves of that same goodly Luce,
did Lewis long maintain with manlike lance
Till Albions Ensign did the same advance.
When English Edward third of that same name,
By battle bold brought in this flower of Fame.
14.
Next unto it, the pretty Pauncyes springs,
all in a rank in borders and in beds,
Who represents a geanalog of kings,
with purple crowns upon their princely heads,
With heary bristles which their chins bespread
An Index of much magnanimity,
Of Virtue, Valor, and Virilitie.
15.
By them do grow the kingcups like to gold,
with sops in wine, that every heart delights:
Which cups the Kings in co^pleme^ts do hold,
carousing to their champions and their knights:
That in their service, for their honor fights:
Kissing the cup, and drinking to the health
Both of their kings, and of their Commonwealth.
16.
Next grows the blew cornuted Collumbine,
like to the crooked horns of Acheloy
When he in shape and Metamorphosin,
of mighty Bull, the wrastler did annoy,
But yet the striuer did this beast destroy:
And when this monstrous battle did surceace,
His horns became our threasethouse of peace.
17.
There Flora takes them by their golden tips, Flora that is our flourishing
fair Queen,
And straws and fa^neth forth her flowers and slips
with gaudie garlands girding Albions green,
With Olive branches that for peace have been:
Blessed be our Flora, that so long has borne,
This Cornu Copia, this same plenteous horn.
18.
The next my pretty Marygold displaies,
her golden bloome like to the sunny beams
Spreading abroad her rich and radyent rays,
resembling Titan in his hottest streams,
Even in the glory of his Summer gleames:
So shynes my Marygold, so does she show,
So as she seems a second Sun below.
19.
Who in the morning spreads her yealow hair
like to the blaze of golden Phoebus bright:
That maks the heavenly clymes to shine so clear,
illuminating all the world with light,
So shines my Marygold so fair in sight:
Till in the dark when as the day is dun,
She closes up and sets with the Sun.
20.
Thus proudly does she brave sir Phoebus shining
and seconds him both in his prime of morn,
And in the night even at his down declining,
setting the silly Sunburnt god at scorn,
As if that she the sovereign sway had born,
Disdaining things inferior here that lies:
But looks aloft, as Lady of the Skies.
21.
On her attends the Dasie dearly dight,
that pretty Primula of Lady Ver,
As handmaid to her mistress day and night,
so does she watch, so waits she on her,
With double diligence and dares not stir,
A fairer flower perfumes not forth in May,
Then is this Daisie, or this Primula.
22.
About her neck she wears a rich wroght ruff,
with double sets most brave and broad bespread,
Resembling lovely Lawn or Cambrick stuff,
pind up and pricked upon her yealow head.
Wearing her hai^e on both sides of her shead:
And with her countenance she has a cast,
Wagging the wa^^on with each wynd and blast.
23.
Commend me to the young ones of the Corte,
and mark how as the pretty Mophies sits,
Wagging their conntenance in seemly sort,
with modest blush that beauty so be fits,
Wyeling fond lovers sometime from their wits*
So wags this wanton with a red complexion,
When as the Sun darts to her his reflection.
24.
Here could I set you down the Honysuckle
the pretty Pinke and purple Pianet,
The Bugles, Boradge, and the blew Bottle,
the bonny Belamour and Violet,
And thriuing Thrift if men would gather it
With lovely Lillies and the fair Narcis,
And Venus sleep at noone with Adonis.
25.
It were a work of labor to unfold
the private secrets of each privy plant,
Therefore (my Muse) go to the Marygold,
least wit be wearied and thy senses scant,
And paper, pen and Ink and all do want,
And in thy study spend a learned hour,
To grace and favor that same golden flower.
26.
Down once again descend (oh holy dame)
infuse me ( Flora) with thy summers heat:
And fa^ my forehead with thy flowers of fame,
when as my temples they begin to sweat,
And that my busy brains and brows do beat.
Fan on apace (my Muse) till I have told
What did betide my maiden Marygold.
27.
It chanced once, the fair Cytherian Queen
came to this goodly Garden on a day:
And brings with her, false Cupid to this green,
where she and he begun to sport and play,
Where Venus did the fair sweet flowers suruay:
Who being pretty frolike in her sport,
She speaks to her son in this same sort.
28.
My child quoth she, and pulls him by the chin,
and lays her other hand about his neck,
And with her lips she culs and kisses him,
as she were charmd, from giving him a check,
Because the boy was always at her beck.
The flattering queen knew how to curry favor power,
Who woed the wa^ton boy with bold behauior.
29.
My child said she, me thinks thou shuldst have power,
to plague in love, each Plant and tender spring,
And brand forth siery flames on every flower,
as thou do use and threat each other thing,
With bended bow of steel, and stubborn string,
With shafts to shoot out, and sharp headed darts
Where with thou cruelly do gall men's hearts.
30.
Why yes quoth Cupid, do but view this Vine,
mark but the sweet imbraceme^ts of his branches
And see his arms how wa^to^ly they twine,
and how his loins lie on his lovers hanches,
Where Venus in his Vinyards he aduances,
Distilling Nectar beryes from above:
All which proceeds from the God of love.
31.
Hark how the Bay tree she begins to breath,
and seems to sigh as she had languisht long:
And with the wanton wind to wrig and wreath,
against the god that did the girl such wrong,
As I have heard some sing in Ouids song:
So that when all is said and all is done,
This all you see is subject to your son.
32.
Then list quoth Venus, til my tale be told,
Long has this Woodbine tree a woer been
Unto this proud disdainful Marygold,
the Viccar of a vain usurping Queen,
Checking the son as I have often seen,
Disdaining both the heavenly powers proud Elf:
And flowting at all flowers but it self.
33.
Thou see the Woodbyne is a tender tree,
that like a wanton winds about our wood,
His flowring forth as sweet as sweet may be,
his youthful sap much like the lusty blood,
In rules of Physic seen and counted good,
A Doctor, to delay this sulty heat,
That sweet hearts take in travel of their sweat.
34.
How often comes he with kingcups full of gold,
and as a present offers to this flower,
And riches in great handfuls he does hold,
rayning upon her lap an Oryent shower,
Of Pearl, which mo^gst fair women have much power
But al as naught her nicitie neglects the^,
And even as rags most rudely she reiects the^.
35.
This spoke false Venus to her bastard brat,
and when her jolly circumstance was done,
The dame tuckt up he clothes and down she sat,
and all in haste she calls her little son,
And for to ben this bow she first begun,
Then g^ue him shasts to practice all his power,
And bring the downfall of this dainty flower.
36.
This cunning Archer aymeth at the mark
(mary at hittie missie is he tooting)
The Boy was blind as is the dazzled dark,
and never suer, nor certain in his shooting:
For oftentimes he fails in his footing.
As you shall hear how this same crafty child,
Even in the brag of cunning was beguild.
37.
It chanct, a Be came flying to this flower,
with hummng melody, and bumming noyce:
And lights upon her stalk even at that stower,
for in his flowers he is very choice:
Sitting and singing there with buzing voice.
Working in summer for his healthful hiue,
That he in winter might the better thrive.
38.
He came but lately from the damask Rose,
unto my Marygould that shines so sunnie:
And got him there a pair of yealow hose,
of virgin wax, all wet about with hunnie.
The sweetest wax that can be made for money
With Meldeaw clam'd, and clagged were his knees,
To carry home, and bring unto his Bees.
39.
But walladay, he was not there aware,
of Cupids shaft, nor of his sudden clap;
The Honey catcher came unto his care,
for there the silly fly received a rap:
(Alas poor Bumble buz, for thy ill hap)
For why the blinded boy (ay me for thee)
Did miss the golden bud, and gauld the Be.
40.
But here I leave the honey bird confounded,
that woefully aloft away did fling:
All unto death he is most deeply wounded,
and stu^g himself, that sometimes used to sting:
Here must I leave that honey bird of wing,
And tell how Venus waxed wrathful wild,
And red with anger at her recklesse child.
41.
Blind bastard (quoth the dame) what have thou done,
recklesse unskillful and unlucky elfe?
Thou base begotten boy, and Cuckolds son,
the sorrow of thy shaft light on thy self,
And plague the archer with his trash and pelf:
And break thy bow, and shiuer shaft and dart,
And clean unarm thee, blind boy as thou art.
42.
Nay then (quoth Cupid) mother you are blind,
that would not help to rule my aim and me:
Unless you had been mad or out of mind,
you might have seen at first I could not see:
But I have shot, and that which will, will be.
The Mary gold must grow and flourish fair,
And in the honey comb must live all care.
43.
Behold the binder shall become a Bond,
Unto this golden stem that here you see:
(Think not my prophecy for to be fond)
For he that once did bind the biggest tree,
unto this tender twig, a bond must be.
And to the good abearing must be staide,
Until loves Manumissum it be made.
44.
The sting that breeds upon the honey britch,
delays the deadly stinging of my dart:
And heals the wound and takes away the stitch,
and is a sovereign salve against his smart.
Who like Prometheus Griphin gripes the heart,
So sting for sting, poison for poison (mother)
As in our nails one drives out an other.
45.
Prat'st thou quoth Venus of old Augurisme?
come thou to tell me Beldams Oracles*
Telst me of any sect or southsawe scisme?
Must I believe thy rables and thy Ridles?
And like a dunce doat on thy didle fidles?
In faith sir no, for I have sworn, my power
Shall work the fatal end of this proud flower.
46.
To this her Cupid answered pretely,
how often (mother) have I seen you shake
The beawtie and the splendour of this tree,
and of the Marygoulds, gay garlands make:
Yea you your self to wear them for their sake.
And on your locks to place the pretty ones,
Preferring them before the precious stones.
47.
How often have I seen your Coatcher trot,
when you in pomp to Paphos Island ran?
How often mother have I garlands got,
for every Dove, and every milk white Swan
That drew your Chariot and your gay waggan.
And make your pretty Pidgions teams and yoaks
Of Mary-goulds to hang about their throats.
48.
How often have the buds been laid abroad
upon the traces whereas you should tread:
How often have they thy stately altars strawd,
and we exalting there thy holy head,
Whilst Hymns were su^g, and sacred Psalms were sed:
Me thinks I see how all the rabble runs,
Unto thy Church, with chains of golden suns.
49.
The^ (queen) accept the of springs of this flower,
and offer not the golden Bud disgrace,
For she is pleasing to thy princely power,
and therefore curse it not in any case:
I pray thee mother let my prayers take place,
And let her shine as does the glimsing sun,
And do as well as she to fore has done.
50.
Thus Cupid said, but see this self-wild wench,
Venus she brings a Brierhooke in her hand,
And cuts me down each border and green be^ch
and all the shading shelter that did stand,
To guard the flowers from the filchers hand,
And lets in a Northern uncouth air,
That almost blasted had her Bloomes so fair.
51.
Note that all mischief comes from the North
for in his blast he blows Boreas in,
Who from his freezing harbor comes forth,
with chilled cheeks and hory frozen chin,
His blood all thawne away and visage thin:
His slauering beard and lips with spattle spewd
With drops of frozen Ifixles bedewd.
52.
He foamde his froth upon her tender rynd,
and made her seem as sunshine in a mist:
And with a winter blast he blows his wind,
beslauering her, with sluttishnesse he kissed,
And had been withered there ere she had wist
But that the blaze of sunny beams by chance,
Dissolved the storm, and blessed the tender bra^ch.
53.
But now I will return unto the Be,
the little Wasp and silly wounded thing:
Who like a soldier from the victory,
comes maimed home, his arm upon a string:
So droups this Be, so hangs he down his wing,
Showing the Marygold his mortal scarre,
Who unto death was wounded in her war.
54.
His honey it was turned into gall,
his wax that he about him long had borne,
The honey and the honey comb and all, and
all his britches from his buttocks torn,
Was from his body wasted and quight worn.
As sure if you had seen you would have sed,
He had been prisoner in the spyder web.
55.
His loins were lean through fast and evil fare,
His legs and knees as ca^mocks were all crooked
That up and down did carry him with care,
his horns that were so strait, became both hooked:
Who like a little spright or devil he looked:
His breath not serving him to buz or bum,
Nor scarce with any noise to hear him hum.
56.
Unto this flower he falls down on his knee,
just at the root that grew upon the ground:
And said grant mercy Marygold on me,
and lend a leaf to lay unto my wound,
That it might plaster me and make me sound.
For on thy branch I here did take my bane,
And here I hope to be recured again.
57.
Deny me not (oh thou fair golden flower)
sweet give me leave a while that I might sit
Upon thy yealow head and work an hour,
and for my hungry self some honey get,
For all is wasted, I have not a whit.
I tell thee my distress, to thee I shriue me,
I have no help, unless thy self wilt hiue me.
58.
I will not (as the creeping canker) waste thee,
nor as the worm in wodsea^ time bespew thee,
I come not like the Butterfly to blast thee:
norwith foul deadly venom to bedeaw thee:
I Will leave thee even as fresh as erst I knew thee:
I Will make my golden shrub that shines so sunny,
As sweet as is the honey comb or hunny.
59.
With that but I must tell you here a wonder)
and almost past my credit for to speak,
This branch her biggen she did burst in sunder
her hair upon a sudden on her neck,
That seemd to wave, and give the Be a beck:
And laid her leaves wide open there for him,
That up aloft the Be might better climb.
60.
Upon her flew the fly and sucked her sweet,
and played full peartly with that pretty one,
And there full fea^ly labourd with his feet,
and kissed her, least he should be deemd a drone:
Now blessed be love, for there was love alone,
The Be begins to find and stir his sting,
Believe me (love) thou art a wanton thing.
61.
There he receives the deaw of honey drops,
and bathes his lims that were so lean and lank,
And in her circle up and down he hops,
and feeds apace and does refresh his flank,
And with her wax he stores his spindle shank,
And now the honey bird away does styue,
With bu^ming and with humming to his hyue.
62.
To buz of Caltha now the Be was bold,
of Caltha now were all the Echos ringing:
For now no more he calls her Marygold,
but news from Lady Caltha is he bringing,
Offaire sweet Lady Caltha is he singing:
And up and down he flies with her fame,
Till he unto his hiue and harbor came.
63.
His Bees with welco^e round about him swarms
and brings him into his thatched home,
And marching all along like men at arms,
they place him in the highest honey come,
Where he as king does keep, and rules alone,
And all his subjects offering him their service:
For to disarme him of his honey harms.
64.
One does his boots vnbutton from his shins,
an other helps for to untie his hose:
An other wipeth honey from his wings,
that came from Lady Caltha and the rose,
The which he gets when he his prograce goes.
And thus comd home with heuie drowsy head,
Th'vnnu^bred birds do bring their Be to bed.
65.
And there he sleeps and slumbers til the morn,
when he awakes and wipes his pinking eyes,
And up he starts and blows like a horn,
where all his soldiers in a swarm do rise,
Attending on him wheresoever he flies.
And he again into his garden goes.
Whereas his Goddess Lady Caltha grows.
66.
There sit they round about and gards this flower
some making of their honey on the Mallow:
An other biting on the Bellamour,
an other like a little dapper fellow
Works on yarrow, making wax so yealow,
And every Fly unto his flower goes,
Some to the Red, some to the damask Rose.
67.
Where having got their honey and their wax,
they come to Caltha, where their master sits,
And throws their honey I erkins down and Iacks
and gives to him the gain their labor gets.
Thus industry his commonwealth befits:
So when they are disloded of their store,
They buz about, and flies away for more.
68.
In mean while this same mighty bumble Be,
is framing of a Chapel for his Queen,
With strange and costly Archetectury,
the rarest sight that ever yet was seen,
Of waxen work, was never like I ween:
Pillars of honey combs with Piramis,
And strong pilasters of great stateliness.
69.
And at one end there stands a proper steeple,
dawbing his height with honey for his lime:
And bells to ring in these same pretty people,
when as they take it to be service time,
To say their prayers, their Matte^s and their prime
And when this Chapel ended was and wald,
La santa Caltha, this same be it called.
70.
With Virgin wax he makes a honey alter,
and on it stands, the torches and the tapers,
Where he must sing his Rosarye and Psalter,
and pray devoutly on his holy papers,
With book, with candlelight, with bells and clappers,
And in the praise of Goddess Caltha sing,
That all the holy quier and Church may ring.
71.
Upon this holy altar there does stand,
The Coatch of Phoebus carved all of wax,
And there the mighty God with whip in hand
it seems the winged Pegasies he thwacks,
Laying good load of blows upon their backs:
And through the Regions they do seem to run,
Carrying fair Caltha, shining like the Sun.
72.
When this same holy Idol he had done,
He calls his pretty people round about:
And makes Priests and Presbiters, and some
of Frvers and Monks he makes a rabble rout,
Of Clarks and Limitors to kneel and lowt,
And there they take at this same present hour
The name of holy Caltheans, from this flower.
73.
The fame of these, and of this new religion,
was spread abroad with passing great report,
And rumor of it, rattles through each Region,
till that it came to Lady Venus cort,
God speed my pen for here begins the sport:
For now does Venus bite and beat her fists,
To be revenged on these Calthanists.
74.
And calling Cupid, this her pretty Squire,
quoth she, lets to these Heretics in have,
And burn the bees, and set their hiues on fire,
And all their waxen superstitions wast,
And charm their Caltha there that is so chaste:
And bring her cursed Cannons to their care,
And plague her prelates with their profane prayre.
75.
She sends for all the Spyders she could get,
and calls for that mighty Cranyon:
Who does his web and subtle engyns set,
and of the long legs brings he many a one,
With Venus to this garden are they gone,
Where they the bees behold with buzing charm
As thick as flies that in Appuleia swarm.
76.
There pitched they their toils in every gap,
and made their gloads the Bees for to beguile
And with their trammels many do entrap,
and fetters by the feet (alack the while)
Beware great bu^ble buz of this same wile:
For why the mighty Cranion comes to catch thee
If that thy warriors do not ward and watch thee.
78.
To Caltha is the crafty Spyder gone,
and weaueth there a witching web (god wot)
With subtle slender thrids and many a one,
where if thou go, thy chance is to be got,
What Fly soever comes escapes it not:
And let him toil to come out of his gin,
The more he strives, the surer is he in.
79.
The Cranion cast his net upon this flower,
that seemed like a wroght bra^ch under Lawn
And there it had not been above an hour,
but comes the Be, and to this bud is flowne,
(He had not made such have if he had known)
But after wit has very seldom thanks,
The Be is got and shakled by the shanks.
80.
Now Venus figgeth, and in have she runs,
and Cupid following after her does fling:
And to this little captive prisoner comes,
whereas she takes the bumble by the wing:
(For why she was afraid the be would sting)
And piniond him that no where could he pas,
But there as prisoner unto Venus was.
81.
She bids her boy, that wily wanton wag,
to hold him fast, least he should fly away:
Whilst she had tide a third about his leg,
and gave him Cupid for to find him play:
As children do with little birds they say.
And there the string he holds in his hand*
Whilst that the be is buzzing in the band.
82.
The boy he gave the bu^ble too much scope,
he found such pretty gambals with the fly:
The Be that had large compass of his rope,
^^ flew at his face, and stung him by and by:
Whereat poor Cupid he began to cry.
And from his fist the joy full bird is fled,
And from aloft, with string about his leg.
83.
He durst notflie where briers and bushes were,
least that the third should trap him in the trees,
But mounts aloft and houers in the Air,
till that he came unto his little Bees,
That helps to pull the shackles from his knees.
And there I Will leave him sure and safe at home,
And tell how Venus does her boy bemone.
84.
She up and down the Garden now does gad,
to gather all the coolest herbs that grow:
To physic and to leach her wounded lad,
whose face like to a blather blown does show:
As scarce his mother could her Cupid know.
And trying many precious plants that be,
At length she comes to the woodbind tree.
85.
And going to his binding branch, that clung
like to a Serpent twining on a tree:
She told him, Cupid with a Be was stung,
asking the flouer what physic there might be
To take away the stinging of the flee.
Who answered her like to a learned Clark,
Be^ding with reverence, both his rynd and bark.
86.
And said in physic I have had some toil,
and for the Scorpions stinging I have found*
Nothing can cure, but even his proper oil,
which being taken, salues and makes sound,
And eases straight the anguish of the wound.
So, for this Be, the best and chiefest thing,
Is his own honey, for to kill his sting.
87.
Of late he came and light upon my head,
and got much honey and his meldew wrought,
And when he went away, some of it shead,
and left behind where I the honey cought.
And looking toward Cupid thus he thought:
Woes me, that I must physic that same elfe,
And am not a physician for my self.
88.
Alas I am that woeful bond you see,
that unto loves behavior bydeth still:
No physic nor physician makes me free,
unless fair Caltha grant me her good will,
For Lady Caltha, she must cure or kill,
Who like the Nettle, left her sting in me:
Worse then the tongue or stinging of a Be.
89.
But Venus pulls his tree down by the top,
and forth from this, his hollow horned flower
Much of his liquid Meldew there did drop,
that shedded out a pretty honey shower,
Healing her Cupid with it that same hour:
And now her only care, is how that she
Might be revenged on Caltha and the Be.
90.
But Proserpine, the sprowtix of our spring,
and sovereign gouernesse of Herb and Plant
That silver Cynthia this sweet horned thing,
must Venus subtle practice now prevent,
With all her malice and her mad intent.
And lo from forth her shining Orb she goes,
Into this garden, whereas Caltha grows.
91.
Her vestall Virgins and her minionstrots,
halling their Lencothea in her waggen,
And brings with the^ their goodly garden pots
with water in the waterbearer flaggen:
The droughtie earth bedewing and bedagging,
And on this garden sheds her heavenly shower,
Where water pearls in ple^tie she does power.
92.
She comes to Caltha to her brodered bed,
and takes hold upon her tender stalk:
This done, she lays her hand upon her head,
and mumbels in her mouth with whisper talk,
And there in circle wise about did walk.
As Tragetors for spirits set their spells,
To conjure up the Fairies or the Elues.
93.
She bends her branch, and bows it up and down
and to the heavens she does exalt her eyes:
And with a very fervent prayer does frown,
looking aloof unto the lostie skies:
Somewhile to kneel, and otherwhiles to rise.
Moving her body with a modest motion,
As holy dames do use in deep devotion.
94.
And from the Center of her soul she sight,
and breathed upon the flower a fuming vapor
Where Caltha feels the quickening of a spright,
and rises up a comely sweet fair creature,
With countenance and full well favored feature:
Her body slender, straight and very even,
Holding her head erected up to heaven.
95.
Her golden yealow locks she still retains,
that hangs along her lilly cheeks and chin:
Whereas the Crimsin Roses comes and stains,
that makes her seem a perfect sanguynine.
Her eyes like looking glasses Christallin:
Her mouth with full plump form yframed is,
For why the full mouth, makes a full sweet kis.
96.
Her breast and nipples round as any Ball,
or like the pleasant Apples of temptation:
That greedy Adam glutted him withal,
and fell in love with, at the worlds creation:
That brought to us this woeful desolation.
Alas that beauty at the first beginning,
Should be too blame, or shent for any sinning.
97.
Her belly like a Globe within his Sphere,
her vains the rules and points and learned lines,
That leads unto that blessed country, where
much milk and Nectar flows, and pleasant wines,
That chears men's hearts and makes merry minds.
In that same happy land me thinks that I
With all my heart could dwell, and live and die.
98.
But I must hide all that that nature hides,
my tongue cries truce I may not utter it:
Although this wanton meriment decides
matters of silence, blame not you my wit,
For readers sometimes, crows with blind me^ hit:
My modesty must leave that thing in doubt,
His hap is somewhat though, that finds it out.
99.
Her thighs like pillars of fair Allablaster,
that do support the body of this Saint:
Where men must kneel th^e down and Idolaster
unto the Image of this Queen so quaynt,
That Caltha she may pity their complaint,
And hear their happy Orysons and prayer,
When as her priest and people do come there.
100.
Now When Diana this her task had done,
and framed all the molements of Nature:
She does adorn this naked Nymph ano^,
covering the seemly corpse of this sweet creature:
And first she decks her head, her face and feature
And with a silken hairelace ties her locks,
That hangs like Iasons golden fleece in flocks.
101.
She ties a Necklace underneath her chin,
of Jasper, Diamond, and of Topasie:
And with an Emrod hangs she on a Ring,
that keeps just reckoning of our chastity:
That breaks when Virgins go to venerie.
And therefore (Ladies) it behoues you well,
To walk full warily, when stones will tell.
102.
Her vesture and her veil, was white as snow,
that mantle wise, this maiden did adorn:
And in her hand she held a bended Bow,
a Bawdrik on her back, and Bugle horn:
With quiver, and with arrows sharp as thorn,
With buskins buckled up unto her knees,
That scarcely reached to her naked theighs.
103.
Now is she made Dianas hunting dame,
and to Eurotas banks, and Cynthias hill,
And unto Gargaphy must seek her game,
where she the Roes with Bucks and does must kill:
With pleasure, sport, and pastime at her will.
And have her springs and fountains fair and feat
To wash her skin from swink of sulty sweat.
104.
And now she takes her leave of Primula,
and with a sigh she said, farewell sweet sister:
The woeful wench she wept to part away,
and down she fell upon the ground and kissed her,
And to remain a Virgins life she wished her:
And said, I know mad Venus missing me,
Without all doubt will be reuengd on thee.
105.
And therefore sister Primula live chaste,
wey not the words the flattering Queen can make
Beware I say, (and then she her embraced)
and from her stalk a Dasie she did take,
And on her head she wears it for her sake:
And now with chaste Diana is she gone,
Fair Primula the Dasie left alone.
106.
Now Venus she determines in her mind,
to come and punish Caltha and to kill her:
And flies down post, with an Eastern wind,
that brings the Canker and the Caterpiller:
With poison for to blast her and to spill her:
And sure the silly dame had cursed that day,
Had she not gone with chaste Dian away.
107.
But now when Venus saw that she was crossed,
and Caltha gone from Lady Primula:
And seeing now her labor all was lost,
she would not have the Caterpillars stay:
But with the wind she sends them all away.
And now fair Primula in Calthas stead,
Must like and love, and loose her maidenhead.
108.
Upon the place and ground where Caltha grew,
a mighty Mandrag there did Venus plant:
An Object for fair Primula to view,
resembling man from thighs unto the shank:
With leaves and veins and members ram and rank,
With long large loins fro flank unto the foot,
That in the earth stuck with ragged root.
109.
His parts of shame like Socrotheus flesh,
swollen without mean, my wanton muse must tuch,
Althogh't be foul and full of filthiness:
then blame me not althoghI write thus much:
A loathsome jesting shape he seemd, and such
As modest Primula did stand in doubt,
Whether that she should loath or laugh it out,
110.
As if a maid should see some wanton sight,
you know she claps her hands upon her eyes,
And winketh at it wild, and blusheth straight,
and tush, and push, and fie for shame she cries:
Yet must she laugh at it in any wise.
And through her fingers looks, with cou^tnance coy,
And tyhie cries, at that same pretty toy.
111.
So at bo peep this pretty sprowt did play,
sometimes her head unto the Mandrag heaues,
And sometimes (half ashamed) would Primula
look down again, and lap her in her leaves:
This lusty wanton bud her wits bereaues.
Thus in the midst of their merry doing,
Away went Venus, leaving them a woing.
112.
And to the Calthean Bees the Queen is gone,
with spungie Paddocks and the foul fusball
For to destroy and smother every one,
and bring the mighty bumble Be in thrall,
And harm his honey and his hiue and all:
And chase them from their Cabinets and choke the^,
And from their holes and honey combs to smoke them.
113.
And suddenly or any of them wist,
comes in a vapor like a ^oakish Ryme:
And there the bees amazed with this same mist,
came swarming forth their hiues, for it was time:
And up aloft into the air they climb.
Some here, some there, some hither, and some thither,
And being blind, they flewe they knew not whether.
114.
The master Be into his garden goes,
to cleanse him from the filth of this same Fus,
And there he thinks yet that Caltha grows
but thou art now deceived (poor bumble buz)
That flower with fair Dian is gone from us:
And in her place he spies a Mandrag spring:
And now poor Be, thy sorrows do begin.
115.
He voweth now for to forsake his hiue,
and like a Pilgrim spend his latter days:
(Gods be his speed and send him well to thrive)
for now he means to wander uncouth ways,
And like an Hermit, he himself arraies:
That safely he might wander up and down,
And seek strange co^utries far, that be unknown.
116.
He made himself a pair of holy beads,
the fifty Aues were of Gooseberies:
The Pater Nosters and the holy Creeds,
were made of red and goodly fair ripe cheries:
Blessing his Marygold with Aue-maries.
And on a staff made of a Fennel stalk,
The beadrowlehangs, whilst he alo^g did walk.
117.
And with the flower mu^kshood makes a cool
and of a gray Dock got himself a gown:
And looking like a Fox or holy fool,
he barbs his little beard, and shaues his crown,
And in his pilgrimage goes up and down.
And with a Wabret leaf he made a wallet,
With scrip to beg his crumbs and pike his sallet.
118.
For here me now, since that unhappy hour
that love was stung (you know) not l^og agone,
He never honey got from any flower,
but did become a drowsy heavy drone,
Slothful and careless in his honey comb:
And there the idle droane Be he does eat,
The sweetness that is got by others sweat.
119.
And by the way, for sweet saint Charity,
he begs his largies of th'outlandish Hiues:
Where having had their liberality,
they se^d him packing and the Droanbee drives
To beg and live amongst the idle lives:
And far and near, further then I can tell,
He goes whereas the ougly Hornets dwell.
120.
He passed through Appuleia, among the flies,
and to that country where the scorpions are:
And to a kingdom of Cantaradyes,
whereas the Gnats and biting gadflies were,
That feared, the bumblebee from biding there.
But with his bag and baggage is he gone,
Wa^dring the world in vncoths far unknown.
121.
At length he lights on famous Ephesus,
where chaste Diana and her vestals be,
And now full weary flies to Platanus,
an aged and an ancient hollow tree,
Where he must rest a while (poor fainting flee)
Precisely looking least the spider webs
Were lurking there to catch him by the legs.
122.
Now having got his sleep and quiet rest,
his morning Mattins does he buz and sing:
And being rowsed from his sluggish nest,
with lauds and Letanies aloft did fling,
And flies now abroad with burgond wing,
And says his Psalmists in his sursurare,
With Pater Noster, and with Auie Marie.
123.
And whilst this runnagate about did roue,
it happened that by chance he did repair,
Unto a gladsome and a goodly Grove,
whereas Diana and her vestals were,
And Caltha too (unknown to him) was there
Where all the train assembled in that place,
For to attend and guard Dianas grace.
124.
Some sits the^ down and gathers green bushes
and others very busy do begin:
To weaue their little baskets of Bulrushes,
to put their herbs and all their flowers in:
Least that they scatter them in gathering,
An other daintily her self does deck,
With garlands for to wear about her neck.
125.
Some makes their sprints and pitfals for the thrush
and very busy round about they stird:
An other less she comes and beats the bush,
and by your leave, an other takes the bird:
And sport alone, for Lady and for Lord.
And in a Cage that he must learn to sing,
But soft and fair, not till the next year spring.
126.
There Lady Caltha in her lap she holds,
and had her skirt her Apron full and all,
Of double Dasies and of Marygolds,
and there she pins and pricks the^ on her Call:
(Now fine and feate and fair might she befall)
For on her locks the flowers stick and stay,
Even for her selfs sake, and fair Primula.
127.
The Be no sooner spies these Marygolds,
but to the yealow flowers he is fled:
And lights upon her locks that lay in rowles,
buzing and huzing round about her head:
Till at the length he sits upon her shead.
But there fair Caltha would not let him stay,
For with a bush, she beats the Be away.
128.
Yet from the Marygolds he would not fly,
nor from her presence will he so depart:
Although by them first came his misery,
and whylom wounded was unto the heart,
(As you have heard of late) through Cupids dart.
Yet would he not away, but busy there,
The Be is buzing round about her ear.
129.
Whereat fair Caltha strikes him to the ground,
and hits the Fly full often with her fist:
The bumble Be would up again rebound,
and be upon her head ere she had wist:
Then would she strike again, and often she mist.
Whereat the Ladies they would laugh to see,
What sport there was, twixt Caltha and the Be.
130.
But as the Fly that with the candle mocks,
and plays so long til he has burnt his wings*
So is this Be entangled in her locks,
and fetterd in these golden yealow strings*
And by the feet he in her trammels hings.
And now the Lady Caltha she does cry,
Whilst that Diana comes to catch the Fly.
131.
The bird now taken from her golden locks,
fair Caltha is desirous of the Fly,
And takes the Be, and puts him in a box,
and calls for honv for him presently,
And makes his bed of Roses by and by:
And Marygolds with pillowes of the Dasie,
That he might lie full lither and full lazy.
132.
Whereat Diana, at Lady Caltha laughed,
and asked, what she would do with that same droan
And said ye slothful thing was good for naught,
But for all that, she lets the Be alone,
And from her box she will not have him gone:
But there the pretty Fly he takes his rest,
Whilst that she told Diana this same jest.
133.
Good Madam when I grew a garden flower,
Venus and Cupid came to shoot at me:
And the^ it chanced (sweet Lady) at that stower,
I was defended by a little Be:
Who blessed my branch from his artillery.
And by good luck and fortune thither came,
To put the cunning Archer from his aim.
134.
For whilst the Be was biting of my bloome,
by chance my body up and down he stird:
So that the Archer did at random rome,
and mist my branch and gauld the little bird:
(The be was in the box and heard that word)
But forwards went they (thinking that the Fly
Had never heard this tale, nor been so nie.)
135.
Now ever since (good Madame) pardon me,
of all the pretty little fools that fly,
I love the best the hyued honey be,
and he shall be my bird, until I die:
With all his noyce and humming harmony.
And let the painted Butterflyes and Flees
Live where they list, I Will love the honey Bees.
136.
With that she opens the little Coffer,
and shakes a Marygold unto the Be:
The Bumble nods his head, and makes an offer,
and come bird com (quoth Caltha) come to me
With so ho ho, and woe ho ho cries she,
And whistled too, and chirped with her lips,
With that the Be out of his box he skips.
137.
And as the Hawke reclaimed from his nest,
and being full well managed and mand,
He comes and flies to Lady Calthas fist,
and takes the golden pray at her fair hand:
And on the top of this same flower does stand.
Not offering once to fly from her away,
But subject to the Ladies lewre does stay.
138.
This prints a strange impression in her soul,
this Simpathy betwixt her and the Be:
Did half persuade her, that this was the foul,
and absolutely said, this is the Flee,
That saved my flower when Cupid shot at me.
This said, Diana swear, that she would try,
And through her sacred art, transform the Fly.
139.
Now does she frame her metamorphosin,
And with her blessed books of divination,
She comes to transform and conjure him,
And strangely works his transumtation,
Casting her just count of his constellation:
And suddenly the bumble Be as than,
Did take the shape and very form of Man.
140.
All saving that betwixt his legs and thies,
his secrets were not seen at all, but gone:
The wanton dames could spy no priuities,
For in that place where should be one was none:
That thing was lost when he became a Drone:
For since it stung and stuck in Cupids cheeks,
He mist it in his buttocks and his breekes:
131.
At this same foul defect (quoth fair Dian)
throughout the world it never shall be said:
That I have fraind a monster of a man,
but always I a perfect creature made:
And once again she tries her charming trade
And cast this new shapte man into a slumber,
Whilst she had wrought this rare and mighty wonder.
142.
From forth the Hawthorne hedge she plucks a thorn,
and works and makes his picture all of wax:
And as a child that must be newly borne,
she pricks the hawthorn where his secrets laks,
And in that place appears his privy knacks:
And from his sleep through wisards strange eue^ts,
He rises up with all his implements.
143.
Now Caltha comes to him, and she must know
if this same new made man were that same be:
Or this same busy Bumble yea or no,
that sat upon her yealow golden tree,
When Cupid shot at her with venerie:
And chargd and dischargd at him with a smile,
Till he the truth had told to her the while.
144.
I was quoth he the very selfsame Fly,
that sometimes sat upon thy yealow lock:
I tell thee fair sweet Caltha it was I,
that gathered honey on thy stem and stock,
When Cupld at my very hartstrings shot,
I was the Fly for whom false Venus set,
Her spyders for to train me in a net.
145.
I was that Bumble, who for thy sweet sake,
like to a thief was tied and bound in band:
And me a captive prisoner did she make,
Where I by chance escapte from Cupids hand.
And by good luck am com'd into this land,
And lost my Bees, not one of them alive,
And I my self here driven from my hiue.
146.
Now Caltha does enquire for Primula,
the man made answer, that she florisht fair:
And in the foresaid Garden she did stay,
but in the room (good madam) where you were
A mandrag has dame Venus planted there:
A filthy object for fair Primula,
And there the monster of all flowers does stay.
147.
But here Diana comes and breaks their talk,
and takes the man aside and goes her ways:
And now the whilst that she and he did walk,
she asked him, and gently to him says,
What pleasure could thou wish to pass thy days?
Ask what thou will, demand and thou shall see,
It shall be surely granted unto thee.
148.
Then madam (said he) when I was a Be,
I spent my days amongst the flowers springing
And merry made me with my melody,
with buzing and with huzing always singing,
Whilst to my Bees, my honey I was bringing.
So that I still retain in disposition,
And much would give, to be a good musition.
149.
And now Diana does present the man,
with learned Lutes, and finest Virginals:
With deep Bandoras Diapasan,
and with the clear well sounding Clarigals,
With subtle Sagbut, and the loud Cimbals,
And with that best beloved lulling Liar,
With other wanton Instruments of wire.
150.
The Kingly Harp, for and the courtly Cithere^,
the Solace, Vyols, and the Vyolins:
The little fidling Kit, and ancient Gittern,
with those same fair and famous Orpherins,
With Bagpipes, Cornets, and the Cymphanins.
And now no more ycleape him bumble Buz,
But call him by the name of Musaeus.
151.
Now Musaeus is master of that Art,
and only rare musician in that land:
Who cunningly can play his pricksong part,
with ready Aroake, and nimble learned hand,
With sweet division of profound deskand:
His discords with true concords to agree,
Which often is seen in Musiques subtletee.
152.
In Tablatury does he take much pain,
and by his learned line his rule and rod:
He pricks down quauers in his pleasant vain,
and merrily he drives a minim od,
Which makes music for the mighty God.
With cratchets, Semibriefs, with large and lo^gs,
That closes up sweet ends in all our songs.
153.
Long lived he amongst these lovely lasses,
and was their chief delight and only treasure:
And taught y^ dames to da^ce their cinquepace,
and for to foot and tread their solemn measure,
And long he sported with them at his pleasure,
Till Caltha she desirous on a day,
Must needs send to her sister Primula.
154.
And now the good Musaeus he must go,
and unto her present his minstralcy,
And this musition he must let her know,
her sister Caltha greets her lovingly:
With commendation of kind courtesy.
And sends a Tutty in her hand to hold,
Of double Dasies and the Marygold.
155.
And now he takes his leave and Caltha kissed,
and ties a base bumfiddle at his back:
That hangs upon a bawdrick of blew list,
much like unto a paltry Pedlers pack,
That sags upon his shoulders til they crack:
That made the little fidling fellow hutch,
As he had gone his crookback with a crutch.
156.
His bagpipes at his girdle you might see,
forth of his bag put out his drone or base:
That bu^d like him which was the humble Be,
and there they lay within a leather case:
To keep them in their tune, and in their grace.
And underneath his armeholes and his elbowes
He had his blasts, his surflats and his bellows.
157.
And all the way whereas Musaeus comes,
he begs his bread with his sweet melody:
And pipes and plays and fidles for his crumbs,
and is rewarded for his harmony.
In every country, and in every City,
Till that he came to famous Nycol Town,
Wherein full weary sits the fiddler down.
158.
And rests him that same night (for it was late)
till morn when he unto the Garden comes:
And raps a pace and knocks at the gate,
and to the door the little Cupid comes,
And spies the fiddlers base, and bagpipe bums:
And unto Venus said her little Ape,
A fiddler mother, yonder is at the gate.
159.
The mother now, as wanton as the boy,
runs to the garden door and welcomes him:
And glad with all her heart, she laughs for joy,
and brings the piper and the fiddler in:
And now the feast must hold and needs begin.
Musaeus comes unto the nuptial day,
Betwixt the Mandrag, and fair Primula.
160.
The tables they were strewed with strawberies,
with bottles and with flaggons full of wine:
With dainty damse^s and the chopping cheries,
with seats and arbors made with Eglentine,
With wanton Iuie and the twining Vine:
And there do sit a bench of fair Ladies,
Of Linfs and Nymps and these same lightfoote faieries.
161.
At upper end set Primula the bride,
Minsing demurely, wagging with her head:
The mandrag and the bridsgroome by her side,
that did attend her fairnes whilst she fed,
And gave her wine and cracknels with cakebred:
And now dame Venus bids Musaeus play,
And there was sport alone for that same day.
162.
Now does he tune and temper all his strings,
and pleases these same fair and pretty folk:
And sometimes plays and then Musaeus sings,
whilst that the flaggo^s full of wine do walk,
And now the little Ladies tongues do talk,
And rises up to dance and figs their breeks,
Whilst coral wine does stain their lilly cheeks.
163.
Thus passed they the day with jolly head,
till night was come, when as each dainty dame
Must get the bride and bridsgroom both to bed,
that they may go about that merry game,
To cause their choler and their courage tame:
And in the night to spend the wanton hours,
To plant and get some other pretty flowers.
164.
Of pescods were their boulsters and their pillows
he downbed it was of a fair green dock:
The sheets they lay upon, were leaves of willows
he in his shert, and she in her fine frock.
And there was playing with her curled lock.
And now i will leave them in their sweet delight,
And bid the bride and bridsgroome both good night.
165.
Now be the bridemaids in their bony bowers,
and coutcht full closely in the summer Tent:
Within the fair green arbors and the flowers,
to rest them after this mad meriment,
That all the day in Tomboyes play had spent.
And what they saw by day, y^ night they dream
But what it was, that what I cannot mean.
166.
Now Venus and the crafty fiddler goes,
into a close fair arbor for to walk:
Adornd with darnecks of the Damask Rose,
whilst Venus enters into this same talk,
And proudly in her stateliness does stalk:
And toong-ripe in her rhetoric does run,
And to Musaeus thus her tale begun.
167.
Musaesus quoth she, I must tell thee here,
within this garden haunts a bumble Be:
But by the way, i will bind thee for to swear,
not to reveal, or prate my priuitie:
But silence use in this my secrecy.
And swears the fiddler to his good abearing,
Whilst her fair sweet lips were the books of
swearing.
168.
Fiddler quoth she (so forwards on her tale)
I have so often plagued this same Be:
And many times have made him ill to ayle,
as I am very fearful of the flee,
That he will come and be reuengd on me.
And therefore fiddler watch me least I slumber,
And so the Bumble come and do me cumber.
169.
The good Musaeus answered her grace,
and said (sweet Lady) take no thought for that,
And forthwith from his crowd or fiddle case,
he cuts a piece of leather as he sat,
And makes a butchers babble or flee-flap.
That if the bu^ble Be come thither humming,
Musaeus swears, his babble it shall bumme him.
170.
In mean while is he scraping on his crowd,
only to keep the wanton Lady waking:
And in the Ela note he fiddles loud,
whilst that she laugheth at his merry laking:
And much co^mends the mirth y^ he is making.
And from her little finger takes a Ring,
And gives Musaeus it, and bids him sing.
171.
The fiddler sings like a Nightingale,
and now his ballad and his song must be,
Entitled, a Grandam or an old wives tale,
the coniuring or charming of the Flee,
And here the song i will set you down to see:
That pretty courtly Ladies may it keep,
To bless them from the Bumble ere they sleep.
The Charming of the Be.
172.
Auant from us false bumble Be,
in thy busy buzing:
And come not here thou crafty Flee,
harm not in thy huzing.
Fly far enough prodigious Foul,
in thy bitter stinging:
Worse then the scrytching ougly Owl,
never good luck bringing.
In thy coming or thy bumming,
If thou come hither humming,
thou false bumble Be,
In thy swarming and thy harming,
If thou chance within my charming,
Exorciso te.
173.
Beware I say thou little bird,
of my leather flee flap:
And come not here nor hitherward,
least it reach a sound rap:
For it shall beat thy little bum,
Here me pretty fellow,
And clap it thriftly if thou come,
harken what I tell you.
In thy coming or thy bumbing,
if thou come hither humming,
thou false Bumble Be.
In thy swarming and thy harming,
if thou chance within my charming.
Exorciso te.
174.
In nomine O domine,
defend us from this Drone:
And charm this hurtful honey Be,
to let us here alone.
Away thou foul and fearful spright
and thou little devil:
I charge thee come not in our sight,
for to do us evil.
In thy coming or thy bumbing,
if thou come hither humming,
thou false bumble Be,
In the swarming and thy harming,
if thou chance within my charming,
Exorciso te.
175.
Now when Musaeus ended had his song,
he turns to Venus, and in looking back:
He spies the Lady there lard all along,
and now the fiddler finds her in a nap,
And lays away his fiddle and flee, flap:
And down he lies, and leanes upon her hips,
And licorously he kissed the Ladies lips.
176.
Now whether that this Lady slept or no,
or winked wild, as little wantons use:
There will I leave you, for I do not know,
judge of it as you list, for you may choose:
And me I pray you heartily excuse.
But there the fiddler found an instrument,
That makes him mirth and much mad merime^t.
177.
And now Musaeus plays his Minstrels prise,
the perfect of the more his mood he made:
Bearing what should be hidden, and his eyes
pry where he thinks most desca^t might be had
Straining beyond Ela, Venus to glad.
And this he found, that music pleases best,
Whose mood by prick, in circle is expressed.
179.
But there I know not how he played or pricked*
but sure it is, and certain too, that she
Forthwith upon a sudden flung and kicked,
and cried out, the Be, the Be, the Be:
Help fiddler, for the Bumble has stung me.
Then quoth Musaeus all our quarrels ends,
And let us kis good madam, and be friends.
180.
I was the Be that bit the Marygold,
I was (oh fair Cytherian Queen) that Be,
Yea that same bumble thou did plague of old
when thou bad shoot, and Cupid shot at me,
Now have I hit the mark and shot at thee.
The scantlin won, the winners must cry whup,
The goal is got, and now the game is up.
181.
With that the Queen she falls into a lafter,
and scarcely would believe this Riddeller:
But in the end as you shall here hereafter,
She knew that it was he that shot at her:
And out of all her doubt did remove her.
Now was the morning, and the Sun it shone,
And to the Bride and Bridesgroome are they gone.
182.
The bridsgroome he lay lolling in his bed,
and all his leaves he litherly displayes:
The pretty Bride was combing of her head,
to spread and open with the mornings rays,
As is her manner and her use always.
And fr^o the arbors and the fresh green burrows
Comes Venus and Musaeus, with good morrows.
183.
Unto the Bride Musaeus does present
himself, and Calthas commendations:
With that sweet Nosegay which her sister sent,
and many other gentle salutations,
The which he greeteth her with gratulations:
And Primula she takes the Tutty there,
And sticks it on her yealow golden hair.
184.
And makes an other pretty nosegay too,
and binds her double Dasies altogether:
And Musaeus must unto Caltha go,
and in a water pot (least that they wither)
To Ephesus must carry those same thither:
And bring her news from Nycol town I say,
Of her fair sister, Lady Primula.
185.
And Venus takes a Jewel from her hat,
which was a yealow golden Cockle shell:
And Musaeus must give fair Caltha that,
and say, the Lady Venus loves her well:
And more then that this traveler must tell.
That if his garden she will once more take,
She shall be welcome for the fiddlers sake.
116.
And now she goes unto the Woodbine Tree,
and breaks his branch, that long has bin be,
And gives it unto Musaeus, that he
may give it unto Lady Calthas hand,
To send her Manumissum to this land.
And wear his branch about her, and in wearing,
Wear out the bond from this his good abearing.
187.
And thus the fair sweet Lady Primula,
deuotes her self to Venus now from us:
And Caltha, with Diana gone away,
the Be reuengd in shape of Musaeus,
The Bond he hopes to hear from Ephesus.
All quarrels ended, and we all cry truce,
Until the fiddler come to bring more news.
FINIS.

