Ludus Scacchiae: Chesse-play.

A Game, both pleasant, witty, and politic: with certain brief instructions
thereunto belonging; Translated out of the Italian into the English tongue.

Containing also therein, A pretty and pleasant Poem of a whole Game played at
Chesse.

Written by G. B.

Printed at London by H. Iackson, dwelling beneath the Conduite in Fleetstreet.
1597.

To the Reader greeting.
STrange (perchance) may it seem to some (curtcous Reader) that any man
should employ his time, and bestow his labor in setting out such books,
whereby men may learn to play, when indeed most men are given rather to play,
than to study and travel: which were true, if it were for the teaching of
Games unlawful, as dice-play, or cogging, or falshoode in card-play, or such
like. But forasmuch as this Game or kingly pastime, is not only void of craft,
fraud, and guile, swearing, staring, impatience, fretting and falling out, but
also breeds in the players, a certain study, wit, policy, forecast and
memory, not only in the play thereof, but also in actions of public
government, both in peace and war: wherein both Counselors at home, and
Captains abroad may pick out of these wodden pieces some pretty policy,
both how to govern their subjects in peace, and how to lead or conduct
lively men in the field in war: for this Game has the similitude of a ranged
battle, as by placing the men, and setting them forth in the march, may very
easily appear. The King stands in the field in the midst of his Army, and
has his Queen next unto him and his nobility about him, with his soldiers
to defend him in the forefront of the battle. Since therefore this Game is
pleasant to all, profitable to most, hurtful to none, I pray thee (gentle
Reader) take this my Labor in good part, and thou shall animate me hereafter
to the setting forth of deeper matters. Farewell.

Thy friend G. B.

The Chesse-play.
THe first principle is to know the pieces, to wit, the names, the number, and
the seat of every one. As for the fashion of the pieces, that is according to
the fantasy of the workman that makes them after this manner: Some make them
like men, whereof the King is the highest, and the Queen (which some name
Amazon) is the next, both two crowned. The Bishops some name Alphius, some
Fools, some Archers, being placed next to the King and the Queen. The Knights
some call horsemen, and they are men on horseback. The Rookes some call
Elephants, carrying Towers upon their backs, and men within the towers. The
Pawnes some do call footmen, and they are soldiers on foot, carrying (some
of them) pikes, and othersome harquebushes, othersome halberdes, and othersome
the iaueline or target. Our English Chessemen are commonly made nothing like to
these foresaid fashions: to wit, the King is made the highest or longest: the
Queen is longest next unto him. The Bishop is made with a sharp top, and cloven
in the mids, not much unlike to a Bishops Miter. The Knight has his top cut
aslope, as though he were dubbed Knight. The Rooke is made likest to the King
and Queen, but that he is not so long. The Pawnes be made the smalest and
least of all, and thereby they may best be known. This have I added hereunto
(good Reader) for the better understanding and knowing of the said Chesse men.

I will not therefore now figurate them, but only in speaking of every place
particularly I will name them according to the most frequent phrase in the
English tongue: To wit, the King (being the head of the play) I will name King.
The Queen (being the best piece in the Game) I will name Queen. The Bishops
next unto the King and Queen, I will name Bishops. The Knights being next unto
the Bishops I will name Knights. The Rookes being next unto the Knights, and
standing in the two corners, I will call Rookes. The Pawnes (standing in a row
before them all) I will call Pawnes.

Of the Rooke or Tower.
The Tower is named among the Spaniardes, Portingales; and Italians, Rocho,
which is as much to say in their language as a fortress, because it is a great
upholding to the game. Also the Towers are set in the uttermost ends of the
Chesse board, as a strong rampire in the front. Their office is not to remove,
but in necessity, and most chiefly for the succor of their King.

Of the Knight or Horsman.
The Horseman is also named, as representing a man of Arms, which fights on
horseback, and his seat is next unto the Tower, from whence he must come
into battle, and place himself where he may most offend, for there is no
piece in the Chesse board that more readily may do hurt then he, because of his
marching forth, which is made from three into three places: to wit, from white
to black, and from black into white, and cease not to make his assault or
his leap, although he be environed; provided that he have room to place
himself in.

Of the Bishop or Archer.
In ancient time, the Frenchmen named him Fool, which seems to me an
improper name. The Spaniards named him Prince with some reason: for (as Prince
of the blood) he is nearer unto the King and the Queen then any other of the
Chesse men. And some name him Archer, because his draughts draw always aside,
and never forth-right: as it is the office of a good Archer or harquebusier in
war, which never planteth himself right against his enemy, but in
skirmishing or in plain fight, make sembla^ce to shoot at one, and hit another,
not remaining long in place.

Of the King.
The King is the head of the conduct, according to the Spaniards, he has
liberty to assault three rooms or steps, as he lists: yea he may make the
assault of the Knight, so that he have not the way, but it must be then,
whilst he is yet in his lodging, and that he is not removed, otherwise he
can make no more but one step. Although in Italy the King (if he have the way
open) may run all the length of the Chesseboord, or may remove a Pawn to set
himself in his place. And in France, they cause him to make two steps along
his front: provided, that there be no pieces between him and the Rooke, and
set the Rooke in the place of the King. Behold here his marching and his
liberty, provided, that he have had no check. And to say the truth, the King
was played no otherwise in the ancient time, but after the manner of the
Frenchmen: yea the most part of the Spaniardes and Portingales (who are counted
the best players) did play it so.

Of the Queen or Amazon.
Some name her Queen, othersome Lady, and it is the best piece in the Chesse
board. her lodging is next unto the Kings, and has as great a train as the
King. Briefly, she represents a Kings Lieutenant in an army: she does (when
she will) the office of the Rooks, and also of the Bishops. And because the
first women that used to go to the wars were the Amazons, therefore some name
her Amazon white, and Amazon black. But above all, the players ought to keep
her well, because that the game is seldom won, after that she is once lost.

Of the Pawn or footeman.
The footman is the rapier and the target, as it were of the great Chesse men,
and the Kings especially for this cause, that when he can proceed so well in
war as to arrive at the last rank of his enemies, he is chosen and made the
best piece of the play, to wit, he is the Queen. And if in making himself
Queen, he can give check, he is so much the more to be esteemed. The marching
forth of the Pawn, for the first time is to make two steps, if he will, or
one only, if he list, marching always right before him, and not aside. And
the best Pawnes are next unto the King. Therefore when check is given to the
King, the Pawn cannot pass the bars of his way, for to succor him: that
is, if check be given to the King, the Pawn cannot march aside, be it on the
left, or on the right, for to cover his King: for his way is beset on both
sides, and cannot go but right forth, and always step by step: provided, that
his way be not stopped. It is true, that in taking he marches awry one only
step, of what side soever it be, and can not take that which is right against
him. It shall be also best for the Pawn, not to advance himself much within
the camp of his enemy.

The Checker or Chesse boorde, whereon are placed the pieces, every one in his
order.
The black side. QR QKn QB Q K KB KKn KR P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P QR
QKn QB Q K KB KKn KR The white side.

Behold here the form of the Checker or Chesseboorde, and how the Chessemen
ought to be placed in every house whereof there are in all, threescore and
four: to wit, thirty two on either side or half, whereof the eight vppermore
opposites (or one against another) are full of principal pieces on both sides.
The other eight also next them on both sides, are full of Pawnes. So that there
are thirty two pieces, which is to each player sixteen, whereof there be eight
great ones and eight little. The rooms where every one of them are set, I will
name seats: the other which be empty, I will name places or houses. Through
the which (as well seats as places) the great Chesse men and small do run in
their order, forward or backward, to give the mate to the contrary King. And
to tell you, why there be so many houses, and why neither more nor less, it
passes my intelligence: and I think there will be found no other resolution,
but the will of him that made the play, whom the best Historiens record to be
Exerses the philosopher, otherwise called Philometer, who to reprove the
tyranny and bad manners of Euilmerodach K. of Babylon, first devised this game.
Some say, the inue^ters thereof, were two brethren Libius and Terrhenus, who
being afflicted with great hunger and famine, did invent this play, to the end,
that in playing it, they might employ their spirits so vehemently, that they
might the more easily pass over the affliction of famine. But whosoever it
was, no doubt the invention and wittiness thereof is greatly to be commended
and followed.

Certain general rules chiefly to be used in the Chesse play.
First, you must play nocast or draught in vain, if it be not upon great
necessity.

Secondly, You must not make a fault.

Thirdly, You must not be too hasty to play.

Fourthly, If you have a good draught to make, look if you have not a better.

Fifthly, If you have advantage, you may well make a change, and yet not loose it.

Sixthly, If you have advantage, wherewith you may win the game, take heed that
you spoil not your game, nor to abandon your King to win only a Pawn.

Seventhly, the principal thing is, to set your king in a sure place, when he
marches forth.

Eighthly, The two Pawnes which be on that side where the King is transported,
must not be removed but in great necessity: for that, oftentimes the game is
lost by remoouing the Rookes Pawn or Knights Pawn one room, because that
there the contrary King finds the way of the mate.

Ninthly, Then you must go abroad with your pieces, and not keep them enclosed
at home.

Lastly, it is good, that the two Pawnes of the King and the Queen, be upon
their fourth houses, and also those of the Bishops.

It is to be noted for the well understanding of the marching forth of the
Chesse men, that the Chesseboord ought to be set in such sort, that the Rooke
on the right side be set in a white place, and take the Chesse men which you
will white or black. Further you must know the names of the pieces and of the
places: for the Chesse men that are on the kings side, be named the Kings
Chesse men, and likewise the kings houses unto the midst of the Chesse
boorde. And from thence forward are the contrary kings houses. As for example:
The Pawn which is before thy king, is in the second house of thy king. And if
thou remove him one step, he shall be in the third, or if he go further, in the
fourth house of the king: But afterward and if he do go further yet, he
shall be in the fourth house of the King of the contrary part. And so of all
the other Chesse men on that side. The other side is that of the Queen, as
well in Chesse men, as in houses, therefore for this cause is it needful to
have before you a Chesse boorde with the Chesse men, for to see with your eyes
the Art which briefly shall be declared in this Treatise. And so, after
presupposing the game, you may begin after two sorts to play it as follows.

The first manner of playing.
The first manner is to begin with the Kings Pawn: and the second is to
begin with the Queens Pawn. The first (according to my judgment) is the best:
that is to wit, to begin with the Kings Pawn as far as he may go. And if
the contrary party play the kings Pawn as far as he may, thou shall play
thy Kings knight to three houses, from the kings bishop. And if he play his
kings knight to three houses from the kings bishop thou shall take with thy
knight his kings pawn, and if he take also thy pawn with his knight, play
thy Queen before thy king.

And if he retire his knight into the third house of his kings bishop, thou
shall give him check with thy Queen, in turning her away from thy knight, the
which thou shall remove into the third house of his Queens bishop. And then
he can not play so well, but that he shall loose his Queen.

And if he remove not his knight, but play his Queen before his king, thou
shall take his knight with thy Queen: then he will play his Queens pawn one
room against thy knight, to the end that if thou remove it from thence, he
may take thy Queen. Therefore thou shall play thy Queens Pawn as far as he
may go, and if he play the pawn of his kings bishop one step, thou shall
play the pawn of thy kings bishop as far as he may go, and if he take thy
knight with his Queens pawn, thou shall take his pawn, with that of thine,
and if he play his other knight to the second house of his Queen, thou shall
remove thine to the third house of thy Queens bishop, by that means thy
Queen shall remain safe.

And if the pawn of his kings bishop do take thy pawn, thou shall play thy
knight to the fourth place of his queen, to take her, but if he set her in her
third house, then shall thou take his pawn with thine.

And if he take thy pawn with his knight, thou shall set thy queens bishop in
the fourth house of thy kings bishop, and so of force he shall lose his knight:
but if he take not thy pawn with his knight, he is like to leese his own.

If in steed of taking thy pawn with his knight he take it with his queen,
thou shall take his with thine, which after shall be taken with his knight.
This done, thou shall give him check with thy knight, in taking the pawn of
his queens bishop, and he shall be forced to loose his queens rooke.

And if he take not thy pawn, but (to save his queen) places her in the
third house of his queens bishop, thou shall play thy kings bishop, to the
fourth house of his queens knight for to take her, and if insteede of taking
her, she take thy bishop, thou shall give him check with thy knight in taking
the pawn of his queens bishop, then shall thou take his queen, for the gain
is much greater than of the rooke.

And if in steed of placing his queen in the third house of his bishop, he
place her in the fourth, thou shall set thy queens bishop in the third room of
thy King for to take her.

And if he give the check with his queen in the fourth house of his rooke,
thou shall cover it with thy bishop, by which means he can do no more but
remove her into the third house of his bishop, and thou shall play the pawn
of thy queens knight, as far as he may go, for to take his queen, then he
shall be forced to set his queen in the third house of his bishop, and thou
shall play thy kings bishop into the fourth house of his Knight, to take his
Queen, and if she take it, thou have thy instruction in the last Article
before. Then can he not play it well, for if it become to pillage or spoil of
queens, thou shall have still the advantage of the check of thy Knight for to
take his rooke. So shall he be weaker both in small and great pieces, as shall
be declared in the Article following.

And if he set his queen in the third house of his King, thou shall yet give
him check with thy Knight, according to the last instruction. But if he set
her in the third place of his Kings Knight (which is the best that he could
play) ye shall spoil together your Queens, then shall thou give the check
with thy Knight, in taking the pawn of his queens bishop, to take his rooke.

The second manner of playing it.
The second manner of play, is to begin with the Queens pawn. If therefore
thou begin, thou shall remove thy Queens pawn, as far as he may go, and
if he play his as far as he may, thou shall play the pawn of thy queens
bishop as far as he may go: and if he take it, play thy Kings pawn as far
as he may go: he then will play the pawn of his queens Knight, as far as
he may to save his other pawn, and thou shall play the pawn of thy Queens
Rooke two steps: and if he take it with his pawn, thou shall take his other
pawn with thy Kings bishop, then must he of force take that Knights pawn, in
playing thy Queens knight into the third house of thy bishop, on that side:
for thou shall have three pieces all prepared to his destruction.

But if he take not thy rookes Pawn, but play the Pawn of his Queens bishop,
thou shall take his pawn with that of thy rooke, and he will take thine with
that of his bishop. Then play the Pawn of thy Queens knight, and if he take
it, thou shall take with thy kings bishop his knights Pawn, and shall say
check, which he will cover with his queens bishop, and with thy queen thou
shall take his other Pawn. And if he take thy bishop with his, thou shall take
his with thy queen, and shall say check, and if he cover it with his queen,
it will be no great danger to spoil them both together, because the pawn of
his queens rooke, being without company, shall leese himself of force, if thou
prepare thither thy Knight or thy bishop.

But if with his bishop he take not thine, but play his queens Knight to the
third house of his bishop, to take thy queens pawn, thou shall play thy queens
bishop to the third house of the King: and if he play his queens Rooke in the
seat of the Knight, then remove thy queen (out of the discovery) to the
fourth house of thy queens Rooke, and if he set his Queen in the third house
of his Knight, thou shall remove thy Queens Knight to the third house of the
bishop.

This done, thy bishop shall kill his Knight, and his Queen shall put to death
thy Bishop, then thy Queen shall take his Rookes pawn who will set himself
out of the way for fear of feeling the heavy strokes of thy queen. And in so
doing suffers his King to fall into check, and yet for some other
considerations, thou shall remove thy Kings Knight into the second house of thy
King, then shall thou serve thee of the rookes in loosing the one, to win the
other, and in so doing thou shall not fail to win the game.

THus have thou here (gentle Reader) for thy better instruction a few short
precepts, only for a taste, because I would not have thee ingorged at the
first, lest thou feeling thy self cloyed with the tediousness of the precepts
in prose thou might also loathe the following verses which I have written for
thy more delight, of a whole game played out at Chesse. And thus briefly I bid
thee farewell, til better opportunity shall cause me to set it down
hereafter more at large.

Finis
G. B.

SCACCHIA LVDVS: Chesse Play.
FOnd shapes of war and fained fight,
lo (here) We do report:
We tell of Soldiers framde of Box,
and Battles fought in sport.
How boxen Princes strive for praise,
in colors black and white:
And how in party colored Arms
each one with other fight.
Aid me ye sweet Sereian Nymphs
(by art of learned Lore)
To speak of that, which Poets Pen
did never touch before.
Hard is the way, yet will I prove,
as Fury does me lead,
In heat of youth, to trace the path
that never none did tread.
Ye sacred Nymphs and Goddesses
that in Sereia dwell,
Vouchsafe to guide my artlesse Pen,
This fained Fight to tell.
You first of all did bring this Play
upon the Italian Shore,
Scacchis your Sisters Monument,
found out in years of yore.
A time there was when Jupiter
(as Poets tell us plain)
Arrived on the Ethiopian shore
where Memnon prince did reign,
To visit old Oceanus,
and taste of his good cheer,
Who then was ioynde in marriage
to Tellus fair and clear.
Thither the Gods did all repair,
to see old Oceans choice,
The waves that beat upon the shore
did seem for to rejoice.
Here Mercury Jove's messenger
did first himself advance.
Then Phoebus with his golden harpes,
that Muses taught to dance,
Thither the Sea-god Neptune went
with his three forked mace,
Whose chariot two mighty Whales
did draw unto the place:
On him the Tritons all did wait,
and Sea-Nymphs on a row:
Thetis and Glaucus on the shore
their watery cheeks did show.
Then mighty Mars the God of war
a castle great did hold,
Carried upon an Elephant
all covered with gold.
Next after him comes Venus fair
set out unto the proof.
Vulcan with hammer in his hand
comes limping on aloof.
Here Ceres was, and Pallas wise
renowned for her wit:
Both Pluto and Proserpina
did here together sit.
Jove's wife and sister Juno fair
was present at the feast:
Himen the God of marriage
was there among the rest.
The Muses nine and Graces three
were likewise there in place,
With pleasant voice and nimble feet
the Measures for to trace:
First Jupiter, then all the rest
of hie gods that were there,
Each one in his degree sits down
to taste of Oceans cheer:
There wants no kind of dainty meats
that land or sea imparts,
Here Nectar and Ambrosia
did comfort all their hearts.
No kind of music there did want
to make them merriments.
For Phoebe himself and Mercury
did use their instruments:
When all the Gods and Goddesses
that sat at wedding board,
Were well refreshed with such fare
as Tellus could afford.
Behold aged Oceanus,
to please the Gods withal,
Did cause a Chesse boorde be brought out
that hanged upon a wall:
Wherein were threescore seats and four
set down in black and white,
Four square the board, and every way
eight ranks appearde in sight.
Each seat had equal form and shape,
each seat had equal space,
And yet in color different,
which quite contrary was.
For as the white succeedes the black,
so black succeedes the white,
Which parti-colored, like a snaile
appeered to their sight.
When gods did wonder at the thing,
old Ocean began declare,
Here may you see the field, quoth he,
and forged tents of war:
Here with their ensigns opposite,
and here with spear and shield
You may behold the soldiers fight
and muster in the field.
Which sight the Sea-gods love to see,
and Sea-nymphs on a row,
When neither Neptune seems to rage,
nor Eolus to blow.
And here behold the soldiers pressed
this fained fight to show.
Which said, out of a box of wood
he powers upon the board,
His men of Box, such as the Art
of Grauers could afford.
These soldiers were in white and black,
whose equal force in fight
And number was sixteen in black,
and sixteeene more in white.
As shapes were diverse, so their names
and office diverse were,
For mong the rest, two crowned Kings
and Queens there did appear.
Here footmen were and horsemen both,
archers some white, some black:
Here Elephants that use to bear
a Castle on their back,
Now one against another place
their battles in the field:
And armies both in battle ray
advance both spear and shield.
The highest line contains the Kings,
in fourth seat opposite,
The white King stands in the black,
the black stands in the white.
Next are the Queens, which by their Kings
full lovingly do stand:
And this upon the right side sittes
that on the other hand,
Black Queen the black field does contain,
the white Queen stands in white,
And in their rooms, their colors both
they do maintain by right.
Next them in either field do stand
the Archers black and white:
Who Mars does love above the rest,
as fittest for the fight
Between them twain both King and Queen
in middle part do stand,
Then come the brave and lusty Knights
their footmen to withstand.
Next them are placed the Elephants,
with Castles on their back:
Which stand like Champions to defend
the Kings both white and black.
Last rank contains Footmen eight,
well armde with sword and shield:
Who in their Kings defense do fight
the first stroke in the field.
One side much like the white-facde Galls,
thus standing in array,
To fight against the Blackamoores,
old Ocean thus began say:
Ye see, great Gods, the pitched Camp,
and Soldiers of the Band.
Now learn their Laws (for Laws they have)
which they must not withstand.
First either King does send abroad
the Battle to begin,
Whom they shall think the fittest man,
the Game or Field to win.
If first a Soldier black do move
to fight in Field alone,
Then straight does meet him one in white:
thus fight they one by one.
But all of them one purpose have,
both Princes to offend,
Or else to take them prisoners:
and thus the Fight does end.
They spare not one, but murder all
that in their way do stand,
That they might sooner check the Prince
when he is badly mand.
By dint of sword dead carkases
lie murdered on the Plain,
The Camps wex thin, and as they slay,
so likewise are they slain.
Who any kills, must straightway stand
within his dead foes place,
And stoutly must both beard and brave,
his foemen to the face.
If he be out of Enemies reach,
and void the present blow,
Backward he may retire again,
and save himself below.
The Footmen only are forbode
by law, among the rest,
Not to retire within the Field,
because their loss is least.
Nor is their Marching all alike,
nor order of their fight:
The fighting Pawnes go step by step
against their Enemies right.
Yet at first meeting may they make
two steps their force to try:
But when they do assail the Foe,
then must they go awrie.
The Elephants right on may go,
on right or on left hand,
Or back again, to murder those,
that in their way do stand.
Yet must they not go overthwart,
their foe-mans force to prove,
As Archers vsen for to do,
whom Mars does chiefly love.
Both Archers may march overthwart,
one stands in the black,
In white space the other seated is
with arrows at his back.
Nor must they change their wonted course,
though they by law may move
And range abroad ore all the field,
and every seat to prove.
The horsman Knight rides through the Camp
with soft and equal pace,
He leapes aloft, yet may not pass
above a double space.
If first in white he takes his place,
the black field must he range:
And must by law keep equal steps,
but color still must change.
The lusty Queen, rightside or left,
forward or back may go*
Right on she goes, not overthwart,
as horsemen use to do.
No certain steps or course she has,
but goes without all stay:
Except that some of either side
do stand within her way.
For by the orders of the Field
it lawful is for none
To ouer-leap another back,
but for the Knight alone.
More warily the Prince does fight
on whom the rest depends*
He being safe, the Battle holds,
he dead, the Battle ends.
If Prince be taken prisoner,
then straight the Field is lost:
Therefore in his defense they stand,
and him they honor most.
Their Prince to save, to dint of sword
their bodies often they yield:
He having no desire to fight,
stands quiet in the Field.
He only seeks his own defense,
not others to offend,
But if they come within his reach,
a blow he will them lend.
The Prince may hurt on every side,
yet far he may not pass:
For when he once removed is,
and changed has his place,
Whether he checked be himself,
or wound his deadly foe,
Or wander harmless in the Field,
but one step must he go.
This is the order of the Field,
these Laws they have in Fight:
Now may you see the Armies both,
how they will use their might.
Thus said good old Oceanus.
But seeing oftentimes,
When Men or Gods together fight
for injuries or crimes.
It so falls out that Gods or Men,
that favor either side,
Do fall at odds among themselves,
till that the Field be tried.
Jove rising from his princely Seat,
and Chair of high Estate,
Forbids the Gods to use their arms,
or foster any hate.
And threatens them with angry words,
and with his thundering Dart,
That all the Gods them quiet keep,
and favor neither part.
This said, he calls Apollo forth,
and Mercury in place,
Old Atlas Son, both young in years,
and beautiful in face.
Old Atlas Nephew Mercury
yet had no wings at all
Upon his heels, nor charming Rod,
which Caducee men call.
Nor yet did fair Apollo rule
the Sun within the skies:
His Bow he used, his golden Hair
did hang about his eyes.
Then Love commands to fight the Field,
as Battle stood prepared.
And promised the Conqueror
to have a just reward.
The great Gods sit, the lesser Gods
stand round as in a Ring:
Forbode by law in word or sign
to further either King.
Then lots were cast, which of the twain
should first begin the Fight:
The lot upon Apollo fell*
which chosen had the white.
Then musing where to gin the Game,
that Pawn he first did move
Which from the Foe deuides the Queen,
the black Men's force to prove:
Two steps he goes, then Mercury
remooues out of his place
A pawn that stood just opposite,
to beard him face to face.
Thus stand these two in Battle front,
offering to fight in vain.
For Pawnes their foemen cannot hurt,
if they go right on plain.
On either side their fellow Pawnes,
march on to meet their foes,
And fill the Field with armed men,
thus on the Battle goes.
And yet they came not to hand blows,
but march like, Men at Arms:
And make but short excursions,
to keep themselves from harms.
But now behold, the foot, man black,
that first did meet his foe:
On left hand stroke his enemy,
and killed him with the blow.
And boldly stands with in his room,
but did not see, alas,
His foe at hand, who with one stroke
did kill him in that place.
Which done, the black Prince then remooues
from place where he did stand,
And kept himself environed
with all his Princely Band.
Then suddenly, the warlike Knights
that on the left hand stood,
Did rouse themselves, and bathe their swords
in slaughtred foemens blood.
Mean time the Paunes go still to wrack,
for back they cannot go:
The Horsemen vaunt it in the Field,
and still offend their foe.
But whiles Apollo seeks the spoil
of Pawnes that armed stand,
And makes his Knight run over all,
to wast the blacker Band:
False Mercuri: does go about
by subtlety and slight,
To daunt his foe, and makes his Knight
run over footmen straight,
Who seeking to entrap the King,
now here, now there does range,
And ouer-runnes his enemies,
and still his place does change.
But having found a place most fit,
he stands as in a Ring,
And seeks by all means possible
to counterchecke the King.
And therewithal sets on the Rooke,
which on the right Wing stands:
While Phoebus seeks to aid the King,
and rid him from his hands.
He sees the Rooke in danger great,
which makes him for to rave:
Since one of them he needs must lose,
for both he can not save.
He therefore seeks to save the King
remoouing him a space:
Mean time the black Knight takes the rank,
and stands in his place.
Great loss (alas) for none there is
(the proud Queen set apart)
That in the field does better good,
or uses greater Art.
Thou shall not unrevenged go
quoth Phoebus, full ofire,
And with his Pawnes does compass him,
which makes him to retire,
And quake for fear, for danger great
his soul does undertake,
While that he sees no hope of help,
nor any way to escape*
For on that side the armed camp,
on this, the Queen did stand,
All armed like an Amazon,
and slew him with her hand.
The army white begins to rage
much like a furious Bull,
Who having lost one horn in fight,
yet beats his horned scull,
Against his raging ennemy,
begored all in blood:
So they inforst, with greater force
their furious foes withstoode.
But Phoebus on the other side
began to rage amain:
And bends his forces to his foes,
to put them to more pain:
But while he seeks to spoil his foes,
two companies he lost*
The slaughter of his enemies
full dear his army cost*
False Mercury does look about,
but stays his hand from stroke,
And now he ventures here, now there
his foemen to provoke,
And that the Queen he might surprise,
a Pawn he does present,
Which nathelesse the subtle God
does seem for to repent.
The Archer then for right side seeks
the white Queen to entangle,
Which heedelesse foe, not marking, thrust
a Pawn in left side angle
When Venus fair foresaw the loss
that thereby should ensue,
She warning gave to Phoebus mild,
by signs and tokens true.
Apollo thus admonished
did cast his eyes about,
And viewd the camp, and suddenly
he spied among the rout,
One of his foes that ready was
to swallow up the Pawn,
And check the Queen, he with his hand
did pull him in again.
And thus he both did save the Pawn,
and rid the Queen from thrall,
Which else had brought destruction
to King and army all.
Then Mercury began to chafe,
and chide Latonaes son:
Affirming that the Queen was taken,
and that the game was won.
The Gods themselves begin to jar,
and speak on either part.
Then Phoebus answers for himself,
and uses all his Art.
What wrong (quoth he) is offered,
if playing such a game,
We mend a sudden oversight,
what law forbids the same?
Then make a law, that whosoever touch
a man, or white or black,
That forward he do play the same,
and not to pull him back.
This sentence pleased all the Gods,
yet with a secret beck,
Jove Venus chid, but Mercury
did not perceive the check.
But yet it grieved him to the heart,
that Phoebus used such play,
And ready was Chesse board, and all
the men to cast away.
Then did he purpose with himself
to use some cunning slight:
If not by force to quell his foe,
to foil him by deceit.
Then does he make the Archer feign
the paces of the Knight:
He standing forth does threaten death
unto the Queen in white.
When Phoebus did perceive his drift,
he smiling turned his face
To all the Gods, and vide these words*
in Mercuries disgrace.
Though thou be subtle Mercury,
and use to filch thy pray,
Yet shall thou not deceive me so,
and therefore mend thy play.
The lookers on began to laugh,
then Mercury, though loath,
Pulld back his man, and made him go
even as the Archer does.
Apollo then began to watch,
and mark the subtle sleights
That Mercury did use in play,
and began to shun his baits.
And now behold the Archer white
against the Knight in black
Opposde himself, who went about
to spoil the Queen, alack.
The right hand Rooke goes here and there*
and glisters in white arms
And in the middst against King and Queen
he threatens mighty harms.
The Knight likewise armed in white
as proud of former spoil,
Began to glory in his acts,
not fearing any foil.
The Archer black seeing his pride
no longer could abide,
But bent his bow, and shot his shaft,
and pierst him in the side.
There lies he tumbling in the dust,
both horseman, horse, and all:
Then steppeth forth a Pawn in white,
and killes the Archer tall:
Him killes another Pawn in black,
the battle waxes hot:
The Rookes do rage, and every man
does stand unto his lot.
The Archers shoot their arrows thick,
the horseman or the Knight
Begin to rage and range the field,
in colors black and white*
Headlong they run and rush in arms,
both armies black and white,
The captains and the soldiers stout,
pel mel in fury fight.
Now this side gets the upper hand,
now that does seem to yield:
Virtue and Fortune meet in one,
and strive to win the field.
The white Queen like an Amazon,
does fight with furious hand,
And going forward killes a Rooke
that in her way did stand:
Retiring back unto her place
the Bishop black she foiles,
And raging thus on every side
her enemies she spoils:
Much like a raging Lioness
the furious Queen does stamp,
On every side she sleys her foes,
and spoils her enemies camp.
At length the army all in black,
and black Prince began to quail,
And of his black Queen aid he craves
his foemen to assail*
Who lays about as she were mad,
and rages here and there,
And helps her friends, and hurtes her foes,
and puts them all in fear.
The Pawnes are slain on every side,
the Archers go to wrack,
And there lay weltring in their blood
the horsemen white and black*
For both the Queens like Amazons
do either strike amain,
Not meaning to forsake the Field
till one of them be slain.
Mean time the rulers of the host
did keep the bodies slain,
And watch the captive prisoners
lest they should fight again.
But Mars a friend to Mercury,
standing by Phoebus side,
Did seek by all means possible
to help his friend that tide.
And from the heap of dead men slain,
black Rooke and Pawn he takes,
And put them in the camp again,
which a fresh battle makes.
Thus secretly the prisoners,
that lately began to yield,
Did stowtly fight, and used now
their weapons in the field.
But Iunos son lame Mulciber
who only spide the act,
Cries out aloude* and Phoebus warnes
of this unlawful fact.
The Thracian Knight Don Mercury
thus taken, wexed pale,
Phoebus began to fret and fume
till Jove had heard his tale,
Then Jupiter angry with Mars,
did Mercury check plain,
Commanding him to throw them out
where they at first lay slain:
And bids him cast those men away
that Mars had given of late,
And causes them to bring their game
unto the former state.
Both captains now began to rage,
and furiously to stamp.
And both their Queens they send abroad,
to spoil each others camp.
Their blades are both imbrewd in blood,
whiles here and there they fling,
At last placed just opposite,
both seek to save their King.
But whiles black Queen less for her self
than for her husband cares,
Behold the white Queen suddenly
did kill her unawares.
But not long time the Queen, alas,
enioyde the victory:
For Bishop shot a deadly shaft,
and slew her presently.
Both armies now began to fail,
the soldiers wept, alas,
When either side saw both their Quee^*
lie slain before their face.
Then began they for to guarde their King,
and stand about them round,
Both armies now began to fear
each soldier had his wound.
Yet were they not quite void of force,
some helps were yet behind,
Which liu'de as yet to try the field,
as Fortune had assignde.
Phoebus had yet three footmen left,
which stood on the right wing,
One Bishop and a Rooke beside
for to defend his King.
So many Pawnes had Mercury
one Bishop and a Knight,
For both his Rookes and all the rest
were slain in former fight.
Then Mercury began to despair,
for loss of men at arms:
Yet warily against Phoebus fought
for fear of future harms.
And seeks by all means possible,
his foemen to offend,
And bide the fortune of the field,
hoping a better end:
Apollo then triumphantly
did march within the field,
Rejoicing in the bloody spoils
of those whom he had killd
Both Princes spoiled of their Queens,
though former love remains:
Yet seek they now new marriages
to ease their former pains.
Therefore the white King first of all,
of waiting Maids I ween,
Does seek to choose a second wife,
and make of her a Queen.
But first he means to try their force
and courage in the Field:
And plant his love on one that makes
her Enemies to yield.
For none the Princes love may gain,
except with courage bold*
She harmless passes to the place
which adverse King does hold.
Straight on do go the waiting Maids,
yet one among the rest,
That on right hand the third place held,
in swiftnes was the best:
And hopes by valor to obtain
the marriage of the King,
For the other twain were cast behind,
and thought of no such thing.
She marches on with courage bold
the foe-man King to greet:
For due reward, and hope of fame,
gave wings unto her feet.
The black Prince likewise does attempt
a second marriage:
Which causes Mercury to step
all forward in a rage.
Moving a Pawn from left hand side,
which on the fourth rank stood,
But by a step he was too slow,
which made him mad and wood.
But now behold the Pawn in white,
on top of Fortunes Ball:
Racing the Camp, did there possess
the highest place of all.
This done, the King adorned her
with dead Queens brave attire:
And takes her to his loving wife,
which was her whole desire.
Now began the white Camp to rejoice,
and black men began to frown:
And Mercury began to weep,
till tears did run adowne.
The black Pawn now from highest place,
one only step did lack,
But Rooke in white was ready pressed*
to have her by the back.
So that for fear she durst not stir
from place wherein she stood,
Least that her deadly Enemy
should triumph in her blood.
Mean time the stately new made Queen
her force in Battle tried,
And raging so, she slew her foes
that stood on either side.
The black Camp at her very sight,
began for fear to tremble:
For Thestilis the Amazon
in Field she did resemble.
The Soldiers began to run away,
afraid of every thing:
And running all upon a heap,
environed their King.
Much like a Heard of Oxen fair
or Heyfers on the Plain*
When as they see the Wolf approach,
their legs begin to strain,
And stand about the master Bull,
all round as in a Ring:
Even so these seely fearful Swains,
stood round about their King.
But furious Queen, as Conqueror*
ran up and down the Field,
And sets upon the King himself,
which now began to yield.
And had she not too hasty been
in running of her race,
No doubt she might have taken the King,
or slain him in his place.
That day had brought a fatal end
to black Prince at a blow*
And Mercury Jove's Messenger,
had had an overthrow.
But Atlas Son did well perceive
Apolloes ouer-sight:
And mocked him, and bade the Queen
look better to her fight.
Thus while Apollo went about
a silly Pawn to catch,
He lost that opportunity
which he before did watch.
And Mercury, to save the King,
his Knight he did oppose
To fight against the new made Queen,
and to defend her blows.
Then seeking to offend the Rooke
that staid the Pawn in black
From being Queen: he draws a shaft,
and shootes him in the back.
Thus while Apollo sought in vain
his foe King to offend,
His lusty Rooke he lost, alas,
and brought him to his end.
The black Pawn then without all fear
in highest place was seen:
Nor could Apollo hinder her
from being made a Queen.
Now both of them with equal force
did fight within the Field.
And valiantly their new made Queens,
did use both spear and shield.
And though the fortune of the Fight,
and hope uncertain was,
Yet Mercvry began to vaunt,
and take new heart at grass.
As certain of the victory,
he began for to insult:
And uses all his subtilties
to make a new tumult.
When Phoebus did perceive his drift,
these words he used hot:
Why Mercury do thy triumph,
before the Field be got.
When thou have gotten victory,
then use thy brauing words:
Mean time let us not braggarts be,
but fight it out with swords.
Thy words I will confute with swords,
thy braues with future blows:
This said, he animates his Queen,
to set upon his foes.
Straight-waies begins a Battle great
and furious in the Field:
Both sides are bold, and neither part
is purposed to yield.
They run upon their foemens blades,
great fear is in the Camp,
Their hands imbrude in blood, their feet
through thick and thin do stamp.
The black Queen now begins to spoil
her foes before her face.
The Queen in white withstood her not,
but runs another race:
Untouched of all her Enemies,
a secret way she takes,
Ceasing to fly at smaller game,
toward the King she makes*
And setting first upon the Guard
that round about him stood,
She seeks to check the King, and bathe
her hands within his blood.
The black Queen then, when as she saw
the white Queens whole intent,
Leaving the Battle as it stood,
to help the King she went.
For rather does she seek to run
upon her present death,
Than see her King, before her face
bereft of vital breath.
But then there chaunst another thing
that grieved Phoebus sore:
For Mercury sent out his Knight
to vex him more and more.
The Horsman furiously does fight,
nor stays he in his race,
Till fearing neither King nor Queen,
he got his wished place.
And brauing in his armor black,
a stout Knight was he seen:
And threateneth destruction
both to the King and Queen:
Which when Apollo did perceive
it grieved him very sore,
And now the hope began to fail
which he conceiud before.
Now Mercury began to vaunt
of hoped victory,
And glad in mind, both heart and voice
did lift unto the sky.
And with his Soldiers compassing
the white Queen round about,
He strikes her dead, and does enjoy
her spoils with courage stout.
In which Conflict by white Kings stroke
he lost his valiant Knight:
Phoebus (though grieved at the loss)
yet fiercely held him Fight.
And with his Bishop all in white
and Pawnes that were but twain
He fights the Field, and does renew
the Battle once again.
The lesser hope they have of help,
the boulder are they found:
To save their King, they yield themselves
to many a fearful wound.
But all in vain: for Mercury
began furiously to fight,
And sends abroad his Queen in black,
to check the King in white.
She rangeth here and there about,
not meaning once to yield,
Till she has got the victory
of white King in the Field.
And having slain the foot men both
that on the King did tend,
She sets upon the King himself
to bring him to his end.
Now had the King no hope of help,
but as a captive stands:
Yet loath he was to yield himself,
into his Enemies hands.
But means by flight to save himself,
and runs now here now there:
And seeks by all means possible
to rid himself from fear.
As one forsaken of his friends
he rangeth all about:
His foes pursue him in the chase,
and fight with courage stout.
The black Prince does pursue the white,
and uses all his strength,
And ever kept behind his foe
about a weapons length.
But when he see him set his foot
upon the highest seat:
He bids his Queen to watch him well,
that he away ne get.
The King thus brought into a straight,
beset of all his foes,
Does faintly fight: yet to their blows
himself he does oppose.
The black Queen watching well her time
pursude the King so fast,
That he no place of refuge had
to save himself at last.
For as he ran into a nooke
himself for to defend,
The black Queen pierst him to the heart,
and so his life did end.
The Gods and all the Goddesses
that stood them round about,
At Phoebus loss and overthrow
began to give a shoute.
And Mercury the conqueror
thus having won the Field,
Began to scoff Apollo fair,
who now of force must yield.
Phoebus was grieved that all the Gods
so ill did him regard:
And Mercury Jove's messenger
did look for his reward.
Whom mighty Jove the king of Gods,
does call unto him soon:
And gives to him a just reward,
for that which he had done.
The gift was strange, a coniuring rod,
which Caducee men call,
Whose virtue was of great effect
to raise the dead withal.
To cast a man into a sleep,
and wake him up again,
To raise the souls from Limbo lake,
and rid them from their pain:
To make men living dead, and send
their quick souls down to hell,
Which caused him in Magickes Arts
all other to excel.
Nor wanted Phoebus his reward,
though Mercury had won,
For Jove did give him leave to rule
the Chariot of the Sun.
This done, the Gods and Goddesses
that saw this pleasant game,
Went every one unto the place
from whence at first they came.
And Mercury long afterward,
in travel, as I guess,
Did teach the men of Italy
to play this game at Chesse.
For landed on the Italian shore,
as ancient stories tell:
He spied by chance a lovely Dame,
that likte him passing well,
And seeing her, and liking her,
he loved her withal:
This was a brave Sereian Nymph,
whom Scacchis men did call:
Who while she kept her snowie swannes
about the rivers wild,
He spyde, and loved and lay with her,
and got the maid with child.
And to requite such courtesy
showed by so kind a Dame:
To drive away the time withal,
he taught her first this game.
And for the loss of liberty,
and maidenhead withal:
Of her name Scacchis Scacchia
this play at Chesse did call.
And that this God in memory
the Less might longer have,
A Boxen Chesse board gilded round
unto the gerle he gave,
And taught her cunning in the same,
to play the game by Art.
Which after to the country swains
this Lady did impart:
Who taught their late posterity
to use this kind of play,
A game of great antiquity
still used at this day.
Finis
W. B.

To the Reader.
THus have you here, as I do guess,
The order of the game at Chesse:
With all the precepts less or more,
As it was used in years of yore:
Which game the Gods did first invent,
To pass the time in merriment:
And that we mortal men on earth
Might imitate their heavenly mirth,
And drive all sorrows from the heart,
Which now and then come overthwart,
I thought it good to set down plain
This Game, which Arcas did ordain
To be a solace to the Gods,
When as their hearts were far at ods.
Wherein if you do take delight,
And use the same by day or night,
To drive away your sorrows past:
I shall be pleased at the last,
Requesting you with all my heart,
To take my verses in good part;
And to remain my loving friend,
For this time thus I make an end.

