I. KILL YOU ALL



Mark well the effect, purtreyed here in all:
The Prelate with his dignities renown,
The King that rules, the Lawyer in the hall,
The Harlot and the country toyling Clown:
How and which way together they agree,
And what their talk and conference might be.
Each to their cause, for guard of their degree,
And yet death is the conqueror you see.
THe bishop vaunts to pray for the other four,
As who would say, he holds the palm and pri e,
And that in him and his most holy power,
It does depend, their causes to suffice
I pray (says he) that Christ's continual grace
May them conduct, and guide in every place.
THe puissant King he claims to defend,
The bishop and the other three like case,
In all conflictes or broils unto the end,
Who but his power their enemies does deface
He ^ursters men, and sends them forth a far
In their behalf, to maintain deadly war.
THe smiling queen, the harlot called by name,
Stands stiff upon the blafe of beauty brave,
To vanquish all, she makes her prized clame.
And that she ought the golden spurs to have,
For by her flights she can bewitch the best,
The strong, the Lawyer, and the rest.
THe Lawyer he, in title of his clame,
Presumes next, by law and justice true,
Somewhat the more, to eleuate his name:
For law (says he) all discord does subdue:
It ends strife, it gives to each his right,
And wholly does contention vanquish quight
THe contry clown full loath to lose his rigth,
Puts in his foot, and pleads to be the chief.
What can they do (says he) by power or might,
If that by me they have not their relief?
For want of food they should all perish than,
What say you now to me the country man.
For want of me they should both line and lack,
For want of me they could not till the earth,
And that's the cause I carry on my back,
This table here of plenty not of dearth.
I feast them all, their hunger I appease,
For by my toil they feed even at their ease.
DEath that aloof in stealing wise does stand
Hearing the vaunts that they begin to make.
Straight steppeth forth, with piercing dart ^ hand
And boldly seems the quarrel up to take.
Are they (says he) so proud in their degree,
Lo, here by me soon conquered shall they be,
And standing by to give their later food,
He enters straight, the conquest to attain,
There Is none of them (says he) the chiefest blond
That valiant death intends to refrain,
I Will crop their crown and garlands fresh and gay,
And at the last I Will shrine them all in clay.
I pray for you all. I help you all to your right. I defend you all. I vanquish
you all. I seed you all. I will kill you all.
(*) The Authors Apostrophe to the Reader.
Here may you see, what as the world might be,
The rich, the poor, Earl, Caesar, Duke, and King*
Death spares not the chiefest high degree,
He triumphs still, on every earthly thing,
While then we live let us endeavor still,
That all our works agree with Gods goodwill.

