A SERMON PREAched in the Cathedral Church of the City of Waterford, in Febr.
1617. Before the Right Honorable the Lord President of Munster, and the State:
AS ALSO, Before Sr William Jones Knight, Lord Chief Justice of Ireland, and
Gerrard Loder Esquire, one of the Judges of the Common Pleas, the then Justices
of Assize held in the same place. At which time the Charter of the same City,
being by diverse Iuries found forfeit, was lastly surrendered. By ROBERT DABORNE
Chancellor of the said Cathedral Church of Waterford.

ROMANS 11.33. Oh the deepnesse of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge
of God! how unsearchable are his Judgments, and his ways past finding out!

Printed at London for H. Gosson. 1618.

TO THE TRVLY ennobled Donogh O Bryan, Baron of Ibrackan, Earl of Thomond, and
Lord President of the Province of Munster in the Kingdom of IRELAND: Robert
Daborne wishes the increase of all Honors, and the fruition of his sanctified
desires.
RIGHT HONORABLE:
AS all Virtue finds both original and perfection in Christian Religion; so
especially Gratitude: that if I would deliver in a word, what our Profession
teaches, it should be this; To be thankful: And though my ablest endeavor,
assisted with most favorable acceptance, can never render me more then
willing to deserve the greatness of your H: bounties; yet if I only of many
my Brethren (as who knows your Honor truly, but must confess you a Father of
our Nation) come back with the Samaritane to make public acknowledgement as
it can no way take from the constancy of your goodness, so it adds this
benefit to me, that I have some testimony of my desire to pay, as I have many
witnesses of my debt. Not to trouble your Lordship with much, as the wisdom of
Kings best appears in their election of Vicegerents and Counselors: An
example where of we have in Solomon and his Son Roboam, 1 King. 12. So the
Lord grant in preferring such Religious and truly Honorable Personages as
your Lordship, to the seat of Justice, we his Majesty's loyal Subjects may
ever continue to admire his high Judgment, and daily bless the Lord for him.

Your Honors faithful Servant and Chaplain, ROB: DABORNE.

A Sermon preached at Waterford in Ireland.
Right Honorable, Right Reverend, Worshipful, and Beloved in the truly
loving, and best beloved Christ Jesus; my Meditations to be expressed at this
time for your edification, are grounded upon that parcel of the word of God,
which you shall find written in the 11. Chap. of the Prophecy of the Prophet
Zachary, the 7. Ver. the last part of the Verse.

And I took unto me two staves, the one I called Beauty, and the other I
called Bands: and I fed the flock.

THe Scripture, as man, consists of a Soul and a Body; the Letter is the Body,
the Sense is the Soul. There is a Law for both, to both; Explication of the
Letter, Application of the Sense: the Ecclesiastical Law to direct the soul,
the Sword of the Magistrate to govern the body: both agree to this time, to
this place: both meet in my Text: the first is called Beauty, the other Bands.
What I have received, that I shall deliver: what I deliver shall become you to
receive; God which is the Creator of the means, knows best how to dispose the
means. He which in the Gospel was restored to his sight, excepted not against
the clay, neither abhorred the spittle. Holy Job despised not the counsel of
his servant: and it Naaman had not bin ruled by his Bondwoman, he had died in
his leprosy. Matter and Breuity, if we believe Fulgentius, are two maine
virtues in a Preacher: though I have only the first in my desires, you shall b^
sure of the last, which is in my power. And I took unto me two staves, etc.

Wherein I observe an action, Feeding; an Actor, I, I am that I am, God. The
Object, circa quod, the Flock. The means of feeding, in quantity two, in
quality excellent, forcible; Beauty, Bands. And I took unto me two staves,
etc.

That Feeding is taken for ordering and governing, Psalm. 78. the last Verses,
He chose David also his servant, and took him from the Sheepfold, to feed
his people in Jacob, and his inheritance in Israel: So be fed them according
to the simplicity of his heart, and guided them by the discretion of his
hands. According to that 2. Sam. 5. Thou shall feed my people in Israel, and be
a Captain in Israel. To come nearer to you, 2. Sam. 7.7. I commanded the
Judges to feed my people Israel.

And that you may not think this government only belongs to the Temporal
Magistrate, S. Paul, 1 Timothy 5.17. tells you, The Elders that rule well are
worthy of double honor. And that ye may not think the word Rule is here
meant only Preaching, in the same Chapter he tells Bishop Timothy what
Witnesses he shall allow of, in what manner he shall rebuke, and above all,
that he be not partial. And as our Savior gives in the person of Peter
warrant sufficient to all Elders to feed and to govern the flock, so S. Peter
expounding the intent of Christ, in the first of Peter, gives as ample
authority to all Bishops, as well as to the Pope, to feed and govern, in
these words; The Elders which are amongst you I beseech, who also am an Elder,
(not Dominus Dominantium) that you feed the Flock which depends upon you,
governing it, not by constraint, but willingly, not for filthy lucre, but of a
free and ready mind. Now if Bozius tell you Saint Peter spoke not to the Pope
here considering his manners in the effects, I am content to believe him.

That the Actor or Feeder here is God, is as S. Jerome tells you upon this
place, that Judges may know they do only supplere vicem Dei, supply Gods
place, not sit in their own: When thou come unto the people of Israel
(says God to Moses, Exodus 3.14.). Thou shall say unto them, I am has sent me
unto you. All power is given from God, and Judgment from above, Wild. 6.1. And
I charged your Judges at that time, saying; Judge rightly between every man and
his neighbor, for the Judgment is Gods. Deuteronomy. 16. Hence comes our reverence:
hence should come your zeal, your fear, God visits us by you, but he will
visit you by himself, Ier.5.29.

The Object or people fed, are named The flock, that you may feed, not fleece
them, and that we which are under your government, may behave our selves, not
as Wolves, ravening; not as Dogs, envying, barking at and tearing one another;
not as Foxes, subtle and crafty; not as Swine, luxurious, unclean; not as
Horses, proud, stubborn: but as Sheep, tractable, gentle, innocent, that
these Judges which are set of GOD, may find us such in their Circuit, as we
would be found at the general Assize by the Judge of Judges Christ Jesus, when
he will acknowledge us by the name of Sheep, even the blessed of his Father,
and separate us from the Heard, Math. 25.33.

To conclude, both Judge and people are hereby taught their duties one to
another, and both to GOD; of whom, being our great Shepherd, we may say
truly, as the Poet fainedly of Pan: -- Pan curat ou^s, ouiumque Magistros.

Our word shall be, Tanquam Deo, to obey you as the Ordinance of God: let your
word be Coram Deo, to judge us as in the sight of God. And I took unto me two
staves, the one I called Beauty, and the other I called Bands, and I fed the
Flock.

Many are of Laertius his mind, they would have but one Law; affirming, Vbi
multi Medici, ibi multi morbi, where there are many Physicians, there are many
diseases. But more are of Demonax mind, Leges prorsus esse inutiles, to have
no Law at all, affirming the good need them not, the bad will not be bettered
by them. Sure as they which maintain these opinions, are not of the good, who
need no Laws, so it is to be feared they would be far worse if they were
without Laws: it is old but true, Oderunt peccare mali formidine poenae: But we
Christians say with S. Peter, Laws are needful for good and bad; for the
punishment evil doers, and for the defense of and encouragement of them that
do well, 1 Pet. 2.15. And we approve that of Chrysostom, To make Music on
a Harp, it is not sufficient to play on one string, but all must be struck in
due measure and proportion. Man as I have said, consists of a body and a soul,
to both a Law is required: at the first, the Law of the Soul was written in
heart, for without this Law Abel could not have offered the acceptable
Sacrifice, Heb. II. In the first ages the Law of Nature restrained those sins
which after, the Law of Nations forbad. The first written Law given to the
Elect people of God, being Ecclesiastical binding the soul, was given into
the hands of Moses a Leuite, but the corrupt manners of men caused them to be
extended to the punishment of the body: wherein as God reserved the Judgment
and inquisition to Moses, the execution was done by the hands of the people,
not by the Levites; Time perfected Sin, Sin severity: the people weary of
the strict government of Samuel a Leuite, will have a King though of the Tribe
of Reniamin, to judge us (say they) and to go out before us, 1 Samuel 8. But was
this request against the ordinance of God? No, the Law of Deuteronomie long
before, gave instruction for the choosing of King, and prescribed a Law to the
King, so that the Israelits sinned not in their request, but in the time of
their request, not attending Gods leisure. Was the Ecclesiastical Law
abrogated now? No, the King must take the Law and read it diligently from the
hands of the Priest, in one and the same Chapter, Deuteronomy. 17.

Now that it is called Bands here, is in respect of that tie which the King
has upon the People, bound to observe his Laws, not repugnant to Gods Law,
for then they cease to be Laws; and of him to the people, as you may read of
King David, 2 Samuel 5. which he calls there, The Covenant between him and the
people. And in 1 Samuel 10. Samuel declares to the people the duty of a
Kingdom. So you see here was a King over the people above the Priest, but
neither Laws abrogated, they being indeed the two hands of 2 King, which must
defend and wash one another: though the wicked persuade them they are feet, the
one cannot be lifted up unless the other be thrust down, godly men will
attend Samuel home, though Saul be chosen above him: but they are branded for
wicked men that slighted the Civil Magistrate when they had a Temporal, 1 Samuel 10.27. Such men forget that Salomons Throne had Lions on either side to
support it, that our Kings carry a Cross in one hand, as well as a Sword in
the other. As the Ministry acknowledges all obedience to the temporal power,
not as Bellarmine and his brood affirm, Virationis non Legis, sed virationis
and Legis, Both by the Law of God and humane reason: so likewise it is the duty
of the Temporal Magistrate to rise up to Nathan, as David did, to uphold the
privileges of the Church, as good Constantine did; Not (says he) only
because I am sworn so to do: but because I am sworn to that which the Law of
God commands. There are some that though they desire not to have the
government of the Church wholly extinguished, yet with Vzza they think it had
need of their help: others with the busy Bethshemites will be prying into the
Arc, they will be inquiring, and looking into the defects of
Church-gouernment, be it but to fill up their discourse, having neither place
nor purpose for the amending it: But the same God which struck Vzza dead for
doing the first, 2. Sam. 6. will not let these escape more then he did the
Bethshemites, of whom he destroyed fifty thousand for presuming the last, 1.
Sam. 6.

There are a third Sect, and those are puri quasi minime puri, the impuritans
of our time, these never cease crying out to the Church, as the Devil did unto
Christ, cast thy self down, humble thy self before us. The Church though
rent and almost ruinde, is yet too glorious in their eyes, it faring with these
men as with those who standing upon earth look up to lofty pinnacles, which
still seem to waver and stand awry, when the defect is truly in their own
sight.

Lastly, there is a fourth number which with Ammon having defiled their sister,
would gladly expose her to the contempt of others: These men (with sacrilegious
hands) having ravished the Church of her Lands and ornaments, are the first
that tell her when she threatens them, A proud Beggar God hates. Surely, as
Thamar said to Ammon, to say I to such in the behalf of my despised Mother:
This last wickedness is greater yet then the first, 2. Sam. 13.16. Let these
and every one of these remember that it was the sin of the Princes of Judah,
to take from the authority of the Priest, which the Lord compares to the
removing of the Bounds, an act accursed in the Leuiticall Law: for which (says
he) I will pour my vengeance upon them like water, Hos. 5.10. As we justify
Pope Boniface the eight to be Antichrist: who wrote to the most Christian King
Phillip le Beau, to come and acknowledge he held his Crown of him; threatening
if he should refuse, to depose him and Crown another: The answer of which
King, I cannot omit, wishing it might be engraven in leaves of gold by a pen of
diamond, Phillippus Dei gra^ia ^rancorum Rex, Bonifacio se gerenti pro summo
pontifice salutem modicam, sine nullam, sciat tua maxima fatuitas, in
temporalibus nos alicui non subesse: To Boniface bearing himself for Pope,
little or no health, be it known to thy exceeding great foolishness, that We
in Temporal affairs are subject to none. As I say we justify the Pope to be
Antichrist for usurping both Swords, so we confess Damascen Bishop of Rome was
a good Bishop and Martyr, who suffered for the liberties of the Church. In this
man's time the devise of the Bishops of Rome might have well been a blanck
paper opposed to a burning glass, the word Candor illaesus, The Arms of the
Church, being then tears and prayers, at nunc horrentia martis, now they are
swords, targets and gunpowder. I fear I have leaned too long upon this staff,
but my conscience the more inforceth me, because I assure my self the want of
that respect and power the Ordinary ought to retain, is a maine cause of so
many being in this place Recusant. Briefly then that you may know by Beauty,
is here meant the Ecclesiastical government, besides the verses following my
Text, which confirm it, which showing that both staves were broken, and
foolish shepherds set over the people: it particularly gives us to
understand, that this staff of Beauty was broken for the sins of the Priests,
and the staff of Bands for the sins of the Prince and his Subjects. The
Prophet David I say in the 19. Psalm. tells us, that the statutes of the Lord
are right, rejoicing the heart; the commandments of the Lord are bright,
enlightening the eyes. And Saint Paul in the 2. of the Corinths 3. If the old
Law, the Law of condemnation were beautiful, were glorious, much more does the
ministration of righteousness exceed in glory: Oh that we could as truly say
the discipline of our Church were as fruitful as Leah, as we can say she is
beautiful as Rachel, nay beauty it self, not in the concreat, but in the
abstract according to the words of my Text: And I took unto me two staves, the
one I called Beauty, and the other I called Bands, and I fed the flock.

But why are both Laws Spiritual and Temporal called Staves; because they
ought to have these four properties of a staff, to direct, to correct, to
defend, to support. They must direct all, correct the wicked, defend from the
oppressor, support the oppressed: And that the stone may be hewed out and
fitted to the line, Iethro places Justice upon a cube or square, painting out
a good Judge with four answerable qualities, Exodus 18.21. Provide (says he to
Moses) amongst all the people, able men: that is for direction, fearing God not
men; that is for correction, dealing truly; that is for defense, hating
covetousness; that is for support. Of these as the spirit of God shall enable
me, your respective patience encourage me, and the time permit. First, a Judge
must direct, therefore understanding is required in a Judge, ignorantia Iudicis
populi calamitas, woe be unto that people who have Children for their Kings and
Governors, Eccle. 10.16. and Ecclus. 11. 7. understand first, and then reform
righteously. Cassbodore gives us the reason why learned and skillful men in the
Law should be chosen Judges, quia non facile erroris vitio sordescit, quem
doctrina purgauit, learning (says he) is the best preserver from vice and
error; and that you may not think only Judges of Assise and Bishops ought to
be learned, in the aforenamed Ex. 18. Let able men be chosen to be Judges, over
hundreds, over fifties, over tens, It is worthy your ear, your regard, who
have power to constitute Judges over inferior Courts, the seed-beds of
corruption and oppression, but he must direct, then he must expound the law
directly: he must be Iudex ius dicens, as our Islands Oracle well observed, not
ius-facie^s, he must pronounce Law, not make Law, which he does when he either
wrests it, or interprets it falsely: Again, dirigit qui direct it, he
directs who goes directly, but he that looks aside can hardly go directly;
he that is blind cannot go directly; he that is a respecter of persons he
looks aside, non consideres personam pauperis, Leuit. 19. Thou shall not
consider the person of the poor, nor behold the countenance of the rich, but
judge thy neighbor justly. And he that takes a bribe cannot see at all, Eccle.
20.18. Rewards and gifts blind the eyes of the wise, and make them dumb, that
they cannot reprove faults. Of the first, Laertius gives us an excellent
example of one Bion a young man newly made a Judge, whom a familiar of his
meeting as he was going to the Bench, runs to him, crying out friend Bion I am
glad I have met you, you are mistaken Sir (says Bion) I left your friend at my
house, whither if you come when the Court is up, you will find him ready to
intertaine you. Oh! had Achab remembered this, when being daz^led by the name of
his friend Benhadab, 1. King. 20. He could not see to do Justice upon the
enemy of God, he had not died so miserably. Had wretched Pilate not been lured
out of the way of Justice by the name of Cesars friend, he had washed his hands
truly in innocence, John 19.12. I exhort you therefore in the name of the ever
living God, who is no respecter of persons, as Moses did the Israelites against
Idolatry, Deuteronomy. 13.6. seeing this friendship is enmity with God, James 4 4.
That if thy Brother the Son of thy Mother, or thy wife that lies in thy
bosom, or thy friend which is as thy own soul, shall entice thee secretly,
saying, I pray wink at the sin of my tenant, give way to the putting off a
Trial which is brought against me but till next Assise, or I pray entertain
my adversary roughly, that he may be disheartened to seek for Justice: I
beseech thee consent not unto it; for why, he that stall respect the person in
judgment, mine ^ie shall be upon that man to cut him off from Israel, says
the Lord, Deuteronomy. 16. As for bribes let Tytus motto be thine, non habet euentus
sordida praeda bonos, The end of filthy gain is miserable. The Judges in the
old Law sat in the gates of the City to avoid suspicion of bribery, and for
easy and unsuspected access. Now we know that the way to a Magistrates
chamber may be open, his hands may be free, but as in a Salmon weire, the
return may be hard, there may be certain sharp prickers at the door, which
will draw blood of him if he depart before he pay tithe. But if a Judge will
flourish like an Olive tree, he must have the property of an Olive tree, which
as Solinus tells us, grows not only smooth it self, but suffers no bryer to
grow near it, quifacit per alium facit perse: now if a Judge will receive
bribes, either directly or indirectly, if Troy will be won with gifts, here
be Greeks will soon be Masters of it: But wise Laocon will cry out, timeo
Danaos and dona ferentes, they will know he was a Heathen that said, profit
smelt well whence soever it came, and with Christian Saint Peter will say, to
the Bribe-giuer, thy money perish with thee, Repent thee of this wickedness,
that God may forgive thee, for I see thou art in the gall of bitterness, and
in the bond of iniquity, Acts 8.20. Justice is the Abner which thou must
pursue; like Asabel rather dye then step out of the way, and though these
bodies of sin we bear about us, like the kine which (carried the Arc to
Bethshemesh) lough after their calves, the friendships and commodities of this
life: yet as those Kine, so you turn not either to the right hand or to the
left, till you come to your eternal Elisium, as they to the field of Joshua the
Bethshemite, 1. Sam. 6. And thus much for the first property of a staff, of
the Law, of the speaking Law, a Judge to direct.

The second property is to Correct, nothing seems more easy to man, nothing
is more hard. There is a correction to amendment, there is a correction to
destruction. First, for the manner, Saint Austin bids us remember to express
God not our selves in our correction, which Cassiodore expounds when he tells
us, to judge justly makes a Judge hold the name of a Judge, not to judge
sharply, proudly, the sword is in the hand of the wise Magistrate to the
punishment of offenders. Now there is a rod of Pride, but that is in the mouth
of the Fool, Pro. 14. will you see them distinguished by pattern? will you
hear a wicked man in authority speak? hear Shimei, Stand forth (says he to
dejected David) thou wicked man, thou murderer, behold God has taken thee in
thy wickedness, because thou art a murderer, 2. Sam. 16. Now you shall hear
a perfect Judge speak, Joshua to Acan, as great a sinner as comes to our
bars, whose sin was the death of thirty six men at an instant, besides
such a danger and reproach to his country, that good Joshua rent his clothes and
fell upon his face all day long before the Ark of the Lord for the finding out
the offender, which person by the infallible lot being now discouerd, Mark how
he flies upon him, My son (says he) I beseech thee give glory to the Lord
God of Israel and make confession unto me what thou have done, but when he
confessed it, then you will expect a Ciceronian volly discharged at him: no,
Joshua is a Judge of the Lord still, Why, oh why (says he to Acan) have thou
thus troubled Israel, even for this cause will all Israel trouble thee, the
correction of the wise like gentle rain, even April showers soften the heart
of a sinner, beget plenty: but cruel words like violent storms wash away the
fruitfulness of sorrow and make a dearth, as Isydore says, he that insolently
corrects his Brother, lanches the sore but cures not the wound. A good Judge
like the Physician gives a bitter potion to the disease, but is not angry with
the sick, Remember Saint Austins rule, Remember that thou a man art a Judge of
men, Quod hominis est miserere, pity that part which is man, considering his
fall, to which without the especial goodness of God, thou also art subject,
oh never forget the curse which David gives in the 109. Psalm. Let there be none
to extend mercy unto him, nor to favor his fatherless children, let the
iniquity of his Fathers be remembered, let their sins be before the Lord
continually, that the memory of them may be cut off from the earth: Why?
because he remembered not to show mercy, but persecuted him that was in misery,
and sought to slay the broken in heart. I know beloved there is crudelis
misericordia, a cruel pity, but I speak to your tongues, not to your hands,
to those sharp pointed daggers which often slay the soul of the sinner: But is
there no place for a bitter reproof; yes, Saint Peter to Ananias and Simon
Magus witnesses there is, where the law falls short to reach a sinner let thy
true zeal piece it out with thy words, let thy tongue like the sword of
Phinees, pearce through the Adulterer and the Adultresse. But herein are all
persons alike? No, the sacrifice that was offered for the sin of the Priest,
was burned without the Host, Leu. 14.11. A minister offending is worthy of
treble punishment, as he that does well is worthy of double honor, but take
heed in reproving one, thou do not bring a shanie upon many. Holy David does
not deny the judgment of God upon the person of Saul Gods anointed, to be
just, but with a most pious regard to the glory of God he breakethout into that
passionate persuasion which I will use unto you, considering the enemies of God
dwell about us: When a Minister offends punish his person, but spare his
fame, Oh tell it not in Gath, publish it not in the streets of Askalon, least
the daughters of the Philistians rejoice, least the daughters of the
uncircumcised triumph, 2. Sam. 1. It is the nakedness of thy parent, let
blessed Sem go backward and cover it. The third note I will give you in
correction is, that as thy hand must be upon the sinner, least the hand of God
be upon thee, Leuit. 5. so herein you must correct as God, not as man, you must
not spare Agag and the fat of the land, and punish the poor tenants and the
lean; we must purge the head, says a writer upon the Kings, if we will keep
the feet from swelling, do you desire to draw the land from idolatry, indite
the Landlords, bring them to Church, the Tenants will soon follow: a good
husband searches the root to prevent the barrenness of the tree; but this is
dangerous doctrine in our days, sure had Barack feared this, Debora had wanted
a part of her song. The Kings came and fought, even the kings of Canaan by the
waters of Megiddo, but they received small profit thereby. Up Debora up arise
and lead the captivity captive, thou son of Abinoam, for a remnant have
dominion over the mighty. The Lord has given me dominion over the strong, so
shall all thine enemies perish, oh Lord, but they that love thee shall be as the
Sun when he rises in his might, Judges the 5. The battles of our Princes have
been fought prosperously in this land, and shall we be afraid to fight the
battles of the Lord, Qui metues viuit liber mihi nan erit vnquam, I will
conclude this second property of a Judge to correct, with that of Syrack.
Eccle. 7.6. Seek not to be made a Judge unless thou can break through
iniquity, and not fear the person of the mighty, which will make thee sin
against thine own uprightness.

The third property is to defend, to which by Iethroes advice I join Truth,
and will now add Watchfulness. To judge truly is to defend against the
oppressor: The Greeks made Aletheia Truth, a goddess, caruing her out of a
Rock, answering to Ciceroes definition, Truth is that which time cannot
violate. Aristotle tells us that veritas, truth, is derived a ver, veris, from
the spring, because in the spring nature gives a pure and simple generation to
creatures, will thou have a fruitful soul, a fruitful harvest, a fruitful
praise? judge truly. The Hebrew, as the skillful in the original note, often
sets down Truth for Justice it self, as in the first to the Chor. 3.
speaking of Charity, It reioiceth not (says he) in iniquity, but it reioiceth
in the Truth, that is, in Justice. In nothing can you come nearer to God, whose
Ambassadors, whose servants you are then in this: who as David tells us in the
91. Psalm. shall cover us under his wings, and his truth shall be our shield and
defense, but how shall a Judge defend us from the oppressor if he be not
watchful over the tongues of the Lawyers, over the persons of the witnesses,
these being the instruments of the oppressor by which he peruerteth judgment
and wounds the poor and the Fatherless, there being none to help, Death and
life are in the power of the Tongue, Prou. 18. this is the weapon that strikes,
against which Justice must have her buckler to defend: as against a sword there
is required a quick eye, so against the tongue is required a settled ear. Now
the wicked with his tongue draws his neighbor out of the way, and there he
smites him, let not the Orator therefore draw thee out of the way: let him not
deuiare go about the bush as the proverb: the old word was ad rem but now it
may be ad res, the Epigram agrees to our times, against these that vent so much
impertinent stuff as though they had sued out a writ of Tales de
circumstantibus got leave to use words for want of matter, or at least for want
of truth to their matter durst not appear before Iebu, unless with Iesabel
they come painted. The Poet I say presents a poor Client having feeed his
Counselor to plead for the recovery of two hogs were taken from him, the
Counselor assures him it should be his first motion, and with all speed steps
to the Bar, there he makes a long Oration so far from the matter, that the
innocent Client, thinking he had forgot him and been busied in other men's
affairs, cries out unto him, Ia^ age de porcis; I beseech you now Sir remember
my hogs. It stands upon the Judges to reform this abuse, and upon the Jury to
beware of them: the Fencer when he dazels most, hits soonest; do thou see him
inueigh against the person of the accused or justify the accuser, let this
plaster smell never so sweet it couers but a sore. But above all, the
witnesses are those I would speak unto, Doeg is the man I would combat with,
but alas they which are suffered to speak against the servants of God, are not
compelled to be here to hear the word of God, were they here I would tell
them it is written, Thou shall not bear false witness against thy neighbor.
I would tell them the word Neighbor was not meant as the decretals expound it,
he that is of thy religion, but the Samaritan is also thy neighbor though
never so wicked; for thou art not to respect against whom, but what thou
swearest: and above all, that as thy oath is in the sight of God, so it must be
to the glory of God, according to that of Jeremy 4.2. Thou shall swear in
truth, in judgment, in righteousness, and the Nations shall bless God and
glory in him, I would tell them were they here that Osee the last king of
Israel for breaking his Oath with Salmanazar king of Ashur an Idolater, died a
captive in extreme misery 2. King. 17. That Sedechias king of Judah rebe^ling
contrary to his Oath against Nabuchadnezzar, not only, brought destruction upon
Jerusalem, but having seen his own Children slain before his eyes, had those
eyes also bored out, from which I would come nearer to them, and tell them that
the Pope and the Counsel of Constance erred, no little when they determined,
Faith ought not be kept with Heretics: I could instance Rodulph king of
Swevia, who being dispensed of his Oath by the Pope which he had made to Henry
the fourth Emperor, upon which he took Arms against the Emperor, lost his
right hand in the same, which hand being brought unto him, and looking thereon,
Oh you wicked men (says he to the Bishops) this hand with which I swore fealty
to the Emperor will remain an argument of my breach of Faith before God, and
of your traitorous and irreligious impulsion thereto. I would tell them lastly
that it is one of the things that the Lord does hate: yea, that his soul does
abhor, Pro. 6. At least how careful, considering these things, ought you to be
what witnesses you receive, seeing the Lord has commanded you to make diligent
inquisition after these, Deuteronomy. 19. Do not imagine it concerns you not, I would
here ask, seeing the Law alowes only the testimony of honest and lawful men,
how a Recusant can stand in the rank. By the Law of God he is to be accounted
as a Pagan that stands excommun^cate, 1. Cor. 5. and by the Law of England a
Recusant cannot have the benefit of the Law against a subject, no not in
recovering of his right: Is it the sentence or the sin that depriues of this
ability, sure you will say the sin is the cause, the sentence does but
demonstrate the person. Now quisque, praesumitur in lege, every man is supposed
honest in the Law till he be proved dishonest, ex ore tuo te iudico, Recusancy
is no blushing sin in these days in this place, their own mouths will
accuse them, if ever Epicarmus his little Jewel, therefore were worthy a
Judge, which Cicero terms the bond of all humane wisdom, let it be your posie
memento diffidere, be not light of belief, Iesabel wanted no witnesses against
Naboth. But these are not so bad: ^ruly as the little birds said being demanded
wherefore they were afraid of the Cucco seeing he was no hawke, so answer I,
though he be no hawke, he is very like one: God knows how far from malice to
the Nation, I speak, who I do assure my self if it would please God to open
their eyes and see the truth would be a stain to us in their devotion in their
abundant charity.

But to conclude, it is not sufficient to defend from the oppressor, but a good
Judge must support the oppressed, he must be a Father to the Fatherless, and a
husband to their mother, Eccle. 4. So shall thou be as the Son of the most
high, thou must be speedy in dispaching their causes, thou must look they be
not dishartned by the greediness of thy fees, or thy officers fees, God is thy
play master, and will be theirs; dispatch them before they cry, for their cry
will reach as far as Heaven, and God will come down, Exodus 3. Now there are
4. crying sins expressed in this Distcik: Clamitat in celu^ vox sanguinis and
Sodomoru^,
Vox oppressorum, merces retenta laborum:
And because the first two are notorious, of the third we have spoken: I
cannot forget to touch the fourth, which is the withholding the reward of the
labourer, seeing he is amongst the most oppressed, and it is your duty to
support him: I need not tell you that the faithful Minister is a true
laborer, a painful watchman, 1. Ez. 3. though it may be in some places, they
are not husbandmen as Paul calls them the 1. Cor. 3. but Haruestmen known only
to their Parishioners when they come to gather their tithes, tanquam
stratonicles in auream messem, reaping where they do not sow, I shall not
need to tell you who withhold their wages, your Courts have their names in
black rowles, as God has them in his black book, but I say you are to support
them that have their wages withholden, you are with Ezra to make have in
restoring the Church to her rights, to bestow travel, nay and cost too for the
rebuilding the Temple of the Lord, but alas our number of Brick is required at
our hands, but the allowance of straw is taken away; nay, there is daily more
Brick required, the poor Minister is forced to attend at the Assizes and
Sessions, to present Recusants at his own cost abroad, who has not wherewith
to feed him at home, if this be not an oppression, I am sure it is to divide
the punishment inconsideratly as David did the inheritance between
Mephisbosheth and Ziba, a good man and a wicked, 2 Samuel 19. Sanabimur si
separemur a caetu says Seneca, and I am sure it is Religious, seeing God has
put us apart from the people, not to lay burdens upon us to impouerish us to
the contempt of the people, but I speak to the wise, less then a word is
here sufficient.

Lastly, the wages of the poor soldier is to be looked unto, a true laborer,
that has sweat his blood for his Country. The son of Syrack in the 26. of
Eccle. 29. says there are two things which grieved his heart: A man of war
that suffered poverty, and a man of understanding, that is not set by. They
have a rule in the Gospel to be content with their pay, but there is no law to
see them miserable for want of pay, let us not use them as we do our chimnies,
creep to them in winter and stand aloof from them in Summer. No let us deal
with them as we do with plants cherish and prune them in our spring, that we
freely may taste their fruit in the fall, I note them as cares worthy your
intertainment, Let Esau speak never so friendly, he hopes yet a day of
mourning will come let us prevent it by our Charity, by Justice, by Prayers.
But he that is wicked to himself, to whom can he be good: therefore to this
fourth property of support I adioined a fourth qualtitie in a Judge to hate
Covetousness, it is well observed that the Mountains where gold grows bear
neither grass nor grain, herb nor tree, so where the love of the World
covetousness reigns, there is no hope no expectation of support, let gold be
interposed between God and the conscience of the Judge once, like the earth
between the Sun and the Moon, we shall have an Eclipse: But wherefore should
I speak so much of the vices of Judges? Surely Right Honorable to your
exceeding great prais, Qui malos corrigit laudat bonos, he that inueighs
against sin, extolles virtue. He that has been the least while a Judge in
this place, having left Jacobs stone in the highest Court of our kingdom, to
witness the integrity of his conscience, that God I say has appeared unto
him, I speak it with great joy, the chiefest in place of Justice whom I have
been so happy to know, have afforded matter of reverence to me, matter of
admiration; reverence toward their virtues, admiration in the goodness of
God, who has his Melchisedeck in Salem, his lot in Sodom. Be thankful, oh be
truly thankful to God beloved brethren, that he has not beheld our sins
with the eye of severity, sin being the cause that in all ages he has set
over rebellious people, cruel and wicked governors, Mich. 3. He has not I say
dealt with us as he has done with other Nations.

The memory of Elizabeth (as that of Josias) is like the composition of the
perfume that is made by the art of the Apothecary, it is sweet as honey in all
mouths, and as Music at a banquet of wine, Eccle. 49.1. As for our Solomon,
whom the Lord grant long to sway the Scepter of these Kingdoms, even one of
his seed rightly serving the Lord to the ends of the world, our posterity
shall say of him, that he reigned in a peaceable time, and was glorious: for
God made all quiet round about, that he might build a house in his name, and
prepare the Sanctuary for ever: we may say truly of him, that he has guided
us with a discreet hand, and appointed worthy governors over us, such as with
Moses have put of their shoes, their desires of the World, before they have
approached to the bush of the Lord, such whose memories we have cause to bless,
and whose posterity shall inherit the Land.

FINIS.

