A FRVITFVLL Commentary upon the twelve Small Prophets, BRIEF, PLAIN, AND
EASY, GOING OVER THE SAME VERSE BY VERSE, AND Showing every where the Method,
points of doctrine, and figures of Rhetoric, to the no small profit of all
godly and well disposed Readers, with very necessary fore-notes for the
understanding both of these, and also all other the Prophets.

The text of these Prophets together with that of the quotations omitted by the
Author, faithfully supplied by the Translatour, and purged of faults in the
Latin coppie almost innumerable, with a table of all the chief matters herein
handled, and marginall notes very plentiful and profitable; so that it may in
manner be counted a new Book in regard of these additions.

Written in Latin by Lambertus Danaeus, and newly turned into English by John
Stockwood Minister and Preacher at Tunbridge.

ye age of ye world in page 86.

2. Pet. 1. ver. 19. We have also a most sure word of the Prophets, to the
which ye do well that ye take heed.

printer's or publisher's device

PRINTED BY JOHN LEGATE, Printer to the University of Cambridge. 1594.

And are to be sold at the sign of the Sun in Paul's Churchyard in London.

The order of the XII. small Prophets, as they are placed in this book. And
here is added where, or in what page they are to be found.
1 Jonas page 82 2 Amos page 201 3 Oseas page 337 4 Micheas page 574 5 Nahum
page 687 6 Joel page 743 7 Sophonias page 814 8 Abdias page 857 9 Abacuc page
863 10 Aggeus page 898 11 Zacharias page 909 12 Malachias page 1116


To the no less virtuous then honorable Personages HENRY Earl of Huntindon,
etc. and the Lady KATHARINE his dear and well-beloved wife, Countess of the
same, etc. John Stockwood, their humbly devoted poor servant wishes all
plentiful increase of heavenly and earthly graces of his holy Spirit, as may be
most for God his glory, and the good and welfare of his Church in this life
present, and in the life hereafter, the only and indeed true life perfect
consummation of all heavenly joys and happiness in Christ our Savior.
IF the Heathen (Right Honorable) have said very wisely and truly, That we are
not borne for our selves alone, but that our parents, our friends, our cuntrie
have their peculiar and several right and interest in our nativity and birth,
so far forth as any way we may be able to profit and do them good: then much
more ought Christians duly to weigh and consider, that accordingly as God
diversely bestows upon them the gifts and graces of his holy spirit, so are
they especially to employ and use them unto the benefit and instruction of the
Church and people of God, and not hide and bury them in the ground, as did the
idle and unthankful servant his talent, as we read in the Gospel. The
calling to remembrance of which most weighty and never to be forgotten
parable, has stirred me up from time to time, as leisure has bin offered from
the duties of my public charge, to be still occupied about some thing, whereby
both the Church, and also the Commonwealth might in some measure be benefited
and edified. And for both their sakes and common good, I have also now again
bestowed no small pains and labor for the publishing of this brief, plain,
and easy Commentary and exposition of the profoundly read, and deeply
learned Danaeus upon all the twelve small Prophets (as they are commonly
called) to the end that hereby the godly minded Christians may be the rather
induced and moved to the reading of the same, being by this help now made so
familiar and without any hardness to be understood. Now what I have more
performed in this my simple translation, then is to be found in the Latin copy
of the Author himself, I have rather thought meet in a word or twain to
signify in a short speech unto the courteous and Christian reader, then here to
be tedious and trouble son* unto your HH. in setting down at large the same.
This my labor such as it is, I have presumed to recommend unto the favorable
protection of both your excellent Honors, toward whom these many years I
have bin a faithful devoted servant, and poor welwiller, and unto whom I
willingly confess that every way I owe far greater duty, then any way
lies in my small ability to yeilde and perform. This work as it is new, and
never has had the like heretofore published in our English tongue, so I
suppose that in easy briefnesse there is not any of like kind that can bring
unto the well disposed Reader, more store of Christian knowledge and profitable
instruction, in which respect I trust it shall come acceptable unto your HH.
and also unto as many of God his faithful children as shall vouch safe the
buying and heedfull reading of the same. And hereby I my self also shall be
further provoked and encouraged to go forward hereafter in the like, or
peradventure of more importance for the behoof and commodity of the well
affected and disposed Christians. So craving your Honorable and gentle
pardoning of this my boldness, I most humbly and earnestly be seech the
Almighty for your prosperous preservation, to this glory your own comfort,
and the great joy and rejoicing of his chosen Israel. Tunbridge this 20. of
June. 1594.

Your Hh. most humble at commandment John Stockwood Minister and Preacher at
Tunbridge.

To the courteous and Christian Reader.
RIght courteous and Christian Reader, I have begun, and through God his grace
and assistance finished this brief, but most learned and easy Commentary
upon the small Prophets, not in profit, but in volume, for thy good and
furtherance, in the midst of many most grievous and almost importable troubles
and incredile molestations, as they well know, who are best acquainted with my
poor distressed estate, and understand the true and inevitable occasions of
the same; as well to show my self willing upon all occasions according to my
small measure to do good unto the congregation of the faithful, and well
disposed Christians, as to stay, or at leastwise to discredit the slanderous
reports of many viperous and poysened tongues, who among many other unjust
accusations and false charges bruited every where against me, have not ceased
to give out that I spend all my time in vain and idle exercises, profitable
unto none, but greatly chargeable unto my self, and much offensive unto
others. For that I my self say nothing, nor seek the true report and
testimony of others, who are well affected in religion, and most privy unto
the carriage of my self in mine outward conversation and behavior; partly this
work now published, partly some others already committed to the press, and
partly some other ready for the same both in Greek and Latin, will easily cry
shame unto this so notorious and open infamy, and cause the rest of like suite
and substance, among all the godly to be esteemed and judged of accordingly.
And as after this manner exercising and occupying of my self at by-times and
spare hours for the profit of the Church and Commonwealth, I have not only
found some release and quiet unto my self in driving many other combersome
cares out of my pensive and heavy heart, but also have had most comfortable
experience of God his fatherly and provident care, to raise up for me some
faithful friends unlooked for, the which moved with Christian pity and
compassion, have proffered me kindness and courtesy, so likewise my good hope
and assured confidence is, that when in more general manner my lamentable case
shall come unto the further knowledge of the greater number of the godly, not
weighing nor believing the sinister practices of the lewd and wicked, they will
in the bowels of brotherly remorse and charitable sympathi and fellow-feeling
of the pinching miseries in the poor members of the same body, show forth
their willing and ready forwardnes to minister some relief and comfort in so
hard and great extremities. But whither am I carried at unawares with the
violent stream of my afflicted estate, and the opprobrious censures of
virulent and venomous tongues misdeeming, and thorough misdeeming, mis-iudging,
and most mis-reporting and mis-speaking of the same? It is high time that
recalling my self, and humbly grauing thy courteous pardon (most gentle Reader
who soever thou art) I should surcease this wa^dring course not pertinent to
the present matter, how soever very needful in respect of my self, and
speak some thing touching that which in the translation of this very
profitable exposition, I have presumed to add and set down of my self, above
that which is to be found in the original coppie of the godly and learned
Author.

1 Understand therefore first of all thus much, that whereas the Latin
treatise has not so much as one marginall note, I have filled the same with
diverse, in one short and easy view laying open unto thy consideration the
sum and principal contents of that which is said upon every verse, as also
pointing unto every especial matter to be noted and marked in the same.

2 Secondly whereas Danaeus him self for shortness sake, sets down no text
in the expounding of all these Prophets verse by verse, but only by quotation
refers thee unto the same, I have laid down the english text according unto
such translations extant among us, as in the iudgem^et of the learned are
supposed to go nearest unto the same (saving that in some few places I have
bin bold in some one word or twain to put down mine own) for that I deemed
that the bare quotation without the text it self, would seem very raw and
little profitable unto the greater number, unless it were unto some few (if
happily any such be to be found) that have the whole text of every prophet
verse by verse without book, and by root of heart, as commonly we use to
term it.

3 Thirdly, where soever the author him self seems to stand upon the
interpretation of some hebrew word dissonant from the exposition of others,
although he never in a manner do use to specify or name the same word; I,
notwithstanding do use in the margin to express the same in latin letters, as
well for the understanding of the most simple and ignorant, as also for that
the Hebrew characters or letters are not very rise with every Printer, nor
their Compositors and workmen always very skillful in the right and true
compounding and ordering of the same, albeit notwithstanding they be orderly
and truly set down in writing unto their hand before.

4 Fourthly, all such places of scripture, the which Danaeus by quotation
sends us unto (the which in this book are almost infinite) not citing the
text of the places themselves, the same so nearly as I could find them, and
upon due examination judge to make fitly for the purpose, whereunto they were
quoted, I have truly set down in the text it self, and so far as my small
skill and little learning would serve me, have labored and endeavored to
apply and frame them unto that which I conceived to be likeliest to be the
sense and meaning of the Author. But how great cumber and trouble the same
oftentimes did bring upon me, as for that not only the verse, but sometimes
the chapter, yea and otherwhiles also the whole book was mistaken, I refer
unto all those that shall assay to make proof and trial hereof in the Latin
coppie it self of the Author.

5 Fifthly, whereas this writer being a great Schooleman and cunning Artist,
does often lay forth the figures of Rhetoric used by the Prophets in their
several writings and sermons, when soever occasion serves that he does name
any such figure, I do briefly in the margin make a short description of the
same, and make it easy for the understanding of the Reader even of the meanast
capacity and conceit by some one or two familiar examples, and so often as
after he makes recital of the same figure again in any part of this work, I
do by quotation refer the Reader whither he shall repair to understand and
know what the said figure is.

6 Last of al, the errors and faults which in the Latin copy partly through
the negligence of the workmen, and partly through oversight of the Author
himself, do amount unto many hundreths, are in this english translation all
of them (especially if they be of any moment or weight) faithfully amended and
corrected, so that all things are made most plain and easy for the drawing on
of the courteous Reader to be delighted with the reading of this book, the
which as by me it was taken in hand, and not without great painetaking as well
in rising early, sitting long at it, and going late to bed, that thou might
increase daily more and more in all Christian and heavenly knowledge, so if it
shall be gently taken, and friendly received at thy courteous hands, I shall
think my travail well bestowed, and daily pray unto God for the increase of
all needful gifts and graces of his holy spirit for thee according to thy
place and calling to his glory, and benefit of his Church and people for Christ
his sake our only Mediator and redeemer.

Thy poor brother in Christ, John Stockwood.

TO HIS VERY SINGVlar good Friend the Right Worshipful, AND FOR MANY VERTVES
MOST renowned M. Antony Bacon, son of the most Noble and Honorable Sir
Nicholas Bacon Chauncelour of England.
THat saying of Tulli, if any other, (right worshipful M. Bacon) is very
notable and true, Tull. Offic. lib. 1.
that nothing is more beautiful, fair, and amiable then virtue. The which, as
in many others, so in you especially has place and experiment. For whom does
not your religiousnes to Godward, cause chiefly for to love you? whom does
not your great towardnes of wit, whom does not your courteousnes, the which
receiving from the right Honorable, and of most blessed memory Sir Nicholas
Bacon your father, sometimes the most wise Chauncelar of England, you
especially have increased, as a most excellent and singular part of inheritance
of your fathers virtues: whom does not that your desire to learn the best
things, to see the more famous countries, to please all good men, whom, I say,
do not these your virtues allure unto you, and draw him in a manner whether he
will or no? He must doubtless, be made of iron, and a block, and as hard as
the Marpesian rock, which is not delited, nor moved with these so many your
sweet odours, who does not for the same unfeignedly wish well unto you, and
which does not favor you with all his heart? For mo^^ truly says Origin, Like
as vice every where is of a most filthy smell: so the savor of virtue is in
all places most pleasant. Origin.
For it smells like precious ointments, the which with a certain maruailous
love thereof draw all men unto them Verily albeit that always heretofore I
have made very great account of the name of the English Bacons, because of the
singular praises of your whole house, and also have hereof given public
testimony in that book, the which I dedicated unto your most worshipful
brother M. Edward Bacon, the which is named Paratitla in Augustinum: yet after
I had seen you, Paratitla in Augustinum.
a branch and noble ympe of the same tree, together with your brother Edward,
and had some taste and experience of you, there was added so great an
augmentntion of my love unto your whole house, and so great was the increase of
the reverence and seruiceablenes the which I carry toward you all, that I my
self did wonder at so great an addition, and think that now there can be added
no more thereunto. Therefore to the end there might no less testimony be
extant of my good will toward you, then your brother Edward, behold right
worshipful Sir, and in all respects most noble, I present unto you a small
gift, namely my Commentaries upon the twelve small Prophets, as they call them,
the which I was desirous to publish and dedicate unto your Name. For they
contain such doctrine, The doctrine of the small Prophets necessary for the
Church of God at all times.
the which as it has bin always necessary for the Church of God, so is it
especially at this time. For that age of the Church was most miserable and full
of troubles, whereof in these small Prophets there is made mention: the enemies
then more dangerous and noisome, then at any time else: the kings both of the
Israelites, and also of the Jews, were for the most part persecutors of the
truth of God and doctrine of the Prophets, or else mockers of the same: there
was left in a manner no outward help and aid for the godly at the hands of
men: nay of the Israelites themselves, and especially of the Jews (who alone
remained of those twelve tribes and seed of Israel, a people embracing the
true knowledge of God) yet I say, of the Jews themselves many did withstand
the true religion, and preferred earthly goods before heavenly: and had their
eyes dazeled with the brightness of the infidelian Monarchies, such as now is
that of the Turks, and was then of the Assyrians and Babylonians: or being
carried away with the sweetness of this earthly peace, chose rather to serve the
infidel Princes, then to follow the service of God. To conclude, in the end
it came to pass, that as the dog can not be driven from his fattie leather,
no more would these Jews afterward be drawn from their blasphemous and
idolatricall, but yet for the time quiet and unto them commodious cuntry of
Babylon, albeit they were captives there, nor could be drawn unto that same
promised land, the which was unto them a token of the heavenly inheritance. All
which things, when have they at any time happened more truly then at this time,
The small Prophets do show the judgments of God upon the wicked, and blessings
upon the godly.
unto the true Church of God? And out of these books also may we notably
learn, what judgments of God did afterward ensue, either upon the enemies of
the Church, or upon the backe-sliders and forsakers of the worship of God, as
well Israelites as Jews, people, as Kings: and on the otherside, what
blessings of God have bin showed toward such men as has bin in deed godly,
and fearing God, which made less account of all that they had, and of
themselves also, then of the glory of God. What then can be more profitable
then this doctrine for every Christian, or more fit for this time? For albeit
your country of England of all places of the world in a manner alone these
many years, England.
both through the singular goodness of almighty God, and also through the most
wise counsails of Queen Elizabeth, have remained quiet, and be to be termed
truly happy: yet has not it bin without her trubles also, or is without for
the name of Christ. And look what calamities you do behold in your
neighbour-brethren, the same also (of your love toward your brethren)
according unto the precept of the Apostle, you do esteem and reckon as your
own. But to return again unto our matter in hand, Jerome has a very notable
saying, That we Christians are borne for this end, that we should be made
eternal, and therefore that despising the deceitful promises of this world,
and all the subtle baytes of the Devil and the flesh, we should wholly
consecrate and vow our selves unto the true immortal, and only wise, blessed,
rich, and almighty God, and his worship and will, which thing is especially
taught in these books. Judging therefore this doctrine and these examples to
concern you chiefly, by reason of the hope of the great good service to be
done in the Commonwealth, whereunto both God himself, by bestowing of
innumerable gifts upon you, does seem to call you, and the which the dignity
of your house does promise unto you, I have the more willingly dedicated these
my Commentaries unto you. For these shall instruct you both unto true godliness,
and also the government of the Commonwealth, and shall frame and work you unto
al increase of virtue, the which at al times you are to labor for. And to be
short, these shall draw you from evil counsails and examples unto those that
be good and godly. For you know that which Plato writes, lib. 3. de Republ.
That young men of good towardnes and nature, are easily corrupted by evil men,
Plato.
and evil counsails, when as they measuring others by their own disposition,
do think no harm or deceit to be in the counsails of others. And truly the
more easily that you great and noble men do live, the more meet it is, that
you should know the things that are godly and holy. Now that your house,
that is, the house of the Bacons is most noble, The house of the Bacons.
appears both by the English and French histories, in the which there is
often made honorable mention of the same: and also by this, that even yet now
at this day there is remaining a most wealthy village in Normandy, as big
as a great town, called Baconvil, in French Bacceville, situated near unto
Diepe a sea town in France, Baconvil.
the which keeps still the memory of your name together with the remnants of
a most strong castle, and the which both the Frenchmen themselves, and all the
inhabitants, and the thing it self does witness and declare to be a monument of
your most noble and honorable family. As for this my poor and simple gift
(right worshipful) I do most earnestly request, pray, and beseech you with as
willing and glad a mind to accept it, as with a loving and unfeigned heart I
do give it. And because that you do love me, as I have always understood by
your self, see that you in like manner love the holy doctrine herein
contained, both for it own, and for my sake also. Fare you well. At Orthesium
which is a town in the cuntry of Bearne, under the mountains called Pyrenaei,
near unto Spain, where is an Vniersitie erected by the most courteous King of
Navarre Henry the second. Calend of May, in the year of the last time 1585.

Your W. most bounden Lamb. Danaeus, Professor of Divinity.

A TABLE OF THE CHIEF FIgures of Rhetoric mentioned in this Treatise.
A Metaphor what it is, see Amos cap. 4. ver. 12. Occupatio what it is, see
Amos cap. 5. ver. 12. Hypophora what it is, see Amos cap 5. ver. 3. Synecdoche
what it is, see Amos cap. 5.21. Apostrophe what it is, see Amos cap. 8. ver.
24. Hypotyposis what it is, see Amos cap. 8. ver. 12. Metonymia what it is, see
Oseas cap. 4. ver. 1. Epiphonema what it is, see Jonas cap. 2. ver. 9. Mimesis
what it is, see Oseas cap. 4. ver. 18. Metalepsis, trassmutation, what it is,
see Oseas cap. 6. v. 18. Katachresis what it is, see Oseas cap. 5. ver. 1.
Prosopopaeia what it is, see Oseas cap. 6. v. 1. Auxesis or Increasing, see
what it is, Oseas cap. 7. ver. 4. Parenthesis what it is, see Oseas cap. 8.
ver. 2. Aposiopesis what it is, see Oseas cap. 8. ver. 10. Dialogismus what it
is, see Micheas cap 6. ver. 6. Anthropopatheia what it is, see Micheas cap. 7.
ver. 8. Periphrasis what it is, see Nahum cap. 2. ver. 7. Sarcasmos what it is,
see Nahum cap. 3. ver. 14. Synathroismos what it is, see Sophon. cap. 1. ver.
15. Hyperbole what it is, see Habacuc cap. 2. ver. 11. Epimone what it is, see
Zachar. cap. 1. ver. 4. Noema what it is, see Zachar. cap. 2. ver. 5. Allegoria
what it is, see Zachar. 11. v. 2. Antonomasia what swit is, see Zach. 12. ver.
10.
FORE-NOTES BY the way of a preface, upon the xii. small Prophets, for the
better understanding of the same.
CAP. I. Of the sundry names, by the which the Prophets have been called.
I Think I shall do a thing worthy the travel, if (intending with the help
of God to take in hand the exposition or laying open of the meaning of the
twelve Prophets, which are called Small Prophets) of a notable argument or
matter I shall make also a notable beginning: and shall first set down as
certain fore-notes, those things the which will bring light unto the whole
discourse ensuing. And such they are as do most especially appertain unto the
declaring of the office and order of the prophets, of the which albeit many
have written many things most learnedly, chiefly John Calvin in his fore-notes
upon Isai, Calvin. Martyr.
and Peter Martyr in his common places, the which are gathered together out of
his works: yet is there as I suppose, no law to the contrary, but that I also
may lay down my shot as it were, for the common use and edifying of the
Church, and now add, if any thing of them be overpassed. For the which no man
will blame me, especially when as I will now only deliver those things the
which do properly belong unto the manner of my purpose, Nay, to speak truly,
are altogether requisite and necessary thereunto. And of these things intonding
a most brief rather then large discourse, I will especially begin with this
point, Prophets. Prophecy. Prophesying.
Of the sundry names or titles of Prophets. For these terms of Prophets,
Prophecy, and Prophesying are found not only in Churchmen or
Church-writers: but also in profane authors, both Greeks, as Plato his
Phoedrus, Charmides, and other his works: also in Aristotle his book of the
world: but also in Latin writers, as appears out of Festus Pompeius.
Diviners.
But M. Tullius calls them every where Diviners: because of all men they come
nearest unto the nature of God, and declare unto us his will and mind, being
otherwise secret and hidden. But to the end this whole discourse may be the
more fitly and easily understood, Prophets have their name of Prophecy.
first we must entreat of the word Prophet it self, and afterward of the
thing meant by the word, and show what it is. Now the name or word Prophecy
is it whereof Prophets are named, the which excel and are endued
therewithal. The Hebrews (to begin with them) call a Prophet Nabia, Nabia.
Nebuah.
and Prophecy Nebuah; because prophets are Messengers unto men of the answers
and decrees of God. For they receave the word from God, the which afterward
they deliver unto others. Whereupon the word Nib signifying a speech, Nib.
has great affinity with the word Nabiah a prophet. Yet others had rather
fetch it from the verb Boa, because that prophets do foretell things that
happen and come afterward to pass. Certes from whence soever the Hebrew word
be derived or set, or with what word soever it have affinity or likeness, this
with full consent and truly has bin noted of the Hebrews, that the verb Naba,
the which signifies to prophecy, is wont to be formed in the passive voice
Niphal, when as mention is made of the true prophets of God, The Hebrews for
the most part speaking of true and false prophets, use the verb signifying to
prophecy, in sundry coniugations.
because that word betokens that the same prophet was truly and indeed
inspired by the spirit of God, and received from God and not from himself the
prophecy, the which he afterward delivers unto men. But when they speak of
false prophets, they use the self same verb in the conjugation Hithpael,
because such prophets are not sent of God, but of themselves thrust forth
themselves of their own authority to prophecy.

Furthermore, the signification of the word Prophet and Prophesying, The large
signification of the word prophet, and prophesying.
is very large among the Hebricians. For it comprehends all those the which
being moved with the spirit of God, either ordinarily or extraordinarily,
either in prose or in verse do set forth, tell, and declare the will of God,
and the same either already known and written: or as yet hidden and unknown.
So the Levites that were Singers are called Prophets, as appears in the
beginning of the 1. Chron. 25. in these words: The finging Levites called
prophets.
So David and the captains of the army separated for the ministry the sons
of Asaph, and Heman, and Ieduthun, who should prophecy with harpes, viols, and
cymbals, etc. Yea moreover the false prophets, who although they lie, False
prophets termed prophets.
yet profess that they will declare the will of God, are also termed
Prophets. Wherefore it comes to pass, that Paul Titus 1.12. Epimenides.
(speaking of Epimenides of Creta, a profane man) calls him a prophet,
because he did lively set forth the disposition and manners of the men of Creta,
and was a most ancient poet, as Cicero teaches in his first book of
Divination. And thus because the signification of a prophet and prophesying is
most large; the words of Paul be these: One of themselves, even one of their
own prophets said, The Cretians are always liars, evil beasts,
slow-bellies. The Sibyllae.
To be short, both Lactantius and sundry others do call the Sibyllae of the
Heathen, Prophetisses. A prophet called a Seer.
The same Hebrews also do call a prophet Chozch, a Seer, because by the
revelation of God they do foresee things to come, as in Samuel 1.9. verse. 19.
He that is now called a Prophet, was in the old time called a Seer. An Angel,
or Messenger.
And verse. 19. And Samuel answered Saul and said, I am the Seer. They call him
also Maleah, that is to say, an Angel or Messenger, because he brings unto
us the commandments of God. Haggai 1.13. Then spoke Haggai the Lords Messenger
in the Lords message unto the people, etc. The difference between an Angel and
a prophet, according unto some.
Although notwithstanding some think that this is the difference between a
Prophet and an Angel, that an Angel or Messenger brings unto us not only
the charge and commandment of another: but also often times the very words and
speech of the commander: but the Prophets, The confutatio^ of the former
difference.
as these men will have it, delivered in their own words the commandment,
which they received from God. As if the self same spirit of God did not tell
unto the Prophets the very words which they should use when as he gave unto
them the matter, the which they should declare, as Peter teaches in his second
Epistle chapt. 1. verse. 20, 21. So that ye first know this, that no Prophecy
in the scripture is of any private motion. For the Prophecy came not in the
old time by the will of man, but holy men of God spoke as they were moved by
the holy ghost. And after this manner do the Hebrews call the prophets.

Now the Greeks also do term them by sundry names. For these words
Prophets, Hupophetes, Mantis, Mesites, do often signify all one thing, as Iul.
Poll. l. 1. Onomast. does teach. Although notwithstanding he seems to be
Prophets who does foresee a thing to come: A difference between these words
Prophets, and Hupophetes.
but Hupophetes is he, who does so far forth declare a thing told him by God,
as it is told unto him at several seasons. Therefore he takes the speech of
another, the which he reports again at the self same instant in which it is
told him. Whereupon Homer Iliad. 16. calls them Hupophetai, who only do
openly recite the oracle, or answer, which they have received from an other.
Mesites is a Messenger between party and party, Mesites.
such a one as Moses was, as he witnesses of himself, Deuteronomy. 5. verse. 3. when
he says, At that time I stood beweene the Lord and you, to declare unto you
the word of the Lord: for ye were afraid at the sight of the fire, and went not
up into the mount, etc. And in the Galatians chap. 3. ver. 19, 20. The law was
ordained by Angels in the hand of a Mediator. Now a Mediator is not a Mediator
of one, etc. He is also called an Angel. Likewise the self same (to wit,
Prophets) are called Manteis, that is to say, Vates, and Chresmodoi, Other
Greek names whereby prophets are called.
Chresmologoi, Chresmodotai, that is, Pronouncers and tellers of oracles, as
Julius Pollux writes. But the Prophets of God are no where in the holy
scripture called manteis and Chresmologoi, of which names I will speak
hereafter.

Moreover the Latin writers also do call Prophets by sundry names. The
Latins call prophets by sundry names also.
Isidorus lib. 7. Etymolog. chap. of Prophets writes thus: Whom the Gentiles
call Vates, or Sooth sayers, these our men call Prophets, because a far off
they do tell and foreshew the truth of things to come. Therefore these words
Prophetae and Vates are with the Latins all one. Festus Pomp.
Festus Pompeius a most diligent author and observer of the Latin tongue
writes thus: Julius in Adrasto calls prophets, praelates of Churches, and
Interpreters of oracles. The words of Julius Caesar in Adrasto, as Josephus
Scaliger the light of our age has restored them, are these, Whom, the
Prophets, which devoutly purify the holy sacrifices, do command to cover
their heads with green laurel. Now this C. Julius Caesar was before the time
of Cicero, whereby appears that the word Prophets was in use among the old
Latins and profane writers. Prophets called Vates.
The same are called Vates, whereof comes the verb vaticinari, Varros
derivation of Vates, and ^aticinari.
to Prophecy: although notwithstanding M. Varro do derive the signification
of the word Vates from one thing, and Vaticinor from an other. Vates, says
he libr. 6. de Lingua Latina, they called the old poets a versibus viandis; of
binding of verses. For in them they did bind words unto certain laws and
rules: whereupon the verses and oration of Poets is said to be bound. But the
verb vaticinari (as he writes in the fifth of the same work) is so termed,
because they which prophecy, do it with a distraughted mind. This is the
opinion of Varro. For (as Tullie teaches lib. 1. De Divinatione) the Prophets
which were known unto profane men did give forth their oracles being stirred
up with madness, or as it were, distraughtnesse. But I would say that these
terms vates and vaticinari are derived of all one word, and that a greek
word, namely Mantis. Danaeus his derivation of the former words.
For it was an easy matter of the Greek word mantis to make vatis: and of
the word vatis to make the verb vaticinor, to prophecy. Furthermore they are
called of the same profane authors, the Interpreters and Messengers of the
gods: and every where of M. Cicero Diviners, of whom afterward they make
many sorts: as, Diviners by the entralles of beasts, Bird-prophets, Dreamers,
oracle-tellers. But the Prophets of God are never called Diviners by the Latin
Fathers and Ecclesiastical or Church-writers, The prophets of God never called
Diviners.
because that name according unto the use and signification of the Latin
tongue is proper unto profane and devilish divination. But these sundry sorts
of divining are notably set forth by Gaspar Peucer the best learned of all the
Germans; if any man have leisure and a mind to read such things. And by so
many names is one and the self same thing called. And now let us see what that
is.

CAP. II. What Prophecy generally is?
WE must first show what Prophecy generally is, and afterward come unto
that signification thereof, the which is proper unto the Prophets of God, From
whence these words prophecy, and prophet are derived.
and is retained and used of the godly in the expounding of holy matters only.
When as Prophecy has his name of the word Prophet: and the same word is
derived and taken from the Greek nowne Prophets: my when as this word
Prophets it self is derived from the Greek verb Prophemi and prophanai, it
may easily be gathered of the nature and signification of the word, that
Prophecy generally, is every kind of foretelling and foresh^wing of things to
come extraordinarily, What prophecy generally is.
from whence soever he have it, which a far off and before they come to
pass does foretell that those things which are to come, shall come to pass.
Therefore after what manner soever he do foretell the same, whether he be well
in his wit or out of his wit, as Lactantius speaks in his first book, that
is, be taken with madness when he pronounces or utters them: or whether
he put them in writing and in books, or be content only with the sound of
words, that is, by mouth to speak them: or finally, whether a man foretell
things to come only either by some gesture, or beckening, or deed, or any
external mean, he is a Prophet, the word being taken generally. For by
diverse vvayes and by diverse things did those of old time, profane men
especially foretell things to come: as Pausanias in his sixth book, Pausanias.
which is the second of his Eliacorum, and libr. 9. does show. Finally,
whosoever do utter any foretelling voice, as Pollux speaks, they generally
may be named Prophets. Plato in Charmide seems to make a difference between
those that are indeed Fore-shevvers, whom he calls Prophets, Plato.
and those which for ostentation or vain glories sake doc foretell things to
come, whom he calls Arrogants: yet in the same place he generally
defines foretelling to be a knowledge of things to come: and a Foreteller to
be one which knows all things to come: whom he does sever from him which
knows things past and things present, who may be termed only a VVise-man,
or a man of a good memory or remembrance, and not a Prophet and Foreteller. Of
all which ensues the thing, that we vvoulde have, that prophecy generally,
is an extraordinary knowledge and foretelling of things to come, by
whomsoever the same is done, and after what manner soever it be declared and
done. Now I have added this word Extraordinary, Extraordinary foretelling.
because that often times things to come may be fore-tolde by ordinary and
natural causes, For as Augustine teaches lib. 4. Trinitat. cap. 7. Physicians.
Physicians do also observe certain Prognosticates or fore-tokens in
diseases, the which do arise of accidents, whereby they do foretell what
shall be the estate of the sick party, whom Cicero lib. 1. de Diviuat.
calls Wisemen, not Diviners, knovvers of natural causes, not Prophets. So
Mariners do know certain signs and tokens of the tempest to come in the
sea, and do likewise foresee the same: Mariners.
to be short, Christ himself when as Matthew. 16. he says unto the Scribes and
Pharisees, When it is evening, Christ.
ye say fair weather: for the sky is read, etc. teaches, that fair weather
or foul may be foretold by the face of the sky or air. But because these
things are known as effects lying in their causes, and the same natural,
they do not at all appertain unto prophecy and foretellings. For to
prophecy or foretell, is to know and foreshewe things to come without their
natural causes, nay without any their causes at all. For the things that are
gathered of their causes, the same are not properly said to be divined or
foretold: But they are foreshewed by their causes, wherein in possibility
they are included, as the parts of a body that shall be afterward, do lie
in the seed.

CAP. III. How diverse and sundry sorts there are of prophecy generally taken.
MOreover there are diverse sorts of prophecy, when as it is thus generally
taken. But yet that we wade not infinitely without end, there may a threefolde
course be taken, by means whereof we may briefly comprehend all those sorts
the which in a manner are innumerable or without number. The many sorts of
prophesies may be brought unto three kinds.
For these prophets may be distinguished or marked out one from another either
in regard of the matter which they handie: or of the efficient cause, and that
which inspireth these kinds of Prophets: or of the evente or issue, which
their predictions or fore-tellings do shevve, and obtain. Diverse men have
made diverse and sundry kinds of divination, some more, and some fewer. Plato
in Phoedro seems generally or in all to have made but two sorts and kinds
thereof: Sorts of prophecy according unto Plato.
namely, the one called Mantiken or soothsaying (which is, when as any body
foretells things to come by the inspiring of some divine power, being as it
were distraughted, and besides himself the other Oionistiken, or appertaining
unto birds, the which by the flying of birds and other shewe-tokens thereunto
belonging does search out things that afterward shall come to pass. Cicero
in like manner lib. 1. De Divinitat. according unto the opinion of the Stoicke
philosophers rehearses two kinds of Prophecy, but diverse from them of
Plato. I therefore (says he) do hold with those which have made two kinds
of divination: the one artificial, the other void of art. For there is a
certain art in those the which by coniecturing do find out nevve things,
and have learned old things by observation. Of which sort is all kind of
foretelling of things by the observation and marking of the flying of birds.
But those are void of art the which foretell things to come not by observing
and marking signs and tokens with reason and conjecture, but by a certain
concitation or trouble of the mind: or some wandering and free motion; the
which falls out also unto dreamers, and sometimes unto those the which
through madness foretell things to come. Of which sort those oracles are to
be accounted, the which are uttered by a divine motion and inspiration. And
thus much Cicero.

Others do make three especial kinds according unto the manner of
revelation. Beda.
Anselmus, or Beda (for those commentaries are Bedaes) make three sorts of
them, according unto the things which are foretold by these prophets, and
according unto the issue and event, or falling out of them. Isidorus reckons
up seven sorts of them. Isidorus. The Schoolmen.
The Schoolmen make mention only of five. To be short, it were an infinite
or endless thing to reckon up the opinions of every several writer in this
behalf. But let us proceed or go forward with that threefolde division of
Prophecy generally taken, the which we have set down before.

Prophets then do differ one from another in regard of the argument or
matter which they handle. Difference of prophets according unto the matter
which they hand. Prophets of God.
For some of them set before them, as the true scope and mark of their
foretellings, the Law of God, and the promises of the Messiah, or the Christ
the redeemer of the world, the which was to come into the world: and these
are called Prophets of God, and true Prophets. Others do only foretell
things belonging unto men, and frame them-selves unto the serving of their
will and curiosity, whilst they do denounce or declare the events or issues
of wars, public or private calamities or miseries and troubles, of the
which they are demanded: these are called prophets of the Gentiles and
Diviners. Of the first sort were Isaias, Prophets of the Gentiles.
Ieremias, Oseas, and the rest of the Prophets of God, both of the old and new
Testament. Of the second sort were Epimenides of Creta, Bacchis, Boccatius, the
Sibyllae, and those which gave out oracles in the wood Dodona, at Delphis in
the den of Coricium, and in other prophesying places, the which were every
where among the Heathen. And this is one division of prophecy and divination
taken generally; according unto which, some are Prophets of God, and other some
may be called prophets of men.

There is another division taken from the efficient cause of the said
divination or prophecy, the which is three fold; namely, Another division of
prophecy.
the efficient cause properly: the isntrumental cause: the manner of
revelation and action. Now the efficient cause of divination or prophecy,
ought properly to be said to be thus; that is to say, the efficient cause is
either God, or satan, or the wicked spirit, and the devil. For those which
were the Prophets of God, and are so called, these being truly moved and
taught by the spirit of God, The prophets of God led by the spirit of God.
did speak and foretell things to come, as Peter the apostle shows in his
latter epistle, chap. 1.21. saying, For prophecy came not in old time by the
will of man, but holy men of God spoke as they were moved by the holy Ghost.
But those prophets which did foretell things belonging unto men, and applied
themselves unto the curiosity and vanity of men, or which now at this day
frame themselves thereunto: these do prophecy and foretell things to come,
The prophets of men, inspired by the devil.
being led with the inspiration of wicked spirits or devils, as appears out
of the first book of Kings, chap. 22.21, 22. where the wicked spirit says, I
will entise Achab. And the Lord said unto him, Wherewith? And he said, I will
go forth, and be a false spirit in the mouth of all his prophets, etc. And
thus are Prophets divided by the efficient cause.

now the isntrumental cause of prophesyings was manifold. The instrumen tall
cause of prophesyings.
And of divine prophesyings it was of three sorts; vision, speaking, dreaming,
as in the book of Number. chap. 12.6. where the Lord says, Hear my words, If
there be a Prophet of the Lord among you, I will be known unto him by a
vision, and will speak unto him by dream, etc. But the isntrumental cause of
divelish prophesies was infinite, or in a manner without number. For there was
almost no kind of things the which the devil in times past did not abuse to
deceive men withal, and to establish that his divination, or prophesying. For
he used both birds, and beasts, and the elements themselves, Devilish
prophesying.
as heaven, the stars, the air, the earth, water, fire, (from whence come
these names, Iudiciarie astrology, Aeromanci, foretelling by the air:
Astrology. Aeromancie. Geomancie. Hydromancie. Pyromancie.
Geomancie, foretelling by the earth, Hydromancie, foretelling by water,
Pyromancie, foretelling by fire) yea and the chippe-axe also (which is a base
instrument or tool of Carpenters ordained to smooth wood withal) and springs,
and herbs, and lottes, and the buckle bones, and the living, and the dead,
and briefly, what not? The devil therefore used all these things, and set them
abroad, as the thing it self, and matter from whence they should fetch their
Prophesying and foretelling of things to come, when as not withstanding they
were but only instruments. And therefore in this regard of prophesyings, the
kinds thereof are in a manner infinite or without number, as M. Agrippa, and
Gasparus Peucerus do teach.

Moreover according unto the manner of action or doing, and revelation there
are also sundry fortes of prophesying, but chiefly two: Two sorts of
prophesying according unto the manner of doing, and revelation.
namely madness, or as it were a kind of distraughtnesse, or a quiet and
stayed mind of men that foretell things to come. For all the oracles or
answers of Apollo, and of Delphos were never given forth by the prophet of
Apollo, but that he was first taken with a fury and madness of mind: the
which Virgil libr. 6. Ae^ead. teaches to have happened unto the Sibyllae.
Therefore this kind of prophesying was indeed altogether madding, and utterly
devilish. But others, as for example, the prophets of God with a quiet heart
and stayed mind did foretell things to come: because God did work in them,
and did mildly reveal his will unto them, whom he now will, and then also
would have of all men to be heard with great attention or heedefulnesse and
reverence of mind, not as mad persons, but as his preachers, and most wise
messengers and godly men. And that God thus declared his will the which he
would have with heedfulnesse and reverence to be heard of men, appears Zach.
1. ver. 6. where the Lord thus speaks: Testimonies showing that the Lord
himself declared his will by his prophets.
Did not my wordses and my statutes, which I commanded by my servants the
Prophets take hold of your fathers? And in Hose a chap. 6. verse. 5. Therefore
have I cut down by the prophets: I have slain them by the words of my mouth:
and thy judgments were as the light that goes forth. Likewise Ierem.25.3.
From the thirteenth year of Josiah the son of Amon king of Judah, even unto
this day (that is, the 23. year) the word of the Lord has come unto me, and I
have spoken unto you rising early, and speaking, but ye would not hear. and
2. King. 17.13. Notwithstanding the Lord testified unto Israel, and to Judah by
all the prophets, and all the Seers, saying, etc. But how many sorts there are
of true and godly prophecy, according unto the manner of revelation, the which
was made by God, shall be showed afterward in his due place.

A third difference of prophecy.
Finally the third difference of divination or prophecy generally taken, is
set from the event or falling out of things foretold. For some of them do
always so come to pass, and in every respect so, as they have bin foretold,
the which is to be termed a true prophecy. As for other prophesies, they are
either not at all fulfilled, or least wise not in such sort, nor after such
manner, as they have bin foretold, the which is called a false prophecy.
Therefore of prophets some are called true, some false: some casie and plain,
others dark and doubtful, and deceivers, which do utter nothing plainly, and
understandably, such a one as was Apollo, that is to say, Apollo the devil of
Delphos.
the devil and Satan, the matter of profane prophets, the which for the
darkness of his answers, was of the heathen themselves accounted dark and
doubtful, some of whose answers full of deceit are these among the rest, King
Craesus entering to the city Halys, This might as well be men's of his own
riches as of theirs of Halys.
shall overthrow great abundance of riches: as Cicero does translate it.
Again, I say thee Pyrrhus the Romans may overcome, which might be understood,
that the Romans were as likely to give Pyrrhus the overrhrow, as Pyrrhus them.
Some also are called deceiving prophets, or lying prophets, of whom hereafter,
for that, albeit they do many times tell the truth, yet they do often tell lies
and are not sent of God. Therefore are they deceivers, such as under the
gospel are the prophets of Antichrist, of whom Paul 2. Proofs of scripture
that Antichrist and his prophets shall be false prophets and deceivers.
These. 2.9. says, that his coming is by the working of Satan, with all power
and signs, and lying wonders, and in all deceiveablenes of unrighteousnes
among them that perish, etc. And in the Revel. chap. 20. v. 10. it is said that
the beast and the false prophets shall be tormented day and night for evermore
in a lake of fire and brimstone. And Peter in his 2. epist. cap. 2. v. 1.
affirms, that there were false prophets also among the people, even as there
shall be (says he) false teachers among you, which privily shall bring in
damnable heresies, even denying the Lord, that has bought them, and bring upon
themselves swift damnation. In the old testament those which withstood the true
prophets are called false and lying prophets, of the which there are these
notable examples. 1. King. cap. 22. of the false prophets that deceived king
Achab, and Amos 7. of Amasias the priest of Bethel. Likewise Ierem. 28. of
Hananiah the false prophet, that withstoode Jeremy. And thus much of prophecy
generally.

CHAP. 4. Of the signification of this word prophecy, as it is used in the
holy Scriptures.
OF all those things which have been said before may easily now be gathered,
what is that signification of the words prophecy and Prophet, whereof there
is use in the holy scriptures. And that is thus, namely that in the word of God
he is properly called a Prophet, A description of a prophet out of the word of
God.
which is sent of God, both to declare his law, and especially also to rehearse
and confirm unto the Church, the promises of Christ or of the Messiah the
alone and only Mediator of the world, which was to come. He therefore for
this cause, does foretell unto the Church things to come, and revealed or
opened unto him of God, both as well to terrify or fear the same from sin:
and also to comfort it being afflicted or troubled, and to stay it up with the
hope of peace and reconciliation or favor with God, made and procured by the
same Messiah Jesus Christ. This definition may seem peradventure somewhat
long, yet is it not withstanding most true. For it comprehended the whole
nature of a true prophet, and of true prophecy. And first of all in this same
definition, Two ends of true prophecy. 1. The prophets were to declare and
expound the law of God delivered by Moses.
is declared the end of true prophecy, the which doubtless is twofold. For the
Prophets do both bring the exposition of the law of God delivered by Moses,
whereupon is this saying of the Prophet, Esa. chap. 8.20. To the law, and to
the testimony. And Malach. 4.4. Remember the law of Moses my servant, which I
commanded unto him in Horeb for all Israel with the statutes and judgments: 2.
To expound the promises of the Messiah.
and also they did call to remembrance of the Church of God, and did expound
and confirm those promises of God concerning Christ, the which was then to be
sent in the world. Whereupon Christ by Paul Romans 10.4. is said to be the end of
the law, and so consequently of the prophets, who as we have said, Christ the
foundation of the Apostles and Prophets.
were always the interpreters and expounders of the law. And therefore is
Christ him self called the foundation, or mark that the prophets aim at, as
also do the Apostles, as Paul witnesses unto the Ephesians. 2.20. where he says,
Ye are built upon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ him
self being the chief corner stone. And 1. Cor. 3.11. For other foundation can
no man lay, then that which is laid, which is Jesus Christ. Likewise Augustine
lib. 12. contra Faustum Manich, cap. 1. and the Prophets by Ambrose lib. 2. de
poenitent, cap. 7. are said to be the mouth of Christ.

After what manner the prophets expound the law of God, and promises of Christ.
Secondly, in that our definition is showed the manner of expounding the law of
God, and promises of Christ by the prophets; namely, in that they foretell unto
the said Church things to come. For they do very plainly declare, what
judgments of God shall come both upon the Church it self, and also upon other
nations and people of the world, because of their contempt or despising of the
doctrine contained in the same law of God, according unto the revelation made
unto them by God. Hereof comes it to pass, that the books of the Prophets
are full of threatenings, The prophets full of threatenings.
and of the fearful wrath of God prepared and ready against the world, as
appears in Esa. chap. 13. ver. 17, 18. and in other places. In Ierem. chap.
25. verse. 44, 47. and in other places. Amos 1. Zach. 6.7. and in other places:
and so in the rest of the prophets also. And Paul Rom, 1. 8. says, that the
wrath of God was made manifest from heaven against all ungodliness. That which
at all times by the Prophets of God especially has been done. Further, what
things the promised Messiah should both suffer for us in this world, and with
how great glory he should afterward be crowned, and how great benefits he
should bestow upon us, the self same Prophets of God have clearly foretold,
because that they did plainly confirm the promises of the Messiah which was to
come. And hereunto does Peter in his first epistle chap. 1.10, 11, 12.
evidently bear record, writing after this manner, Of the which salvation the
Prophets have inquired and searched, which prophesied of the grace that should
come unto you, searching when or what time the spirit which testified before
of Christ which was in them, should declare the sufferings that should come
unto Christ, and the g^^rie that should follow. Unto whom it was revealed,
that not unto themselves, but unto us they should minister the things that are
now showed unto you by them which have preached unto yon the Gospel by the
holy Ghost sent down from heaven, The books of the prophets full of excellent
co^forts.
the which things the Angels desire to behold. Read more of the sufferings and
glory of Christ, and of the benefits which hereby do come unto us, Esa. 53.
Psalm. 22. Hereof it comes to pass, that the same books of the Prophets are
stored and full of most excellent comforts, The books of the prophets full of
excellent comforts.
because they did show that God was appeased with his Church, by and for the
Messiah even then the redeemer and mediator of the same: nay moreover,
according unto the revelation made unto them from God, they did foretell the
benefits both earthly and spiritual, the which should befall unto the Church
to come through the same good will and peace of God toward his in Christ. That
which by the reading of the prophets themselves may easily appear to every
one. Here of is that saying of Paul Romans 15.4. The things that are written, the
same do appertain to our comfort, that is, unto the Church that should be
after them.

Now of these things is concluded, that the self same parties, the which did
both expound the law of God, and show the Messiah that was to come, for the
confirmation of both this their doctrine, did foretell things to come by there
velation of God, of the which foretelling, as the more wonderful part of their
office they are called prophets, that is, foretellers of things to come: The
office of the Levites and Priests ordinary.
and not only interpreters, expositours, masters, or teachers of the law. For
that expounding of the law the which might and ought to be made without the
foretelling of things to come, by the comparing or laying of things together
which are like or dislike, by the proper signification of the words, or motion
of God, belonged no doubt to the Levites and Priests, the which every Sabbath
did teach the same law of God in the Synagogues of the Jews, as it is in
Malach. 2.7. where he says, that the priests lips should preserve knowledge,
and that they should seek the law at his mouth: for he is the messenger of the
Lord of hosts. And of their ordinary expounding of the law every sabbath,
there is testimony Act. 15.21. where James witnesses, that Moses of old time
has in every city them that preach him, seeing he is read in the synagogues
every Sabbath day. But this was an ordinary calling in the Church under the old
testament like as now under the Gospel the office of the pastors in teaching
the same Church is perpetual and ordinary. But the office of the prophets was
extraordinary. The office of the Prophets extraordinary.
For no man without the extraordinary revelation of God either then, or at any
time was able to foreknow and foreshew the things to come, which they foretold.
Therefore the Levites in the Synagogues did not foretell any such certain things
peculiarly, to come to pass afterward. Wherefore the prophets were
extraordinarily called of God, as contrary unto the usual manner of the
Levites, Scribes, and Priests, and beyond their capacity or understanding they
did teach the people of God. And God did set them out with such notes and
spiritual ornaments, that any man were he never so contentious or given to
striving, might easily be sure of their calling, albeit extraordinary,
although many times they did neither raise up the dead, nor heal diseases, nor
show any other miracles, when as they used that their ministry, and came into
the open face of the Church. For God did sufficiently commend them both by the
truth and majesty of his doctrine, and also by the extraordinary knowledge of
his divine or heavenly will, Notes wherewith God commended his prophets.
by the which they were clearly known, even of the most way ward and peevish,
to excel above the capacity or understanding of the rest of the godly, the
which taught others also. These delivering the will of God and heavenly doctrine
sound and pure, peaking nothing to please men, were the servants of God and not
of men. For albeit they gave reverence unto Magistrates and higher powers, and
did not despise them (as the whole popish Clergy at this day does, as Peter 2.
Epist. cap. 2. v. 10. complains of some that walk after the flesh, in the
lust of uncleanness, and despise the government, which are presumptuous, and
stand in their own conceit, and fear not to speak evil of them that are
indigintie) yet did they not flatter them, or wink at the vices of Magistrates
and spare them. Nay they did sharply and with great boldness, that is to say,
liberty of mind reproove all Magistrates, as you may read, Isa. 1. Amos 7. and
in Jeremy every where. Whereof grew this saying, That the prophets of God were
to be believed, the which also is now true, as Augustine teaches libr. 12.
contra Faustum Manich. libr. 4. Trinitat. cap. 17. And in the Sentences
gathered out of August. Sentent. 214. For as Ambrose upon the epistle of Paul
to Titus teaches, and that very well, they could not be deceived, as being
such as did speak as they were led of the spirit of God.

Now the Prophets which do foretell things to come not being called of God, or
promise any thing unto the Church, Prophets not called of God by what names
they are termed.
or do teach in the same without any lawful calling: also those which deliver
false things, that is, maintain and defend false doctrine: these are called
lying prophets, or false prophets and wicked prophets. How the Scripture
speaks of prophets not sent of God.
Hosea 9.7. The Prophet is a fool, the spiritual man is mad for the
multitude of thine iniquities. Ier. 23.25. I have heard what the prophets said,
that prophecy lies in my name, saying, I have dreamed, I have dreamed. Ezech.
13.3. Thus says the Lord God, VVo^ unto the foolish Prophets, that follow
their own spirit, and have seen nothing. Such are those which overthrow and
corrupt the doctrine of Christ, either in part, or in whole, as the heretics
of whom Peterepist. 2. chap. 2.1. speaks, saying: But there were false
prophets also among the people, even in there shall be false teachers among you:
which privily shall bring in damnable heresies, even denying the Lord that has
bought them, and bring upon themselves swift damnation. Their doctrine by Paul
is called a doctrine of devils. 1. Tim. 4. Now the spirit speaks evidently,
that in the latter times some shall depart from the faith, and shall give heed
unto spirits of error, and doctrines of devils. James chap. 3.15. calls it
earthly wisdom, saying, This wisdom descends not from above, but is
earthie, sensual, and develish.

CHAP. 5. Of the dubble signification of the word prophecy, as it is used in
the holy Scriptures.
1. Prophecy taken for expounding of the scriptures.
ACcording unto the former definition of prophecy, whereof there is use in the
church* there has begun to be a double signification of this word, to wit,
the one which betokens the only expounding of the word of God comprehended
in writing without any fore-shewing or foretelling of things to come: 2. For
foretelling of things to come.
the other, which is referred unto the foretelling of things to come.
Therefore both they which only do expound and teach the written word o^ God
truly and syncerely or soundly, and do know nothing by extraordinary
revelation, nor declare any thing to come, are named Prophets notwithstanding:
and those likewise are called Prophets, the which according unto the peculiar
and extraordinari^ revelation which they have from God, do foretell things
decreed by God, The office of the old Prophets twofold.
because this was the double office of the old Prophets as we have showed,
namely to expound diligently and truly the law of God written and delivered by
Moses; and to foretell things to come by the inspiration of the holy Ghost.
Both these significations of the word Prophecy, and the same differing the one
from the other, is found as well in the old Testament, The word Prophet in the
old testament taken for an expounder of the word of God.
as in the new. And in the old Testament 1. Sam. ver. 20. we read thus: And
Saul sent messengers to take David, and when they saw a company of Prophets
prophesying, and Samuel standing as appointed over them, the spirit of God fell
upon the messengers of Saul, and they also prophesied. And 2. King. chap. 4.
ver. 38. Afterward Elisha returned to Gilgal, and a famine was in the land,
and the children of the Prophets dwelt with him. Also Isai, chap. 8. ver. 18.
Behold, I and the children whom the Lord has given me, an as signs and as
wonders in Israel, by the Lord of hosts which dwells in mount Sion. In these
and the like places the word Prophet, in my judgment for him which expounds
the law or God written, with a more majesty and exactnes, then others can and
not for him also, the which does foretell certain things to come. For I can
not think that all those, Why some in the scripture are called the sons and
disciples of the Prophets.
which in the old Testament are called the sons and disciples of the
Prophets, had also an extraordinary revelation from God of things to come:
but I judge them so to be called, because they applied themselves only unto
the true understanding, and sound delivering of the word of God written, and
diligently framed themselves thereunto Therefore they kept the purity of the
word of God, and the doctrine from God delivered by Moses and the other
Prophets, vncorrupt and sound. And among them there were some, which were as it
were them masters of the others, because that in the judgment of all* they did
excel the rest, and did appear to be more furnished with the gifts of God,
that they might be masters unto the rest, as I said before. Now these received
from God the revelation of things to come, the which accordingly as they were
commanded by the spirit of God, they did either only deliver over as it were
by hand unto those their disciples to be preserved and kept, or else they did
openly declare and utter them unto all the people. Elizeus.
So Elizeus among the Prophets of his time, was a master of the rest, and one,
who himself did know thin^^s to come, but the rest which were called the
sons or children of the Prophets, under him as their master, did wholly
attend both upon the exercise of true godliness, and also unto the learning and
retaining of sound doctrine. And this appears both out of 2. King. chap. 4.
and the 6. and also chap. 9. of the same book, ver. 1. Where Elisha the
Prophet called one of the children of the Prophets, and said unto him, Gird
thy loins, and take this box of oil in thine hand, and get thee to Ramo^h
Gilead. For the same Prophet him self, which anointed Iehu king, did not
know that it should come to pass, before it was told him by Elizeus.

The word Prophet in the old testament taken for him that foretells things to
come.
This word Prophet in the old Testament is taken for him also, the which
foretells things to come by the spirit of God teaching him extraordinarily,
and that so often, that I need not stay any longer in citing testimonies for
proof of this matter, and signification of the word. For so is the same word
taken, where Isaias, Ieremias, Ezechiel, Moses, and these twelve small
Prophets, are called Prophets. And this is the proof of the double
signification of this word Prophet out of the old testament. The same is in
like manner confirmed out of the new testament. For Paul in the whole 14 chap.
of the 1. Cor. and also Romans 12. ver. 6. ( Whether we have prophecy, The word
Prophet in the new ^e^^ament, for an expounder of the scripture.
let us prophecy,) does take the word Prophet and prophesying for the only
expounding of the holy Scripture: but in the same 1. epistle to the Cor. cap.
12 ver. 10. he uses the word prophecy for the foretelling of things to come,
as it is also done of Luke Act. 11. ver. 27, 28. For one that foretells
things to come.
In those days also came Prophets from Jerusalem unto Antiochia. And there
stood up one of them named Agabus, and signified by the spirit, that there
should be great famine thorough out all the world, which also came to pass
under Claudius Caesar. And again Act. 21. ver. 10.11. And as we tarred there
many days, there came a certain Prophet from Judea, named Agabus. And when he
was come unto us, he took Paul's girdle and bound his own hands and feet, and
said, Thus says the holy Ghost: so shall the Jews at Jerusalem bind the man
that owes this girdle, and shall deliver him into the hands of the Gentiles.
But why stand I any longer upon a thing that every divine knows very well?

CAP. 6. Of Prophecy, which is the expounding of holy Scripture, and how it
differs from the gift of tongues.
WHereas we have set down a double signification of godly prophecy, we must
first speak briefly of the former, and then afterward of the latter. The
first signification then of this word prophecy, betokens, as I have said
before, the declaring and expounding of the holy Scripture made in the mother
tongue, and therefore comprehends what soever appertains unto the public
office of teaching in the Church. For so does Paul generally divide all the
callings in the Church into prophecy, and offi^e, that is to say, into the
office of teaching and of instructing, Romans 12. ver. 6, 7. saying: Whether we
have prophecy, let us prophecy according unto the proportion of faith: or an
office, Paul his definition of prophecy, taken for expounding of the word^.
let us watte on the office: under the name of prophecy comprehending all
offices in the Church, which deliver sound doctrine; and under the name of
office, all other lawful and ecclesiastical or Church callings. Whereby
without all doubt appears, that prophecy taken in is signification is one
certain chief part of the whole ministry of the Church, the which Paul 1.
Cor. chap. 14. ver. 5. does briefly thus define: He that prophesies, speaks
unto men to edifying, and to exhortation, and to comfort. This Prophecy
therefore, is a sound speaking unto men of the word of God written, by one
that is lawfully called unto the office of teaching in the Church; or it is
expounding of sound doctrine appertaining unto the comfort, exhortation, and
edifying of the Church. Whereby appears, that this prophecy in his force and
signification does comprehend what so ever the said Paul teaches of the fruit
of sound doctrine, and holy scripture expounded 2. Tim. 3. ver. 16. Which is
given by inspiration of God, and is profitable to teach, to improoue, to
correct, and to instruct in righteousness, etc. And Romans 15. ver. 4. where he
affirms, that whatsoever things are written before time, are written for our
learning that we, through patience, and comfort of the scriptures, might have
hope: the which fruit consists in this, that the Church of God may be
instructed, corrected, and finally receive comfort.

Prophecy differs far from the gi^t of tongues.
Now this prophecy differs far and wide from the gift of tongues, as Paul
at large declares 1. Cor. 14. and as out of him afterward both Ambrose and
Chrysostom, and also Anselme have taught. But of these two points may the
difference of them both within themselves be easily perceived. 1 Prophecy
only ^seth the mother tongue.
The one, for that this prophecy only uses the mother tongue. For when as it
does all things unto the edifying of the whole congregation of the Church in
every city, and Church, it onley uses that language and tongue, the which is
known unto that whole Church, and common sort of those men. Therefore unto the
Frenchmen it speaks only French, unto the Spaniards, spanish, and not French
or Dutch or Latin, because that the same tongue, namely the French, Dutch, or
Latin, is not the Spanish tongue. But he, which has the gift of tongues,
speaks with diverse tongues even in every Church. For albeit that the godly,
and nun fearing God, who had received this gift from God, did turn it unto the
edifying of the Church, and nor unto their own of oftentation or vain glory:
yet if they had used but one tongue only, such a gift of God should not have
been known to be in them, and the self same persons should not have been,
judged to have the gift of tongues. Whereof it came to pass, that for the
showing forth of the glory of God unto all men, and his goodness unto his
Church, these kind of men did use diverse tongues even in the assembly of the
Church, either in expounding the public word of God; or also in supplication
and prayer. Therefore they are said of Paul not so much to speak unto men (of
every particular person whereof they could not be understood) as to speak unto
God him self 1. Cor. 14 ver. 2. where he says: For he that speaks a strange
tongue, speaks not unto men, but unto God: for no man health him: howbeit,
the spirit he speaks secret things. Out of which there appears a great
difference between prophecy and the gift of tongues.

2 Prophecy is of greater use in the Church, the^ the gift of tongues.
Another difference also arises of the former, namely, that prophecy is of
more use and edifying in the Church, and rather to be sought after, and desired
of God, then the gift of tongues, as the same Paul shows in the same first
epistle unto the Cor. chap. 14. ver. 5. saying: I would that ye all spoke
strange languages, but rather that ye prophesied: for greater is he that
prophesies, then he that speaks diverse tongues, except he expound it, that
the Church may receive edification. Furthermore prophecy needs no other
help unto the people and assembly of the Church, then it self, to teach and
instruct the Church withal: but the gift of tongues needs an interpreter
besides, to perform the same, (who of Paul is called Diermeneotes) and
interpretation, that the common people may understand the things which he
speaks 1. Cor. 14 ver. 28. But if there be no interpreter, let him keep
silence in the Church, which speaks languages, and let him speak to himself
and to god. whereof it comes to pass that this gift of Prophesi is more
profitable for the Church, then the gift of tongues. Prophecy comprehends
the gift of wisdom and the gift of utterance.


Moreover, prophecy does also comprehend the gift of wisdom, and the gift of
utterance. 1. Cor. 12. ver. 8. and 10. albeit in the former places Paul does
make a difference between them both, and prophecy, which foretells things
to come. For a man can not rightly and fitly expound the holy Scripture, except
he be such a one as is singularly furnished with the science and knowledge of
the same, the which is called wisdom: and does excel in the grace and gift
of speaking and expounding of himself, the which of Paul is called the gift of
speech, or utterance. Albeit among the Prophets themselves some oftentimes
receive and have from God these gifts more excellently then other some And thus
far of Prophecy, as it is taken for the expounding of the word of God
written.

CAP. 7. Of godly Prophecy, which is a foretelling of things to come, and how
it differs from the prophesies of the Gentiles, or Heathen.
Prophecy, as it is taken for the foretelling of things to come.
THere is yet another signification of the word prophecy, used by the holy
Ghost, betokening the foretelling of things to come, the which by God are
revealed unto men extraordinarily, and are commanded to be published or openly
uttered to his glory and the edifying of his Church. And of these kind of
Prophets there were both in the old and new testament, yet more in the old
testament, because that Christ the son of the living God (who is the end and
accomplishment of all prophecy) was not yet come. But we must here consider
how these Prophets do differ from the profane prophets, least that profane
persons should draw those things which hereafter shall be spoken of the true
Prophets of God, unto their diuiners sooth sayers, prophets, and such as by
birds flying, feeding, singing, and such like do foretell things to come, and
least that these and the true Prophets should be thought to be all one. Now
that I gather not infinite things together, wherein the Prophets of God
foretelling things to come, do disagree and differ from the prophets and
oracles of the Heathen, who also fore show things to come, I only set down
three things, by the which this difference between them both may plainly be
noted. A three fold difference between the Proph^ts of God, and the prophets
of the heathen.
For they differ one from another in the matter, cause, and manner of
revelation, the which was made unto them both, that is, unto the Prophets of
God, and those other wicked prophets. And in the matter they differ, for that
the Prophets of God did foretell of Christ to come especially, and that as the
Mediator of the world, 1 Difference in the matter.
as Augustine teaches, lib. 12. contra Faulst. Manich. cap. 2. and against the
adversaries of the Law. c. 3. of whom these profane prophets many times, nay
for the most part speak not one whit: yea when as they have foretold some
thing of him, they have not understood the thing, which themselves did speak,
much less that others did conceive and understand them. Therefore their whole
prophesies tended to this end, namely how they might satisfy or content the
desires and questions of curious persons, seeking to know things to come. But
the true Prophets of God did only employ themselves unto God, and unto the
edifying of the Church: and not unto the curiosity and vanity of men, as did
the oracles and prophets of the Gentiles, as Lactantius teaches lib. 1.
Divinat. institut. cap. 4. whereupon lib. 7. cap. 13. he says, Lactantius.
The manner and divination of the true Prophets consists only in this, that
they teach man to be created unto the service and worship of God, and to
receive immortality from him. As for that which is objected of the Sibyllae,
the which are said to have prophesied some thing of Christ, Objection.
Acro^^ichis is a kind of verses so made, that the first letters of every verse
running thorou^h them all, does make some name or sentence. Answer.
and whose Acrostichis is extant, the capital letters whereof do describe
this name JESUS CHRISTVS Dei Filius, Servator* Crux: Also of other oracles, the
which the same Lactantius in sundry places does recite, especially lib. 4.
divin. institut. where he has many things concerning Christ: I answer, that
both the Sibyllae themselves, and those other profane prophets did either not
at all understand the things which they did utter, or did not speak them to
this end, to establish true godliness, and the true worship of God, the which
thing notwithstanding the true Prophets of God had an especial care of, and
aimed thereunto: Why God suffered the Heathen prophets to fore tell some things
of Christ.
but God would have these things to be extant even among these profane and
heathen men, to this end they might be made inexcusable, who being put in
mind of Christ by their own oracles, they yet despised and refused, when as
afterward he was preached unto them by the Apostles and their successors.
Furthermore, those things the which Satan and the devil revealed and opened
unto these prophets concerning Christ, the same he gathered out of the writings
of the true Prophets themselves, the which were extant, or abroad; but yet he
did new furbish them to serve his own turn the better. Therefore the
difference between the Prophets of God, and these prophets of the heathen is
very la^ge: namely that these of the heathen either spoke nothing of Christ, or
else prophesied of him without fruit and understanding. 2 Difference in the
moving cause.
Again, that these profane prophets were moved by the inspiration of Satan,
but the Prophets of God did speak by the motion of God, and of the holy Ghost.
Therefore all the things which the Prophets of God foretold, did in such sort
come to pass as they did foreshew that they should: but the Heathen prophets
lied in many things, as being wholly led by the lying spirit.

The third difference stands in the manner, whereby they both received
revelation. And concerning the Prophets of God, 3 Difference in the manner of
revelation.
they were led by the meek and mild inspiration of God, and were not like
unto the prophets of the Heathen, taken with a mad frenzy, when as they
prophesied and did speak. And albeit that John say Revel. 1. ver. 10. that he
was in the spirit, or ravished when he prophesied: and Ezechiel confess many
times, The rauishme^ts of God his prophets was not like the madness of the
heathen prophets.
as especially chap. 3. ver. 14. that the spirit of God rushed and fell upon
him: and Daniel chap. 8. ver. 27. and chap. 10. ver. 8. that after the visions
and prophecy, he was taken with sickness, and that his strength failed him: yet
had the holy rauishments and distraughtments of the holy Prophets of God
nothing common and agreeable with the madness of the heathen prophets, wherewith
they were taken, when as they gave forth their prophesies. It could not be,
but that the Prophets of God being mortal men, must needs be very greatly
moved with the presence of the majesty of God, as often as he offered
himself unto them in more great and royal manner, then that he could be
contained within the straightnes of man his body. Wherefore they were for the
time as it were swallowed up, and then it must be of necessity that their
mind after a sort was withdrawn from their body, as Paul writes of him self
2. Cor. 12. ver. 3. where speaking of his being taken up into the third heaven,
Gestures of the Heathen prophets.
he says: I know such a man (whether out of the body, or in the body, I can
not tell: God knows. Yet even in those cases, and at that time were they not
mad, as were the Heathen prophets, neither did they some at the mouth,
neither were they ougly in visage, neither ignorant, or not knowing what they
said or did: but both wise and well advised, and with great reverence of God,
with great faith and full assurance of God speaking in them, did they hear and
receive the things which God did reveal and open unto them; they did
understand the things received and revealed unto them, yielded thereunto, and
afterward delivered them, and for the same did all of them more and more
glorify God. Visions (as writes Lactantius lib. 7 chap. 23.) were by the
spirit of God offered unto their eyes, and they saw them in their sight, to be
as it were done and ended. Whereof comes to pass that they were much moved
with these visions offered unto them. And how could it be otherwise? when as
they were but mere and weak men. Yet for all this neither was their mind put
out of his seat, that they understood nothing: neither were they as blocks
and stocks, or only passive or suffering instruments and organes of God, the
which did but only utter the things to come, and understood not what they
meant: that which fell out unto the profane prophets. The Prophets then of God
did understand and believe the things which they uttered. For otherwise they
could not be called the true Prophets of God. Augustine.
For Augustine lib. 12. de Genesis ad literam, cap. 9. says very well, They which
in the spirit by some bodily things had signs showed unto them, unless there
had bin added thereunto the office of the mind, that they might also
understand them, were not yet prophets. But the Heathen Prophets, when as they
uttered their prophesies, were without doubt besides themselves, The heathen
prophets out of their wits when they prophe^^ed.
out of their wits, and taken with madness, and understood not what they said
or did, but were only the meet instruments of Satan speaking by their mouth,
The strange and beastly ^itting of the prophetess of Apollo, when she
prophesied.
of which like kind of persons possessed with devils we have seen many also at
this day. Therefore Chrysostom writes, that the Prophetess of Apollo at
D^lphos, when she was to prophecy, did sit upon her but tocks, with her naked
legs astride upon a stool, the which was set over an hole and gaping gulf
of the earth or temple of Delphos, and that at those times the devil was wont
to enter in at her secret parts, who did ravish, vex, pr^sse, and in a word
frame her, that she only lent her mouth and teeth, and he himself the
unclean spirit did speak in her. From whence come these terms peculiar and
proper unto these kind of prophets, as Julius Pollux speaks; to be ravished,
to be mad, to be frantic, and the thing it self, or the spirit whereby
they were led, was called the inspiration of the devil, a mad spirit. And
to be short, both Virgil and Lucan do notably describe and set forth the
manner how these prophets were wont to be handled and used by the same their
devil. Virgil for his part lib. 6. AEneid. in these verses: Englished by Phaer.
But good Aeneas to Apollos
Church, and temple towers,
Went to seek the secret cave
Of Siblyes dreadful bowres.
A vaut of widenes vast where mighty
Spirit and mighty mind
Apollo her inspires that all
Things knows in secret kind.
And things that fatal bin he does
Full broad to her unfold.
And a little after, -- As thus she babbling prates
All suddenly with faces more
Then one before the gates
And colors more then one, disfigured
Wild she stood in trance
Her hair vpstarting stands, her trembling
Breast does panting praunse.
Her heart outraging swells,
When of the god she felt the blast
Approaching near. And afterward
But wrestling wild as yet, against
The god in th'entrie large
Dame Siblye mumbling made, and struggling
Strong withstoode the charge.
If happily so she might the gods
Enforcing, shake from breast.
But he prevailing still, with more
And more her spirit oppressed
Her heart, her raging mouth he
Taming staide, and fixed fast.
And thus far Virgil concerning this matter, out of the true history of
oracles. Lucan in like manner lib. 1. Pharsalidos, writes hereof thus: For as
the Thracian Edonis
In Bedlam sort with Bacchus fraught
Does gadding run on Pindus hill
Besides her self through him distraught: One of Bacchus Bedl^m women
priestesses.

So does Oricia Roman Dame
Th'amased city ouer-range,
Dis^losing Phoebus haunting her,
With such like words in manner strange:
Apollo whither am I drawn? etc.
This said she lay as in a trance,
Through madness which upon her fell.


Thus then the profane Poets them selves do liken their Prophets unto very
mad men, and drunken persons: yea their Sibyllas, The Heathen liken their
prophets unto mad men and drunkards.
whom notwithstanding they do reverence with more devotion and holiness, then
their other prophesiars. Yet does Plato in Phaedro, and M. Cicero lib. 1.
diuinat. write that these Sibyllaes themselves were taken with this deuilish
madness, when as they gave forth these prophesies: albeit Tulli afterward
disagreeing from himself, Tulli dissenting from himself.
and being deceived, writes thus in the same book. For (says he) the power
or virtue of the earth did naturally stir up Sibylla the prophetess of
Apollo at Delphos, as if the Sibyllae by a certain natural motion did
foretell things to come, and were not stirred up with that same madness, and
inspiration of the devil, as I said before. The which opinion it seems the
same Tulli had of others also, namly that there were certain prophets by
nature, or by natural causes, yet that all of them were mad when they
prophesied. Thus then he says, And those whose minds forsaking their bodies,
do fly out and go forth, being inflamed and stirred up with a certain
heat, do see for certentie, those things which prophesying they do foretell:
and such minds are inflamed with many things, which abide not in their bodies,
like unto those which are stirred up with a certain sound of words, and
Phrygian songs: many the woods and graves, many the rivers or seas do move,
whose madding wind does long before see, the things which are to come.

But why this madness and stirring up by the devil should be put into these
prophets, Why the Heathen prophets are taken with madness, ^s Plato thinks.
the reason is given of Plato in love in these words, as Serranus my very good
and learned friend has translated them: Wherefore God, when he takes from
them their minds, he uses these ministers, tellers of oracles, and divining
prophets, that we which hear them, should understand that it is not they which
do utter these things of so great importance: not they, I say, which are taken
with madness: but that it is God which speaks them, and speaks unto us by
the ministry or service of those men. Thus much Plato. Of the which appears
how absurd or foolish his madness of these prophesiars, and ravished men did
seem unto the Heathen them selves. And the Poet Claudianus faighning himfelse
a prophet, says: Claudinus.
All humane sense bath madness now
Quite from my breast "retired, "or, exiled
And wholly is mine heart and mind
With Phoebus rage inspired.
And here let these things now have an end.


CHAP. 8. Of sundry kinds of godly Prophets.
LEt us therefore return unto true Prophet, who also are called men of God.
And here it is first of all demanded, how many sorts of godly prophecy there
have bin, and may be gathered out of the word of God. For that there have
been diverse and sundry manners of revelation, and not one alone, by the
which God did speak both unto the Prophets themselves, and by the Prophets unto
others, appears unto the Hebrews c. 1. v. 1. in these words: God spoke by
his prophets after sandrie manners.
At sundry times and in diverse manners God spoke in the old time to our
fathers by the Prophets. And Numb. 12. ver. 5. Hear now my words (says God)
if there be a Prophet of the Lord among you, I will be known unto him by a
vision, and will speak unto him by a dream, etc. For although that in respect
of the heavenly doctrine, they all had one scope or end, to wit* the glory of
God, and the promises of the Messiah to come: yet in regard of the sundry
manner of revelation and extraordinary showing of him, the which was made unto
them from God, there may be observed and noted sundry kinds, or degrees (as
other term them) of godly prophecy. For besides that God did open and show
himself unto them more and less (whereupon some are said to be more excellent
then othersome, and Moses among the rest is named to be most familiar with God,
for Deuteronomy. 34. ver. 10. it is said of him, That there arose not a Prophet since
in Israel like unto Moses, whom the Lord knew face to face. And Number. 12. ver.
8. God says, that he will speak unto him mouth to mouth, and by vision, and
not in dark words, but he shall see the similitude of the Lord.) There was
also a diverse manner and not one only, whereby it pleased God to show and
make known unto them the things to come, that he might declare his manifold
wisdom, even in those extraordinary manners, by the which he did work in his
Prophets. Yet was none of these manners and ways madness and fury, after which
only manner not withstanding the devil, as we have showed, stirred up his
prophets.

Now how many were these diverse ways of God his revelation, Three sundry
man^rs of God his revelation of things to come.
is set down most plainly Number. 12. ver. 6. etc. as has before bin declared,
namely the^e three, O^acle, or speaking: dream, and vision. For whereas some
add unto these exstacie, or being in a trance, as a fourth kind of this
prophetical and divine revelation (after which manner John the Evangelist
Reuelat. chap. 1. ver. 10. saying of him self, And J was ravished in the
spirit on the Lords day, and heard behind me a great voice, as it had been of
a trumpet. And Paul speaking of himself 2. Corinthians. 12. that he can not tell
whether he was in the body, or out of the body, when he was taken up into
Paradise, do show that great secrets were by God opened unto them; this
skilleth not, nor makes any difference at all. For this exstasie, Exstasie
contained under vision.
or being in a trance, wherewith the true Prophets of God sometimes were taken,
as Ezechiel very often, ought to be referred unto vision. Therefore there was
three manners of showing of things to come by God extraordinarily unto his
Prophets, the which I had rather set down in the words of Peter Martyr out of
his commentaries upon the first of Samuel cap. 19. then in mine ow^e. We may
also (says he) after a plain manner thus distinguish o^ m^ke a difference
between the degrees of prophesies, that we may call one an oracle, An oracle.
an other a dream, and the third a vision. An oracle is, when as by the voice
of God himself is declared, what is to be done. So Abraham was willed by a
voice from heaven, that he he should not kill his son. Genesis 22. As for the
manner of dreams, 2 Dreams.
there needs no examples. For they are to be found every wherein the
Scriptures, as Genesis 15 12. ver. 12. Mat 1.20. 2. ver. 13. Vision may be of
three sorts, 3 Vision, and the same threefold.
either that things to come, and true, may be seen by the infusion or prwring
in of light, end simple understanding (that is, without any offered shape of
things) or that besides that light there be described the images or shapes of
things also and that either in mind, of which sort is this, that Zacharias
sees horns, and Jeremy a pot, Zach. 1. and 4. Ierem. 1. ver. 13. or with
the eyes, of which sort is this in Daniel, that a finger is seen on the wall,
These things says Martyr, and the same most truly. For whereas the schoolmen,
and some others prattle of the essential touching of prophetical wit, and of
uniting of the same with the deity, The pratilements of schoolmen.
by the which the minds of the Prophets should be englightned, this is not
only too nice and curious, but also most untrue. For nothing can essentially
touch the God head, it being a thing without body. Neither can our minds
do this, albeit that they also be without body, because that our humane
nature is not capable of such touching, or light. For as Paul teaches 1. Tim.
6. ver. 16. God dwells in the light, that none can attain unto, wherefore
the deity can not be touched of any creatures, no not of the blessed Angels
themselves, much less of the minds of men.

Yet there has bin before this time, Of a peevish kind of men that would be
called Prophets
and is also is this day a certain kind of men, who, on God his name, term
themselves Prophets, and would be so called and accounted. And these good
fellows do vaunt themselves, that by expounding of the holy Scriptures they
can foretell things to come, not only generally, but also particularly unto
every country, kingdom, King, people, of whom they are demanded. For they
promise and tell what shall come to pass at this or that time, in this or that
state of things and counsel as if they had this their prediction or
foretelling from the mouth of God, and word written. Therefore whatsoever is
read in the Scripture they refer unto the alterations of times, chaunges of
kingdoms, and troubles, and restoring of peoples and things. Such a one they
will have one M^thodius and Cy^^llus the Monk to have been, and loachimus the
Abbot, and also Jerome Sauanarola, both Florentines, but a few years agone to
have been. And in this our age one Broccard an Italian, Broccard
that lives at Leyde, or Lugdunum in Hollander this day, whom I did see and
speak with there, the foolishest person, and blasphemous that every I saw, in
this behalf. I do confess that godly and wise men may foresee many things
even now adays, After what sort wise and godly men even at this day may
foresee certain things to come.
and that things to come may be gathered and foretold out of the word of God
by a certain wise conjecture and reasoning, but generally, not particularly:
but by indefinite consideration of time, not by any set and appointed day: but
being such as not only one or two godly persons may foresee, but all that are
godly and wise: but to be brief, being such things the which may and also
ought to be gathered as effects from their causes, by comparing of the promises
and threatenings of God, with the godly, or ungodly life of the men of whom
that Scripture speaks, and not such as he, who so shows or foretells the
judgments and promises of God, has by the peculiar gift of God, or by any
extraordinary spirit of prophecy. For example sake, thus it is written in
Isai cap. 60. verse. 12. ^he nation and kingdom that serves not God, shall
perish, nay shall utterly be rooted out. Out of this place what godly man may
not gather, that the kingdom of the Turks how mighty and invincible, or
unconquerable it may seem now for to be, shall yet in the end be destroyed,
and overthrown? There is this threatening of God against idolatours, Isai chap
1. verse. 19. For they shall be con founded for the trees and groves, which they
have desired. That the Popedom therefore for the like idolatry shall in the
end be confounded and chastened by God, what godly man by wise conjecture may
not conclude? The things are infinite or without number, that after this manner
may be concluded, Against Broccard and his companions, such as are the paltrie
and balsphemous prophesies of one Paul Grebner, of the which some of them
published in english, were so greedily bought up this last har^est ^590.
and things to come foretold unto the world, both for the despising of the
true heavenly doctrine, and also of an holy life. But these things are
foretold in generality, and are gathered of the life of men, the which is a
witness of their faith, or of their infidelity.

But these Broccardical-mates, and Diviners do foretell what shall fall out
particularly unto this or that kingdom, and of this or that deliberation, at
such or such a time, that is to say, they profess or take upon them that they
can tell, as if it were just so written of these things expressly in the
word of God. In the which the Scripture of God is plainly abused of these
paltrie fellows, and they do falsify and corrupt it. For that thing the
which the Holy Ghost has peculiarly and especially foretold of some one
certain nation, the which God has decreed that it shall come to pass at a
certain and set time, the self same I say, neither ought nor may particularly
be applied unto another nation, and unto another time. For these things are
bounded and limited by the word of God, and not only spoken generally.
Neither do these companions in those their predictions or foretellings out of
the word of God, take the word of God written as for their argument, or do
bring their prophesies as conclusions by wise conjecture by them selves
gathered: but in such sort as if the self same thing which they foretell, were
expressly written in the word of God, and that in a manner in so many words,
as these superstitious persons do set down. This therefore these fellows
would have to be observed or marked, that the very names of cities, peoples, A
^rope^ sur^^se and new devise of these new prophets.
and things, are not extant or to be found in the holy and sacred Scriptures
in so many syllables, as they are at this day called: but they will have the
things forsooth which they foretell to have been only darkened, and hidden
under a diverse name. So Tyrus a town of Syria in Ezechiel, is with Broccard
Antwerpe, that is a city of Brabant: so Babylon in Isai is Parise in France
with the said Broccarde: and thus forsooth may these men play the fools.

And now seeing I am fallen into this vain, it shall not peradventure be
besides the purpose, in this place to set down, what I think of the writings
of this Broccard, of the which I my self have had conference with him self
the author of them. For from the Synod of Middleburge (which is the chief
city of the Island of Valacria in Zeland) I, Broccard conferred with all about
his writings.
and the worshipful and learned Martinus Lydius a most faithful minister of
the word of GOD in Austerodam in Hollande, in the year of our Lord 1582,
were appointed to confer with this Broccarde about his writings prophetical.
The which when he was nor able to maintain and defend, at the last he excused
him self, nay, he complained that they were not his own, but were put forth
and printed by the means and at the charges of certain others, unto whom he
had communicated or imparted them: and thus this good fellow did at that time
condemn and renounce the unhappy birth of his wit, and that rightly and
freely.

Absurdities of ^^e prophetical writings of Broccard (...) Absurdity.
As for the things the which in these prophetical writings of Broccard (as he
terms them) I do dislike, they are these for the most part, albeit out of a
great many but a few. First, that according unto the opinion and
interpretation of this man, he will have and presupposes, that the old
prophesies in the Scripture are not yet fulfilled. For all things, which by the
old Prophets have been foretold concerning the overthrow of Jerusalem, Egypt,
Sidon, Tyrus, and other nations and cities, that they should come to pass
after a certain manner, and a certain and set time, this Broccarde does
refer and take as things yet to come, and such as have been no more
foretold of those c^ties and countries, then of France, Antwerpe, the Prince of
Aurange, Condie, and men and things of our time. Which if it be true, what
fulfilling and accomplishment of the old prophesies, may there. I pray you, be
thought to have been? Doutlesse none at all, The old prophesies not yet
fulfilled in the judgment of Broccard.
by the opinion and interpretation of Broccard, for as much as those Cities or
Countries (of the which notwithstanding express mention has been made by the
Prophets) are not meant, but those which are and do remain in this our age:
and that (as he says) neither that manner, nor that time, albeit never so much
limited by them, is the manner, or the time past, or which has been already,
but is either present, or yet now for to come. Wherefore those prophesies can
not be said to be yet fulfilled. The which if it be supposed to be true, what
will profane persons and mockers think of those things, which the self same
same Prophets of God have foretold should come to pass concerning Christ?
Shall not they also be judged as yet to be unfulfilled? Shall not the whole
written word of God at the length go to wrack) one part thereof being
accused of falsehoode, and once undermined) and, as Augustine against Jerome
gathers very well, be deemed false, and overthrowen? And this in die first
place being altogether blasphemous, must needed follow, and be gathered out
of the prophesies of ^^occa^d.

Secondly, 2 Absurdity.
that the same threatenings, which the Spirit of God does denounce or declare
unto mere profane persons, and unto men that are inside, and reprobates, those
does Broccard every where apply unto the Church of God, and the faithful: yea
unto Gods true elect or chosen. That which any man may observe and mark in his
writings. Now to mingle and confound or huddle up together the things, the
which shall come to pass unto the elect, with those things that shall fall out
unto the reprobates, is plainly to confound God his election with his
reprobation, nay to take away both (that is, a chief part of the word of God)
yea it is to make the sons of God, and the enemies of God all one: it is
finally to confound and jumble one with another, temporal pains with pains
eternal, and to make our adoption, or being chosen into the sons of God,
vain and of none effect. The which is no less blasphemous then the former.

Thirdly, Broccard makes a way for every Origenist, especially of a sharp wit.
3. Absurdity. Origenists, were certain he^etikes named after Origin, that used
to turn all the scriptures into allegories. 1. Absurdity.
For now there shall be nothing certain for us in the holy scriptures, for to
follow. Tyrus is not Tyrus: Babylon is not Babylon: but all things forsooth
must be expounded by an allegory. Which thing is flat and plain heresy.

Fourthly, Broccard opens a window unto every Soothsay ^r, and Almanisticall
prediction, or foretelling of things after the manner of Prognosticators and
Almanac makers. For the same, like unto Broccard, sets down some thing,
the which notwithstanding it leaves still vn^^^ten. For these fellows do not
as did the true prophets, set down the manner it self, or any certain time
of the things by them foretold to come: But Broccard affirming some things
peculiarly of some matter and country, does altogether overpasse the other
circumstances. That which is the property of a spirit of the devil, turning
himself into an Angel of light to deceive withal: and when he has deceived,
so cunningly to handle the matter, that he cannot be accused of falsehood,
because he leaves out the circumstances, thee which notwithstanding the
prophets of God do diligently and exactly rehearse, that it may the better be
known, when their prophesies had their accomplishment and fulfilling.

Fifthly and lastly (that this my discourse be not without end) This Broccard in
most of his prophesies has already been found to he vain, 2. Absurdity.
false, and a lying merchant, by the issue and falling out of the matter, and
the same also daily more and more appears. For I let pass that he brings
no proof of this his extraordinatie calling in the Church: nor yet can
(because that being demanded of us for the same at that time, he was mumme,
and had nothing for to say) and is now also tongue-tied, when as he is urged,
or earnestly requested thereunto. And these things do sufficiently condemn
the prophetical writings of Broccard.

Now as oftentimes there have been showed unto the true Prophets the
similitudes and forms of things to come: The true prophets used dive^s ^gn^s
and ge^u^es in fo^etelling of t^i^gs to come.
so they also often when they did foretell things to come, did represent the
same by diverse signs and gestures of their body: that they might the rather
move the Church, and show that the thing should come to pass. So Isai walked
barefooted. Isai. cap. 20. So Jeremy wears a vvoodden chain. Ierem. 28.
The which doings of the Prophets because of their signification, Augustine
calls mystical, lib. 22. contra Faustum Manich. cap. 8.

CAP. 9. Of the true notes and marks of the godly and true Prophets.
FVrther there are certain notes and marks the which the word of God it
self has set down as most true and sure, to discern and know the true
Prophets from the false by. Deuter. cap. 13. verse. 1, 2, 3, etc also the 18.
ver. 21, 22. And if thou think in thine heart, How shall we know the word,
which the Lord has not spoken? When a prophet speaks in the name of the
Lord, if the thing follow not nor come to pass, that is the thing, which the
Lord has not spoken, but the prophet has spoken it presumptuously: thou,
shall not therefore be afraid of him. For when as God substituted or
under-ordained his Prophets to teach the Church, as it were in his stead, and
in as much as Satan does imitate or follow their words and deeds, to
disceive withal, if he could, even the godly themselves: it was altogether
necessary, that there should be extant certain tokens, and the same not at
all doubtful, as being showed by God himself by the which the true prophets
might be severed and marked out from the false. For at all times both in the
old Testament, and in the new, the devil has gone about to overthrow the
found doctrine, by the false prophets, as his Posts and Messengers. Therefore
like as under the law there were false prophets among the Jews, and old people
of God: so have there also been under the gospel, as Peter teaches, epist. 2.
chap. 2. verse. 1. But there were false prophets also among the people, even as
there shall be false teachers among you: which privily shall bring in damnable
heresies, even denying the Lord, which has ^ought them, and bring upon
themselves swift damnation. We must therefore see what these notes and marks
are. Where this is to be noted, Who in this place is prop^rly to be termed a
false prophet.
that in this place he only is called a false prophet, who in respect of the
doctrine which he teaches, and the things which he foretells, ought to be
termed, and is found to be a deceiver and a liar. For those which are called
false Prophets, because they have no lawful calling* albeit they teach* true
doctrine, and foretell things to come, and that truly, of which sort some do
arise out of the midst of the Church, these do not appertain unto this
question, whereas we speak of the true marks of prophets: but unto that,
wherein it is demanded, what is the lawful calling of prophets, or what is the
godly and lawful use of holy prophecy.

False prophets in three respects 1 Jn regard of their calling.
False prophets then are so called generally for three causes, namely, in
regard of their calling, in regard of their use, and in regard of their
doctrine. And in respect of their calling they are to be taken for false
prophets, who albeit they foretell true things, yet are they not sent of God,
but of Satan, to deceive: they are not allowed of God* but are the instruments
of the devil, such as are those distraughted and mad prophets, of whom we
have spoken before: and such also as some are in the Church of God oftentimes
by the just judgment of God, who do lead away men into idolatry.

In regard of their use, those are called false prophets, which have indeed a
lawful calling to prophecy, 2 In regard of their use.
and the same by God plainly confirmed by certain ways and which do foretell
true things, but yet not for such end and purpose, as they ought, not with such
an intent as God appointed, namely for that they foretell those things to come
for vainglory, or for gain sake; and not for the cause of setting forth Gods
glory only, nor yet to do good service in his Church by seeking the profit of
the same. These prophets therefore although they do speak true things, yet do
they not speak the^ truly, that is, with a sincere mind, and such a mind as
they ought. For they seek themselves, and theirs, and not God, or the things
that are Gods. Such a one was Balaim the Prophet in the time of Moses, Balaam.
one that spoke the truth indeed, and was brought forth by God unto that
people, and was not mad: but covetous, an hir^ling, seeking for gain by ^i^
office, as afterward in the Church did Simon M^gus. Simon Magus
Of Balaam read Number. 22. in the whole course of that chapter. And in Peter 2.
epist. 2. chapt. 15. verse. there is mention made of hi^ and such as he was, of
whom he says, that they did forsake the right way, and went astray, following
the way of Baliam, which loved the traces of unrighteousness, etc. Of Simon
Magus you have Act 8. v. 20. where Peter speaks unto him offering to buy the
gift of the holy ghost for money, say^ng, Thy money perish with thee, because
thou think that the gift of God may be obtained with money. Such were they
of whom Paul complains. Philipp. 1. v. 16. Some (says he) preach Christ
even through envy and strife, and of contention, and not purely, supposing to
add more affliction to my bonds. Therefore (they preached not Christ purely,
that is, with a pure mind, albeit they preached true Christ. So they which
abuse true prophecy, nay the gospel it self unto their gain and vain
glory, in respect of this use are false prophets.

Thirdly in respect of doctrine they are called false prophets, 3 ^nregard of
their doctrine.
the which do want either the one only, or else both the true marks, the
which both the true prophets hane, of whom I speak (...) this chapter. Two
marks by the which true prophets are known from the false.
For there are* as I have said, two notes whereby the true prophets are
distinguished and marked out from the false. The one, if they be found co have
made a lie, in in the matters by them foretold, or to have spoken false. When a
prophet shall speak in the name of the Lord, 1 Lying o^ false spe^^ing.
if the thing follow not, nor come to pass, that is the thing, which the Lord
has not spoken, but the same prophet has spoken it through pride, says the
Lord. De^t. 18.22. Therefore such a one is to be termed a false prophet. So
Jeremy the true prophet of God appealeth unto the event or falling out of the
matter foretold by H^nanias the false prophet. Ierem. 28. ver. 6, 7, 8, 9. Even
the prophet Jeremy said, So be it. The Lord so do, the Lord confirm thy
words, which thou have prophesied to restore the vessels of the Lords house,
and all that is carried captive from Babel unto thi^ place. But hear thou now
this word that I will speak in thine ^ares, and in the ears of all the
people. The prophets that have been before thee, and before me in times past,
prophesied against many cuntries and against great kingdoms, of war, and of
plagues, and of pestilence. And the prophet which prophesies of peace, when
the word of the prophet shall come to pass, then shall the prophet be known
that the Lord has sent him.

2 Persuading to idolatry, or false doctrine.
The second mark of a true prophet must altogether and at all times go with
the former: but in the false prophets it is sufficient, if ^ither one, or both
of them be wanting. This second mark therefore is, if he that foretells
things to come, a although they be true, go about, assay, and briefly be
desirous to draw and persuade us from the true God, and his doctrine revealed
unto idols, or any false doctrine. When there shall arise (says the Lord Deuteronomy.
13. ver. 1. etc.) a prophet in the midst of thee, or one that shall dream a
dream, and shall give thee a sign, or a wonder, the which he shall speak
unto thee, saying, Let us go after false gods, whom thou have not known,
and let us worship them: thou shall not obey the words of that prophet. So
Elias 1. King. 18. does reprove and convince or overthrow Achab the king his
false prophets. Whereof comes to pass, that because God would always have
his prophets found to be true, and in every part of their predictions or
fore-tellings, he did so reveal things to come unto them, and they so foretell
them, that they did evidently set down all circumstances of the matter.
Therefore they did not only decla^e something to come (the which often times the
mad prophets, and sometimes Astrologers do) or to fall out unto such a people:
but they did also (as I have said before) express the manner, way, and all the
circumstances of the thing to come, and therefore have they them in their
writings set down. For they do declare and lay down both the time and the
place, and the manner, and the instruments, and the persons, Causes why the
true prophets set down every circumstance.
whereby those things shall come to pass, which they foretell, and that not
without cause. First, least they might seem to speak darkely: so that if they
have erred in any circumstance, false prophets. Moreover, that by so many
circumstances rehearsed, tellers of Oracles, soothsayers, Astrologers, and the
rest of that rabble of divinours, (as they term themselves) do either
generally and indefinitely only take upon them to foretell some thing to ^ome,
but do not evidently and plainly express the thing it self: as for example,
There shall be war, but they add not, civil and f^rreine: or if they do
set down something to come, yet do they not express all the circumstances of
the thing. For by these they should quickly be found out to be false prophets,
or liars. Now these circumstances are the cause, the end, the place, the time,
the manner, the instruments, the matter: like as of these matters, which of
them both are foretold to come to pass, may easily be discerned and known
which of them are true or false prophets. For the true, set down the
circumstances of the thing to come, but the false overp^sse them. The prophets
of God b^gan from the beginning of the world.
And whereas the true prophets do at no time, nor by no means carry us from
the true God, and from his service, and doctrine unto idolatry, or unto the
elements of this world, we gather that all Cabalists, and other such like
prophets are false prophets. For were it granted that all these did always
foretell true things (the which they at no hand will yield unto which have
heard from them of things to come) yet in the end they draw us hereunto, that
in stead of God, we should worship the elements of the world. For they do tie
the power of God unto certain words and syllables, as do the Cabalists, and
some Magians or Sorcerers: or else they do not purely expound the word of God
it self, but do carry and apply it from the knowledge of godliness unto the
vanity and curiosity of men, the which no doubt the Broccardicall prophets use
to do.

CAP. 10. When the godly and true Prophets of God took their beginning. And
likewise when they ceased or ended in the Church.
IT is a worthy question, At what time first the prophets of God began to be,
and at what time they ceased, the which for this cause ought not here of us to
be omitted and overpassed. And first to speak briefly of the first part of
this question: The prophets of God began to be, ever from the beginning of the
world, as being such, who both knew the will of God by his revelation, and
themselves received from God, and delivered over again as it were from hand to
hand that same promise of the Messiah to come, and to suffer for the salvation
of mankind. Hereof it is that the Prophets, the which have spoken of the
Church to be redeemed by Christ, are said by Zachary (who himself was a
prophet) to have been from the beginning of the world, that is from all age of
the world, and from the first making and being of the world, as it is in Luke
in his gosped, chap. 1. v. 70. As he spoke by the mouth of his holy Prophets,
which were since the world began. And Paul writes that the promise of God the
father concerning his Son the Messiah and propitiator or atonement maker of
the world to come, that it was known and foretold by the prophets before the
times of the world, that is, before any ages of the world, or this courses of
years, which does arise of the going about of the sun, were made, and
therefore from the very beginning of this globe or round world, Titus 1.2.
Under the hope of eternal life, which God that can not lie has promised
before the world began. That which also is confirmed out of the epistle unto
the Hebrews cap. 1. verse. 1. in these words: At sundry times, and in diverse
manners God spoke in the old time to the Fathers by the Prophets: In these
last days he has spoken unto us by his Son. For straight after the creation
of the world by God, The promise of the Messiah from the beginning.
and sin committed by the first man Adam, the promise of the Messiah was, I
will put enimitie between thee (to wit, Satan) and between the seed of the
woman, He shall break thine head, and thou shall bruise his heel. Genesis 3.15.
the which promise at the first was made unto Adam in words, and delivered as a
prophecy, and most excellent foretelling of things to come. Afterward it was
declared and expounded by the addition or bringing in of sacrifices. For as God
commanded sacrifices to be made unto him by Adam and his successors or those
that came after him (until the coming of the Messiah himself) so he did
declare the meaning of them: And also moreover the same will of God concerning
the Messiah to come, was always more clearly opened and showed by other
revelations made unto the godly. Whereupon from the very self lame time
prophesies and prophets concerning Christ, the judgment of God to ensue upon
the wicked, and concerning other matters also, and articles of the faith began
to be in the world, and in the Church of God, that is to say, from the very
beginning of the world the true prophets of God were, and began to be. And I
make no doubt, but that Adam himself, who talked so often with God, who first
received from him that same promise of the Messiah, and diligently delivered it
unto his posterity, Adam the chief and first prophet.
who had sacrifices, and the signification of them by God his revelation,
(Hebrews chapt. 11.) was a chief prophet of God, and is to be reckoned first
in the roll of the prophets: after him Abel, then the rest of the Patriarchs
of whom in the holy scripture there is godly and commendable mention, Genesis
cap. 5. Hebr. cap. 1. For as without faith in Christ there was never any
salvation, nor any peace and reconciliation or friends making an atonement
between God and men, Heb. 9. ver. 15. And for this cause is he the Mediator
of the new Testament, that through death which was for the redemption of the
transgressions, which were in the fo^mer Testament, they which were called,
might receive the promise of eternal inheritance. So was there no age of the
world, in the which that same promise of Christ to come was not extant and
preached, and in the which die same was not better confirmed, and by little and
little more clearly expounded by the fuller revelation of the things (which
Christ should suffer and do for us) the which revelation, as the time of the
coming of Christ was more near, so was it of God made more full and more
plain. Whereof it comes to pass, that there was no age, before the coming
of Christ, in which there were not some Prophets, and therefore, that they
began to be from the very instant of the saving of the Church, that is, from
the beginning of the world made. That which Peter also teaches. 1. epist. 1.
chap. verse. 10, 11. namely that the sufferings and glory in Christ to come,
were declared of the prophets of God by the revelation of the holy ghost. The
words be these: Of the which salvation the prophets have inquired and
searched, which prophesyed of the grace that should come unto you, searching
when or what time the spirit which testified before of Christ, which was in
them, should declare the sufferings, that should come unto Christ, and the
glory that should follovv. But these revelations always in the latter times
until the coming of Christ, were more easily and fully revealed: but in the
first times more obscurely or darkely understood. And this is mine answer unto
the first part of the former question, when the prophets of God took their
beginning.

When the prophets of God ^eased in the Church.
In the second place it is demanded, When the prophets ceased in the Church of
God. Unto the which question, that I may the more plainly make answer, I say,
that of the prophets of God some were under the old testament, and some under
the new. Wherefore if the question be of the Prophets of the old Testament, I
answer with the words of Christ himself, Mat. 11. verse 13. That the law and
the prophets continued until John the Baptist: and from that time ceased and
had their end. For after that Christ the promised Messiah came into the world,
and was made manifest or showed, as he was by the finger, by John the Baptist
often pointed unto, when as John beholding Christ walking, said unto his
disciples and unto the people: This is the Lamb of God which takes away the
sin of the world. Ioh. 1. ver. 29. the old Testament then ceased: and
therefore the prophesies and the prophets also ceased, which did foretell of
Christ or the Messiah that was to come in the flesh, because that now he was
already come. For Moses and the Prophets which were under the law, The
prophets of the old Testament ^eased at the coming of Christ.
or under the old Testament, did only foretell of Christ to come in the
flesh. When as he therefore was come and took upon him our flesh, this kind
of Prophets ceased, and new came in their stead. Therefore John the Baptist
himself which saw with his eyes Christ incarnate, or in the flesh, is said
to have been more then a Prophet, Matthew. 11. cap. ver. 9. And some do gather
out of the writings of the Rabbines, and Thalmudists, that Simeon of whom Luke
makes mention cap. 2. ver. 25. was the last of these godly prophets of the old
Testament. For the Thalmudists will have and do teach, that in this Simeon the
spirit of Prophecy ceased among the Jews. And they make Rabbi Jonathan who
wrote the Chaldee translation and interpretation of the holy Bible, to be of
the same time with him. Finally they wrote that this Simeon was the disciple of
Hillel. Howsoever it be, the godly prophets of the old Testament were only
until John the Baptist. For from him began the kingdom of God and the
gospel, that is, the new Testament, as Mark the Evangelist speaks cap. 1.
Therefore what prophets soever were among the Jews after Christ his suffe^ing,
and rising again from the dead, Notes of false prophets after Christ's time.
and his receiving into heaven, or after the overthrowing of the temple of
Jerusalem, which either said that they were the Messiah, or did foretell that
the Messiah was then first to come in the flesh were false proph^^s. 1. Ioh.
cap. 2. ver. 22. Who is a liar, but he that denies that Jesus is Christ? The
same is Antichrist that denies the Father and the Son. And again Ioh. 4.
ver. 3. And every spirit which confesses not that Jesus Christ is come in the
flesh, is not of God: but this is the spirit of Antichrist, etc. Of which sort
among others was that notable robbet and varlet Barchobab, Barchobab.
of whom there is in Eusebius. l. 4. Hist. Eccl. c. 6. and Nicephl. 3. cap. 24.

Now when these former Prophets, that is the Prophets of the old Testament
ceased, then began the Prophets of the new Testament, When the proph^ts of the
new Testament began. Christ a prophet of the new Testam^nt.
of which sort there were many: especially Christ himself the Prophet of
Prophets, but so far forth as he was man, and made manifest or showed in the
flesh. Afterward the Apostles, if not all, yet many of them (for the office of
the Apostles and Prophets was distinct or diverse the one from the other, 1.
Cor. 12. ver. 19. Are all Apostles? Are all Prophets? Are all teacher?) and
such a one was Paul, as appears Rom 11. ver. 25. in these words: For I would
not brethren, Paula prophet.
that ye should be ignorant of this secret (least ye should be arrogant in your
selves) that partly obstinacy is come to Israel, until the fulness of the
Gentiles be come in: which shows that he prophesies of the conversion of the
Jews. And 1. Tim. 4. chapter ver. 1. Now the spirit speaks evidently, that in
the latter times some shall depart from the faith, and shall give heed unto
spirits of error, and doctrines of devils: where be prophesies of a falling
from the truth in the latter times. And Peter also was a Prophet as may easily
be gathered out of his 2. Peter a prophet.
epist. cap. 2. ver. 1, 2. etc. where he prophesies of false teachers, and
cap. 3. ver. 3. where he foretells of mockers and scorners. Likewise John the
Evangelist was a Prophet, as his first epist. cap. 4. and his Revelation does
prove. John the evangelist a prophet.
But after the Apostles there were others also, which were Prophets of God, yet
but for a time only, and until Christ by the preaching of the Gospel wras
plainly and thoroughly made manifest. For the holy Scripture makes mention of
Agabus the Prophet Act. 11. ver. 28. Agabus.
who lived in the days of the Apostles: and of the daughters of Philip the
Evangelist, which were prophetisses, Act. 21. ver. 9. The daughters of Philip
the evangelist.
And furthermore Justinius against Tryphon the Jew does testify, that the gift
of prophecy was in the Church until his times. The which thing also Eusebius
lib. 4. Histor. Eccles. cap. 18. rehearses out of him. But these Prophets
which lived under the Gospel, were both in dignity, and degree, and in time
also inferior unto the Apostles, but above and higher then the Doctors and
Pastors. Therefore the Prophets of the Gospel are rehearsed in the second
place, that is, after the Apostles, Ephesians. cap. 4. ver. 11. He therefore gave
some to be Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors
and teachers. And 1. Corinthians. cap. 12. ver. 29. Are all Apostles? Are all
Prophets? Are all teachers? Now there is a question, when these Prophets of
the new Testament ceased, or had their ending. When the prophets of the n^w
Testament ceased.
Certes albeit I confess, that God for the confirmation of his Gospel, would
have the gift of Miracles, and Tongues, and of Prophecy to flourish long in
his Church, yet were those gifts first by little and little diminished, as it
is most certain, and afterward utterly taken away, to wit, after that the
doctrine of the Gospel was sufficiently and thoroughly confirmed and approved.
Whereof it came to pass, that both the gift of Miracles, and of Tongues, and
also of Prophecy, at the length ceased in the Church. But the gift of
prophecy, which foretold things to come, did then especially take his end,
When the gift of prophecy ceased.
after that Saint John his Apocalypse was written of him by revelation from
God. For it contains what so ever shall happen or fall out unto the Church,
even until the end of the world. Whereof it comes to pass, that it is
forbidden that any thing should be added or put unto it, Revel. cap. 22. ver.
18. If any man shall add unto these things, God shall add unto him the
plagues that are written in this book. For what need was there, that those
things should be foretold unto us, the which shall come to pass after that
this world is ended? Therefore this Apocalypse or Revelation was a sealing and
closing up of all prophecy, the which unfolds the estate of the whole Church
unto the very last age of the world, and resurrection or rising again of the
dead. J^stinus Martyr.
And albeit that Justinius Martyr do affirm that there were afterward some
Prophets remaining in the Church (for the Revelation was written about the last
times of Domitianus the Emperor, and Justinius Martyr lived under under the
Emperors Antonini, to wit, about forty years after the writing of the
Revelation) yet those Prophets flourished but a little time in the Church,
neither foretold they any thing of any great importance: but only such things
as were to come to pass in regard of that time unto the Church, the which God
for this cause would have them to foretell, to comfort the Church withal. And
that self same gift also vanished away by little and little. Therefore after
the revelation, I do not think that there were any prophets in the Church,
the which foretold any falling out of things of any great importance, because
that the same Revelation does abundantly contain all things, as I have said,
the which shall come to pass even until the worlds end.

And whereas I say, that there were Prophets both in the old and also in the
new Testament, I do also under them comprehend Prophetisses, Under prophets
are also to be contained prophetiss^s, that is, certain godly women
extraordinarily endued by God, with the gift of proph^^e.
that is to say, godly women, whom the Lord raised up sometime to prophecy.
Of which sort there is in the holy Scripture mention made of these Marie, the
sister of Moses and Aaron, Exodus 15.20. Debora, which in battle overcame
Sisara, Judge. cap. 4. ver. 4. Olda in the time of Josias King of Judah, 2. King.
cap. 22. verse. 14. The like I would say also of Anna the mother of Samuel,
albeit that expressly she be not called a Prophetess: yet out of her long the
which is extant 1. Sam. chap. 2. ver. 10. It appears that she did prophecy
of the kingdom of Christ, where she says, The Lords adversaries shall be
destroyed, and out of heaven shall he thunder upon them: the Lord shall judge
the ends of the world, and shall give power unto his king, and exalt the
home of his anointed. To conclude, that same Anna, of whom Luke makes
mention, and whom he himself calls a prophetess cap. 2. verse 36. Five
prophetisses of the old Te^ament. Mary, Debora, Olda. Anna the mother of
Samuel, Anna in Luke.
Therefore these five properly are the prophetisses of the old T^stament. Unto
these may be added one Noadia. of whom mention is made Nehem. cap. 6. ver. 14.
bu^ she is said to have abused this gift in the self same place, by this
that Nehemiah there prays against her, when he says, My God remember th^^
Tobiah and Sanballat according unto these their wo^kes, and Noadiah the
proph^tisse also, and the rest of the prophets that would have put me in
fear. Finally the Masoreth of the Hebrews adds unto this number of women
prophetisses, the wise of Isai the prophet, because she is called of him a
prophetess cap. 8. v. 3. But she is not therefore so called by Isai, that
she should be understood to have been endued with this extraordinary gift of
God: but that she may be known to have been his lawful wife, and a most
honest and chaste matrone: and not an harlot as the wife or Oseas is said to be,
whom being such a one Oseas had married, at the commandment of God Ose cap.
1. These then are the women Prophetisses of the old Testament.

The new testament had also his prophetisses, and the same also very famous.
Prophetisses in the new Testament.
For Joel had foretold that it should so come to pass long before, in the time
of the gospel cap. 2. v. 28. saying in the person of God: And afterward I will
power out my spirit upon all flesh: and your sons and your daughters shall
prophecy: your old men shall dream dreams, and your young men shall see
visions. And that for this cause, least the authority and dignity of the new
testament should be less then the old: or lest the gospel should be thought
to be less garnished with the gifts of God, the^ the law was before. Therefore
under the Gospel there were also godly women Prophetisses, as Peter in the
second of the Acts by alleging the former place of Joel, seems for to
prove, as is without all doubt to be seen. Act. 21. ver. 9. where four
virgins the daughters of Philip the Evangelist, The daughters of Phili^ the
Evangelist. Marie the mother of Christ.
are said to have prophesied. The like also would I say of Marie the virgin and
mother of Christ, the which I said before of Anna the mother of Samuel. For
out of Luke 1. v. 15. and so forth, she, as it appears, does foreshew and
foretell certain great things of the kingdom of Christ, and of the power of
God. And these were women Prophetisses in the new Testament. As for a certain
woman called B^igid, and one Merlin of England, of whom some write, (for they
will have them to have prophesied) it is a tale most foolish and most false.
That which the event or falling out of things by them foretold does prove.

CHAP. 11. Of the godly Prophets of the old Testament, and of their order and
succession of following one another.
THis likewise i^ a most profitable question, what godly Prophets have been in
the old Testament, nay from the very beginning of the world, and who succeeded
or followed each other until the birth of Christ, at which time the old
prophecy is said of us before, to have ceased. For this thing brings light,
and the same very great unto the interpretation and exposition hereafter to
ensue, of the twelve Prophets (which are called the small Prophets) and will
show how and in what order they are to be place For this matter is not fully
agreed upon neither among the Hebrews, nor yet among the Christians. Writers
agree not about the order and placing of the prophets. Epiphanius.
And to let pass the Hebrews or Rabbis, Epiphanius in his book of the Life
of the Prophets (as we shall afterward show) thinks one way of the order and
placing of them, to wit, these our twelve, and Isidorus another way. And Jerome
dissenting from them both, follows that order, after which these twelve are
already placed in the coppies of our Bibles. Isid^rus.
Let us therefore now go forward with the question that we have in hand, and
generally show, so far as we may out of the word of God, what Prophets have
bin from the beginning of this world, until the coming of Christ our Lord.
And this shall easily be done, if we divide the whole time which has now
passed from the creation of the world unto Jesus Christ the King and only
son of God, taking flesh upon him for us, unto certain courses or ages of
times. And these we will, The time from the creation of the world until Christ,
divided into seven ages.
for the better laying open of this matter, make and set down to be only
seven, in every one or which we will show what Prophets have lived. Where
first of all I do willingly confess, that the succession of the Prophets, vas
not always so continued, that it never was interrupted or broken off. For
whereas this office was extraordinary in the Church of God, no marvel, if it
often ended, or for a time ceased for to be: in as much as the ordinary
callings them selves (of which sort was sacrificing under the Law) did not
withstanding sometime cease, and were broken off, as in the whole time of their
exile and captivity in Babylon, and oftentimes else. So therefore it came to
pass, the sins of men deserving the same, that the Church of God was often
destitute or void of true Prophets, as is gathered out of 1. Sam. 3.1. And the
word of the Lord was precious in those days: for there was no manifest vision.
And Psalm. 74 9. We see not our signs: there is not one Prophet more, nor any
with us that knows how long. Therefore there were then no Prophets, but their
succession was for the time no doubt of, and the continuation of them broken
off. That which no godly man which reads the holy Scriptures with diligent
heedfulnes, in my judgment, will deny. But let us return unto those seven
ages of the world, which have passed since the beginning thereof unto Christ
borne of the blessed virgin Marie. The first of them contains all that whole
time, which was from the making of the world until the flood, which fell out in
the six 100. year of the Patriarch Noah. And this age comprehends 1656.
years. This first age had these Prophets, The 1. age of the world from the
creation unto the floode, 1656 years, had these prophets. Adam, Abel, Enoch,
Noah.
Adam, Abel, Enoch, and Noah. Of Adam we have spoken before. Of Abel it seems
that it may easily be gathered both out of Mat. 23.34, 35. and Heb. 11.4.
namely that he was a Prophet, as also was Enoch, and other Prophets who^ the
Jews wickedly flew. Of Enoch there is extant or remaining a most certain
Testominie in the word of God to wit, in the epist. of Jude, v. 14. whose
prophesy also is there rehearsed, in these words: And Enoch also the seventh
from Ad^mprophesied of such, saying, Behold, the Lord comes with thousands of
his Saints. Of Noah, it is a matter past al doubt, that he was a Prophet of
God, and did foretell of that overthrow of the whole world, and the dwellers
therein, the which was to come, and was through waters made by God, almost 120
years before it came, and that by especial revelation from God. Genesis 6.13.
And God said unto Noah: God ^^uealed unto Noah the destruction of the world by
water.
An end of al flesh is come before me: for the earth is filled with cruelty
through them: and behold I will destroy them with the earth. Read more hereof
cap. 7. and 2. Pet. 2.5. Neither has he spared the old world, But saved Noah
the eight person, a preacher of righteousness, and brought in the floude upon
the world of the ungodly. If there were any more Prophets besides these, they
are not rehearsed in the holy Scriptures. The sons of God severed from the
sou^^s of men.
The sons of God indeed are severed from the sons of men in all that first
age, and the one are called wicked, and despisers of God, and the other, to
wit, the sons of God, are said to have bin godly, and fearing God, Genesis 4.
ver. 26. And to the same Sheth also, there was borne a son, and he called his
name Enosh. Then men began to call upon the name of the Lord. And Genesis 6. ver.
2. The sons of God saw the daughters of men, that they were fair, etc. But
yet are they not called Prophets. To be short, If any of the^ were such, their
names are not expressed, unless any man peradventure will say, that Lamech the
father of Noah, and others borne of Seth, and the Patriarchs and such as are
named in the holy Scriptures, were prophets of God. And these prophets of God
had that first age of the world.

The second age is from the time of the flood until the first calling of
Abraham out of Vr a city of the Chaldeans, The 2. age containing 422 yerees,
had few or no prophets.
which calling was made by God. For Abraham first departing with his father
Thara out of this city Vr, went unto Carras, following God calling him. This
age had 422 years Gen 12. and Prophets either none, or very few, at least
which are known unto us by the word of God, unless any man peradventure will
reckon Sem the son of Noah, and Melchisedech among the Prophets of that age.
For concerning Abraham himself before this age, it is manifest that he was
anidolater, and therefore no Prophet of God at that time, Ios. 24.2. such a one
not withstanding as afterward he was Genesis 20.7. For the first, that the was an
idolatour ^o^ua says, Your fathers dwelt beyond the flood in old time, even
Terah the father of Abraham, and the father of Nachor, and served other gods.
For the second, that he was afterward a Prophet of God says of him to
Abimelech in the place before cited: Now deliver the man his wife again: for
he is a Prophet, and he shall pray for thee. But whether and of those which
Gen, chapter 10. and chapter 11. are reckoned up for the heads of families and
nations of the posterity of Noah, as Sem the son of Noah, and others were
prophets, it cannot by any means by the word of God be determined. For in the
epistle unto the Hebrews cap. 11. all this whole second age, as it which
lacked his Prophets of God, nay that which more is, godly men, is clean
ouerpassed, and the holy Ghost by and by with a great leap and gulf oftime
and succession, skippeth from Noah unto the calling of Abraham. Then were the
Prophets of the world very few, besides Sem and Abraham.

The 3. age from Abraham to the giving of the law, 430 years, had these
prophets. Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Joseph, Moses, Aaron.
The third age of the world is from the first calling of Abraham out of Vr of
the Chaldeans unto the setting forth and giving of the law of God unto the
people of Israel by Moses in the desert of Sinai. This age comprehends 430.
years, as the holy Scripture it self does declare Exodus 12. ver. 41. Galat.
3. ver. 17. This third age had these six Prophets well known, Abraham, Isaac,
Jacob (who also is called Israel) Joseph, Moses, and Aaron, as appears in
Genesis, the epistle unto the Hebrews 11. cap. and infinite other places. For
whither in the mean season, whilst the children of Israel lived under the
Pharaos in Egypt, after the death of Joseph, and before the birth or the wing
of Moses, there were any other Prophets of God, of the Israelites ab^ding in
Egypt, the holy Scripture does no where plainly make any mention. And therefore
neither will I affirm the ^ame. Further, whereas some will have certain
prophetical writings of Ab^^ham the Patriarch to be extant, they are
child^shly ^^ceiued, foolishly setting one of the Rabbines called Abraham, in
stead of Abraham the Patriarch.

The 4. age from the Law to the bu^lding of the temple by Solomon, 480 years,
had many prophets, as
The fourth age of the world is to be reckoned of us from the giving of the Law
in Mount Sinai until the building of the Temple of God at Jerusalem by Solomon
(the which falls into the fourth year of Solomon his reign. This age
contains 480. years, as appears 1. Thing. 6. cap ver. 1. And in the 480.
year (after the children of Israel came out of the land of Egypt) and in the
4. year of the reign of Solomon over Israel in the month Zif (which is the
second month) he built the house of the Lord. This age had store of many godly
Prophets, Josua, O^bora, the Prophet 1. Sam. 2. ver. 29. Samuel, Davi^, Nathan,
Gad.
as these by the word of God well known unto us, Joshua which succeeded Moses,
Deborah, and a long time after, that ^ame man of God sent unto Eli* 1. Sam. 2.
ver. 27. Samuel, David, Nathan, Gad. But whether those also were Prophets,
which wrote the books of the wars Number. 21. ver. 14. and the book of Iasher
Ios. cap. 10. ver. 13. Also the books of Chronicles of the kingdom of Judah
and Israel, whereof mention is often made in the books of the Kings, is not
set down in the holy Scripture. But that David, and Nathan, and Gad were
Prophets of God, appears 2. Sam. 12. 1. Chron. 29. ver. 29. and cap. 21.
Besides these if there were any other Prophets in that age, their names are not
rehearsed. For that which is written of Othoniel the Judge in the third of the
Judges, verse. 10. and of other Judges also, that the Spirit of God fell upon
them, when as they were called of God extraordinarily unto that office, this in
my judgment is not to be understood of the Spirits of prophecy, as if then
they became Prophets, that is, foretellers of things to come, such as was
Isaias, Ieremias, and others: but it is to be understood of the spirit of
fortitude or strength, whereby they might be able boldly and without fear, to
resist and withstand the enemies of the Church, were they never so much to be
feared. Neither are there any prophesies extant of those Judges, who after
Joshua governed Israel as politic Magistrates in many ages: neither are there
any of them reckoned at any time among the Prophets, but among the Magistrates
of Israel. Therefore that which is Hebr. cap. 11. ver. 32. And what shall I
more say? For the time would be too short for me to test of Gedeon, of Barac,
of Sampson, of Iephthe, and David, and Samuel, and the Prophets, does not
prove those Judges to be numbered among the Prophets: but only among godly
men, which by faith served God. For Paul Act. 13. ver. 20. calls them only
Kritas, that is, Judges, whereas he calls Samuel (who was himself a judge in
Israel) a prophet also. And albeit God, Deu. 18.15. promised the Israelites,
that is, his Church, that it should come to pass, that out of it he would
raise up Prophets, even after that Moses was dead yet was not this rank and
course of Prophets succeeding one an other continual, but oftentimes broken
off, as I have said. And in deed all the whole time in a manner of the Judges
it seems that there were none, Few prophets in the time of the Judges.
or else very few Prophets of God in the Church. Therefore 1. Sam. 3. ver. 1.
vision and prophecy is said to have bin very rare, and failing in Israel, that
is, in the Church and people of God. But after Samuel it began to be both more
common and also more known. Therefore in his time there were many Prophets, as
appears 1. Sam. cap. 9. and 10. whose names notwithstanding the holy
Scripture does not set down.

The 5. age from the temple unto the carrying away of the ten tribes by
Salmanazar 294 years among many other, had these prophets. Proof for this
former spputation of time.
The fifth age of the world is from the Temple of God builded at Jerusalem by
Solomon King of Judah, unto the leading and carrying away of the ten tribes
of the kingdom of Israel, by Salmanazar King of the Assyrians, into Assyria
and Mesopotamia, that which fell into the eight year or there about, o^ die
reign of Ezechias king of Judah, like as the besieging o^ Samaria by the same
Salmanazar happened about the sixth year of the reign of the said Ezechias 2.
King. cap. 17. ver 6. In the ninth year of Hoshea, the king of Asshur took
Samaria, and carru^ Israel away into Asshur. And cap. 18. ver. 9, 10. And in
the fourth year of king Hezekiah (which was the seventh year of H^^shea son
of Elah king of Israel) Shalmanesar king of Asshur cam^ up against Samaria, and
besieged it. And after three years they to^^ it, even in the sixth year of
Hezekiah, that is, the ninth year of Hesheaking of Israel, was Samaria taken.
This age has two hundred ninety four years, to wit, thirty six of those
forty years in which king Solomon reigned after he had built the Temple of
God, and two hundred fifty eight years after the setting up o^ the kingdom
in Israel by Jeroboam the son of Nabat, that is, among the ten tribes, the
which fell a way from the kingdom of Judah by and by after the death or
Solomon. For so man^ years, namely two hundred fifty eight, continued the
same kingdom of Israel, rent from the kingdom of Judah. Now the age had
Prophets almost innumerable. For there was never any age under the whole old
Testament more full of them, (...) more garnished with the gifts of God, and
prophesies, that a^ well the Jews as the Israelites might be made inexcusable
(...) without excuse for the despising of God, and his word. Wherefore both of
them for this cause afterward were very sharpel^ and justly punished by God,
as appears 2. King. chap. 17. an^ Zach. chap. 1. Further, many of the
writings of the Prophets, the which are extant or remaining even unto this day,
were s^ forth and written at that time, and by the same Prophets, which lived
in that age. Prophets in this fifth age.
Therefore let us now speak in order of the Prophets of that age as many as
are extant, for we have not all the^ names, nor writings at this day. The first
then of these seems to have been Ahias the Silonite: Ahias the Silonite.
for he lived in the days of Solomon even unto the beginning of Roboam king of
Judah, and Jeroboam king of Israel: nay which more is, he did foretell of the
renting in sunder into two parts of this body, consisting before of twelve
members and tribes. 1. King. 11. cap. from the 29. verse until the 40. So that
this Ahias was a very old man about the beginning of the reign of Jeroboam 1.
King. 14. cap. ver. 4. where it is said of him, that he could not see: for his
sight was decaled for his age. Therefore he is reckoned as if he succeeded the
Prophet Nathan 2. Chron. cap. 9. ver. 29. where the Acts of Solomon are said to
have bin recorded by Nathan the Prophet, and in the prophecy of Ahiah the
Silonite, and in the visions of Iddo the Seer. And Nathan seems to have come
almost unto the times of the midst of the reign of Solomon. So then the
Prophet Ahias the Silonite succeeded Nathan. Afterward lived Iadi, and was in
the self same time with Ahias: Iadi.
but he seems in age to have been younger then Ahias. Some think this Iadi
to be the same which is called Addo, and Oded, the which I do not suppose to
be true. He was therefore Iadi. There was also at that time Semeias, Semeias.
of whom we read 2. Chron. 12. ver. 15. The Acts also of Rehoboam first and
last, are they not written in the book of Semaiah the Prophet? etc. There was
likewise in the same times, that same man of God and Prophet, his prophecy is
extant or remaining concerning the overthrow of the Altar at Beth-el 1. King.
13. From the first verse unto the fourth, yet is not his name set down; like
as theirs is not also, which in the self same chapter are called the Prophets
of God. There was moreover at the same time Addo, Addo.
2. Chron. 12.15. but he was younger then this Prophet, and Semeia, and Iadi,
after whom also he is set, of whom I have also spoken already. Furthermore,
there was at that time also Azarias the son of Obed, Azarias the son of
Obed.
younger then Addo, of which Azarias mention is made 2. Chron. 15.1. Then the
spirit of God came upon Azarias the son of Obed. For Azarias the son of
Obed lived in the days of Asa king of Judah, who succeeded his father Abias,
and his grandfather Roboam. But Ahias, Iadi, and Semeias, and Addo, lived in
the days of the kings Roboam and Abias, Consider if there be not some error in
this placing of these Prophets.
wherefore this shall be the order, course, and succession of these Prophets, to
wit, Abias, Iadi, Semeia, Obed, Addo, and Azarias, under Roboam, Abias, and
Asa, kings of Judah: and under Jeroboam and Nadab his son kings of Israel.
Further, after the Prophet Azarias, who lived and prophesied about the midst
of the reign of Asa king of Judah there were and flourished these Prophets,
Hanani, Iehu, Elias, Micheas, Elizeus, as appears by the holy history. And
as for Hanani, it is plain that he lived in the days of Asa 2. Chron. cap.
16. ver. 7. At the same time (he speaks of the coming of Baasha King of
Israel, Hanani.
against Asa) Hanani the Seer came to Asa king of Judah, and said unto him,
etc. Ieh^ the Prophet was younger then Hanani, Iehu.
as being his son, as it is said 1. King. cap. 16. verse. 1. Then the word
of the Lord came unto Iehu the son of Hanani against Baasha, etc. He lived in
the days of Baasa king of Israel, unto whom and his whole house he threatened
destruction from God. But he seems to have foretold those things in the
beginning of the reign of Baasa. So that from that time it may appear that
Prophecy ceased for a time in the kingdom of Israel, and was broken off
until the days and age or Elias the Thesbite. For Elias the Thesbite, o^
whom there is 1. King. cap. 17. succeeded this Iehu the Prophet the son of
Hanani, whereof it insueth, that Prophes^^ seem to have ceased in that age
among the ten tribes ren^ from the kingdom of Judah, by the space of thirty
who^^ years at the least. Therefore after that the Prophets had kep^ silence
so many years in the just judgment of God again^ the Israelites being
idolatours (who worshipped the calves (...) Beth-el and Dan) and when as the
true worship of God amon^ the Israelites seemed to be utterly banished bv Achab
king (...) Israel, Elias the Thesbite.
his Law whole blotted out, this Elias the Thesbite appe^^red, or arose up,
sent from God as it were from heaven, to resto^ both the worship of God, and
also the true doctrine of t^^ Law. Therefore like as C. Marius was called of
the Roman the second builder of the city of Rome: so was this Elias as it w^^
an other, Elias compared with Moses.
and a second Moses, who all things being past hope, a^ all religion banished,
was extraordinarily raised up of God: a^ confirmed, and commended unto the
people by the fast of fou^^ days, as Moses was: to be brief, he spoke
familiarly with God* Moses did: nay, he beheld God, as did Moses, and delivered
and re^^^red again the law of God unto the Israelites. Whereupon of (...)
Prophets Elias alone was present with Christ with Moses, and g^^testimony unto
him when he transfigured him self. For he was a new restorer of that same law,
the which Moses at the first d^^uered by the commandment of God. Mat. 17. In a
word; when now by the space of many years there had bin no prophet a^ the
Israelites, then stood up Elias, of his cuntry Thesbe called (...) Thesbite, in
whom was renewed prophecy it self, and the autho^ of the Prophets. For during
the whole time of Baasa, Ela, Zambri, Ambri, kings of Israel, and in the
beginning of the reign of Achab, the ten tribes were destitute or void of
Prophets because of their idolatry. In the which age idolatry and all kind
of superstition was maruailously confirmed among them. And this did Elias
partly repress and stay, and partly take clean away. For he brought again
into use among some godly persons the worship of God, the which before was
clean buried. This Elias succeeded that same Iehu, the son of Hanani of
whom I have spoken already. In the time of Elias was that Micheas, Micheas
the son of Imlah.
of whom mention is made 1. King. cap. 22. ver. 8. who also was in the
kingdom of Israel. After Elias succeeded Elizeus, Elizeus.
as is set down 1. King. cap. 19. ver. 16. where God says unto Elias after
this manner: And Iehu the son of Nimshi, shall thou annoint King oner Israel,
and Elizeus the son of Shaphat of Abel Meholah shall thou anoint to be
Prophet in thy room. And Elizeus lived a very long time, namely unto the days
of Ioas King of Israel, Elizeus prophesied 54. years.
unto the last age of Ioachas king of Judah, that is to say, Elizeus prophesied
almost whole fifty four years, to wit, under the kings of Israel, Ochosias,
Ioram, Iehu, and Ioachas, all which together governed the kingdom of the ten
tribes by so many years, namely fifty four, and under the kings of Judah,
Iosaphat the son of Asa, Ioram, Ochosias, and in the beginning of the reign
of Athalia a woman. But who succeeded next after Elizeus the Prophet, is a
great question. Wherein I am no we to unfold the order and course of those
Prophets, A great question, which of the prophets succeeded Elizeus.
whose writings in part are extant at this day. For here once again the
succession of the Prophets seems to have been broken off for certain
years, because in the word of God it is no where set down, what Prophets
were in Israel under the kings of Israel Ioas and Jeroboam his son: or in the
kingdom of Judah also (except Zacharias the son of Ioiada) under the Queen
Athalia, and Ioas king of Judah the son of Ochosias. And yet this middle
space oftime contains almost fifty seven years, in the which Ioas and
Iereboam his son reigned in Israel. But all things being cast. I find it
to be thus, namely, that under this Jeroboam the son of Ioas, and king of
Israel, was Jonas the Prophet, that self same, whose prophecy (by the consent
of all men) is extant, Jonas succeeded Elizeus.
concerning the overthrowing of the city Ninive, if it did not repent. For he
lived and prophesied under this Jeroboam the son of Ioas 2. King. cap. 14.
ver. 25. For he (to wit, Jeroboam the son of Ioas) restored the coast of
Israel, from the entering of Hanah, unto the sea of the wilderness, according
unto the word of the Lord God of Israel, which he spoke by his servant Jonas,
the son of Amitta^, the Prophet, which was of Gath Hephar. Therefore, to
grant as little time as possibly may be unto this interrupted or broken off
succession, at the least wise there are still above thirty years between the
death of Elizeus, and the Prophet Jonas, who next succeeded Elizeus, to wit,
the whole reign of Ioas king of Israel, the which continued sixteen years,
and a great part of the reign of Jeroboam the son of Ioas, who reigned
fourtie-one years. Finally, to gather the matter into a brief, Jonas the
Gathire succeeded the Prophet Elizeus, albeit that then this continual course
and succession of Prophets were for a time broken off, and for certain years,
A doubt who succeeded Jonas.
and were as it were unjointed. And here arises a greater doubt, who succeeded
Jonas: I will touching this matter speak what I think, and will not that
therefore any man should be abridged of his judgment. I verily suppose that
Amos succeeded next after Jonas. Amos succeeded Jonas.
Neither do I think, that any great reckoning is to be made, what others have
judged of the order of the Prophets of the old Testament. First for that, as
Jerome teaches in the preface of his Commentaries upon Joel, the Hebrews and
the Greeks agree not within themselves concerning this matter and order.
Secondly, because that also among the Ecclesiastical or Church-writers them
selves, look how many men in a manner there are, so many are there opinions,
whilst that they mark not the times, in the which every Prophet flourished,
the which notwithstanding is set down by all the Prophets themselves in a
manner. Therefore to rippe up this whole matter the more deeply for their
sakes that are desirous of this history, it is manifest, The old Christians
not so much careful for the order of the Prophets, and why.
that the first and ancient Christians, which read the the writings of the
Prophets, were not much careful for this order of he the Prophets, either for
that by old tradition, it was then sufficiently known in the Church, who
succeeded each other, that is, what Prophets were first, what were latter:
either for that, when as they had received nothing from the Apostles concerning
this matter, they did; think that they were not hereupon to contend. The
twelve Prophets are in deed numbered among the Canonical books of the holy
and sacred Scripture, as in the Canons of the Apostles (as they are called)
Canon 85. which is the last of all: in the Council also of Laodicea, cap. 58.
and in first Council of Carthage, Canon 24. and of Eusebius. Caesarien. lib. 4.
Histor. cap. 26. and Epiphan. de Mensuris: but they are not reckoned up in
order, who succeeded others. Somewhere this only is written, that there is one
book of the twelve Prophets; otherwhere, that there are twelve books of the
twelve Prophets. But why should not the Greeks and Latins being strangers
and Proselytes among the Hebrews, be ignorant of these things, when as the
Rabbines themselves, The Rabbines themselves see not down the order of the
prophets exactly
and the old Hebrews (so careless were they of their own history) do not
set down this thing? For Ecclesiast. cap. 48. (where no doubt the opinion of
the Rabbines of that age is rehearsed) Isaias is reckoned up, as he that
succeeded next after Elizeus. And cap. 49. of the same book, ver. 12. there is
only said to have been twelve Prophets: but who they are, or at what time
they lived, is not rehearsed, such was the flouthfulnesse of this learned
Hebrews, yet otherwise most curious in searching out of trifles. In Josephus
the Historician, Josephus.
and also a great Hebrewe, of this matter all is whist, when as this thing
notwithstanding did especially appertain unto the unfolding of the antiquity
of the Jewish nation. And albeit the old and first Christians, as I have
said, have left us nothing at all touching this orderly placing of these
twelve small Prophets, as they are called: yet have the latter writers
afterward diligently inquired of this matter. In the which notwithstanding,
as I have showed, they do not consent nor agree within themselves. For
Epiphanius in his book of the Life of the Prophets, does so place the twelve
Prophets, of the which we do now speak, (for of the Prophets of whom I have
spoken already, there can be no doubt at what time they were,) namely that
Oseas is the first of them twelve in order, then Amos, Micheas, How Epiphanius
places the xij. small prophets.
Joel, Abdias, Jonas, Nahum, Abakuk, Sophonias, Aggeus, Zacharias, Malachias,
for that Epiphanius had received from the opinion of the seaventie
Interpreters, that they were so to be placed, as Jerome shows in his preface
upon Joel. But Augustine, who was after Epiphanius, lib. 2. de doctr. Christ.
cap. 8. Augustine.
does reckon them otherwise, namely thus, Oleas, Joel, Amos, Abdias, Jonas,
Micheas, Nahum, Abakuk, Sophonias, Aggeus, Zacharias, Malachias, and this out
of the chief of the Hebrews or Rabbines, as the self same Jerome writes,
who him self notwithstanding sets not down his own opinion. Jsiodorus.
Isidorus Episcop. Hispalens. lib. 7. Etymologic. cap. de Prophetis, does
number them thus: Oseas, Joel, Amos, Nahum, Abakuc, Micheas, Sophonias, Abdias,
Jonas, Zacharias, Aggeus, Malachias, disagreeing from them both, to wit, the
Hebrews and the Seventie. Out of all which appears how diverse the opinion
of the Ecclesiastical or Church-writers has been of the order and placing of
the XII. Prophets, which are called the small Prophets. And I doubt not but
that more also may be gathered of the studious and diligent, if a man would
seek after the opinion of every one: but I for shortness sake, will be
content with these, by the which is understood, how that a man is not
careful of this matter in vain, and that he may without envy set down and
show his opinion or judgment also of these things. Wherefore out of this by
path to return into the way at the length, I say that by the consideration of
the times, it seems unto me thus, that Amos is to be set in the second place,
that is after Jonas, because in time he followed next unto Jonas. Wherein this
rule generally is to be followed of us, A rule for the finding of the
antiquity of one Prophet before another.
That those Prophets which do witness that they prophesied under the former,
or elder Kings, the same may also be deemed to have been former, or more old
and ancient, then those which prophesied under the latter Kings, albeit that
the same do often concurie and meet with those other younger ones, and liuce
at the same time, because that those former Prophets continued long in their
office of prophesying. So Oseas and Isaias do live and prophecy at the same
time, of the which notwithstanding without all doubt Oseas lived first, or
began to prophecy, and therefore it is to be judged to be first. For Oseas
makes mention also of Jeroboam king of Israel, who was the son of Ioas, and
witnesses that he prophesied under him. Now this Jeroboam was more ancient
then those kings under whom Isaias witnesses that he was, and also
prophesied. Wherefore in as much as Amos was, and also prophesied under that
same Jeroboam King of Israel, and son of Ioas, two year before the
earthquake (which fell into the second year of Vzias King of Judah) it
appears that Amos was in age before him, and therefore more ancient then
Oseas, Amos more ancient then Oseas and Isaias.
who notwithstanding prophesied under the same king. Now Oseas prophesied long
after that same famous earthquake, and when as Vzias had been and was now a
good while confirmed in his kingdom: in the beginning of which Vzias his
reign, Amos notwithstanding began to foretell things to come by Gods
commandment. Wherefore this must be the order of the xii. Prophets, Jonas,
Amos, after Amos I place Oseas: for Oseas began to prophecy about the last
days of Jeroboam son of Ioas king of Israel, Oseas.
as appears by his own testimony cap. 1. v. 1. The word of the Lord that
came unto Oseas the son of Beeri, in the days of Vzias, Iotham, Achas, and
Hezekiah kings of Judah, and in the days of Jeroboam son of Ioas hing of
Jsrael. And Oseas prophesied in the kingdom of Israel, at the which self same
time (albeit he began after him, and were younger then he) prophesied also in
the kingdom of Judah that same Isaias, which was of the kings stock. After
Oseas follows in order Micheas, another of the twelve, who prophesied under
Ioatham, Achaz, and Ezechias kings of Judah, Micheas.
before the carrying a way of the ten tribes by the Assyrians, Mich. 1. cap. v.
1. Then word of the Lord which came unto Micah the Morashite in the dies of
Iothan, Achaz and Hezekiah kings of Judah, etc. And Jeremy also makes mention
of his prophesying under Hezekiah cap. 26. v. 18. in these words, Micah the
Morashite prophesied in the days of Hezekiah king of Judah, etc. And these so
many Prophets had this fifth age, that is to say, these which follow, and which
are, Nathan, Ahias the Silonite, Semeias, Iadi, Addo, Obed, Azarias, Anani,
Iehu, Elias, Micheas the first, Elizaerus, Jonas, Amos, Oseas, Isaias, Micheas
the second, or the Morashite, besides those that are not named by their proper
names in the holy scripture.

The sixth age now follows: and the same continues from the carrying away of
the ten Tribes (which were the kingdom of Israel) made by Salmanazar king of
the Assyrians, The sixth age from the carrying away of the ten Tribes until the
full captivity of Babylon 133. years had these prophets.
until the times of the full captivity of Babylon, the which happened unto
the kingdom of Judah (to wit, after the overthrow of the kingdom of Israel)
namely when as the Jews with their king Zedekias were wholly carried unto
Babylon and Media by Nabuchadnezzar Emperor of the Babylonians: and not only
begun to be carried away. For they began to be carried away under Ioacim
king of the Jews, 18 years before their full and through captivity. This sixth
age contains 133 years. For so much space of time passed between the ten
tribes of the kingdom of Israel carried away by the Assyrians, and that full
captivity of the Jews made by the king of Babylon, as it appears by the
continual succession of the kings of Judah 2. King. 17.18. cap. and so forth.
For the first captivity or carrying away of the Jews by the Babylonians
began, in the reign of Ioacim son of Josias, having reigned now 4 years,
as I have said already and appears Matthew. 1. cap. ver. 11. and in the first
year of the Empire of Nabuchadnezzar Dan. 1. verse. 1. And the last or full
captivity fell out under Sedechias the king having reigned no we eleven years.
In this age the Prophets so succeeded one another, that there seems to have
been no interruption or breaking off. For the prophets of God which lived in
this ninth time, succeeded next unto Micheas the Morashite. And the first of
them in my judgment, and so far as I can gather, all things being
considered, was Nahum. For he seems unto me to have been, Nahum.
and to have prophesied next after Micheas, and after the carrying away of the
ten Tribes of Israel by the Assyrians, to wit, under die king Ezechias, when as
yet now the Empire of the Assyrians flourished in all respects, and no man so
much as once durst by dream to think of the fall thereof: yea finally when as
hitherto it had felt no hurt from any people, and as yet had not grown into
contempt, the which notwithstanding happened unto his Empire afterward, to
wit, under Sennacherib who succeeded Salmanazar. For under him first of all the
Assyrians received that great overthrow, at the besieging of the city of
Jerusalem, of the which mention is made by Isaias cap. 37. ver. 36. to wit, how
the Angel of the Lord went out, and smote in the camp of Ashur an hundredth,
four score, and five thousand, etc. At which time the Emperor of the
Assyrians first doubtless began to wax vile and to be contemned or despised
of his subjects. And of this his overthrow, and loss for to come prophesied
Naum: also cap. 1. ver. 14. in these words. And the Lord has given a
commandment concerning thee, that n^ more of thy name be sown: out of the
house of thy gods will I cut off the graven and molten image. I will make it
thy grave for thee: for thou art vile. Therefore after this overthrow, the
people that were subject unto the Assyrians, and especially the Babylonians or
Chaldeans began to lift up themselves into a kingdom of their own, and to
fall away from the Assyrians. A proof whereof is this, for that under
Salmanazar king of the Assyrians, the Babylonians are reckened up as wholly
subject unto the Assyrians, and without any king of their own, 2. king. cap.
17. ver. 24. where we read thus: And the king of Ashur brought folk from Babel
(by which it may appear that Babylon was then subject unto the Assyrians) and
from Cuthah, and from Ava, and from Hamah, and from Sepharhaim, and placed them
in the cities of Samaria in stead of the children of Israel, etc. But after
that same great overthrow, the which Sennacherib king of the Assyrians, and
successor unto Salmanazar received in Judea, the same Babylonians are
rehearsed, as those who had now a king of their own, and did seek and sue
for the fellowship and friendship of other people, which were enemies unto the
Assyrians, Isai. cap. 13. ver. 1. At the sametime Merodach Baladan, the son
of Babadan king of Babel (now Babylon has a king of her own) sent letters
and a present unto Hezekiah, etc. Out of which appears that which we have
said, that the Assyrian Empire began first to fall to decay under king
Sennacherib, and to grovve into contempt among men, so that now all men might
easily think upon the mine of the same. But that the same should come to
pass, Nahum by revelation from God had foreshevved before this time. For what
matter of great importance had it been, Nahum prophesied of the ruin of
Assyria.
or need of any especial prophecy to shevve unto the Assyrians their
destruction then, that is to say, when as all men of by reason of that
overthrow which before they had received, might easily guess, and by wise
conjecture gather that the same vvoulde by and by ensue. Wherefore every one
not given to contend, may now easily understand, at what time Nahum
prophesied. Namely in that middle space of time, which passed betvveene the
carrying away of the ten Tribes by Salmanazar and the destruction or overthrow
of the host of Sennacherib. And this is the space of 8. years under the reign
of Ezechias. So then Nahum prophesied in the days of Ezechias king of Judah,
from the seventh year of his reign unto the fourteenth year, as may be
gathered by the 2. King cap. 18. verse 10, and 13. Next after Nahum prophesies
Jeremy, namely the thirteenth year of the same Ezechias, as he him self
does clearly shevve, chap. the first, verse the second, Jeremy.
where he says that the word of the Lord came unto him, in the days of
Josiah the son of Amon King of Judah in the thirteenth year of his reign, He
seems to have mistaken Hezechiah for Josiah. Joel.
who a very long time used this office in Iudeah, namely by the space of 40
years. After Jeremy I do place Joel: for Joel does foreshew that same famine
the which Jeremy the Prophet did foretell also, and the which was under
Josias, after the 16 year of his reign, as suppose. Of the which read Jeremy
chap. 14. from the first unto the seventh verse. After Joel follows Olda the
Prophetess, Olda the prophetess.
of whom the holy history makes mention, 2. Chron. cap. 34. ver. 22. Then
Hilkiah and they that the king had appointed, went to Olda the Prophetess,
etc. For she was of great authority in the days of Josias, at that time
especially, when as the book of the law was found in the Temple of God, that
which fell out in the 18 year of the reign of Josias, as appears in the 8.
verse of the 2. Chron. cap. 34. And Jeremy the Prophet had now begun to
prophecy six years before, namely in the 13. year of the reign of the said
Josias. I also do place the prophecy of Joel before the finding out of the
book of the law, as I do the famine in like manner, the which was foretold by
Joel, Sophonias.
After Olda I do next set the prophet Sophonias, who prophesied in the latter
days of King Josias, to wit, after the purging of the Temple of God by
Josias, and that same famous keeping of the pass over in Judea, whereof read 2.
Chr. 35. 2. King. 23. when as the glory and state of the kingdom of Judah
seemed to flourish, and to be now thoroughly restored. I do therefore place the
prophecy of Sophonias after the twentieth year of the reign of Josias, at
what time the overthrow of the kingdom of Judah (the which Sophonias
foretells) was lest looked for of any man, because that the worship of God
was now thoroughly restored by Josias. After Sophonias succeeds the prophet
Abdias: Abdias.
for Abdias seems to have prophesied not only after that Josias was slain
in battle by Pharao Necao king of Egypt, when the kingdom of Judah being now
very sore afflicted, the enemies thereof and the next borderers did rush in
upon it on every side, but especially the Idumaeans: but also afrer that Ioakim
king of Judah was fore pressed of Nabucadneza^ king of the Chaldeans, Syrians,
Moabites, Ammonites, and other people borderers, and was troubled and shut up
in Jerusalem, when as also the first captivity of the Jews was near at hand,
as it is to be seen 2. King. 24. v. 2, 3. and 10. Among which borderers the
Idumeans no doubt were the most deadly enemies, because they were the brethren
of the Jews. Therefore above all other neighbor nations they only wished the
destruction of and overthrow of the whole nation of the Jews, and did urge the
same because of their old hatred against the Jews, unto whom, after that
Jerusalem was taken, and the Jews all slain, they were and remained
notwithstanding deadly enemies, as appears Psalm. 157. where the Jews pray
against him for their cruelty showed at the siege of Jerusalem and say:
Remember the children of Edom, O Lord, in the day of Jerusalem, which said,
Raze it, raze it, to the foundation thereof. But at the self same time when as
the Idumeans thought themselves most happy, because of the then first most
doleful state of the Jews (their matters being then brought into so narrow a
streict) under Ioachim king of the Jews, Abdias denounces or shows
destruction unto the Idumeans, as also does Jeremy cap. 49. from the 7. verse
unto the 23. Abdias therefore must have lived and prophesied about the end of
the reign of Ioachim king of Judah, whilst Ieremias also used his office, the
kingdom of the Jews being greatly diminished and decayed, and the Idumeans for
this cause rejoicing and triumphing within themselves. But these Idumeans did
the Chaldeans afterward most cruelly bring in subjection unto themselves, to
wit, when as they come again the second time with their king Nebucadnezar, to
besiege Jerusalem, in the reign of Sedechias, as it was foretold by Abdias.
After Abdias follows Habakuk the prophet, but in Judea. Habakuk*
For after the carrying away of Ioachim king of Judah by Nebucadnezar into
Babylon, together with his mother and family: nay after that the people of the
Jews being the people of God, were sore pressed of the Chaldeans an infidel
nation, Habakuk prophesies under Sedechias, that is, after the seventh year of
his reign. Therefore he sets down a form of prayer for the Jews already
carried captives into Babylon, and for them that were after to be carried.
Habakuk therefore with his own eyes saw the Chaldeans uniustly ruling now over
Judea, and most greevously oppressing the people of God in the time of his
prophecy, at the which time Jeremy lived, and yet also prophesied. Yet in
order and also in age the prophet Ezechiel goes before the Prophet Habakuk:
but in Chaldea. Ezechiel.
For Ezechiel together with Ioacim the king of Judah (who in the kingdom
succeeded his brother Ioacim) was carried away by Nabuchadnezar Emperor of the
Babylonians. But Ezechiel being in Babylon began strait for to prophecy, that
is, in the fifth year after the carrying away of Ioacim, and to comfort the
godly, and to terrify or affray the wicked Jews. Ezech. cap. 1. verse. 2, 3.
In the fifth day of the month Chebar (which was the fifth year of King Ioachims
captivity) the word of the Lord came unto Ezechiel the Priest the son of
Buzi, in the land of the Chaldeans, etc. At the which very time Sedechias the
uncle of Ioacim reigned yet in Judea, and Jeremy also prophesied of the same
event or falling out of things Habakuk then is after Ezechiel, because that
Habakuk came nearer unto the times of the overthrow of the city Jerusalem.
Wherefore this sixth age had these prophets, namely Nahum, Ieremias, Joel, Olda
the prophetess, Sophonias, Abdias, Habakukin Jury, and Ezechiel in Chaldea.

The 7. age from the captivity unto Christ, 508 years, had these prophets.
To conclude, the seventh and last age comprehends all that time, which
passed from the full captivity of the Jewish people under the Babylonians
(which fell into the eleventh year of Sedechias king of Judah) until the birth
of Christ, and manifestating or showing him in the flesh. And this age has
508. years, to wit, 51 which are to be taken out of the 70 years of the
captivity of Babylon. For of those 70 years there were passed. 18. coming
in, and falling between the first, or begun captivity, which was in the
fourth year of Ioacim king of Judah, and their full carrying into Babylon, the
which happened in the eleventh year of Sedechias king of Judah. Therefore of
those 70 there remain only 51, if you take out of them 19 years. Now unto
these fifty and one years add or put too the weeks of Daniel, which are
Dan. cap. 9. and contain 457, and you shall make 508 years, which is the just
space of time which passed between the captivity of the Jews under
Sedeehias, and the birth of Christ. Now this seventh age had these prophets
known unto us out of the word of God: and first of all Daniel, who as
appears by his book prophesied in Chaldea almost that same whole time of the
70 years, or carrying away into Babylon. Daniel.
For he lived both under Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon, and all that time in
the which was the Empire of the Chaldeans. Finally, became even unto Cyrus, who
overthrew the Empire of the Babylonians, and did first set up the kingdom of
the Persians. Of this Daniel we read Ezech. cap. 28. verse. 3. Behold thou art
vviser then Daniel (he speaks so in mock^ge of Tyrus) there is no secret that
they can hide from thee. After Daniel succeeded the Prophet Haggaeus, Aggeus.
after the deliverance of the people of the Jews out of the captivity of
Babylon, prophesying in ^udea. After Haggeus succeeded Zacharias, and albeit
that they prophesied at one time, yet Zacharias was the latter. Zacharias*
And therefore Esdr. 5. Agg. 1. ver. 1. Zach. 1. ver. 1. he is reckened after
Aggeus, as later then he in the execution of his office. After Zacharias
follovveth Malachias, Malachias.
after whom the rank and succession of the prophets was interrupted or broken
of. For those of whom mention is made Nehem. 6. ver. 14. are not allowed.
Moreover, those which after the times of Malachias wrote certain Psalms, are
not known by name, albeit many of them were prophets of God. The last, and
those which lived in the age and time of Christ, but being yet an infant, and
unknowen, are these, Zacharias the father of John the Baptist. Luc. 1.
Zacharias the father of John Baptist. Simeon. Anna the prophetess.
And Simeon and Anna the prophetess, of whom writes the same Luke cap. 2.
Wherefore this seventh and last age had these prophets: Daniel, Aggeus,
Zacharias, Malachias, Zacharias the second, Simeon, Anna. And thus much
hitherto of the order and succession of the prophets of the old Testament.

CAP. 12. How the writings of the godly Prophets have been gathered together.
AND this also is a worthy question, How the writings of the godly Prophets,
which are now extant, have been gathered together. The prophets of the heathen.
For concerning the Prophets of the heathen I have nothing to say, this only
excepted, that it appears out of the 6. book of Virgil his Aeneidos, to
wit, that the Sibyllae did afterward write in leaves, and on the barks of
trees by piece meal, the verses, which they uttered with their mouth, and that
their answers lay thus cast abroad and scattered about their cave (in which
being shut up they prophesied) until such time as they were gathered together
either by themselves, or by some other body, and so were patched and packed up
together. But the manner of the godly prophets was otherwise, the vvvhich did
not make slight account of their prophesies, as namely being such the which
they knew to be the very word of God, neither would they have them to lie
scattered and carelessly, when as they knew that they did appertain not only
unto the edifying of the Church that then was, but also of the Church that was
to come. Therefore I think it necessary to be showed how they were gathered,
and how they at that time became known unto men, and so consequently were
delivered over unto us as it were from hand to hand. The judgment of some, of
the gathering of the writings of the Prophets.
Some he have written being moved with that of Isai. 8.1. and Habac. 2.2. that
this was the manner of the Prophets, after that they were commanded by God to
show and declare anything unto the people, that they did in few words
comprehend the sum or effect of the things by them declared, and fasten it on
the doors of the Temple. The which writings when as by the space of certain
days they have stood sufficiently open, were taken down of the ministers of
the Temple of Solomon, and laid up in the Treasury, that there might be
extant or remaining a perpetual monument or remembrance thereof. And thereof
they will have that it came to pass that the sermons of the prophets be not
always set down in such order as the circumstance of the time, and of the
things also by them foretold does require The which last point of the order of
their sermons, is I confess most true. But whereas out of that which we read
Esai 8. ver. l how God wills the Prophet to take unto him a great roll, an^
to write in it with a man's pen, etc. And Habakuk. 2. God commands Habakuk to
write the vision, and to make it plain, upon tables, that he may run that
reads it: they would confir^^ the former opinion of the manner of the
gathering together of the sermons of the prophets, those two places do only
show that the godly prophets were commanded by God to put the^^ oracles or
prophesies in writing, for that they did make for the comforting of Gods elect,
and confirmation of the authoritied the heavenly truth, but do not teach that
the same prophets (...) fasten their writings on the doors of the Temple: and
much less prove, that the said prophetical writings were afterward
gathered together and preserved or kept by the Priests or Ministers of the
Temple. The confutatio^ of the former opinion.
For if this were the manner of publishing and lawful setting abroad of the
prophesies, what should ha^^ become of those prophesies and prophets, who
executed the^^ office in the kingdom of Israel, as for example Amos did, whe^^
there was neither any Temple of God, neither yet any godly priests. Shall we
say that at such times they sent their prophesies unto Jerusalem, and caused
them there to be set up upon the doors of the Temple? And that so in the end
they were gathered together and kept by the ministers of the Temple? No
doubtless. For how can this be prooved to have been done so by any place of
the holy Scripture? Neither may any man thus think, that the prophets fastened
their writings on the doors of idolatrous Temples (such as were in the cities
of Bethel and Dan) when as they prophesied in the kingdom of Israel. For they
themselves did not so much as once come unto those temples, much less would
they seem to give countenance unto them with so honorable testimony of their
writings, the which places they themselves out of the word of God did pronounce
to be most wicked and detestable, and that mostiustly. Finally what should at
those times have befallen the godly prophets, when as both the priests
themselves of the Temple of Solomon, and all the ministers thereof besides did
judge the doctrine of the prophets and their prophesies, as blasphemous, and
noisome and hurtful unto the people it self, the country and city of
Jerusalem, nay did think them to be utterly abolished or done away, as it fell
out under Vzias and Achaz the kings, and also under Sedechias. Isa. 7. Iere.
36. would any man I pray you suppose that the such like priests and ministers
of the Temple being so deadly enemies unto the prophets of their times,
gathered together notwithstanding and laid up in the Treasury the writings of
the Prophets, and were desirous to have them preserved, and not rather to be
utterly done away and burned, as appears out of the self same 36. chapter of
Jeremy?

Danaeus his judgment of the gathering together of the writings of the
prophets.
Therefore without prejudice or forestalling the judgment of any man this is
my opinion, and thus do I teach, both that these twelve small prophets (whom
for the smallness of the books by them see forth they call the small
prophets) and also those, whom they term the great Prophets, because of the
greater works which they wrote, did in such sort deal concerning the setting
abroad of the word of God, the which they had received of God to declare and
preach, as did before them both Moses, and Ioshuah, and Samuel, and Nathan, and
Gad, and Semeias, who them selves also were Prophets of God, and before those
whose prophetical writings, as they call them, we have at this day, I think
I say, that first of all they did often openly, and in the hearing of all the
people, accordingly as they were moved by the spirit of God, and accordingly
(...) they were commanded by God to execute their office in Iud^^ or in the
kingdom of Israel, or elsewhere, they did, I say, openly diligently, and
carefully declare and deliver that same word (...) God, the which by revelation
they had received from God. A^ so by this means that very excellently and
easily their doctri^^ became known unto the whole people by that often
repetiti^ and making sermons many times of one matter unto the people unto
whom they were sent by God, so that it was manifest a^^certen unto every one,
what those prophets had said, or should say. The prophets themselves did put
the sum and effect of their prophesies in writing.
Now after that their prophesies and doctrine, according a^ was by them
delivered, was known unto the people, the pr^^phets themselves did briefly
comprehend in writing those the prophesies (the which they were expressly by
God comma^^ded to set forth) to the end, that being by them thus written they
might publish and communicate or impart them unto (...) godly, to testify the
providence of God for mankind unto (...) Church, or for the perpetual comfort
of the godly, and for (...) terror or fearing of the wicked. Hereof comes
that say^^ of Ambrose, It belongs unto the people to discern the spirits the
Prophets. For that if they had not first openly declared the doctrine, neither
were they wont to be called prophets, (...) their writings to be read. Moses.
So Moses himself is commanded God to write those things, which he had
foretold concerni^^ the destruction of the Amalechites should come to pass,
Ex^ 17.14. And the Lord said unto Moses, Write this for a remembra^ in the
book, and rehearse it to Joshua: for I will utterly put out (...) remembrance
of Amalek from under heaven. So he the same M^^ses after the rehearsing of the
doctrine of the Law the seco^^ time in the plain of Moab, does write it out,
and delivers t^^ same book unto the Levites to be read continually, to be
w^^ten out, and to be kept. Deuteronomy. 31. v. 24. unto v. 30. And 2. Chr. 3 14. etc.
mention is made of the finding of this book of the L^^ written in the Temple.
Samuel.
But Moses does not fasten or set up t^^ book upon the doors of the
Tabernacle. So the books of S^^muel were written by Samuel. So by Nathan,
Semeias, Gadt (...) prophets, their prophesies being often, or once uttered by
mou^^ accordingly as God commanded, were afterward by them p^^ in writing. 2.
Chron. 9.29. and cap. 12. ver. 15. So the things whi^^ should come to pass
unto Ioram, Elias wrote out in an epistle, Elias.
the which afterward was sent unto Ioram by the prophets, the disciples of
Elias, by whom it was kept, and was not gathered together or kept by the
priests or ministers of the Temple of Solomon. Hereof read 2. Chr. 21. from the
12. unto the 16. ver. So Isaias first taking faithful witnesses does openly
pronounce or speak those things, Esaias.
the which by revelation from God he was commanded to foretell to come to
pass: and afterward he writes them out himself, seals them, and
delivers them to be kept unto his disciples, that is, unto the godly. Isai.
8.1, 2. and 16. But to make an end at the last of this matter, it does no
where better appear that this was used to be done, then out of the book of the
prophet Jeremy. For as it appears by the 26. chap. v. 7, 8, and 16. Jeremy.
Read the whole 26. and 36. chapters.
Jeremy does openly often times utter the doctrine told him from God, to wit,
in the audience of all the people. And the priests of that time do utterly
condemn his words and prophesies, and do think them to be abolished or done
away, much less that they would lay them up in the treasury of the Temple. Nay
morvover, Iehudi the purple or gallant Courtier of the king Sedechias does
burn those oracles or sayings of God, after that they were written by Jeremy
him self. Iere. 36.23. but by the commandment of God and Jeremy telling him
what to write the second time, the self same things are written again by
Baruch his minister, as in the same chapter appears. The like may any man
easily gather out of the same Jeremy cap. 29. Out of Ezec. cap. 12. and 14.
Finally, thus the Apostles, as Paul, Peter, and the Evangelists, Matthew, John,
Mark, and Luke, have left unto us their writing, the which are another part of
the word of God. For this their doctrine the which they afterward put in
writing, they did first along time and often utter by mouth, and then wrote it,
and imparted it unto nations unto the everlasting glory of God, and edifying of
his Church. And this in my judgment was the use, manner, and way of gathering
together of the books and writings of the prophets.

is it recorded of any other book that he was kept in (...) Temple of God,
besides the book it self of the law, the whi^^ Moses wrote with his own and
proper hand 2. Chr. 34.14. (...) Hilkiah the Priest found (to wit, in the
Temple) the book of (...) law of the Lord given by the hand of Moses. To be
short, the w^^tings of the prophets, if they had been kept in the hands of
(...) priests and only in the Temple, of the which they were (...) chief
rulers (they being too too often the open enemies of (...) heavenly truth) they
might of these priests more easily h^^ been corrupted, then if we should
earnestly hold and say the they were kept in the closets and hands of the
godly. Where it comes to pass, that nothing hereby either can, or ought
seem to be taken from the certenty of the writings of the p^^phets (the which
God by his holy spirit speaks into our he^^ 1. Ioh. 2.27. But the anointing
which he received of him, dwellet^ you: and ye need not that any man teach
you, but as the same ann^^ting teaches you of all things, and it is true, and
is not lying, and it taught you, ye shall abide in him) if they have in such
sort been g^^thered together, as we have showed, even out of the word of G^^ it
self.

The prophesies were put in writing, not as the prophet would, but as God
commanded.
that every several p^^phesie was not always in such sort written by the
prophets, a^ was first foretold and foreshewed by them, but they were
co^^manded by God to commit every one to writing. Therefore man times that
prophecy which was later in time was set forth a^ written former
notwithstanding, God so commanding: aga^^ that which was first uttered by
mouth, was yet later written a^ recorded. For neither by the Prophets, nor yet
by the Apos^^ themselves is there always observed or kept an exact or just
(...) koning of time, the spirit of God in such sort enditing unto the those
writings, to the end that godly men might with more (...) and diligence be
occupied in reading of them wholly: and mig^^ rather mark the matter it self,
which is comprised in these w^^tings (because it appertains unto faith in
God) then the hist^^ of the things written by the Prophets, wherein the only
pleas^^ of the readers is many times sought for, and looked after.

CAP. 13. Of those things which ought to be especially observed or marked in
the expounding of the writings of these prophets of the old Testament.
FVrthermore we have also to consider, what is especially to be observed or
marked in the expounding of the writings of the prophets of the old Testament,
that their meaning and understanding may be the more easy unto us: Afterward
I will set down what Epiphanius, Jerome, and Isidorus have written concerning
these xii. prophets, so that at length I may conclude and make an end of these
forenotes. And for the setting forth of an easy exposition of all the
prophetical books of the old Testament, The history and the method
especially to be noted in the prophets.
these two things especially are diligently to be observed and noted, namely
their history, and their method or order in writing. The history, touching the
things, persons, and times, where with the several books of the prophets
deal, and of the which they speak. Wherein notwithstanding we are little or
nothing helped by the profane Historicians, if you except those things, the
which are set down in the 11. chp. of Dan. for the easy understanding
whereof, that makes very much, the which Tit. Livius, Appianus, Plutarchus,
and some other writers of credit of the Greek and Latin history have left
unto us. But as concerning the things which appertain into the former age,
they receive either none at all, or else very small light from the profane
Historiographers, I mean Herodotus, Diodorus, Siculus, Xenophon, and such
other like. For with them all that age was either confused, or disorderly
mingled, or bewrapped with tables, or altogether unknown, wherefore the whole
history of those former times is of us to be sought for out of the word of God
written only: yet has there none hitherto in my judgment been found, who has
wholly gathered it, as it ought, by the diligent and careful comparing and
laying together of the holy scripture with it self, albeit many have written
many Histories, Chronicles, fardels of times etc. The new writers do here more
further us unto the knowledge of these matters, as Josephus Scalig. the very
light of his age, in his books de Emend. Temporum, Matthaeus Beroaldus* a man
whilst he lived, Ios. Scaliger. Beroaldus,
my very friend: Franciscus Iunius, in a manner my citizen, and most dear unto
me, Iunius.
a man of singular learning, in his late scholies and notes most learned (in my
judgment) upon the Bible and finally Arias Montanus in Biblico suo apparatu
(for I would not have any man's praise taken from him) yet for all this there is
wanting unto us at this day such a writing the which out of the word of God
might contain the whole, Arias Montanus.
that is, a just and full history of the former times of the universal
world, the which (...) being helped with the writings of other men am about,
if God grant me life and leisure (for I wrote this at Orthesium in the year
of the Lord 1584 being now fifty year old) and that the peace of the Church
will suffer it. In the mean season, le^ every man note and gather for him
self, as much as he can out of the whole holy Scripture, whatsoever
appertained unto the history of the prophets.

The method also or order of the prophets is diligently to be noted of us, The
method or manner of writing of the prophets.
to the end, that the exposition or knowledge of them may be clear and easy
unto us. For albeit, (...) Lactantius writes libr. 5. Institut. Christian.
cap. 1. the prophets of God, as unto the people did speak in the common and
plain language: yet as Augustine writes Libr. 4. de Doct. Christian. cap. 7.
the same were eloquent men, and they ofter used figures in writing, under which
they covered many things the which by how much the more they seem to be
covered i^ borrowed speeches, by so much are they the more sweet, when as they
are opened, especially if they be referred unto the new Testament. Rules to be
observed in the Prophets.
Let us therefore briefly show what profitable rules especially are in their
writings. As for the te^ they that are diligent may gather out of Augustine
lib. 4. de Doctr. Christ. cap. 7.

They foretell things to come, as if they were present, or already past.
as if they were now present, or else already past, to the end the certenty of
the thing to come and by them foretold may be understood to be the greater.
Therefore the verbe^ which they use in the preterperfectense, or time past, are
to be taken for the future tense, that is, in the signification of the future,
or time to come, and that in all prophesies, and always, like as wen they tell
of a thing done, that those things which the prophets do say to have been, or
to have come to pass by verb of the preter tense, or time past, we do
expound that the same things shall come to pass, and by a verb of the future
tense, or time to come, albeit by them they be as I said conceived and uttered
by a verb of the preter tense or time past. Examples whereof since every one
may meet withal, there is no need to make any stay in the alleging of them.
And especially this rule is to be followed, when as they prophecy of Messiah
the king to come in the flesh. For they deliver those things as already done,
the which notwithstanding were as yet to come. For they had their
accomplishment in Christ, whereupon it is said that the old Testament bears
witness unto the new.

2. Rule. Things spoken figuratively, not to be taken simply
The second rule is, That we expound not, nor take not those things, which by
them have been said or done tropically and figuratively, as if they had been
only said or done naturally or simply, albeit I deny not that they were done
according to the letter, or literally: for that the writings of the Prophets
are full of tropes and figurative kinds of speaking, it is more known, then
that any man can doubt thereof, the which has read but one only leaf in
them. So Mich. 1. So Isa. 1. Many of the doings of the prophets mystical, and
signs of things to come.
So every where that there are to be found many actions and deeds of theirs,
the which are also mystical, and signs of things to come, and not only to be
read according to the letter, and as things by them barely done, Augustine has
long since very notably taught, writing against Faustus. Otherwise they might
be thought to be mad and frantic persons, who notwithstanding were moved
by the holy Ghost unto the doing of them in such order, and therein did
altogether obey God, and were most wise. So Isaias goes bare footed, Isai.
cap. 20. verse. 2. Isaias bare footed.
So Jeremy wears a vvoodden chain about his neck. Jeremy wears a wooden
chain.
Ierem. cap. 28. verse. 10. So Ezechiel carrying his stuff upon his shoulder in
a dark night making an hole in the wall goes into another man's house. Ezech.
cap. 12. verse. 7. Ezechiel carries his stuff by night into another mas house.
All these were the doings of men well in their wits, nay of godly men, being
so commanded by God, but to be expounded mystically, and not only according
unto the bare deed done, but to be understood according unto the signification
of them.

3. Rule. Often amplifications used by the prophets.
The third rule is, That we diligently observe and note the often amplifications
which the Prophets use. For there is nothing more common then them. for both in
the describing or laying out of the sins of men: and in pronouncing or
declaring the judgments of God against them: and in shewing^^ the mercy and
goodness of the same God, they do weigh in m^ner all circumstances always,
they do wisely and advised^ mark, recite, compare, or lay together things
going before, a^^ things that follow after. Whereof it comes to pass that
w^^ do find often amplifications in their writings, the which are (...) either
to be confounded and mingled one with another, or to (...) passed over with
squint eyes, or looking as it were through o^^ fingers, that is, slightly: but
we must also distinguish or mar^ out the reason of one amplification from
another and diligent^ly consider of every one of them. For otherwise it will
come^ pass, that the oration or speech of the godly prophets which most
eloquent, and ought to be said and praised of us to be mo^^ brief, shall be
thought to be but a certain vain babbling, and tedious or troublesome
repeating of one thing only, or as an ab^surde or foolish and incredible
hyperbole or excessive speaking beyond the truth. But doubtless they do speak
and write nothing but that which is well framed: nothing but that which is
fetch^^ and gathered wisely and godlily from the nature it self of the things
whereof they entreat: nothing finally but that which is a^terward confirmed and
approoved by the very issue or falling o^ of things. And they use these
amplifications in the setting forth^ the faults of me^, and both in the
judgments and also in the benefits God, lively to lay out before our eyes the
greatness of the matter who by reason of our natural dullness, are drowsy, and
make sin^^ regard of them otherwise. These amplificatio^s (which others ^^ther
term exornations) they which in the writings of the Prophets either do not
mark, or wisely distinguish one from another b^ their diverse and sundry
argument, matter, or reason, do corrupt the same most eloquent writing of the
prophets, full of great efficaci^ or cause that it should seem to be fond and
foolish, 4. Rule. What figures are chiefly to be noted. Where^in the unlearned
must ask help of the learned, yet as occasion shall be offered I will
endeavor to describe them as plainly as I can.
the which has joined with it great blasphemy toward God himself.

The fourth rule is, that in the writings of the prophets of the old testament,
these figures especially be observed or marked, first in their simple words,
these, to wit, often metaphors, and enallages, or cha^gings of tenses and
persons. For in one and the same verse many times they do go from the second
person to the first, or unto the third, and contrariwise by and by from the
second or third unto the first, and they change the tenses of verbs, that their
speech may be of more force, and more pricking the hearers. In the things
themselves, or sentences of the prophets, these figures must be noted:
Epiphonemata, These are words of art, and shall be expounde^d in their proper
places.
Propodae, Apostrophae, Hypotyposes, Hypophorae, and such similitudes as are
brought by the prophets. Examples whereof, when as they are every where to be
found in these our commentaries following, I have thought good hear to
allege the^. For I must study to be brief. 5. Rule, that those things which
be spoke by way of threatening, be not taken as things absolutely decreed by
God, which can not but come to pass.


Last of all, the fifth rule is this, the which is diligently to be marked in
the same writings; that we take not those things, which they do only denounce
or declare by the way of threatening as if they were the settled and determined
judgments of God simply and in such sort, as they can not be altered. For
Anselmus does teach very well, that there is one prophecy of the
predestination of God, the which shall certainly come to pass; and another of
Commination, or by way of threatening, such as was that of Jonas, Yet forty
days, and Ninive shall be destroyed: 2. Sorts of prophecy.
likewise that of Isai, Thou shall die, and not live, Isai 38. and many other
which are to be found in the other prophets. 1. Of predeflinatio^ vnchageable.
For they which make not a difference between these prophesies in the
predictions or foretellings of the Prophets, do both trouble and misturne the
meaning of God, 2. Of comminatio^ alterable upon the repentance of the parties,
and such like conditions. Peter Martyr.
and do draw them selves into most hard and combersome questions, as it were
snares and labyrinths or mazes, out of the which being once in, they can very
hardly afterward get. Finally it misseth but a little by the means of the fond
opinion of these kind of interpreters, but that the truth and word of God is
like to be discredited. But because that P. Martyr has at large and notably
handled all these points, the which afterward in his Common places have bin
collected together by others, I will here make an end of these things. As for
that which M. Tullius Cicerol. 2. de divin. alle^geth against Divination of
things to come, I have not refuted the same, because that I suppose godly and
prophetical foreshewing of things to come to be sufficiently confirmed by God
himself, who can not lie, Proofs that godly prophecy is warranted by God.
whereof there is undoubted testimony Deuteronomy. 18.15. The Lord thy God will raise
up unto thee a Prophet like unto me from among you, even of thy brethren: unto
him ye shall hearken. Act. 7.37. the very self same is confirmed. 2. Pet.
1.19, 20, 21. We have also a most sure word of the Prophets, to the which ye
do well that ye take heed as unto a light that shines in a dark place,
until the day dawne, and the day star arise in your hearts. So that ye first
know this, that no prophecy in the scripture is of any private motion. For the
prophecy came not in the old time by the will of man: but holy ^^en of God
spoke as they were moved by the holy Ghost. Those therefore which gainsay
him, and dispute against thi^ (...) need of confutation, but of bumbasting.
For as it is in Plato, It is (...) detestable and mad wisdom to curse and
think evil of God. And this thus far.

Almighty God, the father of all mercy and true wisdom, for his only sons
sake Jesus Christ our Lord, grant that we may both expound his Prophets
truly, as being guided by the same spirit, wherewith being moved, they
spoke: and that we our selves reading these Prophets godly, holily, and
reverently, may with all our hearts acknowledge him in Christ, and serve and
worship him for ever.

OVT OF EPIPHAnius his book of the life of the PROPHETS.
The life and death of the Prophet Oseas.
OSee the Prophet the son of Beeri, borne in Belemoth, Osee.
of the stock or tribe of Isachar, gave a sign and a wonder, to wit, that the
Lord should come from heaven into the earth: and that this should be the token
of his coming: if that same oak in Seloin be of it self cloven into twelve
parts, and do become so many oaks. And so it came to pass. He prophesied not
a little of the fornication and whoredom of his nation. When he had laid
down his life in peace, he was buried in his own land.

The life and death of the Prophet Amos.
AMos the Prophet, borne in Theuca, of the land of Zabulon, Amos.
was father unto the Prophet Esaias. And being continually beaten of Amasias
the Priest of Beth el, he was laid wait for, and rayled at. In the end, the
son of Amasias slew him, striking him about the temples with a club, because
that he had checked him about the snares of the two calves of gold But yet
breathing, he went into his own country, and there dying, was buried with his
Auncetours.

The life and death of the Prophet Micheas.
MIcheas the Prophet the Marathite, Micheas.
was borne of the tribe of Ephraim. When as he had showed many things unto Ahab
king of Judah, he dyed being cast down headlong by Ioram the son of Achab;
because he had reproved him for the iniquities of himself, and of his
Auncetours, the which they had committed. He being delivered from the prison
of his body, found a tomb alone by himself at Maratha in his own land
near unto Polyandrum. And his tomb is most famous even until this day.

The life and death of the Prophet Iohel.
IOhel the Prophet, Iohel.
borne of the tribe of Reuben, in the land of Bethor, prophesied many things
over Jerusalem, and or the ending of nations. He also ended his days in peace,
and was buried at Bethor in glory and honor.

The life and death of the Prophet Abdiu.
ABdihu the Prophet born in Sichem, Abdihu.
and in the land of Bethachamar. This is he who carried the half Centurion, or
pe^e Captain, and whom Elias the Thesbite spared. He went down to speak with
the king, and after this, being a forsaker of the kings ordinance, he stuck
unto Elias the Prophet, and became his disciple, for whose sake sustaining many
things, he was saved. And ending his life, he was buried with his father in the
land of Bethachamar.

The life and death of the Prophet Jonas.
Jonas the Prophet was of the land Cariathamarim, Jonas.
not far from Azotus, a city of the Greeks, near unto the Sea. At that
time the Prophet Elias reproved Achab the prince of Samaria. The same Elias
when as he gat him self into the wilderness, by reason of a great famine the
which he had called upon the land, where being nourished by ravens, he
quenched his thirst with the water of the brook, and when the brook was dried
up, he^ was an hungered, and removed unto Saraptha a city or towne^ Sidonia,
It seems that in this, and some other things before and hereafter, that
Epiphanius was deceived, and therefore no futher to be credited, then he has
the word of God to warrant him.
unto a certain poor woman a widow, the mother o^ Jonas, and entered into her
house. Now the woman left nothing undone of that which he commanded her. And
he did eat, and blessed her, as well in her grain as in her oil, and he
remained with her, for he could have no abode with the uncircumcised* And when
as Jonas the son of this widow was deceased, God raised him up by Elias, and
restored him alive unto his mother, because of the entertainment which she gave
him. When Jonas therefore came unto full age, he was sent unto Ninive to the
Assyrians, and when as he went about to fly from God, he was swallowed up of a
Whale in his journey, minding to have gone unto Tharsus. And going forth again
out of the Whale, he preached in Ninive. Then the Ninivites repented before
God, and made God to become favorable unto them: but Jonas overtaken with
heaviness, returned unto his native country, and did not think good to remain
at home, but taking unto him his mother, was a soiourner in Sur, in the land of
the Heathen, for he said, least peradventure it be cast in my teeth, that my
prophecy against the Ninivites was vain or false. When as therefore he
dwelled in the land of Saar, he died there, and was buried in the cave of
Cenezeus the Judge. And the same Prophet prophesied, that when they should see
in Jerusalem innumerable strangers from the West, the same city should be
pulled up by the root, and utterly be destroyed.

The life and death of the Prophet Nahum.
NAhum the Prophet, Nahum.
was borne at Elckesi beyond the river Jordan, toward Hegabar of the tribe of
Simeon. This is that Prophet, who after Jonas gave a sign and a wonder over
Ninive, that in time to come it should be destroyed by sweet waters, and
earthly fire. That which in the end came to pass, because that fire out of an
earthquake compassing it round on every side, water also coming by and by from
the wilderness, drowned all the higher places of the city. As for Nahum he gave
over his life in peace, and rests in quiet death in Begabar in his own home.

The life and death of the Prophet Abacuk.
ABacuk the Propher, borne in the country of Bexzochar, Abacuk.
and tribe of Simeon. When as before the taking of it, he did foresee the
captivity of Jerusalem, he did greatly lament both over the city, and also
over the people of the same. And when as Nabuchodonosor drew near Jerusalem
to destroy it, he fled into Ostracine, and remained a dweller there in the land
of Ismael. But when as the Chaldees breaking up from Jerusalem, returned into
their own country with the spoil and captives, and the remnant of the city
Jerusalem went down into Egypt, this Prophet coming again into his own
country, served the reapers in his field. For he had sown barley: but straight
as he had prepared meat for them, he prophesied unto his, saying: I shall go
into a far country, and return quickly, but if I make any long stay, set
you before our reapers what to eat. And being carried upon the sudden into
Babylon, he gave Daniel his dinner, who was in the cave with the lions. After
coming forth, he stood with his reapers as they were now at supper, and did
not impart unto any man any thing of this matter, which had happened.
Furthermore, within few days after Abacuk showed afterward out of Babylon,
that the people should return to Jerusalem. He gave them also a sign, which
dwell in Indea, namely that they should see in the Temple a great light shining
clearly, and so should behold the glory of God. He foreshewed also of the
overthrow of the Temple, that the overthrow thereof should be in Jerusalem by a
people from the west. Then said Carbasus, Dabir shall be divided in^o two
parts: also the heads or chapters of the two pillars shall be taken from the
midst, and no man shall know where they are, o^ whither they came, but they
shall be carried out by Angels into the desert, where the tabernacle of
Martyrdom was lately made and in them the Lord shall know in the end, that
they shall lighten the persecuted by the serpent, as from the beginning. And
the Lord shall keep them from the shadow of death, and they shall be in the
holy tabernacle. This Prophet prophesied not a few^ things of the coming of
the Lord, and two years before the people returned from Babylon, death took
him, and he was buried with great honor in his own country.

The life and death of the Prophet Sophonias.
SOphonias the Prophet was a Sarabathite, Sophonias.
or of the mount Sarabatha, and of the tribe or stock of Simeon. He also
prophesied of the city Jerusalem, namely that it should be far better it
were built in length and breadth. Also upon the overthrow o^ nations, and like
wife the destruction of the wicked, and the coming of the Lord. He died in the
revelation of the Lord, and was buried alone in his ground.

The life and death of the Prophet Aggeus.
THe Prophet Aggeus when as he was but yet a very young man, Aggeus.
came from Babylon unto Jerusalem, and prophecy plainly of the return of the
people. And he saw with his eye the building of the Temple at Jerusalem. He
there first of all san^ Alleluia, which is to say, Let us set forth with
praises the living God. Amen, which is expounded, So be it, So be it. He
therefore died in the same place, and was buried in the ground near unto the
Priests with honor and glory. And therefore even unto thi^ day we sing
Alleluia, which is said to be the song of Aggeus and Zacharias.

The life and death of the Prophet Zacharias.
ZAcharias the Prophet, the son of Barachias, Zacharias.
came from the land of the Chaldees, and as he went, he prophesied many things
unto the people, and for demonstration sake showed many miracles. This is he
which told Iosedeck unto his face, there shall a son be borne of thee, who
entering into the ministry shall sacrifice unto the Lord at Jerusalem. He also
blessed Salathiel in his son, saying, He shall beget a son, and shall give
him to name Zorobabel. Zacharias also gave a token of Cyrus the king of the
Persians, and that unto victory. He likewise showed a sign touching Croesus
the king of the Lydians, and concerning Astyages the king of the Medes. And he
prophesied furthermore of the public service, the which king Cyrus should do
at Jerusalem, and he set him forth with praises, and did not smally bless him.
Further, touching his own foretelling in Jerusalem (the which they call
prophecy) and of the overthrow of nations, and of the building of the Temple
at Jerusalem, and finally he expounded some things with a certain double
judgment concerning the idleness and sloth as well of the Prophets, as of the
Priests. He died in extreme age in the land of Judea, and was buried next
unto the Prophet Aggeus.

The life and death of the Prophet Malachias.
MAlachias the Prophet was of the tribe of Zabulon. Malachias.
He is said to have bin borne after the return of the people from Babylon, in
Sopha, to wit, in the land of Zabulon. He from the beginning of his age, and
whilst he was a young man, is reported to have lived a blameless life. Certain
things are prophesied by him of the coming of the Lord, and of the judgment
of the dead, and that the ceremonies with the Law of Moses shall have an
end, and be amended. And when as all the people did reverence him, as a man
endued with no less holiness then mildness, they gave him to name
Malachias, the which (if a man require the interpretation) sounds an Angel.
For he was of a marvelous excellent beauty. And what so ever Malachias said
besides in his prophecy, he was thought that an Angel (...) daily instruct
him, and declare unto him, as it is said also to have bin done in the time of
the Anarchi, or when there was yet (...) government, as is set down in
Spharpheti^^, that is, in the book of the Judges. And this Prophet being as
yet a young man, d^^^ before his time, and was laid by his Auncetours in his
own field

OVT OF THE PREFACE of Jerome upon Joel.
Diversity in the order and placing and placing of the xij. Prophets.
THere is not all one order or manner of placin^ of the XII. Prophets with the
70. Interp^^ters, as is retained or kept in the truth of (...) Hebrew. For the
70. make Amos the secon^ Micheas the third, Joel the fourth, Abd^^ the fifth,
Jonas the sixth, Naum the seventh. H^bacuk the eight, Sophonias the ninth,
Agg^us the tenth, Zacharias the eleventh, Malac^^ as the twelft. The order of
the Prophets in the Hebrew.
But the Hebrews after Osee, the which with th^^ both is the first, read Joel
the second, Amos the third, Abdias t^^ fourth, Jonas the fifth, Micheas the
sixth, Naum the seventh, Hab^^cuk the eight, Sophonias the ninth, Aggeus the
tenth, Zacha^^^ the eleventh, Malachias the twelfth, who also is the last. And
because I have once reckoned up all the Prophets of one volume, seems unto me
profitable briefly to set down the Etymologi^ or significations of their
names, both in Greek and Latin^ Osee, whom they interpret Sozon, we may call
a Savior, (...) Archomenos, The significations of their names.
Beginner. Amos, Bastazon, which in latin is called Portans, a Bearer. Abdias,
Doulos Kuriou, that is the serua^^ of the Lord. Jonas, Peristera, that is, a
Dove. Macheas, Hostio^^ a name given of two parts of speech, the which with us
sounde^^ Who as it were, or who will. Naham, Paraklesis, that is comforting,
Abakuk, Perilambanon, that is, embracing, (...) wrestling. Sophonias,
Kekrumenos kuriou, that is the hidden of the Lord. Aggeus, Heortaxon, whom we
may call Feast vall, or solemn. Zacharias, M^neme kuriou, that is, The
remembrance of the Lord. Malachias, Aggelos mou, that is, my Messenger. All
which in what sense they are to be taken, shall be showed in their books. Now
the four other Prophets, that we make up the number of sixteen, are Esaias,
Ezechiel, Ieremias, Daniel: and they have this understanding. Esaias is called
Soteria kuriou, that is, the Salvation of the Lord. Ezechiel Kratos kuriou, the
which we may term, the Strength or commandment of the Lord. Hieremias
Huthelos kuriou, that is, the high one of the Lord. Daniel Ekrine me kurios,
that is, the Lord has judged me.

Ex Isidori Etymologicon lib. 7. cap. de Prophetis.
OSee, Savior, or saving. Osee.
For when as he did prophecy the wrath of God against the people of Israel for
the sin of idolatry, he pronounced or declared health unto the house of
Judah. For the which it is showed, that Ezechias king of Judah, taking away the
idols, the which the former kings had hallowed, did purge and cleanse the Temple
of the Lord.

Joel, the Lord God, or Beginning unto God, or He was Gods. Joel.
For this does his name sound in an uncertain signification.

AMos, a people pulled away. For his prophecy was unto the people of Israel,
because it was now rent from the Lord, Amos.
and ^rued the golden calves, or was pulled away from the kingdom of the
stock of David.

NAhum, a bud, or a Comforter. Nahum.
For he does rebuke the city for blood, and after the overthrow thereof he
comforeth Sion, saying: Behold upon the mountains the feet of him that
ringeth glad tidings, and declares peace.

ABacuk, Embracing, Abacuk.
because that either for this that he was beloved of the Lord, he is called
embracing; or for that he ^ommeth into battle with God, he has the name
embracing, at is, wrestling. For none so boldly durst challenge God unto the
disputing of his righteousness, namely, why in the affairs of men of men (...)
of this world, there was in things so great iniquity?

MIcheas, Micheas.
who is he, This one that is left? For he threatn^ Samaria for the cause of
Idols after that manner: of (...) which another says, Who is this that
wrappeth up sentences*

SOphonias is expounded, Sophonias.
the glass or secret of the Lord. B^ agrees unto the Prophets. For they know
the mysteries o^^ crets of the Lord. Whereupon it is said unto Ezechiel, I have
m^ thee a Watchman, or in Espiall over the house of Israel. And in other place,
The Lord will not do any thing, unless he reveal ^pen it unto his servants
the Prophets.

ABdias, Abdias.
The servant of the Lord. For as Moses was the ^uant of the Lord, and the
Apostle the truant of Christ^o^^ Prophet being sent an Ambassador unto the
Gentiles, does and preach, such things as are beseeming the ministry and sent
of a Prophet: and thereupon he is called the servant or the Lo

Jonas expounded a Dove, Jonas.
or sorrowing A dove, for his ^owing when he was in the belly of the Whale.
Sorrow either for the sorrow which he had for the salvation of the N^vites; or
for the Iuie tree suddenly withering, with whose sha^ he was covered against
the heat of the sun. He also (as Jews do hold) is Amathi the son of the
widow of Sara^whome Helias raised from death, his mother saying unto him
terward, Now I know that thou art a man of God, and the wo^^ of the Lord in thy
mouth is true, and for this cause the child called Amathi For Amathi, out of
Hebrew into english, signif^^ truth, and of this that Helias spoke the truth,
he which was ra^ was called the son of truth.

ZAcharias, Zacharias.
The remembrance of the Lord. For the seuen^ year of the destruction of the
Temple being ended, ^^charias preaching, the Lord remembered his people, and
by* commandment of Darius, the people of God returned, the tie and the Temple
is reedified or builded again.

AGgeus in english, Aggeus.
signifies joyful, and glad. For he propfieth that the Temple destroyed, must
be built up again, and after the sorrow of their captivity, preaches the joy
of their return.

MAlachias is interpreted, the Angel, (that is, Malachias.
the Messenger) of the Lord. For whatsoever he spoke, it was believed, as if
had been commanded from the Lord, and therefore the Seventy have thus
translated his name, saying, The taking up of the word of the Lord upon Israel,
by the hand of his Angel.

Now not only a good man, but also a wicked man may have Prophecy. For we
find that Saul the king did prophecy. For he persecuted the holy one David,
and being filled with the holy Ghost, began to prophecy.

The end of the Fore-notes.
THE WORLD FROM THE CREATION until the coming of Christ* divided into seven
ages, and what Prophets of name flourished in every one of them, as more at
large in the fore-notes appears.
The first age of the worl^ from the creation unto the flood containing 1656.
years, had these Prophets: Adam Abel Enoch Noach
The second age from the flood until the first calling of Abraham out of Vr of
the Chaldees con aining 422. years, had either none at all, or else very few
prophets known unto us out of the word of God, except these may be counted in
that number: Sem Melchisedech
The third age from the first cal^ing of Abraham unit the giving of the Law by
Motes in the desert of Sinai, containing 430 years, had these Prophets:
Abraham Isaach Iaacob Joseph Aaron Miriam the prophetisse.
The fourth age from the giving of the Law until the building of the Temple by
Solomon containing 480. years, bad th^se Prophets: Joshua Debora the
Prophetisse. Samuel David Nathan Gad
The sift age from the Temple unto the captivity of the ten tribes containing
294. years, had Prophets almost innumerable, but of name, these Ahias Iadi
Semeias Addo Azarias Hanani Iehu Elias Micheas 1. Elizeus Jonas Amos Oseas
Esaias Micheas 2.
The 6 age from the captivity of the te^ tribes till the times of the full
captivity of Babylon, is 133. years! in this age flourished these Prophets,
whose names are recorded in the Scriptures. Nahum Jeremy Joel Olda the
prophetisse. Sophonias Abdias Habacuk Ezechiel
The seventh and last age from the captivity of Babylon until the birth of
Christ containing 508. years, had these Prophets, whose names are written in
the Bible. Daniel Aggeus Zacharias Zacharias father of John Baptist. Simeon
Malachias Anna the prophetisse.

A Commentary of Lambertus Danaeus upon the Prophet Joel.
CHAP. I.
THE drift and end of this Prophet, Two ends of this Prophet.
is two fold: the one proper and peculiar unto this Prophet in a manner, 1
Proper and peculiar.
namely to teach with how great aptness to learn, and with how ready
obedience we ought to obey God when he calls, and how that unto this matter
we are not to take to counsel neither flesh nor blood, as Paul speaks Galat.
1. ver. 15, 16. saying of himself, But when it pleased God (which had
separated me from my mothers womb, and called me by his grace) to reveal his
son in me that I should preach him among the Gentiles, immediately I communed
not with flesh and blood: neither ought we to be troubled about the event or
issue of this our travail, and ministry, or service to be done, Act. 26.
ver. 19. Wherefore king A^rippa, I was not disohedient unto the heavenly
vision. 1. Pet. cap. 5. ^er. 2. Feed ye the flock of God, so much as in you
lies, says the Spirit of God. Of the which places, the first in like cases
requires our obedience, and the latter our utmost endeavor and diligence. For
there is a reward ready for us, albeit we be refused of men, and that we
profit not, that is, albeit the matter have not such success as we hoped for,
and wished that it should. August. lib. 1. contra Cresconium, cap. 5.8. and 9.
And this is the proper end of this book, and appertains unto all which
ordinarily or extraordinarily are called by God, either unto offices in the
commonwealth, or in the Church.

The second end and drift of this book, 2 Common with other Prophets.
is common unto Jonas with the other Prophets to wit, to set forth the
iudgemen^ and mercy of God toward mankind: in the which self same point
notwithstanding Jonas has this as peculiar unto himself for that he is not
here sent unto the Church and people of God but only unto profane,
unbelieving, and uncircumcised person that we should understand that God has
rule over all nations, (...) is the God as well of the Gentiles as of the
Jews, and that he^^ ways has bin Lord over them, God is Lord over all, but
yet not father of all in Christ.
but yet not father of them all (...) Christ notwithstanding. Psalm. 105. ver.
7. He is the Lord our G^^ his judgments are through all the earth. Romans 3.29.
God, is he the (...) of the Jews only, and not of the Gentiles also? yes even
of the Gent^^^ also. But of the Prophet himself, many other before us have
sp^ken, and it may sufficiently be gathered who he was by the 2. K^^^ 14.25.
where we read that Jeroboam the second restored the co^^^ of Israel, from the
entering of Hamath, unto the sea of the wilder^^ according unto the word of the
Lord God of Israel, which he spake^ his servant Jonas the son of Amittat the
Prophet, which was (...) Gath Hepher. Who and whence Jonas was.
And it seems that Jonas was the first of all (...) Prophets, whose writings
are remaining in the books Cano^ call. For he lived before the battle of Ioas
king of Israel with (...) Syrians about the end of the life and prophecy of
Elizeus (...) King. cap. 13. ver. 14. etc. and cap. 14. ver. 25. Read that
which have written in my fore-notes, and upon the Prophet Amos. (...) then the
Prophets were sent unto the Syrians, and to them of (...) mascus, and to the
Tyrians, and Gentiles, but yet extraordinaly, as appears by the sending of
Elias to the widow of Sare^^ 1. King. 17. ver. 9. etc. by the going of Elizeus
unto Damascus, (...) King. cap. 8. ver. 7. where in that which follows,
Benha^^ king of Syria being sick, sends to know, whether he sho^^ recover,
or no. And 1. King. cap. 19. ver. 15. where Elias is (...) God willed to go
unto Damascus, and to annoint Haz^king of Syria.

Verse. 1. The word of the Lord came also unto Jonah, the so^ of Amittai,
saying:
THIS verse contains both the calling of the Prophet, Contents of this verse.
as the ratifying of his office to come, 1. The calling of Jonas.
and also the name a^^ stock of Jonas him self. 2. His name and stock. 1.
His calling.
He was therefore called by God, (...) took not upon him this counsel and
purpose of any priu^^ surmize and thought of his own. Therefore when as Jonas
follows not his calling, he resists against God calling him, and is become
guilty of most shameful rebellion. Therefore that we may understand the
sin of Jonas, and of all others that obey not God, when he calls, their
lawful calling is first to be noted, the which here is expressly concerning
Jonas set down, and else where in like manner of others, as 1. Sam. cap. 3. of
the calling of Samuel, and of his obedience being called, and so also of Paul,
as he before Agrippa testifyeth of himself Act. cap. 26. from the 16. verse
unto the 21. 2. His name and stock.
And the name and stock of the Prophet here expressed, do show more certainly
that he was evidently and peculiarly called of God unto that office, the which
afterward notwithstanding he did refuse.

Verse. 2. Arise, and go to Ninive that great city, and cry against it: for
their wick^dnes is come up before me.
A Plainer expressing of that in the first verse. For he shows what that
word of God was, A plain laying out of all the circumstances of Jonas his
calling, and why.
the which in the former verse he said, came unto him. And briefly, he stays
upon the laying down of every the circumstances of his calling, to the end
that we may know that his calling was certain, and from God, and that he
sinned not of ignorance, as one which had known nothing at all what he had
commanded him, but of a settled and purposed obstinacy or stubbornness of
mind.

The first circumstance is here expressed, 1. Circumsta^ce, the commandment of
God.
namely the commandment of God him self, willing him to arise and go, that
is, all delay laid apart, and all hanging back or excuse making set aside, to
remove from the place and land in which he was. He is commanded to arise, and
go him self, that he should understand that he in his own person must
speak these things to the Ninivites in their presence, not by a substitute,
or to get another to do it for him. For those whom God calls unto the
office of teaching his Church, ought to execute this office by them selves, and
not by others for them. A pastor must attend upon his charge, unless the
more special good and service of the Church require his absence. In this case
he may substitute a man: so was the absence of Epaphras at Colosse, and of
Timothy at Ephesus supplied by Tychicus. Calv. Colo^ chap. 4 ver. 7. and 2.
Tim. 4 9, 10.

2. Circumstance. 2. Circumsta^ce. The place whither he was to go.
The Prophet himself shows the pla^^ unto the which God precisely sends
him, and this is Ninive, the great and wealthy city, of the which shall be
spoken hereafter, (...) whereof we read Genesis cap. 10. ver 11. that it was
builded by ^shur: and this city was in Assyria out of the promised land,
(...) borders of the elect or chosen people. Why Jonas was sent unto the
Gentiles.
that (...) only among the Jews and Israelites, but in all nations (...)
people that he is a revenger and punisher of wickedness, an^ chalenger of his
own right, and therefore the God and Lord all peoples, yet not the Redeemer
of them all in Christ, but only of his Church. Ephesians. chap. 5. ver. 6. Let no man
deceive your vain words: Proofs that God is a revenger and punisher of
wickedness.
for, for such things comes the wrath of God^^on the children of
disobedience. Coloss. chap. 3. ver. 6. Mo^^ therefore your members which are on
earth, fornication, vncl^^nesse, the inordinate affection, evil concupiscence,
and coue^^^^nesse, which is idolatry. For the which things sake, the wrath of
(...) comes on the children of disobedience. Romans chap. 1. ver. 18.^ the
wrath of God is revealed from heaven against all ungodliness, (...)
unrighteousness of men, which withhold the truth in vnrighteous^^^^ and ver. 28.
For as they regarded not to know God, even so God del^^^^red them up into a
reprobate mind, to do those things which are (...) convenient. Romans 3. ver.
29. God, That he is God and Lord of all.
is he the God of the Jews only, (...) not of the Gentiles also? Yes, even of
the Gentiles also. Psalm. 105. ve^^^ He is the Lord our God, his judgments are
through all the earth ^ph. 5.23. For the husband is the wives head, even as
Christ is the h^^^ of the Church, That Christ is the Redeemer of his Church.
and the same is the savior of his body. Therefore o^^^^ Prophets also, as
Isaias and Ieremias, have prophesied agai^^^ the Gentiles. Another cause of the
sending of Jonas unto Niniue.
But by this means moreover, and sending of (...) Prophets unto strangers,
and such as were uncircumcised, G^^ would reprove the desperate stubbornness
of the people (...) Israel, the which could not be moved by so many his
Prophe^^ by so many threatenings, when as the infidels, or unbelievers
no^withstanding, did by and by obey even the voice of one Prophet, yea and the
same being Ninivites, that is, the might lords of things, and the most
wealthy Monarkes or Emperors of the world, and consequently most proud
persons. Mat. 12.41. The men of Ninive shall rise in judgment with this
generation, and condemn it: for they repented at the preaching of Jonas: and
behold, a greater then Jonas is here. The like is Luc. 11.33. which shows
both the speedy repentance of the Ninivites, and that the same shall turn unto
the condemnation of all others, whom their example, or greater then they can
not move to do the like.

In the third place is set down the cause of this punishment and denuntiation
or forewarning, 3. Circumstance The cause of this punishment.
the which God would have to be given unto the Ninivites. And this same was
most just, so that Jonas ought the more willingly to obey it, that he might be
a defender of the power of God contemned by the Ninivites wallowing yet in
their sins. Now this cause is not some light small offense of the Ninivites,
but most grievous, old, Sins are then said to cry up into heaven, when as
they are notorious, and exceeding grievous, and in a manner past all hope of
amendment.
and stubborn disobedience against God, so that their ungodliness and wicked
life is said to have come up come up even unto heaven, as Genes. 18.20, 21,
Then the Lord said, Because the cry of Sodom and Gomorrah is great, and
because their sin is exceeding greevous, I will go down now, and see whether
they have done altogether according unto that cry, which is come unto me: and
if not, that I may know.

Verse. 3. But Jonas rose up to flee unto Tarshish, from the presence of the
Lord, and went down to Japho: and he found a ship going to Tarshish: so he
paid the fare thereof, and went down into it, that he might go with them unto
Tarshish, from the presence of the Lord.
Antithesis, or the contrary unto that which God before commanded. The
rebellion of Jonas laid out and enlarged by all his circumstances.
For the rebellion of Jonas, and the same advised and determined upon, is
opposed or set against the commandment and appointment of God, the rebellion
it self also the prophet lays out, and enlarges by all the circumstances
thereof, that he may give full testimony or witness of his sin. And here let
us learn by his example to give the glory unto God, and to justify him, and
not our selves, in his judgments against us, albeit the same be sharp. So does
David Psalm. 51. v. 4. when he says, Against thee, against thee only have I
sinned, and done evil in thy sight, that thou may be just when thou
speak, and pure when thou iudgest. And Psalm. 32. v. 5, 6. Then I
acknowledged my sin unto thee, neither hid I mine iniquity: for I thought, I
will confess against my self my wickedness unto the Lord, and thou forgavest
the punishment of my sin. Selah. Therefore shall every one that is godly,
make his prayer in a time when thou may be found: surely in the flood of
great waters they shall not come near him.

1. Circumstance His change of place.
First then Jonas arises, that is, changes the place in which he was before,
and removes from thence, as minding to withdraw himself from the sight and
presence of God himself: such as is the foolish and carnal thought of men,
yet God is every where, Psalm. 139.7. Whither shall I go from thy spirit,
(...) whither shall I flee from thy presence? etc. to the 13. verse. But the
place being changed, where men have seen God, or the wra^ of God, they think
that so they have escaped his hands also* as Cain did, Genesis 4.16. Then Kain
went out from the presence of (...) Lord, and dwelt in the land of Nod toward
the East side of Eden.

2. Circumstance He flees to Tharsus.
2. circumstance. He flees to Tharsus, that is, as some interpret it, into a
far country which is called Cilicia. But as I expound it, to wards the sea:
and he came afterward unto Tarsis and to the Sea. For here he generally takes
this word Tars^^ for the sea, as it is also taken 2. Chron. cap. 9. verse. 21.
For the Kings ships went to Tharshish (or to the sea) with the servants of
Huram, every three year once came the ships of T^^shish and brought gold
and silver, yvorie, and apes, and pecockes* For the Hebrews call every sea
Tarsis, of his skie-like or bleuish color: as the Greeks and the Latins call
every Sea Pontus. Ovid. All was Pontus, or a sea, and the sea vvanted shore*
He flees unto the sea, and minding to take shipping to loppe^ because at that
time that way they used to travel unto that cu^try, that the Jews would
rather go and travel thither by sea, th^^ by land, by reason of the commodity
of sailing, and the kingdoms of uncircumcised nations lying between, if they
should pass by land.

3. Circumstance His advised and settled, ^urpose to sl^e, and so to break the
commandment of God.
3. circumstance. He him self declares with what advise purpose of mind, and
stubbornness he despised the commandment of God, and did refuse or flee his
^ppointment. He comes unto Ioppe a sea city, of the which see Ios. cap. 19.
ver. 46. Acts cap. 10. ver. 5, 6 there he hyreth a ship, he pays the
master of the ship also beforehand: he chooses rather to join himself with
the mariners and other infidels, then not to flee at all. All which things do
argue or evidently show a stubborn mind, and an especial purpose to flee.

Last of all Jonas does this, to flee from the presence of God, and to refuse
his express commandment, 4. Circumstance He flees from the presence of the
Lord.
and that wittingly and knowing of it. In which words the greatness of his
fault is sufficiently enough painted forth. Yet some will rather have these
words, from the presence of the Lord, to be expounded, that he fled from his
office or gave over his office of a prophet.

Wherefore Jonas flees.
But wherefore flees Jonas? He himself hereafter, namely, cap. 4. verse. 2.
does declare the cause. To wit, because he had seen very many threatenings of
God foretold before that time by his prophets by the commandment of God, to
become void and of none effect, that is to say, not to have been put in
execution by God: therefore he did think that the like also would become of
him, and those his threatenings, whereupon he also should be taken for a false
prophet, and should be laughed at, as other prophets were, especially of those
infidels, and skorners of God. The which thing he also had experience of, and
saw to come to pass in the midst even of the land of Israel, as appears 1.
King. cap. 22. ver. 18. of that which happened unto Micheas the son of Imli,
at the hand of king Achab and his false prophets. Read the place. And 2. King.
cap. 9. ver. 11. where they ask Iehu after this manner of one of the sons of
the prophets, which came to anoint him king: Wherefore came this fellow (thus
scornefully they speak of him) unto thee? etc. And 2. King. cap. 2. verse. 23.
where Elizeus is mocked by the little children of Bethel, who call him
bald-pate, saying, Come up thou bald head, come up thou bald head. For about
those days, or a little after, lived Jonas toward the end of the age of
Elizeus. Being therefore careful of the reteining and keeping whole and sound
of the authority and dignity of his ministry and of him self, measuring and
seeking to establish the same carnally, that is, according unto his own mind,
and the worldly wisdom of his own wit, he supposes that this whole
commandment and charge of God will be but laughed at; and get unto himself
rather discredit, then commendation unto God, and his office of prophesying. He
therefore flees, and refuses to execute it. We must not judge of the success
of God his matters according unto the wisdom of the flesh.
And these things do also fall out unto us so often as we do make reckoning of
the work of God, and of the success and profit thereof according to the
judgment of carnal wisdom: and so long as we do not commit unto him both
the whole work, and also the issue and falling out of the same. And this we
ought indeed to do: as the prophet David teaches us Psalm. 37. ver. 5. when he
says. Commit thy we unto the Lord, and trust in him, and he shall bring it to
pass. And here with all the godly comfort themselves, when as they can not
d^^suade Paul from going up to Jerusalem Act. 21.14. saying, The will of the
Lord be done. And Paul Galat. 1.16. testifies of himself that when he had
once received from God commission (...) preach unto the Gentiles, he forthwith
addressed himself there unto without taking any wordly advise, as it is there
expressed, an^ was before alleged in the very entrance into this proph^^ page
107. Sect. 10. Moses in deed refuses at the first, Moses. Jeremy.
Exodus 3. (...) so does Jeremy also: but yet afterward they obey. But Ion^
continues in refusing, according unto the judgment of carn^^ and fleshly
wisdom.

Verse, 4. But the Lord sent out a great vvinde into the Sea, and the was a
mighty tempest in the Sea, so that the ship was like u^broken.
The second part of this chapter of the judgments of God against Jonas for his
disobedience. 1. The tempest. 2. He is cast into the sea. The tempest described
1. By an extraordinary wind.
THE second part of the chapter unto the 13. verse. in (...) which is showed
what judgments of God did pursue Io^^ fleeing from God, the very infidels
being witnesses and ackno^ledging the same. And first of all, a tempest, and
the same mo^^ cruel and raging, is sent by God upon the whole ship and (...)
only for Jonas his sake sailing with them. Secondly he himse^^ (condemning
himself by his own sentence) is cast into these (...) the infidels beholding
and perceiving the judgment of God against him. And the tempest it self is
here described very fear full: first by a wind, and the same most vehement or
strong, a^^ sing or sent upon the sudden, and beyond the common obse^^^tion or
marking of the mariners: so that it might easily appear that some thing was
then done merely by God, and extraord^narily. This kind of wind Luc. 8.23. is
called Latlaps, that is, (...) whirle wind. and Act. 27.14, Anemos Tuphonikos,
a stormy wi^^ called Euroolydon. 2. By the troubling of the air 3. By that
which followed toward the ship.
Secondly by the troubling of the air, where by the storm arose, and the same
a very great one. Thirdly, b^ the consequent, or the effect that followed, the
ship was in very great hazard to be lost or to suffer shipwreck. Compare the
place with the shipwreck of Paul. Act. 27.14. etc.

guilty?

Verse. 5. Then the mariners were afraid, and cried every man unto his god, and
cast the wares that were in the ship, into the sea, to lighten it of them: but
Jonas was gone down into the sides of the ship, and he lay down, and was
fast a sleep.
AN amplification of the tempest, that is, of the danger and judgment of God
sent upon them for Jonas his sake, An amplificatio^ of the temp st by three
effects. 1. The fear of the mariners.
by three most grievous effects or adjointes* the which are not wont to fall
out, or be seen but in extreme shipwracks on the sea. First, the fear of the
mariners, who otherwise are men well acquainted with these matters, and
therefore hardy, unfearfull, and careless. Secondly, the prayers o^ the
passengers: For every one of them in this so present danger, calls upon that
God, 2. The prayers of the passeger s.
whom he served. For whereas Psalm. 107 verse. 23. to 33. (the whole place is
worth the reading) it is said that God is called upon of them that are like to
suffer shipwreck, albeit that this properly ^e done of the faithful and godly
only, in such sort as indeed ^t ought to be: yet by the sense and telling of
nature, it is done also of the infidels or faithless, but without true faith.
Example in this place, and in Aeneas suffering shipwreck, lib. 1. Aenead. and
in Ulysses Odyss. lib. 5. whereof appears that which Paul wri^^th Romans 1. and
Act. 14.17. That men by the light of nature are ^^^ght sufficiently that there
is a god, By the light of nature men are taught that there is a God.
and that he is the gover^our of this world, and that he is the author and
giver of life, and other good things unto us: but who he is they are ignorant,
who have not learned it out of his word. True it is, that there are so many
blasphemies and superstitions, as men do make unto them gods, and powers to be
worshipped: and yet in dangers especially do men fool^shly call upon, and
worship for gods those powers or ^dols, that is, images which they themselves
do take for gods, Psa. 115. and 1. Corinthians. 8. which plainly prove, 3 Effect
of the tempest, the ^afring out of the mar^s of the ship.
that those which the heathen take for gods, are not so indeed, but idols.
Thirdly, mother effect of this danger is, the loss of the wares, and all the
furniture of ^he ship, that the ship being lightened or unloded the passengers
themselves might be saved. So it is also done, Act. 27.18, 19. T^^ next day
(says Paul) when we were tossed with an exceeding temp^^^ they light^ed the
sh^p: and the third day we cast out with our own hi^ the tackling of the ship.
For the ship is then carried more safely, (...) cause it does more easily yield
and give place unto the waves, (...) the winds. From hence grows this
saying, A man will give^ things for his skin. Job. 2.4. Skin for skin (faith
the devil) and that ever a man has, he will give for his life.

Damages stir men up to call upon God.
Finally here we learn how dangers do stir us to call^^ on God, and to
acknowledge him, yea and that earnestly, Psa^^ 119.71. It is good for me (says
David in that place) that I h^^^ been afflicted or troubled that I may learn
thy statutes.

Jonas his security, expressed by an antithesis, which is a figure, in the
which co^traries are laid down together, as in this place, the behavior of
Jonas contrary unto the passengers.
There follows by a figure called antithesis or the contra^^ (expressing the
contrary disposition of Jonas) the sluggish (...) damnable security, or
carelessness of Jonas. For being p^^^ unto himself of his so great a fault,
he nevertheless sleep^ sweetly and quietly: and in the ship he setleth
himself not (...) the earnest thinking upon his offense, nor unto repentance,
(...) to the calling upon God for the same: but unto pleasant (...) sweet
sleep, as if he were guilty of no crime, or worthy of punishment: nay he
sleeps even unto a dead sleep. Fo^^ snotteth and lies in the ship dead with
sleep, being notw^^^standing in greatest danger, and while others call every
(...) opon his own God. All feeling of sin, yea even in the most godly,
cl^ane gone often, for a season.
Here it appears how blockish and (...) the conscience of men is many times
in their sins, yea and (...) same very heinous, and how for the time all
feeling of the iud^^ment of God may seem to be abolished, as it fared with
^^vid vid also after his adultery, 2. Sam. cap. 11. and 12.

Verse. 6. So the shipmaster came unto him, and said unto him; (...) meanest
thou, O sleeper? Arise, call upon thy God, if so be (...) God will think upon
us that we perish not.
An other amplification of the carelessness of Jonas.
An other amplification not of that tempest, but of the dam^^ble security or
carelessness of Jonas, and of the feeling of (...) judgment of God being
extinct or quenched in him. For (...) a shame that he, both an Israelite and a
Prophet should be pu^^^ mind of praying unto God by a man that was an infidel.
H^ (...) therefore raised up from that his unseasonable, and altogi^^ brutish
dead slumber: and that with a grievous and sore reb^^ as if he had been utterly
godless, or blockish and foolish. For he slept, as one that did not feel the
great danger wherein he was: or being plunged in the same, does not for all
this pray unto God with others for deliverance. He is awaked and raised up by
the master of the ship, a man that was indeed an infidel, yet ^^^^ing this
principle of the light of nature, That God is the author and giver and
preserver of our life, and that therefore in dangers he ought to be called upon.

And whereas he says, Call upon thy God, the prophet shows that this master
of the ship was a mere idolatour, The shipmaster an idolater.
which did think that every God was to be called upon, as for a true God. It
was not therefore true invocation and prayer, or faith wherewith he called upon
his God, or counseled Jonas to pray unto the true God: but only a feeling of
nature, a fear of danger, and such like general light of the knowledge and
understanding of God, Men by the light of natural reason, do know that there
is a God.
whereof Paul speaks. Act. 14. ver. 17. Nevertheless, he (that is, God) left
not himself without witness, in that he did good, and gave us rain from
heaven, and fruitful seasons, filling our hearts with food and gladness. And
Romans cap. 1. v. 20, 21. For the invisible things of God, that is, his eternal
power and godhead, are seen by the creation of the world, being confidered in
his works, to the intent that they should be without excuse. Because that when
they knew God, they glorified him not as God, neither were thankful. Plato
also lib. 10. de legibus, speaks to this purpose.

Verse. 7. And they said ^very one to his fellow, Come, and let us east lottes,
that we may know, for whose cause this evil is upon us. So they cast lottes,
and the lotte fell upon Jonas.
THE third amplification both of the sluggishnesse of Jonas, and of the
shipwreck, and of that same foul and cruel tempest, described before, by the
effect, The third amplification of the foul of Jonas by an extraordinary
effect of casting lors.
were unto men use both seldom for to run, and not except the wrath of God
do manifestly or plainly show it self as it were from heaven, and
extraordinarily, where with notwithstanding Jonas is not yet in such sort
moved, as that he does confess his fault. This effect is casting of lottes,
and as it were an extraordinary speaking, and asking by God himself, with
whom among these all, he should be so offended, that the same parrie might be
judged to be the cause of so great trouble unto the rest. Now the prophet does
amplify or enlarge these things, both that his own fault may appear the
greater, and also that the mercy of God toward him may be acknowledged to be
the more singular: and finally that thorough the fear of so great a judgment
and danger, the rest may be ^^e more fearful and learn to obey God when he
calls For men very seldom grow to cast lots concerning the giving (...)
themselves unto death, The casting of lots upon life and death, extraordinary,
and in what coses used.
and this, not except either God him self by some extraordinary sign or
token, as we have said before, (...) show that he is angry with some one among
many: or that some thing be extraordinarily to be asked of God, the which men
by their own and worldly wisdom, without the just offense of some other, are
not able to declare.

Hereof are gathered two things, the one, that such was the tempest of the sea
at that time, Two things to be noted. 1
so sudden, strange, and unusual that all men might easily perceive that it was
sent from heav^^ by God being angry with some one of them. Therefore that the
might be known, by common consent they run unto lots, (...) if it were to
enquire at the mouth of God himself. For this is a thi^^ known among men not
utterly void of goodness and godliness even by the very light of nature, Gods
providence does appear in the lawful use of lots.
that in the use of such things, (...) wit, in the casting of lots, God, and
the providence of God do^ shine forth and appear. For Solomon Prove. 16.33.
says: The lot is cast into the lap: but the whole disposition thereof, is of
the L^^^ Yet Jerome affirms that this was therefore done of these infedels,
because that always among profane and heathen men the use of lottes has been
common, even in matters of small importance. (...) point in what cases lottes
both have, and also may be used.
The other point is to be noted, to wit, that lots have, an^ may be used both
among profane, and also among godly men (...) matters extraordinary, and
immediately depending upon the w^^ of God, as Josh. 7. for the finding out of
Achan: 1. Sam. 14. for the trying who had eaten meat, contrary unto the oath
taken^ them by Saul: and Act. cap. 1. for the choosing of Matthias in the room
of Judas. Hereupon lots that are lawful, are called consultory, and divisorie.
But such as are divinatorie, whereby they tell of things by way of soothsaying,
and lusorie, or such as a^^ used in play, are to be condemned and disallowed,
the which a^^ not only curious, but also profane and heathenish. Further,
doubt not, but that albeit these, as Ierom says, ran easily to c^sting of
lottes according unto the custom in those times used yet that they took this
course and counsel with one consent by the only instinct or secret motion of
God: because that God himself was minded to lay open before all men the fault
of his blockish prophet, and to bring to light the things which he did hide and
keep close. And for this cause did the lot fall upon Jonas.

Verse. 8. Then said they unto him, Tell us for whose cause this evil is come
upon us? What is thine o^cupation? and whence come thou? Which is thy
country? and of what people art thou?
THE figure Commoratio, or staying in or upon a matter, as in this place upon
the particulars of the tryings out of Jonas his fault. The figure commoratio.
For here is severally set down after what manner at the length, and by what
degrees God both manifested, or opened the fault of Jonas, and also punished
him for the same. And first of all he opens the sin of Jonas by Jonas
himself, who first did stoutly hide and smother up the same. 1. The sin of
Jonas uttered by himself.
For he makes him the Cryar as it were, and the Teller of all things as they
fell out, or were done. But first of all he is asked by the other passengers,
woondring at this man being so hated of God. And they ask him diligently, to
the end they may find out, from whence that his fault might arise, that they
may admonish him, and find a remedy for that evil or mischief, if by any
means it may be. Therefore it proceeded not of curiosity, but of charity and
love and carfulness and trouble for the avoiding of the danger and offense
of God, that they so diligently enquire of Jonas, what is his occupation? what
is his country? who is his people? from whence he comes? For by these
sundry circumstances they supposed might be understood and learned, in what
thing especially Jonas had offended God: or else by all likelihoode that he
followed some unhonest trade, as thieves and murderers are wont to do: or
that he was descended and come of some nation altogether profane, as the
Canaanites etc. Therefore they ask and enquire of the cause of the disease and
sore, that they may, if they can bring a medecin: and not to understand of
certain new matters, and such as they never heard of before.

Verse. 9. And he ansvvered them, I am an Hebrew, and I fear the Lord God of
heaven, which has made the sea, a^^ the dry land.
The answer of Jonas.
THE answer of Jonas, and the same indeed very short, b^^ in the which he
shows unto them all things at large: b^^ that which is here recied or
rehearsed contains only the sum and substance of the whole matter. And
here two things are to be observed, 1. Jonas his true confession.
and marked. First Jonas him self freely at truly confesses the matter it
self as it was. Therefore this answer of Jonas, and his free confession
carries a token of h^ earnest repentance, and of a feeling of the judgment of
Go^ now by God himself stirred up, 1. What he ^nswereth.
and wrought in him. Secon^ly is to be noted what he answers, namely, that
he is of s^^^ a nation as fears the true God, that is, of the Hebrews: a^
that he also fears the true and almighty God, and which ha^^ power over this
self same troubled sea, as he who is the ^^ker of the sea and of the land.
And all these things does Ion^^ rehearse, not to commend unto them his own
godliness o^ show himself to be void of blame, or to purge or clear h^
self, or to lessen his fault: but to increase it, by taking a^^^ from himself
all excuse of ignorance or shifting of the ma^^ Futher in this place Jonas does
not now call himself a proph^^ being privy unto his fault, and lest by so
doing he might br^^^ this so holy an office into contempt: and in this respect
Paul^ nieth himself worthy to be called an Apostle, 1. Cor. 15.9. ^^ing, For I
am the least of the Apostles, which am not meet to be^led an Apostle, because
I persecuted the Church of God.

He adds last of all, that unto the same God (whom he b^^^ worshipped, and
from his cradle, as one being an Hebrew, (...) confessed to be Lord of both
heaven and earth) himself (...) notwithstanding disobedient, and a rebel, and
that he was fled^ from his presence, as from the power as it were and rule of
Lord, lest he should do his commandments, witnessing that ran away maliciously
or of a set purpose, and treacherously. A^^ such indeed and in truth ought our
repentance for to be, What manner of repentance ours ought to be.
the wh^^^ in any case must be true and earnest, that it may give righteous^^^
wholly unto God; and lay upon our selves wholly the whole fa^^ and sin. As
David does, Psalm. 51.4. saying, Against thee, ag^^^ thee only have I sinned,
and done evil in thy sight, that thou may just when thou speak, and pure
when thou iudgest. And Psalm. 32.5 Then I acknowledged my sin unto thee,
neither hid I mine iniquity: for J thought, J will confess against my self
my wickedness unto the Lord, and thou forgavest the punishment of my sin.

Verse. 10. Then were the men exceedingly afraid, and said unto him, Why have
thou done this? (for the men knevve that he fled from the presence of the Lord
because he had told them),
A justifying of God, and condemning of Jonas by the heathen.
A justifying of God is here adjoined, the which is made by the Heathen
themselves, whereunto also is joined the condemnation of Jonas with an earnest
rebuking of him, made likewise by the same Heathen. And this was set down by
the prophet, not only that the course and proceeding in things might be
understoode, as they fell out in order at that time: but also thereby to show
his fault to be so much the greater and more shameful, and to amplify the
same, which of the infidels themselves was judged to be so grievous, and
clearly to prove that the judgment of God against him was just. They all of
them therefore are afraid when they hear these things, the which Jonas had
said of the true God, whom he had offended. And this fear was an
acknowledging of his almighty power, and a confessing of the just anger of God
against Jonas, The passengers rebuke Jonas very sharply, but consider nothing
of their own sins and offenses.
and so consequently against themselves also, the which were conversant, or had
their aboade, and were carried in that ship. Therefore considering the power
of that God (whom Jonas had offended) and also the greatness of his offense
they think that themselves now are not without danger with him. 1 The feeling
of the true God, otherwise touches the consciences of very infidels, then
does the fear of their idols.
They do therefore grievously rebuke Jonas, because that so trecherously he
had prooved so mighty a God both against himself, and also all his fellows
which were joined with him. But concerning themselves and their own sins
against God, these good fellows speak and think nothing. Hereof we are to
gather two things, the one, that the sense or feeling of the true God does
far otherwise moove the consciences of very infidels and unbeleeving persons,
2 Sin condemned by the light of nature in some sort.
and does prick the same, then the fear of their idols does touch them. The
other, that sin namely, so far forth as it is a contempt or despising of God,
is condemned by the testimony or witness of conscience, and the light of
nature left in the same, of every man, whether faithful or unfaithful. For to
the end that men should be left without excuse, God would have this feeling of
his righteousness to reign and dwell in our consciences, whereby we do hold
this general principle, That we can not offend God scorfree, and escape
without punishment. For Paul Roman cap. 1. ver. 31. speaking of the heathen,
says that they did know the righteousness of God, and that they which commit
such things, are worthy of death, that is, the very light of nature did lead
them hereunto, that sin deserves punishment. And therefore Isaias cap. 5. v.
18. cries, VVo unto them which draw inquitie (that is, do nothing else but as
it were with all their might maine purposedly commit sin ( with cords of
vanity, and sin as with cart ropes.

Verse. 11. Then said they unto him, What shall we do unto thee, the the sea
may be calm unto us (for the sea wrought and was troublou^
A deliberation what to do with Jonas.
A deliberation or advise taking what to do, the which proceeded or came from
the fear of God, which they had ^^ceived by the words of Jonas, and by
experience it self. For on th^^ one part they see God to be justly wraught
with Jonas, they a^ knowledge by the words of Jonas, that he is Lord of heaven
a^ earth, the which can stir up, arm, and trouble all the element unto the
revenge of his name, nay that he has stirred them ready. And on the other part
they see Jonas also to be now humbled and to become penitent for his sin, to
be a godly man, one that fears that same God. They therefore take pity on
hi^^ Wherefore they dare not rashly attempt or enterprise any thin^ against him
whom they acknowledge for the servant of them God, lest that God wax angry
with them also.

The passengers conceive hope of the savor of God toward Jonas.
Furthermore, out of that common principle and natural knowledge grafted in the
hearts of men, (to wit, that God is merciful and favorable unto them that
repent) they do now conceive good hope of the wrath of God appeased toward
Jonas, or happily hereafter to be appeased. Being therefore troubled and
perplexed or combred with these thoughts, when as in the mean season the
sourges and tempest of the sea never a whi^ abated, they consult or take advise
not only with in them-selves, but calling Jonas himself to counsail^ what is
needful to be done, and what they should resolve or determine upon concerning
him (whom God manifestly by himself called for, and had declared to be the
cause of this danger) that the wrath of God might be pacified.

In this deliberation appears first of all the singular courtesy and pity of
these mariners being otherwise barbarous and cruel men, the which we ought
to imitate or follow, 1. The courteous pitifulness of these mariners of us
also to be followed.
even then when we see any man justly for his deserts to be punished either by
God, or else by the Magistrate, as an heinous offender. For we may not be like
unto those bloody Emperors of the Romans, Tiberius, Caligula, Claudius, who
were delighted with the blood and punishment of men, and used to come early in
the morning into the market place to behold their executions. For this is
senseless hardhartednesse and brutishness.

Secondly in these Mariners and passengers, 2. These mariners hold the death
of the godly precious.
there is to be noted an image and shadow of true piety or godliness, as
being such, who do account and hold as precious the death of the godly, and
such as fear God, like as in his eyes it is so taken Psalm. 116. verse. 15.
where it is written, Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of his
saints. Now the cause of this their deliberation or counsel taking was:
because that storm and raging of the sea abated not, nor ceased.

Verse. 12. And he said unto them, Take me, and cast me into the sea: so shall
the sea be calm unto you: for I know that for my sake this great tempest is
upon you.
The answer of Jonas.
The answer of Jonas unto the former deliberation, the which in like manner
contains two things. First the answer it self of Jonas: secondly the reason
of the same. his own mouth pronounces or declares himself worthy of the
same. This therefore is a true description of true repentance, that is, of an
earnest acknowledgement of sin, and of a mind changed, Jonas makes this
answerwith a true prophetical spirit.
and apprehending or laying hold of his God by faith, the which is opposed or
set against that sluggishnesse or blockishnesse the which was in Jonas before.
The same appears David Psalm. 51. and in Peter, Mat. 27* It appears
furthermore tha^ Jonas spoke these things, and made this answer with a true
prophetical spirit, not of any grudging of mind against God, not of any
excessive fear, not through hatred or weariness of life, because that he was
now known to be a rebel unto God: nor finally moved with light or humane and
worldly conjectures: but because God by lottes did openly, and as it were with
his own voice rouse him up, and ask, and call for him unto punishment. Jonas
therefore does not rashly offer himself unto death, but wi^^ undergo that
punishment (the which God evidently from heaven did lay upon him) and that
willingly, because God so wi^^ have it.

Verse. 13. Nevertheless the men rowed to bring it to the land, b^ they could
not: for the sea wrought, and was troublous against then
The third part of this 1. chap. and the contents of the same.
THE third part of the chapter, in the which is contained the execution of Gods
punishment laid upon Jonas for his rebellion And first of all there is before
it set down the purgation or excuse of the Mariners and passengers
themselves, le^^ any man might think them to have done this of a certain
cruelty of mind. And in the verse following is contained their pra^er and
protestation before God. The excuse is, in that they ass^^ always before they
come unto Jonas himself. The example of the mariners.
They row wi^^ all the might they can, the which here in Hebrew sounds an^
signifies as much as the latin word sulcare mare, to forowth^ sea. For the
Mariners with their oars, do make as it were, fu^rowes and ditches in the
sea, when they row. They prove wit^ all their might to bring the ship unto the
land, and shore. The^ wrestle against the wind and the tempest. They suffer
themselves also to be in that danger, until that they indeed do find that
they assay all things in vain, as namely having God himself striving against
them. Then come they unto that last remedy: wherein appears their singular
humanity or courtesy and compassion. For to have compassion on the afflicted
or such as are in misery, and to mourn with them that mourn, is the law of
humanity it self, and not only the commandment of Paul. This example ought
judges for to follow, An example for judges.
and such as have authority by the appointment of the law for the punishment
of malefactors or offenders: to wit, judges of life and death, that they do
not rashly, nor of a certain thurst and delight to shed man's blood punish and
condemn men that are even worthy of death. For this is to murder and cut the
throats of men, and not to punish.

Verse. 14. Wherefore they cried unto the Lord, and said, We beseech thee, O
Lord, we beseech thee, let not us perish for this man's life, and lay not upon
us innocent blood: for thou, O Lord, have done as it pleased thee.
The prayer of the mariners containing three points.
THE prayer of the mariners and passengers, wherein they purge themsclues
before God, as they did before clear them selves before men of all suspicion of
cruelty, or conceived hatred against his servant when as they executed upon him
these judgments of God. This prayer contains three things. 1. That God will
turn from them the presens danger.
First they pray, that God will turn away from them that present danger the
which hung over their heads for that one man's sake. Wherein they secretly in
their mind consider the law of Distributive justice, To wit, that punishment
does follow the authors and causes of the same, and that no man is justly
punished for another man's offense, as Abraham in his prayer unto God for the
sparing of the good among them of Sodom and Gomorrah Genesis 18.25. seems to
confirm, speaking unto God for them after this manner: Be it far from thee
from doing this thing, so slay the righteous with the wicked: and that the
righteous should be even as the wicked, be it far from thee. Shall not the
judge of all the world do right. 2. They pray against the death of Jonas.
The second, they pray against the death of Jonas, that it namely be not laid
to their charge, and that they be not punished therefore, when as in this
behalf they are only the executioners and instruments of Gods judgment and
will. For God himself calls for him unto death. They add the third thing for
the which they both excuse themselves, and also do praise God for his
righteousness and justice. They excuse themselves, because it lies the^ upon
to execute those things the which God will have and does declare. 3. They
excuse themselves, and praise God.
And they praise god, in confessing that when as god decrees these things
concerning Jonas, that he does this justly, and according unto his own proper
right, and most just rule and power over all things. For thou do this (say
they) according unto thy good or just and righteous will. For the Hebrewe
Cephet signifies not only thelesin, a willing o^ will, but eudokian, that is,
that same righteous and holy will of God, albeit in comprehensible, or not able
of us to be conceived, whereby the decrees all things. For in this sense is
that word taken and used Matt. 11. v. 26. The Greek word in both places is
Eudo chia.
It is so, O father, because thy good pleasure was such. and Ephesians. cap 1.
verse. 5. Who has predestinate us to be adopted through Jesus Christ unto
himself, according unto the good pleasure of his will.

Furthermore here is nothing spoken of the covenant of God^ of Abraham, of
Isaac, of the Messiah. Because that albeit they conceive and make this prayer,
The prayer of the mariners void of true faith.
yet the same proceeds or comes not from a true faith, but only from that
general knowledge, the which is in every man, who is not altogether godless
or foolish, or mad. To wit, that God is righteous and merciful toward men.
And therefore that he may be prayed unto of mea^ for things that are just and
righteous, and that men are hear^ of him. Yet notwithstanding this prayer has
something the which we Christians may follow, Wherein Christians may follow
this prayer, and judges in especial.
both in this that being in trouble they have recourse unto the true God alone:
and also for the they do show themselves to have singular testimonies of the
^^stice and mercy of God, engraven in their minds, and that the^ do ask no
fond or foolish thing at the hands of God. This e^ample also ought judges to
imitate or follow, to wit, that they (...) prayer first, when as they are to
condemn offenders, and (...) pronounce and give sentence upon life and death.

Verse. 15. So they took up Jonas, and cast him into the sea, and these ceased
from her raging.
The conclusion of the whole former discourse of this 1. chap.
THE conclusion or knitting up of the whole former na^^tion or discourse,
wherein is showed, what in the end w^^ the issue of this rebellion of Jonas
against God, and of the tempest arising in the sea for the same, as well in
regard of Jonas hi^ self, Jonas adjudged unto a most lamentable death.
as also of the mariners and passengers themselves. And in regard of Jonas,
this was the end, how he was grievously punished by God, and adjudged unto a
most lamentable death according to the judgment of man (for he is cast into
the raging and surging sea to be drowned) and that being first of all
condemned of treachery against God by the infidels them selves. And to make
short, here is declared, how Jonas himself was the proclaimer of his own
ignominy or shame, and sin, the which notwithstanding he would before
ful-faine have kept close, and for the covering whereof he fled into strange
nations (as into an unknown place unto God) where he might be reproved of no
man. The like punishment had David, hiding at first his adultery with Bersabe
a. Hereout appears what end tarieth those, who either do not at al give
ear unto God, when he calls, or when they have heard him, nevertheless do
not follow him nor obey him, resting upon, and being deceived with their own
carnal or fleshly cogitations and surmizes. The which doctrine no dout
appertains both unto the politic ministeries or officers in the
commonwealth, and unto the callings in the Church, the which men do refuse or
disdain, when as God calls them. Barac.
So Barac has a show of a draw-backe, when he refuses to go against Sisera,
unless Deborah went with him, and is reproched for the same, and told by
Deborah that the glory of the victory shall be none of his, Judge. 4. ver. 8,
9. And Barac said unto her (to wit, Debora persuading him unto this exploit, or
piece of service) if thou will go with me, I will go, but if thou will not
go with me, I will not go. Then she answered, I will surely go with thee,
but this journey that thou take, shall not be for thine honor: for the Lord
shall sell Sisera into the hands of a woman. And in the 5. cap. ver. 23. the
people of Meroz is cursed, because they came not being called. Curseye Meroz
(said the Angel of the Lord) curse the inhabitants thereof, The people of Meroz
cursed.
because they came not to help the Lord against the mighty. Neither is it
here against, that both Moses, Moses.
does excuse his infancy and unableness, unto God Exodus 3. ver. 11. saying, Who
am I, that I should go unto Pharao, and that I shouldbring the children of
Israelout of Egypt: Jeremy.
Nor Jeremy his in like manner cap. 1. ver. 6. when he says: Oh, Lord God,
Behold, I can not speak, for I amachilde. Jonas the true Arion, whom the
Poets feign to have bin a minstrel cast into the sea by the mariners, and to be
saved by a dolphin.
For it is one thing to acknowledge and lay out his in sufficiency, and
vncapeablenes, and to think truly and modestly of himself, and therefore to
refuse the burden or charge, the which is lawful for any godly man to do: and
another thing utterly to refuse and disdain it, as Jonas did. And he was
indeed and in truth that same godly and Christian Arion, which is feigned of
the Poets, and of whom Herodotus writes.

Verse. 16. Then the men feared the Lord exceedingly, and offered a sacrifice
unto the Lord, and made vows.
The issue of this history in regard of Mariners and passengers.
NOW also is showed what was the issue of the former history in regard of the
Mariners and passengers, who were infidels, and the same is twofold. First,
that in wardly, and in their mind they did carnestly conceive the power and
majesty of the true God, and the God of Israel, by the very effects of the
same, which they saw: albeit that at the first they did not know the same
God, and wholly served idols, and did not believe that there was any God
besides. Therefore by this apprehension o^ conceit of the power and majesty of
the God of Israel, and the same the true God, The fear of the Mariners an
experimental fear.
they did greatly fear him. Wherefore thi^ their fear was not of faith in
Christ, but an experimental fear that is, growing of the terror and fear
the which they had conceived, when as they saw the heaven and the sea in such
so^ by him to be troubled, as the things over which he had most f^e^ rule and
power. They testify their scare by sacrifices.
The second effect is, that they did openly given stimonie and witness of this
their fear, and feeling of the true Go^ by sacrifices, when as they perform
their vows, the which the^ had vowed, being and remaining in that same danger.
That which the very sense or feeling of conscience does teach that it ought^^
be done, albeit the godly, as it is Psalm. 107.31, 32. do this (...) only of a
general knowledge of nature, but of a true faith, the is, of an assured trust
of mind, whereby they do know and fer^ that same true God to be their father
in Christ. The words of the Psalm are these, speaking of the godly trauailers
by sea, and the^ seeing the wonderful works of God delivering them from danger
of drowning and shipwreck: Let them therefore confesse^ fore the Lord his
loving kindness, and his wonderful works before (...) sons of men, And let
them exalt him in the congregation of the p^^ple, and praise him in the
assembly of the elders.

Yet it is not said that these either came unto Jerusalem to ^^crifice; or sent
their vows thither, where that same God one^ would be sacrificed unto, They
worship God together with their idols
or finally that they cast away the wo^^ shipping of their idols; but together
with their idols they take (...) to themselves this God, as the chiefest, and
as to be feared, and (...) desirous to have him favorable and appeased with
them, a^ do acknowledge him before and above their idols, in truth: be the
Lord of heaven and earth: and they do testify or wit^ that them selves in
this same danger were saved and preserved by him, and not by their idols. So
the Samaritans together with their sundry idols, did mingle the worship of the
true God also. For the people alleging that they were destroyed by lions,
because they served not the true God, the king of Asshur commands, saying:
Carry thither one of the Priests, whom ye brought thence, and let him go and
dwell there, and teach them the manner of the God of the country. 2. King. 17.
ver. 27. which being performed accordingly, as it there follows, yet the
people worship their own several gods also. For so it is said, ver. 33. They
feared the Lord, but served their gods after the manner of the nations, whom
they carried thence. The passengers and mariners not to be accoted faithful.
Therefore are these passengers and Mariners neither to be reckoned in the
number of the faithful, albeit they sacrifice never so much unto the true God,
neither are their sacrifices of them selves acceptable unto God, as were the
sacrifices of the faithful, because that they were void of true faith, which
is the foundation of true acceptablenes unto God: Aster what sort the
sacrisices and other external actions of the wicked have pleased God.
but so farforth did their sacrifices, albeit vicious and corrupt, please God,
as in like sort the only picture and shadow of true faith pleases God: and as
he conuerteth or turns unto the edifying of his, and of the godly, those
things which outwardly only have a taste and smell of his honor, although
inwardly they be filthy and foul. So the repentance of Achab pleased God 1.
King. 21. ver. 27. to the end of that chapter. These two latter examples are
very disputable and doutfull in my simple opinion, and as many reasons to be
made to the contrary, as for the proof of them.
Likewise the bold confidence and trust of Achaz, Esai 7. ver. 12. And the
faith of the nine leapers, who afterward did forsake Christ, Luc. 17. read the
whole story beginning ver. 12. unto ver. 20. All which things are to be noted,
least any here upon might suppose and conclude that any works without true
faith in Christ, are either in deed good, or else acceptable unto God, the
which some do most peruersely or wickedly hold. Neither did these passengers
and Mariners become Proselytes or conuerts unto the jews religion: neither
were their sacrifices a conceit or sorrowefull heart and broken spirit: but
carnal sacrifices offered according to their usual manner among their own
countri-men, yet unto the true God notwithstanding.

CAP. 2.
Now the Lord had prepared a great fish to swallow up l^nas: and Jonas was in
the belly of the fish three days and three nights.
Here most conveniently is the beginning of the 2. chap.
ALthough some refer this verse unto the chapter going before, yet in my
Hebrew book it i^ the beginning of the second chapter, and th^^ in my
judgment, most fitly. For the end a^^ drift of this second chapter is, after
the des^^^ bing of the just judgment of God against ^onas for his contempt of
the calling of Go^ made concerning him (the which has bin declared in the
chapter before going) to show how great notwithstanding the mer^^ of the same
true God was toward this same Jonas, The drift of this chapter.
both that (...) his example, we should trust in God, even in the very midst of
(...) afflictions or troubles, be they never so great, as it is said Job ^^ 13.
ver. 15. Lo, though he slay me, yet will I trust in him, and (...) reprove my
ways in his sight: and also that we should vnderst^^^ this to be true in the
elect and true faithful, namely that the ^^cie of God does triumph above
judgment, Iam. 2. ver. 13. (...) there shall be judgment mercylesse to him
that shows no mercy, (...) mercy rejoices against judgment. And Psalm. 30.
ver. 5. For ^^^dureth but a while in his anger, but in his favor is life:
weeping (...) abide at evening, but joy comes in the morning. And Jonas (...)
here briefly in this chapter set down, an especial effect of (...) mercy of
God toward him, to wit, his deliverance from (...) wrack, and his repentance.
So then he was afterward thro^^ the great bounteousnes of God delivered by the
self same Go^ by whom he was adjudged before unto death, and the same (...)
lamentable and reproachful.

1. Jonas his miraculous deliverance.
This verse contains three things, first a brief setting for (...) of that
wonderful and miraculous deliverance, and that al^^gether by God. Secondly,
the means and manner of the sa^^ God prepared at the self same instant or
minute of time (in^^ which according to his pleasure and will Jonas was cast
into (...) sea) a fish, 2. The means of the same.
and that a very great one, the which swallowed up ^^nas being cast into the
sea, but yet did not strangle him, or (...) him: but did keep him for the
space of three days, being by God left as it were unto his custody, and in
the end when God calls for him, delivers him again. This preparation
shows the great providence and care of God for those that are his, and so
consequently the absolute and most mighty power and rule of God over all the
works of this world, be they never so excellent and great, who has at his
beck all living creatures and beasts, as he will, and uses them according as
best pleases him, for his glory, and good of those that are his. This fish is
not said to be a new created, but only prepared, The f^^h that swallow d up
Jonas was of the kind of Whales.
and standing and set as it were, to receive him, whom God would leave with him
to keep. It is manifest that this fish was of the kind of Whales, who are of
so huge a greatness, and so wide bellied, that they can swallow down whole men.
Some will have this fish to be called a Lamia, or Sea dog: others a fish called
Brechinechis, others the fish called a whirle-poole, of the which the Psalm.
104. ver, 26. speaks and some do translate him Leviathan, as it is in the
Hebrew. Plin. lib. 32. not. hist. cap. 1. writes of a Whale that was found the
which was 600. foot long, and 360. foot broad. read him lib. 9. cap. 5.
Thirdly, 3. The means of Jonas his deliverance amplified by the circumstance of
time.
he does amplify the manner of his deliverance by the circumstance of time.
For he was in the belly of that fish, by the space of three days and three
nights, and yet all this notwithstanding neither did the fish nor Jonas die.
The which is an other plain miracle. For who can be and remain alive so long,
having his breath stopped? For the fish did not by and by cast forth Jonas
again, but after three days. Christ our Lord Mat. 12. cap. ver. 40. compares
the time of his burial, by the which his body ^ay in the sepulcher, with the
time that Jonas was shut up in the ^ellie of the whale, as it were in a
sepulcher or grave. For as Jonas (says he) was three days and three nights in
the whales belly: so shall the son of man he three days and three nights in
the heart of the earth: whereof it comes to pass, that I suppose in this
place, part of a day to be taken for an whole day, as it was in the three days
of Christ, and not three whole natural days.

is that same Christian Arion.

Verse. 2. Then Jonas prayed unto the Lord his God out of the fishes belly.
What Jonas did in the belly of the fish.
ORder. For here Jonas tells in order, what followed afterward, that is to
say, what he did lying in the fishes belly by that whole three days space.
And he says that he prayed, and that unto that same true God, whom before he
called the Lord of heaven and earth, as unto him that peculiarly was his God
also. He therefore teaches three things. 1. He prays.
First that he prayed both in mind, and also in voice it self. Wherein the
excellent faith and patience of Jonas appears, who goes eue^ unto the same
God, whom notwithstanding he did within him self feel to be angry with him,
to wit, by a wonderful faith, and feeling of his mercy the which toward his
can never be drawn dry, he prays unto him. He does not therefore as
infidels, utterly cast away all hope: he does not as Atheists, or godless
persons, murmur, or curse God: not as hypocrites fret and whet, or repine
against God: but by faith prays unto him, even at that time when as he is
sorest vexed or troubled: the which things these words, out of the bowels or
belly of the fish, do declare, that is to say, out of the midst of the grave,
wherein he lay in a manner dead, as Job confesses of himself, That he will
trust in God, though he slay him, 2. He prays unto God. 3. He calls him his
God.
and reprove his ways in his sight. Job 13. ver. 15. Secondly, he prays
unto God the Lord, and not unto idols. Thirdly, he calls him his God: wherein
he shows that he prays of true faith, who does not only acknowledge God to
be the true God and Lord over all: but does find and feel him to be
peculiarly his God, that is, the God of every true faithful person. Hereby
appears how that the repentance of Jonas was true repentance springing from a
true faith, whereunto notwithstanding he was called back of God, by a most
hard and grievous punishment.

Verse. 3. And said, I have cried in mine affliction unto the Lord, and he heard
me: out of the belly of hell cried I, and thou hear my voice.
APlaine declaring of the matter. For he shows what he prayed. For this is
here a rehearfall of Jonas his prayer, as he wrote it after his coming forth
of the fish, but yet in such sort as he conceived it before in the fishes
belly. A rehearsal of Jonas his prayer as he wrote is after his deliverance,
having so before conceived is in the fishes belly.
And first of all he does briefly here set down the sum or effect of the
same. Afterward by the figure Commoration, or staying upon the recital of
the particulars, he does more at large declare the same by parts, that the
infinite or endless mercy of God may of us be better understood; and of us
be hoped for in our troubles. Further, here is lively painted out as it were in
colors, the greatness of the danger, wherein Jonas was. The sum of Jonas his
prayer
The sum of Jonas his prayer is this, Jonas prayed in that his most
lamentable affliction or misery, nay being in the midst of the sepulcher or
grave of death, making request unto God, and that with most earnest affection,
and was also heard of God: So God commands us in our troubles for to do, and
promises that he will hear us, Psalm. 50. ver. 15. Call upon me (says God) in
the day of trouble: so will I deliver thee, and thou shall glorify me. And
David to encourage us hereunto, shows in his own example that he so did, and
was delivered, Psalm 116. ver. 3, 4, 6. When the snares of death compassed me
(says he) and the griefs of the grave caught me: when I found trouble and
sorrow: Then I called upon the name of the Lord, saying, I beseech thee, O Lord,
deliver my soul: I was in misery, and he saved me: So then that most sharp
feeling of death, in the which Jonas was, let not, but that he readily had
recourse unto God, that afflicted or troubled him: and with great and daily
prayer and affection turned him self unto him, and with endeavor. For this
does the words of calling and crying signify: whereupon he says, that he was
heard. Such is the sense or feeling of the godly touching immutable or
unchangeable mercy of God toward them through Christ, as Paul teaches, when
he says: For I am persuaded that neither death, nor life, nor Angels, nor
principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor height,
nor depth, nor any other creature shall be able to separate us from the love of
God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. Romans 8. cap. ver. 38, 39. Compare this
prayer of Jonas with these Psalms 142.136.69. and 40.

Verse. 4. For thou had cast me into the bottom in the mids of the sea, and
the floods compassed me about: all thy surges, and all thy waves passed over
me.
THe figure Co^moratio, or staying in recital of particulars. The figure
Co^moratio.
For Jonas does show by parts, what things came into his mind when he prayed.
1. The danger wherein Jonas was.
The first part therefore tells the greatness of the danger, wherein the
Prophet was. The second, the benefit of God in his deliverance ver. 7. in
part, and ver. 8. The third, contains his thanksgiving ver. 9. and 10. The
greatness of the danger was to be declared, that the goodness of God, and also
his power in delivering of Jonas might more evidently or clearly appear unto
us. For the greatness of a disease causes the benefit of health and healing to
appear the greater. And the benefits of God are not lightly or slightly to be
set forth of us, but earnestly and with the consideration of the circumstances,
the which may lift us or others up unto God, The greatness of the danger
described by three words co^taining so many amplifications of the same.
and confirm or strengthen our faith. Here therefore the greatness of the
danger is described by the circumstance of the place, but after this manner,
that the same being expressed by three words, has so many amplifications of
the danger. Jonas was cast into the sea. But he shows that the part of the
sea, whereinto he was thrown, was most deep, an^ therefore most dangerous,
so that according unto the judgment of man, there was no hope left unto him of
his deliueranc^ For he calls it the bottom of the sea that is to say, 1. The
bottom of the sea.
a while poole covered with waters, and an huge gulf in respect of other parts
of the sea. For there are some places in the sea not so v^^deepe, and therefore
not so dangerous. Now that this part^^ the sea whereinto Jonas was thrown,
was such a one, that is (...) such a depth, appears even by this, if there
were nothing el^^ that in it the same mighty whale, which took in, and
swallo^ed up Jonas, could swim. Secondly, he calls it the heart of (...) of
the waters, 2. The heart of the waters.
as if it were the midst of the sea, and the matrice an^ boiling up of the
waters themselves, where the floods, that is, (...) waters are more plentiful
then in the other parts of the same^^^^ For in this place I do take the word
flood for waters (to wit, (...) special being put for the general) or else
because that out of th^^ gulf of the sea (which of Plato is called Tartarus,
that is, he^^ the waters do flow into the passages of the earth, as it is
Eccle^^ 1. ver. 7. All the rivers go into the sea, yet the sea is not full:
for (...) rivers go into the place whence they return, and go. But those
w^ters of the sea, as it were by fining and straining do becom^ sweet by
running along the veins and passages of the eart^ Further, 3. All the surges
and waves.
thirdly he says, all thy surges and waves of waters were (...) the same place
of the sea, that we should understand that Iona^ was cast not only into the
deepest sea, but also into the whirlepoolish and wrestling sea with it self,
the waves in that place violently foming and beating one against an other, and
therefore consequently it was most dangerous. After this manner David also
describes his great troubles, Psalm. 42. ver. 7. saying: One deep calls
another deep by the noise of thy water-spouts: all thy waves and thy floods
are gone over me.

Jonas cast into the sea by the Mariners, says that this was done by God, and
in what sense.
Moreover it is to be noted, that albeit he were cast into the sea by the
Mariners, yet he says that he was cast in by God, because it was done God so
commanding. Of which thing it self appears, in how great anguish and
trouble of mind Jonas then was, who did not only sustain those same terrors
or fear of death in so filthy a place, and such as he could not tuggle out of
laid before him: but did moreover see and feel them as most assured
testimonies or witnesses of the wrath of God against him. It appears also how
great the faith and repentance or turning from sin unto God, of the same
Jonas was, who all this notwithstanding does flee unto God him self as his
father.

Verse. 5. Then I said, I am cast away out of thy sight: yet will I look again
toward thine holy Temple.
The second amplification of Jonas his danger.
THe second amplification of the danger wherein Jonas was by the adjuncts, that
is, by his thoughts and most hard wrastlings the which Jonas then felt in his
mind. And these did let him, that he could not without great difficulty or
hardness assure him self to hope for help from God. Now this cogitation or
thought was in a manner greater and more bitter then the danger it self:
because that he did think with him self that he was banished from the
presence of God, as if that now there were no way open for him unto God, when
as he was evidently punished by God him self, and the same most apparently
angry with him for his most grieous offense committed against God himself.
For so does the flesh judge of the will of God toward it by the feeling of
external or outward things. True faith in Jonas withstandeth his dangerous
tentation.
This feeling therefore did no doubt enstrange him from God. But yet faith, and
the same a true faith, withstoode this most dangerous cogitation or thought.
For faith wrastled and strove against this cogitation, sustaining or upholding
it self upon the covenant of God, the promises unto the seed of Abraham, and
the Sacraments and signs of those promises, as the Tempie. For Jonas did hope
that it would come to pass, that nevertheless at the hands of the same God
before being angry with him, he should now obtain mercy, and be delivered,
nay that he should be brought again unto the holy Temple, in the which God was
worshipped, and should yet again be reckoned to be in the Church and in the
number of the sons of God. Therefore I do take the Hebre we particle (Ac) by
the way of contrariety unto tha^ which he said in the former part of this
verse, for (but) as namely expressing a sentence contrary unto the former.
Hereby appears that same wrestling of faith with diffidencie, or distrust
also the fight of Satan enstranging us from God by the feeling (...) our
sins, with the spirit of God calling us back again vn^^^ God by the feeling
of his inevitable grace and favor toward his, wherein faith in God his elect
or chosen overcomes (...) the end, as in Jonas it did overcome. Such a like
thing may (...) observed in the Psalms 73. and 116. ver. 4, 10, 11.

The Temple taken for all other sacraments by the figure Synecdoche, which is,
when as the whole is put for the part, or contrariwise the part for the wholt.
Moreover, whereas by the figure Synecdoche, Jonas make^ mention of the Temple
of Jerusalem above all other Sacramen^ of that time, unto the which he hops
that he shall yet go again, this appertains hereunto, that he may show that
he d^ earnestly, set before him self the Sacraments and signs of Go^ his
covenant with Israel, and called them as it were to help him against that
importunate or unreasonable and strong assault^^ distrust, so that by this
place, if there were no more, they may b^ understood to be ungodly and wicked
persons, the which d^^ despise and reject or refuse of contempt the Sacraments
appoin^ted by God for the confirmation or strengthening of our faith.

Verse. 6. The waters compassed me about unto the soul: the dep^^ closed me
round about, and the weeds were wrapped about man head.
The third amplification of the danger.
THe third amplification of the danger, by the manner (...) plight that Jonas
was in, whereby appears no hope of escaping and deliverance, that the power
and goodness of Go^ may be acknowledged to be the greater, who notwithstanding
delivered Jonas out of that danger. 1. He is compassed with waves on every
side.
And here he briefly reheatseth three things, namely, that he was on every
side compasse^ round about with the waves, so that he could not swim o^^
Secondly, that he was so overwhelmed in the deep, that he could not come up
again. Thirdly, 2. He is in the depth.
that his very head was compassed with the ooze and other weeds of the sea,
the which do hold and drown the swimmers, be they never so strong otherwise.
3. The sea weeds compass about his head.
Whereof it is manifest, that Jonas, when be was cast out of the ship, and
before that he was swallowed up of the whale, did in such sort fall into the
sea, that he was tumbled and drenched into the very bottom of the sea, and
there did see him self on every side overwhelmed and covered with waters, and
to be wrapped and carried away with most horrible and dangerous whirle-pooles.

Verse. 7. I went down to the bottom of the mountains: the earth with her
bars was about me for ever: yet have thou brought up my life from the pit, O
Lord my God.
The 4. amplification by the description of the sea, and her shoares, in the
which Jonas was.
THe fourth amplification by the description of the sea it self, wherein Jonas
was, and of the shoares thereof, by the which is showed that this place could
not be escaped out of by any mort^ll man. For Jonas was grabling in the very
feet of the mountains compassing in that sea, and in the utmost parts and
bars or bolts of the earth, the which in that part of the sea no man can
break, or overcome by strength that from thence he may swim out of the
waters unto the shore. He does therefore lively set forth the situation of
the sea of Ioppe, into the which Jonas was cast, and teaches, that the same
was compassed about on every side with cliffes and high rocks, such as is the
situation of the Syrian sea, The Poets feign that this And^om da for her pride
was chained to a recke of the sea, near unto Io^pa, to be devoured by a sea
monst^r, or whale, from whom she was delivered by Perseus, who afterward
married her.
especially at the city Ioppa. This may easily be gathered out of the profane
or Heethen writers, where they write of Perseus and Andromeda, Plinius lib. 5.
Nature. Hist. cap. 13. Ioppe (says he) a city of the Phoenicians, was before
the ouerflowing of the world with the flood, and is seated upon an hill,
having a great rock before it. And cap. 31. he faith out of Mutianus, That the
sea is there 50. cubits deep. Strabo lib. 16. speaking of Ioppa, and of the
situation of that place, writes, That it is a very high place, so that they
say that from thence may be seen Jerusalem the chief city of the Jews.
Therefore I thus take these words, The roots of the sea, or the bottom of the
sea, and the bars or bolts of the earth, for the mountains themselves, the
which do shut in that shore, and do there beat back the sea, which
mountains Jonas calls the bars of the earth, or the rayles se^ by God
himself against the sea, that it pass no further, after which like sort God
speaks unto Job cap. 38. ver. 4. and 10. Where wast thou, when I laid the
foundations of the earth? When I stablished m^ commandment upon the sea, and
set bars and doors, and said, Hitherto shall thou come, but no farther, and
here shall it stay thy proud^ waves. These so high and craggie rocks, at that
place especially, no mortal man is able to clime up, and by them to save them
selves from shipwreck, because both of the roughnes and also the height of
those hills and rocks. And this much has Jonas spoken of the greatness of his
danger, wherein consists the first part of thi^ prayer.

2. The benefit of God in delivering Jonas, consisting of two points.
The second part follows, where Jonas his deliverance mad^ by God,
notwithstanding this danger, is described: Yet (sait^ Jonas) have thou made my
life to come up from the grave, etc. An^ hereby the glory of God in helping
those that are his, appeare^ to be the greater, that is, his bounteousnes and
power, by how much the danger is greater and certain. This part of the vers^
contains two things. 1. The sum of his deliverance.
For God by his wonderful power to wi^^ breaking and remoouing all the former
lets which he has recited, made him lying in the very bottom and depth of the
sea, (...) it were in a grave, where he was now oppressed or kept under, (...)
arise and come up, and that alive. It has therefore an emphasis, (...) force,
when he says, Thou have made me to come up, that it may b^ set against the
words of the 4. ver. Thou had cast me into the b^tome, into the heart of the
sea. There is also a notable antithesis, (...) contrariety, between life and
the pit, or corruption, and that n^^ every corruption, but an utter corruption,
the which is death. S^ the^ God brought forth Jonas alive out of the very jaws
of death or out of the castle of hell. The which thing is a shape, figure, a^^
confirmation of the resurrection or rising again of the dead^ For albeit Jonas
lying in that place and belly of the fish, ha^ not yet given up the ghost: yet
it came to pass beyond the natu^^ of things, that he came forth thence alive
and safe, and that he ha^^ not there been dead, and begun to be putrified.
This is o^ point to be noted. 2. The cause of Jonas his deliverance.
The other thing is, the cause of his deliu^rance, the which he shows to have
been the mere or one power and mercy of God: the power, Jonas notes by this
wo^^ Ichouah, that is, Eternal: the grace or mercy in these words, My God.
For this so sweet a s^each, My God, contains the remembrance of the covenant
of God with the seed of Abraham, and the witness of the same covenant, the
which Jonas felt by faith, concerning his peculiar adoption or chosing into the
number of God his elect or chosen.

Verse. 8. When my soul sainted within me, I remembered the Lord: and my prayer
came unto thee into thine holy Temple.
An amplification of the former benefit by the circumsta^ce of time.
AN amplification of the former benefit, by the circumstance of time. For then
God did help, when as Jonas was now fainting, that is, God heard Jonas out of
his holy Temple, at the very pinch, when he cried unto him, and delivered him,
when as he was now utterly void of strength, and fainted. He therefore
witnesses that this his life is a new gift of God. And whereas he says, that
he was heard of God out of his holy temple, he has respect unto that promise
of God, which is 1. King. cap. 1. ver. 38. where Solomon prays that God out
of heaven will hear and grant all the petitions of those that in faith pray
unto him in and toward that Temple. And further, he names the Temple, because
that place was a singular and especial testimony or witness of the presence
and favor of God toward the blessed seed, or the seed of Abraham. And
whereas Jonas says, that he prayed, and remembered the Lord, it does not prove
that Jonas was delivered by God for any worthiness, force, and desert of the
prayer, and of this his cogitation or thought: but that he did that, which God
had commanded concerning praying unto him in affliction and trouble, as it is
Psalm. 107. ver. 28. and Psalm. 50. ver. 15. as has bin recited before, the
which thing all the godly, The figure acclamation, is the allowing or
disalowing of some matter, that we have told before, by the adding of some
pithie sentence thereunto for either of those respects.
that are endued with true faith do perform, that is to say, in their
miseries they call upon God, and have recourse unto him.

Verse. 9. They that wait upon lying vanities, forsake their own mercy.
THe figure epiphonema, or acclamation, with the which the third part of this
prayer begins, to wit, a thanksgiving the which Jonas yeildeth unto God.
This place contains two things. One, the singular praise of the true God
(whom Jonas witnesses that he called upon, and by whom he was delivered) by
comparing him with idols, it contains, I say, the praise of God as the
fountain of all mercy, of al good things, of all salvation, and that the
only fountain, of the which they do deprive or bereave themselves, whosoever
call upon and worship other gods. Therefore Jonas being now delivered, and
ravished as it were besides him self, does triumph upon the earnest
consideration of so great a benefit, and as a conqueror over the idolatours,
avouches the glory of the true God, cries out that al men may hear him,
that this God alone is the father of all clemency and mercy, that is, of all
good things, the which benefits they through their own fault forsake, which
flee unto idols. Wherefore in this place I take the word mercy, for the
effects of mercy, the which God being merciful, bestows upon men. The
second part of this verse has a very excellent and most true description of
idols, the which by the way of contrarieties is opposed or set against that
most bounteous nature of the true God. A notable description of idols by way of
contrarieties set against God.
For he is true: the idols are lies: He is bounteous in deed: the idols are
vain, that is, without any effect. Those therefore which call upon them, and in
their necessities pray unto them, and not unto the true God, do willingly
deprive themselves of true and certain help of all good things: of salvation
it self: because they forsake the true God the fountain of all good things,
as Jeremy, or rather God by Jeremy complains, Ierem. 2.13. My people (says
God) have committed two evils: they have forsaken me the fountain of living
waters, to dig them pittes, oven broken pittes, that can hold no water.

Verse. 19. But I will sacrifice unto thee with the voice of thanksgiving, and
will pay that I have vowed: salvation is of the Lord.
A thanksgiving containing 1. praising of God by voice. 2. Offering of
sacrifice.
A Full thanksgiving for the benefit received. This contains three things.
First, Jonas with voice praises the true God, with voice confessing and
acknowledging him to be the true and only author of his deliverance. Secondly,
it contains a sacrifice offered unto God according unto the worship at that
time commanded. For Jonas sacrifices a sacrifice eucharisticall, or of
thanksgiving, in stead of which sacrifice we now have alms toward the
poor, and giving of thanks, as we are taught, Hebr. cap. 13. ver. 15, 16. Let
us therefore by him (that is, by Christ) offer the sacrifice of praise always
unto God, that is, the fruit of the lips, which confess his name. To do
good and to distribute, forget not: for with such sacrifices God is pleased.
And Jonas also does moreover make mention of his vow, to teach that it was
publicly and solemnly paid by him, witnessing there by that same singular
goodness and mercy of God toward him. So Paul is read to have vowed and
performed the same, Act. cap. 21. ver. 26. And David, Psalm. 116. ver. 28.
says, I will pay my vows unto the Lord, even now in the presence of all his
people. In like manner ought we openly and with a full mouth, to rehearse and
set forth unto others the benefits of God toward us. Thirdly, 3. A reason of
the two former.
he renders a reason of them both, namely for that he does acknowledge that
same his deliverance, and every man's else, to come from that same true God
alone, and not from idols. So David Psalm 36. rehearsing the manifold mercies of
the Lord, among the rest confesses God to be the maintainer and preserver both
of man and beast, ver. 6. Thou Lord (says he) do save man and beast. And
thus does James teach us to acknowledge every good gift, and so consequently
our salvation, and all other our deliverances to come from God, when he writes
cap. 1.17. Every good giving, and every perfect gift is from above, and comes
down from the father of lights, with whom is no variablenes, neither
shadowing by turning. And when Jonas says, I will sacrifice, etc. this word
(I) has a maruailous vehemency or force, as if he should have said, If all
the world besides should be unmindful of their duties, I, even I, that
miserable wretch, rebel, and runagate from God, thus mercifully beyond all
desert delivered, etc. will sacrifice unto God, and show my self thankful.
And touching these sacrifices, I take them to have been such as the law of God
in such cases requires, Leuit. 7. the which Jonas, after that he came forth of
the belly of the fish, sacrificed at Jerusalem according unto the word of God.
This therefore was done afterward. For first he was cast up by the fish.

Verse. 10. And the Lord spoke unto the fish, and it cast out Jonas upon the dry
land.
The effect of Jonas his prayer.
THe effect of Jonas his prayer. God being called upon was present with Jonas,
and sent him forth alive out of the belly of the fish, of whom he had been
swallowed up. This agreeeth with the rule Psalm 34. v. 19. Great are the
troubles of the righteous: but the Lord delivers him out of them all. And
with the which has before been alleged out of other Psalm. as Psalm^ 50.
ver. 19. Psalm. 116. ver. 4. and Psalm. 107. And he says further that God
commanded the fish to cast up Jonas, that is, that the fish should deliver
back again the thing which God had lef^ with him for a time to keep. The
fish obeieth, and delivers him: that herby we also may learn to obey God,
and to acknowledge all things to be subject unto his power, and to reverence
and stand in awe of him, and to worship and fear him. And the is furthermore a
notable example and witness, to prove then r^surrection or rising again of our
bodies. An example of the rising again of our bodies.
For the land and these shall deliver up again, yea all other elements shall
deliver up ^gaine the bodies of men, which they have received, when Go^ so
commands them. Hereof read more at large Ezech. 37.

CAP. 3.
Verse. 1. And the word of the Lord came unto Jonas the seco^^ time, saying,
The second part of this book.
THe other or second part of this history (...) book, in which that same
commandeme^^ of God is rehearsed again, the which w^^ before enjoined and
commanded the Prophet Jonas: the execution whereof is now with great fruit
and profit put in practice b^ Jonas, that it may sufficiently appear, th^^ he
did before amiss suppose that he was i^ vain sent unto the Ninivites, when as
afterward he shall se^ with his own eyes so great and wished for an effect
of his preaching. But yet for all this did not Jonas sufficiently esteem of
the neither, but still had cogitations or surmises that were carnall^^ fleshly,
concerning the contempt, scorning, and diminishing o^ his prophetical office
by means of this his preaching, as appears by the 4. chapter.

A rehearsing again of the former commandment touching the destruction of the
Ninevites.
Now this verse contains the commandment of God, touching the showing unto
the Ninivites their destruction, because of their wickedness, and the same
rehearsed here again in as many words as it was declared before cap. 1. ver.
1. And therefore the Prophet says, Again, or The second time: where
appears, that albeit he were unworthy, yet nevertheless that he was not
only retained in the Church as a member of the same, but also was restored
unto the office of a Prophet through the singular favor and mercy of God. So
likewise Peter after his great fall and denial of his master, was
notwithstanding afterterwards not only received into favor again, but also by
Christ put in commission a fresh to feed his sheep. John 21.17. where Christ
says unto him the third time: Simon the son of Iona, love thou me? Peter
was sorry because he said unto him the third time, love thou me: and said unto
him, Lord, Thou know all things, thou know that I love thee. Then Jesus
said unto him, Feed my sheep. Now if Jonas had not had this commission
renewed, he neither ought nor could have gone to Ninive, and follow that
first commavndement, the which seemed through Jonas his offense, by God
himself to have been revoked, or called back. Further, these things were done
by Jonas, at the least under Jeroboam the son of Ioas king of Israel, under
whom he lived, at what time the power of the Assyrians was now known unto the
Israelites: but as yet not feared of them. For so it began to be under Manahem
the king, 2. King. 15.

Verse. 2. Arise, go to Ninive that great city, and preach unto it the
preaching which I bid thee.
An explanation of that which went before.
AN explanation, or making more plain of that which was said before. For Jonas
declares what God commanded him, to wit, the same thing which he did before.
So much do these words sound: Preach the preaching which J bad thee. For God
will have it wholly to be fulfilled: neither is the same changeable, Psalm.
115.3. Our God is in heaven (say the faithful) he does whatsoever he will.
Therefore albeit here be nothing said of the sins of the Ninivites, yet is
the same to be repeated out of the first chapter ver. 2. as is that which
follows verse. 4. and is said of the 40 days, the which was then also
commanded him to say unto them.

Verse. 3. So Jonas arose, and went to Ninive according unto the word of the
Lord: now Ninive was a great city, and excellent, of three days journey.
THE execution and faithful performance of the commandment of God, as may
thus appear. For God said unto him before, verse. 2. Arise, go to Ninive: and
here it is said, He arose, and went to Ninive according unto the word of the
Lord, that Jonas may show himself now to have been ready to obey, and not to
be resisting, disobedient, and running away, as he was before. So ought we to
obey God both faithfully, and also readily. And for the truth of the history,
and to testify or witness his obedience, he describes Ninive, to show that
he came into the self same city, and that he told the self same things, the
which God had commanded him: that is to say, he came unto that same very
great city Ninive, The greatness of Ninive.
the which as Herodotus and Diodorus Siculus lib. 3. cap. 1. do affirm, was
more then 30. French leagues, and was seated by the river Tygris. Strabo lib.
5. Geograph. says, that there were certain remnants thereof, the which are
called a city. Tacitus lib. 12. Annal. Marcellinus lib. 14. and 18. do
attribute it unto Commagena. Now albeit he were sent both alone and also a
stranger, and to tell them being infidels, hard and heavy news, yet is he not
afraid, being both instructed in faith, and also now taught by experience of
the might and power of God in preserving him. So Elizeus goes to Damascus, 2.
King. cap. 8. ver. 7. So must we in like manner despising all dangers follow
God when he calls us Exodus cap. 3. and Ierem. cap. 1. The repentance
therefore of Jonas was true. Further, why this city Ninive was so great, the
reason is, for that before the Empire of the Macedonians, those countries were
inhabited only by streets: and there were very few cities in them, as says
Pliny libr. 6. Histor. Not. cap. 26. It was situate or seated by the river
Tygris as has been said.

Verse. 4. And Jonas began to enter into the city a days journey, and he
cried, and said, yet forty days, and Ninive shall be destroyed.
THE preaching of the commandment of God concerning the destroying of Ninive
because of her sins, The preaching of the destruction of Ninive.
and that shortly, namely, after 40 days, except it did repent and amend her
former wickedness. Jonas therefore after that he is once entered into Ninive,
begins by and by, and that openly, and as loud as he can: he makes no
delays, he speaks not doubtfully nor darkely, those things the which God
would have told unto them: he does not first go and purchase the favor and
good will of some toward him, but commits unto God the falling out of
things, and as much as in him lies goes forward in the work commanded. And
whereas God would have 40. God is long suffering even toward infidels.
days granted unto the Ninivites for repentance, and that they should not
forthwith be destroyed, this declares the infinite or endless patience and
bearing of God even toward infidels, as Paul Roman. cap. 2. ver. 4. blames
those which abuse the long sufferance of God as an encouragement to induce them
the more boldly to sin, when he says, Despisest thou the riches of his
bountifulness and patience, and long sufferance, not knowing that the
bountifulness of God leads thee unto repentance? And moreover this 40. days
respite shows that in these threatenings of God there was included a condition
of repentance. The threatening of God toward the Ninivites, conditional.
Therefore this threatening was conditional not simple or pure as they say, and
as some notwithstanding do think, wherein they weary them selves against the
words of the prophet.

Verse. 5. So the people of Ninive believed God, and proclaimed a fast, and put
on sackloath, from the greatest of them even unto the least of them.
The effect or fruit of Jonas preaching.
THE fruit or effect of the former preaching of Jonas among the unbeleeuing
Ninivites, being such as were accustomed unto sin, namely their repentance.
Whereby appears that the ministry of Jonas through the grace of God, was
effectual, or of force even among the Ninivites, as Christ himself also does
teach Mat. 12. The men of Ninive shall arise in judgment with this generation,
and condemn it: for they repented at the preaching of Jonas: and behold a
greater then Jonas is here. Of this all they may co^ceive good hope of happy
success, who are called and sent of God unto any work, or ministry to be
executed either among the faithful, or among the unfaithful. But the
repentance of the Ninivites is briefly here described first by two signs or
tokens: and afterward the whole matter is more at large declared by way of
explanation or laying out of the same more plainly. Two signs of the
repentance of the Ninivites.
And the two signs are, namely the faith of the Ninivites (for they are said
to have believed God) and the outward constitution or behavior touching their
body, to express the earnest feeling of the sorrow for their sins
committed, to wit, fasting and sackecloath. Touching the faith of the
Ninivites: they are said to have believed God, that is to say, the prophet
Jonas in the name of God denouncing or showing unto them these threatenings
because of their wickedness. 1 Faith, and how far forth, or in what respect
the Ninivites may be said to have says.
Therefore they neither drove the prophet out of their city, clearly
declaring unto them the judgments of God to ensue upon them except they did
amend: neither yet stopped their ears, as the Scribes do, Act. 7. neither for
bad him, that he should not publish or tell forth these things: but received
them as the most true and certain words of God: they persuaded them selves that
he was assuredly sent unto them by God: and finally they believed that those
things which he threatened would come to pass, as appears hereafter ver. 9.
Thus far forth therefore was this assent or agreeing of the Ninivites unto
the saying of Jonas faith, as they believed this word of the prophet. For here
is nothing spoken of the covenant of God toward men, of the Messiah, of the
means and cause of the forgiveneffe of sins, or of the other parts of the
word of God, unto all the which neither did the Ninivites give assent, neither
yet did know them, albeit i^ these properly the true and justifying faith does
consist. They wanted then this faith, but they had only a particular faith,
the which believes or receives for true, but some one point (...) the word of
God. In this sense many are said by the Evangeli^^ to have believed Christ. And
such as was the faith of the Nin^vites, such was their penitencie or
repentance: not feigned I confess, not hypocritical, not counterfeit, that
when as they w^^ not inwardly touched with the fear of the judgments of Go^
and of his punishment the which was then declared unto the^ yet nevertheless
they did feign themselves to be moved: a^ when as they did not sincerely or
truly acknowledge themsel^^ to be such, that is to say, sinners, such as by
Jonas they were ^^scribed for to be, yet notwithstanding after the manner of
hyp^crites they did counterfeit themselves to be sinners: But t^^ were inwardly
and in their mind earnestly touched both w^ the feeling of their sins, The
Ninivites had not true repentance, which is the effect of a justifying faith.
and also with the fear of Gods iudg^ments: yet notwithstanding had they not
that same true pe^^tencie or repentance, the which is the effect of a true and
iu^^^fying faith, the which the godly only and the elect of God ha^ and whereof
we have a description in those that repented at ^^ters sermon, and were
baptized Act. 2.37. and 41. They felt ind^^^ an inward fear and trembling of
mind, such as by nature the men are wont to have in themselves being convicted
of their sins, and feared with the threatenings of God: but they had not that
same lively and sweet taste of the mercy of God applied unto the^ by Christ,
and the testimony or witness of the holy ghost, by the which the godly with all
their hearts are angry even with themselves, albeit there were no hell or
punishment to come. Whereupon they only and none but they which are godly do
truly repent. Such an affection of mind does Paul describe speaking of the
repenting sorrow of the Corinthians concerning the matter of the incestuous
person. 2. Cor. 7.11. saying, For behold, this thing that ye have bin godly
sorry, what great care it has wrought in you: yea, what clearing of your
selves: yea, what indignation: yea, what fear: yea, how great desire: yea,
what a zeal: yea, what punishment? in all things you have showed your selves
pure in this matter. This affection these Ninivites had not.

the Ninivites repented: ergo, would some conclude, the repentance of the
Ninivites was true repentance, and such as is the repentance of the godly.
Faith and Repentance carry many significations, and are often times attributed
unto those affections which have but an imitation or resemblance of faith and
repentance only, as is the repentance of Achab 1. Kin. 21.29. And in the
gospel of Matthew this word Faith is often so taken, as cap. 9. ver. 2. of
those that brought unto Christ the man sick of the palsy, of whom Christ
says, That he saw their faith, etc. and in the same chap. ver. 22. he says
the like of the faith of the woman that had the bloody issue, coming unto him
to be cured of the same. and chap. 17. v. 20. where Christ tells his
disciples, That if they had faith but as much as a grain of mustard seed, they
should remove mountains, etc. So here after in this prophet cap. 4..2. the
faulty prayer of Jonas, is notwithstanding called a prayer. And thus much of
the faith, and inward repentance of these Ninivites.

2. The outward signs of the repentance of the Ninivites, fasting, sackcloth,
and ashes.
The outward repentance of the Ninivites was in those signs, the which at that
time were used of those that did truly repent, albeit hypocrires also did oft^n
make show of the same: as may appear out of Joel cap. 2. v. 14. where God
says, Rent your hearts and not your garments, and turn to the Lord your
God, etc. signifying that true repentance must proceed from an heart humbled by
faith, and not consist in outward ceremonies, in the which of all others
hypocrites as most forward. For so 1. King. 21.27. Achab, when by Elias he
heard of Gods judgments toward him, Renteth his clothes puts sackcloth
upon him, and fasteth, and lies in sackcloath, and goes sof^ly: yet was he
void of true repentance, such as the godly have. These outward signs are
fasting, sackeloth, and ashes. After which manner the godly have in former times
humbled themselves before God. For so Job. cap. 2. v. 8. sits down among
the ashes. And Psalm. 69 v. 10, 11. David says of himself. I wept, and my
soul fasted, but that was to my reproof (he means among the wicked) I put
on a sack als^ (...) and I became a proverb unto them.

Verse. 6. For word came unto the king of Ninive, and he arose from his throne,
and he laid his robe from him, and covered him with sackecloth, and sat in
ashes.
EXplanation, or laying out more at large that which briefly was set down
before. For now he does more fully declare that, Explanation.
which he had briefly before spoken of the repentance of the Ninivites. He
therefore pursues every circumstance, both that the efficacy or force of the
word of God outwardly preached even among the heathen themselves, may be
understood, and also that we may know that the repentance of these men was
true, and not hypocritical, and that this may be an example for the godly
being put in mind of the threatenings of God to follow. And to this purpose
does Christ allege it Mat. 12. Public and not private repentance here
described.
But in this place is described public, not private, solemn and
extraordinary, and not ordinary repentance, like is as also Joel cap. 2.
Which two kinds of repentance are not to be confounded or hudled up together:
neither are we to look for that in ordinary, or private repentance, the which
is proper and peculiar unto extraordinatie and public repentance: as is for
example, the decree of the magistrate, the putting on of sackcloth and ashes,
etc.

Furthermore we must note, that the signs which are here rehearsed, Fasting,
sack cloth, and ashes, and such like external gesture are rather signs of
true outward repentance of the godly, the which consists in the hears truly
bu^bled by faith, and showing forth the fruits of the same, by the works of
mercy, etc.
did indeed in these Ninivites spring from a sincere or purt mind: yet
notwithstanding if they be considered in themselves they do rather paint out
unto us the true nature and condition of the outward then the inward
repentance of the godly, as may easily appear Isai, 58. v. 5, 6, 7. Is it such
a fast that I have chooses (says the Lord) that a man should afflict his soul
for a day, and to bow down his head as a bulrush, and to lie down in
sackcloth and ashes? Will thou call this a fasting, or an acceptable day unto
the Lord? Is not this the fasting that I have chosen, to loose the bands of
wickedness, to take off the heavy burdens, and to let the oppressed go free,
and that ye break every yoke? Is it not to deal thy bread to the hungry, and
that thou bring the poor that wander unto thine house? When thou see the
naked, that thou cover him, and hide not thy self from thine own flesh. For
inward repentance, such as is in godly men, is assured of the forgiveness of
sins by Christ, of the promises of God, of his fatherly good will toward
them, etc. Now these things were nor in the Ninivites.

The first circumstance of the repentance of the Ninivites, to wit, the persons
repenting.
Moreover the first circumstance of this public repentance of the Ninivites,
are the persons repenting: among the which the person of the king is first
described as the which namely was the cause and example of the repentance of
the rest: Afterward the rest repented. For they all repented from the greatest
unto the least, as was before ver. 5. and not only one or two. Yea the king of
Ninive himself, and not only his subjects. And this repentance of the king,
and that public (laying aside all cogitation and pride of his kingly majesty)
is in this verse described by most excellent contraries, He that sat before
in his royal throne, lay in ashes: he that before was clothed with soft and
gorgeous raiment, took upon him most hard and sackcloath, and cloth of hair.
Compare this outward show of repentance with these places and examples of the
scripture, of Achab 1. King. 21.27. Joel. 2. Isal. 58.5. Job. 16.15. Mat. 11.8.
Whether Jonas came unto the king, or whether the king heard of his sermons by
the report of others, he was earnestly touched.

Verse. 7. And he proclaimed and said through Ninive (by the counsel of the
King and his nobles) saying: Let neither man nor beast, bullock, nor sheep
taste any thing, neither feed, nor drink water.
An amplificatio^ of the former circumstance of the persons.
AN amplification of the same circumstance of the persons, whereunto are also
adjoined two other circumstances: And the amplification of the persons
repenting, consists in this, that the men of all ages, sex, and kind or
condition, as the Peers and States of the Realm, and also the common people
fasted, and clothed themselves with sackecloath. They did therefore openly
repent. Concerning age, the very children and infants also fasted, concerning
sex, the females and the males, yea the bridegromes and brides fasted. And
these are gathered by this word (Man) in this place taken generally. But
Ioellcap. 2. ver. 16. all these former are expressly commanded for to fast in
these words: Gather the people, sanctify the congregation: gather the elders:
assemble the children, and those that suck the breasts: let the bridegroom go
forth of his chamber, and the bride out of her bride ch^mber. Thus then all
that same whole most great city was in sorrow, and full of most bitter
heaviness, and therefore gave forth testimony of her repentance. Such a
general sorrow does the prophet Isai foreshew that the Moabites should be in,
because of the great evils, that were to come upon them. cap. 15. ver. 3. In
their streets (says the Prophet) shall they b^^ girded with sackecloath: on
the tops of their houses, and in their streets every one shall howl and
come down with weeping. Read the whole chapter. To be short, not only the
men, but also the cattle, All the tame beasts of the Ninivites do fast.
that is, all the brute beasts that were tame, and had their being with men,
fasted, and put on sackcloath and cloth of hair, as the oxen, the sheep,
under which by the figure Synecdoth (which is, when the whole is put for the
part, or the part for the whole) I do comprehend the other kinds of tame
beasts, (...) hens, dogs, and the rest, which do live of food given unto
them by men, and not of ravine. But this latter point was extraordinary in
this public repentance, neither is it rashly of us to be followed: but was
used by them to show the greatness of their sorrow. And thus much of the
first circumstance of this public repentance of the Ninivites.

2. Circumstance of this repentance.
There follows the second circumstance, namely, the mean whereby this
repentance was proclaimed. It was proclaimed by the public commandment of the
king and his whole counsel the which by a sergeant was openly cried and
declared through out the whole city of Ninive. So those things which are
public, ought to be done by the authority of the public counsel.

The third circumstance, is the form and manner of this repentance, 3.
Circumstance
and the same most exquisite or perfect so far footh as concerns the
outward signs, for all these are commander to fast from all kind of meat,
not only from delicate and dairtie meats: sackcloath, and cloth of hair are
appointed for the^^to wear and to be clothed withal, so that both the men and
also the beasts themselves might be understood to be worthy of that anger of
God, that is, of death. Finally a strong cry unto God is commanded with
mourning and tears, that by the earnest feeling of their misery and
guiltiness before God, all of them might repent and mourn. For here is
prescribed or appointed a religious fast, and not a natural, or physical fast.

Verse. 8. But let man and beast put on sackcloath, and cry mightily unto God:
yea, let every man turn from his evil way, and from the wickedness that is
in their hands.
4. Circumstance The end of this fast and repentance.
THE fourth circumstance, the end of this fast and repentance. For they were
commanded not only to use these outward things, but also to cast away all their
wicked living earnestly, and to refourme and amend the same sincerely: And this
by the figure Synechdoc he (which is, when the whole is put for the part, or
the part for the whole) is comprehended under the name of wickedness or
violence: because that this is commonly the first public fruit of the unjust
life of men, namely, violence or hurt, the which is offered by us unto our
neighbors. And therefore Paul says 1 Thessalonians. 4.6. Let no man oppress or
defraud his brother in any matter: for the Lord is avenger of all such things.
This is then another part of repentance. Here is nothing spoken of the true
worship of God, of the covenant, and embracing the Messiah: no nor so much as
of laying aside of their idolatry do these Ninivites take any care or
thought, but only of such known vices, as do turn to the hurt of men.

Ver. 9. Who can tell if God will turn, and repent, and turn away from his
fierce wrath, that we perish not?
THis is a rendering of a reason of the former commandment comprehended in the
kings decree concerning their fasting, A reason of the former comman dement of
God.
and also their putting upon them of sackcloath and ashes, whereby both the
people are encouraged unto repentance, to wit, upon hope to escape the wrath of
God: and also by the same is shown, what manner of feeling that same general
feeling is, the which all men have, which are not plain Atheistes, of the
mercy and kindness of God toward mankind. For all men by the remnants of
the light of nature which is in them, do generally know, that God is both
just, and also merciful: that which his government of the world, and
expeperience it self does prove: but yet all this notwithstanding they
neither know the foundation, nor yet the force both of this justice, and also
mercy of God, as namely being infidels, the which nevertheless the faithful
do understand, being taught both by the word of God and also by the holy
ghost. We have therefore seen before both in the mariners, and also in the
Ninivites themselves, what manner of common knowledge there is in all men, yea,
even in the infidels concerning the righteousness of God, to wit, that he is
just, and a punisher of wickedness: so also this is a common principle engraffed
in the hearts of all men, that God likewise is merciful and loving. But both
these knowledges do far differ from that, which the godly and the faith full
have concerning both these properties and virtues of God, out of his word, and
by the feeling and swetnesse of a true faith. For as high as the heaven is
above the earth, so great is Gods mercy toward them that fear him. Psalm. 103.
verse. 11. and Psalm. 34. v. 8. the prophet wills the faithful, who indeed
only have the true feeling hereof, To taste and see how gracious the Lord in
and adds, Blessed is the man that trusts in him. Fear the Lord, ye his
saints: for nothing wants to them that fear him. The lion do lack, and
suffer hunger: but they which seek the Lord, shall want nothing that is good.
This feeling without all doubt the Ninivites wanted, being only troubled and
careful for their destruction, and thereof admonished or warned by Jonas.

I The Ninivites hope well of God, though he threaten them.
But here are two things to be marked. The first is, That they conceive a good
hope of God even then nevertheless, when he threatens them, and do believe
that he may be appeased, but yet doubtingly: and not after that manner, after
which he believed, that said: yea albeit he kill me, yet will I trust in him.
Job. 13. ver. 15. But for that all men, as I have said, being by nature
taught concerning the mercy of God, are not utterly void of all hope, albeit I
do not deny that the Ninivites in this hoping of the mercy of God did greatly
wrestle both against the threatenings of Jonas, and also against the testimony
or witness of their own conscience condemning them. This also we are to
follow, and that so much the rather, because that we have most assured
promises of God to be merciful unto us in Christ, as is plentifully to be
seen in many places of that most comfortable Psalm 89. and also every where
in the prophets, singing this note, Turn unto me. The other point here to be
noted is, That they say God may repent, and call back the sentence by him
given. But God is unchangeable and can not lie. Titus cap. 1. verse. 2. I
answer, ^he voice and sentence of God is of two sorts: 2 They say that God may
repent, and in what sense this may be understood.
The one Comminatorie or threatening only: The other definitive and absolute.
This latter can never be revoked or called back, the former may. For that is
pronounced or given against us under a certain condition, the which if we do
perform according unto the will of God threatening us, it is all one as if it
had never been given against us. Such were these threatenings of God of the
destruction of Ninive, except they repented, as appears by the number of
forty days being adjoined thereunto. Gods threatenings against the Ninivites,
conditional.
They repented: therefore those threatenings ceased to have place any longer. Of
this kind of sentence of God speak the Ninivites here, when as they say, Who
knows, if God will repent, etc.

Verse. 10. And God savv their works, that they turned from their evil ways:
and God repented of the evil that he had said he would do unto them, and he
did it not.
THE conclusion of the whole former narration or discourse. The conclusion of
the former narration.
And it shows that God being moved with the repentance or change of living
made by the Ninivites, spared them, and not for their outward ceremonies only,
as their sackcloath, ashes, and fasting, for this was the meaning of God, that
if they did after this manner repent, they should be saved from the threatened
destruction. The end of God his reprooving of us.
This is the end of all Gods threatenings toward us, and chidings with us, to
wit, that we should earnestly turn unto him. August. God does not in such
sort find fault with us, as to insult or triumph over us, but to bring us to
confusion and shame for our sins, that he may afterward heal us. So God
teaches us that the end of the sending of his prophets to reproove his people,
was, that they should amend and be blessed, as Ierem. cap. 35. verse. 15. I have
(says God) sent unto you all my servants the prophets, rising up early, and
sending them, saying. Return now every man from his evil way, and amend your
works, and go not after other gods to serve them, and ye shall dwell in the
land, which I have given unto you and to your fathers. And David Psalm. 103.
ver. 9. says, That God will not always chide, neither keep his anger for
ever, but that he has mercy in store for them that fear him and turn from
wickedness. Read the whole Psalm, for it is full of most excellent comforts.

Two things are to be observed or noted in this place: The one that it is
attributed unto their works, that God did save them. I answer, 1. The sparing
of the Ninivites in what sense attributed unto their works.
So far forth as those works, namely their repentance were signs and
testimonies or witnesses of the earnest trembling and fear of the Ninivites at
the threatenings of God and they themselves were not hypocrites, but such as
unfainedly were sorry, albeit not in such manner as the godly in such cases are.
For God loves the only resemblances of Christian virtues, as o^ faith, hope,
fear, etc. that we should understand by how much the more he loves the true
virtues themselves, and therefore that we should follow after them the more
earnestly. So he allows the repentance of Achab 1. King. 21.29. And the faith
of Simon Magus. Acts 8.13. and of Judas Iscariot, who also wrought miracles
with the other Apostles. The other thing to be noted is, 2. God did not as he
threatened, and why?
that God is said not to have done, that is, not to have executed those his
threatenings. Not that any thing ca^ let or hinder the will of God, besides God
himself, but, as (...) have showed, therefore he did it not, because he would
not. For he had not simply decreed to destroy the Ninivites, but under this
condition, unless they did repent from their wicked way, at least wise in the
outward regard of their living. The which thing they performed.

CAP. 4.
Verse. 1. Therefore it displeased Jonas exceedingly, and he was angry.
THE consequence or what followed this their repentance. For the Prophet goes
on not only in telling of the history of things that followed, but also in
the description of his own sin, when as he had not yet thoroughly repented
being learned by the former punishments, that by his example all men may learn
the true way of establishing the glory of God, and not to make estimation and
determination of the fruit of the work whereunto they are called of God, We
may not esteem of Gods doing after our own mind, but what he wills the same
ought in every respect to like and content us.
by the judgment and sense or feeling of man's wisdom, and of the flesh, but
by the judgment, will, and wisdom of God himself: that look what he will
have brought to pass, and after what manner he will have it brought to pass,
the same also may like us, and that we allow of the same, albeit that we did
suppose that some other thing, or after some other manner, would have ensued of
it. In a word, we are hereby taught not to consult with flesh and blood
neither in the work, nor about the work of God. For flesh and blood can not
inherit the kingdom of God. 1. Cor. 15.50. For Gods thoughts are not like
unto our thoughts. Isai. 55.8, 9. Now this that follows from this first verse
unto the 5. ver. is here set down by a figure called Hysteron proteron.
Hysteron proteron, is a figure, by the which that that was last is v^ported
first, and contrariwise that which was first, is placed last. 1. Jonas
dissenteth from the will of God. 2. He is exceeding angry.
For after his sermons made in Ninive, Jonas departed out of the city, and
waiting there 40. days, he perceives that God had repented and spared the
Ninivites. Wherefore this prayer was made after those forty days expired or
past. For after those 40. days it came to pass that Jonas complained
grievously with himself because that the Ninivites were spared, and was most
exceeding angry.

This verse then contains two things. First his dissenting or disagreeing
from the will of God: secondly his anger upon this disagreeing, nay his burning
and great boiling in mind, not against God I confess (for that had been the
part of a man utterly wicked, such a one as Jonas was not) but within himself
taking it grievously, for that the matter and issue of his preaching, did not
so fall out, as he hoped it would do, and as he thought it to be meet for the
glory of God, and for the commending of the authority of the ministry
prophetical, and his especially among the Gentiles, and men that were scorners
of the God of Israel. This man therefore did fret within himself, and did
chafe in his mind, (but not against God, accusing him of lying or falsehood, or
blaspheming his name) but preferring the judgment of his own mind concerning
the establishing of the God of Isreal's power among the Heathen, and the
certentie of his word among men that were infidels, before that counsel of the
wisdom of God, and also before so notable a fruit of his ministry or office.
Whereby doubtless does appear evidently the power and fear of the mighty God
of Israel even among the Heathen themselves, whilst they in such sort give ear
unto and receive his prophet, whom they had never seen before, and one that
was not famous among them by any miracles there wrought, Two causes of Jonas
his anger and as it were, sauciness to chide with God. 1
and do believe him to be a most true prophet. There were therefore two causes
of this trouble and malapertnesse of Jonas: The one, for that he supposed that
that way only the glory of the God of Israel might be established among the
Heathen, the which otherwise was like to be contemned or despised, namely if
those things the which he as a prophet and preacher had in the name of God
told unto them for to come to pass might in every respect so fall out as he
had foretold them that they should. And that otherwise God himself should be
accused of inconstancy, and his prophets of vanity and open lying. 2. Jonas
understands not the end of Gods threatenings.
The other cause is, for that he neither thinks that this is the scope or
drift of Gods threatenings, that men should convert or turn, and repent (for
God will not the death of a sinner: but that he should repent and live) neither
does he esteem so much of this effect of his ministry, as he does of the
falling out of the matter according unto the bare word of his preaching. We
must I confess, be fervent or earnest unto God (as Paul Romans 12. v. 11.
bids us be fervent in spirit) in which two causes, Jonas was greatly
deceived, and most men for the most part now a days do offend (whilst they
intermeddle and mingle the^^ own wisdom with the commandment of God) being
men otherwise grave and godly, and ready to obey God: but they consider not
that which is 1. Corinthians. cap. 1. verse. 20. Has not G^^ made the wisdom of
this world foolishness? And Roman. 8.7. The wisdom of the flesh is enmity
against God.

Verse. 2. And he prayed unto the Lord and said, J pray thee, O Lord, was not
this my saying, when I was yet in my country Therefore I prevented it to flee
unto Tarshish. For I knevve that thou art a gracious God, and merciful, slow
to anger, and of great kindness, and repentest thee of the evil.
The first amplification of the sin of Jonas.
THE first amplification of the sin of Jonas, the which Jonas himself makes,
not only to show, whether in the end those our carnal or fleshly cogitations
or thoughts carry us and lead us quite out of the way: but also to teach that
we can often times ley false gloses, and allege fair titles, causes, and
reasons for our foolish prayers, vows, and judgments. So Christ Luc. 9.55.
answers his Apostles. Ye know not of what spirit ye are. Which glosing and
fair excusing of matter is done not only unprofitably in cases between God
and us, but also disobediently and blasphemously, and turns unto our
condemnation. Therefore Jonas is not only foolishly angry: but also will
approove this his foolishness unto God himself, and confirm or strengthen it
as a wise counsel or purpose. Jonas would have God to like of his folly.
Wherefore he says, that he spoke unto God, and pleaded with him (the which in
this place he calls praying) for the avouching and justifying of this his
burning and boiling anger. For he did not blaspheme God, as some wicked persons
use to do: but with greater reverence lays open this his cause unto God. And
finally in the end he desires of God that he may die for the self same cause.

This prayer of Jonas has three parts: first, the entrance or beginning, I
pray thee, O Lord, Three parts of Jonas his prayer. 1. The entrance. 2. The
defense of Jonas his cause.
whereby he wishes God to be favorable, and an upright judge unto him, and
shows that the desire of his mind was most vehement or earnest. The second
is, the defense and prooving of his cause and righteousness, to wit, that he
did at the first justly and upon good ground take this counsel to flee away:
because that he did foresee that this whole commandment of God unto the
Ninivites would be vain and of none effect, and hurtful also unto the glory
of God among them. For they would laugh God to scorn hereby as changeable,
because he brought not to pass the things which he threatened, or as not able
to do it in the judgment of Jonas: and so consequently, that they would more
and more contemn or despise the true God of Israel. This forsooth is the
foolishness of worldly, that is to say, mad wisdom. As if God knew not what
course to take for the maintenance of the glory of his name and majesty of his
power and godhead even among the very heathen themselves, and infidels, after a
far other sort then we can imagine. The third part is the reason of his
righteousness or just cause: 3. The reason of Jonas his righteousness or just
cause.
the which reason does utterly overthrow it self, which reason forsooth is
this, because God is merciful, therefore he shall be contemned or despised of
men: nay rather the self same effects of the mercy of God do prove the power
and efficacy or force of God in the ministry of Jonas, as he that converted
those Ninivites being desperate persons. And God is praised for his mercy and
long sufferance. Roman. 2.4. and Psalm. 136. throughout the whole Psalm.

Verse. 3. Therefore now, O Lord, take I beseech thee, my life from me: for it
is better for me to die then to live.
The second amplification of Jonas his sin.
THE second amplification of the sin of Jonas, taken from the immoderate heat
of his anger, and the malapertnesse of his wit, who will not only have himself
and his cause to be acquitted and cleared before God, albeit the same were
false: but is moreover so carried away with the same force of his wrath, that
therefore he wishes for death, because that God follows not his judgment and
mind against the Ninivites. See whither in the end the wisdom of the flesh
does carry even godly men, and how it is indeed enmity against God, as Paul
terms it. Romans 8.7.

Two parts of this verse. 1. The second part of Jonas his prayer.
There are two parts of this verse, the first is, the second part of Jonas his
prayer, the which shows the vehement and earnest desire of Jonas in the
thing, which he asks, noted in these words, I beseech thee (says he
again) and (Thou O Lord) also (because it is better.) For by these words is
declared and painted forth a greater malapertnesse in Jonas then before, and
the same more damnable or to be blamed, who is so unappesably angry because of
the falling out of the matter otherwise then he thought meet in his wisdom.
This doubtless hereby appears to be true, the which James says, cap. 1.
verse. 20. The wrath of man does not accomplish the righteousness of God.

2. The thing asked.
The second part, is the thing it self, the which he asks. Jonas does not
therefore wish for any small hurt unto himself, but even for death it self.
And albeit that it be lawful for the godly sometimes to wish for death, Jn
what cases death may be wished for.
so far forth as this life of ours is a shop of sins (as Paul calls it
the body of this death, and wishes to be delivered therefrom. Romans 7. ver.
24.) or in respect that death it self is the last degree and entrance unto us
to behold Christ (and so Paul desires to be loosed, and to be with Christ:)
yet to wish for death by and through despair and impatiencie in troubles of
mind, through weariness of this life, which is the gift of God: through pride
of mind, or our wrestling and striving against the providence of God, is
wicked and ungodly. So Elias wishes to die through weariness of life and
fear of Ie^abel, and desires God, saying, 1. King. 19 4 It is now enough, O
Lord, take my soul, for I am no better then my fathers. Jonas most impatient.
These words therefore of Jonas, It is better for me to die then to live, are
the words of a man most impatient, and do not contain a comparison of one
good thing with another good thing: but do show a most bitter feeling of
burning anger, and the assault of a man now able to refrain himself no longer.
It is better, that is to say, it is more to be wished for of me thus carried
away with the trouble and unquietness of my mind.

Verse. 4. Then said the Lord, Do thou well to be angry?
The judgment of God concerning this fact of Jonas.
Now follows the sentence or judgment of God concerning the fact, prayer,
and anger of Jonas. Therefore this place with the whole place following, is a
commoration or staying in laying out of things more particularly. For Jonas
does severally discourse, what was said and done, and followed after his
prayer. First therefore we are to hear the voice of God concerning this anger
of Jonas, to the end that no man should excuse it, as Ierom has done, God
condemns it, what fair gloss so ever it may seem to carry. And he does
afterward show a reason of this his condemning of it, and confirms the same
by a notable falling out of a like matter, and in the end God does approve the
same even unto Jonas himself, who at the length rests satisfied and
contented therewith all. Hereof appears, that how wise soever the carnal or
fleshly reasons of men may seem unto us to be, how fit, glorious and agreeable
unto the matters taken in hand, that they al notwithstanding do vanish away
like smoke, or that they are to veil the bonnet, and as it were to strike
sail unto the wisdom of God alone, that whatsoever God shall ordain to the
contrary, or will to be done, that same be liked and allowed of us, and that we
wholly rest our selves upon his providence, for the counsails of God are not
only diverse from our counsails (as the Lord says Isa. 55.8. My thoughts are
not your thoughts, nor my ways your ways:) but also God is infinite ways
wiser then we, as Paul teaches 1. Cor. 1.25. That the foolishnes of God is
wiser then men, and the weakness of God stronger then men. Yea in the ordering
of all things in particular, and also in general, he alone is the best judge
and Moderator: whose counsa^^^ and works, albeit they be often hidden, and
wonderful unto us, yet are they always most just and well framed, and for
this cause to be allowed.

Verse. 5. So Jonas went out of the city, and sat on the East side of the
city, and there made him a booth, and sat under it in the shadow, till he
might see what should be done in the city.
Where Jonas became after his preaching until the 40. days were ended.
SEcondly here is described, where Jonas became in the mean season whilst after
his preaching had through the whole city of Ninive, he waits for the end of
the matter, that is, of his threatenings. This verse then is a further making
plain of the matter the which ought to be read by a parenthesis. So long
therefore until the 40. days were out, after the diligent execution of his
office in the city. Jonas goes aside out of the city, and abides
notwithstanding in the country near adjoining, in his cottage, the which he
had built unto himself at the East side of the city for a little time. And
here are two things to be noted to wit, the wisdom and patience of Jonas. His
wisdom, in that he departs from the city, The wisdom of Jonas.
believing that it will come to pass, that the Ninevites should be destroyed.
Least therefore that he should be wrapped in the same judgment with them, he
does wisely remove himself from the^, and that by the self same spectacle, he
might the more confirm that his threatening would prove true, and so might make
the Ninevites afraid. And so to assure his people that Babylon should be
destroyed, the Prophet Isai 48.20. says unto them, Go ye out of Babel: flee
from the Chaldeans, with a voice of joy, etc. So the Angel, Apoc. 8.4. wills
the people to depart out of Babel for fear otherwise they should be punished
with them: Go ye out of her my people (says the voice from heaven) that ye be
not partakers in her sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues.

The patience of Jonas.
The patience of Jonas herein appears, that he sits there, that is,
patiently waits until the whole 40. days do pass away. In the mean while
he sits, not under the shadow of the gourd, the which was not yet grown
(for it sprung up afterward) but under the shadow of the cottage the which he
himself had slightly builded and made. For Jonas did not live or dwell there
deliciously and in pleasure.

Verse. 6. And the Lord God prepared a gourd, and made it to come up over Jonas,
that it might be a shadow over his head: and deliver him from grief. So Jonas
was exceeding glad of the gourd.
What ensued after Jonas his prayer, and God his answer unto the same.
THirdly here is declared, what things followed after that same prayer of Jonas,
and God his answer unto the same: both which (as I said before) after those
whole 40. days being fully ended. After those 40. days then, and not before,
Jonas prayed so angerly: and when as God had answered him, he alleges a
reason of this his answer, and mercy toward the Ninevites, the which he
confirms by the confession of Jonas himself, and by the issue and
likelihoode of a thing most apparent, to the end the counsel and purpose of God
in pardoning them, may appear unto all men to be most wise and just. This
therefore fell out after those 40. days, so that Jonas did yet once again
show the malapertnes and impatience of his mind, and the same utterly
inexcusable and yet notwithstanding it did spring from the same fountain from
the which the former did. Out of this self same does God show two things: Our
affections in show never so fair, are hateful unto God, unless they he
wholly subdued unto his will.
first, that our affections, albeit godly, lawful, and tender in show
(unless they be wholly subject unto his will) are troublesome motions of our
disobedient flesh unto God, and fruits of our stubbornnes, and therefore unto
him worthily hateful, bitter, and filthy. The second thing is, God out of this
second anger of Jonas, altogether immoderate or unmeasurable and rash, takes
an occasion and cause to condemn the former anger also. For so by degrees also
God does lead us unto earnest repentance, and teaches us by little and
little, as it were by play, that the things the which in us are vicious, the
which notwithstanding we would not easily confess so to be, he might prove and
show by the comparison and similitude of other things known and granted of
us, to be utterly to be condemned, foul and filthy.

The order of the Prophet in describing his anger.
Further, in the setting out of this whole matter, the Prophet uses this order,
that first he shows the cause of his second anger and wrath unto the 8. ver.
Secondly he declares, that his anger and immoderate rage, ver. 8. and 9.
Lastly, that thereupon God took occasion to condemn Jonas both in this, and
also in that his former complaint, v. 10, 11. This sixth verse contains two
things, and both of them a preparation only unto the declaring of the anger of
Jonas. First, what God prepared for Jonas, yet remaining in his booth, the
which he had slightly made of boughs: and secondly, 1. What God prepared for
Jonas.
what joy Jonas conceived for the same. God ordained and would have a gourd to
grow up for him (for so the word kikaion is to be translated, 2. What was his
joy for the same. Kikaion, There is great stir about the translation of this
word, but I have rather followed those which do english it, a gourd.
whatsoever August. epist. 10. say against Jerome to the contrary) and that
forthwith, and almost in one moment, for it grew up in an artificial day, that
is, within XII. equinoctial hours, v. 10. so high and so full of leaves, that
it shadowed Jonas his whole booth, and did defend him from the heat of the
sun, the which was then most parching and burning: and finally with the
leaves thereof it made him a cool shadow. Therefore the growing and manner of
this gourd was extraordinary: and for this cause God is said to have prepared
it, that is to say, this tree sprang up not by any natural mean, but
supernaturally, or extraordinarily, God so ordaining for the keeping of Jonas
from grief, that is, from that scorching heat, the which Jonas took most
grievously at that time, and in that place. Wherein not only the fact of God,
but also the end of the same is briefly touched, to wit, that we should know
that he is careful for the least discommoditie and grief of those that are
his, that he may help them. And thus much did God.

Jonas his joy.
But Jonas for his part on the otherside, is exceeding glad and joyful both for
his coolth and that same sudden shade given him by God against the burning of
the sun: and also especially for the tree or shrubbe it self that was sprung
up, for the height thereof, for the leaves, for the fairness, for the shade
of it, because that all these things in this gourde were singular above the
manner of other gourds. So in every kind of thing those points and parts do
delice us the which are singular and excelling above the usual manner, because
that in them there appears a certain singular and especial favor of God,
and a work of his omnipotency, or almighty power. So this was in deed in
Jonas a most joyful affection of his mind for the springing up of the gourd,
and the same most favorable and loving toward the gourd it self, a shrub of
base account and of small continuance: yet without any cause, the which might
grow of any especial pains, labor, or hope of his toward the gourd.

Verse. 7. But God prepared a worm, when the morning rose the next day: and it
smote the gourd, that it withered.
The gourd upon the sudden destroyed by God.
THe consequent, or showing what followed. For here is declared how the gourd
quickly springing up, was quickly also destroyed by God. The which also is a
preparatiue unto the declaring of Jonas his anger. For these things in like
manner do prove and show him to have bin impatient, faulty, and beyond measure
and reason delicate and tender: nay wanton, albeit that this his ange^ also
seemed unto Jonas himself lawful and just. Further, it hereby appears, that
this gourd died after an extraordinary and a certain peculiar manner, for that
there breeds so soon a worm i^ him, and the same specially and suddenly by
God set unto the roo^ of him. This worm then gnawing and eating the root of
the gourde, and robbing it of moystnes, forthwith kills the plant whereupon
the tree or shrub withers and dies. For plants have also their diseases and
wounds, as wormeating, blasting, and such like Plin. l. 17. c. 24. Not. Hist.
Yet some will have that the gourd di^ not for all this fall from the booth of
Jonas: but always aforde^ him some small shade such as it was, because that
the withere^ leaves of this gourd did yet remain still hanging upon the pole
of his cottage, and made a shadow, but a small one, and the which did not any
longer keep Jonas from so great burning of the sun*

Verse. 8. And when the sun did arise, God prepared also a ferue^ East wind:
and the sun beat upon the head of Jonas, that (...) fainted, and wished in
his heart to die, and said, It is better f^^ me to die, then to live.
The cause of Jonas his anger.
THe third part of this same preparation, the which declarer the cause and anger
of Jonas: to wit, a parching heat, great then was usual, the which God sent
that same day and time. Therefore this verse contains two things: the which
Jonas is angry, and prays unto God in that his choler and heat of mind. The
second comprehends a description of this anger, and prayer.

The third cause of Jonas his being angry, was the parching and burning of the
sun, being greater then it was wo^t, by the means whereof it did beat upon
the head of Jonas very grievously. Of this heat there were two causes, Two
causes of the heat mentioned in this verse.
both the ordinary season of the year, and the sun, and also that same
extraordinary East wind, faint, and dissoluing or loosing the members, such
like kind of winds as are wont commonly to blow in the summer, the air
being dry and void of clouds, the which winds do not refresh us, or cool
the air: but rather increase the heat of the sun, because that they also
are hot and parching, and faint and calm. By which like means the Lord also
can scorch and parch the fruits of the earth for the sins of his people, as
he testifies Agg. 2.18. where he says: I smote you with blasting, and mildew,
and with hayle, in all the labors of your hands, and yet ye turned not unto
me, says the Lord. Of this I gather that these things were done in the summer.
For Assyria (in the which Ninive is) is no Southern cuntry, that it should
have any great heats, besides in the summer. Here then also, like as before v.
2. and 3. the anger of Jonas was malapert and saucie, and the assault of his
mind very raging, the which grows in this place in like sort, of the too well
liking of his own counsel, and of the things which he approves or allows.
For what rashness and great hastines is this, that he wishes and desires out
of hand to die? for that he should desire this by and by, and that of God, his
hasty anger egged him on thereunto. And Jonas is here angry through the
feeling of the flesh, as before, and that more manifestly, albeit that in show
he seemed to have a colorable and reasonable cause, to wit, for that he was
delited with the fairenes of the gourd that was sprung up, and did solace him
self therewith, as with a most dainty work of God, and a favor of the same
God toward him, being oppressed or grieved with the heat. This is in deed a
fair pretense or show of the flesh. But the true original or beginning of
this kind of anger is the waywardnes and pride of man his wit. Jonas has a
fair show for his anger.
For we do prefer our counsails and will before the wisdom and will of
God, so that we take it very hardly and grievously that it should be and come
to pass, the which albeit that it be done by the will of God, yet
notwithstanding it falls out often otherwise then we would wish. As for Jonas
he is not properly or especially angry, because he now felt the sharp heat
of the sun: neither yet does he pray, that God would strengthen him to bear
so great parching of the same, or that God would a bate the heat: but he is
angry, The proper cause of Jonas his anger.
for that those things the which he had made reckoning with himself should
have continued, and the which for the time ought to have bin fit and commodious
for him, and to be a witness of the favor of God toward his self and his
ministry, the same were now changed and taken away, to wit, his brave gourd,
a work in deed of God and extraordinarily sprung up in the favor of Jonas
was decayed, and extraordinarily also perished. Therefore through the self
same carnal or fleshly wisdom he does imagine the commendation of his
ministry to lie in the gourd, like as he did before suppose his contempt, to
lie in the saving of the city. Therefore Jonas is angry for the dying of the
gourd: and not properly for that he was scorched after that manner with the
burning of the sun, as appears hereafter ver. 9. and 10. and he does not
now any more desire any other sign and testimony of God his favor toward
him, but death through a troubled and disquiet affection. For through
vnstaiednes of mind he desires to die. The which argues or proves the
corruption, disobedience, and fury of men in their carnal or fleshly
affections, and whilst they do not wholly submit them selves unto the will of
God alone.

Verse. 9. And God said unto Jonas, Do thou well to be angry forth gourd? And
he said, I do well to be angry unto the death.
An amplification of the anger of Jonas.
AN amplification of this second sin or anger of Jonas. And it is amplified by
the reprehension or admonition of God, and the disobedience and contestation or
auouchment of Jonas. The reprehension is here made by God, like as before ver.
4. Two things are to be noted in this reprehension. 1. The manner of speaking.
First, the manner o^ speaking, the which is an interrogation or asking of a
question* For this does more press him, and more evidently lay before Jonas
the fault of this his anger, and notes out the same. For it does contain the
manifest anger and reproouing of God the just esteemer and judge of things, 2.
The words here used.
for the same. Secondly, the worde^ themselves are to be noted, Good, that is,
well and rightly done according unto the duty of a godly man, who knows
that God must be obeyed. Furthermore (to be as it were read angry) that is,
(although thou be angry for a just cause and matter) to be moved above
measure, and altogether impatiently, through a raging heat of mind. Finally,
for (a gourd) that is, a thing so light, and of so small an account.

The disobedience of Jonas, and what we are to learn thereby.
The stubbornes and disobedience of Jonas follows described by his own self,
that his earnest repentance may be understood, and that by this his exsample he
may teach that all mortal men how godly soever and the servants of God, do
notwithstanding easily raunge beyond the bounds of their duty, and fall into
most undoubted disobedience, unless they wholly submit themselves and all
their affections, albeit natural and colorable unto the will of God. For we
are carried quite away, when as we yield unto them never so little. Jonas his
disobedience very great. For 1. He strives against God. 2. He justifies his
anger. 3. He does not acknowledge his excessive anger.
And this contestation or auouchment and stubbornes of Jonas is grievous and
great. First in that answering he wrastleth against God so plainly speaking
unto him. Secondly for that in this place, like as before also, he does contend
or earnestly maintain the cause of this his anger to be just, as if that he
would reprove God of unjust judgment. Lastly, in that he does not acknowledge
this outrageous excess of his anger, by the which he was brought to wish for
death. So are we in like manner blinded, when as we do both rest upon the
judgment of our own wisdom, and let lose the bridle unto the affections or
desires of our flesh, and are ruled by such beasts.

Verse. 10. Then said the Lord, Thou have had pity on the gourd for the which
thou have not labored, neither made it grow, which came up in a night, and
perished in a night.
The application of the former history unto Jonas.
THe application of the whole history of the former fact and falling out of the
matter unto Jonas, whereby also God does confute or overthrow him, and shows
that his anger wherein he did so greatly please himself, to have bin most
unjust. In this sentence and condemnation of God, Jonas does now rest, and is
satisfied or contented. And thus in the end he does testify his true
repentance: but first many ways wrestling, and wrestling again, such is the
disobedient nature of man against God. This then is an application. For God
taking an argument from the lesser unto the greater, God proves his purpose in
saving the Ninevites to be most just by the acknowledgement of Jonas himself.
does prove his counsel and purpose in saving the Ninevites, even after the
preaching of Jonas to have bin most just, Jonas himself being now judge, who
is now taught so much by the similitude of the gourd, as it were by play. This
then is a confutation both of the former, and also of the latter cause, the
which Jonas did bring for the justifying of his anger. For God shows that it
was conceived and taken without any just ground. And he refuses the first
cause, for that he spared the Ninevites. For he proves that the consideration
of the gourd, and of Niniuie was diverse, that is, that there was great odds
betwixt them. In like manner he confuteth the latter cause, for that Jonas was
moved i^ such sort about a matter of nothing, and the which belonged not unto
him. The first part of the comparison.
But this verse does only lay open that part of the comparison, the which is
between the gourd and Niniue. By the which is taught, that the mercy of God
in pardoning the Ninuites, even after the threatenings of destruction denounced
or told unto them, was more just then was the pity and pleasure of Jonas
favoring the gourde, the which his pitifulnes Jonas did before maintain to be
just. So that in this place God does retort, or tu^^e back again upon Jonas
the things which he so obstinately al^ leadged and avouched for the justifying
of his own fact. So God does kill us with our own sword, and uses our own
vanity to the commendation and setting forth of his glory. Thus this first
part of the comparison does contain the pity of Jonas toward the gourd, but
God, as I said, does confute and reprove the same.

Verse. 11. And should not I spare Ninive that great city, wherein are six
s^^^ thousand persons, that cannot discern between their right hand and their
(...) hand? and also much cattle.
The second part of the comparison. The parts of this comparison lively laid
out by way of contrariety.
THis verse following has the other part of the same comparison, the which
shows by the other parts of the antithes^ or contrariety, that the cause of
God was the iuster. The parts of the comparison are these: In respect of the
person, Thou a man^ God. In respect of the Thing, Thou sparest a gourd: I,
Ninive. I^ respect of the Cause, The gourd is a shrub: Ninive a city: that is,
(...) company of men. The gourd is a shrub, of small reckoning and sho^
continuance: Ninive is a great multitude of men, and also of ca^^ tell. Thou
art angry for a gourd, the which is none of thine, tha^ is, the which thou
neither have planted, nor brought up, nor taken any pains about: I have planted
Ninive, I have taken pains abo^^ it, it is my labor, it is mine own thing,
the which I take pity o^^ Thou have pity on it, namly the gourd: I on this
city, and that which is mine own. Thou upon a thing the which is not to be
pitied^ have compassion upon men, who by reason of their age, and just (...)
excusable ignorance, are in the judgment of all men worthy o^ pardon, nay of
pity and compassion, the greater part of them being children and young
infants. This is the force of this comparion and justifying of God against
Jonas.

A Commentary of Lambert Danaeus upon the Prophet Amos.
CAP. 1.
The end of this prophecy, as also of the rest.
THe end and drift of this prophecy, is all one with the rest of the other
Prophets and their prophesies, namely, to lead us by the feeling of our own
destruction and misery, unto God the fountain and father of mercy through
his Christ: and so consequently to teach us to repent from our wicked living,
and to serve the true God, and to worship him according unto his law and
commandment. Therefore he both lays down the threatenings of God, and also
the promises. And first of all he does in general set forth the threatenings
against all sinners, yea, even men that are infidels. Then afterward
particularly against those which call themselves the people of God, and do
boast themselves of that name, such as in times past were both the Israelites,
and also the Jews properly so called, and now the Christians, whether Papists,
or Gospellers: whereof it comes to pass, that Amos begins with those
judgments of God, the which God did threaten generally against Idolaters. And
afterward he comes unto those which were peculiarly addressed unto the
Israelites, unto whom by name he was from God appointed a Prophet. Furthermore,
he rehearses those also which were ordained against the Jews themselves,
that is, against the kingdom of Judah, because they also did vaunt themselves
upon the praise and title of the people and inheritance of God, and that upon
better reason, then the kingdom of Israel. And thus much concerning the
threatenings.

As for the promises, Amos has the same which other Prophets have, to wit,
first general unto all mankind, then particular unto the true Church of God,
for and through the Messiah promised unto the Fathers, that is, our Lord Jesus
Christ, the which this our Prophet for the comfort of the godly, does
excellently set down. But concerning the time wherein Amos prophesied, The
time wherein Amos prophesied.
thus I think, saving the judgment of others, the which I would not by this
mine opinion have to be forestalled. Amos seems unto me to have been the
second of all those Prophets, whose prophesies we have in the volume as well
of the great, as also the small Prophets, the which are extant or to be found
in the Canonical books of the holy Scriptures. And I think that he lived
almost after forty years at the least from the death of the Prophet Elizeus,
and was by God raised up in the kingdom of Israel, for that the same part of
the people especially wanted earnest admonitions, when as it had cast away the
Word of God, and the true Sacrifices, and in the room thereof set up their
own. The reason why the Prophet Amos is thought to have prophesied about this
time.
The reason of mine opinion is this, because that Elizeus dyed at least about
the first beginning of the reign of Ioas the son of Ioachaz king of Israel:
for 2. King. cap. 13. ver. 14. mention is made that Ioas came to visit Elizeus
lying in his deathbed in these words, When Elisha fell sick of his sickness
whereof he dyed, Ioash the King of Israel came down unto him, and wept on his
face, and said, O my father, O my father, etc. And that this was in the
beginning of his reign, the diligent considering of that which follows in
that chapter, and in the beginning of the next, will easily declare. And from
that time until the 27. year of King Jeroboam (who was the son of this
Ioas, and in the first year in the which Vzzias began to reign in Judah,
which was the time of the beginning of this prophecy) there do come 41.
years between. So Amos then lived and prophesied in that age, as he himself
teaches. Ionai seems to have been before Amos.
But the Prophet Jonas seems in time to have bin before him, which Jonas his
book of prophecy is in the Canon, or among the Canonical books of the
Bible, for as much as either in the reign of Ioas the father of this Jeroboam
(about the 27. year of whose reign Amos might have begun to prophecy) or at
least wise about the beginning of the reign of this Jeroboam, Jonas executed
his office, as appears 2. King. cap. 14. ver. 23. and so to the end of the
chapter, and as I have showed before in my notes before these Prophets. So that
the beginning of the Prophet Jonas may seem to have bin some certain years
after the death of Elizeus, the succession of the Prophets for a time being
discontinued, as easily may be gathered, if 2. King. cap. 13. ver. 14 be
compared with cap. 14. ver. 25. Wherefore among the Prophets, Jonas the first
in time of all the Prophets canonical.
whose writings are in the Canonical Scripture, Jonas is the first in respect
of time. For that which is objected of Micheas, whose book of prophesies is
extant, is against this nothing at all: because that Micheas is not the same
Micheas, the which prophesied in the days of King Achab, and was before Jonas.
And this our Amos is second, Amos the second, Oseas the third.
Oseas third, who fell into the times of Jeroboam the son of Ioas king of
Israel, and Vzzias the son of Amasias king of Judah: but because he is said
to have prophesied unto the times of King Ezechias, it is likely that he began
not at the self same beginning and instant of time, in the which those two
Kings (each in his kingdom) began to reign: but a little after. For by the
space of 14. years they reigned together, Jeroboam in Israel, and Vzzias in
Judah. Therefore if we do grant that Oseas began to prophecy an year or two
after that same earthquake, two year before the which Amos prophesied: Oseas
must then begin to execute his office in the 31. or 32. year of Jeroboam the
son of Ioas king of Israel, and in the 4. or 5. year of Vzzias king of
Judah. For I hold that the same earthquake happened in the second year of the
reign of Vzzias, and in the thirtith year of the reign of this Jeroboam. And
Oseas prophesied unto the beginning of Ezechias king of Judah, beginning at the
32. year of the reign of Jeroboam son of Ioas, (which fell into the fifth
year of Vzzias the king of Judah) that is, by the space of full 70 years,
well near. Oseas prophesied almost full 70 years, and Amos but 14.
But Amos seems to have finished his office within the space of that time,
wherein this Jeroboam of Israel, and Vzzias of Judah lived in one age together
in their Kingdoms and Empires, to wit, by the space only of 14. years. For
Amos makes mention of no other King, either of Israel, or of Judah, but of
Jeroboam the son of Ioas, and of Vzzias. And thus much of Jonas, Amos, and
Oseas.

Esaias the 4. Prophet in order and time.
The fourth in order and time seems to have been Isaias, and to have begun his
office after Oseas, but to have continued it longer, namely, until the times
of King Manasses, by whom about the beginning of his reign Isaias was put to
death. For when as Isaias makes no mention of this Jeroboam, who was the son
of Ioas, but of Vzzias, Ioatham, etc. only, he seems indeed to have begun to
prophecy under Vzzias king of Judah, but that same Jeroboam being now dead,
under whom both Amos and Oseas had now executed their office of Prophets.
Therefore in as much as Jeroboam the son of Ioas king of Israel dyed in the
14. year of Vzzias the king, Isaias cannot seem to have prophesied before
this time, but afterward about the 16. year of the reign of Vzzias. From
which time unto Manasses, and the beginning of his reign, there come between
above 80. years, all which time Isaias must have executed the office of a
Prophet: for he himself cap. 7. makes mention of three score years.

Verse. 1. The words of Amos, who was among the heardmen at Tecoa, which he saw
upon Israel, in the days of Vzziah King of Judah, and in the days of Jeroboam
son of Ioash King of Israel, two years before the earthquake.
The proposition containing five points.
THe proposition or principal ground of this whole book and prophecy, the
which contains five points. First, the summed the matter, the which is
comprehended in this book, namely* Words, 1. The preaching of Amos.
that is to say, the preaching of Amos, the which he uttered openly with a loud
voice. The second, what manner of words the same words were, that is to say,
the words of God: wherein the certainty and authority of these words, 2. What
manner of preaching it is, namely, such as was reveled by vision.
or prophecy is avouched. For it is a vision, that is, a revelation showed by
God himself, and committed unto the Prophet. Thirdly, unto whom it was showed,
to wit, unto Amos, who by the addition of certain circumstances, is described
what manner of man he was, both for the laying out of his person more
certainly, 3. Unto whom this preaching is committed.
that he might be known from others of the same name: and also for the better
and greater confirmation of his calling, as which was altogether
extraordinary, and raised up by God, for to beat down the pride and
outrageous haughtiness of the men of that age. For God made choice of this
man, whom he would send to terrify or fear the kingdom of Israel, the which
at that time was most flourishing. And he choseth a man that is a Thecuite, that
is, of the Jews, not of the Israelites (such a one as Elias notwithstanding
was) and one of the shepherds that kept cattle, as he confesses of himself,
chap. 7. verse. 14. saying: I was no Prophet, neither was I the son of a
Prophet, (he means of the ordinary manner and calling of Prophets) but I was
a heardman, and a gatherer of wild figs. God sends a Jew unto the
Israelites, to touch them the deeper by this means, as if they were such
manner of persons who now had none among them fit to teach them, but stood in
need of forrainers and strangers, and especially Jews, whom notwithstanding
they did deadly hate, as may appear by the rent and breach, when the ten
Tribes fell away from the other twain, upon that, that their request was not
granted by Rehoboam, where they upon that occasion speak thus, 1. King. cap
12. ver. 16. So when all Israel saw that the King regarded them not, the
people answered the King thus, saying, What portion have we in David? we have
none inheritance in the son of Ishai. To your tents, O Israel: now see to
thine own house, David. So Israel departed unto their tents. God sends a
Neathea^d, that by this obscure and base person in the world, he may cast down
those high and lofty spirits. For as it is 1. Cor. 1. ver. 27.28. God has
chosen the foolish things of the world to confound the wise and God has chosen
the foolish things of the world to confound the mighty things, And vile things
of the world, and things which are despised has God chosen, and things which
are not, to bring to naught things that are. For as the same Apostle speaks,
2. Cor. cap. 10. verse. 4, 5, 6. The weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but
mighty through God to cast down holds, casting down the imaginations, and
every high thing that is exalted against the knowledge of God, and bringing
into captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ, and having ready the
vengeance against all disobedience when your obedience is fulfilled. Thecua, of
the which Amos in this verse is said to be, was one of the cities in Judah,
built by king Rehoboam son of Solomon, as it is 2 Chronicles. cap. 11. verse 5.6.
And Rehoboam dwelt in Jerusalem, and built strong cities in Judah: he built
also Beth-Iehem, and Etam, and Tekoa. Fourthly, 4. Unto whom Amos is sent.
here is taught unto whom Amos is sent or against whom those things were
commanded by God to be spoken, that is to say, against the Israelites, namely,
against that kingdom properly, the which was separated and divided from Judah:
but yet (because God is the keeper of his whole Church) Amos does also
prophecy against the kingdom of Judah, that it also may be saved by God.
Lastly and fifthly, 5. At what time Amos proph^sied.
under Vzzias king of Judah, and Jeroboam the son of Ioas king of Israel,
full two years before that same great earthquake happened in all that same
whole country, the which, as I said, seems to have happened at the least
about the second year of the reign of Vzzias, and the thirtith year of the
reign of this Jeroboam.

Verse. 2. And he said, the Lord shall roar from Zion, and utter ^e voice from
Jerusalem, and the dwelling places of the shephear^ shall perish, and the top
of Carmel shall wither.
The sum of the judgments of God against the Israelites.
THe sum of the judgments of God the which should com^ to pass against the
Israelites, to wit, the utter desolation or wasting of their whole country.
For all the best and fattest things (...) this kingdom of the Israelites,
shall in such sort be strooke^^ God in his just judgment, and for their
disobedience, that bo^^ the cottages of the shepherd themselves shall mourn,
to wit, (...) being destroyed: and also Carmel that same most fruitful
mountain shall wither, being touched with the heat of God his ange^ Therefore
it is certain that these things are denounced and tol^^ against Israel, by the
place Carmel, the which the Prophet rehe^seth in as much as it is a famous
mountain in the land of Isra^^ And here in this place the Prophet also by and
by gets autho^tie unto his prophecy, The Prophet wins authority and
attention unto his prophecy.
that it be not contemned or despised: a^ attention or eare-giuing thereunto,
whereby be they never so pro^^ and lofty otherwise, he does nevertheless
terrify or fear the^* He gets authority when as he teaches that these
things are ^^nounced both by God himself, and that they shall also be
fulfill^^ and that by the same God, the which is the God of Sion, a pla^^ most
known, and most holy, that is, that these things do co^^ from the true God,
and not from Idols. And he gets unto himself attention, or eare-giuing unto
that he speaks, by the figure which he uses, as this proposition and
sentence is garnished wi^^ majesty and loftiness of words. For God is said
now to roare^^ against them with a great and terrible yelling, as it were a
lyonst^red up and teased with anger. For this roaring does express bo^^ the
anger of the lion, and also the terriblenes or fearefulnes of (...) voice:
under which like phrase or manner of speaking the other Prophets do describe
the fierce wrath and anger of God, as lo^^ cap. 3. ver* 16. The Lord also
(says he) shall roar out of Sion, (...) utter his voice from Jerusalem, and
the heavens and the earth s^^ shake, but the Lord will be the hope of his
people, and the strength of t^^ children of Israel. So the Prophet Jeremy cap.
25. verse. 30. is will^^ for the terrifying of the wicked nations, to say unto
them: The L^^ shall roar from above, and thrust forth his voice from his holy
ha^tation: he shall roar upon his habitation, and shall cry alou^^ as they
that press the grapes, against all the inhabitants of the earth.

Verse. 3. Thus says the Lord, For three transgressions of Damascus, and for
four, I will not turn to it, because they have threshed Gilead with threshing
instruments of iron.
The confirmation of the former threatening.
THe confirmation of the former threatening against the Israelites both by the
example of other nations, the which the Prophet here recites, (yea even of
Judah) the which God does punish for the same sins: and also by the justice
and righteousness of God, the which is neither rashly moved, neither yet ought
to suffer these sins of the Israelites to escape unpunished. God is not
rashly moved to punish, but after that he has a long season borne with men,
yea and the same also obstinatly or stiffly continuing in sundry and most
grievous vices. Therefore he does in the end chastise and correct, not for one
or two sins of them only, but for many. But God will not let the sins of
the Israelites go scotfree, who can not suffer the offenses of the Jews their
brethren, nay of the Gentiles being altogether infidels to be unpunished, and
therefore will he not bear with the sins of these, the which ought to be
more holy.

Why the Prophet reckons up only those nations, the which were borderers
upon the Israelites.
Further, he reckons up only those nations, the which were neighbors unto
them, to the end the Israelites should be the more moved, and should believe
the things to be true, the which were threatened. For GOD has also punished
always before this, other nations besides these for their sins, and does yet
at this day punish them. And he begins with the kingdom of Damascus,
because that the power and glory thereof at that time was greater then of
other people near unto them, as being the head of al Syria: for so is it Isai.
cap. 7. verse. 8. The head of Aram (that is of Syria) is Damascus, and the head
of Damascus is Rezin, etc. And 1. King. cap. 19. verse. 15. Elias is commanded
to return by the wilderness unto Damascus, and there (as in the head city of
the land) to anoint Hazael King over Aram, that is, Syria: Damascus the chief
city of Syria.
for Damascus was then the Metropolitan or chief city of Syria.

1. The wicked life of the Damascens.
Now this verse contains two things. The first, the wicked and stubborn life
of them of Damascus. Their life is noted to be wicked by the word (Peshang)
the which signifies open rebellion and treachery against God, and not only
simple sin. And that it was fortresses: 1. Decapolis.
This province was called Decapolis. Secondly, by the country of Auen, or
Aueria, the which was another province of the kingdom of Damascus near unto
the Arabians, 2. Auen, or Aueria.
and in a manner a continual valley by the river Euphrates. And last of all by
the country of Eden, wherein also was a peculiar King of it own, the which
notwithstanding was subject unto the King of Damascus. 3. Eden.
All these countries as they were partners and partakers with them of Damascus,
in these sins and cruelty against the people of God: so shall they in like
manner be all overtaken with the same judgment of God. And thus much
concerning the kingdom it self, and the provinces of the kingdom at that
time most flourishing.

2. What shall become of the men.
In the second place he sets down what shall become of the men themselves.
They shall go into countries unknown unto them, and far off, as namely,
being carried away by the King of the Assyrians into Media, and into the city
thereof, the which i^ called Cir, or Cirus, 2. King. cap. 16. verse. 9. Then the
king of Asshur consented unto him: (that is, to king Achaz king of Judah, hiring
him for money against Rezin king of Syria) and the king of Asshur went up
against Damascus, and when he had taken it, he carried the people away to Kir,
(or Cir, or Cirus, as it is in the common translation, which for the most part
in the proper names this author follows) and slew Rezin. And least that these
things, because of the power and glory of the kingdom of Damascus, might
seem ridiculous, or to be laughed at as toys, and impossible, the Prophet
rehearses again, That these things are threatened by the true God himself,
who cannot lie, and by the almighty Lord Jehovah, whom nothing can withstand.

Verse. 6. Thus says the Lord, for three transgressions of Azzah, and for
four, I will not turn to it, because they carried away prisoners the whole
captivity, to shut them up in Edom.
THe second example of the judgments of God against the people bordering upon
Israel, The second example of God his judgments against the Philistines.
to wit, against the Philistines. The same things in a manner are here to be
noted, the which were before in the example of them of Damascus. I will
therefore only touch such things as it has proper and several to it self.
In this verse then this is singular or proper to it self, to wit, the cause,
why these Palestines, or Philistines are punished by God, and that with so
great a punishment, which is this, for that they also, like as the Damascens,
used great cruelty against the Israelites, that is, against the people of God:
but yet in another kind of cruelty. The Damascens slew the Israelites whom
they took: but the Philistines sold them, taking away all hope of deliverance,
or returning again, and coming home any more. For when they had once taken
the^, they did them away both unto the Greekish merchants, that they might
carry them away into far countries: and also unto the I dumeans the most
deadly enemies of the people of God, making with them this condition when they
sold them, that they never should afterward be redeemed of any* For so do I
expound these words (to shut them up in Edom) as if the Philistines did not
simply carry them into Idumea, when they had taken them, and sold them there:
but on this condition and bargain, that afterward they should never let them
depart again. The extreme cruelty of the Philistines, the which like they
used at other times also against God hi^ people.
Wherein appears their great cruelty, the which may also be gathered by
that which is written, 2. Chron. 21. ver. 16. in these words: So the Lord
stirred up against Iehoram the spirit of the Philistines, and the Arabians that
were beside the Ethiopians. And they came up into Judah, and brake into it; and
carried away all the substance that was found in the Kings house, and his
sons also, and his wives: so that there was not a son left him, save
Iehoahaz, the youngest of his sons. The Lord also by his prophet Joel
complains of this cruelty, as of other nations so also of the Philistines by
name, for selling a way his people into far countries unto the Greeks, that
there might be no hope of their returning, when he says: The children also of
Judah, and the children of Jerusalem have ye sold unto the Grecians, that ye
might send them far from their border.

God his church dear unto him.
By this example also appears, how dear the Church is unto God, how small
tokens soever it retain of his covenant (as was the Church of the Israelites
at that time) when as he is in such sort angry against the enemies thereof,
for handling it so cruelly.

Verse. 7. Therefore will I send a fire upon the walls of Azzah, and it shall
devour the palaces thereof.
This verse is in a manner all one with the fourth before.
THis verse has nothing singular or peculiar to it self from the fourth verse
before, except the name of Azzah, or Gaza only. It therefore notes, that for
this their cruelty they shall utterly be consumed and destroyed, and that in
most fearful manner, as are those things which are wasted by fire, the which
consumes all, and leaves nothing that it can reach or come unto: for with it
there is neither pity nor mercy.

Verse. 8. And I will cut off the inhabitant from Ashdod, and him that holds
the scepter from Ashkelon, and turn mine hand to Ekron, and the remnant of the
Philistims shall perish, says the Lord.
The judgments of God against the whole land of the Philistines.
NOw the judgments of God are threatened to the whole country of the
Philistines, as before verse. 5. to the whole kingdom of Damascus. And in this
place are reckoned up four chief Tetrarchies or Quarternes of that country
of Palestina, to wit, that of Gaza or Azzah, that of Ashdod or Azotus* that of
Asculon, and that of Accaron. The sift Tetrarchie or Quarterne is ouerpassed,
namely, that of Geth, from whence was Goliath. Of this Gethor Gith is mention,
Ios. 13. ver. 3. where it is reckoned up as one of the five Lordships of the
Philistines. But this is singular or peculiar in this verse, for that God does
denounce and show that no remnants of this nation shall be left alive, and this
he threatens, who is Lord, and has rule over all things. So sore a punishment
was not threatened unto the Damascens, but the judgments of the Lord are just
and righteous, albeit the cruelty of the Damascens may seem greater then this
of the Philistines. Yet these Philistines did continually and daily afflict or
trouble the Church of God, when as they did sell the Israelites in such sort
that they should never afterward be free again.

Verse. 9. Thus says the Lord, for three transgressions of Tyrus, and for
four, I will not turn to it because they shut the whole captivity in Edom,
and have not remembered the brotherly covenant.
The third example of God his judgments against the Tyrians.
THe third example of the judgments of God upon the nations near unto the
Israelites, to wit, upon the Tyrians, a flourishing people at that time. The
self same things are here again rehearsed, the which have been in the
threatenings before, besides a very few things peculiar unto Tyrians. For these
also are noted and condemned for their extreme cruelty against the people of
God, whom they did so scatter abroad, that they should never afterward return
again, but perish and dye in miserable captivity. And this cruelty they
procured against the Israelites by the Idumeans the brethren of the Israelites:
The Tyrians break the law of consanguinitie, and of nature.
wherein these Tyrians did violate or break the law of consanguinitie or of
blood and kindred, and of nature, who did set those vnreconcileably together by
the ears within themselves, whom they ought to have made friends one with
another. These Tyrians therefore do make Executioners of their cruelty
against the Church of God, not every one without regard and at all adventures,
but the very brethren of the Church, by how much the more detestable and
unmerciful, nay more hurtful and more contrary unto nature it self, and the
common law of humanity was this cruelty of the Tyrians against the
Israelites, and therefore worthily punished by God more severely or sharply. For
not only those which commit evil are worthy of death, but those also that
consent unto them that do evil, and stretch out the cords of iniquity, and
increase ungodliness and wickedness among men. Finally, those which so far
as in them lies do utterly extinguish or quench the law of nature, as these
Tyrians did: against such kind of sinners the Lord by his Prophet does threaten
a curse, saying: Woe unto them that draw iniquity with cords of vanity, and
sin as with cart ropes. Esaias. cap. 5. verse. 18. And Paul, Romans cap. 1. verse.
31. makes mention of such as being fearfully given over of God unto their own
reprobate sense, that they sin against the law of God, and of their own
conscience, and draw on others to sin, when he writes: Which men (namely,
given over of GOD) though they knew the law of God, how that they which commit
such things, are worthy of death, yet not only do the same, but also favor
them that do them.

Verse. 10. Therefore will I send a fire upon the walls of Tyrus, and it shall
devour the palaces thereof.
This verse is al one with some other before.
Confer this tenth verse with those other verses before, of the same contents
and arguments.

Verse. 11. Thus says the Lord, for three transgressions of Edom, and for
four, I will not turn to it, because he did pursue his brother with the
sword, and did cast off all pity, and his anger spoiled him evermore, and his
wrath watched him always.
The fourth example of God his judgments against the Idumeans.
THe fourth example of the judgments of God against the nations bordering upon
the Israelites, namely, upon the Idumeans themselves, who are called the
brethren of the Israelites. Therefore the Israelites ought to be now the more
moved with their punishment, that they should not think that themselves should
go sco^ free, but should believe the comminations or threatenings of God used
against them, Things common unto the Idumeas with other nations.
to be true. Now these things are common unto the Idumeans with the other
nations before named, to wit, that the Idumeans, like as the former nations,
lived stub borne and disobedient against God, and void of repentance: and
wickedly heaping sins upon sins. Secondly, that they also, like as the
rest, were cruel against the Church of God. Special and peculiar to
themselves, by these circumstances.
But the kind of their crueltie^ special, and proper to themselves, and also
far greater then the which has been set out before. The which the Lord also
does declare by these circumstances. First, in regard of the persons: for
whilst the Idumeans do persecute the Israelites, 1. Of the persons.
they persecute and murder, not every one of the meinie, but their own
brethren. For Esau was the brother of Jacob, yea his brother german, and his
twin, or borne at one birth with him. Of Esau came the Idumeans of Jacob the
Israelites. Their cruelty therefore was more shameful against the Israelites,
then was that of the other nations. For they did manifestly or openly break in
sunder the affections of nature it self. Secondly, God proves the cruelty of
the Idumeans to be greater, 2. Of the outragiousnes of their anger.
by the manner, or outragiousnes of their anger against the Israelites. For it
was so ouerpassing and far out of square, that it did utterly abolish or do
away those inward feelings of nature, the which do stir up pity and
compassion among men, as appeared by the doings and sayings of the Idumeans
against the Israelites. An example whereof may be taken out of the Psalm. 137.
verse. 7. where the Prophet prays unto God against the same, saying: Remember
the children of Edom, O Lord, in the day of Jerusalem, which said, raze it,
raze it to the foundation thereof. Hereupon, that is, by reason of the
excessiuenes thereof, the cruelty of the Idumeans in this place is called, not
only anger, but also wrath, or fury. Thirdly, 3. By the effects.
by the effects: for they both persecuted them with the sword, and also raunged
against the Israelites with robbing and stealing. Therefore the Idumeans spared
neither the life, nor the goods of the Israelites: but being not content to
have murdered them, they carried away, and spoiled all their goods, like
thieves. Fourthly, by the time. 4. By the time.
This anger of the Idumeans against the Iraelites was perpetual, and
continual: not to be appeased, not abating, not ceasing: nay, the Idumeans
spoiled and slew the Israelites both in the time of war: and also their wrath
did watch the Israelites in the time of peace, that is to say: did lay
continual wait for them, procured hatred, and did hurt them.

Verse. 12. Therefore will I send a fire upon Teman, and it shall denoure the
palaces of Bozrah.
The wisdom of Edom shall not help it in the day of visitation.
TEman, a nation, city, or people of Idumea, of the which Jeremy speaks, cap.
49. ver. 7. To Edom thus says the Lord of hosts: Is wisdom no more in
Teman? Is counsel perished from their children? Is their wisdom vanished?
Bozrah the head city of the Idumeans. The rest of this verse is allone with
the like going before, which has been often repeated, and signifies: that for
this their cruelty they shall sharply be punished.

Verse. 13. Thus says the Lord, for three transgressions of the children of
Ammon, and for four, I will not turn unto it, because they have ripped up the
women with child of Gilead, that they might enlarge their border.
The fifth example of the Ammonites.
THe fifth example of the Ammonites, who themselves also were cosines or of kin
unto the Israelites, as namely, those which came of Lot the nephew of Abraham,
to the end the Israelites might be the more moved with these domestical or
home examples. And this in these Ammonites is a peculiar kind of cruelty
against the Israelites, that is, the Church of God such as it was, for that
they most barbarously at one blow as it were, The barbarous cruelty of the
Ammonites.
did cut in sunder the women of the Israelites, and the same great with child,
against the law and feeling of nature cruelly murdering both the mother and
her innocent or giltles child together. The which fury is more then barbarous
and brutish. And this cruelty is increased by the circumstance of the cause,
for that the Ammonites did these things so cruel, not to keep away, or to be
revenged of these mothers, as being in arms, or offering wrong unto them: but
only to the end they might have the larger borders of their kingdom, and the
same void and empty: these Ammonites forsooth made less esteem of the image
of God shining forth in these women and their children, then of one foot of
dead earth the which they had a mind to use and retain. Therefore in these
men there was extreme cruelty joined with extreme covetousness and ambition:
and so consequently it was also grievously punished by God, and th^^ worthily.

God cannot away with cruelty showed against such as bear a show of his
church be it never so little.
Further, in all these examples this is to be observed and note^ that God is
described and set forth to be especially angry wi^^ those nations, because of
the cruelty which they executed agai^^^ the Church of God, even such as it was
(such as the Israelites th^^^ were) that those, which in these our days have
made those mo^^ cruel slaughters and butcheries against the Church of God in
the Realm of France, and elsewhere, may at the last understand wha^ judgment
of God is prepared for them, and hangs over th^^^ head.

Verse. 14. Therefore will I kindle a fire in the wall of Rabbah, and (...)
shall devour the palaces thereof, with shouting in the day of be tell, and
with a tempest in the day of the whirlewinde.
A special and peculiar point in the punishment of the Ammonites, above the
other nations mentioned before.
THis is special and peculiar in the punishment of the Ammonites, that it shall
be most speedy, and most full of terroure fear. It shall be most full of
fear, for that with the burning of Rabbah the chief city of the Ammonites
shall be joined both battle, and such horrible fear, as in miscrable manner
is wont in su^^ cases to be heard, by reason of the slaughters and murders
there^^ committed. For he tells that this fire and burning of Rabbah sh^^ be
in the very day of battle, and in the very noise and shoutings (...) the
battle, where with those that are taken by the enemy shall Sword^ most swift
and speedy. For it shall come creeping like a which wind (such as is wont to
be when storms do arise) that this punishment of the Ammonites may fall out
unlooked for.

Verse. 15. And their King shall go into captivity, he and his print^^
together, says the Lord.
Confer this verse with the fifth of this chapter expounded before, with the
which it has some things agreeing. This no^withstanding is here special and
proper, that not only the peop^^ and common sort, as in the punishment of them
of Damascus the^^ specified: but also the King himself, and the Princes and
Nobl^^ or Peers of the kingdom, shall be led away prisoners, and captives
unto miserable servitude, slavery or bondage together so company.

CAP. 2.
Verse. 1. Thus says the Lord, For three transgressions of Moab, and for four,
I will not turn unto it, because it burnt the bones of the King of Edom into
lime.
The sixth example of the judgments of God against the Moabites.
THe sixth example of the judgments of God against the nations bordering upon
the Israclites, that they thereby might be terrified feared with these
threatenings of God, and so consequently repent. And it is of the Moabites the
cosens and kinsmen of the Ammonites, and also of the Israelites themselves. And
here is expressed a singular or peculiar kind of cruelty in them above the
other nations before, not against the Church of God indeed, but yet
notwithstanding against men, to wit, the Idumeans, who also were cosens and of
kin unto these Moabites themselves. All kind of cruelty displeases God.
Whereof we gather, that all kind of cruelty committed against any men
whatsoever, does highly displease GOD: and much more that, which does violate
or break and blot out the privileges of blood, and the affections of nature,
such as was this barbarousnes of the Moabites against the Idumeans. For Edom or
the Idumeans came of Abraham, and the Moabites of Lot, the nephew of Abraham,
whom Abraham brought up and advanced. But as concerning that which is here
reported of the King of the Idumeans burnt alive by the Moabites, and cruelly
used, and despitefully, as if he had been some ox, so that nothing was left of
him, no not so much as his bones, but that he was all consumed into ashes and
lime, (the which is a through burned kind of ashes) some do refer it unto the
2. King. cap. 3. verse. 26.27. where the King of Moab being not able to break by
force into the King of Edom, who came against him to help the Israelites, he
took his eldest son, that should have reigned after him, and offered him for
a burnt offering upon the wall, by which means the camp of the Israelites
brake up and departed: but others do refer it unto some other history.

Verse. 2. Therefore will I send a fire upon Moab, and it shall devour the
palaces of Kerioth, and Moab shall die with tumult, with shouting, with the
sound of a trumpet.
The description of the punishment of the Moabites.
A Description of the punishment, the which contains the destruction of the
nation of the Moabites, and the overthrow of their whole state, and that like
to ensue with their great fear, tumult, and dismaying. Their dismaying is here
laid forth by a sentence as it were loose and not tied together with the bands
of conjunctions copulative, to wit, in these words (with tumult, shouting,
sound) of the Moabites, at the voice of a trumpet: which thing shows a great
turmoile of all things, and their disordered and tumultuous fear and
trembling, such as is wont to be where nothing is done in order in a battle
and skirmish: but the vanquished on every side run away without captain,
without counsel.

Verse. 3. And I will out off the judge out of the midst thereof, and will slay
all the Princes thereof with him, says the Lord.
The destruction of the people and of the state
THe destruction of the nation and state. For besides the burning of their
cities, their Kings also, nay all their Judges, the which do sustain or uphold
and gather together the body it self of the people, shall miserably be slain,
and that every one in the midst of his Jurisdiction and of the city, over
which he is set to rule, that the Moabites may understand themselves to be
utterly forsaken, and to be void of all hope of winding out of so great
miseries. The Church of God never utterly destroyed.
And this is a thing the which never falls out unto the Church of Gods. So
sore a punishment doubtless does this cruelty of men deserve.

Verse. 4. Thus says the Lord, For three transgressions of Judah, and for
four, I will not turn to it: because they have cast away the law of the Lord,
and have not kept his commandments, and their lies caused them to err, after
the which their fathers have walked.
The seventh example of God his judgments against the Jews.
THe seventh example of the judgments of God against the nations bordering upon
the Israelites, because of their obstinat or stubborn wickedness. And by this
example all dulnes and drowsines ought to be shaken off from the Israelites.
For God sets before the Israelites even the Jews themselves as a mirror or
loocalleth his own people, to wit, because of their sins peculiarly by the
Jews themselves committed against his worship and service, that all men may
understand, and so consequently the Israelites, whether they offend against the
first table of the law, or against the latter, that they do provoke the Lord,
and that they are most worthy of anger and punishment. And whereas in this
place the Jews themselves also are said to be punished, Why punishment is
threatened unto the Jews, as well as unto other nations.
it is done, not only that the Prophet may put away all suspicion of flattery
and currying of favor with his own people, (for Amos was of the tribe of
Judah) whom, as well as the rest he does comprehend: but also that out of all
these examples being gathered together, we should acknowledge the same true
God to be the God and Judge of the Gentiles, and also of the Jews. For so
Paul teaches, Romans 3. ver. 29. saying: God, is he the God of the Jews only,
and not of the Gentiles also? yes, even of the Gentiles also. Secondly, that
we should conclude by a reason taken from things compared together: If God
spare not the Jews themselves, that is, his own beloved people, how much
less will he spare others? for if these things be done unto the green tree,
what shall be done unto the dry? Luke 23. ver. 31. Accordingly whereunto
Peter Epist. 1. cap. 4. ver. 17.18. writes: The time is come, that judgment
must begin at the house of God. If it first begin at us, what shall be the end
of them which obey not the Gospel of God? And if the righteous scarcely be
saved, where shall the ungodly and sinner appear?

Why the Jews are punished.
Further, the peculiar sin of the Jews, for the which they are punished of
God, is said to be the contempt or despising of the first table of the law,
the which in this place is described by three effects that is, for that they
despised the law of GOD it self, The contempt of the law described by three
effects.
the which they had given unto them by the singular benefit of God. And so
Paul seems to ascribe unto the Jews, that they do accept of the law, as of
a special favor of God toward them above all other nations, when he says
Romans 2. ver. 17. Behold thou art called a Jew, and restest in the law, and
gloriest in God, etc. And cap. 9. verse. 4. he says of the Jews, That unto
them do belong the covenants, and giving of the law, and service of God.
Under the name of the law I do comprehend that part of it, the which
contains the moral precepts, that is, the Decalogue, or ten Commandments.
The second effect is. earth, that is, drive them unto extreme beggerie, taking
away from them all that ever they have. Yea finally they do in the end
corrupt the way or life and good manners of these miserable creatures, and in
such sort afflicted or troubled, do make them to go wrong. For they teach and
frame them unto lewdnes both by their example, and also through their cruelty,
that those miserable and afflicted ones may deliver themselves from them.

3. The incest of the Israelites.
The third sin of the Israelites, their wicked incest, through the which they
do defile the name of the true God (whose people because of circumcision the
Israelites do all themselves) among all the heathen, the which do know, or
hear of their life and wickedness. For such is their guise and custom, to
speak evil of God, either for the wicked lives of those that are his people,
or when they see them any ways afflicted and in trouble, as God himself
complains Esai. 52. ver. 5. Now therefore what have I here, says the Lord,
that my people is taken away for naught, and they that rule over them make them
to howl, says the Lord? And my name all the day continually is blasphemed (he
means by the wicked which held them in subjection.) So then the Israelites of
whom Amos here for their incest says, that they caused the name of God to be
dishonored, were nothing at all careful of that commandment of God, Be ye
holy, for I am holy, Leuit. 11. ver. 44.

Verse. 8. And they lie down upon clothes laid to pledge by every altar: and
they drink the wine of the condemned in the house of their God.
The second amplification of the cruelty and covetousness of the Israelites.
THe second amplification of the desperate life of the Israelites, as well the
Judges as also private persons, in the maintaining of that course of their
cruelty and covetousness, as who do openly glory, and shamelesly triumph of
them both, before their gods, (whom they suppose to be divine powers.)
Therefore the Israelites do declare, that all fear of God is shaken off, or
fallen from them. Whereof he brings two examples and testimonies or
witnesses. First, If (says Moses) thou take thy neighbors raiment to pledge,
thou shall restore it unto him before the Sun go down: for that is his
covering only, and this is his garment for his skin: wherein shall he
sleep? Therefore when he cries unto me, I will hear him: for I am merciful.

The second example is, for that they of the spoils of men by them unjustly
condemned and vexed, do shamelesly offer gifts unto their gods, and
especially wine (the which was by them given in sacrifice for drink offerings)
that they might offer of those spoils unto their gods, and feast before them
joyfully and daintily, as if all were well, and that they had behaved
themselves very honestly. To conclude, they make their gods partners with them,
and guilty of that their unjust robbery, booty, and wickedness: wherein
appears a manifest or open contempt or despising of God his power and
majesty. Of such complains the Psalmist, who think that God either does not
see their cruelty or otherwise regards not the same. Psalm. 94. ver 6, 7. They
slay (says he) the widow and the stranger, and murder the fatherles: yet
they say, The Lord shall not see: neither will the God of Iaacob regard it.

Ver. 9. Yet destroyed I the Amorite before the^, whose height was like the
height of the Cedars, and he was strong as the oaks: notwithstanding I
destroyed his fruit from above, and his root from beneath.
THe third amplification of the former sins against God, by the sundry and
great benefits of God toward the Israelites. The third amplification of the
former sins of the Israelites.
One of these benefits is here rehearsed, and laid out by his circumstances,
that is to say, the overthrowing of the Amorites, wrought by God for the
Israelites sake, which Amorites were most deadly enemies unto the Israelites,
and did keep them from their promised habitations or dwellings. The first
circumstance therefore is taken from the person of the Amorites. 1 The Person of
the Amorites.
They were both in stature most tal, and in strength most valiant, and in deed
Giants, as appears Number. 13. verse. 28. and so to the end of the chapter: where
is at large reported the height and strength of the people of the land of
Canaan (whereof the Amorites were a part) in comparison of whom the men that
were sent to search the land, seemed to be but as Grasshoppers, etc. Therefore
they were not overcome by the strength of man but by the power of GOD, when as
they are overthrown by the Israelites, after which manner the Egyptians are
destroyed by God at the red sea, as it is Exodus 14. verse. 14. Where Moses says
unto to the fearful Israelites: The Lord shall fight for you: therefore hold
you your peace. And Psalm. 44. ver. 2, 3. the faithful do ascribe unto God the
whole glory of this driving out of the heathen, and planting their fathers in
their steads: we have heard say they, How thou have driven out the heathen with
thine hand, and planted them (they mean their fathers) how thou have destroyed
the people, (to wit the heathen) and caused them to grow (that is, the
Israelites) For they inherited not the land by their own sword, neither did
their own arm save them: but thy right hand, and thine arm, and the light of
thy countenance, because thou did favor them.

2 The manner of their overthrow.
The second circumstance is from the manner of the victory that God gave against
them. For the Amorites sustained or suffered not only some certain light
plague: but they were vanquished before the Israelites with cutting up and with
utter destruction, so that the root it self of the nation, and the issue or al
fruit is now utterly cut off. Finally the people it self in those battles
was clean destroyed by God. For this was the work not of men, but altogether
of God, and a miracle.

Verse. 10. Also I brought you up from the land of Egypt, and led you forty
years through the wilderness, to possess the land of the Amorite.
Another benefit of God toward the Israelites.
ANother benefit, whereby the goodness of God toward the Israelites and the
miracle of his work is manifestly increased: for God did not only overcome the
Amorites the enemies of the Israelites, and took them away that they should
not hurt them: but moreover God gave the country of the Amorites cut off, and
ouercomen, unto the Israelites for an inheritance, that is, to be possessed and
enjoyed of their posterity by a perpetual and continual succession. It was
much, that the Amorites, the enemies of the Israelites, were destroyed by God:
but it is more, that God also most bountifully and liberally gave their
dwellings, their fenced Cities, and their lands and all their goods to be
possessed of the Israelites, that they should not think that this was to be
attributed unto their own strength, that they possess this land, and have it
from their Elders, and ancestors.

Here is also an amplification of this benefit taken from the person of the
Israelites: for the Israelites were even at that time a people most afflicted
and miserable: namely, the bond slaves of the Egyptians. A third benefit of God
toward the Israelites.
Wherein also God does recite a third benefit of his toward them, to wit,
that he brought them from out of the land of Egypt, and from the Iron furnace,
and by the space of forty years most patiently lead them about, and nourished
them in the midst of the wilderness, and defended them. All which are singular
testimonies or witnesses of the goodness of God toward the ungrateful or
unthankful Israelites.

Verse. 11. And I raised up of your Sons for Prophets, and of your young men
for Nazarites. Is it not even thus O ye children of Israel, says the Lord?
The fourth benefit of God toward the Israelites.
THe fourth benefit of God toward the Israelites, whereby God does amplyfie
his goodness toward them. For he shows that he gave unto them not only
earthly benefits (as were victories, dwellings, riches, and such like before
rehearsed) but also heavenly gifts, and such as made for the health of their
souls, namely the true doctrine of his worship and of everlasting salvation,
and the use thereof, and that most plentifully, whilst that among them, and
out of themselves he rayseth up Prophets and Nazarites. This is a singular
benefit of GOD, and peculiarly reserved for the sons of GOD, and not given
indifferently unto them and the Infidels: the which notwithstanding the
Israelites despised as they did the former, and as the verse following does
declare. And by these two effects is noted not some common declaring of the
healthful and heavenly doctrine: but a most excellent, and also extraordinary,
such as was done by the Prophets: nay moreover the practice, use, and effect
thereof was also showed by God unto them, such as was the vow of the Nazarites,
taken upon them by many of their children, so that God promises no singular
and especial thing unto his: the worship and doctrine of God has nothing
peculiar and proper, the which God has not clearly bestowed upon these
Israelites. The which thing to be most true, the interrogation or asking of a
question following does teach, Is not this true? and also these words (says
the Lord) which two things are added, that the consciences of these men, albeit
never so stubborn and brutish in the acknowledging of God his benefits might
be touched most sharply, and that the confession of the truth to the
justifying of GOD might be wrested from them in spite of their teeth.

Ver. 12. But ye gave the Nazarites Wine to drink, and comm^ded the Prophets,
saying: Prophecy not.
The contempt of all the former benefits of God.
NOw follows the contempt or despising of all the former benefits, but
especially of this fourth and last, that is, of the greatest, and the which
they ought to have made most account of. For both in the Prophets and Nazarites
they showed that they vtte^^ despised every excellent gift of God. The
Nazarites they moue^ and entised, and in the end persuaded to break their
vow: fro^^ the Prophets they took away freedom to speak, and forbad the^ to
prophecy. Then both which what could be committed mo^^ shameful of the
Israelites?

Verse. 13. Behold, I will press you, as the sheaues are pressed vnde^ cart
that is laden.
The punishment most grievous for their former sins.
AFter the sins of the Israelites the Prophet shows unto then their
punishment, and the same most grievous, from the which nothing foreseen either
by the wisdom of man, or sought out by riches, or given by nature shall
deliver them, to the end that they should most certainly assure themselves,
that they only remedy to escape this misery does consist and rest only in
repentance and true turning of the mind unto God. And this verse contains
two points, first, the person of him that speaks and threatens these
judgments. 1 The person of him that speaks.
This is that same God Jehovah, everlasting, and almighty, least the Israelites
might think themselves able to withstand his power, and so consequently escape
these judgments of God, as hypocrites and profane persons do suppose it may
come to pass. To this purpose pertayneth that which is ver. 16. in the end of
this chapter, the saying of the Lord, or says the Lord.

2 The punishment
The punishment it self is here declared, and the same most hard. For God shall
in such sort press these obstinate or stubborn Israelites, as a cart full
laden is wont to do the sheaues in harvest, the which it beats and treads
in the flower, for this is a n="*" Metaphora, is a figure, whereby a word is
changed from hi^ natural and pr^per si^nification unto a like: as to see, for
to understand: to hear for to obey: to thirst, for to desire, etc.
Metaphor borrowed from those that tread out corn. For in old time they did
beat out their corn in the floor with Carts, Waines, and Draies, the which
we now do with ^lailes. Of this kind and manner of beating out of corn out of
the sheaues and ears with Waines and Carts, we may read Isai 28. ver. 27.28.
where the Prophet has these words. For fitches shall not be threshed with a
threshing instrument, neither shall a Cart wheel be turned about upon the
Cummin: but the fitches are beaten out with a staff, and Cummin with a rod.
Bread corn when it is threshed, he does not always thresh it, neither does
the wheel of his cart always make a noise, neither will he break it with the
teeth thereof. God then will rise up unto the punishment of the Israelites, that
is, the rebels against him, not with a light hand or faint strength: but with a
great might, force, and power. Confer this kind of punishment of the
Israelites with that of the Moabites threatened Esaias 25. ver. 10, 11. There we
read thus: For in this mountain shall the hand of the Lord rest, and Moab
shall be threshed under him, even as straw is threshed in Madmenah. And he shall
stretch out his hand in the midst of them (as he that swimmeth stretches them
out to swim) and with the strength of his hands shall he bring down their
pride.

Verse. 14. Therefore the flight shall perish from the swift, and the strong
shall not strengthen his force, neither shall the mighty save his life. Verse.
15. Nor he that handles the bow shall stand, and he that is swift of foot,
shall not escape, neither shall he that rides the horse save his life.
The prophet in these 2 verses answers all their vain opinions for the
escaping of their punishment to come.
AN explanation or more plain laying open of their punishment. For he sets
down the manner of this judgment to come, and in the mean season he answers
all their vain opinions concerning the escaping of this punishment. Now the
manner of this judgment is, that all the refuges or ways to escape, the which
every one of them supposed that they had, God shall make void and
unprofitable, and to stand them in no stead, whether they be natural, as
swiftnes of foot, and strength of body: or attained unto by industry,
diligence and wit, as power and authority among others, skill in war and
fight: or riches and trained horses. And hereby also appears the answer unto
the vain cogitations or furmises of every one of them to deliver themselves
from this judgment of God. For some of them did oppose or set their natural
strength against these threatenings of God, and some their riches and authority.
But nothing besides the mercy of God it self can deliver us from his
judgments, Only the mercy of God delivers from his judgments.
the which his mercy is to be obtained of us only by true repentance of mind,
through the promises of God in Christ.

Verse. 16. And he that is of mighty courage among the strong (...) shall flee
away naked in that day, says the Lord.
COmmoration, Commoratio.
or staying in the setting out of the judgments (...) God against the mighty:
for to the end that the rest may understand and be assured that nothing can set
them in security or safe^^ against their sins, and the judgments of GOD, he
does stay (...) terrifying or fearing of the strong ones by name, who think
th^^ they above the rest can escape, because they do excel in streng t^^ These
therefore themselves also, albeit never so valiant in body and strength, shall
flee as being afraid at the sight of their enemies: ye^ and they shall flee
away naked, to wit, casting away their weapon^ and armor, as those that are
afraid are wont to do, and shall acknowledge themselves not able to match
their enemies, and to be affrighted. And it is not some one or two that shall
do this, but all Therefore they shall one with another by flocks and heaps
shamefully run away, either not at all withstanding their enemies, or no^
escaping those just judgments of God by means of their wondefull strength, the
which they boasted of before.

CAP. 3.
Verse. 1. Hear this word that the Lord pronounces against you, O^ children of
Israel, even against the whole family which I brough^ up from the land of
Egypt, saying:
Another sermon, threatening the judgments of God against the Israelites.
ANother Sermon, wherein Amos threatens the judgments of God against the said
Israelites, and that repeating and expressing the commandment of God, least
that because these men were wonderfully hardened, the former threatening should
by and by vanish away: or least it might seem to have been threatened but for
fashion sake, as hypocrites with these toys and iuglings are wont to shift of
the threatenings of God, be they never so great and earnest. But this verse
contains two chief points. Two parts of this verse. 1 Attention.
First, it has a commendation or getting attention or marking of the things
that are to be spoken: for the Prophet wins authority unto his ministry
from the Majesty of God himself, whom Amos does witness to speak these
things rather then himself being but a man. Therefore when as the Israelites
do hear these things, they must give ear unto them, not as the voice of a
mortal man, but as if they should hear the sound of the everlasting word of
God. This is the first point of this verse. The second, 2 Unto whom this
Sermon belongs.
unto whom this prophecy belongs. And generally it belongs unto all the
tribes, the which God brought out of Egypt: but especially unto the kingdom
of Israel, that is unto the ten tribes, the which had separated themselves from
the kingdom of Judah And this rehearsal of the benefit which God did unto
them, has a secret accusing of their ingratefulnes or unthankfulness, and a
reason and repeating of their more straight bond to serve and worship God.

Verse. 2. You only have I known of all the families of the earth: therefore I
will visit you for all your iniquities.
The chief point of this sermon, a rehearsal of the great benefits of God
toward the Israelites, and of their unthankfulness for the same.
THe proposition or maine point of the whole sermon, and declaring of the
threatenings of God against the Israelites the contemners of God, and in deed
more wicked then other nations, and of themselves inexcusable. And therefore
here is also briefly showed, how just the judgments of God were against
them. This verse contains two things, first, a short but yet a plain and
notable rehearsal of the singular and greatest benefits of God toward the
Israelites, namely, for that the Israelites, through the singular goodness and
bounty of God were preferred before other nations of the world, that they alone
and only should be the people and inheritance of God For God himself only
vouchsafed the^ this special fouour, care, providence and knowledge of himself.
This favor of God toward them before and above other people, David commends
Psalm. 147. ver. 14. saying, For he has exalted the horn of his people, which
is a praise for all his Saints, even for the children of Israel, a people that
is near unto him. And Paul Romans 3. ver. 1.2. Affirms that the preferment of
the Jews, is great in comparison of other nations, in these words: What is
then the preferment of the Jews? Or what is the profit of circumcision? Much
every manner of way: for chiefelie, because unto them were committed the oracles
of God. And yet more plainly, cap. 9. ver. 4.5. where he shows, That unto
them pertains the adoption, and the glory, and the covenants, and the giving
of the law, and the service of God and the promises. Of whom are the fathers,
and of whom concerning the flesh, Christ came, who is God over all, blessed
for ever. Wherefore the more and the greater that the benefits of God were
toward them, so much the more shameful was their ingratitude or
unthankfulness, and contempt of GOD and their sin the greater and more
heinous.

The threatening the^ with punishment for their sins
The second point conreineth the threatening and declaring (...) to them of the
punishments, and the same, as appears, most (...) least any either of them or
us might complain, that they we^^ punished of God unjustly, or more hardly
then was meet, and fal^^^ charge God for the same. For that same comparing by
way of co^traries of the benefits of God, and iniquities of this people
together, does notably set forth the justice of God, and shows (...) same to
be most equal and indifferent.

Verse. 3. Can two walk together except they be agreed?
Commoration, or standing upon the full answering of the objections of the
Israelites, whereby they would shift off the judgments of God against their
sins
COmmoration, or standing upon the more particular layi^^ out of the matter, in
the which he rouseth up the Israelites (...) moreover the Prophet answers
their objections pleasing the^^ selves in their sins, and seeking to shake
and shift off God b^ threatenings. He uses diverse and sundry similitudes, to
confim^^ these his answers unto them, as being notorious hypocrites, and
^^uident contemners or despisers of the judgments of GOD, a^^ herein using
false, but yet colorable pretenses and excuses, and (...) shamefully deceiving
and beguiling themselves. Therefore (...) whole place is as it were a certain
fortifying before hand unto (...) narration and declaration of the judgments
of God to come, (...) which begins verse. 9. that it may be given ear unto
and to ^^ked. For the Israelites were stiff necked and disobedient. Wh^^ by
appears how great the care of GOD is to call us, being (...) stubborn, unto
soundness of mind, that when as we perish, (...) may understand, and in the
end acknowledge, that we have p^^rished through our own default.

This verse contains an answer unto this objection of the ^^raelites:
Objection of the Israelites.
You forsooth do threaten us with the judgments of Go^ but he has made and
entered into a covenant with us. Therefo^^ by this covenant and bargain of God
with us, we are safe enoug^ as being his people, and such as will deal with
him by that cou^nant. The Prophet answers, The answer of the Prophet.
The force and strength of this fo^mer covenant and entering as it were into
league is lost, becau^^ you do not now agree with God, nor yet keep those
conditio^^. Therefore you shall not at all be safe by means of that covenant
whereby before you had a common privilege, bargain, and fe^lowship with God.
For there cannot so much as among men be or remain any society, traffic,
fellowship, or friendship, except they agree together, keep the covenants one
with another, and on both sides stand unto their promises. And this he does
declare and prove by a certain similitude, The similitude of this verse taken
from those that purpose to do any thing together, be it never so small.
the which is taken from one kind of society of fellowship among me^, to wit,
of those that purpose to go about and take in hand some thing together, be it
never so small, as for example a journey: for except these agree together, they
cannot be joined together, and journey and travail together. So also is there
now no agreement between God and the Israelites, neither are they joined
together because of the former covenant, because that the Israelites dissent
from GOD, have broken the league, and stand not to their bargains. Read
Ierem. 5. chap. where God grievously complains, as also chap. 25. of the
universal falling from God and the breach of his covenant both in the people,
and also in the Princes and Rulers.

Verse. 4. Will a lion roar in the forest when he has no pray? or will a
lions whelpe cry out of his den, if he have taken nothing?
Having refuted the vain confidence or trust of the Israelites in the covenant
of God, he does secretly rehearse and confute an other vain objection of
theirs, because of the daily and continual threatenings of the Prophets, and
this also by a most apt or fit similitude. The objection is thus: to wit,
Another objection of the Israelites
We are not moved with these threatenings. For these are your ordinary and
daily manners of dealing. For there is nothing more common then these your
terrifyings or going about to make us afraid, albeit that there have fallen out
nothing among us extraordinarily, or have done no otherwise then we are
continually wont to do. The Prophet answers, The answer of the Prophet.
These things are not threatened for fashion sake, as if God did not purpose to
punish you: but as if they were spoken as words of course, or lightly, without
any anger of God moved against you, and without any punishment prepared
already for you also. For this is even at hand, the which is laid before you
by the express and extraordinary commandment of God. But God does not any
thing in vain, or to no purpose, nor threaten any thing, but to some effect by
his word, for as much as the very lions themselves do not roar except they
see some pray. And so does God by his Prophet teach us concerning the efficacy
or force of his word, which is never without his effect, Isai. 55. ver. 11.
where having compared it with the falling of the rain for the cherishing of
the ear^^ and the things therein, he concludes: So shall my word be that goes
out of my mouth: it shall not return unto me void, but it shall accomplish
that which I will, and it shall prosper in the thing whereto (...) sent it. As
therefore that roaring and yelling of the lions, albeit bruit beasts, is not in
vain, but an assured token of the pray: so i^ like manner neither is the word,
and the threatenings of the most true God declared in vain, or cast forth to
no purpose, but they are the prognostications or foreshewers of the wrath of
God already prepared, and such testimonies of his judgments to come as cannot
lie, and are most true and certain.

Verse. 5. Can a bird fall in a snare upon the earth, where no fouler is? or
will he take up the snare from the earth, and have taken nothing at all?
The third objection.
THe third objection of the Israelites, to wit, from the delay that should be of
these threatenings: These things which thou threatnest, are not so ready and
hasty. The Prophet answers, yes most ready. The answer.
For like as birds are neither caught without a fouler, and without his nets
already set and laid, and he attending upon the business: neither does the
fouler carry away, nor take up his n^^ before he has gotten a pray: so
neither does God threaten these things, but that he has the executioners of
his judgments ready neither will he withdraw his hand, but that he will
punish you, except ye repent. For God is not less wise, nor less constant in
his counsel and purpose, then men that are foulers are wont to be, that you
do not herewithall deceive your selves upon a vain hope of the delay of his
judgments.

Verse. 6. Or shall a trumpet be blown in the city, and the people be not
afraid? or shall there be evil in a city, and the Lord has (...) done it?
THe fourth similitude the which with that following contains as it were an
overplus, that is to say, most earnest exhortations, and shows what is the
most true fruit of the former admonition, and what is their duty, unto whom
God threatens any thing that is, that they give diligent ear or heed unto
those threatenings of God, and do in the end themselves repent. The fourth
similitude.
For like as when a trumpet gives a sign or token out of a watch tower, the
people hearkeneth, and is troubled, and prepare themselves this way, or that
way, accordingly as the trumpet gave the token: so at the voice of GOD, as a
most shrill trumpet, we ought to be attentive, or give ear, and to be moved
with the sound thereof, and accordingly as he gives warning, prepare our
selves, and look about us.

The great love of God toward those whom he punishes.
And these words (Is there an evil in the city, and the Lord has not done
it?) are a reason, whereby the great love of God even toward those whom he
punishes, is described, as who does first expressly show them of these
punishments, to wit, to this end, that they might avoid them, and amend
themselves. Which thing if they do not, then God does chastise and correct
them, and that justly, as obstinate or disobedient persons. God then according
unto his singular and endless mercy toward his Church, does foreshewe his
judgments, wherewith he does punish her, if she do not repent. After which
manner God is not always wont to deal with other people: but toward his
Church he is exceedingly and singularly merciful. To this purpose, besides
many other places, appertains almost the whole 65. chap. of the Prophet Isai,
where God makes a notable difference between his Church, and those that
appertain not unto the same, but especially verse. 13.14.15. Therefore thus
says the Lord God, Behold, my servants shall eat, What is meant by the word
(Evil) in this place.
and ye shall be hungry: behold, my servants shall drink, and ye shall be a
thirst: behold, my servants shall rejoice, and ye shall be ashamed. Behold, my
servants shall sing for joy of heart, Evil Of sin, or of guiltines Of
affliction, or punishment
is From our selves. From God by means, or without means.

and ye shall cry for sorrow of heart, and shall houle for vexation of mind.
And ye shall leave your name as a curse unto my chosen: for the Lord God shall
slay you, and call his servants by another name.

But here by the name of (Evil) we do not understand sin, or the evil of
guiltiness, but affliction or trouble, or the evil of punishment. For God is
not either the author, or the cause of our sin, but we our selves. And so
James cap. 1. verse. 13.14. teaches, when he says: Let no man say when he is
tempted, (that is, moved unto evil) I am tempted of God: for God cannot be
tempted with evil, neither tempts he any man (unto evil) But every man is
tempted, when he is drawn away by his own concupiscence, and is entised. And
the Prophet Osee does learn us, that God is not the author of our destruction,
but of our salvation, cap. 13. ver. 9. O Israel (says he) one has destroyed
thee, but in me is thine help. Speaking thus in the person of God.

Verse. 7. Surely the Lord God will do nothing, but he reueleth his secret unto
his servants the Prophets.
THe meaning of this verse is all one with the sentence going immediately or
next before: only by way of explanation, or making the matter more plain, he
declares that which he had spoken before (Has not the Lord done it?). When
God is said to do evil.
For then, The Lord does evil, or is said, To do evil, when he does either
send just punishments upon obstinate or stiff necked sinners: or else when as
he does show and threaten them to come to pass, by his Prophets, unto whom he
does reveal them, that they should be foretold unto others.

Verse. 8. The lion has roared: who will not be afraid? The Lord God has
spoken, who can but prophecy?
The figure Aitiologia.
THe figure Aitiologia, or rendering of a reason, by the which the Prophet both
shows a cause, why he is unto them so heavy a messenger: and also does
remove and put away al envy from himself: and sinister or wrong opinion,
which they might conceive of him, as crowing over another man his kingdom,
where he had nothing to do: or else, as if he told these things rejoicing at
their calamities or troubles. He answers therefore, that he shows these
things unto the^ both by the express commandment of God, not of any private
pleasure of his own mind, and also that he does this of entire love and
compassion toward them, because that the mind of God toward them, is as of a
lion now roaring and ready and desirous to take and devour his pray. For as
much then as God himself would have thus much to be signified, and has spoken
unto Amos, by what means then can he forsake or refuse this burden and
charge, although it we^e hard and heavy unto the Israelites. For God must in
any case be obeyed, especially when as he commands a thing expressly and by
name. God in any case must be obeyed.
As may appear by the example of Jonas so grievously punished for his
disobedience. And 1. King. cap. 13. ver. 17. The Prophet that was sent to
preach against Jeroboam his altar at Bethel, being afterward requested by
Jeroboam to go home and dine with him, answers: that he would not do it, if
the King would give him his house full of gold, because he had a charge from
God to the contrary. And the like he says to the old Prophet in the place
before specified, which bad him home unto his house also, I may not (says he)
return with thee, nor go in with thee, neither will I eat bread nor drink
water with thee in this place. For it was charged me by the word of the Lord,
saying, Thou shall eat no bread, nor drink water there, nor turn again to
go by the way that thou wentest. This commandment notwithstanding he brake,
and was afterward, for his disobedience, slain by a lion. So Peter Act 4.
verse. 19.20. when he with John was forbidden to speak or teach in the name of
Jesus, answers: Whether it be right in the sight of God, to obey you rather
then God, judge ye. For we cannot but speak the things which we have seen and
heard.

When God in his anger speaks, who can but tremble, and be moved.
Furthermore, when as God speaks these things, and that being angry, and now
as it were addressed and settled to execute those his judgments, who can but
tremble and fear? And being moved with a certain pity and compassion, can
choose but admonish or warn those to repent, over whose heads snorting and
routing in their sins, so heavy punishments do hang? The which thing Amos
did. Whereby both the authority of his ministry or prophecy is avouched:
and all opinion of evil will toward the Israelites is put away and wiped out.

Verse. 9. Proclaim in the palaces at Ashdod, and in the palaces in the land of
Egypt, and say, Assemble your selves upon the mountains of Samaria so behold
the great tumults in the midst thereof, and the oppressed in the midst thereof.
A more plain laying open of the judgments of God against the Israelites.
THe explanation or laying more plainly open of the judgments of God against
the Israelites, and the same very wonderful, and such as they ought to be
amazed at, the which the Prophet now shows, or threatens unto them, to wit,
after that he has answered unto sundry their objections, and has cleared
himself and his ministry from all suspicion, and false charge of bearing
evil will unto them. But to the end the sentence of God against them, albeit
never so hard, may yet seem to be the more just, he produces or brings
forth beholders and witnesses of the desperate wickedness, and all other kind
of sins of the Israelites, Beholders and witnesses of the wickedness of the
Israelites.
not one, or two men only, but whole nations themselves, namely the
Philistines, and the Egyptians, that is, such people as were near, and such
also as were far off, because that he would have the lewdnes of the
Israelites very well known unto every nation. Finally, be brings for
witness the Infidels themselves, that the Israelites may be the more ashamed
both of their disobedience unto God, and also of their own blockishnes, and
soothing or flattering of themselves. In this verse therefore is contained a
calling of the Philistines and Egyptians openly to bear witness against the
Israelites. Under the name of Ashdod the Philistines are comprehended by the
figure Synecdoche, Synecdoche is a figure, whereby the whole is put for the
part, or the part for the whole: as in this place Ashdod one city of the
Philistines is put for the whole nation of them.
but the Egyptians are cited by name. And first of all God will have the
wickedness of the Israelites, to wit, the same which he accuses in them, to
be published or openly told and proclaimed, even in the palaces of those that
should be witnesses. Then secondly he will have those same witnesses to come to
behold, being gathered together in companies, and not severally one by one
after another: and to see and view this wickedness of the Israelites
throughout the whole country of the Samantanes, from the mountains, that is,
from the near and plain, and open places, that they may give the more
certain and true testimony or witness of it, as of a matter the which they
themselves had seen, and whereof they had knowledge and experience.

The Israelites chiefly accused of cruelty and covetousness.
Moreover, he does summarily or chiefly accuse the Israelites of two sins,
under the which the rest are comprehended, that is, of cruelty, whereby they
do vex and trouble one another of them, so that they are never at quiet and
peace within themselves, but continually at garboyle and deadly fewd. Secondly,
of avarice or covetousness, whereby they oppress one another, and rob and
spoil each other, even in the midst of their towns and cities, and in the
bowels of their nation.

Verse. 10. For they know not to do right, says the Lord: they store up
violence and robbery in their palaces.
The lewdness of the Israelites amplified, first generally, and then specially.
AN amplification of the wickedness and sins whereof God accuses the
Israelites before the Philistines and Egyptians, the which amplification is
taken from two places. First, from the general, they are so wicked, that they
are altogether lewd, and do not now any good thing at all. For they have
accustomed themselves unto all kind of sins, so that they know not any way
how to live well. For this word (they know not) does not note out in them any
excusable ignorance, but such as is utterly inexcusable, as who namely by a
long custom of sinning have in such sort gotten a practice and hardiness of
wickedness, that whatsoever before they had learned out of the word of God and
law of Moses concerning good works, they have now through their own default,
shamefully forgotten the same, and wickedly blotted clean cut of their minds.
The second place of this amplification, is from the special. For he does
amplify both the sins of cruelty and covetousness, by the manner of their
exercising of the saine. And concerning their covetousness, he says, that
(they do store, or hord up) their violence, that is, they are not content with
one or two booties from their brethren: but they heap them up. Secondly, they
thereby do gather together treasures in their palaces, the which they may
keep laid up on heaps, and unprofitable, and kept only to feed the eyes of
their covetousness. Their cruelty is hereby amplified, in this that they the
self same are said every where to bring in desolation and wastnes.

Verse. 11. Therefore thus says the Lord God, An adversary shall come even
round about the country, and shall bring down thy strength from thee, and thy
palaces shall be spoiled.
A description of the judgments of God against the Israelites, and the same
very sharp and bitter.
A Declaration and description of the judgments of God, sharp and bitter
indeed: (for it is in every respect answerable unto their sins) but yet most
just and righteous. God therefore does show them that it shall come to pass,
that like as the sins of the Israelites, are on every side seen and beholden
of all their borderers: so shall they be compassed about on every side by the
enemy, and like as the lewdness of them reigns in every place of their
country: so the enemy shall every where raunge against them in their own
country, so that as their wickedness did not live and flourish in one place
only, so should their punishment prevail, and their enemy be present not
only in one place, but in all places of their country. So much then do these
words sound (round about the country) that is to say, your enemies shall be
at hand among you, and shall press and vex you every where, and on every
side. And both the equity, and the grieuousnesse and greatness of the
judgments of God does herein also appear, that like as the Israelites have
used violence, and been covetous: so shall their strength also be broken by
their enemies: that either they shall not be able to stand before them, or if
they stand before them, they shall be slain. Moreover their palaces, the which
were the receivers of their robberies unjustly made by them, and were their
caves and dens, shall be robbed and spoiled by their self same enemies, so
that their punishment may be in every condition fitting and agreeing with their
sin.

Verse. 12. Thus says the Lord, As the shepherd takes out of the mouth of the
lion two legs, or a piece of an ear: so shall the children of Israel be
taken out, that dwell in Samaria in the corner of a bed, and in Damascus, as in
a couch.
An amplification of the former punishment.
AN amplification of the punishment described before, taken from the lamentable
event or falling out of things: namely, for that very few and scarce none at
all shall remain out of that destruction, or be delivered, that is, very few
shall escape. And that which follows, the Prophet does set down under two
similitudes taken from a shepherd, with great difficulty and danger pulling
some little piece or part of his sheep or other cattle out of the jaws of
the lion. This therefore that here is added, has in it a great force and
stirring up of affection, when he shows, that there shall not many of those
which dwell and live delicatly and deintily in Scimron or Samaria it self,
that same brave and gorgeous city, deliver and withdraw themselves out of this
so great misery and destruction. A description of the riotous and deintie life
of the Israelites in Samaria.
And this their nice and deintie life is described by their beds and couches of
their houses, upon the which these daily lie and rest themselves by reason of
their wantonness and delicacie, and excessive pleasures and tenderness of
living. These then of whom he here speaks are the rich and mighty ones, who
live deliciouslie, whose condition in such kind of calamities and miseries
will therefore be the harder, and their estate the more bitter, for that they
have little been acquainted with such manner of usage. The Prophet therefore by
this kind of speaking, does, as I have said, move affection, that he may at
last stir and rouse them vpto think on the matter.

Verse. 13. Hear and testify in the house of Iaacob, says the Lord God, the
God of hoasts.
The second part of the judgments of God against the Israelites.
ANother part of the judgments of God against the Israelites, and that declared
and uttered in this place with great contestation or calling of God to
witness. For the former part recited before showed what should happen or fall
out unto the men themselves: this latter part declares, what shall betide the
country it self, and otherthings, which were in the country of the
Israelites. And this verse contains two things, and the same yet appertaining
and aiming to all one mark, namely, to move the Israelites with the fear of
this punishment, and to show the certain event, or issue and falling out of
these threatenings, except they repent. The first contestation therefore, or
calling to witness of GOD, threatening these judgments against the Israelites,
1. The Jews are called as witnesses of the threatenings of GOD against the
Israelites, and to what end.
is made before the Jews a people near unto the Israelites, and their
brethren by nature. For God will have these his threatenings against the
Israelites to be declared unto the jews, and that the Jews be taken for
witnesses of them so threatened, that they may afterward testify and
acknowledge the notorious and desperate hardness and stubbornness of the
Israelites their brethren in contemning or despising the judgments of God: and
on the other side the great care and most loving mind of God, who so earnestly
and timely did before hand give warning of these things unto the Israelites.
And that therefore God be justified in his judgments, and men abide and remain
guilty, as David in his own cause witnesses of GOD, Psalm. 51. ver. 4. saying:
Against thee, against thee only have I sinned, and done evil in thy sight,
that thou may be just when thou speak, and pure when thou iudgest. And so
by this means the Israelites are made inexcusable. Therefore they shall know
that these threatenings are not cast forth in vain, or that words are not
uttered at all adventure by the Prophet, when as the Jews their neighbors are
called as witnesses of the fulfilling of them, who themselves also by this
means are by the way moved unto repentance by the example of the Israelites.

2 The titles of God heaped up in this place together, and what we are thereby
to learn.
Secondly, in this verse is to be noted the heap of words and titles, by the
which appears that these things are threatened by almighty God, and not by
Amos a mortal man and a Neat-heard only, that they may be believed as most
certainly to come to pass, unless the Israelites do change their life. For
hereunto appertains this which the Prophet affirms, that this which he
utters is (the saying of Jehovah, and the same the Lord, and God of hosts)
all which things do avouch the authority and rule of God, and do teach that
there is in him power to perform and bring the same to pass.

Verse. 14. Surely in the day that I shall visit the transgressions of Israel
upon him, I will also visit the Altars of Beth-el, and the horns of the Altar
shall be broken off, and fall to the ground.
A description of the second part of Gods judgments the which has two parts.
A Description of the second part of the judgments of God, or punishment
against the Israelites, the which consists of two parts. The first contains
the destruction of all their holy places, that is, of those places, in the
which because of their religions and Idolatries, 1 The overthrow of their holy
places.
they did put considence or trust. And these places are signified under the
name of Beth-el; because they had placed the chief exercises of their Idolatry
in the towns or cities of Dan and Beth-el. God therefore in this place does
pull down and take from them those things which they held, as religious and
holy, and inviolable or such as could not be broken, and should remain for
ever because of their religiousnes, and the which they did oppose or set
against the threatenings of God, as a most safe and sure buckler or shield,
whereunder they might hide themselves. For all their holy places shall be
overthrown, their altars shall be cloven in sunder, and the horns of their
altars (the which are thought to be holier then the other parts) shall be
broken. For nothing is able to stand against the threatenings of God, Nothing
but repentance can stand against the threatenings of God.
but the repentance of men: and as for these places, they were but monuments
and instruments of mere and blasphemous Idolatry. Now the things the which
Amos here threatens, fell out or came to pass when as Josias did purge and
cleanse all that whole country from Idolatry, 2. King. cap. 23. ver 15. for
thus is it there written concerning this matter: Furthermore the altar that was
at Beth-el, and the hie place made by Jeroboam, the Son of Nebat, which made
Israel to sin, both this altar, and also the high place brake he down, and
burnt the hie place, and stamped it to powder, and burnt the grove.

Verse. 15. And I will smite the winter housewith the summer house, and the
house of yuorie shall perish, and the great houses shall be consumed, says
the Lord.
The second part of this punishment against the Israelites.
THe second part of this punishment against the Israelites. And it contains
the destruction and overthrow of all the best and chiefest houses Therefore not
only those holy places shall perish, and be destroyed, but also the profane,
yea the most sumptuous palaces (the which those Israelites have so laboriously
builded) that every where in that country there may be a sharp and heavy
token, footing, and print of God his judgments, and of their obstinate or
wilful wickedness. And not only their sumptuous palaces shall be broken down:
but also their other houses, so that there shall be throughout that whole
country a great wastnes, the which in these words no doubt is described.
Further there is mention made of The Summer and Winter house, because that in
those wealthy kingdoms, not only the Kings, but also the other nobles, yea
and private persons in like manner, had their Summer houses severed from their
Winter houses, and especially in hot countries. So Judge 3. ver. 24. there is
mention made of the summer Parlour of Eglon King of the Moabites slain by
^hud, whom when his servants missed, and saw the doors of the Parlour shut,
They say one to another, surely he does his easement in his summer Parlour. So
the Kings of the Persians had Susa and Ecbatana. The Greeks had their under
roumes, and upper roumes, but yet all in one house: as also the Latins had
their sundry supping and dining places.

CAP. 4.
Verse. 1. Hear this word, ye kine of Bashan, which are in the mountain of
Samaria, which oppress the poor, and destroy the needy: and they say to their
masters, bring, and let us drink.
AFter the Prophet Amos in the chapter before going has indifferently dealt
with all the Israelites, Two chief parts of this verse.
now he does severally and particularly set upon the Princes and Rulers of the
kingdom of Israel, because of certain special and particular and notorious
sins of theirs. Wherefore there are two parts of this verse. 1. To whom the
prophet speaks.
The first shows unto whom the Prophet speaks: The second, wherefore he
speaks unto them. He speaks unto them not in his own person, but in the
person of God, whose messenger he is, 2 Wherefore he speaks unto them.
that the more authority and assured credit may be gotten hereby unto that
which he utters. And he speaks unto the Kine of Bashan, the which do dwell
in the mountain of Simron, that is, in the chief City of Samaria (the which
was both called Samaria, or Simron, and also was seated upon a mountain) For
thus it does appear, 1. King cap. 16. ver. 24. where we find that Omri King
of Israel bought the mountain Samaria of one Shemer for two talents of silver,
Samaria, whereof so called, and whereupon it was built.
and built in the mountain, and called the name of the city which he built,
after the name of Shemer, Lord of the moutaine, Samaria. By these name^ and
descriptions, the which are taken partly from the place, are partly from the
qualities of the persons, the Prophet does (...) and point out the princes
themselves of the Kingdom, both for their fiercenes and curstnes toward all
men: and also because or their overmuch and blockish security or carelesnes,
by reason o^ their too much wealth and riches. For Bashan was a mountain
beyond Jordan, near unto Galaad, in the possession of the half^ tribe of
Manasses. Ios. cap. 13. ver. 4, 5. fit for pasturing, where most notable kine
and fat cattle were fed, as we may see Deuteronomy. 32 cap. ver. 14. where among
other benefits of God great and excellent, done for his people, Moses shows
how he planted them, where they were fed with Butter of kine, and milk of
sheep, with f^^ of the Lambs and Rams, fed in Bashan, etc. Whereupon men
that are fierce and cruel, and proud and haughty through over good succes in
things falling out happily unto them, are in the Scripture, compared unto these
kine, and bulls of Bashan. As where it is said in the Psalm. 22. ver. 14. Many
young bulls have compassed m^^ mighty bulls of Bashan have closed me about.
Amos therefore calls these so by the commandment of God, not to speak evil
of Princes or Magistrates, but to shake off from them sluggishnes of mind.

The Princes of the Israelites threatened especially for their covetousness and
cruelty.
Further he speaks unto them, that is, threatens them for many causes, of the
which in this place there are expressed especially two, that is, Covetousness
and Cruelty. Covetousness, because they do rob and oppress the poor: they do
suck the needy dry, ye^ even breaking their bones, that they may eat out
their marrow, and take it clean a way. Cruelty also is joined herewithall:
that which the words of (oppressing, and breaking) do declare. And i^ these
Princes both these vices is insatiable, or such as can never be filled, and
barbarous, because they ask daily, and crave that some thing may be brought
them: and also do moreover wittingly and willingly feast themselves most
dayntily with those spoils of the poor, the which is altogether a cruel and
unmerciful part, void of all natural affection, that men should in such
sort devour one another, and after the manner of wild beasts be fierce and
cruel against living creatures of their own kind. Of the which kind of
cruel and merciless men, David Psalm. 14. ver. 4 does complain, saying: Do
not all the workers of iniquity know that they eat up my people, as they eat
bread?

Verse. 2. The Lord God has sworn by his holiness, that lo, the days shall
come upon you, that he will take you away with thorns, and your posterity with
fish hooks.
HE has noted and pointed out the persons whom he threatens: now he does
declare and utter the threatenings of God themselves. Wherein two things are
also to be noted: first, Two things to be noted in this verse.
the form and manner of the declaring of them, the which is not only done
inthe name of God: but also with the using of an oath, that it may be the more
assured and certain unto them, 1 The manner of speaking.
and that he may take away and shake off from them their cruelty, and al other
starting holes, whrewith the great ones are wont to shift off the threatenings
of God. And thus does the Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews teach us, cap.
6. ver. 17, 18. that God uses to confirm his promises unto us by an oath, to
the end we should the more certainly believe the same: So God (says he)
willing more abundantly to show unto the heirs of promise the stablenesse of
his ciunsell, bound himself by an oath, That by two immutable things, wherein
it is impossible that God should lie, we might have strong consolation, which
have our refuge to hold fast the hope that is set before us. In what sense God
is said to swear by his holiness or temple.
And God in this place swears by his Holiness, Sanctuary, or Temple, so far
forth as it was unto them a manifest and visible token both of his holiness and
true worship: and also of his majesty, to the end they should not think that
any vain Idol did here speak unto them, and not the true God, whose temple
they saw with their eyes, at leastwise it was extant among them to be seen.
And so does Christ teach Math. 5. ver. 35. That Jerusalem is the City of the
great King, that is an outward sign of God his glory, and the seat and house
that he had chosen for his kingdom and empire: and therefore that they which
should swear by it, did even swear by God, of whose honor and glory it was a
president: like as Mat. 23. ver. 21. he does expressly show that he which
swears by the Temple, does swear by it, and him that dwells in it, that
is, by God, of whose presence the Temple was an outward Sacrament, testimony or
witness.

The second thing to be marked in this verse, 2 The punishment to fall upon the
Israelites exc^pt they repent.
is the punishment which is here described, and the event or issue which should
immediately ensue of the same, if they did not repent. This punishment is most
sore and grievous, and yet unto God most easy, howsoever they were the Peers
of the realm; and therefore seemed to be immovable, the which could not be
shaken, nor stirred from their place, nor cast from their degree. 1. The
punishment of the Israelites most grievous.
And this punishment is most grievous because that it is both the neck break
of themselves, and touches also their posterity: and does not only plague
them in their own country, but shall further thrust them out from their own
home. For thus much signifies this speech (I will take you away) that is, I
will cause you to remove (and your posterity) out of this you^ most pleasant
land and country. 2. Most easy unto God to execute.
It shall also be most easy, even as easily as a fisher takes fishes with
his hook and angle, as if it were in sport and playing.

Verse. 3. And ye shall go out at the breaches every Kowe forward: and ye shall
cast your selves out of the palace, says the Lord.
The amplifiyng of the punishment by their fear and trembling.
THe amplifiyng of the punishment threatened unto them, taken from their fear
and trembling. For both themselves shall flee away with speed, wheresoever
they can find a way, as men void of counsel and not knowing what to do, nor
yet able by strength to resist: and also they shall with their own hands cast
out those things and goods, the which they have kept so long and so carefully
in their palaces, that every one may take and possess them as things by them
left and forsaken, like as it is wont to fall out in a shipwreck or in firing
and burning of houses. The which is a most miserable condition or estate of
rich men, who seemed unto themselves to be safe and without danger in their own
seats and houses But yet for all this these things shall fall out and come to
pass unto the Israelites continuing obstinatly or stiffly in their sins.

Verse. 4. Come to Beth-el, and transgress: to Gilgal, and multiply
transgression: and bring your sacrifices in the morning, and your tithes after
three years.
A second reason why the Israelites are punished.
THis is another rendering of a reason why the Israelites are so grievously
punished by God (for there has been one expounded in the first verse of this
chapter) namely their horrible Idolatry, wherein they were most superstitious,
1. The Israelites most superstitious.
and most obstinate or stifnecked. Superstitious they were in this, that in
their Idolatry they did falsify and corrupt all the parts and points of the
true worship of God, and like unto Apes did imitate or counterfeit the same,
the which thing is taught in this verse, and in the verse following. And they
were most obstinate or stifnecked in their Idolatry, 2 Obstinate and
stifnecked.
because that they could not by any punishments be withdrawn therefrom, and be
brought to acknowledge and worship the true God. And this so outrageous
Idolatry of the Israelites is set forth by the great indignation and wrath of
God, God speaks unto them as desperate persons, in the way of mock^ge.
yet under a i^sting and mocking manner of speaking, as if God dealt with
desperate persons, or such as were past all hope, and so consequently as if God
gave them leave, that according unto the wish and desire of their desperate
hearts they should wholly drown and plundge themselves over head and ears in
this sin, and in the same play the wantons their belly full, continue,
transgress and offend God. Thus Ierem. 7. ver. 21. God in mockage bids the
Israelites continue their wonted manner of sacrificing with opinion, that how
wickedly soever they lived, yet for the outward work sake he must needs be
pleased with them, saying: Put your burnt offerings unto your sacrifice and
eat the flesh. Likewise in Ezechiel cap. 21. ver. 39. As for you, O house of
Israel, Thus says the Lord God, go you, and serve every one his Idol, seeing
that ye will not obey me, and pollute mine holy name no more with your gifts,
and with your Idols. So Malach. 1. ver. 4. GOD in mockage grants unto the
Edomites, as it were in spite of him, to build up again the places, the which
he had laid waste, but shows that they shall have but ill success with the
same. For says he there: Though Edome say, we are impouerished, but we will
return and build the desolate places, yet says the Lord of hosts, They shall
build, but I will destroy it, and they shall call them, The border of
wickedness, and the people with whom the Lord is angry for ever. God then in
these and the like kind of speeches, does not encourage men unto sin, nor is
delighted with those that sin ( For God is not a God that loves wickedness,
neither shall evil dwell with him. Psalm. 5. ver. 4.) but he deals after this
manner with desperate persons (that he which is filthy may be more filthy Apoc.
22. ver. 11.) and that they may be made altogether inexcusable.

In this verse there are three things to be considered. 3. Things to be noted.
First the place it self, where they did so grievously sin, namely, Beth-el
and Gilgal. Osee 4. ver. 15. Though thou, Israel, play the harlot, 1 The place,
yet let not Judah sin. Come ye not unto Gilgal neither go ye up to
Bethauen, nor swear the Lord lives. These places Jeroboam had chosen out for
Idolatry in the south parts of Iewry: 2 The ordinary sacrifices of that place.
Secondly, the ordinary sacrifices, the which were done there, the which are
he^^^ called (Transgression) that is, a notorious and heinous sin: a^^
therefore the more sacrifices that were made by them, so much the more did
these Israelites sin, and heap up their iniquities upon their own heads.
The reason is, because that this service was (...) will worship, as in the next
verse following, and ordained by m^^ not commanded by God, nor allowed of him,
which kind of service and worship God does hate. For so God speaks of the
sacrifices of the Jews, Ierem. 7. ver. 22. I spoke not unto your fathers,
(...) commanded them, when I brought them out of the Land of Egypt, concerning
burnt offerings and sacrifices. And Paul Coloss. 2. verse. 22. teaches that
such kind of traditions all perish with the using and are after the
commandments and doctrines of men. 3 The corruption of a notable part of God
his worship.
Thirdly, there is in this verse noted a corruption of a notable part of the
worship of GOD made by the Israelites, and so consequently their most filthy
superstition is in like manner noted, while^^ that every three year they lay
aside their tithes for the maintenance of those their Idolatrous services, and
the finding of them that labor about them, as their Priests, etc. in such
sort as God commanded it to be done for the maintenance of the Levites, that
is, for the nourishing of the maintayners and workmen about his true worship
and service. For so were the Israelites commanded to lay up their three
years tithes for the mayntenance of the Levites, and for such other like uses
Deuteronomy. 14 ver 28. At the end of three year (says Moses) thou shall bring forth
all the tithes of thine increase of the same year, and lay it up within thy
gates. Then the Leuite shall come, because he has no part nor inheritance
with thee, and the stranger, and the fatherles and the widow wh^^^ are within
thy gates, and shall eat and be filled, that the Lord thy G^^ may bless thee
in all the work of thine hand which thou do. And for this cause does GOD by
the Prophet Malachias cap. 3. ver. 10. command the people to do the like,
promising a blessing thereunto, Bring ye (says God) all the tithes into the
storehouse, that then may be meat in mine house (he means for such uses as
were appointed in the place of Deutronomie before cited) and prove me no^
herewith, says the Lord of hosts, if I will not open the windows of heaven
unto you, and power you out a blessing without measure.

Verse. 5. And offer at thanksgiving of leaven, publish and proclaim the free
offerings: for this likes you, O ye children of Israel, says the Lord.
Two other kinds of superstition and idolatry of the Israelites.
THe Prophet reckons up two other kinds of their superstition and idolatry.
The one, for that the Israelites offered peace offerings unto their Idols in
Beth-el, after the imitation or example of the true sacrifices of God, whereof
read Leuit. cap. 6. from the beginning, unto the end of the seventh verse. 1.
Their peace offerings.
But this in these Israelites was but an apish imitation without faith, the
commandment of God, and true end of the same, and therefore it was mere
blasphemy. The other, for that they also made vows and free will offerings,
2. Their vows and free will offerings.
after the imitation of the true worship of God, and called upon their gods
with a most high voice. The which although they seem to be done after the
imitation or following or true godliness, yet for as much as they were done in
the honor of those unto who^ they were done, in that place, and of those by
whom they were done, and for that end, they are mere idolatry and will
worship, and therefore are called in this place, the devices and inventions of
men, and not the precepts or commandments of God, or the service and worship
of God. And that we may be thoroughly resolved or persuaded that this is so,
there is added (That the Lord has so said and pronounced) So then an apish
imitation of the true worship of God, is not in deed and truth the true worship
of God.

Verse. 6. And therefore have I given you cleannes of teeth in all your cities,
and scarcenes of bread in all your places: yet have ye not returned unto me,
says the Lord.
The stubborn continuance of the Israelites in their sin, and the sundry
punishment for the same.
AFter the setting down of the outragiousnesse of the idolatry of the
Israelites, he describes their obstinacy, or stubborn continuance in the
same, the which appears hereby, for that they could not b^ any afflictions or
punishments be drawn from the same, and be turned to worship and serve the
true God. Now then in this verse and certain others that follow, are reckoned
up sundry their afflictions or punishments, among the which the first, and the
same very great, is famine, 1. Famine.
the which in this verse is mentioned, and well known by the story 1 King.
cap. 17. where you may read of that same most notable famine in the days of
Elias, the which continued by the space of three years and an half at the
least. And 2. King. cap. 4. mention is likewise made of another famine in the
days of Elizeus.

Verse. 7. And also I have withholden the rain from you, when there were yet
three months to the harvest: and I caused it to ra^^ upon one city, and have
not caused it to rain upon another: o^^ piece was rained upon, and the piece
whereupon it rained not, ^^thered. Verse. 8. So two or three cities wandered unto
one city to drink wate^ but they were not satisfied: yet have ye not returned
unto me, s^^^ the Lord.
THe second punishment is Drought or drines, 2. Drought.
altogether miraculous and wonderful, that it might evidently appear, that
the same was sent of God being wroth against them. For it rained (...) some
cities, and in other some it rained not. Moreover, there wa^ not water enough
to give the men themselves drink: last of a^^ whole cities came by heaps and
companies to seek for water, by means of the overmuch thirst and dries.
Hereby appears th^^ the seasons of the year are not governed and ruled by
fortune, (...) by the stars themselves, but by God, whether they fall out to
be^ fruitful, or else barren. And thus much does Paul teach Act. 14. verse. 17.
when he says, That God left not himself without witness in the he did good,
and gave us rain from heaven, and fruitful seasons, f^^ling our hearts with
food and gladness.

Verse. 9. I have smitten you with blasting and mildew: your gre^^ gardens and
your vineyards, and your fig trees, and your oli^^ trees did the palmer worm
devour: yet have ye not returned v^ to me, says the Lord.
3. Barrennes of the earth and of the fruits thereof.
THe third punishment, barrennes of the earth, and of the fruit of all sorts:
wherein doubtless the wrath of God did appear For not only one sort of
fruit failed: but all sorts. Therefore both the herbs, and also the vines,
and fig trees, and olives were barren at one time, and also beaten and
strooken with a parching and burning wind, the which brought blasting: the
palmer worm moreover and the caterpiller devouring and eating that which was
left, as God by Joel does witness of a like plague cap. 1. ver. 4. where he
says: That which is left of the palmer worm, has the grasshopper eaten, and
the residue of the grasshopper, has the canker worm eaten, and the residue of
the canker worm, has the caterpiller eaten.

Verse. 10. Pestilence have I sent among you, after the manner of Egypt: your
young men have I slain with the sword, and have taken away your horses: and I
have made the stink of your tents to come up even into your nostrels: yet have
you not returned unto me, says the Lord.
4. The pestilence.
THe fourth punishment, the Pestilence. The fifth, War, in the which so many
men and horses were slain, that the very stink of them in the tents killed up
the Israelites. The sixth punishment, 5 War.
Captivity. But the Pestilence was greatest, 6. Captivity.
the which the similitude taken from Egypt does declare. And of this Egyptian
pestilence records the Psalm. 78. ver. 49.50. as especially sent of God, in
these words: He cast upon them the fiercenes of his anger, indignation and
wrath, and vexation, by sending out of evil angels: He made away unto his
anger: he spared not their soul from death, but gave their life to the
pestilence.

Verse. 11. I have overthrown you, as God overthrew Sodom and Gomorah: and ye
were as a firebrand plucked out of the burning: yet have ye not returned unto
me, says the Lord.
7. The subversion and overthrow of their land after some fearful and strange
manner.
THe seventh punishment, the subversion or overthrowing of their lands, either
by some opening of the earth, or whether it happened by any other means, as by
flood, or burning. For this the Scripture does not set down after what manner
it was: but that this overthrow was wonderful, and horrible or fearful, and
a manifest judgment of GOD against the Israelites, appears in this place by
a double comparison, to wit, of Sodom and Gomorah: and also of a fireband. By
the similitude of the fire brand, he signifies that all perished not, but that
some were saved, albeit very hardly.
Of this fearful destruction of Sodom and Gomorah, from whence the first
comparison is taken, Peter in his 2. Epist. cap. 2. ver. 6. says, That God
turned the cities of Sodom and Gomorah into ashes, condemned them and overthrew
them, and made them an ensample unto them that after should live ungodly. And
agreeably unto Peter does Jude also teach, that God his fearful judgment
against Sodom and Gomorah, ought to be a warning unto all others to flee from
sin, in the 7. verse of his Epistle. As Sodom and Gomorah, and the cities
about them, which in like manner as they did, committed and followed strange
flesh, are set forth for an ensample, and suffer the vengeance of eternal fire.

The addition in the end of every one of the punishments.
Furthermore it is to be noted, what is added unto all the punishments at the
end of every one of them (yet ye have not returned unto me.) For this addition
shows that the mind of the Israelites was not only sluggish and careless in
so great miseries and punishments, as who were not herewithall stirred up and
moved: but also that it was desperate and past recovery in this idolatry, the
which they would by no means cast off, to return unto the true knowledge and
worship of God, by true repentance of mind. And such are the punishments of
obstinate or stubborn persons, as appears Isai. 5. ver. 25. Therefore is the
wrath of the Lord kindled against his people, and he has stretched out his
hand upon them, and has smitten them that the mountains did tremble: and
their carkases were torn in the midst of the streets, and for all this his
wrath was not turned away, but his hand was stretched out still. And in the
Psalm. 32. ver. 9.10. David counsels that we should not be without sense and
feeling of our sins, and as unbridled colts run on headlong in wickedness,
least that we be curbed and bridled by God, who has many punishments for the
ungodly. Be not (says he) like an horse, or like a mule, which understand not:
whose mouths thou do bind with bit and bridle, least they come near thee.
Many sorrows shall come to the wicked: but he that trusts in the Lord, mercy
shall compass him.

Verse. 12. Therefore thus will I do unto thee, O Israel: and because I will
do this unto thee, prepare to meet thy God, O Israel.
The conclusion of the place before going.
THe conclusion of the whole former place with an exhortation. The conclusion is
this, namely, that the punishments threatened ver. 2. and 3. to the Israelites
the Peers and Nobles, because of their sins before recited, shall assuredly
come to pass, except they do earnestly repent. There follows therefore an
earnest exhortation and a weighty, (and conceived also in the name of God
himself) that they might avoid these judgments of God, and so consequently
(whilst there is yet some time left) go against the fearful wrath of God,
as it were to entreat him before hand, and that by earnest repentance of
mind. Wherefore this verse has these two especial parts, to wit, a
conclusion, and an exhortation. And this place shows what is the most
certain and ready way to turn the judgments of God from our beads: namely,
if we refrain from our sins, and turn unto God, and unto a better mind. For
by this means, and conversion or turning of our mind, we do meet God even
running as it were upon us, and being angry with us, and do find him easy
to be appeased with us. In which manner of speaking there is a n="*" A Metaphor
is a figure, whereby a word is changed from his natural signification unto a
like, as to smell, for to find out and in this place, to go to meet, for to
seek, to entreat, or to appease.
Metaphor borrowed from those that go to receive them that come unto them. And
these words (prepare thee) do not show what lies in our power, but what is
the nature of true repentance: namely, that it must be a change of life, and
absteining from wickedness, the cause of which work in us is the spirit of
God. And therefore this self same must be begged of God, and sought for at his
hand.

Verse. 13. For lo, he that forms the mountains, and creates the wind, and
declares unto man what is his thought: which makes the morning darkness, and
walks upon the hie places of the earth, the Lord God of hosts is his name.
A reason of the former exhortation.
THe garnishing, or rendering of a reason of the former exhortation, least that
the Israelites should either but coldly be moved at the same, such was the
hardiness of these men: or should hear it slightly, as if God were not so
greatly to be feared, such was forsooth the pride of these men, and their
confidence or trust in the help of men. Therefore here is showed by a
description of the majesty of God himself, how he is both to be given ear
unto, and also to be feared. So Paul 1. Tim. 1. ver. 17. when as he says (Now
unto the King ever lasting, immortal, invisible, unto God only wise, be honor
and glory for ever and ever, Amen) by showing that glory is due unto God, he
does paint forth before our eyes the majesty of God in lively colors, because
of our dulnes, who in our minds do not conceive it to be such, and so great.
Now this the most sacred majesty of God is in this place laid forth unto us by
diverse effects indeed of his power, but not by all: yet especially by his name
it self, whereby the true God is called the God of hosts. And so is he in like
manner described Psalm. 68. ver. 4. by his name, in these words: Sing unto God,
and sing praises unto his name: exalt him that rides upon the heavens, in his
name (Iah) and rejoice before him. For names are not without cause given unto
God, nor in vain. But the effects whereby the majesty of GOD in this place is
described, are here reckoned up to be five, taken partly from the first
creation of things: and partly from the ordering and governing of them already
created, Five effects of the majesty of God.
and the same most free and mighty, that is, according unto his own will,
pleasure and power, without the controlement of any. Unto the creation of
things it pertains, for that GOD is called both the former of the mountains,
1 He forms the mountains.
and the creator of the winds. So Psalm. 104. ver. 4.8. the making of the
winds and mountains is attributed unto God: the winds where he says: He
makes the spirits his messengers, 2. He creates the wind.
(for by spirits he understands the winds) and a flaming fire his ministers.
The mountains, in these words: And the mountains ascend, and the valleys
descend to the place, which thou have established for them. And 3. John. ver.
8. Christ unto Nicodemus speaks of the wind as directed to blow when and
where GOD will, saying: The wind blows where it lists, and thou hear
the sound thereof, but can not tell whence it comes, and whither it goes.
3. He knows the thoughts.
To the ordering and governing of the things created belongs, that the same
God is said to be the knower of the thought of man, nay the iudger thereof, yea
and of man himself also: for God knows us better then we do our selves.
And therefore Paul to show that there is nothing so secret or deep, but that
the spirit of God does pierce and sound the same, and so consequently knows
the very innermost thoughts of men, says Cor. cap. 2. ver. 1^. The spirit
searches all things, yea the deep things of God. And Ioh. 3. ver. 20. Christ
in that his long conference with Nicodemus, teaches, that every man that evil
does, hates the light, neither comes to light, lest his deeds should be
reproved. By the which he shows, that as by the light of the Sun men their
actions are in such for manifested, as all men may discern of them, being done
in the same: so much more Jesus Christ, who in that which goes immediately
before calls himself the true light, does look into the darkest corners of
the hearts of men, and does discover and reprove the same. 4. He makes light
darkness.
So does it in like manner appertain unto the ordering and government of
things created, that God is said by the Prophet in this verse, when it pleases
him to make dark the very light of the Sun, and the morning, and in steed of
the day to make darkness. So God by the hand of Moses makes thick darkness
in Egypt for three days together, as it is in Exodus cap. 10. ver. 22. The
Moses stretched out his hand toward heaven, and there was a black^ darkness in
all the land of Egypt three days. And when Christ suffered, God caused on the
sudden that there was a darkness over all the land of Iewrie for a certain
space, as Matthew. cap. 27. ver. 45. does witness saying: Now there was a
darkness over all the land from the sixth hour unto the ninth hour. Lastly,
in that God is said, 3. He walks upon the hi^ places of the earth.
To wake upon the high places of the earth, this also appertains thereunto,
namely, to declare the absolute, mere and alone power of God in the government
of the world, that we might understand that nothing is able to withstand his
will.

CAP. 5.
Verse. 1. Hear you this word, which I lift up upon you, even a lamentation of
the house of Israel.
The sum of this chapter.
THe sum of this Sermon and chapter following, tends to this end, that the
Israelites may be brought unto true repentance, if by any means it may be,
both by the feeling and conceiving of the punishments to come, if they continue
in their sin, and also by thinking and considering upon the goodness of God,
and of his majesty, whom they offend. Therefore both the judgments of God are
here set forth against them, being obstinate and stiffenecked: and also the
great majesty of God is described. And by God his this calling of them to
repentance, and by his care of the Israelites is showed, how the wicked perish
through their own lewdness and stubbornnes: and not through any fault of God.

Concerning this Sermon and exhortation, it was made some time after that which
went before, that in the mean space GOD might see whether the Israelites being
admonished or warned would repent. The which when they did not, albeit they
were long looked for, they are by the same God called again unto penitencie or
repentance, that they may be altogether inexcusable. And this verse has two
parts. For it does expressly show, Two parts of this verse.
both what God threatens, and whom he threatens. God threatens (a burden)
and that full of lamentation and mourning, and misery; 1. A burden.
unto all the Israelites. 2. To all the Israelites.
Therefore the word of God is not simply or alone declared unto them, whereunto
notwithstanding (even because it is the word of God) they ought diligently to
give ear, and to hear the same: but the word of God full of punishments,
tears, and mourning, by how much the more (if they have any care of their
salvation) they ought most heedfully to hearken thereunto, and be therewith
touched and moved. For extreme or utter destruction is now threatened unto them,
being obstinate or stubborn, even from God himself, that they should not say
but that they had wa^^^^ of their danger in time.

Verse. 2. The virgin Israel is fallen, and shall no more rise: she is (...)
upon her land, and there is none to raise her up.
The utter overthrow of the Israelites.
THe making more plain of that which went in the verse before. For now God does
show what that burden full of mourning^ the which he threatened before, to wit,
the overthrowing of the whole kingdom and nation of the Israelites, and that
in such for that there is no hope of recovering of their estate again
afterward, nor of raising up themselves again. And this ouerthrows the nation
is described by two ways and words, to wit (of sall^^) yet in such sort that
it cannot rise again, the which is most m^^^rable, and a sign of utter
destruction. And so much seems l^^mie to signify cap. 8. ver. 4. when as at
the commandment of the Lord he says unto the rebellious Jews: Thus says the
Lord, Se^ they fall and not arise? shall he turn away, and not return aga^^^
And secondly, their utter overthrow is noted by the word (lea^^^^^ all alone)
for when she is fallen, she shall be forsaken of all (...) neither shall she
get help or aid of any man, to lift up he^ (...) again.

To what end the people is called by the name of a virgin.
Further, he calls the people by the name of a (virgin) very ^fectionatly, to
move them unto the more pity and compassion, as more tender and vehement or
earnest affections, that at the (...) they may have pity both of themselves,
and also of those their ^^der virgins which were among them. The singular
number notes the whole body, and not every particular person.
Moreover, albeit that GOD use the singular number in saying (the virgin
Israel) yet his meaning is not that every particular person of the Israelites
shall perish, and so none at all be saved, but the whole body it self of
(...) people and kingdom is signified, the which shall not any more b^^ raised
up, nor arise again.

Verse. 3. For thus says the Lord God, The city which went out by thousand,
shall leave an hundredth: and that, which went out (...) an hundredth, shall
leave ten to the house of Israel.
Occupatio, which is a figure whereby we answer before hand an objection that
might bemade.
THe figure occupatio, or an answering before hand of an obi^ction, wherein the
punishment mentioned in the second ver^^ before going is more plainly
declared, and showed, how great and grievous it shall be. And the end why it is
made more plain, is lest, as I said before, because that God in the former
verse used the singular number, every particular Israelite might be supposed
that he should perish, hope of escaping being left unto none. For God speaks
of the body it self of the people, and not of every particular person of
them. For there were some of them the which should be left alive, albeit the
number of them very small, and the same very few. And hereby is taught, How
great the ruin of the people shall be.
how great the ruin and decaie of that people was like to be, to wit, every
tenth person of them shall be left in the house, or people of Israel, that is,
of that kingdom, the which was called the kingdom of Israel, and had fallen
away from the kingdom of the twelve tribes, the which were once all joined
together.

Where it is likely that the Israelites which were left should live and dwell.
Further, it is not here expressed, where those which shall be left, should
live and dwell, whether in their own country, and promised land, or
elsewhere, as in Media, or Colchis, or Hircania, into which countries they
seem to have been carried by the Assyrians. Others think that this is to be
understood of Media, or Hircania: but I suppose it to be meant of their own
land and country, where also some of the Israelites were left. For it is said
here, The places here quoted 2. King. 22. and 2. Chro. 30. are misqueted, and
contain no such thing. But I suppose that he takes the name Israel here for
the Jews, of the which some were left behind in the land. 2. King. 25. ver.
22. Ierem. 40. v. 5, 9.
they shall go out by hundreths and by tennes, to wit, (out of their Cities.)
They shall then be in their cities.

Verse. 4. For thus says the Lord unto the house of Israel: Seek ye me, and ye
shall live.
COmmoratio^, or standing, to show more largely what they ought to do, where
the end of the former threatening is declared, and some other causes added also.
The end therefore of so hard and lamentable a punishment here threatened is,
that the Israelites should repent, that is to say, turning unto God from these
so great sins, might be saved and live. Other reasons are set down in the
verses following, why they should do so. But hereby appears what is the end
of these most sharp threatenings, The end why this punishment is threatened.
namely that men should give ear unto them, repent, and be saved. For Ezech.
18. ver. 32. I desire not the death of him that dies, says the Lord: cause
therefore one another to return, and live ye. And Paul shows that God his
long suffering and bearing with us in our sins, is, that thereby we should be
drawn unto repentance, of the which those that make none account he sharply
rebukes, where Romans 2. cap. ver. 4,, 5. he says thus: Despisest thou the
riches of his bountifulnes, and ^^tience, and long sufferance, not knowing that
the bountifulnes of G^^leadeth thee to repentance? But thou after thine
hardness, and heart the cannot repent, heapest unto thy self wrath against the
day of wrath (...) of the declaration of the just judgment of God. Whereby
appears the great loving kindness of God, even against men that are wicked
(...) also his just vengeance against the same continuing obstin at or
s^^necked, and such as wilnot repent. Further, these two points are he
rehearsed in very good order, to wit, first, To seek God: and second^^ To
live. For the cause of life and salvation, and of our deliverance o^ of
troubles is, To have God with us: And the way to have Go^ with us, does consist
or lie herein, if we seek him. For so (...) teaches Mat. 7. ver. 7. Ask, and
it shall be given you, seek* and ye^^ find: knock and it shall be opened unto
you. This cause then, namely to seek God, in respect of our selves goes
before: the effect, it wit, To find and live, follows. But in respect of God,
the cause, why we can both seek him and also find him, is his mercy. Here
(...) are comprehended briefly both the nature and also the effect of (...)
repentance: the nature, To seek God: the effect, To find (...) and live.

Verse. 5. But seek not Beth-el, nor enter into Gilgal: and go not (...)
Beer-sheba: for Gilgal shall go into captivity, and Beth-el (...) come to
naught.
AN explanation, or making more plain of the sentence and ^^hortation before
going, ( seek Jehovah, or the Lord) taken fr^^ the contrary. To seek the
Lord is to abstain from Idols, (...) which then were in Beth-el, and Gilgal,
and Beer-sheba. For (...) first part of earnest repentance is to abstain from
evil, The first part of earnest repentance is to abstain from evil.
and to (...) test and abhor the same, the which is he^e expressed. And so^
we taught Psalm. 34. ver 14. Eschew evil, and do good: seek pea^ and follow
after it. The second part is, To do good, and to i^ brace the same, The
second, to do good.
the which is contained in the verse before go^ (seek ye me) so that of these
twain now joined together we ha^^ a true definition of repentance. True
repentance then, is to absu^^ from evil things, What true repentance is.
and to follow such good things, such as are commanded us by God: as for
example, to abstain from idols, and (...) serve the true God, and to seek
him. And this course took P^^^ with the Thessalonians, as may appear by their
turning from idols, and serving the true God, for the which they were much
commended of the faithful of other places, as Paul himself reports 1 Thessalonians. cap. 1. ver. 9. in these words: For they themselves show of you (he
means the faithful in Macedonia and Achaia, and of other places) what manner
of entering in we had unto you, and how you turned to God from idols, to serve
the living and true God. And the repetition of this word (seek) in this place,
and in the verse before going, is very excellent: Seek the Lord, and seek
not Beth-el, etc.

A reason why they ought to abstain from worshipping in those piaces.
For Gilgal shall go into captivity, etc. This is a reason added to amplify
the matter with all, that they might the rather abstain from the worship of
those places, or having of them in any reverent regard, albeit that they were
then of the Idolaters deemed to be most holy. For those places shall not be
defended, no not by their own Idols or gods, as they supposed them. Therefore
shall you much less be saved by the self same gods. For Gilgal according to
the signification of the name thereof shall be cut off, and rooted out: Beth-el
shall be brought to (Auen) that is, unto nothing. To what end then do you
hope, or seek for help from those places?

Verse. 6. Seek the Lord, and ye shall live, least he break out like fire in
the house of Joseph, and devour it, and there be none to quench it in Beth-el.
The former exhortation repeated, and amplified.
A Repetition of the sentence of the fourth verse, that the exhortation before
going, concerning the seeking of God, may be understood to be the more
earnest, and the only saving of the Israelites, and the way to stay and pacify
the punishments threatened unto them And the Prophet does amplify the
exhortation repeated, by the danger hanging over their heads, except they do
it. For he threatens that it will come to pass, that a fire from God, and
such punishment shall be sent upon them (except they do see^e God) that it will
overthrow their whole kingdom, and common wealth and society, and that there
shall not be any able to remedy this so sore and great ruin Therefore the
Prophet has ins^rted or interlaced these reasons of the vanity of the place,
Gilgal, and Beth-el: of their great punishment to come, that the Israelites
being warned of that their exceeding and assured danger, albeit they were never
so perverse or wicked, might yet notwithstanding be mo^ed and touched, and
pierced, and in the end return unto the^ duty, and unto God.

Verse. 7. They turn judgment to wormwood, and leave off righteousness in the
earth.
A Parenthesis, or putting in of another sentence between the verse that went
before, and the next that follows, not appertaining unto either of them, but
making a full sense of it self, whereby the Prophet turns his speech and
exhortation of seeking the true God, peculiarly and especially unto the Rulers
of the people of Israel, unto whom did appertain the authority of ministering
law, the oversight of the people, the correction or punishment of vice, and the
setting up of Justice among men, whose Idolatry before, and in this place
their negligence and carelesnes in executing of their office the Prophet does
most sharply reprehend and find fault withal. An especial reprehension of the
princes and nobles, and the same twofold.
Therefore this verse does contain an especial and peculiar reprehension of
the kings, nobles, and Judges of the people of Israel: albeit that the rest of
the people also were not free from neither of these sins, to wit, ungodliness,
or Idolatry toward God, and injustice toward their neighbors: but the Rulers
of the people were especially hereof guilty, whom the Prophet does for this
cause reprove more sharply, 1. The ouerturning of justice.
and as it were by name. And their peculiar and proper sin is here showed to
be twofolde. First, for that they themselves did ouerturne all law, the
authority of the administration or ordering whereof was notwithstanding, in
their hands only. For they did turn into cruelty and injustice or wrong that
their sacred or holy authority, the which in it self is most sweet and most
holy. Therefore they changed this honey into most bitter wormwood. And of such
a perverting of justice does the Prophet Isai complain cap. 5. ver. 7. when he
faith that the Lordlooked to have had from his vineyard (which was the house of
Israel and men of Judah) Judgment, but behold oppression: for righteousness
but behold a crying.

The second sin of the Rulers was, that they suffered all justice to perish
in others, 2. Th^^ suffered (...) to perish (...) ^^ers.
as in the affairs and dealings of private persons, whom notwithstanding they
ought to have amended, and to frame them unto the rules of equity, or else to
correct and punish them. And this is that which the prophet says, That they
leave off, or cast aside justice upon earth, for that they did not better and
amend the manners of men. Hereof are often complaints in the Prophet Isai, as
cap 59. ver. 4. No man calls for justice: no man contendeth for truth: they
trust in vanity and speak vain things: they conceive mischief, and bring
forth iniquity. And ver. 13, 14, 15. We have departed away from our God, and
have spoken of cruelty and rebellion, conceiving and uttering out of the heart
false matters. Therefore judgment is turned backward, and justice stands
far off: for truth is fallen in the street, and equity cannot enter. Yea,
truth fails, and he that refraineth from evil, makes himself a pray: and
when the Lord saw it, it displeased him, that there was no judgment. And so
forth as in that same chapter follows.

Verse. 8. He makes Pleiades and Orion, and he turns the shadow of death into
the morning, and he makes the day dark as night: he calls the waters of the
sea, and powers them out upon the open earth, the Lord is his name.
The second exhortation of the Prophet unto repentance.
THe second exhortation of the Prophet, wherewith he stirs up the Israelites
to earnest repentance of mind, that they should turn unto the true God, and
that they should not any longer dwell and lie slugging in their sins,
wherewith they do offend him. This exhortation is taken from the glorious, and
yet true and very brave description of the power and majesty of GOD, unto
whose sweet imbracings and bosom he does call them back. For he is that
alone true God, most mighty and full of majesty, who has most free rule and
power over all things: so that he can neither be mocked nor despised scotfree,
nor yet be appeased with the toys and devises of men: all which things the
Israelites supposed might be, the which in like manner all hypocrites did
think, but falsely. For Paul teaches Galat. cap. 6. ver. 7. That God is not
mocked. And John shows cap. 4. ver. 24. That God is a spirit, and that they
that worship him, must worship him in spirit and truth.

The infinite power of God described by sundry his works.
But here in this verse is described that same infinite or endless power of God,
by the creation of the world, and by the reckoning up of things ordinary, and
such as are plainly seen among us, how hard and great soever other wise they
be, as is the creation or making of the stars, and those bringing forth
diverse effects, as of the stars called Pleiades, the which are stars of the
spring, and calm, and fair: and of the star Orion (the which is a rainie
and stormy star) such as is the mutual or orderly succession, and course of
the night after the day, and the day after the night: and lastly, the severing
of the sea from the earth, and yet the springing and powrin^ out of waters upon
the face of the earth for the use of men and beasts. Of all which we have
Psalm. 19. Genes. 8. Psalm. 104 Genes. 1.

Verse. 9. He stregthneth the destroyer against the mighty: and the destroyer
shall come against the fortress.
Another description of God by his extraordinary works.
ANother description of the same power of God by his extraord^nary and
wonderful works: of which sort is, that he throueth down most strong and
mighty men, when as he pleases punish them, and also beats down most
strong holds, and s^^tresses. And these are but certain parcels of those
works, the which God does in great numbers and infinitlie, both ordinary,
(...) also chiefly extraordinary.

Verse. 10. They have hated him that rebuked in the gate: and they abhorred him
that speaks uprightly.
A reason of the punishment of the Israelites, by the description of their
corrupt life.
A Rendering of a reason, the which by the description or layi^^ out of the most
corrupt life of the Israelites shows, why bo^^ the former judgments of God
are threatened against them wordly, and also moreover a new course of life must
be taken by then. And in all this description it is to be noted, that first
the Prophet speaks of such vices which were common unto them all, and (...)
of those which were proper unto the Magistrates and judges. F^^ this so wicked
a life as is here described, was the life of all the people. Secondly, it is
also to be noted, that but part only of their lewdnes is here rehearsed, and
not every their particular vices, (...) a word, by this place, and by the
seventh verse it appears, what manner of life the life of the^ is (who either
worship not the true God or else worship not him truly) and what is the public
and priua^^ order of their manners, and governing of the commonwealth, that is
to say, most ungodly and wicked.

The obstinacy and shamelesnes of the Israelites.
But this verse describes both the obstinacy or stubborn continuance of the
Israelites in their sins and wickedness, in that (The hated the Elders) and
other grave men, who reproved their manifest vices publicly and in the gate
(that is, in those places, in the which men in those times were wont to
assemble and come together:) and also their impudency or shamelesnes, to wit,
for that they did detest and abhor them, which did speak of things, and of
their doings uprightly and truly, and as it was indeed. For they could not
abide or suffer once so much as to hear the truth it self, much less that
they had any purpose for themselves to be bettered and amended.

Ver. 11. For as much then as your treading is upon the poor, and ye take
from him burdens of wheat, ye have built houses of hewn stone, but ye shall
not dwell in them: ye have planted pleasant vineyards, but ye shall not
drink wine of them.
A reckoning up of other vices of the Israelite.
A Reckoning up of other vices, the which were manifest in these same
Israelites, namely, of their cruelty and covetousness, and both these
notorious. Of their cruelty, for that they handled and used most hardly and
extremely their own brethren being also very needy and poor, as if there
were not one drop of mercy left in them, to help them. 1 Their cruelty,
Therefore this barbarous and cruel vexation of the poor Israelites and their
brethren, is in this place said to be a treading down of them: doubtless it is
a sign of noto^ious cruelty of mind. And therefore David Psalm. 109. ver. 16.
prays that such merciles ones may have their memorial or remembrance cut out
from among men, Because they remembered not to show mercy, but persecuted the
afflicted and poor man, and the sorrowful hearted to slay him. 2 Their
covetousness.
And Amos reckons up the covetousness of the Israelites in this, that if these
poor silly souls had any thing (...) maintain their life withal, the same
also did these cruel ones ^^ke a way from them. Nay, that which more is, they
commanded them to carry it home to their houses and barnes upon their own
^houlders. Therefore they took the life from these poor persons, whilst
through outrageous and unmerciful covetousness they bereft them of such food
and sustenance, as they had left to live withal.

A threatening.
Ye have built houses of hewn stone, but ye shall not dwell in them, etc. In
these words is a threatening, the which is here set in by the great indignation
of God against such lewd wickedness, as if he should say, ye shall not
therefore enjoy these your cruel robberies, neither shall the possession of
these goods continue with you long, ^ot be profitable unto you. For ye shall
not so much as drink of the fruit of the vines which you have planted. And
this among many other plagues, does God also threaten unto the disobedien^^
unto his word Deuteronomy. 28. You shall build then, but I will pull (...) down
again, says God. And in this manner likewise does he b^ the Prophet Malac.
cap. 1. threaten the Edomites. Albeit there seems in these words to be a
certain amplification of the some cruelty and covetousness, A cer^^^^
^mplification of their cruelty and covetousness.
as if God should cast in their teethe that whilst these rich, mighty, and
cruel ones do rob and spo^^ their poor brethren, they do not this of any
need, or want, (...) that they may the more sumptuously and delicatly enjoy
the pleasures, and vain and unmeasurable riot and superfluity.

Verse. 12. For I know your manifold transgressions, and your might sins: they
afflict the just, they take rewards, and they oppress the poor in the gate.
THe conclusion of the former description of the sins, where unto the
Israelites were given. In sum or briefly, God do^^ show that they were both
(infinite) the which the word (manif^^^^ does import; Their sins infinite.
Most heinous.
and most heinous, the which the word (mighty) do^^ signify, and that
therefore they are worthily to be punished: (...) men convicted and guilty of
notorious wickedness. And this conclusion God proves to be true, The
conclusion proved true.
both by his own person an^ knowledge: and also by the bedroule or example of
the thing (...) self, 1. By the person of God.
that is, of certain vices, or that there can be none worse. A^^ first by his
own person. For he says, and I my self, who am God and who understand all
things truly, do know and witness thi^ Wherein by the person of the
witness himself, that is, of God th^^ speaks, the hard conscience of men is
the more roused up, that (...) should not deny it, or lie dead in sin, or
flatter it self. Secondly, 2. By the examle of certain foul vices.
by the example of most foul and filthy vices: ye oppress the ius^ says he,
and for meed and reward which you have taken, you do^ by your sentences and
judgments acquit every most lewd an^ wicked person. Therefore you receive
ransom and buying out (...) sins most shamefully, and that in the gate,
that is to say, in yo^ public judgments, the which ought to be sacred and
holy, ye^ and this moreover ye do against the poor and needy, who t^^sting
to a good cause cannot buy your favor, as that lewd and wicke^ guilty party
does. These also are most true witnesses of the publis^ ordering of matters,
and of the desperate overthrow of iudgemen^, being now past recovery: and are
no doubt most grievous sins also. For against such corruption in Judges and
judgment does the Prophet greatly complain Psalm. 82. ver. 2. saying: How long
will ye judge unjustly, and accept the persons of the wicked? I have said ye
are Gods (to wit, because those Judges sat on God his throne to execute
judgment and justice in his stead) and ye all are children of the most high.
But ye shall dye as a man, (he means because of their corrupting of
judgment) and ye princes shall fall like others.

Verse. 13. Therefore the prudent shall keep silence in that time: for it is an
evil time.
An admonition for the godly.
AN admonition, the which is here put in to comfort and teach the godly, that
they may understand what they in the mean time and season are to do, in so
great corruption of all things both public, and also private. And this is the
counsel, nay the commandment which the Spirit of God gives, that the
faithful do in the mean season serve God, and remain quiet, looking and
waiting, what, that is, how sorrowful shall be the end of this desperate and
ouerflowing wickedness. The silence therefore that in this place is prescribed
or appointed unto him that is indeed a wise and godly man, is not a blameable
tonguetiednes, the which can hear and not reprove the blasphemies of God, and
the heinous sins of the wicked reigning and being committed openly before
their eyes (for this is a damnable timiditie, or cowardly fearfulnes, the which
shall be punished in the lake that burns with fire and brimstone Apoc. 21.
ver. 8) neither is it any giving assent unto the wicked or their wickedness
for fear, the which is bewrayed by our silence: nor yet finally is it the
neglecting and passing over of general corruption, the which has now taken
hold on all degrees of men, as an evil that cannot be remedied (the which
therefore must be borne withal, because it cannot be reformed) (for such
wisdom is humane, or wordly, carnal, and politic only, and not christian)
but the silence in this place commanded and commended, What manner of silence
is here commanded and commended.
is a godly patience wrestling against the sins and vices of men, so far
forth as it can, and at no hands either bearing with, or assenting to them, the
which notwithstanding does neither complain of God, nor yet yields unto the
common corruption: but abides firm and sure in the fear of God, even in the
midst of the corruption of the world, or of the Church, reigning and raunging
over all. A^^ in this sense Luke 21. ver. 19. Christ says unto his godly
flock: ^^sesse your souls by patience. And Isai cap. 30. ver. 15. says like^
(...) unto the Church: Thus says the Lord God, the holy one of Israe^ (...)
rest and quietness shall ye be saved: in quietness and confidence shall (...)
your strength. And ver. 7. I cried unto her, their strength is to sit (...) So
in the midst of al their troubles Jeremy in his Lamentations (...) 3. ver. 26.
wills the faithful, saying: It is good both to trust, (...) wait for the
salvation of the Lord. Therefore because that time, (...) course of the life of
the whole people was then wicked, and su^^ (...) might easily draw away the
godly from the right way, and (...) duty, they had need of this silence, and
patience. And he w^^^^ now and in these days behaueth himself after this
manner, The note of a wise man in the midst of corruption and troubles.
(...) that time did so likewise, is said to be indeed a wise man, as (...)
does look for the work of the Lord, and diligently attend or (...) thereupon
with patience, doing nothing upon a head or rash^^ (...) Isai. 28. ver. 16. the
Lord says: He that believes shall not ma^^ (...) And so does David exhort the
godly with diligence to atten^ (...) Lord his wonderful working for the
delivery of the poor an^ ^^flicted, and his punishing of the wicked, and then
shuts v^ (...) Psalm 107. with this verse 43. Who is wise, that he may
obser^^ (...) mark these things? For they shall understand the loving kind^^
(...) the Lord.

Verse. 14. Seek good and not evil, that ye may live: and the (...) God of
hosts shall be with you, as you have spoken.
A continuing, and an amplifying of the admonition before.
A Continuing or amplifying of the same admonition that (...) before. For now
the Prophet does not speak unto the go^ (...) alone, but unto all the
Israelites, that they may avoid the iudge^^^^ of God, threatened against them,
and prove the same hope to (...) true, the which they boasted that they had in
God. The Prop^^^^ therefore warns and teaches them, what is the way to turn
f^^^^^ them the wrath of God. True repentance the only way to turn away the
wrath of God.
And this he shows to be but only (...) that is, true repentance of mind.
And the same he says to be (...) yet unto them notwithstanding, how greatly
soever God have (...) ready showed his judgments: for God will not have men
to ^^^rish, but to convert or turn, and be saved. As he says by his P^^phet
Ezechiel cap. 30. ver. 31.32. Cast away from you all your tr^^^gressions,
whereby ye have transgressed, and make you a new heart, and a new spirit: for
why will ye dye, O house of Israel? For I desire not the death of him that
dies, says the Lord: cause therefore one another to return, and live ye.

An exhortation unto repenrance, taken from the effects of the same.
But in this verse repentance is also set forth by a full description of the
same, that is to say, by the hatred of evil, and the love of good. The which
this verse with that which follows, does contain. So then this first verse
has an exhortation unto repentance taken from the effects: and the latter
verse, or that verse which follows, has the definition of repentance. He
therefore does here exhort unto repentance by a most notable effect of the
same, the which is twofold, namely, by their life, and by the healthful
presence of God with them; both which will follow those that truly repent. By
the which self same thing we do understand why the Prophet so earnestly does
monish or warn the Israelites to repent. The exhortation.
The exhortation therefore, or the admonition, the which is contained in this
verse, is, Seek ye good, and not evil. The reason, The reason.
Because that so ye shall both live, and God shall be with you. When as the
Prophet says, Seek ye good, and not evil, he shows that then at the last,
good is truly sought, when as we cast away the things that are evil, and do
utterly forsake them, and not when as we mingle good with evil: as for
example, idolatry with reformation or amendment of manners: or contrariwise,
amendment of manners with idolatry. When as he says (ye shall live) first he
understands that there shall be a deliverance from the wrath of God,
afterward he does therein also comprehend life, and good success of things
among them. For this does the Prophet comprise under the word (live). And where
he says (God shall be with you) he means, as an helper, a keeper, and as
your safety and salvation. The Lord of hosts.
There is added (The Lord of hosts) to the end the majesty and power of that
God unto whose help they shall flee, may be the more clearly represented and
showed forth unto them. Finally that which follows ( as you have spoken, that
is, have hoped and boasted) shows that these men under the pretense or color
of their circumcision, the which they yet still retained, did promise
themselves, that God would always be favorable unto them, and that they did
set the same (as a visour, being namely but a bare sign, and void of his
effect among them) against the threatenings of the Prophets.

Verse. 15. Hate the evil, and love the good, and establish judgment in the
gate: it may be that the Lord God of hosts will be mercif^^ unto the remnant of
Joseph.
A description of true repentance.
A Description of repentance, the which God does require at th^^^ hands both
privately, and also publikly. And that is, the hat^^ of evil, and the love or
desire of good. It by nature goes before that we should from our heart hate
evil, and our sins, and (...) only condemn them with the mouth: and then
afterward ^^^loweth, that we should with earnest affection love good thing
that is, those things which are commanded by God: and not o^^^^ counterfeit
them for fashion sake and outwardly in our actions, a^^ seem to seek God. And
both these things is of God, or the wo^^ of God in us, and not our work:
albeit that we also must asser^^^ have a will to repent truly. And God
requires this repentance (...) mind not only in private, but also in public
actions, and judgments, as for example, that the Magistrates should judge
vprigh^^ Lastly, he avouches that this is the only way which is left, when by
God may take pity on them which remain of that kingdo^^ of Israel, after so
many and so great overthrows and punishme^^ For so much do these words
signify (if peradventure, or it may (...) that God will be merciful unto the
remnant of Joseph). For it is (...) speech of doubting, but of assurance in the
scripture. And so Ca^^^ Josh. 14 ver. 12. when he desires that portion of
inheritance (...) which the Lord had given him, where the Anakims or Giants i^
habited, says: If so be that the Lord will be with me, that I may d^^^^ them
out, as the Lord said. By which saying he doubts not of G^^ his strengthening
him to drive them out, but notes the hardness of the matter, and stirs up
others unto the same hope, that God i^ assisting him, will be as good as his
promise.

Verse. 16. Therefore the Lord God of hosts, the Lord says thus, mi^^ning shall
be in all streets: and they shall say in all the highw^^^, Alas, alas: and
they shall call the husbandmen to lamentati^^ and such as can mourn, to
mourning.
The amplification of the former exhortation
THe confirmation, or amplification of the former exhortation unto repentance,
taken from the greatness of the punishmen^ in a readiness and to be looked for
otherwise, that is of the unrepentant: the which greatness is described and
set forth by the adjuncts and the same diverse and sundry. 1. By the effect.
And first of all it is described by the effect, because it shall be such, and
so grievous a punishment and plague, the which remains for the obstinate and
stubborn sinners, as will not only breed sorrow, and a bitter feeling and
sadness in their heart: but also such as will procure open mourning, that is to
say, public gestures, as witnesses and bewrayers of their great heaviness:
because that this sorrow can be no longer smothered and kept in. Now this
punishment is most heavy, the which shall draw forth and stir up such
manifest and public tears, and mourning and knocking of their breasts. 2. By
the place.
The second is described by the place: for in all streets and high ways these
mournings and cryings shall be made. The third, by the persons. 3. By the
persons.
For they shall be made by all degrees of men, yea even by the husbandmen, and
vinedressers, a kind of men otherwise most hard and tough, and able to endure
and bear out things: and that most heavily, and in such sort as if they had
been used and trained up to mourning: but because of the greatness of the
punishments, and misery (the which even these hard men shall also feel) they
shall after this manner publikly mourn with weeping tears with others. And
that even those persons the which are never so slow to repent, may understand
all these things to be most true, the Prophet rehearses the power, and
majesty, and nature of God that cannot lie, and whose power nothing can resist
or withstand, who threatens these judgments unto them Titus. 1. God then, and
that he which is the true Jehovah, and the Lord of hosts, that is, the Lord of
heaven and earth, threatens these things: and therefore they shall most
assuredly come to pass unto the unrepentant.

Verse. 17. And in all the vines shall be lamentation: for I will pass through
thee, says the Lord.
A reason why these kind of persons shall mourn.
THis is a rendering of a reason, why the husbandmen, being such persons as can
abide and endure hardness, shall notwithstanding mourn, namely, because their
labors, and their fields and vineyards shall be utterly wasted. But it may
also be an amplification, as if not only the husbandmen the which do till the
ground appointed for corn and sowing: but also the vinekeepers themselves, the
which do deal with vines, that is, another kind of fields fit and necessary
for the uses of man his life, shall lament after the same sort that the
husbandmen do, because of the like punishmen^ and misery, the which they shall
taste of in like manner: for neith^^ shall these be free from the judgments of
God. Wherefore by the^^ words ( husbandmen, and vine dressers) the Lord shows
that (...) will take from the Israelites all food and meats necessary for
(...) live withal.

The reason is added, Because I will pass through the midst of th^^^ The
passage of God is of two sorts. God his passage joyful. Fearful.
The one joyful and to be wish^^ for, wherewith he does recreate and refresh
us. The other fearful wherewith as a burning fire he does consume and devour
us. O^ the former sort was the passage of God by the houses of the Israelites
in the land of Egypt, where he spared them, and slew the Egyptians, whereof is
mention Exodus 12. ver. 13. in these words: A^^ the blood shall be a token for
you, upon the houses where ye are: so when I see the blood, I will pass over
you, and the plague shall not be vp^^ you to destruction, when I smite the land
of Egypt. Of the other pa^sage unto the destruction of those by whom God
passes, we ha^^ Exodus 11. ver. 4.5. About midnight (says God) will I go out
into the midst of Egypt, and all the first borne of Egypt shall dye. For as
Mos^^ witnesses Deuteronomy. 4. ver. 24. The Lord is a consuming fire, and a^ al^^
God. This place therefore of Amos must be taken of the latter p^^sage of God.
And surely it is a fearful thing to fall into the ha^^ of God being angry
with us. Hebr. 10. ver. 31.

Verse. 18. Woe unto you that desire the day of the Lord: what have y^^ to do
with it? The day of the Lord is darkness, and not light.
A sharp reproving of those which were not moved with the threatenings of God,
against the which they had many exceptions.
A Sharp rebuking of those, who after so many and so earnest admonitions or
warnings, were not moved with the threatenings of God, nor did tremble at them:
who through a certain brutish carelesnes being senseles, or waxen fierce
through the contempt of God, wished to see those judgments of God, that is to
say, they did despise them. It appears by many places that the hypocrites of
this nation wanted not their exceptions against the threatning^ of the
Prophets: as namely, that they were Israelites, and so consequently the seed
of Abraham, and blessed of God: that they were circumcised, and therefore in
the covenant of God: that they had the Temple of God, the which last exception
was peculiar and proper unto the kingdom of Judah: and not unto the kingdome^
Israel also. This exception therefore of the hypocrites, the Prophet refuteth
or overthrows two ways. First, by this reprehension (woe.) For this
reprehension teaches that they are far and wide deceived, which said these
things. For circumcision which is outward, or he which is a Jew outwardly, is
not the seed of Abraham, or true circumcision, or a Jew indeed, or the son
of Abraham. So Paul. 2. Col. 4. ver. 11. teaches, that the inward circumcision
is the true circumcision, speaking of the faithful among them, and saying:
Inwhom (meaning in Christ) also ye are circumcised with circumcision made
without hands, by putting off the sinful body of the flesh, through the
circumcision of Christ. And to the Romans cap. 2. ver. 28. he says: He is not a
Jew, which is one outward, neither is that circumcision, which is outward in
the flesh. And Romans 9. ver. 7. They are not (says he) all children, because
they are the seed of Abraham. Therefore by this answer they shall seek unto
themselves destruction, and not help or aid at all. For this woe is threatened
unto them in the name of God, that is, there is threatened unto them a curse,
and anger, and punishment. Secondly, the Prophet refuteth them by the
description of the Day of the Lord, that is of Judgment (the which these
boasted that they would have, and wished for to come) the which shows most
heavy destruction to fall upon them. For this day, although it be the coming
and day of the Lord, yet shall it be unto them not a day of light, but of
darkness. So the Prophet Zephaniah cap. 1. ver. 15. says: That day is a day of
wrath, a day of trouble and heaviness, a day of destruction and desolation, a
day of obscurity and darkness, a day of clouds and blacknes. And the Prophet
Isai. cap. 5. ver. 19. pronounces a woe against them that, after this mocking
manner of the Israelites in this place, wish for the proof and experience of
the Lord his work and counsel, saying: Let him make speed: let him hasten his
work that we may see it: and let the counsel of the holy one of Israel draw
near, and come, that we may know it. The day of the Lord is indeed light in it
self: but unto those hypocrites it shall not be light.

Verse. 19. As if a man did flee from a lion, and a bear met him: or went into
the house and leaned his hand on the wall, and a serpent bit him.
The confirmation of the former reprehension.
A Confirmation of the former reprehension by a similitude, the which is set
down as it were by the way of answering an objection. For worser evil shall
betide them each day, then others, neither shall there be any place wherein
they may be safe against those evils. If they shall say, we shall be safe
abroad or at home, the Prophet answers, that they shall not be without
danger, neither abroad, or without doors, nor yet at home or within. Moreover
they shall go from misery to misery, from punishment into punishment, and they
shall always grow worse and worse. If they she from a Lion, they shall light
upon a Bear. If they shall suppose that they have provided some safety for
themselves, or that they have taken i^, being offered unto them: they shall even
there be in like danger as if they had laid hold upon a venomous serpent,
which shall be them. Their case therefore and estate, shall be most
lamentable. There is a like place Ierem. 48 ver. 43, 44. Fear, and pit, and
sn^^ (says he) shall be upon thee, o inhabitant of Moah, says the Lord. He
that escapes from the fear, shall fall in the pit, and he that gets (...)
out of the pit shall be taken in the snare: for I will bring upon it, eu^^
upon Moab, the year of their visitation, says the Lord. And almost the self
same words are Isai 24. ver. 17.18. And this also is set down by the way of
answering an objection, that they should not think that by change of times, or
places, or things, they can be in any better case if they remain obstinate and
stubborn is their sins.

Verse. 20. Shall not the day of the Lord be darkness and not light ^uen darkness
and no light in it?
A repetition of the end of the 18. verse. and whereto it serves.
A Repetition, or rehearsing again of the latter part of the 18 verse, the
which with a most weighty and earnest affirmati^^ does again confirm unto
them the heavy effects and falling o^^ of the day of the Lord against them, to
the end they should not sooth and flatter themselves by reason of their
imagined exceptions and pretenses, and harden themselves against the
threatenings of God. That which al hypocrites are wont to do. This their cloud
and mist therefore, wherewith they would cover and hide themselves, was
diligently to be scattered and driven away.

Verse. 21. I hate and abhor your feast days, and I will not smell is your
solemn assemblies.
Hypophora, which is a figure, by the which we answer an objection that might
be made either by our selves, or others: as here they might say, yea, but God
will be pleased at least wise with our sacrifices, etc.
THe figure Hypophora, or the answering an objection, which the hypocrites might
make, lest they might suppose that with their sacrifices they might pacify and
appease God, and turn his threatenings from them. For God answers that all
those he hates and abhors. And there are two parts of this verse, the one
contains the words, whereby the Lord says that he abhors all the worship
and service done unto him by the Israelites, such as at that time was done unto
him in Beth-el, Galgal, and Dan. The words are these, (I hate, I refuse, I will
not smell.) the which being set down loosely, and as it were unjointed, without
any copulative conjunction to tie and knit them together, do argue and show a
greater loathing of God in the^, and a more going of his stomach (as it were)
against al those sacrifices. Again, in as much as God says that they are
hateful and grievous unto him, not only one manner of way, but declares and
sets down all those ways by the which men may and are wont to abhor and
loath a thing (for whatsoever likes not men, they do either hate it also, or
refuse it only, or finally they will not so much as smell unto it, or taste it,
that is, they vouchsafe not to look upon it,) doubtless God shows that they
are utterly tedious unto him, and by all means unacceptable and disliking him,
and therefore that they shall be unprofitable, may hurtful unto the Israelites
also.

Two reasons why the worship of the Israelites displeased God.
Now there are two reasons why this kind of worship and service of the
Israelites displeased God, and rather moved him unto anger, then any ways
pacified or appeased him. The one for that it was a will worship, or service
invented of themselves, and ordained of them without his commandment, and
appointment. 1. Because they themselves appointed it with out the warrant of
the word.
For that such kind of inventions please not God may thus appear by these
places. Mat. 15. ver. 9. In vain they worship me, teaching for doctrines, men's
precepts. Deuteronomy. 12. ver. 8. Ye shall not do after all these things that we do
here this day: that is, every man whatsoever seems good in his own eyes. And
Paul 2. Col. ver. 22, 23. of these kind of traditions and inventions of men
says, That they all perish with the using, and are after the commandments and
doctrines of men: which things have indeed a show of wisdom, in voluntary
religion, and humblenes of mind, and in not sparing the body: neither have
they it in any estimation to satisfy the flesh.

2 Because they placed therein the means of their salvation.
The other reason why this worship pleases not God, is, for that they offered
it unto God, as a just or full price and recompense of their sins. Therefore
they placed the means of their justification, in those their works, and not
in the alone mercy of God, the which is a most grievous blasphemy against God,
whom it robs of the most true and due praise of our salvation. For the
worship the which of such a mind and intent is done unto God, although it be
never so much commanded of God himself, yet does it utterly displease him,
because of the opinion of binding or making of God beholding unto them thereby.
And this is the cause that Isai cap. 1. verse. 12. in the person of God
rejects and refuses the^ sacrifices and other ceremonies, saying: When ye
come to appear before me, who required this at your hands to tread in my
courts? And far more plainly he shows his great disliking and abhorring of
the^ cap. 66. ver. 3. in these words: He that kills a bullock, is as if be
slew a man: he that sacrifices a sheep, as if he cut off a dogs neck: he
that offers an oblation, as if he offered swines blood: he that remembers
incense, as if he blessed an Idol: yea they have chosen their own^ ways, and
their soul delights in their abominations. And this ^s the first part of
this verse.

A description of the worship of the Israelites.
The second part does lay forth and describe this worship of God. For it calls
it Feast days and solemn assemblies, under which words it comprehends the
other parts of the same worship by the figure Synecdoche. Synecdoche, is a
figure, when as the whole is put for the part or the part for the whole: as
here the feast days and solemn assemblies, for all the rest of their worship.
And by this means the Prophet shows that even the same worship which seemed
unto the Israelites the most holy, the greatest and most religious, was mere
and utter blasphemy against God, and therefore much more that the inferior
parts of the same worship were so likewise, as for example, the sacrifices of
private persons, and their less solemn feast days, the which they did not
observe and keep with so great religion as they did the other.

Verse. 22. Though ye offer me burnt offerings and meat offerings, (...) will
not accept them: neither will I regard the peace offerings of your fat beasts.
An amplification of the former sentence.
AN amplification of the former sentence, the which contains other parts of
the external or outward worship of God by the^ appointed after the imitatio^ or
example of the true sacrifices ordained by the true God, such as were the burnt
offerings, and meat offerings, and peace offerings of their fattest sacrifices:
al which the Lord shows and affirms that he neither likes of, nor
regards or cares for, that they might stand the Israelites in steed to turn
away the wrath of God, and his anger. In this verse like as in the former, both
the words wherewith God detesteth this counterfeit worship, and also the
description of the said worship, is to be noted and marked.

Ver. 23. Take thou away from me the multitude of thy songs, for I will not
hear the melody of thy violes.
The conclusion of the former Exhortation.
THe conclusion of the former exhortation or admonition, and finally of this
whole place, That they must earnestly repent, if they will please God, and do
such works as are truly acceptable and liked of him. This repentance also
here in this place, like as before in this chap. ver. 5. and 6. he describes,
first, by the casting away, or laying aside of evil, and especially Idolatry:
secondly, by the taking unto them or following after good, and true
righteousness, in the verse following. Briefly then he wills them to cast away
all Idolatry, albeit never so delightsome and liking unto them, and of never so
many sorts, and ordained after a bad imitation or following of the true
worship of God, the which was used in the temple of Solomon, where was singing
Psalteries, Harps, and that sundry and of many sorts, as it were, to delight
GOD himself, and to stir up men to pray the more ardently or earnestly. And
hereupon were Singers, Levites ordained and appointed, of which sundry sorts
of singing instruments ye may read Psalm. 150. And of the singing Levites 1.
Chron. cap. 25. for albeit all musical singing and tunes, the which were used
by the Israelites on their feast days, and at their sacrifices, seemed unto
them to be a most pleasant worship unto God: yet God himself denies that he
is delighted with that tune, or that the same consent or agreement (which was
indeed rather a discord, and a jar) did please him, or was heard or allowed
of him, to wit, for the same causes the which I have spoken of before in this
chapter, ver. 21. that is, because they invented them of their own heads, and
besides, put opinion of merit and pleasing God in them. What then will the
Papists say of their Organes?

Verse. 24. And let judgment run down as waters, and righteousness as a
mighty river.
A description that good which shall follow the banishment of Idolatry.
A Description of that good, and righteousness, the which shall follow, Idolatry
being forsaken: wherein the second part of repentance does consist. For then
both the affection or desire and love of true righteousness shall be in their
hearts, and also the outward work thereof, namely, judgment shall every where
spring, be scattered and flow abroad among them as it were water, or some
strong and mighty stream, that is, it shall be seen, appear, and be
exercised. Therefore I in this place do take the name of ( water, and of a
river) in good part. These are wont to be spread fa^^ abroad. I do also take
the word (Flow) in good part, for to be dispersed or scattered abroad, like as
it is taken John 7. verse 38 where Christ says: He that believes in me, as
says the Scriptu^^ out of his belly shall flow rivers of waters of life.
Briefly, we are taught in this place that the entrance into the true
reformation or amending of evil manners, Reformation of life and manners must
begin at the true worship of God.
and of a wicked life must be begun at their^ worship of God, and the casting
away of false superstition, albei^ that it do please and like us never so
much. For Idolators contin^ing Idolators, do never truly repent.

Verse 25. Have ye offered unto me sacrifices and offerings in the wilderness
forty years, o house of Israel?
AN indignation or great anger of God, whereby he does (...) earnestly
complain that at all times, yea of old and longs gone, and not once only, or
that now only, and first of all, he ha^^ been despised, provoked, and set at
naught by the Israelites a^^ their fathers, that hereby the wrath of God may
appear to be th^^ iuster against them. There is a like place Psalm. 95. ver. 8,
9, 10. He ^^den not your hearts, as in Meribah, and as in the day of Massah, in
(...) wilderness. Where your fathers tempted me, provoked me, thou^^^ they
had seen my work. Forty years have I contended with this gen^ration, and
said, The Jews from old, and as it were by succession have been disobedient
unto God.
They are a people that err in their heart, for they h^^ not known my ways.
After the self same manner Christ dealeths against the Jews Mat. 23. ver. 35.
whom he charge from old, an^ by a continual succession to have been
persecutors, That (says ^e) upon you may come all the righteous blood that was
shed upon t^^ earth, from the blood of Abel the righteous, unto the blood of
Zacha^^ as the son of Barachias, whom ye slew between the Temple and the
Altar. And so likewise does Steven charge them Acts 7. ver. 5^ saying: Ye
stifnecked and of uncircumcised hearts and ears, ye has always resisted the
holy Ghost: as your fathers did, so do you. Therefore if these repent not, who
are now called to repentance, (...) them understand that they are most justly
punished by God, wh^^ as among them, and of them he has always been
despised and the patience of GOD in bearing with them has been incredible.

Three points of this verse.
This verse has three things to be observed or noted. First, What God
speaks. Secondly, To whom he speaks. Thirdly, after what manner he speaks.
Concerning the first, he says, 1. What is spoken
that God and his worship was utterly contemned or despised of this people, the
which notwithstanding did name and boast themselves to be the alone and only
people of God. This contempt do these words signify (ye have offered unto
me neither sacrifice nor offerings.) For in these words he comprehends all
the parts of the worship of God both outward and also inward. For in their
heart and secretly men fear not to despise him, whom openly and outwardly
they do contemn. And he increases this sin by the circumstance of the
place, and of the time. Of the place, because they did this even there, where
notwithstanding they were in safety, and nourished by the only mercy of God,
that is to say, in the desert or wilderness. For there were they nourished
both with ( Water and Manna) which two were the daily, but yet extraordinary
benefit of God notwithstanding toward them: and also were defended from
serpents and from their enemies by the only hand of God. The circumstance of
the time is, for that by the space of whole forty years, they continued in
this contempt, as it is Psalm. 95. ver. 10. the which place has been set down
before in the beginning almost of the exposition of this verse.

2. To whom it is spoken.
The second point to be noted here, is, whom God speaks unto, namely (the
whole house) of Israel. So then GOD complayneth not of the uncircumcised, or of
those which had entered into no covenant or league with him: but of that people
who boasted themselves to be the inheritance of God: yea and of this whole
people God complayneth. For the greatest part of the people always assented
unto those sins, and not one or two only of the people.

3. The manner of speaking.
The third point is, the phrase, or manner of speaking, the which God uses. And
this is not only an Apostrophe, or turning of speech, whereby he directs his
talk unto them expressly: but it is also an earnest interrogation, or asking of
a question, where by he pricketh, nay pearceth their consciences albeit they
were never so obstinate or stifnecked.

Verse. 26. But you have borne Siccuth your King, and Chiun y^^ images, and the
star of your gods, which ye made to your selves*
An amplification of the former sin.
AN amplification of the former sin, to wit, that these men (...) not content
to have despised the true God, and his worship but also exercised and used
afterward all kind of idolatry, whe^^ by they did the more provoke God, and
showed themselves (...) every one to be most manifest and obstinate or
stubborn Ido^tors, and despisers of God. There is alike place Act. 7. verse.
42.4* For there Steven uses against the Jews the very self sa^^ words in a
manner: read the place. But the sorts of idolatries ^e recited, are not to be
restrained unto that time of forty years ^^ly, in the which the Israelites
lived in the wilderness: but are to^^ extended unto that whole space, the which
passed from the d^^^ the people his coming out of Egypt unto the time of Amos:
for that does the Prophet briefly comprehend in this one verse.

1. Sundr^e kinds of idolatry of this people, but especially three.
And this verse has two parts. The first contains diu^^^ kinds of
idolatry, whereunto this people was given. For the na^^ of Idolators, is
altogether set on madding, and insatiable, or not^ be filled, as which namely
can never make an end, or measure (...) number of her idolatries: but inuenteth
every day new fo^^^ But in this place there are reckoned up three sorts: 1.
The worship of Moloch.
first, the worship of Moloch the God of the Ammonites, whom they wors^^ped
carrying certain Temples or closets of his, the which were^sie to be borne
from place to place, the which are here called the (...) bernacles of Moloch.
So Act. 19. ver. 24 there were Temples m^^ unto Diana. The words are: A
certainc man named Demetr^^^ silver smith, which made silver temples of Diana,
brought gr^^^ gains unto the crafts men, etc. These Temples the French-m^^
call (Cha'sses, that is to say, cofers, and boxes for bones, and sh^^^ for
images. These Temples or shrines, or cosers, or such like, w^^ carried either
upon men's shoulders, or else hanged and put abo^^ their necks after the manner
of Tablets, as they use at this day in ^^pistrie. 2. The worship of Ch^un.
The second kind of idolatry is the worship of Chiun, (...) is, of another
God of the Ammonites also, fet from a town of the name nere unto the
Israelites, the which afterward was ca^^ Ren^pham. This god had his images
open, and not cased up in^^fers or boxes, like Moloch. Therefore this was the
second kind^ and more manifest or open idolatry, and also more against the
ve^^ words of the law of God. 3. The worship of the stars and host of heaven.
The third idolatry was the worship of the stars and host of heaven, against
the which we have Deuteronomy. 4. verse. 19. where Moses having a little before showed
the Israelites that God when he spoke unto them out of the midst of the fire
in Horeb, let them see no image of any creatures living or vnliuing, among the
rest he sets down this: Least thou lift up thine eyes unto heaven, and when
thou see the sun and the moon, and the stars, with all the host of
heaven should be driven to worship them, and serve them, which the Lord thy
God has distributed to all people under the whole heaven.

Their obstinate and stubborn continuing in all these idolatries.
The second part of this verse sets out their obstinacy, and the fault of
this people stubbornely continuing in all these kinds of idolatry. These
things you did, says the Prophet. Therefore you cannot lay the blame upon any
others, and so consequently you are inexcusable. Again, (And ye have made
unto you your Gods) that is to say, you have made gods unto your selves to
worship, to wit, putting and thrusting me out of my place, and as it were from
my degree and standing. You have therefore shown your stubbornnes of mind in
despising me, whom, when as you knew to be God, yea and peculiarly your God,
you have cast away notwithstanding, and in my room have placed others, that is
to say, those same most vain idols.

Verse. 27. Therefore will I cause you to go into captivity beyond Damascus,
says the Lord, whose name is the God of hosts.
A Commination.
A Commination or threatening, the which is set down by way of a conclusion,
that except they repent, it will so come to pass that God will carry them
into captivity, and that into far countries, and into great misery, that is
beyond Damascus, in the Caspian mountains, and among fierce, cruel, and
unpleasant nations. This place does Steven also in the Acts cap. 7. verse 43.
allege against the Jews, and tells them that for their many idolatries God
threatened captivity unto their fathers, saying: Therefore I will carry you
away beyond Babylon. This threatening (least these Israelites might think that
they were both mocked and dallied withal, or that they could avoid it) does
God confirm by his power, and the same infinite or endless. For he the very
same who threatens these things, is the God of hosts, and has authority and
mere and absolute sovereignty over all things, the which he exercises and
uses according to his own pleasure. Therefore nothing can withstand him.

CAP. 6.
Verse. 1. Woe to them that are at ease in Zion, and trust in the mountain of
Samaria, which were famous at the beginning of the nations, and the house of
Israel came to them.
This Sermon also does peculiarly belong unto the Israelites. The opinion of
most Interpreters touching this Sermon.
THis sermon following, like as al those before, is properly directed unto the
kingdom of Israel, albeit that in the beginning of th^^ Chapter mention be
made of Zion, and in the 8. verse, of Jacob* Which thing has brought all the
interpreters for the most part to this point, that they would have in this
place both the kingdom of Judah, and also the kingdom of Israel to be
reprehended or reproved, and to be joined together. But by the whole chapter it
appears otherwise, namely, that these things do especially appertain unto
the kingdom of Israel only, unto the which Amos was sent peculiarly: for
notwithstanding that there be mention made of (Sion and of Jacob) this is not
simply for it self, Why mention is here made of Sion and Jacob, if this
Sermon appertain not unto Judah.
but in another respect, and for another purpose, and for the confirmation of
that reprehension which is here made concerning the Israelites. For this cause
is it I say, why mention is here made of Sion and Jacob, as it shall anon
appear by the exposition it felfe. Moreover, as (...) the chapter before
going, he reproved both the Nobles and also the Judges or Magistrates of this
kingdom of Israel, and did thre^ten unto them most heavy judgments of God:
so in this he first generally rebukes the people themselves, then afterward
those, who among the people were of the wealthier sort, the more mighty and
richer, and therefore the more insolent or proud against others. God therefore
among them was most grieuouslie offende^ by all sorts and degrees of men.

Three parts of this verse.
Now this verse has three parts. First, a curse, and the same does the Prophet
threaten from God himself. For this is the proper signification of the word
(Hoi) among the Hebrews: 1. A curse.
and of (V^) among the Latins: and (ouai) among the Greeks, and in English
(Woe) that it betokens threatenings not from men, but from God, that is uttered
from heaven. And thus it is taken, 1. Sam. cap. 4 verse 7.8 in these words:
Then the Philistines were afraid, a^^ said, God is come into the host:
therefore said they, Woe unto us: f^ it has not been so heretofore. Woe unto
us: who shall deliver us out of the hand of these mighty gods? These are the
gods that smote the Egyptians with all the plagues in the wilderness. And Isa.
cap. 1. ver. 4. Woe finfull nation etc. And Mat. 23. ver. 13. Woe be unto you
Scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites, etc. And in many other the verses there
following. And Apocal. 8. verse. 13. Woe, woe to the inhabitants of the earth,
etc. 2. To whom this curse is threatened.
The second part of this verse shows unto whom he denounces or to those that
were subject unto the kingdom of Israel. And these he describes or sets
out by their sin or quality in these words, Which trust in the mountain of
Samaria. For this was the chief cause of their security, or carelesnes, why
they despised the judgments of GOD, because they judged Samaria, the chief
city of that kingdom, to be inuicible or vnwonable. For it was most hardly
besieged by the King of Syria, 2. King. cap. 6. ver. 24. etc. Yet was it not
won, nor taken cap. 7. ver. 6.7. And they supposed the power of the kingdom,
and their king also (by whom they judged that they should be well enough
defended against all enemies) to be unconquerable. Whereupon there was in them
not only a certain confidence or trust in the mountain and city of Samaria:
but also such a trust, that they did wholly rest and stay therein, as in a
defense that could not be won. And therefore they slept soundly, and without
all fear against enemies and the threatenings of God. For such a kind of
security or carelesnes does the Hebrew word (Schaan) betoken. And that the
city Samaria was the head city of that kingdom, and seated or built upon a
Mountain, appears 1. King. cap. 16. verse. 24. in these words: And he (to
wit Omri King of Israel) bought the mountain Samaria of one Shemer for two
talents of silver, and built in the mountain, and called the name of the city
which he built, after the name of Shemer, Lord of the mountain, Samaria. The
third part of this verse, 3. With what reasons he confirms his threatening. 1.
Reason.
teaches with what examples and reasons the Prophet confirms this his
threatening against these secure or careless Israelites. And he confirms it by
two, the first whereof is taken from their neighbors at home, to wit in this
verse, from the kingdom of Judah, and men that were subject thereunto, who
were both the people of God, and had also themselves an head city and a
mountain, wherein they trusted. 2. Reason.
The second reason and example is taken from strangers and those of other
countries in the verses following. Therefore mention is made, but by occasion,
of Sion, and of those that trust in it, that is, of the Jews or of Jacob, to
wit, that the Prophet might take from the Israelites that security or
carelesnes, (...) might confirm his threatenings against them by an home
example, and such one as was near unto them.

Moreover, this reason was of very great weight. For it is (...) not only from
the like, or from the equal, but also from the gre^^ to the lesser. After what
manner this reason may be taken from the like or equal.
From the like or equal thus, as is here set down. (...) Israelites trust in
the mountain Samaria: so do the Jews in^^ mountain Sion. The mountain
Samaria is the head of the peo^^^ of Israel, and a place well fortified and
fenced: so mount Sio^ the head of the kingdom of Judah, a place likewise well
forti^^ and fenced. The Israelites have the strength of their kingdom the
placed, there do they hold their judgments, and in the ad^^stration and
ordering of public matters thither have they (...) recourse and resort, as it
were unto the Chamber of State, ora^^ctuarie and place of refuge, and the
Oracle temple of the (...) land: after the same manner resort the Jews unto
Sion. B^^^ as the Jews were not in safety from the threatenings of God^ cause
of that their Sion: no more shall the Israelites be for that (...) Samaria. And
concerning the Jews, there was then a freshe^^^ple of their miseries, and of
the wrath of God against them* (...) Ioas the father of this Jeroboam, under
whom Amos spoke (...) things, had taken Amasias the King of Judah, made the
citied ^^rusalem subject under his power, and had lately in part br^^ down the
wall thereof, as appears 2. King. cap. 14. verse. 1^ (...) where it is thus
written: But Judah was put to the worse before (...) and they fled every man to
their tents. But Iehoash king of Israel (...) Amasiah king of Judah, the son
of Iehoash the son of Ahazi^^ Beth-shemesh, and came to Jerusalem, and brake
down the wall (...) ^^rusalem, from the gate of Ephraim to the corner gate,
four h^^dr^^ cubits. So then the mount Sion did not defend them from (...)
wrath of GOD. And this is the reason the which in this place (...) Prophet
takes from the like. The which reason notwithstand^ may be from the greater to
the lesser, How this may be a reason from the greater to the lesser.
as thus: If mount Sion, w^^^ has so many peculiar and singular promises of
God, the Tem^^ of God it self, the Sacrifices; delivered not the kingdom of
I^^^ from the just judgment of God: much less shall the mount^^^ Samaria
defend the Israelites from the threatenings of the same (...) when as it has no
manner of such promises. But concerning (...) mount Sion notable is that which
is by David spoken of it Psal^^ ver. 15.16. The mountain of God (he means
mount Sion) is like the mountain of Bashan: it is an high mountain, as mount
Bashan. Why leap ye, ye mountains? As for this mountain, God delights to
dwell in it: yea, the Lord will dwell in it for ever.

Verse. 2. Go you unto Calneh, and see: and from thence go you to Hamah the
great: then go down to Gath of the Philistims: be they better then these
kingdoms? or the border of their land greater then your border?
The second example or reason* whereby he confirms the threatenings of God
against them.
THe second example, whereby the Prophet confirms the threatenings of God
against the Israelites. And it is taken from foreign and strange people, to
wit, from the uncircumcised, yet their neighbors notwithstanding, and such as
were known unto the people of Israel: it is also taken from the like, after
this manner: If God, because of their unthankfulness, have punished the
nations and people borderers and near unto you, unto whom he had given both
power, and also a large dominion and kingdom, shall he not also punish you
being no less unthankful then they were, and unmindful of the benefits of
God, and of power and dominion, bestowed upon you in fresh memory, and of your
kingdom also enlarged? These things, which are rehearsed concerning the
enlarged borders of the kingdom of Israel, and of the making greater of the
same, were benefits of God then most fresh among them. For this self same
Jeroboam the son of Ioas (under whom Amos lived and prophesied) had enlarged
those borders of the kingdom of Israel, and through the singular benefit of
God, and compassion and mercy toward the people of Israel, had also obtained
and gotten great power in comparison of those Kings, which had gone before him.
For it is recorded of him 2. King. 14. ver. 25. That he restored the coast of
Israel* from the entering of Hamath, unto the sea of the wilderness, according
to the word of the Lord God of Israel, which he spoke by his servant Jonah the
son of Amittai the Prophet, which was of Gath Hephar. And in this place there
are three kingdoms reckoned up for example sake, namely, the kingdom on the
East, the head whereof was Calnch, Calnch.
and it was a parcel of the kingdom of Nimrod sometimes, as it is Genesis 10.
ver. 10. for there it is written, That the beginning of his kingdom was Babel,
and Erech, and Accad, and Calneh, in the land of Shinar. The secondis the
kingdom of Syria, whose chief city in times past was Chamat, a great city,
Chamat.
of the which the Scripture makes mention in many places. The third kingdom
is of the Philistims, Gath.
whose head city was Geth, or Gath. And all these kingdoms did God sharply
punish under Se^nacherib afterward, but yet even then he had begun to weak^^
them under this Jeroboam. Unto these therefore does God bid the Israelites
turn their eyes, and learn to be wise by the exampl^ and punishments of
others.

Verse. 3. Ye that put far away the evil day, and approach to the s^^ of
iniquity?
The rendering of a reason, whereby they are proved guilty of many s^nnes.
THe rendering of a reason, whereby the Prophet does con^^^^ the Israelites, or
prove them guilty of many faults very g^^uous, belonging some unto the first
table, and some unto the ^^cond table of the law. And touching the first table,
he proves (...) guilty of the manifest contempt or despising of God, and his
th^^^nings: of outrageous wantonness and cruelty concerning the second table.
But this verse declares that their manifest contemp^^ the threatenings of God,
and the most shameful effect of the sa^^* The contempt is contained in these
words: What it is to put far away the evil day.
They put far (...) from them the evil day, that is, through their reasons
and e^^^tions they persuade themselves, that the afflictions or trou^^^ which
are threatened, do not appertain unto them, or at least (...) shall not so
soon come upon them. The effect of this contem^^ comprehended in these words,
(and approach to the seat of in^^^tie) that is, by this means, and mocking
and contemning of (...) judgments of God, ye establish the seat of iniquity,
to wit, (...) do confirm and strengthen them in their sins, and give a^^^
course unto wickedness. And thus much of the vices of the who^^ people in
general, against whom the judgments of God are he^^ set down.

Verse. 4. They lie upon beds of yuorie, and stretch themselves (...) their
beds, and eat the lambs of the flock, and the calves o^^ (...) the stall.
He deals now with the rich ones.
NOw the Prophet does particularly set upon the richer and w^^thier ones among
this self same people, whom he had ge^^rally noted in the former verse. And
these also he condemns (...) of outrageous wantonness and riot: and afterward
of cruelty ve^. And by the description it appears cleerer then the noone
day, that this riot was a shameful abuse of the singular benefits and gifts
of God. And therefore is it worthily so sharply reprehended or reproved. For
albeit that we may use the gifts of God, yea and that (according unto the
plentifulnes of them bestowed upon us by GOD) somewhat more largely sometimes,
with thanksgiving, 1. Tim. 4. Psalm. 23. yet ought we never to abuse those
benefits. For when as that is done of us, all their whole fruit and use is
turned into pomp, vain boasting, arrogancy, pride, and nicenes or delicatnes
of mind. Therefore then are our riches a token, and a fostering of our vices,
and not an helping of the poor, or a bestowing of them upon certain holy
works, for which use God bestows riches and goods, that is, his benefits
upon us. For the bestowing of these gifts after the manner of the world upon
the satisfying of the lusts of the flesh, is not any token of the children of
God: For (as John says 1. Epist. cap. 2. ver. 16.) all that is in the world
(as the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life) is not
of the father, but is of the world, whereunto the godly are not at any hand to
fashion themselves.

Concerning this verse, it does especially find fault with the riot and excess
of these wealthy ones in things otherwise necessary, as is sleep and meat.
Their sleep.
They did sleep not only in beds well furnished and made; but also in beds of
yuorie, the which kind of matter was in those places most rare and scarsie, A
note of great waste.
and a token of a great waste of expenses. For the throne of Solomon 2. Chro.
9. and the house of yuorie made by Achab 1. King. 22. are recorded as a rare
and especial matter. For there were few Elephants in those places, and in the
places near there abouts: but yuorie was brought unto them as far as from
Ethiopia, or from India, as may appear by that of Ezechiel cap. 27. ver. 15.
The men of Dedan were thy merchants: and the merchandise of many yles were in
thine hands: they brought thee for a present horns, teeth, and pecockes. This
then that the Prophet here speaks of was an unreasonable and unmeasurable
waste of money. And the steddles of their beds were not only too sumptuous, but
also the bedding of the said beds: for they had most plentiful, most wastfull,
and most costly couerlets, and such like bed furniture. And thus much
concerning their beds and sleep. As for their meats, Their meat.
these rich and wealthy ones did eat no flesh but such as was of special
request and note, and therefore most deintie and fit to foster the filthy lust
of the flesh. For otherwise (...) is not forbidden to eat good meats.

Verse. 5. They sing to the sound of the viole: they invent to themsel^^^
instruments of music like David.
Their excess in things not necessary.
THe second kind of riot and excess in things altogether not ^^cessarie, but
wholly for pleasure: in the which also they abus^^ the most holy example of
David, who did consecrate and dedic^^^ his music unto God. So then the
instruments of music alrea^^ invented; and others, the which they devised
anew, they did vtt^^lie abuse, unto their filthy and wanton music and
pleasure. For ^therwise it is lawful for an honest man to recreate himself
(...) godly music, Music in it self very lawful.
and it is an art in it self commendable, and very (...) beseeming a free man.
But it is the abuse thereof that is to be ^^^demned.

Verse. 6. They drink wine in bowls, and anoint themselves with (...) chief
ointments: but no man is sorry for the affliction of Joseph.
1 The third kind of encessiue riot in the Israelites.
THis verse has two parts. The first contains the third kind^^ the excessive
cost and riot, the which the Israelites were a^^ goblets to drink wine in, and
in ointments, that is, in things a^^^gether superfluous (as wasting their goods
and the benefits of G^^ like mad men.) To be anointed and to drink in
goblets, that is, (...) large cups, is not in it self forbidden: but to use
them unto riot (...) drunkenness, and always to seek for, and to occupy
most co^^^ ointments and of greatest price: and not to be content with me^^ and
common vessels, and meats, and the same wholesome (be^^^^^ they are good
cheap:) is monstrous madness of mind, and pr^^^ gall wastfulnes and spending
of money, and finally a most ass^^red sign and token of a mind thoroughly
drowned in vices and ple^sures, such as was in Caligula, Nero, Lucullus, and
Heliogabalus.

2. They use their excessive pleasures in the midst of the troubles of their
brethren.
The second part of this verse is an exaggeration or making g^^^ter of the
former crimes by the circumstance of the time and of the persons. Of the time,
in this, that they used those superfluous and ^uer delicate pleasures even
then, when as there was yet now amo^^ them great misery and affliction of
their brethren, and the sa^^ being as it were present before their eyes to be
beholden. By the circumstance of the person their sin is increased by this
word (Joseph) for those were both their brethren, By Joseph he means the
tribe of Manasses, who was the son of Joseph.
and also citizens of the same kingdom: with whose great miseries and breaches
notwithstanding the Ephramites themselves (in whose tribe Samaria was, and
where these excessive riots were especially used) with the rest of the people
of the kingdom of Israel were never awhit grieved, moved nor touched. Wherein
no doubt a third most grievous sin of the Israelites is noted, to wit, their
unmercifulness and cruelty toward their brethren and citizens. And touching
this breach and misery of Joseph, it happened and fell out unto the tribe of
Manasses, which was beyond Jorden, under King Ioas, as appears 2. King. cap.
13. ver. 7. where it is written of Hazael king of Syria, that besides many
injuries which he had done unto Ioas King of Israel, He had now left him of the
people but fifty horsemen and ten chariots, and ten thousand footmen, because
he had destroyed them, and made them like dust beaten to powder. From this
great plague and overthrow these of the tribe of Manasses, the brethren of the
Ephraemites, and part of the kingdom of Israel, had not yet now recovered
themselves.

Verse. 7. Therefore now shall they go captive with the first that go captive,
and the sorrow of them that stretched themselves is at hand.
A threatening against the former sins.
A Threatening the which agrees with the former most foul and shameful vices,
and denounces a revenging punishment for all these sins: to wit, for the
contempt or despising of Gods captivity, and the same most swift and speedy:
for their excessive riot and pleasure, mourning shall forthwith come upon these
so wastfull persons, carelessly and wealthily playing the wantons. They shall
therefore be carried away, and that with the first of those nations, the which
the Assyrians shall lead into captivity. And these things shall fall out unto
the^, which imagined the day of the Lord, and these punishments to be far
from them. And this first captivity of the Israelites was made by the
Assyrians, and fell out under King Oseas after the Syrians were carried away by
the same Assyrians. Further, the immoderate pleasure of the same Israelites
shall then be mourning, and want of all things.

Verse. 8. The Lord God has sworn by himself, says the Lord G^^ of hosts, I
abhor the pride of Jacob, and hate his palaces: therefore will I deliver up
the city with all that is therein.
A confirmation of the former threatening.
A Confirmation of the former threatening both by an oath of God and also by the
cause. The oath is interlaced of God by himself, (...) by his life, after the
manner of men, because God cannot swear b^ a greater then himself. 1. By an
oath.
And therefore the writer to the Hebrewe^ says, That when God made the promise
to Abraham, because he b^^ no greater to swear by, he swear by himself, cap.
6. ver. 1^. And th^^ oath is added unto the former threatening, that these
stubborn persons and hypocrites may be the more pierced and moved as it we^^
with the fear of assured punishment.

2. By a cause.
Further, those punishments are confirmed also by a cause, to (...), for that
God does now hate these lofty, proud, unthankful and ^nmindfull persons of
the benefits from him received. For like as the favor of God, and his good
will toward us is the cause of all hi^ benefits unto us: so his just hatred
against us does bring upon (...) all evils and miseries. Furthermore, when as
God says (the pride (...) Jacob) he shows that he has not cast them off,
and hated then without a cause, or for naught, but for their horrible
unthankfulness and pride, whereby they despised God the author and giver of the^
life. For God does especially hate the pride and haughtines of m^^. For as it
is 1. Pet. 5. ver. 5. God resists the proud, and gives grace (...) the
humble. And 1. John. 2. ver. 16. we are taught, That all that is (...) the
world (as the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride (...)
life) is not of the father, but is of the world. Whereof it comes a^^o to
pass, that the Prophet in the words which follow, does amplify the
^unishments threatened before unto these proud ones: for they themselves shall
not only be carried away captive: but also Samaria the city it self, the
head of the kingdom, and their hope, and confidence: yea and moreover all the
wealth thereof shall be given to their enemies, as a reward of their labors.
Wherefore these altogether, both naked and spoiled, shall be led away into
captivity and misery. So is the Lord wont in the end to be revenged on our
wantonness and pride, and by contrary punishments to teach us, what moderation
and measure we should have used before, whilst we did enjoy his benefits.

Verse. 9. And if there remain ten men in one house, they shall dye.
An amplification of the same punishment.
AN amplification of the same punishment, in that they shall not only be slain
and taken of their enemies, but they shall also perish with sickness, as being
afflicted or plagued with the pestilence, and by other means, in that their
City, in the midst of their country and delights. They therefore shall die in
such multitudes and on heaps, that by the same plague many shall be dead in
their several houses. For albeit in those houses be never so many, yet but a
few of them shall be left alive, as for example, if there be ten in a house
they shall dye. And these things seem to have happened, when as by the space of
whole three years Salmanasar King of the Assyrians besieged the City Samaria,
for that so long it was besieged, appears 2. King cap. 17. ver. 5. Then the
King of Asshur came up throughout all the land, and went against Samaria, and
besieged it three years: for in this time many Israelites dyed no doubt in
every house.

Verse. 10. And his uncle shall take him up, and burn him to carry out the
bones out of the house, and shall say unto him that is by the sides of the
house, is there yet any with thee? And he shall say: None. Then shall he say,
Hold thy tongue: for we may not remember the name of the Lord.
1 The amplification of the mortality.
THere are two parts of this verse. The first contains the amplification of
this mortality and death, the which the Prophet threatened that it should come
to pass. The second, and evident cause of the same: 2 The cause of the same.
to the end that these men being feared at the length and warned by these so
many ways, should repent from this their obstinate or stubborn wickedness, if
by any means it might be. In the which is described and set forth the singular
patience and love of God toward men. The amplification of this mortality is
twofold.
And this amplification is twofolde, first, from the person of those that had
care of the funeral, or of the buriers of the dead. Secondly, from the number
and multitude of the dead. From the person of the buriers and prouiders of the
funeral: for there shall be so great scarsitie of them by reason of the mighty
number of those that lie on dying, 1. From the person of the Buriers.
and of those which are dead already: the danger of the sickness being so hot
and raging every where shall be so great, that there shall scarce any be found,
the which either be able or willling to put them into the ground and bury
them. That which happened also in that same pestilence, the which Thucidides in
his second book of the Peloponesian war, and Virgil about the end of the
third book of his Georgicks, do describe. Therefore those which then shall
bury others, and provide for their funerals shall be of their chiefest
friends, and near of kin unto them, as their uncle by the father, or their
uncle by the mother. 2 From the number of those that die.
From the number of those which dye this mortality is also amplified: This
fame plague and mortality shall be so great, that many times in a whole
street there shall not be one left alive in the City of Samaria. Therefore
when as these buriers, which shall bury their friends, shall ask their
n^ighbour whether there be another left alive with him, he shall answer thus:
There is none with me. There si none but I only left alive in all this whole
street. The which words the Propheter-presseth by the way of moving them to
pity and compassion, that he may the rather move the Israelites being
obstinate and stubborn in their sins, that yet then at least wise they might
take some pity on themselves, whose case was like to be so miserable and
lamentable.

2. The cause of this great punishment of the Israelites with mortality.
And as for the cause of this so great and far raging evil, the same is also
here expressed, namely, for that in the same people and in the same City no
man called upon and worshipped the true God. For thus much does these words and
speech import (we may not remember the name of the Lord) Hereby the buryers and
those that were occupied about the funeral do give earnest admonition or
warning to him that is left alive, that no man is to murm^^^ because of this so
great a punishment and misery of this City Samaria: but as has been said
before cap. 5. ver. 13. that they all do rest contented with the most just
judgments of God, and do rather condemn themselves, then accuse God of
severity or cruelty. And this admonition or warning in them might arise at that
time, and in that so great feeling of the punishment, either from the fear of
God his judgment, the which these buriers and these warners might conceive by
so many and so great plagues of God: or else from the earnest faith of a few,
the which at that time did yet remain godly in that people, and did perform
this same their last duty of godliness, which is to bury the dead. Whereupon
they did by this plague and punishment admonish and warn those that were yet
living, that they should repent, and patiently bear God his judgments. For
under King Oseas the fear of God was a little restored among the Israelites.
For it is said of him 2. King. cap. 17. ver. 2. That albeit he did evil in the
sight of the Lord, yet not so (and in such sort) as the kings of Israel which
were before him.

Verse. 11. For behold, the Lord commands, and he will strike the great
house with breaches, and the little house with cleftes.
The conclusion
THe conclusion, That these things shall come to pass in such sort as they were
foretold. The reason: Because God commands it, that is, will raise up
against these hard and unrepentant men, most cruel enemies, to wit, the
Assyrians, as it afterward came to pass. There is a like place Isai 7. ver.
18.19. And in that day shall the Lord hiss for the fly that is at the
uttermost part of the floods of Egypt, and for the Be which is in the land of
Ashur, (whereby he means the host of the Egyptians and Assyrians, the which
at hi^ command shall come in swarms like Flies and Bees) And they shall come
and light all in the desolate valleys, and in the holes of the rock^^* and
upon all thorny places, and upon all bushie places.

There is also in this verse the figure ( Occupatio, The figure Occupatio. What
that is, look before, cap. 5. ver. 3.
or answering of an obiecti^n that might be made) for they might alleadg
against this threatening of the Prophet: but how hard soever the world goes, we
shall in some place or other shift for our selves either in the great houses,
or else in the little ones This vain hope the Prophet here cutteth off, to the
end that they should not imagine that they could any where be it^ safety. For
both their small and also their great houses shall be ouert^rowen, and
therefore nothing can defend and save them: their whole City shall be wasted
and spoiled and pulled down. For as for their great and gorgeous houses, they
shall perish and be destroyed with all kind ruin, as with an heap and hoord
of evils, rushing in upon them. And their little houses shall be filled with
clefts, and thrown down to the ground.

Verse. 12. Shall horses run upon the rock? or will one plowe there with
Oxen? For ye have turned judgment into gall, and the fruit of righteousness
into wormwood.
God by argument proves that he does justly punish them.
A Nargument or reason whereby God proves that he is justly avenged on them,
and does punish them. For this must he needs do, except he will be counted
unjust. Therefore God proves by two similitudes, that there cannot, or could
not be any more agreement between their most lewd and wicked manen (...) his
justice, then there is agreement between a most rugged rock^ horses running or
Oxen plowing thereupon. For a stony rock is no^ (...) to be plowed, nor for a
course to be made upon it with horses. T^^ country of Ithaca (says one) is
not fit for a race with horses, because it is stony and rockie: neither do men
use to sow in a ban^ soil, such as is a rock. And therefore in Mat. cap. 13.
ver. 5. Christ in the parable of the seed says, That it that fell on stony
gro^^ where it had not much earth, sprung up anon, because it had not d^^^ of
earth, and when the sun rose up, The application of the two simslitudes.
it was parched, and for lack (...) rooting, withered away. Therefore as these
things agree not together, To plow in a barren soil, To run with horses in a
ro^^^ place: so is it neither convenient nor meet that God (who is (...)
should cherish most wicked persons, such as are the Israel^^^^ There is a like
place Isai 28. ver. 24, 25. where things appertaini^g unto husbandry are
compared with the judgment and natu^^^ God. Does the plow man (says the
Prophet) plowe all the da^^^ sow? Does he open and break the clots of his
ground? When he h^^^ made it plain, will he not then sow the fitches, and
sow cummin, and cast in wheat by measure, and the appointed barley and rye in
their place*

The Mayor. It stands with the justice of God to punish the wicked
Now concerning the foundation and ground of this argume^ and reason, (to wit,
that it is not meet that God should spare the wicked) it appears by many
places of scripture to be most true Psalm. 94. ver. 20. Has the throne of
iniquity (says David to Go^) any fellowship with thee, which forgeth wrong
for a law? And Paul^ Cor. cap. 6. ver. 16. Has the Temple of GOD any agreement
with Idols? whereby consequently he shows that there is no agreem^^^ between
God and between any thing that is evil. And Isai 32. v. 1^ the Prophet
teaches, That the work of justice is peace, even the (...) of justice and
quietness, and assurance for ever. Whereby he means that as the fruits of God
his spirit in the faithful are justice, p^^^^, and joy, so God both likes and
loves, and rewards the same: and on the other side that his justice
requires, that he should punis^ the contrary.

The Minor. I^e I^ra^lites are most wic^ed.
The assumption, or minor proposition of this argument follo^eth in these words
(ye have changed judgment into gall) that is to say, ye are most lewd and
wicked. Therefore by the course of their whole life God does argue and prove
them guilty of horrible iniquity. For God speaks generally (ye have changed)
so tha^ whether the magistrates, or p^iuat persons be looked upon, they are
both here proved guilty. Further he says, (Judgment and the fruit of
righteousness) that is, whatsoever you do owe unto God or men, the same you
have corrupted, overthrown, changed into couetous^es and cueltie, abusing unto
that your iniquity and wickedness all the duties and parts of man his life
and society. So that (...) were more tolerable to drink and eat gall and
wormwood, then to be judged by your judgments, to live among you, and to have
de^l^ng with you. Behold what manner of life the life of those men is, the which
despise the truth and worship of God, and how lamentable and miserable it is to
have conversation and living with them.

Verse. 13. Ye rejoice in a thing of naught: ye say, Have we not gotten us
horns by our own strength?
Another proof of the minor In these terms of art, the which cannot so fitly
be set ^^wn^ in English, the ignorant Reader must crave the help of the learned.
ANother argument or proof of the assumption of the former Syllogism, which
was (you are most wicked) taken from their arrogancy or pride most outrageous,
whereby they did show themselves to be sacrilegious or robbers of God of his
honor, whilst they did attribute or give that unto their own strength, the
which they were to have thanked God only for, as was (for example) the estate
and glory of the kingdom, the which under Jeroboam the son of Ioas they had
recovered. But they attributed these things unto themselves, that is, they made
themselves their own gods. Wherein is a proof of their notorious ingratitude
or unthankfulness toward God, and consequently a testimony or witness of their
singular wickedness. The Godly d^e acknowledge al their good gifts to come from
God alone, and do praise him only for the same.
So then the godly speak otherwise of themselves, and of their felicity or
happiness, and of their strength: for they attribute all their good gifts unto
God, yea and that unto him alone, as appears Psalm. 44. ver. 6.7.8. for there
David says in the person of the godly: I do not trust in my bow, neither can
my sword save me. But thou have saved us from our adversaries, and have put
them to confusion that hate us. Therefore will we praise God continually, and
will confess thy name for ever. Likewise Psalm. 89. verse. 17. Thou art the
glory of their strength, and by thy favor our horns shall be exalted.

Verse. 14. But behold, I will raise up against you a nation, O house (...)
Israel, says the Lord God of hosts: and they shall afflict y^^ from the
entering in of Hamath unto the river of the wilderne^*
The conclusion of the former a^gument.
THe conclusion of the former Syllogism with a more plai^^ laying open of the
matter, to wit: when as there is no agreement between God and evil men, but
God the revenger of in^quitie punishes them: and you for your parts are
wicked, therefore God also will punish you. But he does furthermore in (...)
verse lay forth this reason and the kind of the plague or punishment, wherein
consists the explanation or making more plai^^ of the matter, of the which I
spoke in the beginning of this verse The punishment then is, The kind of their
punishment.
most grievous and hard exile or bani^^ment and captivity, whereinto they
shall be carried not by any ration near unto them, and such as they know, but
by a nation fa^e off: and not only part of them, or some one province of the
kingdom of Israel only, but the whole country shall be afflicted (...)
punished, even so far and wide as that kingdom lies and stretches. God then
shall raise up nations against the Israelites, and th^^ from far countries,
to wit, the Assyrians, as appears 2. King. cap. 17. verse. 6. where it is
recorded, That in the ninth year of Hosh* (...) the King of Asshur took
Samaria, and carried Israel always unto As^^^* and put them in Halah, and in
Habor by the river Gozan, and in (...) cities of the Medes. Of this coming of
the king of Assyria agai^^^ them Isay prophsieth also cap. 7. ver. 18.19. which
places are (...) down but a little before in this chapter, namely ver. 11.
These Assyrians then shall cruelly range into all the quarters and borders
(...) their kingdom, and shall drive the Israelites into narrow strai^^^* and
press them, spoil and vex them, from the entrance of the ^tie Hamah or
Emath, These places are like in respect of the bounds and borders, but not in
respect of the matter, f^r the one spea^eth of their captivity, and the other,
of their deliverance.
and the river Euphrates, or from the East unto the river of Egypt, or the
river Sichor, the which from the West did separat the land of the Israelites
from Egypt. Number. 34 ver. 5. and 8. There is a like place Isai. 27. ver. 12.13.
And in th^^ day shall the Lord thresh from the channel of the river unto the
river of Egypt, and ye shall be gathered, one by one, O children of Israel. In
th^^ day also shall the great trumpe be blown, and they shall come, which
perished in the land of Asshur, and they that were chased into the land (...)
Egypt: and they shall worship the Lord in the holy mount at Jerusalem*

CAP. 7.
Verse. 1. Thus has the Lord God showed unto me, and behold, he formed
grasshoppers in the beginning of the shooting up of the latter growth: and lo,
it was in the latter growth after the mowing.
ALbeit that God in the Chapter before going has declared, what things should
in the end fall out unto obstinat and stubborn persons, and chiefly unto the
Israelites; and especially that at the last they should be carried away with
great misery and scarsitie from their own homes into unknown countries: yet
notwithstanding both in this chapter, and in the other following, he shows
and foretells unto the same parties other afflictions or troubles, To what
end these other sma^^er punishment^ are threa^ned.
the which God would send upon them before that same their last and utter
destruction, both to the end that he might call them back (if by any means
they were to be cured) from their wicked life: and also, that albeit these more
gentle and forerunning punishments were not to continue and last always, but
at the length to cease and have their end, yet they should not therefore think
that the same greater judgment of God against them should cease also.
Therefore least they should suppose that it should not either come at all, or
else be turned into these more milder punishments, the which they suffered, the
things that follow are now added. For both hypocrites, and also stubborn and
profane or wicked persons, do easily sooth and flatter themselves in the
shifting of, and in the interpreting or expounding of the threatenings of God,
wherewith in the end they do destroy and undo themselves.

The con^^nte^ of this cha^^^^.
But touching this chapter it has a description of sundry punishments, the
which fell out unto the unrepentant Israelites before that same last and utter
destruction specified cap. 6. verse. 14. before going: yet must we not thus
think, that here such things are showed by the Prophet, which had happened
unto the Israelites already (albeit that the Lord had chastised and warned
them sundry ways before, as appears 2. King. 14. ver. 26.) but because that
this Chapter is a prophecy, it contains those things which were to come, and
not such as were past already. The desc^iptio^ of a grieu^u^ famine in this
verse and the two other following.
Further, this verse with the two following, contains a description and
foretelling of the first punishment. And this was a most grievous famine, the
which, all kind of fruits being eaten up and devoured by the grasshoppers, the
Israelites felt and endured, as there is mention of the like Joel. cap. 1. but
in this place there are to be noted three things. The one, 1. What is showed.
what is showed: the other, who shows it: the third, after what manner it is
showed. A great famine, as I said before, is showed, the which should fall out
unto them. And God is he that shows the same, 2. Who shows it.
the Lord of all things, and Jehovah, that is, the euethsting and true God. He
shows it by a vision, the which he off^red and laid before the Prophet. 3.
After what manner it is showed.
For he shows unto him grasshoppers, especially those which are called They
are in l^tire called Portici^ae, and may in English be named Leeke eaters.
Prasocurides (which have their names of eating up the green things of the
earth, as leekes and lettice, and such like) that, of all kind of grasshoppers
are the greatest hurters of herbs that be tender and young growing up, the
which they do most speedily devour. And these did God form or make, because
as yet they were not: neither were they bred at all adventures and by chance,
but by God his decree. As concerning the time, wherein God sent them into the
countried the Israelites, it was after the common hay mowing, or cutting of the
grass of the meddowes, when as rowen grass begins (...) grow again, and
to spring up. This is the first part of this vision.

Verse. 2. And when they had made an end of eating the grass of the land, then
I said, O Lord God, spare I beseech thee: who shall r^^^ up Iaacob? for he is
small.
The second part of this vision, showing what these grasshoppers did. Synecdoche
what it is, read Amos cap. 5. verse. 21.
THe second part of this vision, declaring what these grashopp^^ sent of God,
did, namely they did utterly devour and eate^^ all the green grass and
herbs, wherewith every kind of liui^^ creature is wont to be nourished.
Moreover, I do here vndersta^^ the other grain and fruits of the earth, as
of trees and other plain, to have been eaten up by these same grasshoppers, by
the figure Synecdoche. This vision therefore did portend or signify first, a
great famine of the beasts: and secondly of men themselves. for hay mowing is
wont to be at such times, as about the which other fruits do begin now to
wax ripe. So then a great wasting of them is here noted for to come by these
grasshoppers.

The prayer of the Prophet for the people, the which he obtains. verse. 3.
And I said, O Lord, etc. The prayer of the Prophet taking pitti^ on so great
misery of the people, and therefore praying God, that he would either turn it
away, or else mittigate or assuage it. The which he shows that he obtained at
the hand of God. And the Prophet makes this prayer, not that he would be
against God, or condemn his judgments, but for that he is moved with a godly
pity toward his afflicted brethren. Therefore in that Amos is a Prophet, In
what sense Amos prays for the people against whom he prophesies.
he denounces and declares those judgments of God: but in that he is their
brother and a man, he prays and sueth for the Israelites. And there are two
causes of the Prophet his commending this people unto God, and seeking to have
them eased, in this place set down. The one, 1. Cause why he prateth for the^.
because this people is of the seed and family or house of Jacob, and
therefore that same elect and chosen people of God him self, unto whom GOD
promised his mercy. For in the Psalm. 89. ver. 33.34. God speaks of them
after this manner: Yet my loving kindness will I not take from him, neither will
I falsify my truth. My covenant will I not break, nor alter the thing that
is gone out of my lips, etc. as it there follows more at large. 2. Cause
why he prays for the^.
The second cause why he prays for this people is, for that this self same
people is small, that is to say, already, and hardly used and afflicted by
their enemies. For this does not agree with the good will and loving kindness of
God to ward men, yea and that which more is, with his especial covenant
toward his people, to afflict or punish him being afflicted or punished
already; and being fallen, to thrust him further into the extremest misery of
destruction. Lastly, that he should show forth the great and fearful power of
his justice upon those that are his, It stands not with God his mercy to use
ex tremity unto* those that are his: for that he keeps for his enemies.
and men that are almost consumed already, and that he should quite and clean
swallow them up, being as it were at the last cast, and brought so low that
they can scarce fetch their breath. And therefore David in his Psalms does
often pray that he will not use against his, but reserve for his enemies, his
great wrath, strength and power to be powered and showed forth upon them: as
Psalm. 89. verse. 6. Power out thy wrath upon the heathen that have not known
thee, and upon the kingdoms that have not called upon thy name. But for the
faithful he prays: Return (o Lord, how long?) and be pacified toward thy
servants. And Psalm. 130. verse. 3, 4. If thou, o Lord, straightly markest
iniquities, o Lord who shall stand? But mercy is with thee, that thou may be
feared.

Verse. 3. So the Lord repented for this. It shall not be, says the Lord.
The effect of the for (...) ^raie (...) Pro^^^^.
THe effect of the former prayer, to wit, the appeasing of the wrath of God, and
the turning away of the same from them, hanging now as it were over the heads
and necks of the Jews* For the Prophet was heard of God: and therefore that
same punishment of famine ceased. It repented God of his anger against them,
that is to say, God changed his mind, and he that was a^grie with them
before, appeared afterward to be favorable, an^ reconciled or made friends
with them. In what sense and after what manner God is said to repent.
But GOD is said to repe^^ by a certain kind of humane affection attributed
unto him^^^ our better understanding, in as much as thereby we do by the
^^fects know his mind toward us to be changed: not that God, (...) his will,
which is always one and the same, is changed: but (...) that, look what
effects of his anger and mercy he had from eu^lasting decreed to be extant, and
to be felt diverse, the same in th^^ times he brings forth and shows. The
true cause why Amos his prayer was heard.
Further, the true cause (...) this appeasing of God, is not to be attributed
unto Amos, or (...) his prayer, but unto Christ, or the mediator: the effects
of wh^^ death afterward to ensue, were now felt of the people of God. Y^^ the
prayers of the godly offered in this name unto God, are accep^ble unto him, and
therefore heard of him. And therefore Iam. (...) says: That the prayer of a
righteous man avails much, if it be fer^^.

Verse. 4. Thus also has the Lord God showed unto me, and beh^^^ the Lord God
called to judgment by fire, and it deu^^red (...) great deep, and did eat up
a part.
The second vision.
THe second vision, wherein the second punishment decreed ^gaynst the Israelites
is showed unto the Prophet. And this (...) showed unto him under the likeness of
fire raging far abroad, (...) devouring a certain great deep, and land or
possession: and fully in the form of fire with great shaking, and crackling,
and lab^^ring, getting the upper hand of great masses and heaps of thi^^ that
were in the way of it, or set against it. Therefore this fire (...) said to be
called to judge or contend, and to fight, because (...) the matter laid against
it would not easily yield unto it. This ^^fliction or punishment happened after
the former already expo^^ded. And it was, When this fire was, and what it may
be vnderst^od to be.
when as Thelgat Phalnasar King of Assyria carried away two tribes: and the
half tribe of Manasses the which were beyond Jordan, and a part of the
Kingdom of Israel. Of th^^ history is mention 1. Chron. cap. 5. ver. 26. in
these words. A^^ the God of Israel stirred up the spirit of Pull King of
Asshur, and the spirit of Tilgath Pilneeser King of Asshur, and he carried them
away even the Reubenites and the Gadites, and the half tribe of Manesse^ and
brought them unto Halah, and Habor, and Harah, and to the river Gozan, unto
this day. See more hereof 2. King. cap. 15. ver. 29. and cap. 16. ver. 9. Of
this also seems the Prophet Isai to mean cap. 9. ver. 1. where it is thus
written: Yet the darkness shall not be according to the affliction, that it
had when at the first he touched lightly the land of Zebulun, and the land of
Nepthali, nor afterward when he was more grievous by the way of the sea beyond
Jordan in Galile of the Gentiles. For at that time that whole country and
possession, the which was as a deep, as being seated in the valleys and
monnataines of Galaad, was consumed with fire, that is, afflicted, by reason of
the most grievous wars which were then, and the desolation, or wasting of the
land, which was then brought in and made. Thus does my friend Franciscus Iunius
notably expound this place.

Verse. 5. Then said I, O Lord God, cease I beseech thee: who shall raise up
Iaacob? for he is small.
See the meaning of this ver. before in the exposition of the 2 verse of this
chapter.
THis verse has been expounded before in this self same chapter ver. 2. in
these words: (And I said, O Lord God, etc.) For as often as affliction
arises, so often must we pray, and not only concefor all (during the whole
term of our life is God to be prayed unto) as the Atheists, and Epicures or
belly-gods do affirm and hold.

Verse. 6. So the Lord repented for this. This also shall not be, says the Lord
God.
See verse 3. of this chapter.
THis verse also is to be expounded after the same manner, that the third verse
of this chapter before was. For where it is said, (This shall not be) the
meaning hereof is, this affliction shall not continue but shall be taken away,
and this people shall be helped and relieved, that if it may be, they may
repent, and being taught by their own punishment may return unto more thrift,
and unto true godliness.

Verse. 7. Thus again he showed me, and behold, the Lord stood upon a wall
made by line, with a line in his hand.
The 3. vision.
THe third vision the which contains not only a punishment: but also the
destruction of Israel, for as much as the Israelites repented not being warned
neither by the first, nor yet by the second punishment, nor turned themselves
unto God earnestly: for ab^^ that at the last under Oseas their last King, that
same outragio^^ ^^grosse Idolatry were a little in some sort repressed, or
restrayne^ yet was not therefore notwithstanding the true worship of God^
stored or set up among them, as appears 2. King. 17. And h^^ first of all in
this verse the vision it self is described: and the e^^sition thereof in the
verse that follows. The vision therefore (...) presented these two things
unto the Prophet, to wit, God himse^^ who stood upon some wall: and also who
held now in his ha^^ rule, leauel or line. For to the end that the
signification of (...) vision might be the better understood, and from whence
it was ^^ken, God after this manner showed himself like unto a master ^^penter
or chief builder, as he does also Zach. cap. 2. ver. 1, 2. I^^ similitude
therefore seems to be taken from Carpenters and ^^^sons weighing and
considering some thing earnestly and diligently in a building. The which that
they may do, whether anythi^^ be at the first or newly to be built, or being
already built, be to (...) corrected and amended: or finally whether it be to
be leau^^^ they use their line and squire, that they may do it by leauel, that
(...) by most just measure and rule, and that they do not determine (...) set
down any thing rashly, or beyond the rules of their a^^ (...) word, they frame
it according unto rule in all points.

Verse. 8. And the Lord said unto me, Amos, what see thou A^^ said, A line.
Then said the Lord, Behold, I will set A line i^ (...) midst of my people
Israel, and will pass by them no more.
The exposition of the vision.
THe interpretation and exposition of the vision. And this (...) has two
parts, The one contains an interrogation, or (...) question of GOD unto
Amos. The other the exposition of t^^ vision or answer of Amos. And GOD asks
Amos in this ^^sion especially, and peculiarly, because it was of greater
weight, (...) of a more sorrowful event or falling out and issue, then the^^
^^^mer and therefore was the more diligently to be marked, told a^^ heard of
the people, What the Israelites have henceforth to look for, who hitherto have
waxen worse through God his mercy.
because that it now threatened the very dest^^ction of Israel. Wherefore they
ought to be pearsed herewith. And the exposition showed unto the prophet
tends unto this e^^ that they may understand that even now God himself does
e^mine and try the doings of the Israelites according unto theer (...) or
perfect rule of his justice (that is, the which he has prescribe (...) set
down in his law) that he may judge and give sentence on them accordingly
thereunto, and not now any more according unto the grace, nuldnes, and
gentleness of his mercy, as he has done before: because that thereby they have
not been made the better, nay they have waxen worse. And therefore that it
shall come to pass that he will pardon, ouerpasse, and forgive nothing any
more unto this people, but will call all things unto a just accounts, leuel^,
rule and weight: like as Carpenters and builders are wont to try and examine
all things by line and by level.

Verse. 9. And the hie places of Ishak shall be desolate, and the temples of
Israel shall be destroyed: and I will rise against the ^cuse of Jeroboam with
the sword.
A confirmation of the former similitude.
A Confirmation taken from the event and falling out of things, or from the
punishment the which shall come upon them from God, judging and examining their
deeds and works. This punishment is twofold. One, the which is in common and
indifferently threatened unto all the people, to wit, 1. A general punishment.
That it shall come to pass, that their hie places and Chapels, that is to
say, those places in which they do especially trust because of their
religiousnesse, shall be laid waste, and overthrown: and their other munitions
and fortresses in like manner, and places in which they supposed that they
should be in safety and find some aid. And he calls those places, The Idol
places in what sense called Sanctuaries or holy Temples.
in the which the Calves and Idols were worshipped by the Israelites, Temples,
Sanctuaries, or holy places, not that they were so indeed, but by yielding
unto them the names the which they of superstition gave unto them: like as the
Idols also of the heathen are, according unto the opinion which they themselves
have of them, in the holy Scripture called gods. He calls them also the hie
places of Isaac, The hie places of their Idols why called the hie places of
Isaac.
because they were builded by the Israelites in those places, in the which the
Patriarch Isaac did sometimes offer sacrifice, but unto the true God, and by the
commandment and appointment of God himself, when as there was not as yet any
certain Temple of God, in the which one and alone, God would have sacrifices
to be offered unto him: as then there was, to wit, the Temple at Jerusalem.
Therefore there was not then the like reason of the Israelites for worshipping
in those places, when as there both was a Temple appointed by God for
sacrifices: and when as they themselves in those hie places did sacrifice unto
Idols, and not unto the true God. Wherefore the example of Isaac did help them
nothing at all, but rather all this was an apish, vai^^ and counterfeit
imitation or following of the worship of the (...) Patriarchs, The wo^ship of
the Israelits an apish imitatio^ of the old Patriarchs.
like as was the worship of the Samaritans, where^^ seems that they much
boasted, by the speech that the woman Samaria had with Christ Ioh. 4. ver. 20.
where she says: O^^ others worshipped in this mountain, and ye say that in
Jerusalem is (...) place wherein men ought to worship.

2 A particular punishment for Jeroboam and his house.
The second punishment here threatened, belongs peculi^^ unto Jeroboam the
son of Ioas, whose family and house is s^^ shall be smitten with the sword.
The which thing came afterw^^^^ to pass, as it is declared 2. King. cap. 15.
ver. 10. where mention made how Shallum rose up against Zachariah the son of
I^^boam, and slew him, in whom that line ceased. The words be th^^^ And Shallum
the son of Iabesh conspired against him (to wi^, against Zachariah) and smote
him in the sight of the people, and ki^^^^ him, and reigned in his stead.

Verse. 10. Then Amaziah the Priest of Bethel sent to Ierobo^^ (...) of Israel,
saying, Amos has conspired against thee in the (...) of the house of Israel:
the land is not able to bear all his w^^^
What followed unto Amos after this sermon.
THe consequent, that is what followed after this sermon o^ (...) Prophet. For
the Prophet goes on to show what befell (...) him among this people after
that he had denounced against t^^ so many threatenings of God: namely, how he
was accused bo^^^ sedition or conspiracy against the King, and also of
vngod^^^^ among the Israelites: yea, and that by such a one, who would (...)
counted the ringleader of others unto godliness, and to be (...) holy. This
by so many admonitions or warnings was not broug^^ to pass, that either the
Priests themselves, as they were called: or the King: yea, or the people
repented themselves of their fo^^^^ and wicked life, and turned unto the true
God. The which th^^g does most manifestly prove, that both the obstinacy or
stubbo^nes of the Israelites was notorious, The contents of this verse.
and also their treachery and trothlesnes to Godward desperate, 1. The accuser.
or past hope of recovery. Th^^fore the history here now after this Sermon
set down is mo^^ profitable. 2. Unto whom he accuses.


This verse generally contains an accusation of Amos: wherein these three
things are to be marked. First, who accuses. Secondly, unto whom the
accusation is made. 3. Of what matter.
Thirdly, of what matters (...) is made. Amasias, and the same a Priest in
Beth-el, accuses. The Prophet calls him a Priest, by granting unto him that
which he was taken of others for to be. For this fellow in truth was a
worshipper of Idols, a Priest and Sacrificer in Beth-el: and not a Priest of
the true God. Now it appears that this was the chiefest and head Priest in
that place, and not a common one of the meaner sort: but some great and
especial one of chief regard and account. And therefore his testimony or
witness against Amos was of the more weight and credit. The titles by Amos
given unto Amasias do make more for his shame, then commendation.
But Amos makes mention of this title of Amasias, that his fault may be seen
to be the greater, who when as both by the reason of his name and also of his
office, that is, of the Priesthood, the which he did bear, he ought before all
the rest in that people to give ear unto the judgments of God, he does
notwithstanding first of all other cavil and find fault with them, and goes
about to overthrow them and to make them of none effect, by charging of the
true Prophet of God, and accusing him of sedition, but yet falsely
notwithstanding. After this sort did the Pharisees accuse Christ Ioh. 11. ver.
48. If ^e^ let him alone (say they) thus, Christ by the Pharisees accused of
sedition.
all men will believe in him, and the Romans will come and take away both our
place and the nation. And yet more plainly cap. 19. ver. 12. If thou deliver
him (cry the Jews to Pilate, who sought to loose Jesus and set him free) thou
art not Casars friend: for whosoever makes himself ^^king, speaks against
Caesar. So do the Priests at Jerusalem a^^use the Prophet Jeremy of treason,
Jeremy by the Priests accused of treason.
Ierem. cap. 26. ver. 11. Then spoke the Priests and the Prophets (he means
the false Prophets) unto the Princes, and to all the people, saying: This man
(to w^^* Jeremy) is worthy to die: for he has prophesied against this city,
(...) ye have heard with your ears. And cap. 38. ver. 4. having in the 26.
chapter accused him before the Princes and rulers, and as it may seem, missed
of their purpose, they do here complain of him unto the King himself, saying,
as the Prophet reports: We beseech you let this man be put to death: for thus
he weakneth the hands of the men of war that remain in this city, and the
hands of all the people, in speaking such words unto them: for this man seeks
not the wealth of this people but the hurt. So at this day the popish Prelates
do accuse us of treason* when as we preach the true word of God, The popish
prelates accuse the preachers of the G^spell of treason.
because their kitchen waxes cold through our doctrine. Amos is accused unto
the King himself, and that forthwith, and not unto them that could judge of
the doctrine, whether it were of God: but unto him, whose own case it seemed
for to be, to the end that by this means Amos might be the sooner condemned:
namely, for that those words of Amos might be thought to tend unto the hurt of
the king, therefore is Amos accused before the king. Finally, he is accused of
conspiracy against the king, Amos accused of conspiracy and sedition.
and of sedition already stirred up among the people, or at leastwise
presently to be practiced, the which can now scarce be withstood, or by any
means be prevented. For thus was the people moved against the king through his
words: so do the hearts of all men fail already for to defend their
country, that all in general have lost all courage and hope to withstand
their enemies, if they should come upon them. The ^erie self same policy
every where do the popish Prelates and prechers use against the true doctrine
of God now through the goodness of God restored, the which they cannot abide
that it should come unto light, and be published abroad. For it does scatter ^^
drive away their darkness.

Verse. 11. For thus Amos says, Jeroboam shall die by the sword, (...) Israel
shall be led away captive our of their own land.
The proof of the accusation.
THe proof of the accusation by the prophecy it self of An whose words albeit
Amasias do not retain and keep, (...) sets down his meaning Although
this which is said (I^ shall die by the sword) seems to be spoken of envy
against (...) by wresting of his words and meaning, that therewithal (...)
might color and cloak the rest, to wit, Amos conspireth (...) thee, and thy
death and murder. For this Amos says, that it is ^^dained by God, that thou
shall die by the sword. The which (...) Amos did not speak and prophecy of
Jeroboam, but of his (...) and family.

Verse. 12. Also Amasiah said unto Amos: O thou the seer, go (...) thou away
into the land of Judah, and there eat thy bre^^ (...) prophecy there.
The counsel of Amasias to Amos.
THe admonition or counsel of the said Amasias unto A^^^ wherein lies hid the
great subtlety of this idolatrous Priest against the true Prophet of God. For
these words of Amasias (...) as it were a show of his good will toward Amos,
and of his ^fulnes for him: but indeed and truth they thrust at the very (...)
of Amos, and by all the ways that may be, pull him from (...) fice. For they
fear the Prophet, that he should not obey the commandment and will of God.
These arts and sleights of the wicked for the most part are described Psalm. 55.
ver. 21. where the Prophet shows how that in their most sugared words they
hide most bitter gall, and under fair speeches shroud foul dealings, when he
says: The words of his mouth were softer then butter, yet war was in his
heart: his words were more gentle then oil, yet they were sword^. See also a
pattern of these fetches Matthew. 4. ver. 3. and 6. in the tentations of the
devil against our Savior Christ.

The counsel of Amasias twofold.
But concerning this admonition or counsel of Amasias, the same is twofold. The
first, that (he go away) that is, that the Prophet Amos whilst he may, and
honestly, and without let or without danger he may do it, he make shift for
himself, he depart of his own accord, and get him into his own country, 1
That Amos go away.
and there (if it seem so good unto him) exercise and use his office, that is
to say, prophecy. Secondly, (that he flee) that is, that Amos betimes withdraw
himself from the imminent and present danger, 2. That he flee.
the which was very shortly for to come: because that he might run into great
danger of his life, because of such threatenings and prophesies delivered
touching the destruction both of the King, and also of the people. Wherein we
see how this Amasias, a most utter enemy unto the true prophecy of God, does
notwithstanding cover that his hatred against Amos his prophet under an honest
and cleanly pretense, as if he had care and regard of the honor and safety of
the true Prophet of God, the which was there present. So does this devil turn
himself into an angel of light, as did the false Apostles in Paul his time
turn themselves into the Apostles of Christ, the which he says is no wonder
2. Cor. 11. ver* 14. For Satan himself is transformed into an angel of light.
A most crafty counsel of the Papists unto some gospellers.
And this do the most sworn enemies of the truth of the Gospel at this day,
the which would seem ^ore reasonable then others of that crew, and to carry a
more favorable mind toward such as are godly indeed, or also toward the
faithful Pastors of the Church of God. For under a color of honest counsel,
and such as tends to their safety, so far as in them lies, they do move
and exhort them to leave their standing, and to give over for a time, or else
utterly to forsake and lay aside their ministry and work of God. The which
no doubt is a most great and most dangerous fetch and reach of the devil,
against the which the spirit of wisdom is to be begged with most earnest
prayers at the hands of our good and merciful God. For say they: You may be
safe and in honor, or credit and reputation at home among your own, if you
hold your self quiet, and give over the office or religion. Do not therefore
so openly profess this ^elig^on, but leave of this ministry of the gospel
which you exercise. At leastwise tarry a leisure and put it off for a season,
etc.

Three notes of the great subtlety of Amasi^s.
Furthermore, that the subtlety and cunning of this Amas^as was great (as a
chief instrument of Satan) like as also other varlets in such cases is wont
to be, it may appear by these three points. First, in that he calls him by
that honorable na^^ of a Seer, 1. In that he calls Amos by the honorable name
of a Seer.
as if he made some great account of him, and did acknowledge and confess him
to be the true Prophet of God. For this (...) the first and in old time was
wont to be the name of a Prophet, (...) we read 1. Sam. 9. cap. ver. 9. Before
time in Israel, when a m^^ (...) to seek an answer of God, thus he spoke, Come
and let us go to the S^n for he that is called now a Prophet, was in the old
time called a S^^* So the craftier and closer enemies of the gospel are very
liberal and frank in giving of such titles unto the true professors* T^^
second point is hereby to be seen, 2. In that he seeks to draw him home
into his own country.
for that he draws back (...) unto his own country, whereas he may be safe
and without d^^ger, and live commodiouslie and very well. For our own co^^^^^
does by a certain natural sense and feeling allure and deligh^ (...) He then
does not send him into the deserts, and unto far people (...) the uttermost
parts of the world, as to the Garamantes and ^^^ans, but among his own people
and country folks. Whe^^^^ the speech and persuasion of Amasias might seem
the mo^^ (...) sonable, and more full of goodwill and love toward Amo^* (...)
third point is this, 3. In that he will not have him utterly leave prophesying,
but that he prophecy not in Israel.
that Amasias desires not, that Amos hence^^^^ should not prophecy any more
at all: but that he should not (...) here in this place, that is, in the
kingdom of Israel, and (...) in Bethel, but in Judah, where there are many
other* Prophets (...) his place, and like unto himself, and are heard: there
let him P^^phesie as much as him list, and spare not. What may seem^ (...)
reasonable then these requests.

Verse. 13. But prophecy no more at Beth-el: for it is the King ^^^pell, and it
is the Kings court.
The reason, why Amos might not prophecy in Bethel, taken
THis is a rendering of a reason why Amos neither ough^ (...) might prophecy in
Beth-el especially, these things which (...) spoke and uttered. And this reason
is twofold, namely from the holiness, and also from the dignity of the city or
place. 1. From the holiness of the place.
The Holiness is described in these words (It is the Kings chapel) the which
words do sound thus much, as if Amasias should say: This place is unto us all
a most holy temple, ordained by the commandment of the King, ^e as unto you is
your Temple at Jerusalem most holy* It is therefore unlawful for thee to
speak any thing against the worship and holiness o^ this temple. For thou
may not here be suffered, as namely being one that is blasphemous against
our gods, and injurious unto this place the which is so holy. After such like
manner Jeroboam the first would have maintained the false and counterfeit
holiness of his altar in the selfsame city Beth-el against the Prophet of God,
but he was punished for his labor. For when he^ s^r^tched out his arm to have
had the Prophet stayed, his hand which he put forth against him, dried up, and
he could not pull it in again to him, 1. King. 13. ver 4. 2. From the
dignity of ^h^ same.
The dignity of the city is declared in these words: (It is the Kings house)
that is to say, it is the chiefest of the cities of the kingdom of Israel* And
therefore thou cause speak nothing against it, but thou must draw and pull
the whole kingdom upon thine head. Therefore (O Amos) in uttering these things
thou shall stir up sedition, either against thine own self, or else in this
kingdom. And as in this place falsely by this Priest, so Psalm. 122. the
commendation of the city Jerusalem is truly b^ the. Prophet drawn from the
holiness and dignity of the place Read the whole Psalm.

Verse. 14. Then answered Amos, and said to Amaziah, I was no Prophet, neither
was I a Prophets son, but I was a heard man, and a gatherer of wild figs.
The answer of Amos unto Amasias twofold.
THe answer of Amos unto the former and subtle admonition or counsel of
Amasias the Baalamitish Priest. This answer is also twofold. 1. He directly
deni^th to follow his counsel.
First, in the which Amos directly and flatly denies tha^ be either may, or
ought with a good conscience follow and obey the counsel or commandment of
Amasias, because God expreslie has given him otherwise in charge, and that he
ought rather to obey God then man. And so are we taught to do by the answer
which Peter and John do make unto the rulers of the Temple, forbidding them any
more to preach in the name of Jesus Act. 4. ver. 19. For there they answer unto
them thus: Whether it be right in ^he fight of God, to obey you rather then
God, judge ye. For we cannot but speak the things, which we have seen and
heard. Amos then declares what God had commanded him to do, that is, to
preach those things the which he spoke, yea and that unto the people or
Kingdom of Israel, and not unto the Kingdom of Judah, whither he was sent by
Amasias. Therefore when God commands any thing to be done in any certain
place, or time, or manner, i^ must in every point be so done, as he has
appointed, and we may not upon any occasion go one hairs breadth from that
commandment of God. There are examples in Saul, whilst he spares the King
Agag, and the fat cattle 1. Sam. 15. In the Prophet eating meat with the
Prophet of Israel in the city of Beth-el against the commandment of God, 1.
King. 13. Because we must neither pu^ ought to, A description of the
extraordinary calling of Amos.
or take ought from the word of God.

Further, this verse sets down the calling of Amos, and the same
extraordinary, unto this office and charge of prophesying against the kingdom
of Israel, that it may be known, that this which he does, he does of duty.
So then here is a description of a calling altogether extraordinary, the which
neither is, nor was any way made by the means of men: but immediately from God,
not by man, nor of men, but by God himself, as Paul says of his calling
Galat. cap. 1. ver. 1. and 15. Therefore says Amos, I became not such a one,
that is, a Prophet, either by any succession of families as the Levites come to
their office, nor by the ordinance or re^^^ing of any man which was my master
and teacher. For there were among the Israelites certain colleges or schools
of the Prophets, as we read 2. King cap. 4. ver. 38. where it may appear that
Elizaeus was as it were the master and head of them. After (...) (says the
text) Elisha returned to Gilgal, and a famine was in the land, and the children
of the Prophets dwelt with him, etc. For pro^ of this also makes the first
verse of the sixth chapter of this foresaid book. By children he means his
disciples and scholars, albeit this place by some be taken otherwise.
Hereunto also appertains that of the Prophet Isai cap. 8 ver. 18. where he
says: Behold, I and the children, whom the Lord has given me are as signs
and as wonders by the Lord of hosts, (...) dwells in mount Sion. But (says
Amos) I was not after this so^^ trained up and instructed. For I was altogether
a country man an^ a heardman living in the fields, and after the rude and
country manner, being little conversant and known among men.

Verse. 15. And the Lord took me as I followed the flock, and the Lord said
unto me, Go, prophecy unto my people Israel.
Another point of an extraordinary calling.
ANother part of an extraordinary vocation or calling, to wit, than this
calling was made by God himself. For Amos does not only here shut out the
ordinary mean (which is to be called by men) but also sets down the
extraordinary, which is to be ordained immediately from God. Hoe therefore
confirms himself to be a simple country man by profession and kind of
life, and which was taken from the keeping of the flock unto the office of a
Prophet, like as it is also said of David the King Psalm. 78. ver. 70.71. He
chose David also his servant, and took him from the sheepefolds. Even from
behind the Ewes with young brought he him to feed his people in Jacob, and
his inheritance in Israel. Lastly, Amos adds expreslie the commandment it
self of God concerning his prophesying, and the persons unto whom he was sent
by God.

Verse. 16. Now therefore hear thou the word of the Lord. Thou say, prophecy
not against Israel, and speak nothing against the house of Ishak.
The second answer of Amos unto Amasias.
ANother, or the second answer of Amos unto Amasias, wherein he threatens unto
him most grievous punishment for that his rashness in staying and letting (so
far as in him was) the course and will of the word of God: that hereby all
malapart and saucie persons against God, or his Prophets may understand, that
whilst, so much as in them lies, they do stop and hinder the truth of God,
it is so far off, that hereby they shall bring any thing to pass or do any
good, that they shall win and bring upon themselves most miserable des^rection.
And therefore does Gamaliel Act. 5. ver. 38.39. sai^e wise counsel to his
colleagues and fellows to leave of their ^^^erprise against the Apostles,
saying: Refrain your selves from these men, and let them alone: for if this
counsel, or this work be of men, it will come to naught: but if it be of
God, ye cannot destroy it, least ye he found even fighters against God. And so
cap. 12. you shall read how Herod wearied himself in vain by seeking for the
gratifying or pleasing of the Jews to make Peter a spectacle of his bloody
cruelty, God wonderfully mocking and disappoynting his ^^^^ie all devises.
Examples of those which by thus striving have wrought their own bane, the holy
Scripture afoordeth in great plenty, as 1. King. 18. ver. 4. Of the drying up
the arm of Jeroboam the first, Jeroboam.
stretching out the same to stay the Prophet, whom God had sent to preach
against his altar. In Sedechias or Zidkiiah, Zidkiiah.
who opposes or sets himself against Michaiah, whose punishment Michaiah
shows him, shall be to run from chamber to chamber in the end to save his
life from the enemies, the which shall seek to spill the same, 1. King. 22.
ver. 25. Likewise Ierem. 20. In Pashur, Pashur.
that smote the Prophet Jeremy, unto whom he threatens captivity. In
Zedekiah, that seeking to save his life by another course, then that which was
taught him by the Prophet Jeremy, cap. 38. ver. 17.18. is taken by
Nebuchadnezzar, and used most cruelly, cap. 39. ver. 7.

The word of God against the words of Amasias.
Moreover, this verse opposes or sets The word of the Lord Jehovah against
the words of Amasias. He forbad Amos to prophecy: but God commands him to
prophecy. He promised security or safety unto Amos if he would hold his
peace, or run away* God pronounces most grievous punishments both private and
also public unto this Amasias, that could not patiently abide and suffer Amos
prophesying.

Verse. 17. Therefore thus says the Lord, Thy wife shall be an harlot is the
city, and thy sons and thy daughters shall fall by the (...) and thy land
shall be divided by line: and thou shall dye in ap^^^ted land, and Israel shall
surely go into captivity forth of his land.
1. The private punishment of Amasias containing four things.
A Double kind of punishment is here showed unto Amasias, (...) I have s^id; a
private and a public. The private, the which ^^^^cheth Amasias himself
especially and it is a most assured testimony or witness of God being angry
with him, because of his so great boldness in hindering and staying of the word
of God. And this private punishment of Amasias contains these four things. 1.
The whoredom of his wife.
F^^st, the whoredom of his wife, after that Beth-el it self shall be taken
by the enemies. 2. The murder of his children.
Therefore in this self same city, and thou looking on, thy wife shall play
the whore with the soldiers. The second And all thy sons and thy daughters
(says the Lord) shall be sla^^^ cruelly by the enemies. 3. The spoil of his
land.
The third, Thy land or thy fields shall be d^^ded among those self fame
enemies whom thou do deny shall (...) and whom thou can not abide, 4.
Himself shall go into captivity.
and hear. The fourth, And thou thy self shall dye a captive and prisoner in
a strange land poll^^^ land. As touching the public punishment, it is the same
the which has been declared before, namely, 2. His public punishment common
with the rest of his people.
Israel shall be carried captive into a strange land, yea and that in great
companies or altogether, and being moreover miserably afflicted or punished.

CAP. 8.
Verse. 1. Thus has the Lord God showed unto me, and behold a basket of Summer
fruit.
IN the chapter before going, God threatened utter destruction unto the kingdom
of Israel because of his obstinacy or stubborn continuance in sin. The
self same thing does he also in this and the next chapter confirm, that he
might shake off from the unbelievers and such as despise those threatenings, all
security and carelesnes: take from the hypocrites all refuges and starting
holes to shroud themselves in, the which they devise to help themselves
withal: and may earnestly stir up, and give mind and courage to the godly,
of repentance, if any were left among them. Speedy punishment threatened unto
all the people in general in this chapter.
But in this chapter is foretold or rather confirmed to the whole people in
general a calamity or punishment, the which was even hard at hand, and should
presently ensue, as namely when as their notorious and heinous sin were now
waxen through ripe and mellow: but in the chapter following, unto their Temples
and Chapels the like is denounced. Why these punishments are represented by
visions and figures.
Notwithstanding in both these places or chapters this punishment is
represented or showed under visions and figures, both that the Israelites might
more diligently and earnestly attend or consider of these prophesies: and also
might the better be pierced and touched with them, albeit their hearts and
minds were never so stubborn and disobedient. Thus does God witness his good
will and care toward this people: yea and toward all disobedient persons
also, that they may understand that they do perish through their own fault,
and not through any fault in God.

Touching this verse, it contains a bare vision of a thing offered or laid
before the eyes and sight of the Prophet. And it was a basket full of fruits,
the which were now grown to their end or ripenes, and therefore to be plucked
off, A basket full of ripe fruits showed unto Amos in a vision.
and forthwith to be beaten down, as Varro speaks libr. 1. de Re rustic.
cap. 68. Those (says he, speaking of fruits) which are ripe (the which
appears by the changing of their color) if you take them not down to eat,
they show themselves ready to be thrown down. But to the end that the
resemblance and likeness of the names of ripe or summer fruits, The Latin and
English cannot express the trim resemblance of sound and letters between the
hebrew words, Kaits fruit, and Kets, the fine or end, with such a grace as
they carry in their own tongue.
and of their ripeness or ending which is in the Hebrew tongue, may in some
sort be retained and kept in the Latin, this place were to be turned thus:
Sic ostendit mihi visionem domin^^ Jehovah, nimirum ecce canistrum finalium (id
est aestiuorum) fructuum: that is: The Lord Iehoua showed me a vision thus: to
wit, behold a basket of final (that is to say summer) fruits. This word (Thus,
or So) is added and set down, that the Prophet may expressly witness, that he
does in every respect in such sort report the matter it self, as it was by GOD
offered and showed unto him. Therefore he does commend the authority of the
narration to ensue by the truth of the same, to the end it may be heard with all diligence and attention or heedfulnes, and marked, noted and considered.

Vres. 2. And he said, Amos, what see thou? And I said, a basket of summer:
Kaits.
fruit. Then said the Lord unto me, The Kets.
end is come upon my people of Israel, I will pass by them no more.
The declaration of the former vision.
THe declaration of the former vision. And this verse has three parts. First,
an interrogation, or God his asking a question of the Prophet. Secondly, the
Prophets answer unto God. Thirdly, the interpretation and exposition of the
matter made by God himself. God asks and speaks unto the Prophet, to
stir his up more diligently to behold the thing, which he shows unto him:
and so consequently to stir up the people and us also. For so weighty
visions, and so necessary for the Church of GOD are not lightly or slightly,
with a light arm or winking eyes to be looked upon or handled, but with
steadfast and heedefull eyes and minds. The Prophet answers plainly, hiding,
dissembling, ouerpassing, or adding nothing to the matter. Wherein his
faithfulness in his ministry and office is declared, like as in Paul 1. Cor.
cap. 4. ver. 12. for there he says: Let a man so think of us, as of the
ministers of Christ, and disposers of the secrets of God. As for the rest, i^
is required of the disposers, that every man be found faithful.

The declaration of this vision follows, the which shows first what is
signified by these final or ripe fruits: Secondly, to whom in especial the
signification thereof appertains. By these fruits is signified that the end
and destruction of the kingdom and people of Israel is at hand (howsoever God
before this time have taken them and cherished them for his people) because
that unto them especially belongs this signification of the end, 1 The
s^gnificatio^ of this vision.
2 It concerns the whole people of Israel.
or destruction. So before cap. 7. ver. 7. and 8. in the vision of God standing
upon a wall, and with a plumming line in his hand, the same vision did
concern the Israelites in general. But by this similitude of final, or
summer fruits, not only destruction is showed unto this people: but also the
neerenes and speedines of the punishment to come is noted, that these fellows
should not think that they should long be borne withal at the hand of God. A
reason why they shall finally and speedily be destroyed.
(I will pass by them no more) ^n these words there is a reason yielded, why
this final and utter destruction hangs over their heads, and that
immediately and out of hand to ensue and fall upon this people, to wit, because
GOD has decreed and determined no more henceforth and hereafter to forgive
the^ any of their sins either to come or also already past. For so much do
these words ( I will not add to pass by them, or, I will not pass by them
any more) signify, that is, I will not pardon or forgive them, as Tullie
speaks. For to pardon or forgive, is to pass over the punishment of a fault,
Epist. 15. ad M. Brutum: to wit, as if such sin of the men, whom we pardon
and forgive, were unknown unto us. So to pretermit and ouerpasse, is taken
for, to leave untouched and unpunished, as Mat. 26. ver. 39. where Christ
prays unto his Father: if it be possible, let this cuppasse from me, he
means, Let not this punishment or death touch me. Let me not suffer it, let
me be pardoned of it. So in the seventh chapter of this Prophet before, and
ver. 8. when God says, And I will pass by them no more, he means: I will
spare them no more, I will not forgive them any more.

Verse. 3. And the songs of the Temple shall be howlings in that day, says the
Lord God: many dead bodies shall be in every place: they shall cast them
forthwith silence.
The amplfication of these threatenings.
THe amplification of these threatenings by the adioynts. For the judgment of
God against the Israelites shall be so great, the which the Prophet declares
unto them, that both their Temples shall be utterly forsaken: and also that the
songs and worships now done in them, shall afterward be howlings, because that
they shall quite cease, and shall not be exercised, or heard any more. Finally,
there shall be an infinite number of the slain and dead bodies of the
Israelites, in every part of their kingdom, the which notwithstanding no man
shall openly burye and with mourning, but shall do it holding his peace and
still, whosoever he be that out of so great a number and slaughter of them
shall pick out some and bury them. And by thrs amplification is taken from
them all the aid the which they looked for from their gods, Temples, and
religious worship, and there is foretold unto them an exceeding great plague
and massacre, or slaughter of the people of Israel, the which shall be in every
quarter. Last of all there shall be in them all great fear and trembling by
reason of their enemies, the which GOD shall send upon them, they shall be so
horrible and fearful, and the Israelites so quailed and daunted in their
hearts and courage.

Verse. 4. Hear this, Oye that swallow up the poor, that ye may make the
needy of the Land to fail.
The figure Apostrophe, or turning of speech, which is when as we changeour
talk from those to whom we spoke unto some other person or thing either present
or absent, as in in this place, from the former punishment unto the wicked
livers deserving the same.
AN Apostrophe, or turning of his speech unto the wicked ones, whereby he does
earnestly stir up and reprove all lewd livers: but especially the covetous
and cruel persons among this people, the which did devour, spoil and oppress
the poor through great subtilty and unmerciful dealing, the which did spring
from th^^ insatiable or vnfilable covetousness. This verse therefore does set
forth the sum or effect of this their cruelty and covetousness, and the verse
following shows the kinds and manner of them both. Therefore these men are
called and as it were cited by name to hear these threatenings of God. And in
this place both these vices of cruelty and covetousness is painted forth in them
to be notorious in that they do not only look for the goods and wealth and
substance of the poor and needy, and those even their brethren: but that they
also do labor with all their might and maine to spoil them. And this they
do after such a sort, that by their wills they would not now have any of
their poor brethren to be left alive, but that they should be all consumed. As
if forsooth these jolly fellow through their overmuch cruelty and covetousness
did utterly dece^^ and abhor the poor, who are their brethren, and the image
of God himself. See whither in the end avarice and covetousness does draw and
carry us.

Verse. 5. Saying, When will the new month be gone, that we may sell corn? and
the Sabbath, that we may set forth wheat, and make the Ephah small, and the
shekle great, and falsify the weights by deceit?
The making more plain of that which went before.
AN explanation or making more plain of that which went before, by the which
the kinds of deceits and cruelty practiced and devised by the rich against
their poor and needy brethren, are reckoned up, and declared. And in this
place there are rehearsed four. The first, 1. They think much to refrain
from traffic on the Sabbath, and feast days.
That these insatiable or never filled covetous wretches could not away with so
much as the Sabbath and new moons (that is, feast days at that time of the
moon holden) because that on those days they ceased from merchandise and
traffic, that is, from their deceits and use of buying and selling. For they
complayn, that there are too many holy days, and that they are held too long,
because that in all that time they could have no gains, norsell any thing.
This was in those days notorious covetousness, and also is at this day, when as
men find fault that the worship and service of God does take from them
occasions and commodities of lucre and gain, and that the times appointed by
the word of God for this matter are too long, and nothing but idle ceasings
from worldly business. The second kind, They did diminish and lessen the
public or common weights, 2. They did lessen the common weightes, not in the
weights themselves, but in making too little weight and measure in their wares.
because they would not make so good weight in selling and measuring of their
wares, as by the common weights they ought, but would give less weight then
was meet, the which notwithstanding so lessened and curtold, they would have to
be taken for good and lawful, and to be counted for full measure of their
wares. This also is notorious covetousness, the which does falsify and corrupt
the common weights, so far as it may. The third kind is, that they do
increase the price of the coin within themselves, 3. They raise the price of
the coin.
to make it to be of more valewe then it ought. Therefore when ought is to be
paid unto them by the poor man, or him that is their debtor, they will have
more paid them in money for a crown, then three pound french. They would have
the Floren among the Merchants to be of more value then twenty Souses. They
allege for themselves, that the price or value of the coin is risen since
the time that they sold their wares, or since the poor men received that
money. The fourth kind is, Their shameless corrupting, 4. They do make the
common weights less the^ they ought to be.
or changing of the common weights and measures, the which they did by
subtlety and false dealing. For those former falsifiers of the weights did
keep the rates of the common weights just, but they would not deliver so much
in weight and measure. But these fellows did subtillie falsify the common
weights in making of them less, and yet would show them for just and true
weights. This also is shameless covetousness.

Verse. 6. That we may buy the poor for silver, and the needy for sh^^^ yea
and sell the refuse of the wheat.
Sundry kinds of their cruelty.
AS before he set down sundry kinds of covetousness, so do he here reckon up
diverse kinds of their cruelty, and the same also joined with covetousness.
The first, for that they would for their money buy unto themselves the poor
man, 1. They bought the poor for money, like bruit beasts.
and have him t^ be their own after such sort, as they did buy any bruit
beast. Ye^ these were both men, and also their brethren, whom therefore it was
not lawful for them to buy in such sort. And therefore they might not by the
law of God use those of their own nation, wh^^ they bought for their money, in
such sort as they might other servants that were strangers, but were after
certain years to let th^^ go out free, as it is Exodus 21. ver. 2. etc. If
thou buy an Hebrew s^^uant, he shall serve six years, and in the seventh he
shall go out fr^^ for nothing. 2. They bought them for a matter of nothing.
The second, for that they bought, or would buy thee for a most vile and low
price, as for a pair of shoes, that is, for a matter of nothing; for the which
value they could not buy at any (...) his hand so much as a poor dog, or
silie sheep: so great doubtless was their cruelty and unmercifulness, that they
made (...) much account of men, yea and those their brethren also, as they did
of the basest and smallest cattle. 3. They used false dealing with their wares
in corrupting the same.
The third kind is, for that they used very bad and false dealing in the
delivery of the ware and ^^^ter, which they sold or gave, to wit, they did
mix and mingle together the soil and refuse with the grain in the barn, and
(...) sell this mixture or medlie in stead of the good and sound come the which
by bargain and promise they were to deliver, wherewith the men that bought it
were not nourished. Therefore like there was in them notorious covetousness,
so was there also op^^ cruelty and deceit. By this occasion let our Merchant
men of (...) times consider how they deal, and with what faithfulness and
vprightnes they do sell their wares, least that they also come with the
compass of these threatenings.

Verse. 7. The Lord has sworn by the excellency of Iaacob, surely I will
never forget any of their works.
Two parts of this verse.
THe threatening of a most grievous punishment, the which is afterward declared.
As for this verse it has two parts: namely, the threatening it self, and the
confirmation of the threatening. 1. A threatening.
The threatening is, That God will not afterward forget these their wicked
deeds, and so lewd works, like as before (whilst that he spares them, and
tarrieth for them and their repentance) he seems to have forgotten them: but
he will in the end punish them all most sharply, keeping the bedroule and
number of them in his mind, as has bin showed before in the second verse of
this chapter. So in the second of Malach ver. 17. the Lord shows that he
remembers the speeches of the wicked, when as they by their bold answer seem
to think that he has nothing to charge them withal. For thus in that place
says the Prophet: Ye have wearied the Lord with your words: yet ye say:
wherein have we wearied him? when ye say, every one that does evil, is good in
the sight of the Lord, and he delights in them. Or, where is the God of
judgment? And in his third chapter ver. 16. he does in plain words teach us,
that God keeps a book of remembrance of those that do fear him, that he
may recompense them in the end, though for a time they seem to be forgotten:
Then spoke they that feared the Lord, (says Malachie) every one to his
neighbor, and the Lord hearkened, and heard it: and abooke of remembrance was
written before him for them that feared the Lord, and that thought upon his
name. And David Psalm. 130. ver. 3. shows that none is able to abide it, if
God enter into a strait reckoning with him for his misdoings: saying, If thou,
O Lord, straightly markest iniquities, O Lord, who shall stand? And therefore Psalm.
32. ver. 1. he pronounces him an happy man that is not called to this sharp
reckoning, as the wicked ones that are unrepentant in their sinning shall be,
where he writes: Blessed is he whose wickedness is forgiven, and whose sin is
covered. After what manner God is said to remember, and to forget.
But touching this that here the Lord is said (not to forget) it is to be
noted, that remembrance and forgetfulness are in the holy Scripture attributed
unto God by a certain Anthropopathia, that is, by ascribing unto him for our
capacity and better understanding, such affections as are in man.

2. The confirmation of the threatening.
The confirmation of the former threatening is contained in the oath, the which in
this place is expreslie set down by God, that these hypocrites or rebels should
not think that these were but vain and bare words, and childish feare-bugs.
And God swears here in this place by the excellency of Iaacob, that is, by
all the privileges and prerogatives which he had given unto them, wherewith
they did excel the other nations of the world in happiness both heavenly, and
earthly. This excellency is set out by Paul Romans 3. ver. 1.2. What is then the
preferment of the Jew? or what is the profit of circumcision? Much every manner
of way (answers he:) for chiefly, because unto them were committed the
Oracles of God. And again Romans 9. ver. 4.5. he reckons up a great many of
them, showing, That unto them pertains the adoption, and the glory, and the
covenants, and the giving of the law, and the promises. Of whom (...) the
fathers, and of whom concerning the flesh, Christ came, who is God over all
blessed for ever. Before chap. 6. ver. 8. God swear by himself. The name of
Jacob is here recited, because that he, and also his posterity was preferred
before Esau and his seed, of the mere or only favor of God toward the
Israelites, and also Jacob himself, as it is witnessed Malach. cap. 1. ver.
2.3. Was not Esau Jacobs brother, says the Lord? yet I loved Jacob, and I
hated Esau, and made his mountains waste, and his heritage a wilderness for
dragons.

Ver. 8. Shall not the land tremble for this, and every one mourn that
dwells therein? And it shall rise up wholly as a flood, and it shall be cast
out, and drowned as by the flood of Egypt.
The amplifying of the former sins.
THe exaggeration or making greater of the former sins, whereby the punishment
which shall hereafter be denounced or threatened, may appear to be the more
just. But in this verse both the manner of speaking, and also the thing it
self which is spoken, is to be considered. 1. The manner of speaking to be
considered.
The manner of speaking is an interrogatice or asking of a question continued
for a good space, wherewith the Prophet pricketh the consciences of them, and
brings forth the land it self for a witness against their obstinacy and
stubbor^^^^ and shows the equity of this punishment. 2. The thing it self
the it is spoken.
Touching the thing it self which is spoken, it briefly tends unto this end,
that these fellows might understand that their works are so abominable and
lewd (howsoever they do flatter themselves, and sleep in the same) that they
are worthy of any kind of punishment whatsoever, not only private, but also
public, and not only against the men themselves, but also against the very
sole and earth, whereupon they dwelled, and committed those same sins. For by
reason of the sins of men God destroys or punishes the earth and land it
self, the which was the seat of those sins, as is witnessed Psalm. 107. ver.
33.34. He turns the floods into a wilderness, The earth punished for the
sins of the dwellers therein.
and the springs of waters into dryness, and a fruitful land into barrenness,
for the wickedness of them that dwell therein. So Genesis 3. ver. 17. for the
sin of Adam God curses the earth, saying: Cursed is the earth for thy sake:
in sorrow shall thou eat of it all the days of thy life. Wherefore God
teaches that their sins do deserve, that their whole land should be full of
tumult and hurliburlie, and that all their affairs should be turmoyled and
troubled, and turned vpside down, that both the inhabitants of the land
themselves, and the committers of these sins, and also others should mourn.
Finally, that their whole land should be drowned with waters, and ouerflowed,
like as their wickedness has ouerflowed in it. And this ouerflowing he
compares with that of Egypt, not in this respect, that the river Nilus by his
ouerflowing does make the land and country fruitful: but in this, that his
water being conveyed into the land, does chase and drive away all the
inhabitants from their places and homes, and brings in a foul and evil
favored shape and sight upon the land, such as appears after a great flood
and ouerflowing of waters, the land remaining slimie and muddie after the same.
So hereafter cap. 9. ver. 5. this same comparison is used again.

Verse. 9. And in that day, says the Lord God, I will even cause the Sun to
go down at noone: and I will darken the earth in the clear day.
A description of the punishment the which should fall upon them.
A Description of the punishment that was to ensue upon them, first by a
similitude taken from such a thing as is wont to bring upon men exceeding
fear, and does contain a most great sharpnes and bitterness of the punishment.
And by this means God of his great loving kindness unto mankind, would rouse
up these fellows snorting in their sins, that we might understand how
patiently and lovingly God deals with us, and therefore that we should
confess our selves to be the less excusable. The similitude
The similitude is this, That God will cause the Sun to go down at noone
day: or (as is added for more plainnes sake) he will bring darkness upon them in
the clear day. Therefore these evils shall fall upon them both beyond their
expectation or looking for (because they believed not the word and threatenings
of God) as it fell out unto them, who obeyed not the admonitions or warnings of
Noah Matthew. 24. ver. 38. but following the lusts of their flesh in eating and
drinking marrying, and giving in marriage, until the flood came suddain^^ upon
them, were drowned in the same: and they shall fall upon them as punishments
and most grievous plagues and troubles (...) storms and tempests, the which
do make the Sun dark unto us at noone day. What the figure called a
Metaphor is, see Amos cap. 4 ver. 12.
The same Metaphor or borrowed speech is used i^ the second chapter of Joel.
Thus then this similitude of the Sun and of darkness does signify both
these things, that is to say, both great punishments, and the same also
sudden and unlooked for.

Verse. 10. And I will turn your feasts into mournings, and all you songs into
lamentation: and I will bring sackcloth upon all loyes, and baldnes upon every
head: and I will make it as the mourning of an only son, and the end thereof
as a bitter day.
A description of this punishment without any Metaphor.
A Plain description of the same punishment without any Metaphor, the which is
painted or laid forth to be most lamentable, in holy matters, in politic
matters: in public and private m^^er in the beginning and in the end of the
punishment and mise^^e. For these three things does this verse briefly show.
1. In holy and politic matters.
First, it shows the punishment in holy matters, and in matters politic,
because their public and common assemblies, their holy solemnities and the^^
songs shall be turned into mourning both inward, and also ^^ward: also it
shows public affliction or punishment, in that the backs of all men in
stead of clothing, shall be covered with sackcloth: the heads of al men in
stead of natural hair shall be corred with baldnes, the which shall befall
them through sorrow and grief. 2. In private.
The private misery it declares hereby, that al shall mou^^ as if every one in
particular did bewail his only begotten some Lastly, 3. In the end.
it shows that the end of this misery shall be most lamestable, whereas it
is said (the end of them) shall be continual persiuenes, and sorrow of mind,
wherein they shall wax old and (...) For these ten Tribes of the kingdom of
Israel, carried away by the Assyrians, did never afterward return again into
the promised land. Therefore they perished and rotted in that their misery.

Verse. 11. Behold, the days come, says the Lord God, that I will send a famine
in the land, not a famine of bread, nor a thirst for water, but of hearing the
word of the Lord.
An amplification of the former punishment by an especial effect ensuing of
the same.
AN amplification of this punishment described before, by an especial effect,
the which shall follow of the same, namely, That those which shall also be then
left in their own country, together with those which shall be carried away
into strange lands, shall want the most true food and comfort of their
souls, that is to say, the preaching of the word of God. And to the end that
some weight may be added unto this threatening, God rehearses that he himself,
who threatens the same, is the Lord of all things, and that same Jehovah the
creator of all things, most known unto them. Two things in this verse.
And this verse contains a description both of the Time and also of the
matter. Concerning the time, these words, (Behold, the days come) do
declare that it will presently come to pass. 1. The time of this misery.
For they signify, that those days are by and by at hand. So then the misery
the which is in this verse told of, did both follow after the captivity of
this nation, and also went before it. For the Israelites wanted also the
preaching of the word of God before their exile and captivity, and carrying
away by the Assyrians. 2. The matter it self.
As for the matter then or the effect, it is here set down to be horrible and
fearful: The bereauing them of the pure and outward preaching of the word of
God, the which the Israelites feeling before hand the evils hanging over their
heads, or now already suffering them, longed after in vain, and a little
before their captivity, and also in their captivity.

The greatness of the misery to want the true preaching of the word showed by a
reason taken from a comparison.
Further, by an argument taken from a comparison, it is showed, how great a
punishment and heavy a judgment of God against men fed before with the word
of God, it is to be left without the pure and outward preaching of his holy
word, as it is said Psalm. 74. ver. 9. where the faithful complain of this
great misery of wanting the food of the word, saying: We see not our signs:
there is not one Prophet more, nor any with us that knows how long. First,
therefore in this comparing of the food of the word with the food of the
body, the greatness of the misery in wanting the same is declared in this,
that it is called (a famine:) Secondly, 1. A famine.
in that as it is in deed, so it is also said to be greater then the Famine of
the body, be it never so great, that is to say, wherein we utterly want both
meat, and also water, having not so much as it to quench our thi^^^ withal.
Two Sects of Heretakes.
These things are of great force against the Schuenfeldians and Anabaptists,
which contemn or despise the outward ministry of the gospel.

Verse. 12. And they shall wander from sea, to sea, and from the North even to
the East shall they run to and fro, to seek the word of the Lord, and shall
not find it.
Hypotyposis is a figure, whereby we do so lively express and set out the
doing of a thing, that it may rather be thought to be seen to be done, then
to be told, as is in this place, their maruailous endeavor to find the word
of God by travailing far and near, from sea to sea, from coast to coast, from
all quarters, places, and countries, etc.
BY a certain Hypotyposis or lively demonstration, he sets or unto them the
most lamentable sorrow, and exceeding great misery of this effect, or
punishment threatened unto them: for he shows and declares, how great then
shall be their endeavor and diligence in seeking of the word of God, the which
notwithstanding they shall not thereby find, nor enjoy the same. Their
diligence therefore and earnestnes is described, for that they shall seek it
from the Syrian sea, unto the Arabian sea, and in every quarter and coast of
their own country, in the East, in the West in the North, in the South.
Secondly, for that they shall traile after it as it were by the foot, that is,
they shall very narrowly and thoroughly search and peer into every place, and
yet shall not any where find the word of God. For when as God offered himself
unto them, they did despise him. But God and his word must the be accepted of,
when as it is offered unto us. And therefore (...) counsels us very
excellently to this end cap. 55. ver. 6. saying^ Seek ye the Lord while he may
be found: call ye upon him while he i^nere. Neither makes the place of
Matthew any thing here against cap. 7. ver. 7. Seek, and ye shall find. For
whilst men do in such (...) seek God and his word, as in this place is spoken
of: they seek him rather for their own sake, then for true fear of God,
namely that they may have some comfort: not that they have any min^^ to serve
and worship God simply and for himself, but in regard of some fear of hurt
or peril toward themselves. And therefore Christ checketh the multitude, for
that they rather sought him because he filled their bellies, then of love
toward his miracles, John 6. ver. 26. in these words: Verily, verily, I say
unto you, ye seek (...) not, because ye saw the miracles, but because ye did
eat of the loa^es and were filled. There is a like place to this 12. ver. of
this Prophet, Ierem. cap. 14. ver. 12. in the which, as here God tells them,
that seeking for the word of God they shall not find it (to wit because they
sought it not aright) so there he shows that he will not accept of their
prayer and sacrifice, for that they were not done in true faith, but for some
other sinister or wrong and bad respect. The words be these: When they fast, I
will not hear their cry, and when they offer burnt offerings, and an
oblation, I will not accept them: but I will consume them by the sword, and by
the famine, and by the pestilence.

Verse. 13. In that day shall the fair Virgins and the young men perish for
thirst.
The conclusion.
THe conclusion, None shall be spared: for the Virgins themselves, (be they never
so dear unto all persons, because of their comlines and beauty of their
faces) shall perish for thirst, not now for the thirst of their soul and of
the word of God, but through the thirst of their body. The th^^st of the body
also threatened.
For in this place the Lord does threaten unto them another thirst also. In
like manner shall their young men, which can bear and endure thirst a long
season, dye notwithstanding for lack of drink. For both these sexes to wit
young men, and maidens, because that they are moist, are wont to endure thirst
longer then elder persons, but in this time they shall perish for want of
drink. Finally, no kind of men, howsoever otherwise excepted from common
miseries, shall then be delivered from these most just judgments of God.

Verse. 14. They that swear by the sin of Samaria, and that say, Thy God, O
Dan lives, and the manner of Beersheba lives, even they shall fall, and never
rise up again.
A reason of their former punishment.
THe rendering of a reason with the repeating again and rehearsing of the former
punishment, to the end that these may be the more moved, and believe. The cause
of their punishment is the mere idolatry of these men. For they bestow the
honor of the true God upon idols: for we are to swear by the name and majesty
of the true God only. But these fellows by their idols of Samaria, and of
Beth-el. The repetition and conclusion of the punishment is: Therefore they
shall utterly perish. For they shall fall, and never rise again.

CAP. 9.
Verse. 1. I saw the Lord standing upon the altar, and he said: Smite the
lintle of the door, that the posts may shake: and cut them in pieces, even
the heads of them all, and I will slay the last of them with the sword: he
that flees of them, shall not fly away: and he that escapes of them shall
not be delivered.
The last Sermon of Amos.
THe last prophecy and Sermon of Amos, the which confirms unto the Israelites
the same, which God had threatened unto them before, namely, that the utter
destruction of this kingdom is at hand. Therefore does this threatening also
properly belong unto the kingdom of Israel. And God by so many ways, and at
so many several times avouches and foretells unto them one and the same
thing, to take away all excuse from the Rebels and hypocrites. But concerning
this Sermon and prophecy, the same also is represented and showed by a vision,
that it may the rather move the minds of the readers and hearers, and that by
the offering and laying before them of a strange and unwonted form and manner
of the matter, he might bring them in fear, and make them attentive or ready
to hear. And the peculiar and especial end of this prophecy and sermon is
to show, That God will take from the Israelites, all their safest and surest
aids and starting holes as they thought, the which they placed especially,
and chiefly in their idols, and idol places, that is in the temples of their
idols. And therefore God shows in this place, like as before, that he will
overthrow them, and that they the Israelites shall come into great misery and
utter destruction because of their wickedness.

Two parts of this verse.
Further, this verse has two parts, to wit, a vision, and the exposition of
the same made by God himself the expounder thereof. The vision was after this
manner: 1. A vision.
God stood upon a certain altar, and commanded the vaulte or archroofe of the
temple, in which that altar was, to be smitten, yea and moreover, the posts
(whereupon both that arch-roofe and temple rested) to be pulled down, and
every post from the top to the foot, to be cut and divided by the middle,
so that every post might fall down. These things were represented or showed
unto this Prophet neither in Jerusalem, nor yet in the Temple of Solomon, but
at Beth-el, where then Amos conuersed or abode, as before cap. 7. Yea and in
the altar and Temple of Beth-el, not that God by that his presence did
countenance or allow those places (the which were mere idolatry) but that he
coming into the thing present, and drawing his Prophet also thereinto, and
unto the consideration thereof, he might the rather, and more assuredly show
unto these superstitious persons, being such also as put great trust and
confidence in their idol of Beth-el, that God would at once take all these
things from them, and therefore that they did in vain flee unto this both
temple and altar. So 1. King. 13. God bids the Prophet to go even unto the
idolatrous altar of Beth-el, that he might with his finger point out the
destruction of the same, not to show that he made any account or reckoning of
that altar, albeit that for the altars sake he sent his Prophet even unto
Beth-el. Neither is it a thing any more absurd or contrary to reason, that God
should be seen on this idolatrous altar, then afterward in the temple of
Solomon, when as it was profaned or defiled exceedingly, of which apparition of
God in the Temple of God then greatly polluted see Ezech. cap. 1. for in that
he appears upon this impure altar, this is only done to show the more
assured destruction thereof: not that thereby any dignity or reverence might
be woune unto this Altar. And this is my judgment and opinion of the first
part of this verse.

2. The exposition of this vision.
The second part is the exposition of this same vision, the which in sum and
briefly comes unto this point, that none shall be saved out of this
calamity or misery, although he flee away never so much, or seek to withdraw
himself, or do trust in those temples and idols, as most safe couertes, and
most sure and strong defenses. For (to be after the posts or behinds the
posts) as it is in the Hebrew, is to be hidden, and to repose for themselves,
or to put great confidence and trust of saftie in those couertes.

Verse. 2. Though they dig into hell, thence shall mine hand take them: though
they clime up to heaven, thence will I bring them down.
A confirmation of the former threatening.
A Confirmation of the former threatening by removing and taking away of their
safest and surest aids and places of refuge. For those men use to seek for
either in heaven, or in earth: and the most safe are thought to be in the top
of heaven, or in the bottom and deep of the earth, whither the enemies cannot
come, or the which are not wont to be searched and sought into. But even there
or in these places these men shall have no couerts to hide themsclues in. For
the hand of God, which is every where, will draw them from thence and give
them unto their enemies. Thus much also does David confess of God his mighty
power and presence, showing that there is no man that can any where so hide
himself, but that he will easily find him out, when he says, Psalm. 139.
verse. 7.8. Whither shall I go from thy Spirit? Or whither shall I flee from
thy presence? If I ascend into heaven, thou art there: if I lie down in hell,
thou art there. And so forth, verse. 9, 10, 11, 12.

Verse. 3. And though they hide themselves in the top of Carmel, I will search
and take them out thence: and though they be hid from my sight in the bottom
of the sea, thence will I command the serpent, and he shall bite them.
An amplification of the former removing of aids from them.
AN amplification of the said removing and taking away of aid spoken of in the
second verse, to the end that these rebellious persons might thoroughly resolve
and persuade themselves, that nothing can privilege them from the wrath and
judgment of God, and keep them in safety and out of danger from the same.
And here are other things reckoned up, unto the which men use and are wont to
flee and betake themselves, as unto safe couerts to hide themselves in, namely
the tops of most high mountains such as is the top of Mount Carmel: and the
deep of the sea it self. But even from thence also God shall cast them out and
deliver them to be spoiled and murdered of their enemies. For from the bottom
of the sea shall Snakes or Serpents be raised up of God, the which shall bite
these fellows, and with their venomous or poisoned teeth drive them from the
waters even whether they will or no.

Verse. 4. And though they go into captivity before their enemies, thence will
I command the sword, and it shall slay them: and I will set mine eyes upon
them for evil, and not for good.
Two parts of this verse.
THis verse contains 2. parts. The first, wherein is comprehended yet another
amplification of the removing of the former aides. The second, 1. Another
amplification of the removing of the former aids.
in the which is a conclusion of this removing of the^. The second
amplification of the removing of the former aids is contained in these words,
(And though they go into captivity before their enemies, thence will I
command the sword, and it shall slay them) For God shows that these men
shall not mitigate or lessen their punishment, albeit they willingly yield
themselves unto their enemies, that by this means they might escape their
death and murder. For whilst they shall yield up themselves, and that
willingly and of their own accord, unto the will and pleasure of the
conqueror, and shall go into captivity, yet shall they by the way be killed
with the sword, by the said conqueror their enemy. So speaks Isay of the
cruelty of the Medes and Persians toward the Babylonians, though they yield
themselves and join with them cap. 13. ver. 15. Every one that is found shall
be stricken through: and whosoever joins himself, shall fall by the sword.
And ver. 16. Their children also shall be broken in pieces before their eyes,
their houses shall be spoiled, and their wives ravished. Likewise does God
threaten his own people that they shall both go into captivity, and even there
also be consumed by the sword of their enemies. Ierem. 9 cap. ver. 16. I will
scatter them also among the Heathen, whom neither they, nor their fathers have
known, and I will send a sword after them, till I have consumed them. The very
like is cap. 49. ver. 37. and almost in the same words. For he that by God is
appointed unto the sword, because of his notorious sins must needs perish
with the sword, and shall not be able to deliver himself by captivity or
voluntary and willing yielding. And thus does God show Ierem. cap. 43. ver.
11. that the Egyptians the which should fall into the hands of Nabuchad-nezzar
shall die every one that death whereunto he is appointed, saying: And when he
shall come (to wit Nabuchad-nezzar) he shall smite the land of Egypt: such as
are appointed for death, to death: and such as are for captivity, to captivity:
and such as are for the sword, to the sword. By the which is now gathered, that
men which are stubborn, and hardened in their sins shall not any where be safe
and free from the wrath of God, neither in heaven, nor in earth, nor in the
sea: Finally, neither in their country, neither among their enemies: neither
fighting it out, neither yielding themselves captives, shall they escape that
just punishment. They must therefore repent.

2. The conclusion of this removing of their aids.
Now the conclusion of this removing of their aides, follows, and is taken
from the rendering of a reason of the same, to wit, from the just anger of God
against them. There shall therefore be no place, in the which they shall not
be in misery, because God (who with his eyes vieweth all things) shall not do
any thing for their good, nor have any loving care of them: but shall devise
and dispose and ordain all things for their destruction. The eye of the Lord
shall be upon them unto evil, and that wholly and in all cases: and he shall
no where look upon them for their good, or lovingly.

Verse. 5. And the Lord God of hosts shall touch the land, and it shall melt
away, and all that dwell therein shall mourn, and it shall rise up wholly like
a flood, and shall be drowned as by the flood of Egypt.
The confirmation of the former conclusion by three effects.
THe confirmation of the conclusion by the event or issue and falling out of
things afterward. For God shall manifestly appear angry and offended by the
effects that shall follow, with these Israelites. And these effects are three.
The first, There shall be so great a smiting or affliction of this land, 1 The
punishment of the earth it self.
that even the very earth it self, which is a brute and dull or dead element
shall tremble and shake, feeling this curse and anger of God against it. In
which fearful manner God powered forth his vengeance and tokens of his worthily
incensed fury upon the land of the Egyptians, at what time he delivered his
own people thence, the horriblenes whereof is at large described Psalm. 114.
ver. 3, 4, 7, 8. after this manner: The Sea saw it and fled: Jordan was turned
back. The mountains leaped like rams, and the little hills as lambs? The earth
trembled at the presence of the Lord, at the presence of the God of Jacob,
which turns the rock into water pools, 2 And universal Mourning of all the
inahbitants.
and the flint into a fountain of water. The second, The great and common or
universal mourning of the men or inhabitants themselves, the which shows
that this punishment is sent of God, and shall be general, and exceeding
great. For all shall mourn, none being excepted, no not the stoutest hearts,
or the most mighty, unto the which the miseries of the common sort do not
easily and usually reach. The third is, The wastnes and deformity of the land
it self after the driving out of all the inhabitants, 3. The laying of the
land wast.
as if the whole land were covered and drowned with waters, and so consequently
untilled and desolate or lying waste like a wilderness. Read chap. 8. before
ver. 8.

Verse. 6. He builds his spheres in the heaven, and has laid the foundation
of his globe of elements in the earth he calls the waters of the sea, and
powers them out upon the open earth: the Lord is his name.
THe second confirmation of the said conclusion and misery to ensue upon the
Israelites taken from the person of him that threatens the same, to wit of God
himself, The second co^firmatio^ of the former conclusion.
who is both true and almighty, that is, which has power over all things,
whom nothing can withstand, who according to his pleasure (and yet the same
very just) changes and ouerturneth when him pleases, the nature and course
and state of things. Finally, who gives unto all things their being, which
are, and have a being. A description of God his omnipotency by the effects of
the same, to wit.
Therefore this verse contains a royal description of the omnipotency, or
almighty power of God, partly by the effects, and partly by his name Jehovah,
that is everlasting in himself, and giving unto al things life and strength.
The effects are of two sorts. First, the Creation of all things of nothing, 1.
The creation of all things. Synecdoche, what it is, see Amos cap. 5. ver. 2^.
contained under the word (Heaven) by the figure Synecdoche. Therefore God
created the heaven, of how long soever space and manifold stretching out it do
consist, as it were of diverse lower roumes and upper roumes. The which heaven
also he made most firm: and also hanging over the earth. And both these
things, to wit, the Creation of the heaven, and also the firmnes of the same is
both a great miracle, and also a notable work and witness of the
omnipotency, or almighty power of God.

2. The power and rule of God over all creatures.
The second effect of his almighty power, is the rule and authority of GOD over
the things created, the which at his beck and pleasure he changes, and
establishes: for example whereof there is in this place reckoned up the
ouerflowing of the Sea into the maine land, and the drowning of the same, as it
sometime fell out in the universal flood, and has also often afterward since
that time fallen out, and does even yet in some places at this day come to
pass, as it did in Holland and Friezland some threescore years since, nay
not past twenty years agone, as may be understood by the Chronicle and history
of those countries, for in those places many countries have been drowned with
waters.

Verse. 7. Are ye not as the Ethiopians unto me, o children of Israel, says the
Lord? Have not I brought up Israel out of the land of Egypt? and the
Philistims from Caphtor, and Aram from Kir?
A Third confirmation from the person of those whom God speaks unto, A third
confirmation of this misery from the person of the Israelites.
who, so far forth as they are considered in themselves, are in no further
regard and account before God then other nations. Therefore God will no more
spare them then other peoples, as the Ethiopians or Arabians, whom the Lord
spared not for the same sins, being angry with them. Wherefore to make them
know their original, and first estate and pedigree, he tells them by his
Prophet Ezechiel cap. 16. ver. 3. Thine habitation and thy kindred is of the
land of Canaan: thy father was an Amorite, and thy mother a Hittite. And so
does Joshua also show them cap. 24. ver. 2. where he says unto them: Your
fathers dwelt beyond the flood in old time, even Terah the father of Abraham,
and the father of Nachor, What Hypophora is, see Antos cap. 5. ver. 21. The
Hypophora or objections of the Israelites might be: we were removed from Egypt
of God his especial favor, therefore he will not punish us.
and served other gods. But there is added in this verse a secret Hypophora, or
answering beforehand of an objection that might be made, least, because God
upon especial favor brought them out of Egypt, they might think that
therefore it was lawful for them to do any thing, and that when they sin,
they have an especial privilege before any other people. The Lord indeed of
his special grace brought them out of the land of Egypt, and slew mighty
kings for their sakes, and as it is in the Psalm 135. ver. 12.13.14. He gave
their land for an inheritance, even an inheritance unto Israel his people. For
the which the Psalmist highly extolleth the name of the Lord immediately, and
says: Thy name, O Lord, endures for ever, O Lord thy remembrance is from
generation togeneration. For the Lord will judge his people, and be pacified
toward his servants. The answer of God is, that this follows not. Because he
spares not other nations in their sins, whom he removed out of their own
land, as well as them.
But the Prophet Amos here answers, that GOD brought other people, as well as
he did them, yea and such as were their neighbors, from one country into an
other, whose sins notwithstanding he did not therefore leave unrevenged and
unpunished, as they themselves with their eyes do see. And these people which
in this place he speaks of, are first the Philistims, whom GOD caused to
remove from Cappadocia into a country near unto the Jews. So also did he
sometimes bring Aram, that is the Syrians, who themselves are borderers
likewise unto the Jews. So also did he sometimes bring Aram, that is the
Syrians, who themselves are borderers likewise unto the Jews, from the city
Kyr, or Cyr, or Cyrus into Syria. Of this removing of nations something is
spoken not impertinent unto this place Deuteronomy. 2. ver. 23. for there Moses
shows how the Anims the old inhabitants of the land of the Philistines, were
driven out by the Caphtorims, which are now the new Philistines, and had their
original from Caphtor a town in Cappadocia, who came and dwelled in their
steads.

Verse. 8. Behold, the eyes of the Lord God are upon the sinful kingdom, and I
will destroy it clean out of the earth. Nevertheless I will not utterly
destroy the house of Iaacob, says the Lord.
A fourth confirmation both from the justice, and also the providence of God.
Parts of this verse.
A Fourth confirmation, both from the justice of God, and also from his
providence, the which is contained in a very notable and excellent common
saying. And the providence of God is described herein, for that God does behold
the means and doings of all kingdoms. His justice, in that he punishes
unjust kingdoms, and in the end destroys them. But this verse has two
parts. The one, in the which this confirmation is declared. The other, the
which comprehe^deth as it were an exception of this sentence in the kingdom of
Judah. 1. The confirmation it self.
As touching the declaration of the sentence or threatenings, there are two
things in the same to be noted. First, 2. An exception from the same. Two parts
of the confirmation.
that not only certain small or light punishments are in this place threatened
unto whole kingdoms, but also, that their desolation and laying waste, yea and
finally their utter ruin and overthrow is here foretold. Secondly, that this
punishment is threatened unto all ungodly and sinful kingdoms, that is to say,
1. Utter ruin.
in the which the contempt of God and injustice do raunge without punishment
and scotfree. For how great and flourishing soever they are, 2. To sinful
kingdoms.
yet God is more mighty then they, and therefore he will utterly destroy them.
And so does God threaten Isai. 60. ver. 12. The kingdom that will not serve
me, shall perish, says the Lord. But there is an exception added concerning
the kingdom of Judah peculiarly, The exception touching the kingdom of Judah.
not to the end the bridle should be let loose unto that kingdom and people
for to sin, (for God has most sharply punished the sins of this kingdom
also:) but to show the singular and especial favor of God toward that
kingdom above the rest, because of the covenant, and the Messiah promised unto
the same. The which benefit of God, other people at that time wanted, and were
without; according^y as it is in the Psalm. 147. ver. 20. He has not dealt so
with every nation, neither have they known his judgments.

Verse. 9. For lo, I will command, and I will sift the house of Israel among
all nations, like as corn is sifted in a sieue, yet shall not the least stone
fall upon the earth.
The last conclusion.
THe last conclusion, in the which the same threatenings against the Israelites
are both confirmed: and also more plainly laid open and declared. They are
confirmed, in as much as they are so often, and so earnestly repeated and
rehearsed. They are laid down more plainly, because the manner is showed, after
which God will destroy and overthrow them. What the figure Metaphora is, see
Amos cap. 4. Ver. 12.
And here under the Metaphor of a winower or sifter of corn is threatened unto
every particular Israelite, and not only unto the body it self of the
people, this most sharp and grievous punishment. For God will in such sort
comprise al and singular the Israelites within this vanne or sieue of
affliction or punishment, that not one of them, although he be never so small
or little, shall escape, and shall be free, void, or dye without this tossing
and shaking to and fro, and up and down. For hereunto appertains the
similitude of a little stone, the which, albeit he be small and never so
little, yet shall he not then fall unto the earth, without shaking, that is to
say, but that he shall be shaken, but that he shall be tossed and shogged to
and fro with others in that same vanne or sieue. John the Baptist, like as the
Prophet Amos in this place, has also used the similitude of a va^ne or sieue
Mat. 3. ver. 12. speaking of Christ his judgment in these words: Which has
his vanne in his hand, and will make clean his floor, and gather his wheat
into his garner, but will burn up the chafe with unquenchable fire. But here
the manner how God will do this, The manner how God will deal with the
Israelites.
is declared. For all nations are said shall be stirred up against the
Israelites and their kingdom, least that either the power or the populousnes
of that realm or kingdom might seem to be able to place them in safety
against God.

Verse. 10. But all the sinners of my people shall die by the sword, which say,
The evil shall not come, nor hasten for us.
An other explanation.
AN other explanation, or making more plain of the matter, where the kind of
punishment is more specially declared, wherewithal the Israelites are to be
destroyed, to wit, they shall perish with slaughter, and with the sword, that
is, by a most cruel death, and full of terror and fear. And there is added in
this place also an explication or laying open of the matter more plainly of the
most impudent or shameless lewdnes of these men, to the end that their so
grievous punishment may seem to be the more just. What manner of sinners the
Israeli^es w^^e.
For they were not only wicked, and sinners in such sort as all men generally
and naturally are, but notoriously unfaithful, and scoffers at God and his
word: as namely being such who openly scorned the threatening of God, and the
oracles or prophesies of his Prophets, and denied that these so great
calamities or punishments should either come at them at al, or else that they
should come so soon, and speedily, to wit, mocking God carelessly, as if they
had made a covenant with death it self. Against such kind of scorners speaks
God by his Prophet Isai. cap. 28 ver. 15. which say: We have made a covenant
with death, and with hell are we at agreement: though a scourge run over, and
pass through, it shall not come at us: for we have made falsehood our refuge,
and under vanity are we hid. But read what follows in that place touching
their punishment. And thus far has Amos threatened punishments unto the
Israelites.

Verse. 11. In that day will I raise up the tabernacle of David, that is fallen
down, and close up the breaches thereof, and I will raise up his ruins, and I
will build it, as in the days of old.
The last part of this prophecy
THere follows the last part of this book or prophecy, wherein are contained
comforts, and the same very great and eternal, founded, and in the end
fulfilled in the Messiah, promised unto the whole family and house of Israel,
or Jacob. For he is the cause, and the foundation of all the promises of God
toward his elect or chosen, as Paul 2. Cor. cap 1. verse. 20. speaks, That in
him (namely Christ) all the promises of God are yea, and are in him Amen unto
the glory of God through us. And these self same promises ^re every where to
be found in the other Prophets also, because that one and the same Christ alone
was the end of the Law, and the Prophets, unto whon they all do send us back.
James also makes mention of this prophecy Act. 15. ver. 16.17. in these
words: After this I will return, and will build again the tabernacle of
David, I^^es the A^ (...) ^^^^e^h (...) pr^phes^^ (...) a^pertaine unto the
calling of the Gentiles.
which is fallen down, and the ruins thereof will I build ag^ine, and will
set it up, that the residue of men might seek after the Lord, and all the
Gentiles, upon whom my name is called, says the Lord, which does all these
things. And this prophecy does he teach to appertain unto the kingdom of
Christ, spread abroad by the preaching of the Gospel, and unto the calling and
conversion of the Gentiles unto the true GOD, like as the true fulfilling of
the same was both at that time, and also is now at this day. But Amos does in
such sort deliver this comfort and promise, that first he promises the
restoring of the kingdom of God by the Messiah: and secondly shows the
fruit and profit which shall ensue of this kingdom.

Two parts of this verse.
This verse then has two things to be observed and noted. First, a description
of the restoring of the Church it self, or kingdom of God promised here
figuratively. 1. A description of the restoring of the Church.
Secondly, a noting and poynting out of the time generally, in the which this
shall come to pass, but not of the very moment and instant of time, as is in
Daniel cap. 9. And whereof Peter in the first Epistle cap. 1. ver 10.11.
witnesses, 2. A general noting of the time of the same.
that the Prophets have diligently enquired and searched, Which (says he)
prophesied of the grace that should come unto you, searching when or what time
the spirit which testified before of Christ which was in them, should declare
the sufferings that shall come unto Christ, and the glory that should follow.
So then the true Church of God is here signified under the name of the
(tabernacle or cottage of David) because that like as David was a figure of
Christ, so his tabernacle was and is a token or Sacrament of the Church. And
first of all the most miserable estate thereof is noted, The miserable estate
of the Church. The glorious restoring of the same.
when as this tabernacle is said to have been a cottage. Again, (that it was
fallen, and had many breaches and ruins or rentings.) But the restoring, yea
and the same in most excellent manner is described, when as it is said, that it
shall nevertheless come to pass, that both the building shall be reared up
again, and all his rentings and breaches shall be repaired and amended: and
that in such manner that the same dignity, commendation, fame and reverence
shall remain unto the same second restored tabernacle, the which both was in
the first tabernacle, and also was given unto the same, as is also Agg. cap. 2.
Indeed the body and tabernacle of the Church has been pulled down both by the
captivity of Babylon, the which happened afterward: and also by the tyranny
of the Antiochi, and other kings of Syria, and likewise by the wicked doctrine
of the Pharisees: but it was restored again by Christ, that same true Messiah,
and son of the Virgin Mary, and that indeed far more gloriously and holily,
and excellently, then was that first tabernacle under David and Solomon. And
this is the most notable promise of the restoring of the Church. The time of
the restoring of the church set down in generality.
Now the certain time is rehearsed, in the which these things shall be done,
but in generality. For God had not yet revealed or opened unto his Prophets
the very article, moment and instant of time. Therefore Amos says, (in that
day) to wit, in the which I will send my Messiah promised unto you.

Verse. 12. That they may possess the remnant of Edom, and of all the heathen,
because my name is called upon them, says the Lord, that does this.
The end of the building up again of the Church.
THe end is showed of this building up again of the Church, to to wit, that the
true God (and he whom these contemn or despise) may be worshipped of all
nations, and that all people of the whole world may serve him, as the Prophet
Malach. cap. 1. ver. 11. does prophecy hereof, where he says: From the rising
of the Sun unto the going down of the same, my name is great among the
Gentiles, and in every place incense shall be offered unto my name, and a pure
offering: for my name is great among the heathen, says the Lord of hosts. To
which purpose does James the Apostle conclude of this place of Amos, as has
bin cited immediately before in the 11. verse of this chapter. Wherefore this
place does manifestly or plainly contain the calling of the Gentiles, and the
setting up of the true worship of God among them, and the true observation or
keeping of the same. So then not only the Israelites shall at that time be in
the Church and inheritance of God, but also the Idumeans, and other nations,
because that they also shall call upon the name of the true GOD, to wit, being
taught thereunto by the Spirit of GOD through the preaching of the Gospel, as
it is showed by Paul among other nations in the example of the Ephesians, in
the second chapter of his Epistle unto them. But because this seemed unto the
Jews a thing always impossible, that the Gentiles should be converted and
turned unto the true God, this promise is confirmed by the person of God
himself promising the same, because that he himself shall perform and bring
it to pass, unto whom nothing is hard, much less impossible, as the Angel
Gabriel tells the Virgin Mary Luke 1. ver. 37. saying unto her, me^uailing
how she a virgin should conceive and bear Christ: With God nothing shall be
impossible.

Verse. 13. Behold, the days come, says the Lord, that the plowma^ shall touch
the mower, and the treader of grapes him that sows seed: and the mountains
shall drop sweet wine, and all the hil^ shall melt.
The manifold fruits of this restoring of the Church.
NOw the fruits and commodities are reckoned up, the which shall come of this
restoring of the kingdom of God, and the same manifold or of many sorts. Yet
notwithstanding, in all these by a proportionable sense and meaning, are
understood the spiritual and healthsome gifts of God bestowed upon those that
are his, The earthly blessings here promised, are figures and tokens of
spiritual and heavenly graces.
of the which the earthly (the which are here rehearsed) were signs, figures,
and Sacraments, like as Christ his curing of our bodily diseases, were
significations of his healing of our spiritual infirmities, that is, the
diseases and imperfections of our souls, to which end it seems that Matthew
in his Gospel cap. 8. ver. 17. alleges the place of Isai, He took our
infirmities, and bare our sicknesses. And the writer unto the Hebrews seems
thus far forth to give testimony unto the godly fathers of the former ages of
the world, that they even then did understand that the promises of earthly
benefits should have their full accomplishment and verifying in Christ, and in
his heavenly inheritance and spiritual blessings. For thus writes he of them
cap. 11. ver. 14.15.16. They that say such things, dec^^^^ plainly that they
seek a country. (whereby he declares that they rested not in the outward
promises of the earthly inheritance in the land of Canaan) And if they had been
mindfdll of that countr^^* from whence they came out, they had leisure to have
returned. B^ now they desire a better, that is an heauenly^ (a plain proof
that they had a special regard unto the spiritual signification of these
earthly promises) Wherefore God is not ashamed of them to be called th^^ God:
for he has prepared for them a city. And so does August^^ teach that these
earthly blessings are to be understood to be mo^^ fully and truly fulfilled
in the spiritual, the which they did represent, Sermon. in Mat. 18. and tractat.
in Joan. Euang. 49. But it was needful that these things should be promised,
and in such sort to be declared unto the Jews and Israelites at that time,
because they we^^ accustomed and acquainted with these figures and kinds of
spe^king. First of all therefore store and plenty of all kind of goo^ things,
^. Al kind of good things promised, and that in great plenty and abundance
or all kind of good things is in this place promised, and showed that this is
a most true fruit of the kingdom of God. And no^ only every kind of good
thing is promised, but the same also in most great abundance. For it is said
that it shall come to pass that these shall be cast upon us by God largely
and plentifully, in such wise that after the former the which we have already
received, others forthwith shall succeed, or follow, yea whatsoever are
necessary and needful for the life of man, (as are corn and wine) whether
they do come by the industry or travail of men (as by plowing, sowing,
vinedressing): or whether they come of their own accord from the earth, as
mountains, or hills do use to bring forth many things of that sort. There is
a like place unto this Leuit. 26. ver. 5. where Moses tells them that hear
the law, and follow the same, that they shall have all kind of blessings
heaped one in the neck of another: Your threshing (says he) shall reach unto
the vintage, and the vintage shall reach unto sowing time, and you shall eat
your bread in plenteousnes, and dwell in your land safely. But by these earthly
things, matters healthsome or concerning salvation, and spiritual, are of us
to be understood.

Verse. 14. And I will bring again the captivity of my people of Israel: and
they shall build the waste cities, and inhabit them, and they shall plant
vineyards, and drink the wine thereof: they shall also make gardens, and eat
the fruits of them.
The second fruit of the restoring of the kingdom of God.
THe second fruit of the Gospel, or restoring of the kingdom of God, to wit,
deliverance, and the same most full, from all captivity. For the greatest
delicates and dainties are in exile and banishment vnioyfull, and unpleasant:
but in our own country most welcome and joyful. So Psalm. 137. ver. 4. the
godly answer unto their scoffing enemies, willing them to sing some of their
Hebrewe songs: How shall we sing (say they) a song of the Lord in a strange
land? whereby they signify that their music could not be pleasant unto them
in their miserable captivity. And therefore but a little before in the same
Psalm, they say that they hung up their harpes, and sat by the river sides
weeping. The godly therefore shall be delivered and brought back again from
that most miserable exile, to wit, from the captivity of Satan, and sin,
and the lust of the flesh, of the which tyrants men are held captives before
they have faith in Christ. Deliverance from spiritual captivity, and bondage.
And this deliverance shall not be slight and slender, but a most full
deliverance, because men may dwell in their own cities, and then plant there,
and plow, and do all those things, the which all they whatsoever do, the
which dwell in their own homes in greatest security and safety. But these
things are to be applied unto the benefits of the Gospel toward the godly by
Christ in a spiritual sense, such as may proportionably be gathered from these
earthly promises, the which godly through Christ do enjoy great tranquillity
or quiet of mind and conscience, even whilst they live here upon earth, and
therefore much more in that everlasting and blessed life.

Verse. 15. And I will plant them upon their land, and they shall no more be
pulled up again out of their land, which I have given them, says the Lord thy
God.
The third fruit
THE third fruit, the stabilitie or setlednes, and continuance of every godly
and faithful person in his own seat and home, that is, in the same, wherein
he shall be placed by God, the which is especially to be understood of
everlasting life. And this is as it were an access or increase of both the
former benefits. For many times neither does ple^tie of good things delight
us, nor yet the dwelling in our own native country, if in the same there ha^g
over our heads continual and assured fear, that we shall forthwith be
deprived and spoiled of both these commodities: but when as unto the former
benefits of God there comes also a promise of continual security, or being
without fear and danger, and of enjoying and keeping of our goods, then may
we in deed and in truth be judged most happy. These things are chiefly to be
understood of our heavenly dwelling.
But these things, as I have said, are rather to be understood of that heavenly
land, that is, of heaven, in the which we shall be after this life, then of
that earthly mansion, or dwelling: for because that this seat only is firm,
stable, steadfast, and sure, to wit, heaven, and eternal life, ordained for us
of God. And thus much does the place of the Hebrews cap 11. ver. 14.15.16. a
little before recited ver. 13. of this chapter, sufficiently enough declare.
But this earthly land is often given us of God to dwell in only for a time, out
of the which we are afterward driven into other seats, either by enemies, or
by the ouerflowing of waters. Wherefore let no man think himself to be here
upon earth placed by God in such sort, that he cannot be pulled out, but they
which are in heaven, they only and alone are so placed and dwell, that they can
never be removed.

FINIS.
A Commentary of Lambertus Danaeus upon the Prophet Oseas.
CAP. 1.
Verse. 1. The word of the Lord that came unto Hosea the son of Beeri, in the
days of Vzziah, Iotham, Ahaz, and Hezekiah Kings of Judah, and in the days of
Jeroboam son of Ioash King of Israel.
The great disobedience of the kingdom of Israel unto God.
IT appears 2. King. cap. 17. how great the disobedience and stubbornness of
the people of Israel (that is, those which lived in the kingdom of Israel
after the departure thereof from Judah) was against almighty God, who had so
long time been unto them a most merciful father. The which also is confirmed,
Ierem. 25. for there was in them both ungodliness and injustice most obstinate,
The long bearing of God with the Israelites.
albeit that the Lord for the space of more then two hundredth years had borne
with them, and earnestly both day and night had admonished or warned them
continually by his Prophets. Whereupon that was needs to follow, the which
Paul says 1. Romans 18. That in the end the wrath of God was revealed against
them from heaven it self: and that, as it is Ephe. 5. ver. 6. God should most
sharply punish this disobedience. For by means of the ungodliness and
unrighteousness of men and of those especially which call themselves the sons
of God, the wrath of God is most worthily powered out upon the world, and upon
such chiefly. For as Paul says 3. Colos. ver. 6. For such things sake the
wrath of God comes on the children of disobedience. And so does Moses
threaten the Israelites, that for their disobedience they should perish like
unto other nations, Deuteronomy. 8. ver. 20. As the nations, which the Lord destroyed
before you, so ye shall perish, because ye would not be obedient unto the
voice of the Lord your God. And to this end is all that to be referred Deuteronomy.
28. of the several sorts of punishments which the Lord has in store for
those that follow not his law and commandments. Wherefore God at the last
determined to overthrow and utterly to destroy this people, that is, the
kingdom of Israel, like as for the iniquity of men he destroyed the first
world it self also in the days of Noe, as it is Genesis 6. But yet such is the
mercy of God always both toward all mankind: but especially toward those
the which do carry the sign and token of his covenant (such as they were) he
would not punish them, but being a long time and much warned before of their
destruction, God from time to time raised up Prophets among the Israelites to
put them in mind of their duties.
if they continued still in the same sins. Therefore in a certain continual
rank as it were, and succession, he raised up Prophets, the which should
certify those men, both of the most sharp judgment of God against them, if
they did not repent, and of his mercy ready for them, if they would convert
and turn unto him: and that they should show and declare unto them both, these
sentences of judgment and of mercy: and in their persons should foretell the
self same things unto the whole world: and now also unto us at this day, who
by their examples ought to learn to be wise. The office of the Prophets,
where in it does consist.
Whereof it comes to pass, that the office of the Prophets does consist both
in the showing of the judgments of God against the sins of men, and also in
promising his favor and fire mercy unto his Church through Christ. The which
two points ought especially to be observed or marked of us in the books of
all the Prophets, which are extant or remaining among us, like as also those
are the chief parts and end of their whole ministry or office. And among
those Prophets the which God peculiarly ordained and sent unto the Israelites,
was this Oseas, whose holy writings are these extant, and the which continued
in the exercise of this office by the space of very many years, and that
continuall^e and without ceasing. Oseas not the first Prophet that was sent
unto the Israelites. Why Oseas is placed first in the order of the books of
the Small prophets.
Yet was not this Oseas the first of those prophets, whom God sent unto that
kingdom of Israel, and who^e writings are also now extant, as I have showed in
my notes before these Prophets, and also upon Amos: but because of the long
continuance in his office, he is preferred before the rest in setting down
the order of the books of the twelve small Prophets, and set in the first
place. For he prophesied by the space of more the^ forty years. Therefore
the whole argument and matter of his writing and Prophecy does consist both in
showing and setting forth of the judgments of God against the wicked, and also
in declaring of his mercy toward his church and the godly.

Things to be noted in the first verse.
This first verse then has three certain things to be observed or noted. The
one, what is the certainty, and authority of the doctrine following, and the
which is to be propounded or delivered. And it is very singular and worthy of
greatest reverence, 1. The certainty, and authority of this prophecy.
because it is the word of (Jehovah) that is, of that same indeed almighty
and true God, and not the devise of men, or the dreaming of the Prophet Oseas,
or some odd fable or tale composed and made by art, for as Peter teaches 2.
Epist. cap. 1. ver. 16.18. the word of God is not any fable fraught with
deceit, but a matter of assured truth and certainty, and therefore he says
of the same unto the faithful, unto whom he did write: We followed not
deceiuable fables, when we opened unto you the power and coming of our Lord
Jesus, but with our eyes we same his majesty, And we heard the voice (of his
father concerning him) when it came from heaven, being with him in the holy
mount. This his word God would not have to be kept secret and hidden: but to
be opened and declared unto those men. And therefore the Prophet is commanded
to deliver it, And unto him this word came from God himself. In the second
place it is to be noted in this verse, 2. Unto whom the word of God was
revealed.
unto whom this word was revealed that it might be declared, to with unto
Oseas the son of Beeri, that is, unto that Oseas who at the same time was
sufficiently known and famous among the Israelites by the honesty, name,
godliness and diginitie of his father. For the setting down of this name of his
father does not only note out the family or house of Oseas, but also the
famousnes of the same, then well known. The third point is here declared, at
what time Oseas prophesied. 3. At what time Oseas prophesied.
And this time is noted two manner of ways, namely both by the kings of Judah:
and also by the kings of Israel, as for the Kings of Judah, Oseas prophesied in
the days of Vzzias, Iotham, Ahaz, and Hezekias. For under all these he
executed his office by the space of above forty years, and under the King
Jeroboam the son of Ioas, which was King of Israel. And him alone does he
name of the Kings of Israel, because that albeit he continued his office under
other Kings of Israel also, yet was it more maruailous that in that time such
judgments of God as these, should be declared unto this people, whenas the
estate of this kingdom of Israel was under this Jeroboam most flourishing. For
as it is 2. King cap. 14. ver. 25. He restored the coast of Israel from the
entering of Hamath unto the Sea of the wilderness. And it may appear by Amos
cap. 6. ver. 2. that in this kings days, under whom he prophesied, the
kingdom of Israel might compare with any other kingdom on any side of them
both for wealth and largenes. For thus he says of the same: Go you unto
Calneh, and see: and from thence go ye unto Hamah the great: the^ go down
unto Gath of the Philistines, be they better then these kingdoms or the border
of their land greater then your border? By these things it is manifest, Oseas
began to prophecy before the Prophet Isay.
that Oseas began to prophecy before the Prophet Isai. For Isaias, as is
gathered cap. 7. ver. 8. began threescore and five years before the captivity
and overthrow of the Israelites, that is, about the thirtith year of King
Azarias, and seven whole years after the death of this Jeroboam, of whom
Oseas here makes mention: and therefore by Isaias there is no mention made of
Jeroboam the son of Ioas. But Oseas began to prophecy, as the fourth verse
hereafter shows, about the end of the reign of Jeroboam. Oseas prophesies
after Amos, and Jonas.
Therefore he prophesied also after Amos the Prophet, as I have said upon Amos,
and almost threescore and two years after the death of the Prophet Elizaeus.
Whereof there is 2. King. cap. 13. ver. 14. He prophesied also after the
Prophet Jonas.

Verse. 2. At the beginning the Lord spoke by Hosea, and the Lord said unto
Hosea, Go, take unto thee a wife of fornications, and children of
fornications: for the land has committed great wh^^dome, departing from the
Lord.
A plain declaration of God his dealing with the Prophet.
A Plain laying open of the process ensuing. For Oseas reports the very
words themselves by God revealed unto him: and that in such order as the same
were by God declared unto him. For he says, In the beginning and at what time,
the Lord spoke unto me by that same extraordinary manner, he commanded, that I
should take unto me a wife, etc. The Prophet therefore hereby does signify,
that God spoke unto him, and commanded him often times, that he should deliver
many things unto the people of Israel: but the first revelation, the which was
made unto him by God, and the thing that first of all he was commanded to
open, do, and propound unto them, 1. What God commanded Oseas.
was this, that he should take unto him a wife, etc.

This verse then contains two things: the one, what GOD spoke, or commanded
Oseas. The other, why he commanded him any such thing, as is here in this
place mentioned. 2. Why he so commands him.
And touching the first, God commanded, that Oseas should take unto himself in
marriage a wife, and that not any one whatsoever, 1. Oseas commanded to marry
a common harlot. The children begotten called bastards.
but such a one expreslie as some times had been a known and stinking
strumpet, yea and the which continued an harlot after that she was married.
Oseas then married a strumpet, of whom he should beget afterward children,
the which by reason of that blot and infamy or evil name of their mother,
were here named by the Prophet, and also commonly by others, the children of
an harlot, or bastards. This place misse-vnderstood by some.
For this is not the meaning (as some suppose of these words) (children of an
harlot, or of fornications,) as if the mind of the Prophet were, that the
wife, which Oseas at the commandment of God had married, was first his
strumpet, and that he begat the children on her in fornication: but Oseas begat
them in lawful marriage, the which notwithstanding because of that same
dishonestie and unchasteness of their mother known unto every man, and of her
not laid a side after her marriage, were called the children of an harlot. But
albeit this place of some be understood in this sense, as I have expounded it:
yet I had rather yield unto their opinion, The better sense and meaning of this
place.
who write that these things are in such wise told by the Prophet, as if they
had been appointed by God to be declared only, and not commanded to be done
indeed. This therefore (Take unto thee a wife) is thus much to say, declare
this from me says the Lord, as if thou thy self had taken unto thy felfe a
wife, the which was before a strumpet, and unchaste: yea and moreover remained
such a one also after marriage, as appears cap. 2. of this prophecy, verse. 5.

Now the reason why God would have such a thing as this propounded and setforth
by the Prophet, as if it had been done by him, 2. Oseas commanded to propounds
this similitude unto them, to signify their spiritual fornication against God
their husband.
is this. For that God by this similitude of a married woman and a wife,
playing yet still the strumpet after marriage, would teach, that the fame
people whom he had taken to wife, had always most shamelessly played the
harlot. For both of old, that is, before they were taken of God to be his
people, they were idolators in the person of Abraham Josh. 24. ver. 2. Yea and
much more also after that they were taken and joined unto God for his
inheritance by a peculiar covenant, as the prophet will show hereafter, cap. 2.
ver. 5. Further, he defines, what, and what manner of fornication this
fornication of the people, or of the land is: that is to say, it is to turn
aside from the true worship of God, and to cleave unto idols: the contrary
whereof Paul does declare in the Thessalonians to their great praise and
commendations 1 Thessalonians. 1. ver. 9. writing of them thus: For they themselves
(he means other faithful in Macedonia and Achaia) show of you what manner of
entering in we had unto you, and how ye turned to GOD from Idols to serve the
living and true God. This whoredom therefore whereof he speaks is
spiritual, like as this marriage of God with us is spiritual, as Paul shows
speaking of the marriage of the Church of the faithful among the Corinthians
with Christ after this manner: I am jealous over you with godly jealousy: for
I have prepared you for one husband, to present you as a pure virgin unto
Christ.

Verse. 3. So he went and took Gomer, the daughter of Diblai^, which conceived,
and bare him a son.
A continuing of the former process, showing,
THe continuing of the former process. For Oseas goes on to show, what
followed the same commanding of God unto him. And first of all he teaches that
this marriage by the commandment of God was in such sort of him propounded and
told unto the people, 1. The propounding of this marriage.
as if he had indeed and in truth married such a wife, that is to say an
harlot. Secondly, he declares what fruit and children were begotten by that
marriage: 2. The children coming of the same.
and what the signification of them is, that is, what is the mind and meaning
of God herein. Now the purpose and meaning of God was, under the name and
figure of this kind of marriage to have showed and declared the notorious
treachery and faithlesnesse of the Israelites toward him, wherein when as
that wife no doubt was greatly honored by her husband, 3. What God signifies
hereby.
she notwithstanding on the contrary part by a singular kind of
unthankfulness did wonderfully dishonor her husband and therefore did grieve
him, 1. The faithlesnes of the Israelites the wife toward^s God their husband.
and provoke him against her, as i^ is Ezech. 16. Moreover God by this
similitude teaches, that his anger toward this people is most just, as who
namely has received so great an injury at their hand: 2. That therefore his
anger is most just toward them.
for the husband has most worthy cause to be angry with his wife that still
continues playing the harlot.

Further, the name of the Prophets wife is here set down, (...) wit, Gomer,
that is to say, Perfection, such a one as God had made this people after his
marriage with them, The name of the Prophets wise.
to wit, most plentifuly enriched and garnished with all gifts and graces. And
this Gomer was the danghter of Diblaim, that is, of a most desolate an^ waste
wilderness. For at the first, the condition and estate of th^^ family or house,
that is, the family or house of Abraham and Jacob, of the which this people
was borne, was most lamentable and base, in Assyria, and in Egypt, even like
unto the estate of a nation as unknown, and dwelling in a place that is
utterly desolate or a mere wilderness, and destitute or void of all things.
Thus much of this marriage, and of that wife. And as for the fruit of this
marriage, they are three children begotten of Gomer, of the which the first,
who he was, and what is the signification thereof according unto the meaning,
and mind of GOD, the verse following does declare.

Verse. 4. And the Lord said unto him, call his name Izreel: for yet a little
and I will visit the blood of Izreel upon the house of Iehu, and will cause to
cease the Kingdom of the house of Israel.
The children begotten by this marriage represent the state of the Israelites,
past, present, and to come.
THe Lord purposing to set down what the estate of the people of Israel both
before time was, and also what it was at that time and in time to come should
be, does in like manner set down three children, as if they had been by the
Prophet begotten of Gomer the harlot, the same being of diverse names, and also
sex. And as touching the first of these children, it is a man child, whose
name should be Izreel.

The signification and reason of this name is expressed hereafter. This Izreel
does declare the estate of the people of Israel, such as it was before, that
is, from the time that Jeroboam the son of Ioas began to reign, until the
beginning of this prophecy. For as much then as the state of this kingdom was
not only tolerable but also flourishing, and that this Jeroboam had restored
the old borders unto the kingdom of Israel, taken away before by the Syrians,
this their estate is very well, and worthily compared unto a man, that is, unto
a male child. The first child named Izreel and what this name betokens.
But this male child is called Izreel, according unto the name of the City,
where Iehu had before slain the posterity of Achab, 2. King. cap. 9. wherein
there is no doubt an allusion or resemblance made both unto the name of Israel
(betwixt which and (Izreel) there is a great likelyhoode both in sound and
letters) by the which this people being divided from the kingdom of Judah did
name it self, and vaunted of the same; and also unto that city, the which,
Izreel the chief city of the Israelites was first to seele the heavy
judgments of God
as it was first made by Iehu famous and renowned through the reuengement of
the contempt or despising of the true God (for in the same the first murdering
of the house of Achab was committed) so was it first of all to feel these most
grievous threatenings of God against this people. And this does the reason of
this name here yielded show, the which contains 3. things: Why the child is
called Iizreel.
And the cause of this name was, that Iizreel, that is, this man child should
betoken that same before time most flourishing and mighty city, the which in
the Kingdom of Israel was called Iizreel, and was the palace of the house of
Iehu. For God against that city and territory of the same, and the
inhabitants thereof would avenge the blood which was shed by Iehu, whilst that
of himself, and by his he does destroy the house of Achab: for he slew Ioram
in the territory or field of Iizreel: and the rest of the sons of Achab,
which were left alive (albeit they were slain in the City Samaria) yet are
they said to be slain of the Princes and nobles of the city Iizreel: at
lestwise the heads of them being murdered were brought thither, that is, to
Iizreel, unto King Iehu, as as appears 2. Why Iehu is punished in his family,
for doing that which God commanded.
King. cap. 9. and 10. Further God auengeth this blood of Achab upon the house
of Iehu, although that it were shed by his commandment, because that Iehu in
the destroying of the house of Achab did not fulfill the will of God, but his
own will, that is to say, he did not restore the worship of the true God, but
he suffered the same Idolatry to be in that kingdom, the which was there
before. Wherefore these slaughters are reckoned, and that worthily to have been
mere, or no better then killing and cutting of throats by the high way sides,
the which were committed by Iehu. Therefore Iehu slew Ioram his Lord rather to
obtain the kingdom, then to restore unto the true God his right. For all was
the which are unjust, be they either civil, or foreign, are great
throat-cuttings. 2 The time of the fulfilling of these things.
And thus much of this name of his son Iizreel As for the time of the
fulfilling of this judgment, he shows that there remains a very short
space for the same by these words (yet a little) For Oseas began to prophecy
about the end of the reign of Jeroboam: and after the death of the same
Jeroboam came these things to pass, the which are here spoken of, or at lea^^
wise began to be fulfilled. 3. The condition or estate of this people.
Lastly, the condition or estate of the whole people, is here declared and
showed what it 0173 0203 V 3 shall be, to wit, it is foretold that it shall
come to pass, that the said House^ Israel shall utterly and thoroughly cease to
be a kingdom. The which afterward came to pass under King Oseas, about
forty years more or less after these things were foretold.

Verse. 5. And at that day will I also break the bow of Israel in the valley
of Izreel.
Two parts of this verse.
A More plain making of the former matter. For he declares both the manner of
the doing of these things, and also the place where they shall be done. The
manner of the doing of these things is, that God shall break all the strength of
this kingdom, 1. The manner of doing of these things. The figure Synecdoche,
what it is, see Amos cap. 5. verse. 21.
the which is here signified under the name of a ( bow, one part of the
strength in war being put for all) by the figure Synecdoche. So David Psalm.
44. ver. 6. when he says: I do not trust in my bow, neither can my sword
save me, means that reposed not his confidence in any instruments of war
whatsoever, but only in the help of the living. God. The place wherein these
things shall be done, 2. The place wherein these things shall be done.
is the valley of Iizreel, in the which Ioram and his companions were slain.
For as it is 2. King. cap. 8. ver. 29. King Ioramwent down to Izreel to be
cured of the wounds which the Syrians had given him at Ramah, when he fought
against Hazael King of Syria. And there was slain by Iehu in Izreel, where the
Israelites shall sustain a great slaughter of their enemies and Assyrians.

Verse. 6. She conceived yet again, and bare a daughter, and God said unto
him, call her name Lo-ruchamah: for I will no more have pity upon the house
of Israel: but I will utterly take them away.
What this daughter betokens.
THe second birth of Gomer is declared. And this a daughter, that is, a woman,
not a man whose name is expressed, and the reason of the name. This daughter
does betoke^ the estate of the people of Israel, such as it was after the death
of this Jeroboam, that is to say, decayed, weak, and lying open unto the
strength of the enemy, like as a woman is weak and little able to shift for
her self. And this fell out under Phace the son of Romelia, 2. King. 15. ver.
29. where is showed how the King of the Assyrians did vex and molest them, and
took their cities, in these words: In the days of Pekah (or Phace) King of
Israel, came Tiglath Pileser King of Asshur, and took Iion and Abel,
Beth-maachah, and Ionoah, and Kedesh, and Hazor, and Gilead, and Galiah, and
all the lan^ (...) Naphtali, and carried them away to Asshur. Wherefore the
ab^^ged estate, The daughters name, Lo-ruchama, No pitied, and what it
signifies.
and the weak strength of this kingdom are comp^^^ unto a woman, and not to a
man. And this daughter is called (...) ruchamah, because that the estate of
this people was in such so^^ afflicted by God, that he would not afterward take
any pitti^ t^^on, nor afterward raise it up and restore it, albeit they
themse^^^ under King Oseas never so much attempted or assayed to do (...)
same. Hereof comes the signification or reason of the (...) For this daughter
is commanded so to be called, because that (...) hereafter would not pity,
that is, use mercy toward this peop^^ but purposes and minds utterly to
overthrow them, as it ca^^ to pass because of their desperate wickedness.

Verse. 7. Yet will I have mercy upon the house of Judah, and (...) save them
by the Lord their GOD, and will not save then by bow, nor by sword, nor by
battle, by horses, nor by horsemen.
The figure Hypophora, or answering of an objection that might be made. See
what Hypophora is, Amos cap. 5. ver. 21.
THis is the figure Hypophora, or answering of an objection th^^ might be made,
whereby God meets with a doubt of the godly, and does the more bite and grieve
the Israelites. And first he^ deals with the question: Whether then will God
root out and d^stroy all the seed of Abraham and Israel, or will he reserve
and sa^^ some: God answers, that he will save that other kingdom, t^^ which
was called the house of Judah, and was the true and law^^^ issue of Israel, the
posterity of David: the very church of GOD* where the Temple, where the
sacrifices ordained by God, and the true doctrine flourished. And he does bite
and grieve the Israelites, that whilst they are destroyed, their neighbors
notwithstanding and brethren the Jews, and those, whom the Israelites (...)
greatly hated, and for their worshipping of the true God, laughe^ to scorn,
are neuerthelsse saved. That which came to pass vnde^ king Ezechias.

1. The cause of the saving of the Jews.
Further, both the cause and also the manner of this saving and delivering of the
Jews is expressed. The cause is, The only mercy of God toward them, the
which Oseas foretold before that these rebellious Israelites should be
destitute or void of. 2. The manner of their deliue. ^ance.
As for the man^^ of their deliverance it is extraordinary. For God at that
time will help and save the kingdom of Judah, by no weapons, or horses, or
bow, battle, or other means used among men in war, but by such a way as is
altogether ^x^^aordinary: for the Jews drove away their enemies by the only
invocation or calling upon of the name God, when as Ieru^alem was besieged of
Sennacherib, and Rapsace. 2. King. 19. And so does David give this glory unto
GOD, Psalm. 20. that h^ will give victory unto his king neither by chariots nor
horses, but by his own strength, at the prayer of the faithful. I therefore
do translate this place thus: But I will have mercy on the house of Judah,
etc. So that by the way of contrariety, and by the aduersatiue conjunction
(but) I make this sentence of the saving of the house of Judah contrary unto
that which went before of the destruction of the house of Israel.

Verse. 8. Now when she had wayned Lo ruchamah, she conceived and bare a son,
Verse. 9. Then said God, Call his name Lo-ammi: for ye are not my people:
therefore I will not be yours.
The third birth or child of Gomer.
THe third birth of Gomer, the which shows what shall be the last state of the
said people of Israel, and at such time as they shall be destroyed. But this
child was not forthwith and by and by borne, but after some space time coming
between, within the which the daughter was wayned which was borne before him.
And doubtless, this same kingdom of Israel, albeit that it were cut shorter,
continued yet a little space of time. For Phace, or Pekah the son of Romeleas
reigned twenty years, 2. King. 15. ver. 27. under whom notwithstanding, the
power and strength of that Kingdom was broken and weakened.

Three points of the 9. verse.
But this verse the 9. contains three things: The sex of the child, His
name, And the reason of his name. This child was a man-child. 1. The sex of
the chi^de, which was a man child.
For under Oseas the last King of the Israelites the strength of this Kingdom
seemed after some sort to be restored. for albeit that they were now under the
Assyria^s, yet now notwithstanding the estate of that people seemed somewhat
tolerable, before they fell away from the Assyrians, and until that Samaria
was besieged by Salmanazar king of the Assyrians, because of the treachery and
rebellion of King Oseas. For even yet then the strength of the Israelites was
so great, that for the space of three whole years they withstood the
Assyrians, and all their greatest forces. 2. King. 17. whereupon that estate of
this kingdom, although their last state, is compared unto a man child, and
not unto a woman. And he is called, 2. The name of the child, Loghammi, or
Loghnammi.
Lo-ghammi, that is, Not my people, as Paul does expound it Romans 9. ver. 25.
For there speaking of the calling of the Gentiles, he cites the place of this
Prophet cap. 2. verse. 23. after this manner: I will call them my people, which
were not my people: an^ her beloved which was not beloved, alluding unto the
names of Lo-ammi, and Lo-ruchamah. 3. The reason of the name.
The reason of the name, because (...) should come to pass after this
destruction, that the same whole part of the seed of Jacob and Abraham, that
is, the ten tribes, should not any more be reckoned the people of God: nor
should retain the covenant of God, or any sign thereof: but that they should
live miserably dispersed among barbarous nations, among the which they should
neither keep nor celebrate circumcision, and the memory of the true GOD (as
namely having forgotten altogether the God of Abraham) when as the Jews
notwithstanding in the captivity of Babylon diligently retained both, as a
token o^ the covenant of God yet remaining with them. The people of Israel in
their captivity retained no seal of God his covenant.
So then the people of Israel in their captivity retained no seal of the
covenant of God: and there fore ceased to be the people of God, and the true
God ceased also to be the God of this people, or to be counted and called, and
acknowledged their Father: And therefore they were in deed Lo-ghammi, that is,
Not his people.

Verse. 10. Yet the number of the people of Israel shall be as the sand of the
sea, which cannot be measured nor told: and in the place where it was said
unto them, ye are not my people, it shall be said unto them, ye are the sons
of the living God.
A comfort for the small number of the godly yet remaining.
A Comfort, which the Lord interlaceth to raise up, cheer and comfort the
small, but yet dear number unto him of the godly* the which did yet remain in
that people. For albeit this kingdom should perish, yet should not the Church
of GOD in that people perish therefore notwithstanding. For God would gather it
out of the midst of this people, of the which notwithstanding being dispersed
among the Assyrians there should not be any more a body, and in which people
there should remain no sign visible, o^ to be seen of the covenant of God.
To be short, God gathers his Church out of all peoples, much more out of the
Israelites. Wherefore this prophecy of the gathering together and preserving
of the church appertains unto the calling of the Gentiles also, and not only
unto the calling back of these ten tribes of Israel, as Paul teaches Romans 9.
cap. ver. 25. alleged before in the verse immediately before going, where the
Apostle, as it is evident to be seen of every one, does purposedly cite it to
prove the calling of the Gentiles.

Two parts of this verse.
This verse therefore contains two things, one of the preserving in the mean
season, and restoring of the church, and the same most plentiful or in great
number, 1. The preserving and ^estoring of the Church.
so that it may afterward be compared unto the sand of the sea which is
infinite, and cannot be numbered nor measured. And this did then come to pass,
when as the Gentiles through the preaching of the Gospel were called unto
Christ. The other, it declares those, 2. Out of whom God will gather his
church
out of whom GOD will afterward gather the self same Church, to wit, out of
all them, the which were not his people before, or at that time. Therefore this
promise is general, as Paul teaches Ephesians. 2. ver. 1. where he shows that
God quickened the Ephesians which were dead in sins, and took them also into
the number of his Church, as it follows anon after the beginning of that
chapter. So then those which before were not the people of God, the same
afterward were made his, not only people and inheritance, but also his
sons, and the Temple of the living GOD, such as were both the Gentiles and
also the Israelites being converted unto the Gospel, and gathered together by
Christ into one sheepfold, as Christ teaches John 10. ver. 16. where speaking
of the Gentiles in time to be gathered unto the Church of the Jews he says:
Other sheep I have also, which are not of this fold: them also must I bring,
and they shall hear my voice: and there shall be one sheepfold and one
shepherd. And unto these does Peter Epist. 1. cap. 2. ver. 9. give very
glorious titles, when he calls them, A chosen generation, a royal
Priesthood, an holy nation, a peculiar (or purchased) people, to show forth
the virtues of him that has called them out of darkness into his marvelous
light.

Verse. 11. Then shall the children of Judah, and the children of Israel be
gathered together, and appoint themselves one head, and they shall come up out
of the land: for great is the day of Izreel.
A confirmation of the former promise consisting of three parts.
A Confirmation of the former promise of the restoring of the Church, and that
in most great number, from the declaring of the thing and manner of the same,
albeit that the kingdom of Israel, shall perish. 1. The two kingdoms shall be
frien^^y united
And here are three things told that they shall then come to pass, when as GOD
will gather together that same his Church. First, that Judah and Israel, that
is, both those kingdoms shall come together into one, the division of minds
being taken away, the which was before between them both. For when as God
through the Gospel gathered the Church unto Christ, all such distinction,
hatred, and grudge of sex of men, kingdoms, and nations, which was before,
was taken away. 2. They shall all ch^se unto themselves one and the same head.
The second point is, That all these shall choose unto themselves one and the
same head, to wit, Christ given unto them by God. For it is not in the power of
the Church to choose her own head, but he that is by God himself set for the
head thereof, he only may be the head. Ephesians. 1. ver. 22. for so Paul there
witnesses of God, That he has made al things subject under the feet of
Christ, and has appointed him over all things to be the head to the Church.
But when as men being instructed by the word of God do allow of that head,
follow, and embrace him, forsaking all others, they are said to set over
themselves an head, the which notwithstanding God gave and set over them. 3.
They shall come up out of those countries, into the which they have been
scattered.
The third thing is, They shall go up captives out of those countries, into
the which they were dispersed or scattered before, that they may be joined
together into one body. Therefore least this scattering of them into other
places might seem to be a let, that these Israelites being carried away should
not come unto Christ, and that the Church should not be so copious or plentiful
and many in number, as is promised, they themselves are said, that they shall
then come up out of those countries where they were before held captives. For
they shall be scattered abroad, because that the day of Izreel, that is, in the
which this kingdom shall be afflicted or punished, shall be horrible and
fearful, and shall utterly scatter this people into diverse countries, as
appears 2. King. cap 15. ver. 29. and cap. 17. ver. 6. where the several
places are named, from whence they were ca^ried by the Assyrians. In the first
place it is recorded thus: In the days of Pekah king of ^srael came Tiglath
Pileser king of Asshur* and took Iion, and Abel* Beth-maachah, and Ianoah, and
Kedesh, and Hazor, and Gilead, and G^lilah and all the land of Naphtali, and
carr^ed them away to Asshur. In the second place the words are these: In the
ninth year of Hoshea the king of Asshur took Samari^, and carried Israel away
into Asshur, and put them in Halah, and i^ Habor by the river of Goshan, and in
the cities of the Medes. But all this captivity and scattering
notwithstanding, they among them which are the elect of God, shall afterward
be gathered together by God, that they perish not.

CAP. 2.
Verse. 1. Say unto your brethren Ammi, and unto your sisters, Ruchamah.
A confirmation of the former promise of G^d, from that which should follow of
the same.
A Confirmation of the former promise of GOD from the consequent, or that which
should follow: nan^ely, from the name, by the which those Israelites are
commanded to be called, unto whom God promised mercy and favor in the chapter
before going. For God does not command any thing to be done in vain, or
gives any name unto any thing, or commands any name to be given, without the
true effect to ensue of the same. Wherefore when as God expressly commands
them to be called (beloved) he does no doubt by this name confirm that his
mercy toward them. And as concerning this verse, it contains two things.
The one, the name by the which they were to be called afterward. 1. The name,
whereby the Israelites should be called.
The other, those, by whom these Israelites shall be thus named. The name is
both (my people) and also (having obtained mercy.) The which two are evidently
opposed or set against the two former names, by the which before the most
miserable estate of this people, by reason of their sins, was described in
the chapter before going verse. 8.9. Wherefore the condition and estate of this
people shall be clean otherwise, when as the Lord shall begin through Christ,
and the preaching of the Gospel, to be merciful, and favorable unto the^, as
unto oth^^ nations also, as Paul in like manner does expound it Ro^^^ ^here
ver. 25. he translateth these words (having obtained mericie) Hegapemenen, that
is to say, Beloved, the which is all one.

2. By whom the Israelites ^^all thus be called.
As for the other point by whom they shall be thus called: first, he commands
these Israelites, that is to say, men by reason of their sins before forsaken
of him justly, to be so called by their brethren, and sisters, that is, by the
Jews, whom God before cap. 1. ver. 7. promised that he would save, and keep
for his people, 1. By the Iew^^.
even at such time as the Israelites are abandoned and put away: and secondly,
by all the true faithful: 2. By a^l the faith^u^^.
that both the Israelites may understand, and also the other peoples the which
were left by God in their ways, that they shall afterward be truly gathered
together in the Church of God: that they shall be sho^ed and joined in
fellowship unto the true faithful, and that company, whom God has always
taken for his especial people and inheritance. Therefore the true faithful
are commanded to acknowledge those, whom God calls, for their brethren and
sisters, for the sons of the living God, for the people of God, and such as
have obtained mercy, and not to despise them in regard of themselves, because
they come, and are called after them. So in the chapter before going ver. 10.
they are called God his people, and the sons of the living God. And Ephe. 2.
ver. 12.13. Paul shows, that They which sometimes were without Christ, and
were aliants from the common wealth of Israel, and were strangers from the
covenants of promise, and had no hope, and were without God in the world, were
now in Christ Jesus, being a far off before, made near by the blood of
Christ. And cap. 4. ver. 4. he tells them that There is one body, and one
spirit, even as they were called in ^^e hope of their vocation. And Romans 9.
ver. 25.26. he confirms the former titles that the converted Gentiles should
be called by, with the testimonies of the places of Oseas cap. 1. ver. 10. And
cap. 2. ver. 23. hereafter following. This then doubtless is a singular comfort,
and a most true fulfilling of the former promise of God.

Verse. 2. Plead with your mother: plead with her: for she is not (...) wife,
neither am I her husband: but let her take away her fornications out of her
sight, and her adulteries from between her breasts.
An admonition fer the godly.
AN admonition, whereby the true Israelites are taught what is their duty,
when as they hear these promises of God, to wit, that they reprove others of
their people that are obstinate and stubborn for their idolatry, that they
call them back unto repentance, and finally foretell them of the most heavy
judgment of God against them, if they hereafter abstain not from their
received idolatry, and the rest of their sins. And this admonition has God
set down, both to show that his good will toward them, which are saved out
of this whole people which are most corrupt, is altogether free without any
their deserving, and also to make those stubborn Israelites excuseles: in as
much as being admonished both by God himself, and also by their brethren, that
is, men most dear unto them, yet they repented not, and turned unto him, which
kind of offward and untoward dealing Christ complains of against the Jews of
his time, who could not any way be withdrawn from their sins, neither by
gentle, nor yet by rough admonitions, of whom he says Matthew. 11. ver. 16.
Whereunto shall I liken this generation? It is like unto little children, which
sit in the markets and call unto their fellows, and say: we have piped unto
you, and ye have not daunced, we have mourned unto you, and ye have not
lamented.

In this verse to be noted,
But there are two things especially to be noted in this verse. The one, the
kind of speaking it self, the which is most significant by the doubling of
the word (plead ye, plead ye): 1. The phrase or kind of speaking it self.
and by the often repeating of the whoredoms, that is, the idolatries of this
people, the which they had both diverse and manifold, and the same such also as
they were most dearly in love withal: which thing the plural number
(fornications) does declare, and also these words (sight, or face, and breasts)
in which parts of their body the Israelites are said to have openly showed and
cherished or sostered that their filthiness, after the manner of desperate and
common or shameless strumpets, the which do carry both in their face, and in
their breasts, and bosoms, their paintings, sosse and slabber, and wanton
attirements, and arts, wherewith they provoke and stir up men unto filthy
lust, and to lie with them: for they dress, trim, attire, and color and
paint both their face, and also most shameless breasts to entice and allure men
withal. 2. The matter it se^fe.
And these things are to be noted in the kind of speaking. The other point to
be here marked contains the thing or matter it self, the which of the godly
Israelites is to be told by way of admonition unto the whole body, that is, to
the rest of the Israelites, to wit, that they had violated or broken that same
holy covenant or marriage of God with them. And therefore that now they are
not the people, wife and spouse of God, by reason of those their most filthy
fornications. For that spiritual marriage is broken, and God is not now the
husband of this people, because he has forsaken them, or put them away as it
were by diuorcement. For so are sinners to be terrified or feared with the
threatenings of the judgments of God, that they may repent. Confer and
compare with this place other the like in the other Prophets, as first that of
Isai cap. 50. ver. 1. in these words: Thus says the Lord, where is that bill
of your mothers diuorcement, whom I have cast off? Or who is the creditor, unto
whom I sold you? Behold for your iniquities are ye sold, and because of your
transgressions is your mother forsaken. Secondly, Ierem. 3. ver. 8. where GOD
speaks thus: When I saw, how that by all occasions rebellious Israel has
played the harlot, I cast her away, and gave her a bill of diuorcement: yet her
rebellious sister Judah was not afraid, but she went also and played the harlot.
And thirdly, almost the whole 16. chapter of Ezechiel.

Verse. 3. Least I strip her naked, and set her as in the day that she was
borne, and make her as a wilderness, and leave her like a dry land, and slay
her for thirst.
A lively setting out of the danger that was to fall upon them.
A Lively setting out of the danger that was like to ensue, wherein the
necessity of the former admonition is showed, to wit, by the excee^ing great
danger, the which did even then hang over the heads both of the body of the
kingdom it self, and also their successors and posterity. And first of all
he deals with the danger the which was then in breeding against the whole
body. And that is such, that the condition and case of this whole nation shall
become most miserable, unless it cast away her idolatries.

Three things to be noted in this verse.
In this verse three things are showed to hang over the head of the whole land.
First, that this nation shall of God be made so naked as she was at the first,
when as God adopted and chose it unto him at the beginning, the miser^ble
estate whereof at that time is at the full set do^ne Ezech. 16. The second, 1.
God will make the land as naked as it was at the first.
that after he has in this order forsaken her before, he will make her into a
wilderness, that is, bring her into a great laying waste both of cities, and
also of men, that is to say, 2. He will lay it waste.
that he will send enemies upon her, the which shall rob and spoil all
things, shall destroy their towns and cities, and slay the inhabitants. The
third is, that in the end he will also kill it, 3. He will cause it to dye for
thirst.
and cause it to dye for thirst, that is, will afflict or punish it with a most
miserable and lamentable kind of death. Out of which appears, that all our
happiness, yea that which is earthly also, does depend or hang upon the only
mercy and goodness of God toward us Matthew. 5. ver. 45. the which when as
through our sins we do turn away from us, then does great penury and want
of all things invade or come upon us. And this does David acknowledge Psalm.
30. ver. 7. when having made great reckoning of the assuredness of his former
most prosperous estate, he says unto God: But thou did hide thy face, and
I was troubled. And so Psalm. 4. ver. 6. by his answer the which he makes unto
the common question of the worldlings concerning the attaining unto good
things, he plainly enough declares, that God his favorable and loving
countenance toward us, is the cause and procurer of the same. Many (says he)
say, who will show us any good? but Lord, lift up the light of thy countenance
upon us.

Verse. 4. And I will have no pity upon her children: for they be the children
of fornications.
A danger that shall fall out unto their posterity.
NOw he preaches of the danger, the which hangs over the heads of the
children of that nation, that is, over their posterity also: namely, that it
will come to pass, that God afterward will not take any pity on them, but
will forsake them utterly also, and cast them away. See before concerning this
matter cap 1. ver. 6. The which thing afterward came in deed and in truth to
pass, as appears 2. King cap. 17. Now of that which has gone before, is
gathered, that neither that company, assembly, Idolaters, and idolatrous
assemblies, albeit they have some outward tokens of the covenant of God, are
not properly the Church of God.
or congregation which is an idolater, is the Church of God properly: albeit
that outwardly it retain some outward sign and token of the covenant of God:
neither that they which are of this company and assembly, and do worship
idols, albeit in old time they were circumcised, or now be baptized, are indeed
the people of God, because that in this place ver. 2. such a congregation is
denied to be the wife of God: and the children which are borne therein, are
said to be bastards, and not lawful, true, and the children of God in this
self same verse. Let the Papists then look and consider, A note for the
Papists.
what they have to judge of themselves, although they never so much brag, and
boast, and thunder, and give out great words that they are the Catholic Church.

Verse. 5. For their mother has played the harlot: she that conceived them,
has done shamefully: for she said, I will go after my lovers, that give me my
bread and my water, my wool, and my flax, mine oil, and my drink.
A reason of the threatening of these judgments.
THis is a rendering of a reason, why God does justly threaten such a judgment
and danger against the Israelites: and therefore would have it foretold unto
them. And the reason is, because that this whole nation has played the harlot,
and that most shamefully, and toward God most despitefully, whilst in such
sort it worshippeth idols. Whereof may easily be perceived how great, and how
execrable or accursed a sin idolatry is, albeit that men do either please
themselves in the same, or judge it to be no sin, or do often affirm and
define it to be great godliness. And idolatry is, What ido^^trie is.
either when any other, then the true God is worshipped: or when as the cause
of our good gifts and benefits is ascribed unto any other, then unto the true
God, and thanks therefore given to any other: or also, when as the true God is
otherwise worshipped of us, then he himself has commanded. And this verse
sets forth that same notorious idolatry of the nation of the Israelites,
the which is more largely described 2. King. cap. 17. and Ierem. cap. 25.
Therefore she plays the harlot, whilst she worshippeth idols: and that so
shamelesly and openly, that she is defiled with whoredoms and adulteries. For
the Altars of their idols, and the worship of them were set up in every place,
they were solemnised and reigned every where, albeit that things never so
beastly and filthy were there committed and done, as Sodometries, whoredoms,
and fornications, murtherings of children, dedications and consecrations of al
things made unto idols. Finally, the people did this most obstinatly or
stubbornly, and against GOD most reproachfully. For the whole nation did
profess and say, That those idols were their gods, whom they loved, and the
which alone they acknowledged for gods: after whom they would go: that is,
whom they labored diligently to worship and serve. In a word, which were unto
them the giuers and bestowers of all good things upon them, as of bread, water,
flare, oil, wine, etc. with all which good gifts and benefits they did
(through the goodness and bounty of the true God) abound, and yet gave
thanks for them unto their idols, but not unto the me God. What can be more
like unto the doings of the Papists the^ this?

Verse. 6. Therefore behold, I will stop thy way with thorns, and make an
hedge, that she shall not find her paths.
The threatening of a most grievous punishment.
THe threatening of a most grievous punishment: namely, of great straites and
troubles, whereinto God at the last shall bring and force this nation, so that
at that time there will be no gadding and running unto their idols, and idol
Temples, to wit, they shall so straightly and narrowly be besieged by their
enemies, that then they cannot get forth of their cities, and run unto Bethel
and Dan, where they had their idols placed. Therefore their paths shall be beset
and hedged in with thorns, that albeit in their hearts and minds they do
seek after those their forged and framed Gods, yet can they not with their
feet go unto them: although being in such sort afflicted or troubled they do
call upon them, yet from them shall they feel no help nor comfort. And these
things do indeed fall out unto idolaters. The true God is always near at
hand unto his Church.
But the true GOD is always near unto his Church, and does not at any time
forsake the same, and is not to be sought after from place to place, as if he
did flee away from her: neither is he at any time sought or called upon in
vain, but as Christ teaches Matthew. 7. ver. 7. If they ask, it shall be given
them: if they seek, they shall find: if they knock, it shall be opened unto
them. And the Psalmist comfortably to this effect and purpose writes Psalm.
145. ver. 18. The Lord is near to all that call upon him: yea, to all that
call upon him in truth.

Verse. 7. Though she follow after her lovers, yet shall she not come at them:
though she seek them, yet shall she not find them: then shall she say, I will
go and return to my first husband: for at that time was I better then now.
A confirmation of the former troubles threatened unto them.
A Confirmation of the troubles threatened before, taken from the effect that
should follow. For they shall be so great, that in the end the Israelites shall
be compelled and constrained to return unto God himself, whom they had
forsaken before. This happened under Oseas the last king of the Israelites, who
in part restored the worship of God among that people, as may appear 2. King.
cap. 17 ver. 2. where it is reported of him, That although he did evil in the
sight of the Lord, yet not in such sort as the other Kings of Israel that were
before him. Wherefore this place of Oseas is not to be understood of true
repentance of mind, whereby idolatry is utterly cast away, and the true
worship of God set up in the room of it: but of that same hypocritical
repentance, to wit, when as men being pressed down with the weight and burden
of afflictions or troubles, are in the end compelled to confess that it went
more happily and better with them, when as they served the true God. After
what sort hypocrites repent, and call upon God.
Therefore if then peradventure they seek the true God, and do call upon him,
they have not care of it, nor do it for God his self sake: nor of earnest love
or fear of him: but only for their own sake, that is, for fear of
punishment hanging over their heads, that by this means they may be delivered
from the miseries and troubles wherewithal they are oppressed. So Achab
repented for fear of the judgments of God. So did the Ninevites at the
preaching of Jonas. So also do Ivnderstand this place of false and fained
repentance only: and not of true repentance, the which at that time was not in
this people, as appears in the verse following. Although I make no doubt but
that the elect, or chosen of God are sometimes by God in such sort humbled and
cast down by afflictions, that being admonished or warned thereby, they do
truly and earnestly repent: whereof we have example Luke 15. ver. 17. and 21.
of the prodigal son. And in David Psalm. 119. ver. 71. where he acknowledges
that by affliction he was brought to the knowledge of the law of GOD. For there
he consesseth thus: It is good for me that I have been afflicted, that I may
learn thy statutes.

Verse. 8. Now she did not know that I gave her corn and wine, and oil, and
multiplied her silver and gold, which they bestowed upon Baal.
He plainly shows that their repentance was hypocritical, and fained.
AN explanation or making plain of their hypocritical repentance. For the
Prophet shows what manner of conversion or turning unto God, this of the
peoples was, that is, how counterfeit and fained: and therefore that it did not
turn away from them the judgments of God threatened before in the third verse.
And here the Prophet notes two things. The first, that in this the whole
counterfeit repentance of the people (the which they professed or made show of
by reason of the very great afflictions which they suffered) God by that people
was not truly acknowledged to be the author both of those good things the
which this people did enjoy; 1. The Israelites ascribe the cause of their
benefits unto others the^ God.
and also of that plenty or abundance, the which ouerflowed as it were unto
the self same people: but rather that the causes of this double benefit was by
them ascribed unto Idols, and Baalims, or else unto the Israelites themselves:
the which is notorious blasphemy against God. Therefore whether we have any
certain benefits, albeit in never so small plenty; or whether the same be
many and in abundance, all this is the gift of the true God, the meet
bounty and grace of God: neither is the praise of this bounteousnes to be
ascribed either unto idols, or else unto our selves in any case. The other point
of this verse is, 2. They made idols of the gold and silver, and of the other
benefits ordained worship unto them.
That these Israelites even at that time, when as they repented in such manner
as they made show of, did of those gifts of God, that is, gold and silver,
make Baalims and Idols: and of the oil, wine, and corn (the which the self
same Israelites had received of the true God) they did ordain and set up
worship unto the same Baalims, and not unto God. Then the which what can be
more reproachful against the true God, and also more blasphemous? Now as for
those things the which are here set down of the repentance of the
Israelites, the same did happen especially under Oseas the last king of the
Israelites, but yet before also at other times and upon the like occasions: the
which no doubt do prove and show this conversion or turning of this people
unto the true God to have been altogether counterfeit and feigned.

Verse. 9. Therefore will I return, and take away my corn in the time thereof,
and my wine in the season thereof, and will recover my wool, and my flax
lent, to cover her shame.
A grievous and just threatening
A Threatening both most grievous, and also most just against the same
Israelites: for the former declaration of their repentance shows that the
judgments of God against them are most just. For they are men so past al hope,
so cou^terfeit, and such hypocrites, that they must needs be punished. For
they which would not return unto the true God being tamed with so many
punishments and miseries: but feigned themselves to repent of their former life,
did in deed and in truth very notably mock GOD. As for the threatenings be
here mentioned they do contain sundry kinds of punishments to ensue, to the
end that hypocrites should understand, that they shall never mock God
scotfree, or without punishment: and also that wicked persons, and Idolators,
and backsliders may know, Sundry punishments to ensue upon the wicked
Israelites.
that (howsoever for the time they do flatter themselves) yet they do in the
end pull upon their heads most sharp and grievous punishments, wherewith they
shall be ouerpressed. And the first kind of punishment to ensue is penury and
want of all things, 1. Penury and want of all things.
the which do appertain unto the food and apparelling of men: like as in
those two things especially the life and commodity of men is contained, as
Paul teaches 1. Tim. 6. ver 8. when he wills Christians to be content being
provided of these necessaries, saying: Therefore when we have food and raiment
let us therewith be content. Therefore as GOD alone gives these things: so in
like manner does he take them away.

Verse. 10. And now will I discover her lewdnes in the sight of her lovers, and
no man shall deliver her out of mine hand.
SHame and public infamy or reproach is the second kind of punishment here
threatened. 2. Public shame and reproach.
For unto the former misery this second shall be added, that is, unto the great
want of all things shall also be added reproach and scorning, the which shall
openly be made of them: and this not at the hands of every one of mean regard
indifferently: but even of those very same, whom the Israelites themselves did
before so greatly account of, that is, they shall be laughed to scorn of the
Idolators, whom they praised, imitated of followed, and preferred before the
true servants of God. These shall openly mock them in their greatest misery
and want of all things. Secondly, the third kind of punishment is in this verse
also rehearsed, to wit, 3. Their want and reproach shall be perpetual.
This the both want and reproach of the Israelites shall be perpetual. For no
man shall deliver this hypocritical people out of the hand of God, and from
that affliction. Further, let all hypocrites note that these things are
threatened also unto them.

Verse. 11. I will also cause all her mirth to cease, her feast days, her new
moons, and her Sabboths, and all her solemn feasts.
THe fourth kind of affliction to ensue, to wit, 4. Taking from them all
public joy and mirth.
The depriving or bereauing them of all public joy and mirth (whether the same
be taken in matters politic, or religious and divine) and the ceasing of the
same: and so consequently great mourning, sorrow and heaviness, the which
shall be joined unto their both want and perpetual ignominy or reproach on
every side and in all places. For at least wise to them in such sort afflicted
some comfort of mind should be left either of matters political, or of holy
matters, and of feasts and worship dedicated unto GOD, that by some means they
might mittigate or assuage this their mourning and affliction. But occasion and
granting, and means of all joy shall be taken from them. And surely it is
meet and reason, in as much as such punishment (as is here threatened against
wicked persons, Idolators, and back sliders) is a certain earnest and sensie
of everlasting death appointed for them, that they should also be deprived and
void of all comfort, and joy, and of all mirth and gladness. And in this place
the Prophet has comprised all kind of public and private comfort. For the
same is taken either of public meetings, feasts, and joys: or of religious
assemblies, as when the worship of God is celebrated or exercised. But God
takes away and denies both these kinds unto them: the first or joy in
politic matters, under this word (mirth or gladness) the other that is joy or
comfor in religious matters, under the other words, by the which for the most
part those holy reioycings are signified in the Scriptures, as is, solemn
feast days, namely such as falls out yearly: also the feasts of the new
moon, the Sabboths, and lastly, such other feast days as fall out in the
year, and are commanded by God.

Verse. 12. And I will destroy her vines and her fig trees, whereof she has
said, These are my rewards that my lovers have given me: and I will make them
as a forest, and the wild beasts shall eat them.
THe fifth kind of affliction, Exceeding great wastenes of the whole land. 5.
The laying wast of their whole land.
For God shall deny unto them not only the increase and fruits of the fields,
trees, and plants: but shall moreover destroy the trees themselves, and shall
damme and stop up the fountains and springs of all good gifts and
benefits. For God shall destroy and pull up by the roots, their vines, and
wild fig trees, and other trees growing in their land of their own accord,
to wit, for a perpetual testimony or witness of his wrath against them.
Finally, he shall lay waste, and bring into a wilderness the fields them
selves, yea and also their whole country, so that afterward it cannot be
tilled by men: but shall be eaten up and inhabited by wild beasts. So sharp
doubtless and heavy, but yet just are the judgments of God against our sins
and Idolatries, that we should all of us betimes think upon them, feel them,
and avoid them: or otherwise continuing in our wickedness be oppressed with
those punishments, and perish with the world, as Paul tells the Corinthians
epist. 1. cap. 11. verse 32. whom he wills to judge themselves that they be
not judged. Forwe (says he) when we are judged or chastened of the Lord, that
we should not be condemned with the world, for these punishments does the world
and wicked men feel even now at this day, and that daily.

Verse. 13. And I will visit upon her the days of Baalim, wherein she burnt
incense unto them: and she decked her self with her earings and her jewels,
and she followed her lovers, and forgot me says the Lord.
The conclusion of the former punishment.
THe conclusion of the former punishment declaring the cause of the same. God
then will in such sort be avenged of the contempt or despising of his name and
worship: and will punish those profane and heathenish Idolatries of this
people. The days of Baalim, The Israelites served Idols above 200. years
are that same whole time wherein the kingdom of Israel served Idols. And this
time was very long, and far above more then two hundredth years continually did
this wickedness reign in that people. And as this time was long, so also was
the Idolatry of these men very strange and outrageous: the which thing the
similitudes following do declare and show, to wit, That this people did deck
up themselves with earings and jewels, when as they worshipped their Baalims,
that is to say, willingly spared for no furniture, no cost, no brave apparel
and attiring in the doing service and worship unto these Idols: so bedlam mad
are men forsooth that are Idolaters in the garnishing and honoring of their
gods, the which are nothing but the idle inventions of their own brains. But
we on the contrary part are too covetous and pinching in the doing of cost for
the name and honor of the true God. The which course even at this day to our
great grief of mind, we do see to be taken of the Popish Idolators. But let
them not be deceived. For God does not always tarry and wait for the
repentance of every one so long space of time, as he did for these Israelites.
Let them therefore forthwith, and by and by repent. And let us in like manner
depart from our sins and wickedness. Finally, says the Lord, This nation has
forgotten me. The which was a notorious and wonderful ingratitude or
unthankfulness, and infidelity to worship Idols, and to forget the true God, by
whom they above all other people of the world by a peculiar and especial
covenant were in Abraham adopted or chosen for his people and proper
inheritance. Therefore they were inexcusable and most worthily punished by God
with so grievous punishments.

Verse. 14. Therefore behold I will allure her, and bring her into the
wilderness, and speak friendly unto her.
A comfort for the small number of the godly
A Comfort wherewith God lifts up the remnant of this people, the which have
continued in the fear of God, and wills them to hope well in the midst of
most sorrowful afflictions or troubles, how desper at soever in the judgment
of men, things may seem to be, and that there may be thought to be no hope at
all of the restoring of the church at that time. But this verse contains
four especial points to be noted. 1. The orderly hanging together of this
sentence noted in the word laken.
First the orderly hanging together of this sentence, the which is showed by
the hebrew word (laken) the which some translate (for this cause) others
(therefore) but I translate it (wherefore). For it is not a word rendering a
reason, of that which God will do after the accomplishment of the former
punishments. It seems therefore to be a note of God meditating or devising
and bethinking, and as it were determining with himself what he will do,
after that he has represented or laid before himself the miserable condition
and estate of this people. Secondly, there is to be noted, 2. Who promises
who promises those things the which do follow, or who speaks: to wit, he
that is God indeed, speaking the truth, and almighty: I, says he: lest any
man might doubt of the coming to pass of the matter, albeit never so hard in
the opinion of men. Thirdly, what God promises, to wit, 3. What God promises.
the restoring of his church, even in the remnant and residue of this people
the which was before most grievously afflicted, albeit, the same be very small.
The which is afterward particularly declared, but in this place there is first
generally set down after what manner God will before hand prepare the same
remnant, before that he will gather out of them the same church unto himself.
First of al therefore, he will so inwardly move them by his holy spirit, that
they shall long after God, and seek his word: I will allure them, says he.
After the same sort God speaks before, Amos 8. ver. 12. of their longing and
seeking after the word of God. So David Psalm. 42. ver. 2. expresses his
longing after GOD, saying: My soul thirsts for God, even for the living God:
When shall I come and appear before the presence of God? And again Psalm. 84.
ver. 2. My soul longs, yea, and faynteth for the courts of the Lord: for
mine heart and my flesh rejoice in the living God. Secondly, he shall speak unto
that remnant with a sounding voice in the outward ministry by his Prophets and
Apostles, and their lawful successors. Thirdly, God speaks those things
which shall be unto them most wholesome, wished for, joyful, and pleasant and
well liking to their hearts, to wit, he shall speak of their salvation, of
their peace with God, of the forgiveness of their sins. All which things are
most joyful news, and indeed the Gospel of Christ. So Psalm. 85. ver. 2, and
10. David says: Thou have forgiven the iniquity of thy people, and covered
all their sins. Mercy and truth shall meet: righteousness and peace shall
kiss one another. And so is the Psalm. 126. full of most sweet joys that the
godly after their return from the captivity shall be filled withal. The
fourth thing here to be noted, 4. When this great mercy shall be showed unto
them.
is the time, after the which this so great mercy of God shall happen unto
them, namely, after that God has afflicted or punished this nation of Israel,
and that after such a sort, that, as at the first they wandered in the most
waste desert of Sinai: (when as they were delivered out of Egypt) so when as
they shall be brought again even unto the same condition and estate, and shall
be driven again into an horrible desert, because of their long captivity in
the mountains of Media: for thither were they dispersed as appears 2. King.
17. These things then were not to come to pass forth with and by and by: but
then at last after the long exile and captivity of this people among strange,
and savage nations and countries. And these things shall then especially come
to pass, when as God shall have pity on Israel, and that whole people shall
be saved, and by faith shall receive Christ, as Paul teaches that it shall
come to pass Romans 11. ver. 26. where he writes: And so all Israel shall be
saved, as it is written, The deliverer shall come out of Sion; and shall turn
away the ungodliness from Iaacob. Yet notwithstanding these things did in part
fall out as often as God in any age before that same general calling, did by
the preaching of the Gospel convert or turn any of them unto him: or else by
the preaching of his Prophets brought them unto his true worship, as under King
Ezechias.

Verse. 15. And I will give her her vineyards from thence, and the valley of
Achor for the door of hope, and she shall sing there as in the days of her
youth, and as in the day when she came up out of the land of Egypt.
A making more plain of the matter.
AN explanation or making of the matter more plain: for God does severally and
particularly set down what the promise of the restoring of the Church in the
remnant of this people does contain, and how great benefits it does
comprehend, that, accordingly as it is meet, 1. God promises them earthly
blessings.
it may of us most especially be accounted of. And first God promises earthly
benefits. For godliness, says Paul, has promises not only of the life to
come, but also of this brittle fleeting, and present life 1. Tim. 4. ver. 8.
But these benefits by the figure Synecdoche are comprehended under the name of
(vineyards) because that among other nourishments of the life of man a chief
place and reckoning is of wine, What Synecdoche is, see Amos cap. 5 ver. 21*
wherewith the strength of our body is very greatly sustained, like as the
goodness of God is greatly by the Prophet commended for the benefit of the same
Psalm. 22. and 104. Yet that the rest are here comprehended appears by the
verses 21. and 22. hereafter following. Furthermore, 2. He promises them most
ple^tifully.
by an argument from comparison God promises these benefits most abundant,
that is, great store and plenty of them. For look after what manner, and how
great he gave those benefits, when as at the first he brought them into the
promised land, so great also afterward will he bestow them on them. Therefore
they shall rejoice as in the day of their youth, etc. Lastly, he will give them
most unlooked for, and so shall these benefits be the more welcome unto them,
3. He promises them most valooked for.
like as when at the first in the valley of Achor God gave unto them the sight
and use of that holy and most fruitful land. For that valley was as it were the
beginning of those benefits and first entrance into that hope, whereby they saw
and knew indeed, that they should in short time enjoy and possess those good
gifts of God. For Hiericho was destroyed, and there they gathered together
both in that city, and in that valley an infinite mass of gold and silver,
lof. 6. verse. 19. where Ioshuah wills that it should be consecrated unto the
Lord, saying: But all silver and gold, and vessels of brass and iron shall be
consecrate unto the Lord, and shall come into the Lords treasury.

Verse. 16. And at that day, says the Lord, thou shall call me Ishi, and shall
call me no more Baali.
Another kind of benefits.
ANother kind of benefits the which then also GOD will bestow upon his, that
is, Spiritual benefits, the which being sundry and manifold, there is but one
sort of them in this place reckoned up, to wit, the mutual marriage of GOD and
them. For this marriage is between God and all the godly. 2. Corinthians. 11. And
Christ Mat. 9. ver. 15. compares himself unto a bridgroome, and his disciples
unto the bride, where he says: Can the children of the marriage chamber
mourn, as long as the bridegroom is with them? So Cant. 4. ver. 8. Christ
calls the Church his spouse, as also in many other places of that most holy,
sweet, and excellent song, saying: Come with me from Lebanon my spouse, God so
hates Idolatry that he will not have his people use so much as a name that has
been superstiticusly abused.
even with me from Lebanon, and look from the top of Amanah, etc. For our
souls are the spouses of Christ. And this shall appear by the words the which
the Church shall use. For she shall call that same true God and Ichouah, her
husband, and not any longer her Baal, or by the name of Baal; albeit that name
do oftentimes signify an husband also. But lest there should any sign or
senfie of Idolatry remain among the godly even in the very names, the godly
talking and speaking of God shall no more use the word (Baal:) but shall call him
Ichouah, and their husband. And such titles does the Prophet Isa^ give unto God
cap. 54. ver. 5. where we read thus: For heeth^ made thee is thine husband
(whose name is the Lord of hosts) and thy redeemer the holy one of Israel,
shall be called the God of the whol^ world. And truly we ought to hate even
the very names of Idols, neither is it lawful to use them when as we speak of
God. Finally, we may never talk of any filthy matters, but by way of
execution, or detesting and abhorring of them. And therefore Psalm. 16. ver. 4.
David witnesses, That he will not with his lips make mention of the names of
their Idols. And Paul Ephesians. 5. ver. 3. says: B^^ fornication, and all
uncleanness, or covetousness, let it not be once ^^med among you, as becomes
Saints: yea under the Gospel Paul^, Cor. 6. verse. 15. opposes or sets Baal
against Christ saying: What concord has Christ with Belial?

Verse. 17. For I will take away the names of Baalim out of^^ mouth, and they
shall be no more remembered by their names.
An amplficatio^ of the former promise.
AN amplification of the former promise. For the faythfulnes of this spiritual
marriage shall be so sincere and pure even on the behalf and part of the
godly, that, God so firmly joining and turning their hearts unto him, they
shall within themselves blou^ out, do away, and utterly cast out both from
their mind and mouth, al remembrance of Baal, that is, spiritual fornication,
and the occasion thereof.

Verse. 18. And in that day will I make a covenant for them, with the wild
beasts, and with the fowls of the heaven, and with that that creeps upon the
earth: and I will break the bow, and the sword, and the battle out of the
earth, and will make them to sleep safely.
THe third kind of benefits, the which, although it be referred unto earthly
benefits, A third kind of benefits.
yet is it diverse from that which is contained before ver. 15. For there food
and sustenance was promised: but here peace and great tranquillity or quietness.
And this kind of benefits also is an especial gift of God, the which is
opposed or set against the former calamities and miseries of this people, the
which by wars they had now already so often felt. Of this benefit of GOD
toward the godly the law makes mention Deuteronomy. 28. Also Psalm. 25. ver. 13.
where the Psalmist speaking of the godly man, says: His soul shall dwell at
ease, and his seed shall inherit the land. And Psalm. 144. ver. 14. among
other the blessings in that Psalm reckoned up, he adds: That there be none
invasion, nor going out, nor no crying in our streets. Further, there is in
this place promised unto the Church peace both with the brute beasts and also
with men themselves. And with the bruit beasts, because that by the beasts men
are wont to be troubled; and beasts, together with the hurt that they may do
unto men, is reckoned up among the four sorts of God his plagues Ezec. 14.
ver. 21. For thus says the Lord God: God his four sore judgments
How much more when I send my four sore judgments upon Jerusalem, even the
sword, and famine, and the noisome beast, and pestilence, to destroy man and
beast out of it? And Eliphas Job 5. ver. 23. does in like manner rehearse this
security from the fear of the beasts of the field, as a special favor of
God toward the godly when he says: For the stones of the field shall be in
league with thee, and the beasts of the field shall be at peace with thee. But
when God shall perform this blessing here promised, the godly shall have peace
and security, or freedom from danger even from all kind of beasts, whether
they have their being in heaven (that is in the air) or in the waters, or in
the earth. For they are all at God his command to execute his judgment, upon
the disobedient unto his word. And hereof we have example in the Lions sent in
by God upon those Idolatrous nations, whom the king of Assyria placed in the
Land of Israel, who slew them (as they themselves complain) because they knew
not the manner of the God of the land, 2. King. cap. 17. ver. 26.

Yea the Church of God shall be at peace with men also. For all wars shall be
whist, and such things as are used for the making of wars withal, as bow,
sword, spear, etc. shall be broken in pieces by God, that the Church even in
this world may dwell safely among men and publicly and openly serve the true
God, and worship him according to his word. And this is acknowledged for God
his great benefit Act. 9. ver. 31. where it is mentioned, That the Churches
then had rest through all Judea, and Galile, and Samaria, and were edified, and
walked in the fear of the Lord, and were multiplied by the comfort of the holy
Ghost. So Psalm. 46. ver. 9. David speaks of God, that He makes wars to
cease unto the ends of the world: he breaks the bow, and cutteth the spear,
and burns the chariots with fire. And Isai imputes it unto one of the
fruits of the Gospel, that God will knit the hearts of the godly by the same
converted, in such a godly love and amity, that they shall be at peace and
concord one with another cap. 11. ver. 9. Then shall none hurt nor destroy in
all the mountain of mine holiness (says God:) for the earth shall be full of
the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters that cover the sea. The like he
reports cap. 2. ver. 4. That they shall break their swords into mattocks:
and their spears into siethes: nation shall not lift up a sword against
nation, neither shall they learn to fight any more.

Verse. 19. And I will marry thee unto me for ever: yea, I will marry thee
unto me in righteousness, and in judgment, and in mercy, and in compassion.
A repetition and further declaration of one of the former benefits.
A Repetition and declaration of that benefit, the which is contained before
verse. 16. that it may of us be better understood, what manner of benefit it
is, and how great it is. And it is rehearsed again, because it is the
foundation and cause of the rest of the gifts of God toward us. There have
been inserted or set between this benefit there mentioned and here again
repeated, certain things in the mean season touching earthly blessings:
because that in the reckoning up of so great store and plenty of the gifts of
God toward his Church, neither order nor method can exactly or perfectly be
kept: for the power and meditation or thinking of the wit of man upon them, is
overwhelmed with the multitude of the^, much less that the discourse of our
speaking of them, and reckoning of them up can be exact and perfect as it ought
to be. So then this verse and that which follows do show wa t manner of
marriage this spiritual marriage of God with us is, What manner of marriage
that of God is with us showed by sundry effects of the same.
and after what manner we are to enter into it. And this first verse teaches
what manner of marriage it is, by the sundry effects thereof, of the which
this is the first, that this covenant and marriage is perpetual, and not for a
time. For albeit that sometime it seem for a season to be broken off: yet it
lasts and indureth notwithstanding. For God his election by Christ is
unvariable or unchangeable, 1. It is perpetual.
as his good will and loving affection toward his Church cannot be changed or
broken off by any means whatsoever, as appears Romans 8. in the end of the
chapter, Who shall separate us (says Paul most comfortably) from the love of
Christ? Shall tribulation, or anguish, or persecution, or famine, or
nakedness, or peril, or sword? In all these things we are more then
conquerours through him that loved us. For I am persuaded that neither death,
nor life, nor Angels, nor Principalities, nor Powers, nor things present, nor
things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature shall be able to
separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. Secondly,
2. It is most holy, and constant in respect of God.
this self same marriage in respect of God is in righteousness and judgment,
that is to say, it is most holy and constant or steadfast. For I take the word
(righteousness) in this place for the things and promises themselves, wherein
the bargain and covenant of this marriage does consist. And all these are most
holy, and most just, to wit, such as is this, that we may have the true God
for our God: that we may worship him, and he on the other side will have and
take us for his people. For all these covenants are the substance of this
marriage, and do contain truly most lawful and most holy promises. I take
the word (judgment) for the constancy and steadfastness of the former
conditions or covenants. For all these does God for his part perform and
steadfastly fulfill. And in respect of our selves, 3. It is in mercy and
compassion in respect of our selves.
this self same marriage is in the bounteousnes and compassion of God toward
us, that is to say, it does every where show and declare the singular
bounteousnes of God proceeding from his mere mercy and compassion. So is it
declared in the Psalm 85. And these things do set out what manner of marriage
our spiritual marriage with God is.

Verse. 20. I will even marry thee unto me in faithfulness, and thou shall know
the Lord.
How this marriage between God and us is contracted.
NOw the Prophet teaches how this same spiritual marriage is begun and
contracted of us with God: namely, in faith toward God alone, and in the
sincere and true knowledge of him. And in deed they are the true Church and
Spouse of God, the which do know God truly: and that not after any sort
whatsoever: but out of his word written. So do I in this place understand this
verb (Thou shall know) by Romans 10. ver. 14. where invocation or calling upon
God is said to come by faith, and faith by hearing, and hearing by preaching,
etc. And it is not sufficient or enough to know God out of his word written:
but faith also must be had in him, whereby we may with all our heart rest in
his promises through Christ, and depend or hang upon him alone. But here faith
went before knowledge: Faith going before knowledge, and how?
because that in the holy Scriptures oftentimes the effects are wont to be
rehearsed before the causes, as being better known unto us: but yet in the
order of causes knowing, or knowledge goes before faith.

Verse. 21. And in that day I will hear, says the Lord, I will eue^ hear the
heavens, and they shall hear the earth.
Why certain earthly blessings are here again repeated.
LIke as in the verses before the Prophet repeated or rehearsed again some
spiritual blessings, to the end that he might beat them the more and more
into our heads, and show that they were diligently to be considered and
weighed of us: so does he here also repeat or rehearse again, and set down
certain earthly benefits, both that they might assuredly persuade themselves
in the penury and want of all things, that yet notwithstanding these should
come, and that they should be given them of God: and also that they might
understand by what means and after what sort so great store and plenty of
good things, as was promised before ver. 19. might be powered out upon them. And
this self same is of force to confirm and strengthen us also in the promises
of God, how greatly soever we are to struggle and wrestle with a desperate
estate of all things.

Three things to be noted.
But here are three things to be noted. The one, the time, (In that day) that
is, at that time, in the which God shall gather his Church of the remnants of
Israel: 1. The time.
and not forthwith, or at such time as they peradventure might think that it
should come to pass, the impatiencie of their minds pressing them. 2. Who
promises.
The second, who promises these things, that is, Jehovah, that is to say, he
that is the true God, true of his word, and almighty, whose will nothing can
withstand. The third, 3. What he promises.
what he promises, to wit, a most ready and most certain way, whereby great
plenty and store of all things and earthly blessings shall ensue and follow.
For the Lord God shall hear the heavens, and the heavens the earth: and on the
contrary side great scarcity and want of all things happens, when as the
heaven is of brass, and the earth of iron Deuteronomy. 28. that is to say, the
temperature and disposition of the heaven is not answerable nor agreeable unto
the earth, that it may bring forth her fruits, and God gives not the evening
and morning rain Iam. 5. ver. 7. The which the godly husbandman with long
patience looks for at the hands of God. For, Behold (says James) the
husbandman wayteth for the precious fruit of the earth, and has long patience
for it, until he receive the former and latter rain. And so does Zachary
teach them to beg the same of God for the increasing of the fruits of the
earth, cap. 10. ver. 1. saying: Ask you of the Lord rain in the time of the
latter rain: so shall the Lord make white clouds, and give you showers of
rain, and to every one grass in the field. How God is said to hear the
heaven.
But God is said (to hear) the heaven, because the heaven after a certain
manner does pray unto God, that it may do his duty in making of the earth
fruitful, and so the same may bring forth food and sustenance for men. For all
creatures after a sort do feel that they were made for the sake of men: and
therefore they do groan with them, and do labor and travail in the helping
of them, according unto the charge laid upon them by God, the which their
charge that they may fulfill, they are said to pray unto God, and to be heard
of him. And touching this point, Paul writes Romans 8. ver. 22. after this
manner. For we know that every creature groaneth with us also, and trauaileth
in pain together unto this present.

Verse. 22. And the earth shall hear the corn, and the wine, and the oil, and
they shall hear Izreel.
A Confirmation by the event or that which should follow. A confirmation.
There shall therefore be very great store of all kind of sustenance, albeit
denied unto them before, yet at that time notwithstanding, as of corn, must
or new wine, oil, etc. ver. 9. before in this chapter denied them: yea and
also in the self same place there shall be this abundance of all things, where
there was before the great curse of God, and want of all things, to wit, in the
territories and ground of Izreel, unto the which God before cap. 1. ver. 4. and
5. threatened most grievous punishments, and great barrennes of al fruits. For
when as God cease to be angry with us, all things also cease to be hurtful
unto us, and begin to be favorable.

Verse. 23. And I will sow her unto me in the earth, and I will have mercy
upon her, that was not pitied, and I will say unto them, which were not my
people, thou art my people: and they shall say, thou art my God.
The conclusion.
THe conclusion, the which also is made by an allusion and resemblance unto the
name of Izreel. God therefore will acknowledge the Israelites, whom before cap.
1. ver. 6. and 9. he called ( Loruchamah, and Lo-gammi) for his people,
inheritance, Church, and will bestow upon them his mercy through Christ: Yea
that land which before was called Iizreel, as hated unto God, a shop of
idolatry, and theater or open stage of cruelty, shall be now Iizreel* that
is, that blessed seed, out of which God gathers his Church. For of Iizreel
God will sow his Church, that is, he will acknowledge and make that land and
country his own, and a peculiar inheritance unto himself. But these things
shall at that time most truly happen and come to pass, when, as Paul says,
Romans 11. ver. 26. all Israel, and not only the tribe of Judah, or Benjamin
shall be saved, and converted or turned unto Christ by the preaching of the
Gospel. Yet they have and do come to pass in part, when some of thee
Israelites at any time either by the Prophets, or by the preaching of the
Gospel are converted unto the true God.

CAP. 3.
Verse. 1. Then said the Lord unto me, Go yet, and love a woman (beloved of her
husband, and was an harlot) according to the love of the Lord toward the
children of Israel: yet they looked to other gods, and loved their wine
bottles.
An other Sermon much like unto those which went before. Why the same things
are so often rehearsed
ANother Sermon, the which briefly repeateth or rehearses that which has been
set forth in the chapters going before: it adds or puts to only one
thing more, to wit, the time, wherein the gathering together of the Church out
of the remnants of the kingdom of Israel, shall be. And it was needful that
these things should be often spoken, both by reason of the most miserable
estate of this kingdom, the which happened within a little while afterward:
and also because that by reason of the longnes of the time, wherein the things
which are promised unto them, shall come to pass, the godly might be
discouraged, and wax faint hearted. Therefore to the end that they may be
thoroughly confirmed or strengthened, these things are set forth and rehearsed
afresh. So in the Prophet Isai almost from the 40. chapter unto the 66. the
same promises of God are often rehearsed. So likewise in the Revelation the
same threatenings of God after a diverse manner, and under diverse figures are
iterated or repeated again, to the end that men may the better and more
certainly believe that they shall come to pass.

Three things to be noted in this verse.
Now this verse has three certain points to be observed or noted. The one, The
person of him that speaks: and that is Jehovah. For hereby there comes
assurance and authority unto this promise, when as he which declares the
same, 1. The person speaking.
is that same true God which cannot lie, as Paul says Tit. 1. The second, What
God wills to be done, to wit, 2. What he speaks.
he commands that the Prophet do yet once again represent or show
himself unto the same people of Israel, as if again he married a wife, the
which being very greatly loved of that her first husband, nevertheless most
lewdly played the harlot, or rather the whore most shamefully. So then I do in
this place take the word (Reangh) for an husband, as Paul Philip. 4. ver. 3.
does generally translate this word (Suzugon) a yoke fellow: and Jeremy the 2.
it is also taken for an husband. Furthermore the word (Naph) the which is taken
for those only that are married, does persuade the same, or leads unto this
interpretation. And this vision is like unto that which was rehearsed before
cap. 1. The third point shows the cause of this vision. And that is, 3. The
cause of this vision.
for this that the people, or that kingdom of Israel, greatly beloved of God
their husband, had notwithstanding shamefullie played the harlot, and was
defiled both with most manifest or open idolatry, and also with most wicked
filthiness and wantonness of life. For these words (they look unto other gods)
note their bedlam madding after idols: and these (they love their bottles of
wine) betoken their wicked life, drunkenness, bodily whoredom, and other such
like vices. So is this kingdom called a kingdom of tossepots and drunkards
Isai cap. 28. ver. 1. Woe to the crown of pride (says the Prophet) the
drunkards of Ephraim, for his glorious beauty shall be a fading flower, which is
upon the head of the valley of them that be fat, and are overcome with wine.

Verse. 2. So I bought her to me for fifteen pieces of silver, and for an homer
of barley, and an half homer of barley.
The second part of this vision.
THe second part of this vision, wherein is described or set forth the
execution of the former commandment. The Prophet therefore obeyed: and
speaks unto the people by the commandment of God, in such sort as if he had
betrothed unto himself such a wife. But he shows that this self same, whom
both her first husband loved, and which the Prophet had appointed for his wife,
was at the first of very base regard, and of a servile condition. For the
Prophet bought her unto him, and that not for so great a pri^^^ as other
bondslaues are wont to be sold for: but far better cheap* For other servants
for the most part according unto the law of Go^ Exodus 21. ver. 32. were
esteemed at 30. sicles of silver, that is at f^^teene Talers: but this his wife
that should be, is bought but for f^^teene sicles of silver, that is, for
seven Talers and an half, a sm^^ matter and of very little price being added
unto the said sum, The Taler, or Daler is an outlandish coin of some five
shillings value, or there abouts, of the which there are very many several
sorts, and of several prices.
such as might be the value of an homer and an half of barley. An^ these
things do the more notably set forth and show how gre^^ the mercy and
favor of God was toward this people chosen (...) him to be his inheritance:
and how great on the other side was the unthankfulness of this people toward
God: that we also may apply the self same unto our selves.

Verse. 3. And I said unto her, Thou shall abide with me many dai^^: thou shall
not play the harlot, and thou shall be to no other (...), and I will be so unto
thee.
THe third part of this vision or commandment of God unto Oseas. The third
part of this vision.
And it contains what he was to do, before that he married to wife this
woman, the which had before so shamefully played the whore. And he must keep
her with him a good space, betrothed only unto him, and as yet not his married
wife: yet so that in the mean while she should not play the harlot, but
contain and keep her self chaste, and reserved for the marriage to come.
Therefore the promise, force, and remembrance of the condition of marriage to
come between that woman and the Prophet remained still. So then there ought to
be no playing the harlot in the mean season. But the fit time of consummating
or finishing up the marriage, was of that Spouse quietly to be waited, and
tarried for. For in the mean while both of them ought to address, reserve,
and stay themselves unto the marriage to come, by vow, mind, and that most
assured promise, and not to commit whoredom with any other.

Verse. 4. For the children of Israel shall remain many days without a King,
and without a Prince, and without an offering, and without an image, and without
an Ephod, and without Teraphim.
AN explanation or laying open of all this matter more plainly. For he shows
more plainly the signification of that time, wherein the marriage between
Oseas and the woman betrothed unto him, was commanded so long to be differred
or put off. A more plain laying open of the differring of this marriage
And this is, by such a kind of sign and token, that God shows, that it
shall come to pass, that the people, and that same kingdom of Israel for a
very long season, and for many not only days or years: but whole ages shall
remain in such sort overthrown, and lie cast down, as has been foretold,
and shall not by any means at that time be acknowledged for a people or
nation. And yet notwithstanding that in the mean season this self same people
is not utterly accursed with God, or clean out of remembrance. For the hope
and most assured promise remains of a covenant and spiritual marriage, that
shall yet now hereafter be entered into and made again with God. Therefore God
is always mindful of that people.

Three parts of this explanatio^
This explanation contains three parts. The first rehearses the time, that
is, those many days, in the which this Spouse of the Prophet remained only a
spouse. 1. The time of Oseas his wife remaining only betrothed, and not married.
And those days are that same long ages, in the which that same kingdom and
people of Israel remained, and does yet now at this day remain in banishment,
and abandoned and cast off by God, until, as Paul says, the fulness of the
Gentiles be entered in. So then this people of Israel has now this long season
layen, and yet presently does lie as it we^e unknown, and almost blotted out
by destruction. And these days are to be measured or reckoned from the time
of the captivity of the ten tribes until that age, wherein God, casting off
the Gentiles, shall bring back and call again all Israel unto him, as I have
said, and as it appears Romans 11. ver. 26. alleged oftentimes before. That
which shall at the last come to pass and be fulfilled in the latter times of
the world, as is showed ver. 5. hereafter. For albeit when as God delivered the
Jews out of the captivity of Babylon, (and not the Israelites properly)
certain of these Israelites mixed and joined themselves unto the Jews
returning, and together with them came again into the holy land, as appears
by the book of Esdras cap. 7. and albeit that by the preaching of the Gospel
done by the Apostles and their Successors afterward, many out of every nation
came unto Christ, as is gathered out of the Acts cap. 2. and by the conversion
of the Gentiles: and so consequently many of these Israelites also were
gathered unto the Church of God: yet all this notwithstanding, the fulfilling of
this time, whereof here is spoken, shall be then at the last, when as the whole
Israel shall be converted unto Christ, the Gentiles because of their horrible
and notorious blasphemies being refused of GOD. And this is the first part of
this explantion.

2. What it signifies, that this spouse is said not to have played the harlot
during the time of her espousage.
The second part is, what it signifies, that this self same spouse is said not
to have played the harlot in the mean season, to wi^ that this nation so long
as they lived in that their miserable estate and condition, had no public or
open idolatries: as it had, when i^ was a kingdom divided from the kingdom of
Judah. Therefo^^ all that whole time of their banishment, until that their
conversion, they were, and shall be without idols, idol Temples, manifest and
open worshipping of idols, without images: nay also without Ephod and Teraphim,
or any similitudes and pictures, all which li^e they ungodly had, and openly
retained, during the time of their flourishing and prosperity. But when as the
self same nation shall be called unto Christ, yet shall it not put in ure
again their outward common wealth government and politic laws of Moses, as
Bernard writes upon the Canticles Sermon. 67. and 68. whatsoever others would go
about to prove and conclude out of the 9. of Amos, ver. 11. where GOD says,
That in that day he will raise up the tabernacle of David, that is fallen
down, and close up the breaches thereof, and that he will raise up his ruins,
and build it, as in the days of old. Read the exposition of that place before.

3. What the sitting or remaining of Oseas his spouse unto him many days, ver
3. before, does signify.
The third part of this explanation, what the gesture of sitting, or the
commandment of sitting or abiding ver. 3. before, does signify: namely, that
this kingdom utterly overthrown, shall lie ^s (...) were a dead body, and
shall so remain a very long season. For this kingdom shall lie without a
king, and without their prince, as it now appears. For no man does now truly
know, where are those same ten tribes long ago carried away by the Assyrians,
and which are their seats or abidings at this day. For they have not i^ the
whole universal world any outward form of their common weal, kingdom, or
dominion. Yet notwithstanding God has a care of them in the mean season: and
they remain as it were seed put into the ground: or as a body buried to rise
again (because of the old and ancient covenant of GOD with them) the which in
his due time shall show forth it self, and declare and confirm the
fulfilling of the things here spoken of. But some hold opinion that the Turks
came of those ten tribes, the which do hate most deadly all kinds of
idolatries.

Verse. 5. Afterward shall the children of Israel convert, and seek the Lord
their God, and David their king, and shall fear the Lord, and his goodness in
the latter days.
Two parts of this Verse.
A Comfort the which does altogether agree with the place of Paul Romans 11. ver.
26. of the general conversion of the Jews. But this verse contains two
things, 1. A comfort.
The comfort and the time of the same. The time is, The ending of days, the
which I understand not only of the time of Christ his being showed in the
flesh: 2. The time of the same.
but also of the very last times and age of the world. For then at the last
shall all Israel be converted unto Christ by faith in the Gospel, to wit, when
as the fulness of the Gentiles shall have entered in. For so does Paul evidently
expound this place. The comfort.
The comfort which here is promised, briefly is, the conversion of this people
so cast off before, and so past all hope of recovery, unto God
notwithstanding, and their uniting and knitting into the Church. They shall
then be converted, to wit, unto God, and that by faith of the Gospel
concerning Christ, whom these shall embrace, albeit the Jews crucified him.
And further here is declared manifestly, who shall be converted, and after what
manner. And the children of Israel shall be converted, that is, those self
same, which being severed from the kingdom of Judah, were called Israel. For
Paul says, All Israel, and not the Jews alone shall embrace Christ through
the preaching of the Gospel. And they shall so repent, that first they shall
seek the true God for their God; and not strange gods any more, unto whom
they looked before: but (Jehovah) that is, the same God that is almighty.
Secondly, the same Israelites shall seek David their king, that is, the true
Christ, of whom David was a figure, and the author of the seed. For Christ, as
he is man, is of the seed of David. In this place therefore David is taken for
that same true David, that is Christ, who was the truth of that David which
was the king, and who has an everlasting kingdom in the Church of God, the
which is the house of David. And therefore Luke 2. ver. 32.33. the Angel
tells the Virgin Mary, That the Lord God shall give unto him the throne of
David his father, and that he shall reign over the house of Jacob for ever,
and of his kingdom shall be none end. But these self same Israelites had
wickedly pulled and rent themselves from the kingdom of David, that is, from
the Church 1. King. 12. yet at that time they shall join themselves unto the
Church, and that most earnestly. Lastly, they shall with fear and admiration
or wondering at so great a benefit of God toward them turn unto God. For this
fear or trembling in this place is nothing else but an admiration, and that
very exceeding, at the so great mercy and goodness of God toward them. So
Ierem. 33. ver. 9. God shows that he will in such sort deal for Jerusalem,
and the captive Israelites, that all that shall hear of it shall fear and
tremble for all the goodness, and for all the wealth that he will show unto that
city. It is not then such a fear and a trembling as shall drive away, and
fray men from God: but such as shall allure and draw men unto God.

CAP. 4.
Verse. 1. Hear the word of the Lord, ye children of Israel: for the Lord has
a controversy with the inhabytants of the land, because there is no truth,
nor mercy, nor knowledge of God in the land.
Another sermon against the people and priests.
ANother Sermon, wherein first the people generally, and afterward the Priests
particularly are condemned of most grieous sins: and therefore most heavy
judgments of GOD are threatened against them both. And this threatening of God
is herein this place set after the comfort going before both, lest by means
thereof ungodly and wicked men should flatter themselves in their sins, and
promise unto themselves escaping without punishment: and also that it might be
as it were an answering unto an objection, as namely thus, If God will
hereafter acknowledge us for his, why does he now bruise and in a manner kill us
with so many punishments? ^. Parts of this verse.
This verse has three parts. The first contains an exhortation to harken
unto the word, yea and that of Jehovah, that is, the true God, to the end they
may appear to be the more disobedient and stubborn if they do not now hear it
being requested and exhorted thereunto. 1. An exhortation.
Hereby is seen how great our sluggishnes and sloth is, who even at that time
must be stirred up and pricked forward to hear, when as God himself
spea^eth. The second part shows, who are so earnestly exhorted to hear,
namely, The children of Israel, 2. Who are exhorted.
that is, the whole people, and not only one part thereof. This sluggishnes if
it were in the people of God, how great may it be noted to be, and always to
have been in other mortal men? The third part lays forth the matter it
self, 3. Whereunto they are exhorted.
unto the hearing whereof both all of us in general, and every faithful person
particularly ought to give ear. And this is a controversy and contention of
God against all the Israelites, the which he is desirous to have debated
whether in judgment or out of judgment by way of conference, that he may
prove them to be guilty, and that of most grievous sins. Metonymia is a
figure whereby one thing is put for another like unto the same, as here, the
land for the dwellers in it.
Therefore by a figure called Metonymia the land is here taken for the
Israelites the inhabitants or dwellers therein.

Further, there are reckoned up three most grievous kinds of sins, the which
reigned commonly and openly among these men, that is, Infidelity, and cruelty,
the which appertain unto the second table, and ignorance of the true God and
his word, the which is to be referred unto the first table of the law of God.
And this ignorance is the fountain of the other twain, that is, 1.
Unfaithful dealing. 2. Cruelty. 3. Ignorance of God.
of unfaithful dealing and cruelty: for where the true God is not known, there
must all kind of notorious offenses needs be rife: as may appear Romans 1.
ver. 28, 29. and so forth, where is at large rehearsed a long bead roll of
notorious sins following the ignorance of God. Then the which vices what is
more usual and common in the world at this day.

Verse. 2. By swearing, and lying, and killing, and stealing, and whoring they
break out, and blood touches blood.
A confirmation of the former accusation.
A Confirmation of the former accusation of the people, and the just foundation
or ground of the controversy of GOD with them. For he confirms it by the
effects themselves of those vices which he reproves in them, the which are
manifest and peculiar. And here first of all he reckons up the effects of
two vices (the which he named before verse. 1.) the which appeared by their
manners to be most known, and by the common course and fashion of the life of
them all. The effects of unfaithfulness are their perjury, lying, adultery.
The fruits of their cruelty void of all bountifulness and liberality among
them, are stealing and murder, and these latter so continual, so unpunished,
so usual, that they brake out as it were into a common custom among them: and
they joined murders unto murders, and blood unto blood, being restrained with
no fear, and with no punishment, either public or private. And these manners
do bewray a desperate licentiousnes of vices utterly past all hope of
recovery, and therefo^^ most sharply by God to be punished. With this
accusation of this people agree also these places of Scripture. Isai cap. 1.
ver. 21, 22, 23 where he cries out against the sins of Jerusalem in this
manner How is the faithful City become an harlot? it was full of iudgem^^ and
justice lodged therein, but now they are murderers. Thy (...) is become
dross: thy wine is mixed with water. Thy princes are rebellious, and companions
of thieves: every one loves gifts, and followe^^ after rewards: they judge
not the fatherles, neither does the wid^^^ cause come before them? And Amos
cap. 6. ver. 6. complayneth o^ their excessive feasting and reuelling without
any compassion and brotherly fellow-feeling of the miseries of others, saying:
They dri^^ wine in bowls, and annoint themselves with the chief ointments,
(...) no man is sorry for the affliction of Joseph. So Micheas cap. 1. verse. ^.
calls the dumme elements, yea and GOD himself to testify against them for
their sins like unto Oseas in this place: He^^^ (says he) al ye people,
hearken thou o earth and all that therein is, and let the Lord God be witness
against you, even the Lord from his holy Temple. And cap. 2. ver. 12. he names
the particular notorious vices of the mightier among the^, saying: Woe unto
them that imagine iniquity, and work wickedness upon their beds: when the
morning is light they practice it, because their hand has power. And they
covet fields, and take the^ by violence, and houses, and take them away: so
they oppress a man, and his house, even man and his heritage.

Verse. 3. Therefore shall the land mourn, and every one that dwells therein
shall be cut off, with the beasts of the field and with the fowls of the
heaven, and also the fishes of the sea shall be taken away.
A threatening of God his judgment for their sins, and the same two fold.
A Threatening of the judgment of God against the Israelites for the two former
sins of them, to wit, unfaithful dealing within themselves, and cruelty void
of all humanity and courtesy. And the threatening of this judgment of God is
two fold: namely, against the country, land or soil it self: Secondly,
against all the inhabitants or dwellers in the Country, 1. Against the
country it self
whether men, or brute beasts, 2. Against all the inhabitants, whether men, or
beasts.
and the same of all sorts, that is, cattle, fowls, and fishes the which
shall both mourn, and by little and little consume and pine away, and finally
shall be wasted and perish. Whereby appears that this punishment was some
contagious and infectious disease, the which God sent both upon the men and
also upon all kind of living creatures, such as is the pestilence, or some such
like, as is described Deuteronomy. 28. ver. 35. where Moses writes thus: The Lord
shall smite thee in thy knees, and in thy thighs, with a sore botch, that thou
can not be healed: even from the sole of thy foot unto the top of thine
head. And this punishment must needs be very sore, when as this sickness or
punishment touched the fishes themselves (the which in a manner do dwell in
another world from us) and not only the fowls and beasts of the field.
Further, to the end that men may be the more pierced and deeply touched, God
does not only destroy them themselves, as those which have sinned: but also
such things as are necessary for man to live withal: and that justly: for
whilst the master of the house is punished, the self same punishment does
worthily redound or fall upon such things also as are under his subjection, to
the end the judgments of God may be the more feared of us.

Verse. 4. Yet let none rebuke nor reprove another: for thy people are as they
that rebuke the Priest.
An amplificatio^ of their horrible wickedness
AN amplification of the wickedness of the Israelites described before, taken
from the manner of the same, and that very horrible and fearful. For unto this
pass was that their lewdnes grown and come, that they would not now suffer
themselves to be gently admonished, nor sharply reproved, such as Christ
likeneth the people of his time unto Luke 7. ver. 32. saying: They are like
unto children sitting in the market place, and crying one to another, and
saying: We have piped unto you, and ye have not daunced: we have mourned to
you, and ye have not wept. Nay these of whom Oseas speaks, were not content,
nor would suffer themselves to be proved faulty in those sins by the
servants of God, or of any good man whatsoever, having a care of their
salvation. Wherefore all the godly are willed to be silent, and to cease from
both admonishing, and also rebuking of them. For they do but lose their
labor, which do it. Finally this their stubbornness is showed by a similitude
to be desperate and past recovery. The stubbornnes of the Israc lites past
recovery.
For they are like unto those who withstand the Sacrificers or Priests of God
even to their faces, and that shamelesly: the which Priests by the word of God
it self do reprove the sins of men. And these kind of persons are condemned
Deuteronomy. 17. ver. 12. in these words: And that man that will do presumptuously
not harkening unto the Priest (that stands before the Lord thy God to
minister there) or unto the judge, that man shall dye, and thou shall take away
evil from Israel. Nay without al doubt these kind of men are most peevish,
stubborn in their sins, and altogether desperate or past hope of amendment.
Such it seems were the Asians, Phygellus. Hermogenes.
among whom were Phygellus and Hermogenes of whom Paul complayneth 2. Tim. 1.
ver. 15. where he writes unto Timothy: This thou know that all they which
are in Asia, be turned from me: of which sort are Phygellus and Hermogenes.
And such also were Hymeneus and Alexander, whom 1. Tim. 1. ver. 20. Paul
says, Hymeneus. Alexander.
that he delivered unto Satan, that they might learn not to blaspheme. And
albeit that all those whosoever, that are obstinate or stubborn in their
sins, are not by the Pastors to be given over (for Paul wills Timothy, and
in his person al ministers, to Preach the word: to be instant in season, and
out of season: to improve, rebuke, exhort with all long suffering and doctrine.
2. Tim. 4. ver. 2.) Yet those which are altogether past amendment, and will not
so much as lend their ears unto holy admonitions, are to be left, such as were
those the which murdered Steven, whom Act. 7. ver. 51. he calls Stifnecked,
and of uncircumcised hearts and ears: and those who by Christ are compared unto
hogs, unto whom pearls are notto be cast.

Verse. 5. Therefore shall thou fall in the day, and the Prophet shall fall with
thee in the night, and I will destroy thy mother.
The judgment of God against the Israelites, amplified by three places.
LIke as in the verse before going, the Prophet amplified the stubbornness of
the Israelites, so also does he now in this place amplify the judgment of God
which was to ensue against them, that he may show it worthylie, or as they have
deserved, to be such as they should feel it for to be. And he does amplify it
by three places. First, 1. By the persons that shall then perish. What the
figure Apostrophe is, see Amos cap. 8. ver 4.
by the persons, the which at the same time shall perish and dye. And these
are, both the People it self (unto whom by the figure Apostrophe he turns
his speech for the more vehemency, or earnestnes sake, and also that thereby
they may the more be stirred up) and also the Prophets of this people, that
is, the false prophets, the which have brought them unto such contemning or
despising of God, and ignorance of the truth of God. For as Christ says, If
the blind lead the blind they shall both fall into the ditch. Mat. 15. ver. 14.
So this Prophet cap. 9. ver. 8. complayneth of these ducing of the people by
the false prophets: The watchman of Ephraim (says he) should be with my God:
but the prophet is the snare of a fouler in all his ways. And therefore
Ezechiel cap. 14. ver. 10. shows that they and the people that seek unto
them shall be punished alike: And they shall bear their punishment: the
punishment of the Prophet shall be even as the punishment of him that asks.
Both of them therefore shall worthily be punished, because that these, to wit,
the false prophets have deceived the people, and they, namely, the people
themselves would be deceived, and preferred a lie before the truth. Such as
these Paul 2. Thessal. 2. ver. 11, 12. says: That God shall send unto them
strong delusion, that they should believe lies, that all they might be damned
which believed, not the truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness. Secondly,
2. By the circumstance of time.
he does amplify this judgment of God by the circumstance of time. For they
shall perish (day and night) that is, at all times, and when they shall think
to be in prosperity, as also in adversity. For the night covers many,
ends strifes, and stops and staieth the flying away of many: yet shall it
not deliver those from peril and danger. For darkness is no darkness but
light unto God, from whose presence it cannot hide men, as David confesses
Psalm. 139. verse. 11, 12. If I say, yet the darkness shall hide me, even the
night shall be light about me. Yea the darkness hides not from thee: but the
night shines as the day: the darkness and light are both alike. And where as
here the Prophet makes mention of the night, he seems to allude or have
respect unto the vain boasting of the false Prophets, who falsely gave out that
they received from God, night revelations, that is, in the night time revealed
unto them. But they therefore in the self same time chiefly shall be punished
by God. 3. By the greatness of the affliction.
The third part of this verse does amplify the punishment by the greatness of
the affliction. For it shall be so great that the mother of this people, that
is, the land it self wherein they have their abode, shall be laid waste, and
shall feel this judgment of God. The land therefore is called a Mother,
because those fruits, wherewith we are nourished by God, do grow out of the
earth. Wherefore of the profane or heathen writers the earth is also called
The mother of all things, and giver of life. And he terms the soil it self
by the name of a mother, to move the hard affections of these men, that they
might be thoroughly touched with the fear of so great punishments, as who by
and for their stubbornnes, have miserably pulled the same both upon their own
heads, and also upon the head of their mother.

Verse. 6. My people are destroyed for lack of knowledge: Because thou have
refused knowledge, I will also refuse thee, that thou shall be no priest unto
me: and seeing thou have forgotten the law of thy God, I will also forget thy
children.
He deals against their ignorance of the wor^ of God.
Order. AFter that he has entreated of the two vices, the which he set down
in the first place, now he comes orderly unto the third, namely, unto the
ignorance of the true knowledge of the word of God. And this he teaches to be
the fountain of all the sins of the people, of their stubbornnes and
disobedience, and other vices: and so consequently of the destruction, ruin
and misery of this people.

Two parts of this verse.
This verse has two parts. The first, Concerns the people. The second, The
Priests themselves, who ought to instruct the people in the word and fear of.
1. Concerning the people.
As touching the people, God pronou^ceth that they shall be destroyed, that is,
that they shall be pulled up by the roots, 2. Concerning the Priests.
and utterly killed and spoiled for ever growing any more. The cause is added
or set down, Because this people w^^ without knowledge.

Here first of all the word (knowledge) is restrained unto the knowledge of
GOD: 1. The people. The word knowledge taken here
Secondly, unto the knowledge of the tru^ God, and not of any counterfeit God:
finally, unto the true ^^^wledge of that same true God, 1. For the knowledge of
God.
the which is to be had thro^^^ (...) holy Ghost out of his written word only,
and not out of the^ ^^^tions and devices of men. It is not therefore to be
referr^^ (...) that knowledge of God, 2. The knowledge of the true God
the which has remained and is in^^^ly by the light of nature left unto us*
and by the things and cr^^^^ the which we see and do behold with our eyes: 3.
The true knowledge of the true God.
For the Isr^^^ were not void of this, but the name of knowledge betoken (...)
understanding of the secret of God revealed to the faithful^ (...) written
word, and so is the Gr^eke word (gnosis) every whe^^ken in Paul. So the word
knowledge is taken Isai 5. ver. 13. w^^^ he says in the person of God:
Therefore my people is gone into captivity because they had no knowledge. So
cap 11. ver. 9. rendering a reason why violence and wrong, and hurting one of
another should cease in the faithful converted by the Gospel, he says: For
the earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters that cover
the sea.

Moreover, 2. The Priests.
as concerning the Priests, who have been the cause of this ignorance, they
also shall be punished of God, and that justly: and not only they themselves,
but also their children and al their posterity. For God in the end made all this kind of Priests to be miserable and scorned, who both before and then also
have taught and did teach the Israelites most naughtily and falsely: first, in
the captivity of Assyria: afterwerds in all the rest of the time following, as
it now also appears in the other Levites and Priests, and in their
posterity and children which are remaining in the Jewish nation. Whereby
appears that a most grievous punishment is threatened by the Prophet unto
sacrificing Priests, that is, unto all wicked teachers even under the Gospel,
of whom and their punishment Peter writes at large in these words, 2. epist.
cap. 2. verse. 1, 2, 3. But there were false Prophets also among the people,
even as there shall be false teachers among you: which privily shall bring in
damnable heresies, even denying the Lord that has bought them, and bring upon
themselves swift damnation. And many shall follow their damnable ways, by
whom the way of truth shall be evil spoken of. And through covetousness
shall they with feigned words make merchandise of you, whose judgment long
agone is not far off, and their damnation sleeps not.

The cause of this punishment. of the Priests.
Further, the cause is added, and the same most just, of this so fearful
judgment of God against them, to wit, for that these fellow^^ who should have
instructed others in the true knowledge of ^^^d, and did profess the same, yet
notwithstanding did first them^lues despise the same knowledge, yea and forgot
it also, and therefo^^ could not teach it unto others. Wherefore they shall by
God ^^^de priued and bereaved of their dignity, and shall be put from their
degree and Priesthood. So Christ threatens the Scribes and Pharisees Mat. 21.
ver. 41. who with their own mouths pronounce the it own sentence against
themselves, when they answer unto ^is demand what shall be done unto those
wicked husband men, who l^^l^d the Lord and heir of the vineyard: He shall
(say they) ^ruelly destroy those wicked men, and shall let out his vineyard
unto o^^en (...) and men, which shall deliver him the fruits in their seasons.
^o Ezech. 44. verse. 12. the same judgment is rehearsed against the ^^^^l^ese
words: Because they served before their Idols, and caus^d the house of Israel
to fall into iniquity, therefore have I lift up mine ^^nd^g^^st them, says the
Lord God, and they shall bear their ini^^itie, ^he self same at this day
falls out unto the Popish Bi^ops.

Verse. 7. As they were increased, so they sinned against me: therefore will I
change their glory into shame.
The punishments of false and loytring teachers.
NOw from this place the Prophet enters into those punishments, the which God
threatens unto these false or negligent teachers, that by this example al
others that are set over the church for the government and teaching of the
same, may learn to do their duty: for as Paul says, the office of a Bishop
is (ergon) that is to say (a work) and not only (time) that is a certain
dumme dignity and honor 1. Tim. 3. ver. 1. This is a true saying, if any man
desire the office of a Bishop, he desires a worthy work. And therefore Isai
in their colors painteth out those that rather seek the gain then to
discharge the pain, and the profit before the teaching of the flock cap. 56.
ver. 10, 11. in this manner: Their watchmen are all blind: they have no
knowledge: they are all dumme dogs: they cannot bark: they lie and sleep,
and delight in sleeping. And these greedy dogs can never have enough: and
these shepherds cannot understand: for they all look to their own way, every
one for his advantage, and for his own purpose. Therefore Oseas here amplifieth
both the sin and also the negligence or sluggishnes of the Priests, that the
punishment of God against them may appear to be the more just. The prophet by
comparing the honor of the Priests above the rest of their brethren, increases
their s^a in staining and blotting of the same by negligence and false doctrine.
And first of all in this place he does it by the comparing of the honor, the
which they had obtained from God among that people above the other tribes of
the said people, as appears 1. Sam. 2. ver. 28. where God by the Prophet
puts Eli the Priest in mind of the same dignity whereunto he called Aaron
and his posterity above the rest of the people, saying: And I chose him out of
all the tribes of Israel to be my Priest, to offer upon mine altar, and to
burn incense, and to wear and Ephod before me, and I gave unto the house of
thy father all the offerings made by fire of the children of Israel. Read more
largely hereof Malach. 2. verse. 4, 5, 6, 7. For the Tribe of Leui only was by
God preferred before the other tribes in the exercising of the ministry or
office of his service and worship: and in the self same tribe of Leui, the
Priests, that is the sons of Aaron, were without al doubt preferred likewise by
God before their brethren of the same tribe. For the Priests alone attended
upon the Temple it self, the altar, and sacrifices, as appears Numb. 18. in
the beginning, and so certain verses following. But in the higher degree of
honor that they were placed in by God; so much the more filthilie, shameful,
and manifestly did they despise God. First, because every vice of the mind
has in it so much the more easy a blot to be seen, as the party that
offends therein, is greater in place and dignity then another offending in
the same. Secondly, because they sinned more shamefully, and disobediently then
the rest of the common people. And therefore they are more grievously to be
punished. Wherefore God threatens that it shall come to pass, that he will
turn the honor which he has given them into their open ignominy or reproach
and shame. For GOD honors those which honor him, and despises those which
despise him 1. Sam. 2. ver. 30.

Verse. 8. They eat up the sins of my people, and lift up their minds in
their iniquity, (or unto their iniquity.)
An amplificatio^ of the sin of the priests and of their contempt of God.
AN amplification of the fault and contempt of God, the which was committed by
these Priests. For they did not only despise the knowledge of the true God: but
they also abused the sacrifices of God unto their covetousness, leacherie,
drunkenness and gluttony, and gain and profit. And these are sins the
which both are, and also have at all times been common, and peculiar unto false
Prophets, as Peter teaches 2. Epist. cap. 2. verse. 3. alleged a little
before, verse. 6. of this chapter. For they make merchandise of the souls of
men. The same does Micheas teach also cap. 3. ver. 11. The heads thereof (says
he) judge for rewards, and the Priests thereof teach for hire, and the Prophets
thereof prophecy for money. The same likewise does Paul teach 1. Tim. 6. ver.
5. where he wills Timothy to avoid vain disputations of men of corrupt
minds, and destitute of the truth, which think that gain is godliness. And
lastly Christ himself does the like Matthew. 23. ver. 14. where he cries woe
against the covetousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, saying: Woe be unto you
Scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites: for ye devour widows houses, even under a
color of long prayers: wherefore ye shall receive the greater damnation. Yea,
and more over the false Apostles do abuse true godliness to fill the lusts of
their bellies, of whom Philip. 3. ver. 19. Paul says, their bellis is their
God, Two point to be noted.
and whose glory is their shame, which mind earthly things.

But this verse has two especial points to be noted. The first, of what
Priests and Sacrifices Ose as speaks, 1. Of what priests and sacrifices the
Prophet speaks.
when as there were no true Priest, nor any true Sacrifices then among the
Israelites, of whom only he now entreats. For the true Sacrificers or
Priests, and the true Sacrifices were by God ordained only at Jerusalem, where
was the Temple. I answer. Albeit those which at that time sacrificed among the
Israelites, were neither true Priests, according unto the true rule: and that
their sacrifices, which were made unto Idols, were no true sacrifices: yet he
speaks according unto the judgment and opinion which the Israelites
themselves, and their Priests, had of them, and he calls those, Priests, and
their killings of beasts, sacrifices: because that they did them in such sort,
at leastwise in their own judgment, as if they had been true Priests, and as
if those sacrifices also had been true sacrifices ordained by God himself. So
the idols which of themselves are nothing, yet unto the Idolaters are gods. And
so according to their opinion does Paul call them 1. Cor. 8. ver. 4.5. when he
says, That there be ma^^^ Gods, and many Lords. So those horned and dumme
false Bishops, are unto the Papists, Bishops. Therefore if this matter be
considered according unto their opinion, they did as much abuse both the
Priesthood, and also the sacrifices, as if they had been true Priests. And this
is the first point that is to be noted.

The second point is, how they abused those their sacrifices, to wit in this,
2. How they abused their sacrifices.
that they turned unto a mere or only occasion of their covetousness,
leacherie, gurmandise, even the very self same sacrifices, the which they held
and taught to be ordained unto the worship of God, holiness and godliness of the
mind, and also forgiveness of sins. To eat the sins of the people, is to
eat the sacrifices, which they offered for their sins.
So then they did eat the sins of the people, that is to say, they did
sweetly and delicatly devour the sacrifices for their sins offered of every
one of the people, they did eat them I say, to satisfy the lust and
gurmandise of their belly, and this was the end of the sacrifices the which
they propounded unto themselves, and the which only they respected and
regarded. So in the Popedom every the most holy things are by the Priests
converted and turned into an occasion of lucre and gain. Lastly, (they lifted
their minds unto the iniquities of the people) that is to say, they hearkened,
when as the sins of the people were many, or increased, as if then there were
a good harvest for them at hand So the Confessioners, The popish Conf^ss^rs.
or ghostly fathers, and Shriuing priests among the Papists, gather a most rich
and plentiful crop of the sins of men: and look by how much any man does
confess himself to be more miserable and sinful, so much the more gain do
they suck and pick our of him. So Paul says, that such Pastors have a great
pray and booty by women laden with sins. For such, (says he 2. Tim. 3.
verse. 6.) or of this sort are they which creep into houses, and lead captive
simple women laden with sins, and led with diverse lusts.

Verse. 9. And there shall be like people, like priest: for I will visit their
ways upon them, and reward them their deeds.
The threatening of a more grievous judgment.
THe threatening of a more grievous judgment of GOD against the same men also.
For God does not only forget them, and shall thrust them from the ministry of
the Church, as has been said before ver. 6. but moreover God shall utterly
overthrow and quite and clean race out their whole ministry, that afterward
there shall be no difference between the people and the priest, that is to
say, there shall afterward be no priest among them: there shall be remaining
no mention, regard, or dignity of this order. So Isai. 24. ver. 2.3. There
shall be like people, like priest, and like servant, like master, like maid,
like mistres, like buyer, like seller, like lender, like borower, like giver,
like taker upon usury. The earth shall be clean emptied, and utterly spoiled:
For the Lord has spoken this word. This no doubt is a most just punishment,
that those dignities, the which have despised God, and contemned him, should
also themselves by God be done away, and removed, and utterly abolished or
overthrown. And this the histories and experience of all times has taught,
and does teach. So at this day Nobility is extinct or rooted out among the
Grecians, because they greatly abused the same. So is the office of Bishops in
Asia, where there was exceeding great abuse of the same. For as it is 1. Sam.
2. ver. 30. Them that honor God, he will honor, and those that despise him
shall be despised.

The time, and cause of this punishment.
Further, the Prophet notes both the time, and also the cause of this
punishment. The time, when this ministry shall be done away of God, to wit,
when as God shall visit, and reward unto them their wickedness. The which that
it shall one day be, the words themselves do evidently declare, albeit the
set moment or minute of time be not here expressed. The cause of this
punishment, is their ways, that is to say, their wicked manners: also their
transgression and rebellion, or falling from the true God, when as he
notwithstanding had declared himself more unto them, then unto other nations;
and unto their priests more then unto the rest of the people.

Verse. 10. For they shall eat, and not have enough: they shall commite
adultery, and shall not increase, because they have left off to take beede to
the Lord.
AN amplification by way of making the matter more plain. For now the several
punishments are reckoned up and declared, wherewith God will punish and plague
these priests, and that proportionably unto their sins, that look after what
manner they have sinned, after the same they may be punished.

Two sins reckoned up in this verse, glutt^nie and whoredom.
But in this verse two kinds of sins are rehearsed, unto the which is added a
reason of the same also. Wherefore like as they abused their sacrifices both
unto the cramming and ouergorging of their bellies, and also unto their wicked
whoredoms, to wit, being full gorged with meat (for lust and wantonness flow
from wine and good cheer) so they shall eat, but not be satisfied. For our
satisfying comes not of the store of meat that we eat, but of the blessing
of God upon the same. For as it is in the Psalm 105. verse. 16. God calls a
famine upon a land, and utterly breaks the staff of bread. That is, as he
gives it strength to nourish for a blessing, so for a plague he takes at his
pleasure that power and virtue from it, whereof insueth famine and hunger. And
as they did eat and were not filled, so they shall commit whoredom with many
women for to get children, and yet their houses shall not be increased, but
rooted out and perish. For these men have a proud desire to continue their
stock and seed, but they shall be without seed, and shall beget no children.
Being like to those of whom the Psalm. 49. ver. 11. speaks, that think their
houses and habitations shall continue for ever. The reason of this punishment
is, because that they have after such manner, and so stubbornly and shamefully
forsaken God, that they have no way kept nor cared for his commandments. For
in old times issue, and fruitfulnes in having of children, was a blessing that
was promised unto men fearing God, Fruitfules in having of children was in old
time reckoned for an especial blessing of God
and not unto profane or lewd persons, and despisers of God. And therefore
unto the man that fears God it is promised in the Psalm. 128. ver. 3. after
this manner: Thy wife shall be as the fruitful vine on the sides of thine
house, and thy children like the olive plants round about thy table. And unto
us also that love God, the number of children, especially such as be godly, is
a token of God his mercy toward us. For by this means God does witness,
that he will be worshipped of us in many ages, and reign in our families.
Wherefore let them praise God which have begotten and brought up many children
to be dedicated unto God.

Verse. 11. Whoredom, and wine, and new wine take away their heart.
THis is the figure called Epiphonema, or acclamation, What the figure
Epiphonema is, see Jonas cap. 2. ver. 9.
whereby the Lord does yet more fowlie detest the former vices of the priests,
and shows them to be most miserable, as the which do bring them unto a most
shameful pass: namely this, that now they are no more capable, or such as can
receive any faithful admonition, repentance, understanding: but live like unto
brute beasts given only to the filling of their belly, and satisfying of
their lust. And this does Peter teach in every age to fall out unto other false
Prophets in like manner 2. Epist. cap. 2. ver. 14.18. of whom he affirms that
they have eyes full of adultery, and that cannot cease to sin, beguiling
unstable souls: For they swell in speaking words of vanity: they beguile with
wantonness, through the lusts of the flesh, them that were clean escaped from
them which are wrapped in error. And experience it self proves this to be
true both in the popish Bishops, and also Chanons, who are slow bellies, evil
beasts, wholly given to whoredom and wine. Further, here is in three words
described the life altogether of an Epicure, or plain belly-god, namely,
(whoredom, wine, and new wine.) And the Prophet does distinguish or make a
difference between wine and new wine, both to show the gurmandise of these
men, who mixed and drunk old wine with Must, that is, with new wine for
pleasantnes sake: and also their insatiable wanton lust, who by this means did
the more earnestly stir up themselves unto whoredom. Now these things take
from men their heart, or mind. For both drunkenness and also whoredom do
very greatly weaken the reason and understanding: yea, moreover they over
whelme and dull the common sense, and instruments of the same, so that they
seem rather beasts then men, which are given unto these vices. With this place
agrees this saying taken out of Virgil his Epigram.

Quum mentes hominum furiauit vterque (.i Bacchus and Venus)
Et pudor and probitas and metus omnis abest.
Ergo.
Nec Veneris, nec tu vini capiaris amore:
Vno namque modo vina Venusque nocent.
In rude meter thus:

Where wine once and women enraged have the brain,
All shame, fear, and goodness no longer remain.
On wine then, and women set thou not thy mind:
For them both like hurtful at last thou shall find.
And so forth, as there follows.

The like is that saying of Jerome, Wine is poison: from the which
notwithstanding no Orders of Monks, profess they never so great holiness, do
abstain.

Verse. 12. My people ask counsel at their stocks, and their staff teaches
them: for the spirit of fornications has caused them to err, and they have
gone a whoring from under their God.
A continuing of the threatening against the whole people.
THis is a continuing of the threatening of the wrath and judgments of God: but
the same is now directed unto the whole people and not unto the priests alone,
as was the former immediately going before. And the reason why GOD does now
turn his speech unto the whole people, is, that the Israelites, that is, the
rest of the people, which were not priests, should not think themselves
(whilst they are ignorant of the true God, whilst they serve other then him)
to be clear and free from sin before God: and therefore suppose themselves
also to be void from punishment, because not they, but the priests, are
properly the cause of this evil; for these ought to teach the people. But
according unto the answer of Christ in the Gospel, not only the blind guides
themselves, but they also that follow those blind guides, are justly punished,
Mat. 15. ver. 14. If the blind lead the blind, both shall fall into the
ditch. Furthermore, this self same shows, into what, and how shameful
blasphemies of GOD, and horrible punishments they do fall, the which under any
pretense or color whatsoever shall despise the true knowledge of God, drawn
from his word.

Two parts of this verse.
And this verse has two things to be noted. First, the kind of idolatry or
superstition, whereunto this people was given. The second part shows the
cause of this so shameful blasphemy. 1. The kind of idolatry.
The kind of sin then, was not only common idolatry, but that most shameful
manner thereof, 2. The cause of the same.
whereby the idolaters, as being curious, vain, and ambitious men, do enquire
at their idols of things to come. The Prophet Isai notes the same vice in the
Israelites cap. 2. ver. 6. where he says: Surely thou have forsaken thy
people, the house of Iaacob, because they are full of the East manners, and are
Sorcerers, as the Philistims. And again, cap. 47. ver. 13. where he bids
them in mockage seek unto their Astrologers and Soothsayers, that they, if
they can, should foretell them of the miseries that were to fall upon them, or
were able to save them from them: Let now the Astrologers, the starre-gasers,
and Prognosticators stand up, and save thee from these things that shall come
upon thee. And this sin of enquiting after things to come at idols, or any
other, together with those that profess this knowledge, by what names soever
they be termed, has long since by God been condemned Deuteronomy. 18. ver. 10. for
there God by Moses commands thus: Let none be found among you that uses
witchcraft, or is a regarder of times, (Tremchus translateth them Planetarios)
or a marker of the flying of fowls, or a Sorcerer, or a charmer, or that
counsels with spirits, or a Soothsayer, or that asks counsel at the dead.
How great a sin it is to enquire of things to come at id^^^.
Doubtless this sin takes from God his government of this world, and gives
it unto idols, at who^ the issues and falling out of things to come are looked
for, and enquired. It is therefore a most shameful blasphemy against God.
Further, in this place the vanity of this kind of idolatric is refuted and
mocked in one word, when as these idols, of whom the foretellings of things to
come are asked, are called ( wood or stocks) that is, a dead thing, and a
staff, that is, a dumme and dull thing: for so are idols called in contempt of
them.

The cause of this filthy idocatrie in the Israelites.
And the cause or reason why the Israelites were given unto this so filthy
idolatry, is this: because they had fallen away from the true God, and from
his knowledge, and right and lawful worship, and with great endeavor had
betaken themselves unto that spiritual fornication, that is to say, unto the
worshipping of idols. They were therefore deceived by the self same spirit, of
whom they were taught to worship idols, and by whom they were moved thereunto,
that they should at idols also ask the knowledge of things to come. For God
gives efficacy or strength of error unto Satan against those which have not
received the love of the truth, or have forsaken the same, as Paul teaches 2 Thessalonians. 2. ver. 10.11. writing, that the coming of Antichrist is by the working
of Satan, with all power and signs and lying wonders, and in all
deceiueablenes of unrighteousness, among them that perish, because they
received not the love of the truth, that they might be saved. And therefore God
shall send them strong delusion, that they should believe lies, and give care
unto such predictions or foretellings, and vain promises, and enquire and
seek after them. This Broccard is a peevish Prophet yet now living in Holl^d
or at leastwise dead but very lately, of whom you may read more in the fore
notes.
Let them therefore hereby beware, the which at this day enquire at
Mathematicians, or Broccardical Sooth-sayen concerning the state of their
things to come.

Verse. 13. They sacrifice upon the tops of the mountains, and burn incense
upon the hills under the Oaks, and the Poplar tree, and the Elm, because the
shadow thereof is good: therefore your daughters shall be harlots, and your
spouses shall be whores.
An amplification of their idolatry.
AN amplification of the Idolatry of this people, taken from their exceeding
great earnestnes in worshipping of Idols. For they do it every where, and in
all places. They appoint and dedicate al sorts of high trees unto this sin
and wickedness: briefly the Idolatry of these men is rather a madness, then a
sickness. The Prophet Isay cap 57. ver. 7, 8, 9, 10. does most lively express
their madding and gadding after Idols, sparing for no cost, nor travel in
worshipping of the same, in this wise: Thou have made thy bed upon a very hie
mountain: thou wentest up thither, even thither wentest thou to offer
sacrifice. Behind the doors also and posts have thou set up thy
remembrance: for thou have discovered thy self to another then me, and
wentest up, and did enlarge thy bed, and make a covenant between thee and
them, and louedst their bed in every place where thou saw it. Thou wentest
to the Kings with oil, and did increase thine ointments, and send thy
messengers far off, and did humble thy self unto hell. Thou weariedst
thy self in thy manifold iournies, yet saydest thou not, There is no hope;
thou have found life by thine hand, therefore thou was not grieved. Wherefore
God foreseeing this their outragiousnes in this sin, set down a law to
restrain the same Deuteronomy. 12. ver. 13. where he speaks thus: Take heed that
thou offer not thy burnt offerings in every place that thou see, but only in
the place which the Lord shall appoint thee. But there is a punishment prepared
for this so vile a sin, A punishment answerable unto their sin.
and that according unto the proportion of this spiritual fornication, that
is, of Idolatry with bodily fornication. For God threatens that it shall come
to pass, that those women whom among themselves they would have to be most
chaste of all others, the very same shall among themselves commit fornication or
play the whores. And these are their daughters and their spouses, whom every
man would have to be chaste before his maids, yea in a manner before their
married wives. And indeed the fornication of a spouse or betrothed wife with
another before marriage is most filthy, as is also a man his daughters un
married: yet is not therefore the whoredom of the married wives any whit the
less, or the lighter: but the Prophet thus speaks according to the judgment
of man, that they should understand that (...) fornication should be most
grievous unto them, like as their fornication was unto God most grievous and
loathsome. After this manner does God repay home just punishments unto iniquity
and sin.

Verse. 14. I will not visit your daughters when they are harlots, nor your
spouses when they are whores: for they themselves are separated with harlots,
and sacrifice with whores: therefore the people that does not understand, shall
fall.
A reason why these Idolators should in such wise be punished.
THis is a rendering of a reason wherewith the Prophet confirms it to be most
meet and right that these fornicators against God, should themselves also in
their own houses for a punishment see and suffer those most filthy
fornications. Therefore this part of this verse is to be read by way of
interrogation, or asking of a question: as thus: will I not, or shall I not
visit your daughters when they are harlots, and your spouses, when they are
whores? For that these separate with harlots the which they sacrifice with
whores? A comparison showing that their punishment shall be proportionable or
agreeable unto their sin.
Further there is here set down a comparison and proportion to express more
clearly this equity of the punishment of God against them, to wit, That as
these do separate or put apart all the best and most choice of their goods, to
sacrifice unto Idols together with their whores (for with Idolators these vices
for the most part are common and go together, to wit, spiritual fornication
and bodily whoredom, the which are committed together, and in the same
Temples. For as one says, the women come thither, that is, to those Temples
for to behold and gaze, they come that they may be beheld and gazed upon: and
therefore, that place says the same writer, has the hurts and loss of chaste
shamefastnes, that is in those places they are many times dishonested.) So the^
as they give and bestow every their best things upon their Idols, when as they
commit spiritual whordome with them: likewise shall those women kind whom they
account most dear as are their daughters, and their spouses, play the whores
and harlots most impudently, or shamelesly among them. Lastly, the conclusion
of this whole place is added in these words: The conclusion of this place.
This people that does not understand, shall fall or perish: to wit, because
they are without the true knowledge, worship, and fear of God. For here
(understanding) without the which the Israelites are said to be, does not only
comprehend the true knowledge of God, but also his true worship and fear, or
the practice of this knowledge as in 1. Ioh. cap. 2. ver. 4. where he writes:
He that says, I know him, (that is, God) and keeps not his commandments,
is a liar, and the truth is not in him. For these two are always to be linked
together, to wit, knowledge and practice.

Verse. 15. Though thou, Israel, play the harlot, yet let not Iudias sin: come
not ye unto Gilgal, neither go ye up to Beth-auen, no^ swear, the Lordliueth.
An admonition for the kingdom of Judah.
AN admonition, the which properly appertains unto the people and kingdom of
Judah, at that time separated from the kingdom of Israel. For the Jews are
admonished, that they also sin not after the example of the Israelites their
brethren, and neighbors: and that they mingle not themselves with them, or
defile themselves in their Idolatries, or any other their sins whatsoever.
For it appears sufficiently, that the Israelites by the example of the Jews,
and the Jews by the following of the Israelites, ran into all wickedness.
Read for proof hereof Ezech 16. from the verse 45. almost to the end of the
chapter. Moreover experience it self does teach, that neighbor people are
easily corrupted by neighbor people. For those things the which are practiced
or done among people dwelling near together, those which are their neighbors,
and do dwell near unto them, do easily imitate or follow, and take up the
same. So the Romans quickly received the South sayings of the Hetruscians.
Wherefore we are both publicly and privately with all diligence to beware such
so easy corruption and infection. For in this case also does the rule of Paul
1. Cor. 15. hold: Evil communication corrupts good manners.

2. Parts of this verse.
But this verse has two parts. The first does generally propound or set forth
the prohibition or forbidding, that the Jews should nor corrupt themselves
after the likeness of the Israelites, 1. Generally sets d^wne a prohibition
fro G^d unto the Jews.
and especially that they should not give themselves over unto Idolatry or
Idols, the which is expressed by the word Fornication or playing the harlot.
And this communicating or taking part with other men their wickedness, god
calls (sin or guiltines) that is a most grievous offense cleaving properly
unto them which do sin after the example of others: whereby they also become
guilty before God, as they in like manner are guilty whom they do imitate or
follow: and therefore worthy of the judgment of God. This guiltiness, the
which by the mouth of God him self is pronounced or declared against those
which are partakers of other men's sins (as Paul speaks 1. Tim. 5. ver. 22.
where he says to Timothy, be not partaker of other men's sins) is opposed or
set against the many excuses, the which those both allege, and also feign
unto themselves, that imitate or follow other men's deeds, and sins: for
being reproved they make excuses for themselves. The second part of this verse
is an explication, or making more plain of the sin, 2. Makes the same more
evident and plain.
from the which the Jews especially were to abstain. He therefore rehearses
two sorts of Idolatry, common and most usual among the Israelites (I confess)
but yet horrible before God. The one for that they went to Gilgal and Beth^el
(the which here is called Beth-auen) that they might there do service and
sacrifice unto their Idols. 1. Their idolatry at Gilgal and Beth-el.
Gilgal in this place I take not for the border of the kingdom of Israel, and
as it divided the bounds thereof from the kingdom of Judah: but for a most
famous Idol Temple, the which was builded in those places, and was commonly of
all the Israelites frequented or gone unto, and with great superstition
worshipped and had in reverence. See hereafter cap. 9. verse. 15. cap. 12. ver.
11. And before Amos 4. ver. 4. and cap. 5. ver. 5. Beth-auen is named for
Beth-el, Why Beth-el is here named Beth-auen.
to procure hatred unto that place by so hard and bad a name. For it was now no
longer the house of God (as the name does importe) but an house of Idols, or of
iniquity and wickedness, as Beth-auen does signify. Concerning the naming of
it Beth-el read Genesis 28. ver. 19. There was more over another Beth-auen, and by
the proper name thereof so called in the promised land, the which is
distinguished and severed from Beth-el, and was in the borders of the tribe of
Benjamin near unto Hai, whereof read Josh. cap. 7. ver. 2 and cap. 18. ver.
12, 13. Hereof we do gather, that glorious and godly names of Cities do not
excuse them before God, or cover the evils that are there by the citizens
committed. So the Temple of God is called, a den of thieves. For the names
are changed the things being changed, or else godly names do turn unto the
greater hurt both of the places, and also of the inhabitants or dwellers in
them, if they in godliness be not answerable unto their names.

2. Their abusing or swearing.
The second kind of their most filthy Idolatry, is the profanation or defiling
and abusing of swearing. The which is then done, when as we either swear by
the name of idols only, as is found fault withal Amos 8. ver. 14. when he
says: They that swear by the sin of Samaria, and that say, Thy God, O Dan,
lives, and the manner of Beer-sheba lives, even they shall fall, and never
rise up again: or when as together with the name of the true God the name of
^dols is used also in swearing. So was it at that time used to be done by the
Israelites, the which the Jews in this place are forbidden to imitate or
follow. And against these that swear by God and by idols, the Prophet
Sophonias cap. 1. ver. 5. threatens that God will plague and punish them,
where he writes, that God will cut off them that worship the host of heaven
upon the house tops, and them that worship and swear by the Lord, We must
swear by the name of God only.
and swear by Malcham. For we must swear only by the name of the true God,
and not by the name of Idols, or Saints. And therefore Deuteronomy. 6. ver. 13. Moses
gives this commandment unto the Israelites, saying: Thou shall fear the
Lord thy God, and serve him, and shall swear by his name. And Iere. cap. 5.
ver. 7. accounts this swearing by other the^ by the true God, to be a
forsaking of God, and a sin so great that God cannot spare them that use it,
speaking there in the person of God after this manner: How should I spare thee
for this? Thy children have forsaken me, and sworn by them that are no Gods?

Verse. 16. For Israel is rebellious as an unruly heifer. Now the Lord will
feed them as a Lamb in a large place.
A reason, why the Israelites are not to be followed of the Jews.
THis is a reason, why the Israelites are not to be imitated or followed of the
Jews, and this same reason is twofold. The first is taken from the most foul
and filthy fruit of the idolatry, and wickedness of the Israelites. And this
is, That the Israelites being given over unto those their sins,

2. A second reason why the Jews should not imitate the Israelites.
The second cause is, a most lamentable effect of the same stubbornnes of the
Israelites against GOD, the which followed their idolatry, and falling away
from the true worship of GOD. And this is a most grievous judgment of God,
wherewith they are ^^^ortly to be punished, the which estate and condition the
Jews should not unwisely draw and pull upon themselves. And this judgment of
God against the Israelites is painted out under a similitude taken from the
estate of a poor lamb of an year old, and most fearful, yea solitary
also, and feeding in a ground or field of roomth and largenes enough indeed,
but where as it can see no other sheep with it. Under this similitude is
foretold the laying waste of the land of Israel, by reason of their sins, the
which then first happened, when as the three tribes which were beyond Jordan,
were carried away by the Assyrians: and afterward when as the other tribes of
the kingdom of Israel were carried away also by the same Assyrians. Therefore
let not the Jews pull upon themselves the like punishment: and so consequently
let them not be partakers of their sins.

Verse. 17. Ephraim is joined to idols: let him alone.
The conclusion.
THis is the conclusion, whereby the most miserable estate of the Israelites is
described, that they were now utterly and wholly become idolaters: and
therefore there is no part to be taken with them, but they were to be forsaken
and left in that their filthiness, as those that were not at all to be cured.
Diversity of judgments about the meaning of this place.
Now some do attribute these words unto God speaking unto the Prophet: others
attribute them unto the Prophet himself speaking unto the Jews. In effect it
is all one. Yet I for my part had rather have them to be the words of the
Prophet concluding and ending that his exhortation unto the Jews in the name
of God. What the figure Epiphonema is, see Jonas cap. 2 ver. 9.
It is therefore the conclusion by way of an Epiphonema or acclamation, like as
was before verse. 11. of this chapter.

1. What Synecdoche is, see Amos cap. ^. ver. 21.
This conclusion contains two things. The one shows that this people of the
Israelites, and the same universally (for so by the figure Synecdoche I do in
this place take Ephraim for the whole kingdom of Israel) does now wholly
cleave and is joined unto their idols, and idolatry, and has fallen away
utterly from the true God and his worship. And therefore that now there is not
one drop of true godliness remaining in them. The other part, which is the
consequent, or follows of the former, That therefore this people is to be
fled from of the godly, the which have a desire to serve God sincerely or
purely, and have not a mind to defile themselves, or at least wise which would
not themselves also fall into the most great danger of falling away from God.
So Paul. 2. Cor. 6. forbids that we should not have fellowship with the
infidels or unfaithful ver. 14.15.16. Be not (says he) unequally yoked with
the infidels. For what fellowship has righteousness with unrighteousness?
and what communion has light with darkness? And what concord has Christ with
Belial? or what part has the believer with the infidel? And what agreement
has the Temple of God with idols? So the people of God are commanded to get
them out of the midst of Babylon Apoc. 18. ver. 4. Go out of her my people
(says the voice from heaven) that ye be not partakers in her sins, and that
ye receive not of her plagues. So Isai 48. ver. 20. Go ye out of Babel: flee
ye from the Chaldeans with a voice of joy. Furthermore, those images oridols
are here called (Gnat sabbim) either for that they bring labor and sadness in
fearing of men: Gnat sabbim.
or because they were the pictures of things labouriously polished, framed, or
wrought. And by this means the vanity and filthiness of idols is declared and
described, how greatly soever notwithstanding they be esteemed of their
idolaters and worshippers.

Verse. 18. Their drunkenness stinketh: they have committed whoredom: their
rulers love to say with shame, Bring ye, bring ye.
A confirmation of the former conclusion.
A Confirmation of the former conclusion by their most filthy usual, and
commonly reigning works. For the vices of the Israelites which are here
reckoned up, are the fruits and effects of that their falling away from God,
by the which all order, government, modesty, justice, is declared to be taken
away among them. And therefore all public honesty is signified to be now
banished, and absent from them. And here the Prophet reckons up three vices
most usual among them, nay, which were rife in every one of the people,
Drunkenness. Whore^ome.
to wit, Drunkenness, as before ver. 11. with the which he matcheth continual
fornication, and such as in a manner was common and openly used, Covetousness.
as before ver. 11. The third vice, is Covetousness, and that in their very
Judges, whose words here expressed by the figure Mimesis, Mimesis, or Imitation
is a figure whereby we do express the words, or gestures, or maders of
another, sometime in the good part and sometime in the evil; as here in the
evil part he expresses the w^rdes of the ^rthebegging Judges, Bring ye, bring
ye.
or imitation, or uttering them, as the Judges, in their own persons, were
wont to do, to wit (Bring ye, bring ye) do show how known, shameless, and
unbridled the begging of these Judges was, who shamed not openly to crave
gifts. Yet do these corrupt or spill the very best Judges, and do blind their
eyes, and therefore Deuteronomy. 1. ver. 15.16. Moses says, that he charged the
Judges to judge righteously, and that they should have no respect of persons in
judgment, but should hear the small as well as the great. And Amos cap. 4.1.
vpbraydeth the^ in like sort, as does our Prophet in this place, for that they
say to their masters, Bring, and let us drink. And this shameless begging in
Judges and others of the like affection, Solomon Proverb. 30. ver. 15
pleasantly expresses, when he says: The horseleach has two daughters, which
cry, give, give. But where as he calls them stubborn or unruly wine, (for
so according to Tremelius, he translateth that which others translate, their
wine stinketh) this is the figure Metalepsis, Metalepsis, or Transsumptio^, is
a figure, when as the effects and actions of men, are attr^buted unto the
things themse^ues, whereby men are stirred up to do the same. The which is
made plain by the example Albeit that some do otherwise describe this figure,
the which notwithstanding in some cases can hardly be discerned from the figure
Metonymia.
or Transsupmtion (but others call it rather Metonymia, of the which read Oseas
cap. 4. ver. 1.) where the deeds or effects of men, are attributed unto the
things themselves, with the which men being moved, do the same. As here for
example, when he follows this translation (their wine is sturdie, stubborn
or unruly) sturdines, stubbornes, or unruliness is attributed unto the wine,
the which is in the men that drink too much of the same, whereby they become
bold, stubborn, sturdie, and unruly, when they are drunken, that is, full of
wine. So a work or writing is called learned, by the which men do become, or,
are made learned. Compare with this place Pro. 20. ver. 1. where in like manner
that is said of the wine and strong drink it self, the which is in men that
take too much, or are overcome with the same: Wine (says Solomon in that
place) is a mocker (that is, it makes men that are drunken with it, to be
mockers) and strong drink is raging, (that is, sets men in a rage or a
madness, when they take too much of it) and whosoever is deceived therewith is
not wise. For drunkenness thrusts forth the coward, or unarmed man into
battle, and makes men dull, not forecasting of perils or dangers that may
ensue, and so consequently, bold and desperate. Finally wines, some are called
pleasant, otherwise swinish, othersome lyonish, because that they make men to
be such, that are drunken with it, to wit, in conditions and manners like unto
swine, or lions. Further, all these vices are amplified, or rather the most
desperate estate of the Israelites past recovery, by the manner of excuse,
where with these fellows did cover themselves: to wit, They cast over their
vices as a cloak the public licentiousnes or disorder and ignominy, or
reproach. So then reproach and shame was their recovering, their buckler, or
defense, and help when they were reproved. And moreover this place shows, if
there be any bad custom, or if any vices do publicly reign and get the
upper hand, that the same notwithstanding bring or give no p^rdo^ or excuse
unto sins, or men that do sin. For Paul Romans 1. ver. 21. teaches, that
the general ignorance of the heathen was not by the universality thereof
privileged against God his judgment, because that they had so much light left
unto them by the view of the creation, as made them void of all excuse, for
that knowing God, they did not glorify him as God, neither were thankful. For
the only word of God written ought to be unto us for a true rule of our whole
life against all licentiousnes or disorderous living and liberty in sinning, A
golden rule for the direction of al our actions.
be it never so public, common, and unpunished.

Verse. 19. The wind has bound them up in her wings, and they shall be ashamed
of their sacrifices.
An answer unto the last part of the former verse.
AN answer unto the last part of the former verse, wherewith obstinate or
stubborn persons, do think with themselves to cover very well themselves and
their vices, when as they object the common manners, be they never so corrupt,
shameful, and reproachful, for a buckler for their sins. God therefore
makes answer that all such excuses are vain, and not worth a rush. And this
their vain and balde excuse he shows and sets out by a similitude and
Metaphorical kind of speaking, What the figure Metaphora is, see Amos cap. 4.
ver. 12.
when as he says, that the wind shall carry away with it this defense or
reproach, that is, this public course and excuse of their living, and bind it
to her wings to be conveyed into the utmost and unknown parts of the world,
so that there shall no such excuse as this remain for them. So in this sense
sins are said to be cast into the sea. So a Poet says speaking of periuries,
And he commands the swift South winds to carry them into the sea: whereas
he teaches that periuries are not to be seared, or that they are to be
contemned, or set at naught, These men therefore shall be confounded and
ashamed, whatsoever fair gloss they set upon their idolatry, and whatsoever
defense they seek from any where. Wherefore he concludes, These stubborn and
stiffenecked persons shall be ashamed in the end, because of their idolatrous
sacrifices, neither shall the common going of this sin without punishment
excuse them unto God. Let the whole world mark this, and by the same learn to
be wise.

CAP. 5.
Verse. 1. O ye priests hear this, and hearken ye, O house of Israel, and give
ye ear, O house of the King: for judgment is toward you, because you have
been a snare on Hizpah, and a net spread upon Tabor.
Another Sermon.
A New Sermon, but such a one as is very fitly joined unto that which went
before. For the former Sermon properly respected or concerned the whole people
(albeit that something were inserted or put in by the way touching the priests,
as the most true causes of that ignorance of God, the which was in the people)
but now this Sermon strikes all the heads themselves of this people, that is,
both them of the Church (who here are called by the name of priests) and also
them of the common wealth, whom GOD here comprehends under the names of the
house of Israel and the house of the King: albeit I will not deny the same
vices to have been also in the people the which reigned in these princes: but
so far forth, as the common people is wont to imitate or follow their princes
and heads, which are set over them. For this is a common saying, Such as are
the Princes, such are also the rest of the citizens.

Two parts of this verse.
But this verse has two things first of all and generally to be observed and
marked. To wit, the alluring and exhorting of these princes or heads to hear.
And secondly, 1. An exhortation.
the showing or setting down of the matter it self, whereof they are warned
and accused. 2. The matter it self, whereof they are accused. The first part
has two sorts of hearers, The priests, and the rulers of the common wealth.
The first part shows both who are requested here by the Prophet, or spoken
unto expressly and by name: and how diligently and earnestly they are stirred up
to hear. And all those are requested to hear, which are rulers over the
people, of the which generally there are two sorts: namely the Priests, and the
Governors of the common wealth. The Priests have the rule of holy matters, or
of things appertaining unto the service of God among the people. And albeit to
speak properly, that the Priests of these Israelites, that is, of the
kingdom of Israel were in deed and truth no Priests, as neither of the tribe
of Levy for the most part, nor of the family of Aaron: nor attending or doing
their service in the Temple of God: nor offering any lawful sacrifices: nor
unto God: yet by the figure Katachresis, Katachresis, or misusage of speech, is
a figure, whereby we improperly give names or titles unto persons or things,
the which in deed and in truth belong not unto them, as the examples here
alleged d^e make very plain.
or misusage of speech they are called Priests, as the popish Bishops are
called Bishops, to the end that they may understand by the very name and degree
of dignity the which they attribute unto themselves, that they are most justly
condemn^^ Of Governors and Magistrates of the common wealth there are in this
place made two sorts: namely, the house it self of the King, that is to say,
the chief Magistrate, as is the King himself, his Nobles, Courtiers: and the
inferior Magistrate, that is to say, such other governors and officers which
in every city bare rule in ministering of law matters, and ordering of the
common wealth, the which are here called the house of Israel, because that
these inferior Judges were heads of the people, and do represent the whole
people. So the Consistory, or Senate of the Church is called the Church Matthew.
18. ver. 17. So then all these are stirred up to hear, and that most
diligently. For hereunto appertains it that the Prophet speaks severally
unto them, distinguishing his speech and frame of words as it were loosely and
without joints and conjunctions copulative to knit and bind it fast together,
whereby he calls every one of these orders by their name and severally. Unto
this also it makes that the Prophet uses these words, Hear, hearken, give
ear: for these words do signify that there is required of them very great
attention or eare-giuing. For God does crave and look for it at their hands.
And hereby appears that all sorts of men, be they of never so great
excellency and dignity: and that all orders and states of the common wealth
in the Church of God, how high soever they be (as is the royal dignity and
honor of a King) are notwithstanding subject unto the word of GOD, because that
is the scepter of the kingdom of God, and the voice of God himself, unto the
which all and singular the members of the Church ought to obey, yea and all
mortal men besides. For so Paul speaks of the majesty, might, and power of
the Gospel, when he compares it unto the powerful weapons and munitions of
war 2. Cor. 10. ver. 5. Casting down the imaginations, and every high thing
that is exalted against the knowledge of God, and bringing into captivity
every thought to the obedience of Christ.

2. Part. The matter it self, whereof they are accused.
Now is set forth the matter it self, or the accusation against these rulers
of the people, the which is manifold or of sundry sorts, as appears by the
verses following: but here in this verse one kind alone of their wickedness,
and the same most grievous, is reproved, and described by a very shameful
similitude. The Prophet therefore pronounces or shows first of al, that
these judgments or threatenings of God the which he is to utter, are properly
directed and do appertain unto them. The reason, because that they ^e in the
people, although the rulers of the same yet most merciles and cruel thieves:
not Fathers of the people, not Pastors: but Wolves and Destroyers. For they are
a net unto the common people, and the same spread, that the people committed
unto them may fall into their nets. They are such, as are those thieves and
robbers, who in Mispha and Tabor did rob the passers by, and such as they could
meet withal. The crafty cruelty of the rulers.
The Prophet therefore does signify that these princes and rulers with great
subtlety, deceites, and guiles were wont to entrap the poor people, whom
afterward they might both spoil of their goods, and when they had spoiled
them, treacherously and mercilesly murder them. And these are the usual and
common arts, courses, manners, and most wicked kind of life, used
notwithstanding (as it is well known unto all men) of all Tyrants, or men that
abuse public authority, albeit otherwise in it self lawful.

Verse. 2. Yet they were profound to decline to slaughter, though I have been a
rebuker of them all.
The first amplification of the former wick^dnesse.
THe first amplification of the former wickedness, taken from the manner, which
these used in spoiling and killing of the people committed unto them, whose
keepers and pastors they ought to have been. For to the end they might the more
easily rob and spoil them, and exercise their cruelty against their flock
committed by God unto their trust, they do seek most deep and hidden or
secret places, that is, deceipts and subtilties. And after this manner does
David describe and set out in their colors such kind of crafty and subtle
oppressors in these words Psalm. 10. ver. 8, 9, 10. He lies in wait in the
villages: in the secret places does he murder the innocent: his eyes are bent
against the poor. He lies in wait secretly, even as a lion in his den: he
lies in wait to spoil the poor: he does spoil the poor, when he draws
him into his net. He crowcheth and boweth: therefore heaps of the poor do
fall by his might. In this therefore did these princes and rulers imitate, or
do after the manners and disposition of most wicked and crafty thieves raunging
and rouing up and down in the woods, who to the end they may the more safely
murder and cut the throats of trauailers and wayfaring men, they stay for
them in most hidden and secret dales and valleys, and prepare such ambushments
to entrap and catch them as they are least aware of. What the figure Metaphora
is see Amos cap. 4. ver. 12.
And further by this Metaphor of profound or deep places and corners are
signified the devilish and most crafty counsels of tyrannous Magistrates
against the people, (whom they are wont at their pleasure both to spoil and to
murder) the which notwithstanding by them are covered with most glorious
pretenses and edicts, so that nothing is more filthy and shameful then these
devilish shifts, and nothing more deep then these secret and deep deceipts
and subtilties. So Apocal. 2. ver. 24. God says to them of Thyatira that have
not known the deepnes of Satan, (meaning his secret and hidden craftines and
subtlety covered under the glorious titles of high and most singular knowledge
and learning) he will put upon them none other burden. But here in this verse
God by way of contraries does expound and declare himself, what manner a one he
will be unto these tyrannous oppressors, to wit, he will oppose or set himself
against all their subtilties, be they never so subtle. So then when he says
(I have been a rebuker, or there shall be a chastising or rebuking unto these)
he means that he will chastise, correct and punish them: yea and that all of
them, so that neither their dignity, nor their subtlety shall be able to
cover any of them, or to deliver them from the hand of God. Wherefore, although
they be the rulers of the people, yet notwithstanding have they a Judge, that
is above them, or higher then they.

Verse. 3. I know Ephraim, and Israel is not hid from me: for now, O Ephraim,
thou art become an harlot, and Israel is defiled.
A Rendering of a reason, the which sets the nature of GOD against that
double counsel of the crafty princes. The clear sightednes of God set
against their hidden subtilties: and the truth of their deeds and life
matched against their c^loured wickedness.
And against their crafty subtilties and hypocrisy, and their covered
fetches, he sets the clear sightednes of God, whereby he thoroughly knows
all and every of us both within, and also without. And against their sins so
well colored and ouerpainted, God matcheth the truth it self of their deeds
and life. The truth is so, that these tyrants labor to cast a cloud or a
mist over their deeds tyrannical, that is, most full of covetousness and
cruelty, and that in the end do they accomplish before men: but not before
God, what depths, and subtilties, and crafts soever they do seek out and
hunt after. For God knows them, and pronounces or declares their deeds to
be most filthy whordomes, and most unclean wickedness. Wherefore this verse
contains a most certain contrariety set against ^hese words of the verse
before going (Going aside they seek deep corners) that is, they lay colors
and pretenses or gloses over their heinous offenses, showing here that God for all their hiding and covering, knows and sees them well enough. This
contrariety then, as I have said, stands upon two points, of the which the
first sets the clear sightednes of the eyes of God, and his most high
knowledge, the which he has of every particular man, and their counsels
against the deceits of these Princes and Rulers. For God is he that knows the
heart and all things are manifest or open in his sight. As the writer to the
Hebrews cap. 4. ver. 13. witnesses, saying: Neither is there any creature,
which is not manifest in his sight: but all things are naked and open unto his
eyes, with whom we have to do. Wherefore God says, I know Ephraim: this
Israel is not unknown unto me, that is to say, these kings and princes of the
kingdom of Israel: but they are well and thoroughly known and seen into of
me, what they hide in their heart, what they do, what they think and
dissemble, I know it all. Therefore by the name of Ephraim I think the kings
to be noted: and by the name of Israel, the Counselors. For out of the tribe
of Ephraim came the first kings of this kingdom. The house of Israel were
called the Counselors before. God therefore knows them all, both as a
witness, and also as one that will be a judge, and a punisher of their
wickedness.

The second part of this contrariety pronounces plainly of the deeds of these
Princes, to wit, that they all are so wicked and filthy as is fornication or
whoredom: so that they make them all to be unclean and defiled howsoever they
may seem unto themselves to have well colored them, and that the same among
men be thought to be just. Compare this place with the Psalm. 94. verse. 7, 8, 9,
where the ungodly think to keep their Tyranny and oppression from the
knowledge of God, as the Prophet in that place bewrays their pretenses,
saying: Yet they say, The Lord shall not see: neither will the God of Iaacob
regard it. Understand ye unwise among the people: and ye fools, when will ye
be wise? He that planted the ear, shall he not hear? or he that formed the
eye, shall he not see? where he says, Thou art become an harlot, I take the
word fornication in this place generally for every kind of most filthy sin,
as it is taken in Paul Ephesians. 5. ver. 3. and 5. for uncleanness: Whordom here
taken generally for every filthy act as to the Ephesias it is joined with
uncleanness, and seems to be set for all kinds of the same.
and not only for unlawful lying of man with woman, or for idolatry. For it
is expounded by the Prophet himself by the word defiled, where he adds by
and by (and Israel is defiled.) After the same mane^ and in the same sense and
meaning do I take the self same word in the verse following.

Verse. 4. They will not give their minds to turn unto their God: for the
spirit of fornication is in the midst of them, and they have not known the
Lord.
The second amplification of the wickedness of the P^iests and Rulers.
THe second amplification of the same wickedness both of the Priests, and also of
the nobles and Princes, taken from the vnrecourable obstinacy or stubbornnes
of their mind. For they are so forlorn and drowned in their vices, and
delighted with the same, that they will not by any means amend the same their
wicked life, or once so much as think, or go about to do the same.

2. Parts of this verse.
And this verse has two especial points to be noted. The one the description or
setting out of a sinner past hope of amendment: The other the cause of the so
miserable estate of such kind of persons, the which is here showed to be
twofold. 1. The description of a desperate sinner.
Concerning the first, those are said to be past recovery, the which by no
means do labor to amend or reform their wicked life, nor give themselves
unto those works, and actions of life, by the which they may be converted
unto God: but the which persevere or continue in those works, by the which
they are turned from God daily more and more. Such therefore run daily from
worse to worse, of whom it is said in the Psalm. 64. ver. 3, 4, 5, 6. They have
whet their tongue like a sword, and shot for their arrows bitter words: to
shoot at the upright in secret: they shoot at him suddenly, and fear not.
They encourage themselves in a wicked purpose: they commune together to lay
snares privily, and say, who shall see them? They have sought out iniquities,
and have accomplished that which they sought out, even every one his secret
thoughts, and the depths of his heart. By so lamentable effects therefore is
understood who are desperate sinners, and such as cannot repent: for whom
therefore most grievous judgments of God do awayte and remain. Now to turn
unto God is to conform and frame their life according unto the law of God.

And now there is here expressed what are the causes of this so miserable a
fall and estate of such kind of sinners. The one is, 2. The causes of their so
miserable estate.
The spirit of uncleanness and of filthy lusts wherewith they are lead, and
fully governed. The other, The ignorance of the true God, and his word written,
the which it self is also the cause and foundation of the former, that is, of
the spirit of uncleanness. And surely, 1. The spirit of uncleanness.
they which know not God, are not ruled by the spirit of God. For as Paul
teaches Romans 8. ver. 14. As many as are led by the spirit of God, 2. The
ignorance of God and his word.
are the sons of God. And they which are not led by the spirit of God, they
must needs follow the spirit of the flesh, and of the devil for their guide
and Captain. For if you live after the flesh (says Paul in the same chapter
ver. 13.) ye shall dye: but if ye mortify the deeds of the body by the
spirit, ye shall live. For we are subject and obey either God or the devil,
and so consequently the lusts of the flesh. For as it is Mat. 6. ver. 24. We
cannot serve two masters, God, and the devil. And Luke 16. ver. 13. we are
likewise taught the very same. So then there is no mean. He that is without
the spirit of God, has the spirit of the devil.

Verse. 5. And the pride of Israel does testify to his face: therefore shall
Israel and Ephraim fall in their iniquity: Judah also shall fall with them.
A confirmation of the former accusation.
A Confirmation of the former accusation by the pride of the Israelites, and by
their boasting in their sins, nay in their heinous wickedness: where in is
contained the third amplification of their lewdnes, as being such, who not
only sin desperately, but also do glory, and are proud of their outrageous
offenses. These men therefore became daily more proud, more disdainful, and
intolerable: which thing shows their mind to have been desperate. So are
the wicked rich ones described Psalm. 73. ver. 7, 8, 9. Their eyes (says David)
stand out for fatnes: they have more then their heart can wish. They are
licentious, and speak wickedly of their oppression: they talk presumptuously.
They set their mouth against heaven, and their tongue walks through the
earth. Therefore here in this place God brings this self same their pride
for a witness against them of their lewdnes, that look whereof the ungodly
are most proud, by the same most especially they may be condemned of GOD, and
the same may be a most heavy witness against them.

And now in the second part, or in the part of this verse following God does
add and set down the punishment of this so great and so wicked stubbornnes
and disobedience, 2. The punishment of their great disobedience.
the which by the former description appears to be most just. And this
punishment contains the overthrow and destruction of the whole nation, and of
the Princes themselves especially (the which here als^ are noted by the name of
Ephraim and Israel.) All these Princes, Priests, and nobles therefore shall
fall, that they themselves together with their dignity shall now be no more
at all in this kingdom. For this kingdom also it self shall be destroyed
for the same cause. Wherefore by this it appears most plainly ho^e greatly
the sins of the Rulers do hurt both themselves, and also the whole people
and kingdom over which they do rule. There is added moreover in stead of a
confirmation, The figure Hypophora. What this is, see Amos cap. 5 verse. 21.
and as a certain Hypophora, or answering of an objection (Judah also shall
fall.) For the Israelites albeit that themselves were never so corrupt and
wicked, were wont notwithstanding against such threatenings of the Prophets to
object the examples and manners of the Jews, who were never a whit better then
they, yea many times worse: and yet were they called and said to be the people
of God by the same Prophets, and such as should be saved, and the beloved of
GOD. And to show that the Jews were worse sometimes then the Israelites, the
testimony of Ezechiel cap. 16. ver. 51. is sufficient, where he speaks of
them thus: Neither has Samaria (by which he means the Israelites) committed
half of thy sins, but thou have exceeded them in thine abominations, and
have justified thy sisters in all thine abominations which thou have done. The
Prophet Oseas therefore answers, The Iwes also shall fall, because of the
same sins, that you should not for this cause sooth and delight your selves
in your sins: or in them promise unto your selves escaping without
punishment, because others also sin as well as you.

Verse. 6. They shall go with their sheep and their bullockes to seek the
Lord: but they shall not find him: for he has withdrawn himself from them.
THe amplification of the former judgment or punishment pronounced against
them, An amplification of the former punishment
because that then, how earnestly and diligently soever they go about and
labor to appease God with their sacrifices, and to seek him, they shall not
have him either merciful unto them notwithstanding, or find him. And surely
this is a most just punishment of so great disobedience of men continuing in
sin, that like as they themselves were hardened at the admonitions of God: so
God also should wax hard and deaf at their prayers. And that now therefore
he should not hear them nor help them being oppressed, although he be
called upon by them never so much. So Hebr. 12. ver. 17. it is said of Esau
making at the first small account of the blessing, That afterward he was
rejected, and found no place to repentance, though he sought the blessing with
tears. And Ierem. cap. 11. verse. 11. God says of the obstinate Jews, Behold
I will bring a plague upon them, which they shall not be able to escape, and
though they cry unto me I will not hear them. And to the same effect, and
almost in the same words he speaks Ezech. 8. ver. 18. Therefore will I also
execute my wrath: mine eye shall not spare them, neither will I have pity:
and though they cry in mine ears with a loud voice, yet will I not hear
them.

This verse has two chief points to be considered. The one, 2. Parts of this
verse.
The preposterous or overthwart desire of the ungodly persons, who then at last
remember God in their most grievous miseries and afflictions or troubles, 1.
The wicked flee unto God only in their troubles.
that they dream that they can appease him with external or outward things
only, as with fat, or costly sacrifices, or with a great company of
sacrifices. And therefore in such a case or at such a time they spare neither
sheep, nor the whole heard it self of greater cattle. But they offer not
unto God those things which are true sacrifices indeed, and acceptable unto
him, as is faith, repentance of mind, conversion or truly turning unto him,
the remembrance of the covenant made with them for the Messiah sake. And
therefore David Psalm. 40. ver. 6. knowing that God respects not the outward
sacrifice only, says: Sacrifice and offering thou did not require: (for
mine ears have thou prepared) burnt offering and sin offering had thou not
required. But Psalm. 51. ver. 17. he shows with what sacrifices God is well
pleased, where he says: The sacrifices of God are a contrite spirit, a
contrite and a broken heart* O God, thou will not despise. Wherefore Paul Romans
12. verse. 1. exhorts the Christians that they give up their bodies a living
sacrifice, holy, accept able unto God, which (he says) is their reasonable
serving of God. But God is then said to be found of us (who otherwise is every
where) when he is felt of us to be favorable, a helper, merciful, and hearing
us. 2. Why God is not found of them, that seek him.


The other point here to be noted is, why God is not found of them that seek
him? to wit, because God does altogether withdraw draw himself from obstinate
persons, and such as are past hope of amendment. For they have cast away all
faith in him, yea that which they had once tasted of, of which like kind of
men you read Hebr. 6. And without faith no man can find God. God indeed hates
sins, and the same do drive away God from us. And Isai cap. 59. ver. 2.
tells the people of his time, saying: Your iniquities have separated between
you and your God, and your sins have hid his face from you that he will not
hear. To which purpose see Psalm. 5. God forsakes not al sinners at the first.
But God does not forsake all sinners, nor yet forthwith and by and by, so that
he will quite and clean turn himself from them. For he is present with them
that call upon him. But when as men have willingly fallen into so deep a gulf
of ungodliness, that they are past amendment, and do sin with the whole
affection and delight of their mind: then God does forsake them, and
withdraws himself from them. For they which are such, have utterly cast off
the holy Ghost: nay to say the truth, they never truly had him, but were
hypocrites and dissemblers, of whom John says epist. 1. cap. 2. verse. 19. They
went out from us, but they were not of us: for if they had been of us, they
would have continued with us. And therefore cap. 3. verse. 9. he further
affirms, That whosoever is borne of God sins not (that is, gives not
himself over wholly unto sin) for his seed remains in him, neither can be
sin because he is borne of God. Wherefore of such kind of desperate and
malicious sinners God is not found.

Verse 7. They have transgressed against the Lord: for they have begotten
strange children: now shall a month destroy them with their portions.
An amplification of their wickedness taken from the circumstance of the person
of God, and also from the person of the Israelites themselves.
AN amplification of their wickedness, that both the cause of God his withdrawing
himself from them may be understood: and also the greatness of their
shamelesnes and disobedience. The amplification is taken from the circumstance
of the person of God, whom these have forsaken. For he is Jehovah, that is,
that same true, most mighty and alone God. Also from the person of the
Israelites themselves, the which by an especial covenant had vowed themselves
unto that God: and as it were by a contracted marriage had agreed within
themselves, that the same God should be their husband; and they the chaste
spouse of God, playing the harlot at no hand. And therefore Paul 2. Cor. cap.
11. verse. 2. in regard of this spiritual marriage between Christ and his
Church, says of the Corinthians a member of the same, That he was ielous over
them with a godly jealousy, because he had prepared them for one husband, to
present them as a pure Virgin unto Christ. See before touching this marriage
cap. 2. ver. 16. And yet this covenant notwithstanding, they had joined
themselves unto others, and had played the harlots both in body, and also in
mind. In mind with Idols, as has been said before. In body with strange
women against the commandment of God Deuteronomy. 7. by whom they had begotten
strange children, that is, not of the seed of Abraham, or of another, then the
blood of Abraham, to wit, they had begotten them of a strange woman the which
should be notwithstanding a part of the people of God. Of this matching with
strange women, see Ezra 10. Nehem. 13. And by this means they did communicate
or impart the heritage unto others the^ unto the true sons of Abraham,
against the grant and pleasure of God, that is, of the true Lord and right
owner of that land. Which is unlawful to be done even among men, and in those
lands which we hire, and pay farm and rent for: much more is it unlawful in
that land, the which God had appointed to the seed of Abraham only.

Their punishment shall be agreeable to their sins.
Last of all is set down, with what punishment they shall in the end be
punished by God for this so vile pleasure in playing the harlots, to wit, with
a punishment answerable and most agreeable unto their sin. For a month, that
is to say, their monthly terms, and that same most filthy corruption shall
devour and defile them, and weaken all parts of their body. Others take the
word (month) for their seed, the which they shall not be able to keep, like
as harlots and unchaste women cannot keep the same. But I for my part had
rather to refer this punishment unto terms, fluxes or issues of seed,
hemeroids, or the Piles, and such like bloody issues, the which may happen as
well unto men as women sometimes. And these kinds of diseases are very
troublesome, and grievous, the which in the end do bring a consuming of the
whole body unto those which are haunted with them, and weaken the parts of
their bodies, take away the color of the face, and to be short, wear them a
way by little and little, and consume, and eat up their whole body with pains
most grievous, that which they find, and have proof of, which are taken with
the sickness of Naples, that is the filthy disease of the pox. And this to be
true in the Jews at this day, experience does teach, who are known peculiarly
to have many foul bloody diseases. For the Jews said, Let the blood of Christ
be upon us, and upon our children Mat. 27. ver. 25. And among other diseases
the which for their not walking according unto God his commandments, are
threatened unto them Deuteronomy. 28. ver. 27. issues and followings of blood is
reckoned, where Moses writes thus: The Lord will smite thee with the botch of
Egypt, and with the emeroids (under which he comprehends all manner of
bloody issues) and with the scab, and with the itch, that thou can n^^ be
healed. So then experience it self does plainly confirm mine opinion, and my
interpretation.

Verse. 8. Blow ye the trumpet in Gibeah, and the shaume in R^mah: cry out at
Beth-auen, after thee, o Benjamin.
A confirmation of the former threatenings of God.
A Confirmation of the former threatenings of God against the Israelites and
Jews by the adioyntes. For it appears that they shall both perish, in as
much as God does will the same to be forthwith proclaimed, and that openly in
the borders of both people and kingdoms. And therefore God will have cryers of
this punishment and destruction to be sent, the which should affirm that thing
to come to pass, the which God by Oseas has foretold. And this place is a
very notable Hypotyposis, The figure Hypotyposis, which what it is, see Amos
cap. 8. ver. 12.
or lively setting fon^ of the matter, where by it seems in such sort to be
described as if it were represented or showed to be seen with the eyes in a
manner.

This description has two things to be noted. First the place where these
things are willed to be proclaimed. 1. The place where this proclamation is to
be ^s ^^e.
And this is not comanded to be done in one place alone, but in diverse, as
namely in Gabaa, or Gibeah, Rama, and Beth-aue^, al which were border towns
between both kingdoms. For thus, when as wars are proclaimed by Heraults,
the war is proclaimed, and published to be notified in those Cities and
towns especially, which are the bounders of the kingdom. But it is added
also, (in all Benjamin) the country of which tribe bordered upon those towns,
and that behind and not before them, and the Prophet himself also prophesiyng
in Israel. Wherefore Benjamin is said to be after or behind in respect of the
situation of the place, after such sort as it stood then before the eyes of
Oseas turning himself unto Israel, unto whom he spoke. And Oseas makes
mention of Benjamin about the other tribes, because that the first tempest of
GOD his judgments laid harder upon that tribe then upon the rest, and
therefore it is expreslie set down by name. For out of that quarter commonly
the Jews and the Israelites crushed each others with wars.

2. The phrase or manner of speaking.
The second part of this verse contains the kind or manner of speaking here
used by the Prophet, which is unjointed as it were and loose, and not tied
together with any bands of conjunctions coplatiues. Therefore he repeateth one
thing after diverse manners, both that he might thereby the more stir up both
nations, and confirm and avouch that the thing which here is rehearsed, should
come to pass indeed and in truth. He therefore thus speaks with great
earnestnes, to awaken these dull and blockish fellows.

Verse. 9. Ephraim shall be desolate in the day of rebuke: among the tribes of
Israel have I caused to know the truth.
A showing what was by the Heralts to be proclaimed.
AN explanation or making of the matter more plain. For he lays down the
thing, the which by these Heralts was to be proclaimed, To wit, that Israel
should be destroyed, and brought into an horrible or fearful wast or
wilderness. And although that under the name Israel the whole people be
comprehended, yet in my judgment these threatenings also do peculiarly and
especially concern the Priests and Nobles of Israel, as may appear by the
course of this whole chapter. The time, when these things shall come to pass.
And he does set down the day or the time, wherein these things shall come to
pass, to wit, that time in the which God will no longer, as he then did,
chastise and correct Israel in bare words only, but in deed, and will make
this self same overthrow and punishing of them to be known by the event or
falling out of the matter, unto all the tribes and provinces of that kingdom
of Israel. The which thing came to pass, or was fulfilled, by the Assyrians
under Oseas the last King of the Israelites. Therefore albeit that God
oftentimes do seem to be slack and to make delays, or from day to day to put
off the punishment of men's sins, yet in deed and truth be shows in the end
that he has spoken the truth, and has not threatened in vain: because that
those threatenings do at the last appear and come to pass.

Verse. 10. The Princes of Judah were like them that remove the bound: therefore
will I pour out my wrath upon them like water.
The figure Metasthasis, or Transition, is when as we either briefly repeat
what has been said, or else show what remains to be said. When both these
things are performed together, then is it called a perfect transition: when but
one of them, as in this place, then is it called an imperfect transation, or
passing to another matter.
THe figure Metasthasis, or Transitio, or passage to another matter. For after
that the Prophet has set out the punishment the which did hang over the heads
of the Israelites: he passes unto the Jews, whose sins and punishment like
to ensue for the same he now declares also. And that these things also do
appertain and are to be referred unto the Priests and Nobles of the kingdom
of Israel especially, the words themselves of the Prophets do declare.

This verse has two parts. The first shows the sins of the Jews, and
that by a metaphor (which what it is, see Amos cap. 4. ver. 12) or similitude.
For they are compared unto those that remove and maliciously confound land
marks. Whereupon ensue great hurliburlies and disordering of things, yea and
sometimes wars and fallings out even among citizens themselves, or among
kingdoms. Hereof is that saying of Ovid:

Termine, sieve lapis, sieve es defossus in agro
Stipes, ab antiquis tu quoque nomen habes.
Si tu signasses olim Tyreatida terram,
Corpora non letho missa trecenta forent.
In English thus:

Thou God of bounds, if stone thou be,
Or doule deep set in ground,
Of old thou also have thy name,
And thus the same does sound.
If in times past thou bounded had
And marked the Tyrean soil,
Three hundredth persons then by death
Should not have taken the foil.
A law of God against removing of marks and bounds.
Wherefore this sin is most sharply punished in the law of God Deuteronomy. 19. ver.
14. there is a law set down touching this matter after this manner: Thou shall
not remove thy neighbors mark, which they of old time have set in thine
inheritance, that thou shall inherit the land, which the Lord thy God gives
thee to possess it. And Deuteronomy. A curse against the same sin.
27. ver. 17. there is a curse pronounced against those that commit this sin.
Cursed be he that remoueth his neighbors mark: and all the people shall say:
So be it. Hereof also is much spoken in the civil laws of the Romans, in the
whole title Digest. De termino moto. Now the Princes and the Priests of Judah
did confound, remove, and alter the marks set by God Deuteronomy. 19. in
distinguishing and seuering of civil and Church matters, the one from the
other, for that the Kings did with great pride of mind assay, and would have
usurped, or unlawfully taken upon themselves the privileges and offices of the
Priests, as appears 2. Chr. cap. 26. by Vzzia his attempting to burn
incense in the Temple of the Lord. And also 2. King. 16. ver. 10.11. By Ahaz
his prescribing Vriiah the Priest, to make an idolatrous Altar after the
pattern of that of Damascus: for when as the Magistrate how faithful and godly
soever he be encrocheth upon the office of the pastors: and on the contraric
when as the pastor of the Church takes on him the office of the politic
Magistrate, doubtless there must needs follow great disturbance and disordering
of things: and the marks and bounds which God has set in the due government
of this world are pulled up, and al things are turned topsie turuie, and do
run to wrack, ruin and decay. This therefore was the sin of the princes of
Judah.

Now follows the punishment, 2. The punishment of the former sin in
removing of marks.
namely not only the anger of God, but also his red hot or burning anger, that
is, the most exceeding great heat of the wrath of God against them. And this
heat of the wrath of God shall not fall upon them by drop meal, but shall
be poured down upon the heads of them. For the anger of God shall light upon
them, and follow after them withal his might and maine, sway and weight. And
it shall be poured out upon them as water, that is to say, most plentifully and
in great abundance, and on every fide bursting forth and dividing it self
into all places, like as water poured out, is wont to do. This is indeed a
most sharp and heavy punishment of proud Princes, and such as confound or
alter the bounds set by God, whereby God beats down their stubborn pride
and power: albeit that for the most part such kind of fellows are not afraid
of men at all: but range about without punishment, being held under and kept
back with no fear of laws nor punishments of man. Let therefore princes and
rulers whatsoever, consider how great a judgment of God hangs over their
heads, when as they meddle with those things which appertain not unto them,
and will order them at their pleasure: without any warrant from Almighty God.

Verse. 11. Ephraim is oppressed, and broken in judgment, because h^^ willingly
walked after the commandment.
THis is a rendering of a reason, why the Israelites, and especiallies their
Princes, as also those of Judah, shall be punished with so sore a punishment,
as has been described before, and shall also be showed hereafter, to wit, that
they shall be laid open for a pray, and shall be bruised and oppressed with that
weight of God his judgment against them: The cause of this punishments.
The cause (I say) hereof is this, for that they both of them, altogether
wittingly and willingly and desirouslye, embrace, follow and keep the
Commandments, the which are contrary unto the word of GOD. But the
commandments the which in this place are condemned, Against what
commandments the Prophet here speaks.
are not politic laws, the which should prescribe true godliness and
modesty among men 1. Tim. 2. (for those we are to obey) but they are such
ordinances of Kings, as being allowed of the Nobles and Peers of the Realm,
the people was thereby at the first brought unto idolatry by Ieroboa^ the
son of Nabat the first founder of this kingdom of Israel, and afsterwards by
his Successors 2. King. 17. So then these commandments are that same
will-worshippes, which Paul condemns Colos. 2. ver. 23. of which he says,
That they have indeed a show of wisdom, in voluntary religion and
humblenes of mind, and men's sparing the body, etc. They are the precepts of
men, wherewith God every where with so loud voice does witness that he is
worshipped in vain, Isai. 29. Amos 4. ver. 4. where the Lord accounts the
for transgressions, in what regard soever the people have them For thus in that
place he speaks of them: Come to Beth-el, and transgress: to Gilgal, and
multiply transgression: and bring your sacrifices in the morning, and your
tithes after three years. And Christ out of Isai. Matthew. 15. ver. 9. tells
the Scribes and Pharisees that they worship him in vain, teaching for doctrines
men's precepts. Idolatry therefore without all doubt, is in this verse condemned
in both those kingdoms, and out of this verse it is taught that it reigned
among the people of them both. And the same was always set up among the
Israelites and Jews, by the edict or proclamation of their Princes, as it is
now a days done in the Popedom by the writs and commandment of Princes.

Verse. 12. Therefore will I be unto Ephraim as a moth, and to the house of
Judah as a rottennes.
The greatness of their punishment set out by two similitudes
AS in the verse before going the Prophet described a very great sin, and such
as was ratified and warranted by the authority of their princes and rulers: so
now he sets down, and that unto the princes both of Israel and also of
Judah, the greatness of the punishment, wherewith the self same princes shall
be punished. And this is no new punishment, the which is here rehearsed: but an
amplification, or a more especial laying open of that which has been already
threatened. For he painteth out the greatness thereof by two similitudes. And
here are two things to be noted, to wit, 1. What punishment is threatened.
what punishment is here threatened, and unto whom. The punishment is most
heavy: namely, because these princes shall be eaten up and consumed in long
continuance of time, and by little and little, 2. To wh^m it is thre^^ned.
and not forthwith or at once: neither shall they cease to be vexed: but as a
moth uses to eat a garment by little and little, and to fret it by piece
meal, so shall they be vexed by little and little, and continually. So were
they threatened before ver. 7. to be consumed with a lingering disease, as also
Deuteronomy. 28. ver. 51.52. Moses shows among other plagues that shall fall upon
them for the despising of God his commandments, that foreign enemies shall
waste them and all theirs, both corn, fruit, and cattle, wine, and oil,
etc. by little and little, until they be quite and clean destroyed. The like
similitude of a moth is used Psalm. 39. ver. 11. where the Prophet writes after
this manner: When thou with rebukes do chastise man for iniquity, thou as a
moth make his beauty to consume: surely every man is vanity. Therefore as
the moth does eat away the beauty, The simi^^^^de of a garm^^at e^ten with
moths, is used also Job. 1^. ver. 28.
and every the best part of a garment: so shall every the best things of both
these kingdoms, that is, of Israel and of Judah, by the enemies be by little
and little carried away, and taken from them. That which was done in the
kingdom of Israel by the Assyrians: and in the kingdom of Judah by the
Babylonians or Chaldees. For by these was both these kingdoms at the first
broken, and spoiled of their richest countries, and littled in their borders.
To the self same purpose appertains also the similitude of Rottennes in the
latter end of this verse. See Iam. 5. ver. 5. to much like effect the like
comparison of the rust and cancre in the gold and silver of the cruel and
merciles rich men, the which he threatens shall eat their flesh also, as it
were fire. Further, the punishment which the Prophet here speaks of, is
threatened unto both the kingdoms, to with, that of Israel, and also that of
Judah: and unto those especially, the which in them both were the princes and
peers of the people, that men should not deceive themselves with vain names
and titles.

Verse. 13. Further more.
When Ephraim saw his sickness, and Judah his wound, then went Ephraim to
Asshur, and sent unto A king that should help the^.
King Iareb: yet could he not heal you, nor cure you of your wound.
Their distrust in his promises reproved.
ANother sin of both this people, and the same most shameful: namely,
distrust in Gods promises, and therefore their infidelity is plainly reproved
in this place. And a most certain and sure sign and proof hereof is, that
both peoples when as they were pressed by their enemies, ran not unto the true
God, but unto the help of people that were infidels, to wit, unto the
Assyrians, Egyptians, and unto others, as if there either had been no God among
them: or as if the true God, had not been God, and true of his promise. So
Ahaziah sending in his sickness to Baal-zebub, to know whether he should
recover or no, is sharply reproved by the Prophet Elijah 2. King. 1. ver. 6.
who says unto his servants in the name of the Lord: Is it not because there is
no God in Israel, that thou sendest to inquire of Baal-zebub the God of Ekron?
And in the Psalm. 44. ver. 20. the godly say: If we have forgotten the name of
our God, and holden up our hands unto a strange God, shall not God search this
out? And therefore is there a very fore and heavy curse pronounced against
those that forsaking the true God, flee into Egypt for help, Isai. cap. 31.1,
2, 3. in these words: Woe unto them that go down into Egypt for help, and
stay upon horses, and trust in chariots, because they are many, and in
horsemen, because they are very strong: but they look not unto the holy one of
Israel, nor seek unto the Lord. But he yet is wisest: therefore he will bring
evil, and not turn back his word, but he will arise against the house of the
wicked, and against the help of them that work vanity. Now the Egyptians are
men, and not God, and their horses flesh, and not spirit, and when the Lord
shall stretch out his hand, the helper shall fall, and he that is helped shall
fall, and they shall altogether fail.

Two parts of this verse.
This verse has two parts. The first sets forth the sin of these peoples
severally. Therefore I interpret the particle van, 1. A new sin of lo^^ the
people.
(Furthermore) that it may be understood that a new sin is now described,
yet such a one the which sprung no doubt of idolatry, and the contempt or
despising of God. Ephraim therefore ran unto the Assyrians, as appears 2.
King. 15. ver. 19. where Menahem the usurper bribeth Pull the King of Assyria,
to be favorable unto him: and Judah unto any King whatsoever, that would
promise him help. So then Judah flees not unto any one King only, but unto
diverse Kings, and all of them idolaters, to wit, as distrusting the promises of
God toward them, and making more account of the help of idolaters, and judging
it more certain then the help of the true God. They flee unto the Assyrians
2. King. 16. They flee unto the Egyptians Isai. 31.1. They flee unto the
Israelites 2. Chro. 25. ver. 6. Isai. 8. ver. 6 Read cap. 10. ver. 6.
hereafter. Therefore they ran not unto the Assyrian alone: unto whom the
Israelites especially looked against the Syrians: albeit the Israelites
themselves also hired the help of the Syrians oftentimes: or took them unto
themselves as league-fellowes against Judah. Further, there is a great force in
these words: He saw his sorrow or his pain, and his wound. For by the self
same they were sufficiently admonished, or put in mind to flee unto God, and
not unto those idolaters.

The second part of this verse shows the vanity of this help which they
sought after. For these Physicians did not cure their wounds, nay they took no
care of them at all. For 2. Chro. 28. ver. 20, 21. we read that the wicked
king Achaz was rather troubled then helped by the king of Assyria: yea though
he gave unto him large gifts, yet it helped him not. And Isai. 31. ver. 5.
cited but a few lines before, it is showed that those which sought unto Egypt
for help, were thereby harmed, and not helped. For neither the Israelites, nor
yet the Jews were any thing at all furthered or eased by these their aids.
Thus does our hope that is disagreeing and contrary unto the word of God,
deceive and disappoynt us.

Verse. 14. For I will be unto Ephraim as a lion, and as a lions whelpe unto the
house of Judah: I, even I, will spoil, and go away: I will take away, and
none shall rescue it.
A reason why the former aides shall not stand them in any stead.
THe rendering of a reason, why the former aids shall be unprofitable both unto
the Israelites, and also unto the Jews: namely, because God the auenger and
punisher of their sins and life, will pursue them both, and will break in
pieces and destroy them with most grievous punishments, and being stirred up
with wonderful anger and might and power. Therefore none shall deliver them
out of the hand of God.

There are therefore two things here to be considered. The first, who shall
stand against them, to wit, Jehovah, that is to say, the true God, Who shall
stand against them.
and he that is almighty, who himself will pursue them. Therefore there is a
great vehemency and force in this word (I) three times together rehearsed in
this place.

2. After what sort God will pursue them.
The second thing to be noted in this verse, is, after what manner, that is, with
how great force, might and power God will pursue the^, and break them in
pieces: namely, like unto a lion gaping after his pray. At which time the lion
is wont to be most fierce, cruel, and to gather all his strength together.
And therefore there is an example brought in this place of lions of two ages,
or of younger and older lions (albeit that some translate the first word a
Leopard) that these princes as well of Judah as of Israel, should not dream
any way to escape (but by repentance of mind, and earnest turning unto God:)
how mighty soever they seem unto themselves to be, and well underpropped and
stayed up with the aids of such kind of Kings, that is, Kings most mighty,
and of most great power. But God himself will take them away, as his own, and
lawful pray: and therefore no man shall rescue them. For who can withstand the
will and power of God? Let these things make us more wise, and take away from
us all vain confidence and trust.

Verse. 15. I will go, and return to my place, till they acknowledge their
fault, and seek me: in their affliction they will seek me diligently.
An amplification of the punishment by continuing the former similitude.
AN amplification of the punishment by the continuing in the similitude, the
which is taken from lions. For this punishment shall continue long. Therefore
like as a lion, after that he has taken his pray, returns unto his den,
that there he may at his pleasure enjoy the same: so God after that he has
laid these open unto the pray and power of their enemies, will return and
betake himself unto his own place, that he may a long season miserably vex
them, being thus laid open unto their enemies, and until they learn to
repent. Two parts of this verse.


1. The long continuance of their punishment.
Therefore this verse has two points to be observed, To wit, the longnes or
continuance of the banishment or captivity, and punishment threatened both unto
the Israelites, and also unto the Jews, the which is signified in these words
(I will go away, and return, until, etc.) Secondly, the cause of this so
long affliction or punishment: 2. The cause of the same.
namely, that these (who have lived so long as rebels) may return unto a
better mind. The which thing cannot be brought to pass but after long
punishment. For look how much the more hard the iron is, and the more hard the
heart of man is, with so much the more long punishments and hammers it is to
be beaten and laid on upon. And therefore Psalm. 32. ver. 9.10. David exhorts
the wicked and ungodly, that they should not wax senseles and brutish in
their manners and conversation, being like unto an horse, or like a mule, which
understand not, whose mouths a man must bind with bit and bridle, least they
come near him. And therefore (says he) many sorrows shall come unto the
wicked. So that it appears to betrue which the profane and heathen authors
do write: That the punishment of God is slow and long ere it come upon the
sins of men: but in the end God does recompense the slacknesse of the
punishment with the grieuousnes, or greatness of the pain. And out of this
self same place also appears, how that we are not in any case to abuse the
patience and long suffering of God Romans 2. Lastly, how just always the
judgments of almighty God are against men, how hard and long continuing
soever they seem to be. For whom God does long chastise and correct, all that
same while he does stir them up, and call them unto repentance. But men are
deaf: and for the most part make small benefit and profit in those
judgments of God.

A description of true repentance, which has two parts.
Further, here is described true repentance of mind, the which in the elect or
chosen is the effect and fruit of long afflictions: and moreover the scope or
end that God propounds or sets down unto himself, when as he afflicts,
or punishes them. And this true or earnest repentance does consist of these
two parts, to wit, 1. An unfeigned acknowledging of sin.
the unfeigned acknowledging of a man his sin, whereby he which repents,
does confess, and acknowledge from his heart before God, that he is in deed
and in truth guilty. Secondly, 2. Conversion or turning unto God.
of conversion or turning unto God, whom the self same party, who does in
such sort detest and loathe his sin, seeks notwithstanding, as his most
merciful father in Christ. Therefore this second part of repentance must
needs spring from true faith, and the laying hold of the grace of God prepared
for us for Christ his sake: like as the first part proceeds from the law, and
from the earnest feeling and taste of a man his own sin, the which strikes
into us an horror and a fear. From thence comes it that we do fear sin.
And therefore Paul 2. Cor. cap. 7. verse. 11. excellently sets out the many
singular effects that came of their godly sorrow for the neglecting of their
duty concerning the incestuous Corinthian, in these words: For behold, this
thing that ye have been godly sorry, what great care it has wrought in you,
yea, what clearing of your selves: yea, what indignation: yea, what fear: yea,
how great desire: yea, what a zeal: yea, what punishment in all things ye have
showed your seluet, that you are pure in this matter.

CAP. 6.
Verse. 1. Come and let us return to the Lord: for he has spoiled, and he will
heal us: he has wounded us, and he will bind or up.
A continuing of the former sermon.
THis is a continuing of the sermon, the which was made in the chapter before
going. For in the last verse he had said that the godly Israelites being at the
last stirred up with so many miseries and punishments should seek the face of
the Lord, and most ^^ligently make haste and run unto him. The which in my
judgment is to be referred unto diverse times; as for example, unto the
beginning of the reign of Oseas the last King of the Israelites. 2. King. 17.
verse. 2. For he was, though bad, yet not so bad as oth^^ Kings before him: The
figure Prosopopoeia or faining of a person, is when we set down the speech of
another, as here the Prophet does the speech of the ^odly converted.
unto the times of King Ezechias, where some of the Israelites repented. 2.
Chron. 30. verse 25. And lastly, unto the times of Josias King of Judah, when
he held the Passover, (...) it is 2. King. 23. Also 2. Chron. 34. verse. 19.
Now then the Prophet shows and declares the self same thing, namely, how
o^ after what sort they shall seek GOD. For he teaches how great their
diligence shall be, and their endeavor in knowing the true God, and in seeking
of him. Wherefore the Israelites are by the figure Prosopopoeia or sayning of a
person, brought in speaking, 2. Parts of this verse.
to the end that their conversion unto God may be the better set before the
eyes of the Readers.

1. The godly their exhorting one another to turn unto God.
And this verse has two especial things to be noted. First, the godly their
stirring up and exhorting one another to return unto God. See the like in the
godly Isai 2. verse. 3. where you shall find it thus: And many people shall go
and say: Come and let us go up unto the mountain of the Lord, to the house of
the God of Iaacob, and he will teach us his ways, and we will walk in his
paths. And they shall desire not only to come unto God a little way, or in some
part: but also to be converted, or turned unto him, that is, with all their
heart to repent, and now henceforth to become subject unto God: to follow his
word as a light shining before them: and they will have a mind utterly to cast
away their Idols. And this conversion or turning unto God, is the chiefest part
of repentance, and as I have said, springs of true says in Christ.

2. The cause of their exhorting one another.
In the second place the cause of their exhorting one another is to be observed
or marked. And this is the only mercy, bounteousnes and love of GOD through
Christ toward those that are his, howsoever they have been rebellious and
disobedient before, the which his love it is easy to gather by his promises
toward them in all the holy Scriptures. So then by the laying hold on the
mercy of God toward them, and that by true confidence or trust of mind, even
the godly themselves, who before had most grievously offended God* do
notwithstanding come home again, and convert or turn unto him. For they know
that God will heal and bind up their wounds. For as the Psalmist says Psalm.
147. verse. 2, 3. The Lord does build up Jerusalem, and does gather together the
dispersed of Israel. He heals those that are broken in heart, and binds up
their sores. And Psalm. 103. verse. 3. He forgiueth all thine iniquity, and
health all thine infirmities. And Isai 57. verse. 18. God says of the recalling
of the sinner: I have seen his ways, and will heal him: I will lead him
also, and restore comfort unto him, and to those that lament him. And therefore
Ierem. 3. verse. 22. he cries: O ye disobedient children, return and I will
heal your rebellions. And the people there make answer: Behold we come unto
thee. For thou art the Lord our God. And cap. 30. verse. 17. God most lovingly
and comfortablie speaks unto his church: For I will restore health unto thee,
and I will heal thee of thy wounds, says the Lord, because they called thee,
The cast away, saying, This is Zion, whom no man seeks after. They desire
then to return unto God, as unto their physician. This conversion, is the
other part of repentance.

Verse. 2. After two days will he revive us, and in the third day he will raise
us up, and we shall live in his sight. An amplification of the former benefit
taken from the greatness and speedines of the same.

AN amplification of this benefit of God taken both from the greatness, and
also from the speedines of the same. From the greatness, 1. From the greatness.
for that God in such sort cures and heals those that be his, that not
only their wounds grow together, and be made whole and sound again: but
also their former strength, might, courage, lustines and liuelines shall a
fresh and fully be restored unto them again by God, how greatly and grievously
soever they were wounded before. The which thing the Prophet does signify by
the words of (reviving and raising up) Examples hereof we do see in the
miracles of Christ done unto men's bodies, in the which the diseased were in
such sort healed, that there remained no print or token of the former
infirmity had it continued or hanted them never so long. And therefore Christ
said: Arise, take up thy bed, and walk. John 5. And likewise Act 3. verse. 8.
it is reported of the lame cripple begging at the gate of the Temple, that he
was in such sort restored by Peter and John, that he leaped up, stood, and
walked. And doubtless concerning our spiritual wounds also, that is to say,
our sins, Christ does in such sort take them away, that after the last
resurrection, neither the punishment, nor the guilt, nor any senfie of them
remains, or shall remain in us. For all these things Christ shall heal and
destroy in us, so that we may boldly say, as it is in Paul. 1. Cor. cap. 15.
verse 55. O death, where is thy sting! O hell, Our estate shall be better in
Christ, the^ that which we should have had in Adam.
where is thy victory? Nay Christ shall then restore us unto a far better
condition and estate then was that, which we should have had by the first
Adam, when he was pure, without sin, and in his innocence, by how much our
humane nature is more nearly and straightly joined with God, that is to say,
with the fountain it self of goodness in Christ (as who namely is true God,
and true man, in one and the same person) then in Adam, who only was the Image
of God, but not God himself, as Christ is. And this is the greatness of GOD his
benefit toward his, the which is prepared for us by Christ alone.

2. The speedines of the benefit.
The speedines of the same benefit is described and set forth to be very great.
For within the space of two days, or at the furthest, of three days, God
bestows upon his Church these so great benefits, that is to say, in a very
short time. For the mention, or words of (two days and three days) do
signify a most short space. A most singular comfort against our impatiencie.
For God always helps those that are his, when need is, and in the very
point and pinch, or moment and minute of time that he thinks convenient. For
as Paul teaches us 1. Cor. 10. verse. 13. God is faithful, which will not
suffer us to be tempted above that we be able, but will even give the issue
with the temptation, that we may be able to bear it. Touching this power of
God in bringing most hard things to pass, and in helping of those that are
his, there is a most notable, and of al other a most excellent example in the
resurrection or rising again of our Lord Jesus Christ: of whom for this cause
many do take and expound this place but too stricktly or narrowly. For it
appertains generally unto every help of God, the which he performs toward
his. And the same is always in respect of God speedy, howsoever it may seem
unto our impatient flesh unto the contrary, unto whom notwithstanding it is
joyful and welcome whenever it comes.

Verse. 3. Then shall we have knowledge, and endeavor our selves to know the
Lord: his going forth is prepared as the morning, and he shall come unto us as
the rain, and as the latter rain unto the earth.
A second amplification of the former benefit.
THe second amplification of the former benefit of GOD toward his that do
truly repent from their idolatry, and wicked life. And this amplification is
drawn partly from the increase, the which shall daily be more and more: and
partly from the fruit and profit the which shall grow thereon, and appear
most great, as it were from a rain that falls upon the earth in due season.
Therefore this benefit of God shall not be momentary, or for a little and a
short time: but continual. For the godly shall goeforward, and profit daily
more and more in the true knowledge of God out of his written word, the which
self same is the fountain and cause of their conversion or turning unto God.
They shall therefore know God, the which thing is opposed or set against that
same ignorance, the which the Prophet reproved in them before: and they shall
go forward in that same true knowledge of God, and shall daily in the same
have more happy success, profit, and growing forward. The fruit of the same
benefits of God shall be most plentiful, the which is understood by the cause
expressing one thing in words, and in sense and meaning betokening another
thing. For this coming of God unto those that are his, and his favor and help
is compared unto such a rayn as comes in due season, yea to the latter rain,
that is, such a rain as falls in Summer. And this rain is wont to bring
forth most plentiful fruit. Again, it shall be as the morning, that is to
say, then shall the presence of God be unto his most joyful and welcome. What
the figure Metaphora is, see Amos cap. 4. ver. 12.
These Metaphors do lively paynt out the exceeding great gladness of the godly,
and of the Church, when as it is healed and helped by God.

Verse. 4. O Ephraim, what shall I do unto thee? O Judah, how shall I entreat
thee? For your goodness is as a morning cloud, and as the morning dew it goes
away.
An admonition to the godly to continue in well doing.
AN admonition, whereby God exhorts those which are his being thus brought
into the way to continue, that they do not faint, wax weary, give back of
that their earnestnes, and become cold afterward, the which is a vanity,
lightness, and inconstancy in good things, that haunteth all men, yea even the
godly. And God here by the figure Hypophora, The figure Hypophora. What this
is, see Amos cap. 5 verse. 21.
or answering of an objection shows, if they depart from that right way the
which they have once entered into, that this comes to pass not through his,
but through their own fault. For he has sufficiently and thoroughly done his
part in teaching them both by words and also by stripes: but they on the
contrary part have always showed themselves light and inconstant, and so also
will hereafter show themselves to be.

Two parts of this verse.
But this verse has two parts. The first is the answering of an objection that
might be made, whereby God most justly remoueth from himself all the whole
blame both of the former wickedness of the Israelites, 1. The answering of an
objection.
and Jews, and also of their rebellion which should follow. So then in this
place the same God speaks unto both the Israelites, and also the Jews,
because he was the God of them both. The like he does Isai 5. verse. 4. in these
words, when he says: What could I have done any more to my vineyarde?

2. The turning of the fault upon themselves.
The second part is a turning of the fault of them both upon themselves because
of their lightness, and continual inconstancy in weldoing and thinking. For by
and by both these peoples fell unto idolatries, and unto a lewd and wicked
life, as appears by the holy histories, under Ioas king of Judah 2. Chro. 24.
verse. 17, 18. And after the death of Iehoiada, came the Princes of Judah, and
did reverence unto the King, and the King hearkened unto them. And they left
the house of the Lord GOD of their fathers, and served groves and idols: and
wrath came upon Judah and Jerusalem, because of this their trespass. Under
Manasses 2. Chron. 33. who succeeded Ezechias a singular good Prince. Also
under Oseas king of Israel, 2. King. 17. These examples ought to fear and to
move us. Therefore let us take heed, ^est he that now stands, do fall
afterward, What the figure Metaphora is, see Amos cap. 4 ver. 12.
as Paul counsels 1. Cor. 10. verse. 12. Moreover, under the Metaphors both
of dew, which rises in the morning, and forthwith melts away: also of a
morning cloud which is by and by dissolved, or vanishes away, there is
notably described the lightness, vanity, and inconstancy of the nature and
disposition of man in well-doing, and wel-willing, that no man should trust in
his own strength. From whence then comes our perseverance or continuance in
good things but from God?

Verse. 5. Therefore have I cut down by the Prophets: I have slain them by the
words of my mouth, and thy judgments were as the light that goes forth.
A confirmation of this turning of the fault upon them, taken from a double
work of God.
A Confirmation of this turning of the fault upon the Israelites and also upon
the Jews taken from the work of God himself, the which is here described to
be twofold. The one, The matter it self, that is to say, the punishments by the
Prophets threatened unto them sinning, the which afterward came to pass upon
them: yet for all this did they not repent. 1. The punishments that should fall
upon them.
And thus much does God signify by his Prophet Isai cap. 1. verse. 5. where he
says: Wherefore should ye be smitten any more? for ye fall away more and more:
the whole head is sick, and the whole heart is heavy. And so he notes the
continuance in their sin by the Prophet Jeremy cap. 2. verse. 22. speaking
thus: Though thou wash thee with nitre, and take thee much soap, yet thine
iniquity is marked before me, says the Lord. Therefore by these words of
(slaying and killing) by the Prophets, are signified the judgments of God, the
which fell out indeed unto both these peoples because of their sins. For
then these were both slain and killed, as appears Zach. 1. verse. 6. where
God speaks unto them after this manner: Did not my words and my statutes,
which I commanded by my servants the Prophets take hold of your fathers? And
they returned, and said, As the Lord of hosts has determined to do unto us,
according to our own ways, and according to our works so has he dealt with
us. And they were slain by the words or mouth of God, that is, by those
threatenings, the which the Prophets at the appointment and commandment of God
did deliver and declare unto the^ by mouth. But these phrases or kinds of
speaking do not give unto the Prophets, or Apostles, or their Successors the
power of any earthly sword, the which God has reserved, or given unto the
politic Magistrate only, as Paul teaches Romans 13. and 2. Cor. 10. ver. 4. he
witnesses, that the weapons of their warfare are not carnal, but mighty
through God to cast down holds. For these words, sword, slay, kill, etc. are
Metaphorical or Allegorical.

2. God in his law has taught, what is to be followed, and what to be avoided.
The other work of God is, that the self same God in his law, (wherein he
has plainly and clearly declared unto men his judgments and will) has
taught them sufficiently, what was to be followed and done: and also what was
to be avoided and left undone. Therefore whether men be moved either by
feeling of stripes, or else with doctrine alone, God laid both these means
before them, and was purposed both these ways to keep them within the compass
of their duty. Wherefore these words (The light of thy judgments, etc.) I
do take and understand of the law of God, the which was given by Moses,
wherein is set down more clearly then the day light the duty of man, the
judgments of God laid open, and the care of God showed for the instructing of
us aright in every respect, to the end that men which live wickedly may be made
inexcusable.

Verse 6. For I desired mercy and not sacrifice, and the knowledge of God more
then burnt offerings.
GOd repeteth the sum of all the commandments, the which he taught them,
least he might leave them any excuse of their ignorance: The complaint of the
Israelites and Jews.
or that they should not seem justly to complain, as if they were punished
vndeseruingly. For these men complained of the judgments of God brought forth
against them, as not deserving the same, as if they had fulfilled the law of
God, whilst forsooth they offered sacrifices diligently, God his answer.
and observed and kept the only outward ceremonies of his law. But God
answers, that he did not chiefly and especially desire those sacrifices, and
outward things: but rather mercy toward their neighbor, and the true
knowledge of himself out of his holy word written. Therefore as there are two
tables of the law of God: so is there in this place described a double end
thereof by the prophet, who begins at the second table, the effects whereof
are better known unto us. For the end thereof is Mercy, Bounteousnes, or
Charity toward our neighbor: and the sum of the first table is the true
knowledge and understanding of God. There is a like place unto this 1. Sam. 15.
ver. 22. Where Samuel says unto Saul, Has the Lord as great pleasure in burnt
offerings and sacrifices, as when the voice of the Lord is obeyed? Behold, to
obey, is better then sacrifice, and to hearken, is better then the fat of
Rams. And Matthew. 9. ver. 13. and 12. ver. 7. this selfsame place of Oseas is
alleged by Christ against the Scribes and Pharisees. And Mic. 6. ver. 8.
against those that trust unto the multitude of their sacrifices the Prophet
speaks thus: He has showed thee, O man, what is good, and what the Lord
requires of thee: surely to do justly, and to love mercy, and to humble thy
self, to walk with thy God. And Paul Romans 13. ver. 8. wills them, saying:
Owe nothing to any man, but to love one another: for he that loves another
has fulfilled the law. See Paul Romans 13.

Verse. 7. But they like men have transgressed the covenant: there have they
trespassed against me.
An antithesis, or setting down the contrary unto that which went before.
AN Antithesis, or setting down the contrary unto that which went before,
whereby God shows, and opposes, or matcheth the stubborn and most shameful
disobedience of the Israelites against his diligence, in prescribing or setting
down of holy and honest things unto them. For this all care, and doctrine of
GOD in teaching of them, did them no good at all: nay, they stoutly despised
it, and treacherously brake the covenant of God. There is a like place, and
setting down of the contrary unto that which God required at their hands
Psalm. 81. ver. 10, 11. expressed in these words: I am the Lord thy God, which
brought thee out of the Land of Egypt: open thy mouth wide, and I will fill it.
But my people would not hear my voice, and Israel would none of me. and so
forth.

1. The contempt of God.
This verse contains two things. One, to wit, the contempt it self of God and
his covenant showed by the Israelites. The other, the manner, or the
amplification of this contempt. 2. The manner of the same.
As touching the contempt, these men transgressed the law of GOD, whereof has
been spoken before. And this his law has God set down and made as the mark
and rule of all our actions, mutual and perpetual privilege and covenant
between themselves, Exodus 20. Deuteronomy. 6. Romans 9. ver. 4. Ephe. 2. ver. 12. And
the people for their part couenanted to obey God: and God for his part
conditioned to show himself a father of this people, by how much the more
shameful on their behalf the breach of his law appears for to be.

Bagedu.
For so does the Hebrew word signify. And therefore this sin and rebellion
is the greater.

Verse. 8. Gilead is a city of them that work iniquity, and is polluted with
blood.
A confirmation of the antithesis or contrariety set down before.
A Confirmation of the Antithesis or contrariety, taken from the examples of
heinous sins in all degrees and orders of men. And first of all of the
cruelty ranging every where, and being committed of the^ and among them, and
reigning even in whole towns and cities. Galaad a shop and storehouse of all
wickedness and cruelty.
For that of Gilead, or Galaad was known to every body. For that country was
at that time the shop, and house of all iniquity and cruelty. Therefore I
take Galaad for the country it self, in the which at that time every city
was full of blood, and wickedness for want of punishment. And for this cause
was that country afterward first punished by God most sharply, and also by
infidels, as when it was first taken by Pull King of the Assyrians 1. Chro. 5.
ver. 26. Further, the towns and cities of this country are called towns of
them that work iniquity, towns flowing and defiled with blood: finally,
towns in which the print and footing of cruel persons is set so deeply, that
they cannot be blotted or wiped out. The which kind of speaking carries a
great vehemency and force, and painteth out the most shameful, and most
cruel manners of the inhabitants or dwellers in that country. And therefore
the Prophet David Psalm. 55. ver. 9, 10, 11. does after such like manner describe
the wickedness of Saul, and of the inhabitants of Jerusalem, when he prays
unto God against their cruelty and subtlety after this wise: Destroy, O Lord,
and divide their tongues: for I have seen cruelty and strife in the city.
Day and night they go about it upon the walls thereof: both iniquity and
mischief are in the midst of it. Wickedness is in the midst thereof: deceit
and guile depart not from her streets.

Verse. 9. And as thieves wait for a man, so the company of priests murder in
the way by consent, for they work mischief.
A laying out of the matter more plainly.
A Laying out of the matter more plainly. For he shows by what means men grew
there to be so wicked, and became to be so cruel, and that not one sort of
them alone, but all the degrees of this people. And first of all their priests,
whom he teaches secretly to have agreed upon, and to have made meetings within
themselves to slay and spoil men; and look what mischief soever, they had
once conceived in their mind, that same did they in the end lewdly put in
proof and practice. A double accusation of the priests.
Wherefore there is here contained a double accusation of the priests. The one,
of their wicked meeting together to spoil men under the pretense of godliness
and sacrifices. That which one or two of the^ alone does not, 1. They agree to
spoil men under a show of godliness.
but their whole order with one consent, as if they were certain companies of
thieves besetting the passages and high ways sides. After which sort David
sets out the qualities and conditions of the oppressor and cruel man Psalm.
10. ver. 8. in these words: He lies in wait in the villages: in the secret
places does he murder the innocent: his eyes are bent against the poor.
Whereupon the society, confederacy, or fellowship of these priests, is here
called and compared unto companies of thieves that lie in wait for trauailers
and passers by.

2. They put their counsels and devises in execution and practice.
The other accusation of the priests is, That whatsoever they devised and
thought within themselves wickedly and ungodly, the same do they subtillie and
craftily put in execution and practice. In the first accusation therefore the
cruelty and craftiness of the priests is described: In the second their
desperate lewdnes and wickedness. Both these flatly agrees with the popish
sacrificing Mass priests, and may be fitted against them most truly: and let
us take heed that it may not be so justly against us also.

Verse. 10. I have seen villenie in the house of Israel: there is the whordome
of Ephraim: Israel is defiled.
The life of the Princes and of the people.
IN the second place he reckons up the life of the Princes and rulers of the
people of Israel. In the third, of the whole people, mutual and perpetual
privilege and covenant between themselves, Exodus 20. Deuteronomy. 6. Romans 9. ver. 4.
Ephe. 2. ver. 12. And the people for their part couenanted to obey God: and God
for his part conditioned to show himself a father of this people, by how much
the more shameful on their behalf the breach of his law appears for to be.

Bagedu.
For so does the Hebrew word signify. And therefore this sin and rebellion
is the greater.

Verse. 8. Gilead is a city of them that work iniquity, and is polluted with
blood.
A confirmation of the antithesis or contrariety set down before.
A Confirmation of the Antithesis or contrariety, taken from the examples of
heinous sins in all degrees and orders of men. And first of all of the
cruelty ranging every where, and being committed of the^ and among them, and
reigning even in whole towns and cities. For that of Gilead, or Galaad was
known to every body. For that country was at that time the shop, Galaad a
shop and storehouse of all wickedness and cruelty.
and house of all iniquity and cruelty. Therefore I take Galaad for the
country it self, in the which at that time every city was full of blood, and
wickedness for want of punishment. And for this cause was that country
afterward first punished by God most sharply, and also by infidels, as when it
was first taken by Pull King of the Assyrians 1. Chro. 5. ver. 26. Further, the
towns and cities of this country are called towns of them that work
iniquity, towns flowing and defiled with blood: finally, towns in which the
print and footing of cruel persons is set so deeply, that they cannot be
blotted or wiped out. The which kind of speaking carries a great vehemency
and force, and painteth out the most shameful, and most cruel manners of the
inhabitants or dwellers in that country. And therefore the Prophet David Psalm.
55. ver. 9, 10, 11. does after such like manner describe the wickedness of
Saul, and of the inhabitants of Jerusalem, when he prays unto God against
their cruelty and subtlety after this wise: Destroy, O Lord, and divide their
tongues: for I have seen cruelty and strife in the city. Day and night they
go about it upon the walls thereof: both iniquity and mischief are in the
midst of it. Wickedness is in the midst thereof: deceit and guile depart not
from her streets.

Verse. 9. And as thieves wait for a man, so the company of priests murder in
the way by consent, for they work mischief.
A laying out of the matter more plainly.
A Laying out of the matter more plainly. For he shows by what means men grew
there to be so wicked, and became to be so cruel, and that not one sort of
them alone, but all the degrees of this people. And first of all their priests,
whom he teaches secretly to have agreed upon, and to have made meetings within
themselves to slay and spoil men; and look what mischief soever, they had
once conceived in their mind, that same did they in the end lewdly put in
proof and practice. A double accusation of the priests.
Wherefore there is here contained a double accusation of the priests. The one,
of their wicked meeting together to spoil men under the pretense of godliness
and sacrifices. That which one or two of the^ alone does not, 1. They agree to
spoil men under a show of godliness.
but their whole order with one consent, as if they were certain companies of
thieves besetting the passages and high ways sides. After which sort David
sets out the qualities and conditions of the oppressor and cruel man Psalm.
10. ver. 8. in these words: He lies in wait in the villages: in the secret
places does he murder the innocent: his eyes are bent against the poor.
Whereupon the society, confederacy, or fellowship of these priests, is here
called and compared unto companies of thieves that lie in wait for trauailers
and passers by.

2. They put their counsels and devises in execution and practice.
The other accusation of the priests is, That whatsoever they devised and
thought within themselves wickedly and ungodly, the same do they subtillie and
craftily put in execution and practice. In the first accusation therefore the
cruelty and craftiness of the priests is described: In the second their
desperate lewdnes and wickedness. Both these flatly agrees with the popish
sacrificing Mass priests, and may be sitted against them most truly: and let
us take heed that it may not be so justly against us also.

Verse. 10. I have seen villenie in the house of Israel: there is the whordome
of Ephraim: Israel is defiled.
The life of the Princes and of the people.
IN the second place he reckons up the life of the Princes and rulers of the
people of Israel. In the third, of the whole people, that, as I have said, all
the degrees and estates of that kingdom may be held guilty before God: and
therefore there is here also contained a most evident confirmation and proof
of the accusation of the Israelites, the which was begun before, as in the
former verses, to wit, 8. and 9. So then the Princes are accused of whoredom.
And these are understood questionles under the name of the house of Israel and
Ephraim, as I have said before cap. 5. ver. 1. But this whoredom is called an
horrible matter, and a villainy, and notorious offense, to the end that in this
place we should understand not any kind of whoredom whatsoever to be noted,
but that the which of all other does most greatly displease God. And that is
idolatry, the which was first ordained and set up by the Princes, by the King
himself, and the Nobles of the kingdom of Israel, who were Ephraimites, and
afterward by the self same defended: after whose example the rest of the
people committed whoredom afterward, that is, worshipped idols, and polluted
or defiled themselves before God. For such as are the Princes, says Plato,
such the rest of the citizens are wont for to be. The whole world frames
themselves after the example of the King. And therefore 1. King. 12 ver. 30.
you shall find, how easily the whole people were drawn unto idolatry, after
that Jeroboam had once builded up the Altars and golden Calves at Dan and
Beth-el: For the people went (because of the one) of the calves, even to Dan.
And after this manner did the Princes of Israel sin.

The people sin after the example of the Princes.
The people also did afterward pollute and defile themselves with the same
idolatries and superstitions, unto the which they saw their Princes to be
given. And therefore it is added, Israel is defiled with whoredom, to wit, the
which the Princes of this people of Ephraim did teach them. Wherefore now in
this place, as I have said before, I think the word (Israel) to be taken for
the whole people. Therefore the sins, and especially the sins of idolatry,
excuse not the people before God.

Verse. 11. Yea Judah has set a plant for thee, whiles I would return the
captivity of my people.
An amplification of this idolatry reigning among the Israelites.
AN amplification of the idolatry, which reigned among the Israelites. For in
such price was it among them, in such honor, in such dignity, so great was the
love of it, such the commendation, so earnest was their mind toward it, and
such was the labor and endeavor of these Israelites to spread it abroad among
others, that they had infected Judah it self also with this sin. For the
Israelites had sown the most shameful seeds thereof among the Jews, the which
afterward grew up, and brought forth their crop, that is their fruit, and the
same most unhappy, and lamentable, but yet most plentiful, and speedy. What
a Metaphor is, see Amos. cap. 4. ver. 12.
Wherefore it is a Metaphorical kind of speaking, when as the contagion and
infection of the idolatry of the Israelites by them at the first conueighed,
scattered, and imparted unto the Jews, and afterward growing up among the
Jews themselves, is called an harvest, (or as some translate it, a plant).
Furthermore, the time is rehearsed, wherein the Jews were in such sort
corrupted and infected by the Israelites: namely, whilst God brought them
back again being captives, that is, taken by the Israelites. This history
appertains unto the times of Achaz king of the Jews 2. Chro. 28. for then
were the Jews overcome and taken by the Israelites, yet were they liberally,
and freely by them let go again. Through which benefit it is likely that the
Jews were moved to favor both the Israelites, and also their religion, that
is, their idolatry: and from thence took those seeds, the which afterward
grew up, and made them more ready and forward unto horrible idolatry under
Achaz their king, as appears 2. Chro. 28. ver. 22. and in that which there
follows. So easy doubtless is the nature of man to be drawn into
idolatry, and with so small ado can idolaters deceive men, as the fish is
beguiled with the bait. And so quickly, as it is 1. Cor. 15. ver. 33. does
evil speakings corrupt good manners. So also even at this day many being
rewarded with benefits from the Turk, do first of all grow into a liking of
Turkish blasphemy: and in the end become Turks themselves also. So in like
manner in our time now, many professors of the Gospel become Papists, being
allured with their bounteousnes and liberality. For benefits do often so
beguile us, that we favor our benefactors and weldoers to the reproach of God
himself: the which notwithstanding ought not in any case to be allowed, nay,
it is to be condemned.

CAP. 7.
Verse. 1. When I would have healed Israel, then the iniquity of Ephraim was
discovered, and the wickedness of Samaria: for they have dealt falsely: and
the thief comes in, and the robber spoyleth without.
AN overplus or addition unto that which went before. For in the former chapter
he declared the corruption of all degrees of this kingdom of Israel: but here
he gives in as it were for an advantage, or an ouer-draught and measure, the
particular horrible and lewd corruption and course of life of the Nobles and
Princes (whom before he had briefly reprehended with the rest) and does more
diligently set down and handle the same, as the fountain and welspring of all
that corruption, the which he had condemned before. Wherefore this now insueth
and follows of the former argument or matter, which the Prophet has already
handled, that the public state of this people may be known to have been
desperate, and very miserable: like as in the chapter before going, the private
estate of these men was showed to have been corrupt and wretched.

Three parts of this verse.
But this verse contains three things. For first of all is showed what was the
occasion of finding out of this mischief, the which he hereafter rehearses.
1. The occasion of finding out of the sin or evil, which the Prophet here
rehearses.
And this was, That whilst God as a most excellent Physician, labors to
heal this people, and is desirous to deal with their sins and to cure them,
as if it were diseases and wounds, and whiles he intends thoroughly to search
into the causes of the same, as Physicians use for to do: he does at the last
repeat, that the causes of all these evils are in the Princes themselves of
this people, and in the very mother or head city of the kingdom Samaria. For
they do most shamefully and foully corrupt and spill the rest of the citizens
and inhabitants with their example. For the experience of all ages teaches
that saying of Plato to be true, That such as the Princes and Rulers are, such
also are the rest of the citizens. And as one says, The examples of the
Governors do flow forth unto the people. The which thing also Isocrates in
his Oration unto Nicocles, and Agapetus unto Justinian the Emperor, do write.
By how much the more it behooves Princes and Rulers to live holilie, least that
by their shameful life they do not only overthrow themselves: but also their
subjects. So then whilst the causes of these vices, which reigned in the
people, are diligently sought into of God, the Princes are found out to be the
fountains of this whole mischief.

2. Who are here especially condemned.
Another point in this verse worthy the noting is this, Who are here especially
condemned and described. I answer, to wit, both the Princes themselves, that
is to say, the King, and his familiars and friends the Nobles and Peers of the
Realm: and also the chief city of the kingdom, Samaria. Therefore by the
name of (Ephraim) is signified the Princes (out of which tribe the first king
of this people, to wit, Jeroboam, and so consequently the Princes, had their
original) and by the word (Samaria) is noted the head city of the whole
kingdom, and not any city whatsoever, nor any one of the people whatsoever is
here reproved by the Prophet. For the miserable condition and estate of those
which sat at the stern of the common wealth, and their lewd and wicked life
is here lively described, as the most plentiful and first head-spring of the
rest of the wickedness. And if in any place else of the holy Scripture the
public desperate estate of any common wealth be set out, it is especially in
this place, and in this kingdom of Israel.

3. What is said of these Princes, and of their head city.
Now the third thing the which is to be marked in this verse, is, What is said
of these Princes and their head city, that is to say, what manner of
wickedness, corruption and life this of theirs was. And first of all it is set
down in general: then particularly by the several parts and sorts of their
lewdnes and wickedness. And generally, when as their wickedness is termed
iniquity, and falsehood: nay in the plural number wickednesses, and
subtilties or falsehoods, that these Princes may be proved to have abounded in
all kind of lewdnes, together with their chief city: and not with one or two
heinous sins: albeit notwithstanding that some sins hereafter reckoned up,
and some outrageous offenses were committed licentiously among them, and with
full sway reigned and flourished. Further, iniquity and falsehood in this place
do betoken unfaithful dealing, the which hurts and wrongeth our neighbor,
against the law of God, and duty of charity: and that both in the deed it
self (for they are said to have committed falsehood, or to have dealt
falselie, that is, to have effected their crafty counsels) and also by
deceit, or sleights, and shifts, and lies. For these Princes were most
notorious liars, deceivers, most vain. Now the suites and sorts of this wicked
life, and that reigning in Samaria the chief city of the kingdom among the
Princes are, at home Deceit: and abroad Violence. For at home they are thieves,
as being such who by subtilty and craft take away from the poor that which is
theirs, and devise shifts to pull from their subjects their goods. But abroad
and without their cities they are gathered together by heaps, after the manner
of thieves and robbers, to rob and spoil every man. The life of some Noble
men of our time as they are called, could not be better painted out then it is
in this place represented and showed forth under the name and person of the
Princes and Rulers of Israel.

Verse. 2. And they consider not in their hearts, that I remember al their
wickedness: now their own inventions have beset them about: they are in my
sight.
The first amplification of the former wickedness.
THe first amplification of the former wickedness, from the manner of committing
the same. For these Princes are in such sort thieves at home, and also violent
and robbers abroad, that they bury within themselves all remembrance and
feeling of the judgments of God, as if either there were no God at all: or as
if he were not just, or not executing and taking punishment upon the wicked
deeds of men, especially of his own people. The which is an especial
argument or token of impiety or ungodliness and all retchlesse shamelesnes in
all men, but chiefly in Princes. That which notwithstanding has been in all
ages, and is now adays also to be seen in many Nobles and great men. David
Psalm. 50. verse. 21. after that in the person of God he has blamed them for
pretending and making show of religion, yet being in life and conversation most
wicked, partners with thieves and whoremasters, deceitful, and slanderers,
signifiyng these outrageous offenses to be openly committed among them, he
adds: These things have thou done, and I held my tongue: therefore thou
thoughtest that I was like thee: but I will reprove thee, and set them in order
before thee. And Psalm. 94. verse. 7. having before expressed the violence and
arrogancy of tyrants, declaring that in the committing of these things they
cast off all remembrance and feeling of God, says: Yet the Lord shall not see:
neither will the God of Iaacob regard it. Therefore unto that their wickedness
these Princes join for the most part notorious ungodliness also, as namely
being such, who either utterly deny God, or else take away his justice and
providence from out of mankind, and from out of the life of man.

The carefulnes of God to punish, set against the carlesnes of men that think
in sinning to escape without punishment.
Now their own inventions have beset them about: they are in my sight.) This
is an Antithesis or a setting down of the contrary unto that which went
immediately before of their supposall, that God sees them not in the doing of
these things, the which opposes or sets against the former sencelesnesse
and blockish mind of these Princes the perpetual or continual care of God
concerning the doings and practices of men, and his thinking upon the
punishment of their wickedness. It is therefore so far off, that therefore GOD
should not remember them, or think upon the punishing of them, how great
Princes soever they are, that their iniquity is always present before his
sight: and does on every side beset them, and hemme them in, that in no part of
them they can be seen sound and pure, or remain hidden or covered. For that
their wickedness lies open on all parts, like as a garment the which men do
wear, or wherewith they are clothed on all parts, is to be seen on every
side. There is a like place Psalm. 73. verse. 6. where the Prophet says of the
ungodly puffed up by prosperity, That pride is as a chain unto them, and
cruelty covers them as a garment. And again Psalm. 109. verse. 18. in these
words: As he clothed himself with cursing as with a garment, so shall it
come into his bowels like water, and like oil into his bones. Therefore what
pardon soever men that are hypocrites may feign unto them for their sins,
having forgotten God and his justice, they are deceived; be they of common
people, or be they Princes. For God will punish them both in the end: and the
great ones the more grievously, by how much they have done the more hurt by
their example. Touching this point, see Romans 2. from the third verse and
forward even to the end of the chapter. Let Princes therefore endeavor and
labor to be an example or pattern of an honest life unto the rest of the
people.

Verse. 3. They make the king glad with their wickedness, and their Princes with
their lies.
The second amplification of the wicked life of the Peers and Nobles.
THe second amplification of the wicked life of the Nobles and Peers of Israel
taken from the effects of the same. They with their lewdnes, which is heathen
like and shameless, do corrupt and utterly spoil, not only themselves, but
also the King himself, and other princes the which retained or kept some
parcel of modesty, godliness, and honesty.

Two parts of this verse.
Two things therefore are to be noted in this place, first, whom they make to be
worse. Secondly, by what means they do it. And for the first: They corrupt
not the people alone (for as I have said before, 1. Whom they corrupt.
they do put aside and turn the people also out of the right way by their
example) but also the other Princes, 2. By what mean.
in whom there remained some sparks of godliness. And not only the princes,
but they corrupt and spill the king himself also. 1. The people and other
Princes, and the King himself also.
By how much the more hurtful is the wickedness of these Nobles unto the whole
commonwealth. For what can there be hole and sound in the rest of the body,
when as the king, and the head it self of the kingdom is sick and ill at ease?
And therefore in a sense not much unlike Christ says of his Apostles and
disciples Mat 5. ver. 13. Ye are the salt of the earth: but if the salt have
lost his savor, wherewith shall it be salted? It is thenceforth good for
nothing, but to be cast out, and to be trodden under foot of men. And cap. 6.
verse. 22. The light of the body is the eye: if then thine eye be single, thy
whole body shall be light. But if thine eye be wicked, the^ al thy body shall be
dark. Wherefore if the light that is in thee be darkness, how great is that
darkness? Doubtless the manners of the courtiers of our time are here by the
Prophet most truly described, so that they cannot be more truly painted forth
by the pensil of the Painter.

2. With their flat teries, lies and wickedness.
The Prophet likewise sets down by what means these self same do win the
Kings unto them, to wit, They make them merry, and glad with their
flatterings, lies, and wickedness. They deal therefore after this sort, as
that they would seem only to delight the king, whilst they live so wickedly,
forge lies, and finally deal so lewdly. Thus then by little and little, and as
it were by drop meal, they do drop and power in the vileness of their life into
the minds of kings under a pretense and seasoning or sawcing of the same with
pleasure, the which they bring unto Princes: and do teach them to live and to
deal after the same manner, and with the same allurements. A point worth the
noting.
Pleasure, says Plato, is the bayte of evil. For we do easily drink in
those vices, the which do make us merry and withal do offer and show us
delight, although they be most shameful and present poisons. Wherefore even
kings are to abstain from all filthy pleasure, and to keep a diligent watch
and ward over those that are their friends and familiars. Let them shun the
wicked: and take unto them the godly and virtuous, according unto that pattern
which David sets down for the ordering and reforming of a Princes house and
Court Psalm. 101.

Verse. 4. They are all adulterers, and as a very oven heated by the baker,
which cease from raising up, and from Kneading the dough, until it be
leauened.
A lewd and bad practice of some wicked courtiers.
A More plain laying open of this matter. For he shows forth that kind of
wickedness of Courtiers especially, wherewithal lewd and baggage Courtiers do
make glad and delight the king. And this is first of all, whoredom it self:
and secondly, the rehearsing and boasting of their most shameful companying
and unlawful lying with women, whereby they stir up the king unto lust, and
delight him. The figure Auxesis or increasing, is when as by degrees as it
were, we do go from the lower unto the higher, yea unto the highest, and above
the highest sometimes: as here the Prophet from their whoredom goes as it
were ene stephigher, and increases the same by likening it unto the extreme
heat of an oven made so hot as possibly the baker by all diligence can devise
and make it
So then these wicked Noble men are fornicators, nay most filthy whoremasters,
and most earnestly given that way first themselves, and secondly they are most
shameless baudes unto their kings. For by the figure Auxesis, or incereasing of
the matter as it were by degrees, and by a similitude taken from an oven or
furnace, and a Baker, is declared how burning hot this fleshy lust of these
men, that is, of these Courtiers, is: for look how a furnace or oven once
heated by the baker, and from out of the which the fire has not been removed
or taken away through any negligence or sloth of the baker, look I say, how
greatly that same furnace burns, and is glowing hot: so hot, raging and
burning is the lust of these Nobles and Courtiers, unto the which also they do
stir up the king himself, and do in such sort make him glad, and corrupt
him. And what is more known and common at this day them these Arts in the
Courts of Kings and princes, to allure kings, and to draw them unto their
parts and sides?

Verse. 5. This is the day of our king: the Princes have made him sick with
flagons of wine: he stretches out his hand to scorners.
AN amplification of the former wickedness of the Nobles and Courtiers from
three places, namely, from the time, the adioints, The former wickedness
amplified from three places.
and persons. And from the time, for that even at the self same day that the
king holds the remembrance of the kingdom either given him by God, or
obtained by himself, 1. From the time.
or keeps his birth day, neither do they themselves abstain from these
intemperancies, vices, corruptions, and drinkings: neither do they suffer or
grant the king himself, or other Princes to abstain. Yet these a e such days
in the which thanks are rather to be given unto God, both by the Kings
themselves, and also by their Princes, then after this manner, to give over
themselves unto wantonness and sin: in as much as then they call to mind
again the remembrance of the benefit received from God, and the same indeed
a most singular benefit. Example in the Psalm. 2. and 18.21. and 22. where
David celebrateth or keeps the remembrance of his enstalling in his kingdom,
or of his coronation. Example also in Mat. 14. ver. 6. where the birth day of
King Herod is holden, albeit not in such manner as it ought to be. So then (the
day of the king) is taken for that day, in the which the King holds and
keeps publicly the remembrance of some especial benefit of God toward
him. And this was the first circumstance of time, the which increases this
sin of these Courtiers.

Secondly, the adioints also do make the former lewdnes of the Princes greater,
2. From the adioynts.
to wit, For that they have added unto this burning lust of the flesh, or
whoredom singular intemperancie, and surfeiting or gurmandise. For they drink
not wine out of cups, but out of flagons and bottels, the which they carouse
all out, and that so intemperately, that both themselves, and also the King and
other princes (the which by them are urged unto such quaffings) wax sick in
the end thereby. So then they sin two ways, namely, by the abusing of the
gifts of God, to wit, meats and wine: and also their health (the which in like
manner is the gift of God) the which by this means they do lose, hurt, and
impair. And this is a sign and token of notorious and most intemperate
gurmandise. And these vices always for the most part are linked and yoked
together, namely, whoredom and surfeiting or drunkenness. For as one says,
without good cheer and wine lust is cold. But now there is added also a
certain third thing, that is to say, That the King being accustomed unto such
a loose, unbridled and wicked life, in the end stretches out his hands to (or
with) scorners, that is to say, is delighted with men that contemn or despise
God, both learneth and allows or likes their manners, and adioyneth himself
unto them. And finally at the last he himself casts off all fear of God,
all shamefastnes and modesty: by whose examples the rest also become scorners
of God. Now a scorner, is a mocker of God, as Peter epist. 2. cap. 3. ver. 3.
calls him, that is to say, an open gyber and iester at the Godhead, power,
and majesty of God, so that he which is such a manner of person, can now no
longer be kept within the bounds of his duty, or be touched with any shame.
Whereby is understood, how lamentable and miserable the estate of those
commonwealths is, in the which such Princes bear rule as are given unto
drunkenness and wine, or else do follow whoredom. For they do not only
neglect or foreslow the public business or matters of the commonwealth,
growing brutish and senseless through wine and women, but also do quench and
put out in themselves and others all remnants of religion and sparkles of the
fear of God through their example. Worthily therefore is surfeiting in the
Proverbs forbidden both unto Kings and also unto all those which have the
government of the commonwealth. Prove. 31. ver. 4, 5. where it is said: It is
not for Kings, O Lemuel, it is not for Kings to drink wine, nor for Princes
strong drink, least he drink and forget the decree, and change the judgment
of all the children of affliction. And from hence also we learn how Kings by
little and little are corrupted by Courtiers, and by certain degrees are
framed and drawn unto great Iewdnesse and wickedness.

The third place of this amplification, is from the Persons. 3. From the
persons.
These whorehunting and drunken Noblemen, do not only corrupt themselves,
nor the people; but others besides, yea even the Princes of the kingdom, nay
the King himself also, as I have showed before, upon whom lies the whole
charge of the commonwealth. Wherefore these, whilst they spill the King, do
overthrow the whole commonwealth, as being the public enemies of the same.
Thus then it appears, how great a mischief in every kingdom the corruption
of the Court is.

Verse. 6. For they have made ready their heart like an oven, whiles they lie
in wait: their baker sleeps all the night: in the morning it burns as a
flame of fire.
The second amplification of their former wickedness.
THe second amplification of the former wickedness, taken from the Consequent or
that which follows hereupon. In the end these Nobles do so boil and burn
with all kind of heinous sins, as an oven or furnace is glowing hot, being
most extremely heated by the baker, and from whom the fire through negligence
has not been removed. Nay in the end they lie in wait against their Kings
and Princes. And in deed these commonly are the degrees, whereby at the last
these courtly-nobles do come up and clime unto this treacherousnes, that they
lie in wait even for their King himself, to take him away, and to destroy
him, and to enter into conspiracies against him. First of all, they bind the
King unto them through their lewdnes, and besot him with all kind of vices.
Secondly, they cause him to become a mocker, that there may remain in him no
spark of goodness and honesty. Furthermore, when he will not be ruled by them
in all points, then do they afterward disdain and despise him, as a blockish
person, and a du^me image. And finally, they in the end conspire against him:
or they set their mind against him, being now in such sort become a man
infected and past all hope of recovery in all kind of sin, that they do
lie in wait for him the self same their King. For look in what
commonwealths or kingdoms such Courtiers and Nobles are, The author or the
printer mistaketh in the report of these histories, for Menahem, and not
Phaceias or Pekakiah, killed Sellum.
as in this place be described, there never wants store of conspiratours,
seed of civil wars, and causes of seditions, the which by these parties are
scattered and spread abroad. The which thing fell out in the kingdom of
Israel, in the last times of the Kings of Israel. For Sellum killed Zacharias,
Phaceias slew Sellum, Phacee the son of Romelias killed King Phaceias. 2.
King. 15.

Moreover, the wicked mind of these Nobles is described by the metaphor taken
from a furnace or oven, as before ver. 4. that it may plainly appear that
these do exceedingly boil and burn within themselves in all kind of sins:
What a Metaphor is, see Amos, cap. 4.12.
and so long as they are and continue such, it is manifest that they themselves
are burned of their own sins. So Otho corrupted Nero, as Cornelius Tacitus
reports. So the drudges and slaves of the Court spoiled and spilled the
Emperor Commodus, the son of Marcus, as Herodianus writes.

Verse. 7. They are all whote as an oven, and have devoured their judges: all
their Kings are fallen: there is none among them that calls unto me.
A Confirmation of the former description of these Princes taken from the
effects, The former description of the wicked Nobles confirmed by three effects.
the which are in this place reckoned up three in number, and the same most
grievous, and such as do witness a most disordered estate of the common
wealth, and a most miserable licentiousnes or over great liberty of vices. The
first of these is, a most exceeding great heat and violent sway of al vices,
the which boyleth up, Of their great earnestnes in committing all kind of
sins.
and heateth in the breasts of these men, as a most hot furnace. And surely
experience of things teaches this to be most true, that nothing can be seen
more wanton then the manners of these once forlorn Nobles: nothing more
malapert then their lust, nothing more shameless then their boldness, and
finally, nothing more hot and earnest then their desires, be they never so
unjust and unlawful, in such sort forsooth do they abuse the height and
glory of their authority and dignity, as if there ought to be no let unto
them, nothing to hinder their wishings, and as if all things were to be at
their beck and command. Therefore whatsoever enterprise they would have
effected, be it never so shameful, filthy, ungodly, and unjust, they think
it lawful to bring it to pass: and therefore in all their actions, their
desire of bringing the same about, and of putting them in practice, boyleth and
seetheth as it were a most hot and fiery furnace.

2 Of their eating up the Kings treasures and overthrowing of the state.
The second effect is, that these same wicked Courtiers do consume their
Judges, that is, both their Kings, and also their Princes, whom they ought to
maintain and increase. For partly they empty and draw dry the treasuries of
their Princes, whom they have at their own command, and do rob and spoil
the same, craftily getting and stealing the Kings coin into their own hands:
and partly they do ouerturne and in the end destroy their Princes, and their
most flourishing estate with those their wicked counsels. The which thing to be
most true, both the history of all ages, and also this time of ours will most
evidently and clearly witness. For the Nobles, and these lewd and bad
Courtiers do in the end bring their Lords and masters into such narrow
straights for money and other matters, through their most wicked vices,
counsels, charges, and privy whisperings, that their Kings themselves can not
afterward wind out again from this poverty, but lie overwhelmed in the
same, and perish therein at the last with their kingdom.

3 Of their driving away of all fear of God and godimes out of the hearts of
their kings and rulers.
The third effect, that by the means of these Nobles, and badde Courtiers, all
fear of God and godliness is in such sort shaken off from the Kings, that when
as they perish, they call not upon God, as namely being utterly unmindful
and forgetful of him, the which is great ungodliness, unto the which
notwithstanding those Princes are drawn, which give care unto these lewd
Courtiers, or bear any favor or liking toward them. This because it has
appeared sufficiently in the Kings of Israel, many of the which have died
naturally, or bin slain violently without the calling upon of the true God:
there is no need that it should be confirmed or proved with any more
examples. But here out appears, unto what pass in the end that estate
grows of a kingdom or commonwealth, wherein such Nobles and wicked
Courtiers, and mockers of God can do all things, and have the Kings at their
beck: and what manner of death and life that of their Kings themselves in such
a state uses for to be, such namely as the death and life of Atheists or
godless and most wicked persons accustomably is. See the Psalm 101. in the
which David makes protestation, that he will purge his Court and kingdom of
such bad members. And Psalm. 75. he complains of the like growing of things
out of square through the badde practices of such kind of persons, and shows
that he will be careful to bring things unto a better course, and that he was
not tongue-tied at such abuses in the wicked, in these words: The earth, and
all the inhabitants thereof are dissolved: but I will establish the pillars of
it I said unto the foolish, Be not so follish: and to the wicked, Lift not up
the horn. And there is an old saying and a true concerning those Courts, where
such wicked Courtiers bear all the rule and sway, Let him get him out of the
Court, which has a desire to be godly.

Verse. 8. Ephraim has mixed himself among the people. Ephram is as a cake on
the hearth not turned.
The conclusion describing their ungodliness, and the judgments of God bent
against them for the same.
THe Conclusion, wherein is described the ungodliness of these men, and the
judgments of God against them declared. Their ungodliness in this, that Ephraim
has mixed himself with the Heathen, and such people as are altogether
Idolatours, both in making marriages with them (by the which they became more
corrupt) and also in other things, leagues, traffiques, and entering into
societies or fellowships, all which things by the law of God they were
forbidden for to do. So the^, here in this place Ephraim is showed to have
become utterly Heathenish, and so consequently that Israel whom God had chosen
and culled out as a peculiar people unto himself, and had commanded by Moses
to be holy, and to remain pure and severed from the uncleanness of the
infidels. And so much the more sharnefull and inexcusable the sin of this
people appears now for to be, and their rebellion the greater. The word
Ephraim, albeit by consequent it may signify the whole people of Israel, yet
properly and chiefly in this place, it is here taken for the Nobles. For their
ruin and fall does show and draw with it the misery and destruction of the
whole people, the which was afterward to ensue. And this was one ungodliness of
the Israelitish Nobility, as the fountain and original of al their wickedness
and corruption, to wit, their common mingling of themselves, and their society
or fellowship with uncircumcised people. For godliness was then utterly exstinct
or put out among them.

Now follows and is described their punishment, to wit, these self same both
Nobles and people, 2 Their punishment for the same.
shall be most pleasantly devoured and eaten up of these Heathen unto whom
they a dioyne themselves, as if they were some fine and dainty cake, the which
is wont to be baked only on one side, that it may be the more pleasant in
eating. For such iunkets, spice cakes, and such like other daintrels are wont
to be baked but on one side, and not on both sides. Therefore look how
greedily those cakes are eaten up by the guests; so sweetly is the whole cuntry
of the Israelites eaten up, that is to say, consumed, wasted, pilled, devoured
of the infidel people with whom they mingle themselves. That which even at
this day also appears to be true in those commonwealths and godly kingdoms,
the which draw and seek unto themselves foreign helps and aids, especially
of Infidels: For in the end they are utterly consumed by them. And this also
is a most grievous punishment, and shows the estate of that commonwealth to
be most miserable the which is overthrown by their aydes-men and helpers.
Wherefore that same straight society or fellowship with infidels is always
hurtful and unlucky unto the godly.

Verse. 9. Strangers have devoured his strength, and he knows it not: yea,
gray hairs are here and there upon him, yet he knows not.
A Making of the matter more plain. For he describes or sets out after
what manner the Israelites shall be consumed or destroyed by the infidel
people, namely, that these nations shall eat, waste, and carry away the
strength of the Israelites: and at the last, Israel shall be made most weak,
faint, and feeble, who notwithstanding shall not thereby be brought to
repentance, nor yet acknowledge his own misery.

3 Things to be noted in this verse.
Wherefore this verse has three things worthy the noting. One, that he says,
strangers shall devour his strength. For by the name of strangers and foreign
people, I understand the Infidels, with whom Israel has joined himself by
leagues, 1. That strangers shall devour them.
marriages, or other public contracts and conditions. These in requiring
stipends, tributes, or pensions, shall eat up the strength, that is to say,
the wealth of the Israelites, the which they shall wholly consume. For the
public or common treasury shall be drawn dry and clean spent, and the
people undone, by the paying and giving of those pensions, and tributes.

2. That gray hairs are here and there upon him.
The second point to be noted is, That he says, gray hairs are scattered, or
here and there upon him. For by the figure Metalepsis or Transsumption, I here
take gray or hoare hairs for infirmity or weakness, the cause for the effect,
or adioynt: for because that old men are feeble, What the figure Metalepsis
is, see Oseas cap 4. ver. 18.
faint, and weak, especially when as they come unto extreme old age (in the
which there is hoarenes of hairs for the most part) therefore I do here
expound hoarenes to be taken for the feeble and weak state of that kingdom,
such as it was under the last kings thereof Phaceias, otherwise Pekahiah, and
Oseas.

3. That he says: But Israel understands not.
Lastly he says, But Israel understands not, that is to say, he does not for
all that consider nor weigh that his misery, nor is thereby made any whit the
more wise. But here the repeating and doubling of the same sentence or reproof
is to be noted. For this repetition shows that either the blockishnes, or the
disdain and pride of this people was the greater, the which did not
acknowledge or know themselves, nor their weakness: nor that condition and
estate wherewith they were so miserably entreated by strangers. Great
therefore is the blindness of the godly, when as they flee unto the aids of
Infidels, and besides they do forsake their godliness.

Verse. 10. And the pride of Israel testifies to his face, and they do not
reture to the Lord their God, nor seek him for all this.
THe first amplification of the same both pride and blockishnes of the
Israelites, The first amplification of the pride and blockishnes of these
Israelites
so hardly notwithstanding and grievously oppressed, for that albeit this their
blockishnes were known unto all me^: nay, that all men did plainly and openly
witness that their pride was miserable and unhappy, they nevertheless
repented not for the same, neither yet became the better minded, nor were
turned to call upon God: nay rather growing more stubborn, malapert and cruel
thereby, they added transgression unto transgression; like unto those whom God
complains of by his Prophet Isai. cap. 1. verse. 5. who the more they were
punished the worse they waxed: and therefore he complains on them in this
wise: Wherefore should ye be smitten any more? for ye fall away more and more:
the whole head is sick: and the whole heart is heavy: or unto those of whom
cap. 5. ver. 20. he says, That they speak good of evil, and evil of good,
which put darkness for light, and light for darkness, that put bitter for sweet,
and sweet for bitter. This wilfulnes therefore of the Israelites was froward
and stubborn.

2. Parts of this verse.
This verse has two parts. One, wherein it is said: Their pride witnesses to
their face, etc. The other, when it is said, But they returned not unto the
Lord. As touching the first part, Expounded before.
it proves that the blockishnes and senslesnes of this people in their
miseries, and their contemning or despising of God was very great and
notorious. In that it is said: They returned not unto the Lord.
and to put us in mind of our infirmity and weakness, that we might seek and
ask for aid and help at the hands of God. But these in all their afflictions
returned not unto God, nay they did not so much as once seek after him. For by
the figure Auxesis, What the figure Auxesis is, see Oseas, cap. 7. ver. 4.
he shows that it was a sign of greater forgetfulness of God, not so much as
to seek after him, and to have been careful of God their helper, then not to
have turned unto him, and stayed upon him as their only help, and to have
changed their life unto the better. But when as men have once ungodly begun to
turn aside from true godliness, they always run unto worse, and become
more obstinate by the just judgment of God.

Verse. 11. Ephraim also is like a dove deceived, without heart: they call to
Egypt: they go to Asshur.
The second amplification of the two former vices of the Israelites.
THe second amplification of both vices of the Israelites, rehearsed in the
verse before going. And this amplification is twofold. The first, by a
comparison of the foolishnes of the Israelites with a dove, a brute creature.
The Israelites were no more wise, or had no more wit in their miseries, the^ a
bruit beast is wont to have, By comparing of them unto a dove.
and fearful, above other creatures. And therefore David Psalm. 55. ver. 6.
says: Oh that I had wings like a dove, then would I fly away, and rest.
Christ indeed wills that we should be simple as doves: but he adds, and
wise as serpents Matthew. 10. ver. 16. Where by is showed that there is no
wisdom in doves. 2. For seeking aid at the Egyptians and Assyrians.
The second place of this amplification is, That they call the Egyptians and
the Assyrians to help them, and go unto them for aid, unto the Assyrians
before cap. 5. ver. 13. unto the Egyptians, as appears 2. King cap. 17. By
the rehearsal of both these nations, first, the painful journey and travail
of the Israelites is described, when as notwithstanding they had God near unto
them, if so be they would have sought unto him. Secondly, the help that they
sought at the hands of profane and heathen men, is condemned, to wit, of men
that were Infidels, and uncircumcised. Furthermore, it was unprofitable and
hurtful unto those Israelites For these nations overthrew the Israelites, unto
whom they came as helpers 2. King. 17. Isai. 30. and at the last destroyed
them. Of the which is gathered, that the help of God alone is most sure.

Verse. 12. But when they shall go, I will spread my net upon them, and draw
them down as the fowls of the heaven: I will chastise them, as their
congregation has heard.
A confirmation of their vain labor in seeking foreign aid.
A Confirmation of their vain and unprofitable labor in seeking help at the
Egyptians and Assyrians, taken from the issue and falling out of this practice.
For God himself shall make these helps void, and utterly unprofitable. The
reason, because God shall spread his net upon them going to seek and crave such
help, that they may be taken, and held back, that either they cannot go so
far, or else obtain and find any help at all at their hand. For God shall
cast them down in this their pride, and vaunting and lifting up themselves,
because of those profane or heathenish helps which they hoped for, even as a
bird flying is notwithstanding by the fouler cast down, being taken with his
nets, or with lime twigges. Finally, God will chasten the Israelites, as they
have heard before that he has done, and as it has been publicly told them by
the Prophets, whiles the Prophets used their congregations, and reproved them.
Whereby appears, that this Oseas lived after other Prophets, Oseas prophes^th
after Elizaeus, Jonas, Amos, and others.
who had now already threatened the judgments of God unto the Israelites. As
was Elizaeus, Jonas, Amos, and many others, which had gone before, as it is 2.
Chron. 24. verse. 18.19. where is showed, how after that the Jews under king
Ioash had fallen to idolatry, Iehoiada the good priest being once dead, God
sent Prophets unto them from time to time to recall them, and to bring the^
home again into the right way, in these words, as we find there written: And
they left the house of the Lord God of their fathers, and served groves and
idols: and wrath came upon Judah and Jerusalem, because of this their
trespass. And God sent Prophets among them to bring them again unto the Lord:
and they made protestation among them, but they would not hear.

Verse. 13. Woe unto them: for they have fled away from me: destruction shall be
upon them, because they have transgressed against me: though I have redeemed
them, yet have they spoken lies against me.
A reprehensio^.
A Reprehension: for God does most sharply inueigh against the Israelites,
because that they have both departed from him, and when as they fained that
they would return unto him, that was done wholly in great hypocrisy and
dissimulation of mind. Three things to be noted.
Here therefore are three things to be noted: A most grievous kind of
reprehension or reproving, the which this word (woe) declares. 1. A grieueus
rebuke.
The punishment threatened unto them by this (woe) namely, vastation, that is to
say, laying of them waste, 2. The punishment threatened thereby.
and destruction of the whole country. The cause of this punishment, the which
is here alleged to be threefold. One, for that they were manifestly departed
from the law and worship of the true God, 3. A threefold cause of the same.
and had forged unto themselves other gods, and worshipped them: moreover they
had followed another rule of life, then the law of God given them by Moses. And
the Prophet uses such an Hebrew word, the which shows the singular in
constantnesse or unsteadfastness of this people against God. 1. Their falling
away from the law of God. Nadedu.
For suddenly and for a most light cause fell they away from God through their
idolatries. This is one cause. Another cause is, because that they dealt
unfaithfully besides the covenant, namely, made and set down between God and
them, 2. Their breaking of the covenant between God and them.
I will be thy God, and thou shall be my people. And of this covenant renewed
more fully to the faithful in Christ Peter makes mention, to put them in
mind that in life and conversation they be answerable thereunto Epist. 1. cap.
2. ver. 9. where he says: But ye are a chosen generation, a royal Priesthood,
an holy nation, a peculiar people, that ye should show forth the virtues of
him that has called you out of darkness into his marvelous light. The third
cause, 3. They lied and dissembled with God, when in their troubles they called
upon him.
for that when as they called upon God in their afflictions, or troubles, and
God delivered them, and redeemed them from their enemies, they did this
dissemblingly, and lying unto God. For they feigned and made as if they
worshipped the true God, when as notwithstanding they did nothing from their
heart, and in true godliness and faith. Confer with this place that of the
Psalm. 78. verse. 36. where, after that David had showed before, that their
fathers in their afflictions called upon God, and sought him early, and
acknowledged him to be their stre^gtth and their redeemer, he adds: but they
flattered him with their mouth, and dissembled with him with their gongue. But
God, as Plato says, is not a Sophister, neither is mocked, nor will be mocked,
as Paul also tells the Galathians cap. 6. ver. 7. where he says unto them:
Be ye not deceived: God is not mocked: for whatsoever a man sows, that shall
he also reap.

Verse. 14. And they have not cried unto me with their hearts, when they howled
upon their beds: they assemble themselves for corn and wine, and they rebel
against me.
What it is in this place to speak lies unto God.
A Making plain of the former sentence, what it is to speak lies unto God. It
is to call upon God, with the mouth, and with words, and an outward sound or
noise, but not from the mind sincerely, or uprightly and truly: That which is
the property of hypocrites. This their crying therefore, for as much as it is
without repentance and motion of the mind, God calls an howling. For after
the manner of howling dogs they do indeed murmur and make a great noise, but
they prayed not. So profane and wicked Esau cried and sighed for the
privilege of the birthright stolen from him through his own fault, but he
repented not, as the writer unto the Hebrews witnesses cap. 12. ver. 17. in
these words: for ye know how that afterward also, when he would have
inherited the blessing, he was rejected: for he found no place to repentance,
though he sought the blessing with tears.

An amplification of their former hypocrisy.
When as they assemble themselves for corn, etc. In these words there is an
amplification of their former hypocrisy and contempt or despising of God taken
from the circumstance of things compared together. For wine, corn, oil, and
other necessaries for this fleeting and brittle life they easily, willingly and
continually assemble together, and deliberate or take advise by what means
they may get these things for themselves. But touching the restoring of the
worship of God not so much as one word spoken: nay moreover when they meet
together for this purpose even then do they transgress and rebel against
God. For they ask these things which are the gifts of the true God, at the
hands of their Idols. But Psalm. 4. ver. 7. David teaches that the contrary
unto this is to be done, thas is to say, that he did a great deal more rejoice
in God his favor and assurance of his mercy and love toward him, then the
worldlings did or could do for the enjoying of their earthly commodities
whatsoever. For (says he) thou have given me more joy of heart, then they have
had when their wheat and their wine did abound. Whereby appears, how
shameless, stubborn, and manifest forgetfulness of the power and majesty of God
reigned among the Israelites, who when as they diligently looked unto their
other matters and business, this one thing yet had they no regard of, the which
appertained unto the restoring of the true worship of God. Therefore they
continued securely or carelessly in their sins. But first of all the kingdom
of God is to be sought for, and not these earthly things, as Christ teaches us
Mat. 6. verse. 33. when he says: Seek ye first the kingdom of God, and the
righteousness thereof, and all these things shall be ministered unto you.

Verse. 15. Though I have bound, and strengthened their arm, yet do they
imagine mischief against me.
THis is an Antithesis, or setting down of the contrary unto that which went
before. God sets his benefits against their unthankfulness.
For God opposes or matcheth against the former contempt of the Israelites
touching his name, his benefits, the which he had bestowed upon the
Israelites. He has bound their wounds, he has strengthened their arms, and
yet all this notwithstanding they rebel against God, for that unthankfulness
is more foul and shameful the which blotteth out, and manifestly despises
the fresh and continued benefits of God. And look by how much the greater
they are, so much the less excusable this ingratitude or unthankfulness is. And
unto such ingratitude these Israelites were fallen, as is showed in this place.
As for the binding and strengthening of the arms of Israel, it is referred
unto those histories and times, when as God gave unto them strong kings, the
which delivered them out of the hands of their enemies, restored unto them
their old bounds and borders, and finally renewed the ancient glory and
renown of that kingdom, such a one as was Jeroboam the son of Ioas king of
Israel 2. King. 14. God therefore forgets not his benefits toward us,
although we remember them not.

Verse. 16. They return, but not to the most high: they are like a deceitful
bow: their princes shall fall by the sword, for the rage of their tongues:
this shall be their derision in the land of Egypt.
The co^clusio^ or issue of their contempt of God and his punishments.
THe conclusion, both of the contempt of God proceeding from the nobles of
Israel, and of the punishment to ensue for this contempt was this, that by no
means they either returned before, or do now return unto the true God, who
in this place is termed The most high. Therefore these rebellious Nobles of
Israel, although they were never so much admonished and chastened by God,
remained yet still for all that Idolators turned from God, nay Atheists, or
godles persons: then the which impiety or ungodliness there is none greater.
Finally, they lived like unto a deceitful bow, which in show seems to strike
the enemy, but indeed wounds or kills him that shoots therewith. So
these Nobles seemed in show to defend the people from their enemies, to take
order for the ministering of law, to worship God, to carry and have a care of
the commonwealth: but in truth they spoil the people, betray them to their
enemies, maintain Idolatry, nourish strifes, and under pretenses and shows
of doing for their good, rob the people committed by God unto them, and their
trust. And to be short, they themselves overthrow their own commonwealth.
And the like similitude does David use against their fathers many years before
Psalm 78. verse. 57. saying: They turned back, and dealt falsely, like their
fathers: they turned like a deceifull bow.

Their punishment.
The punishment of them shall be this. They shall fall by the sword, and they
shall stir up against themselves mutual wars through their pride, and
poysonednes of their tongues, and shall procure and forge unto themselves their
own punishment and misery. Therefore both their pride, and rage of their
speech, their boasting, disdain, and vaunting of their tongue shall destroy
them. To conclude, they shall be a laughing stock unto the Egyptians their
borderers whom they shall call to help them. After this manner then does God
punish us with our own hand, and, as I may so term it, cut our throats
with our own sword.

CAP. 8.
Verse. 1. Set the trumpet to thy mouth: He shall come as an Eagle against the
house of the Lord, because they have transgressed my covenant, and trespassed
against my law.
A new sermon full of terror.
THis is a new sermon full of terror against all Israel, to the end that at
last they may be strooken with fear. And the people is reproved of most
ungodly falling back from the kingdom and priesthood, the which were two
especial foundations and holy marks of seuering this people from other
nations, because both of them did represent Christ the Messiah that was for to
come Psalm. 110.

Two parts of this verse.
This verse has two parts: the one contains the manner or order of
denouncing or declaring of the judgment of GOD the which was to come, to wit,
1. The manner of declaring this judgment.
that the same should publicly be showed or proclaimed with a trump or
trumpet, as it were by a Cryar or public Herault.

The second part contains the matter it self the which is to be declared,
and to whom it must be declared. 2. The matter to be declared, and to whom, to
wit, unto the people severally from the Nobles and Priests.
It is declared unto the whole people from the Nobles alone, or from the
Sacrificers or Priests. And he calls the people the house and inheritance of
God, because of the peculiar covenant of GOD made with the whole seed of
Abraham, and Jacob, of whom were those ten tribes. And this name carries
with it a great emphasis, or vehemency and force, because that it is objected
unto these same people thus honored and advanced by God, that they had
contemned, nay clean forsaken the law of GOD, and this peculiar covenant.

The thing it self here declared is the judgment of God against them.
The thing it self which is declared, is the judgment of God against them, and
the same to come most speedlly, and to be executed upon them most mightily, and
with invincible or vnouercomable power. So an Eagle excels among other
fowls both in swiftnes, and also in strength. The reason is added, because
that this people had denied and forsaken God, who was so bounteous toward
them, and had shamefully transgressed and rebelled against him, as is
afterward more largely showed.

Verse. 2. (Israel shall cry unto me, My God, we know thee.)
Hypophora, or the answering of an objection, what it is, see Amos cap 3. verse.
2.
THis is the figure Hypophora, or the answering unto an objection that might be
made, whereby he takes away from themal excuse or hope of avoiding and escaping
of this judgment, the which with the verse following is to be read by a
Parenthesis, which is the enclosing of a sentence within two such half circles
as this ()the one at the beginning and the other at the ending of the same,
thereby signifiyng that if the sentence in such a manner enclosed, were left
clean out, yet were the sense full and perfect notwithstanding. If then they
take exception and say. We will cry unto thee, O Lord we have known thee, we
are thine Israel, wherefore these evils shall not touch us. God answers, They
shall indeed cry unto me, they shall say these things unto me. But for all
that shall they not escape, nor be free from this my judgment. Wherefore God
by the figure Mimesis, What the figure Mimesis is, see Oseas cap 4. verse. 18.
or imitating and following their speech has expressed the words and
hypocrisy of this people promising unto themselves deliverance from the
miseries and punishments threatened unto them. But in vain do we promise unto
our selves deliverance, when God denies the same.

Verse. 3. (Israel has cast off the thing that is good: The enemy shall pursue
him.
The answer to the former objection with a reason of the same.
THe answer unto the objection of the former verse, together with the reason of
the same, Why those that do cry unto God, shall neuerthele not be delivered,
because all this their crying is hypocritical or dissembled. A token whereof,
and the same most certain is, That this Israel who says that he knows God,
and confesses him to be good, forsakes him not withstanding, that is to say,
departs from all parts of his duty, and of the will of God, has departed,
and yet still continues in the same rebellion. But says Paul, let him depart
from all iniquity, which calls upon the name of the Lord, that he may give
out proof and trial that he calls upon God earnestly, or in truth, 2. Tim.
2. ver. 19. wherefore in as much as these Israelites are indeed most notorious
hypocrites, and stubborn Rebels, they shall not escape the wrath and
judgments of God, how great show soever they make of godliness. But theirenemie
shall pursue them, and they shall have experience and trial of those judgments
of God, the which are foretold them by the word of God.

Verse. 4. They have set up a King, but not by me: they have made Princes, and I
knew it not: of their silver and their gold have they made them Idols:
therefore shall they be destroyed.
An explanatio^ of the first verse. of this chapter.
A Making more plain of the first verse of this chapter, where it was said
(They have forsaken the covenant of God) for of this forsaking there are
brought two examples, and both of them very shameful, wicked and horrible, and
a most assured testimony or witness of their desperate rebellion and
stubbornnes against GOD. They fell away from the kingdom, the which God had
set up in the only family of David representing Christ. 1. They fell away
from the kingdom of David
For they them selves and not God, chose unto themselves a King, to wit,
Jeroboam the first, 1. King. 12. verse. 20. w3812 here we read thus: And when
all Israel had heard that Jeroboam was come again, they sent, and called him
unto the assembly, and made him King over all Israel: none followed the house
of David, but the tribe of Judah only. Whereupon the other kings that
followed, were afterward after his example ordained, and allowed, and kept
among those ten tribes.

2. They fell away from the worship of God, and from the priest hood.
Their second falling away is from the true worship of God, and from the
Priesthood, and from the temple, in the which priesthood there was another most
express and plain figure of Christ to come. So then these men, whilst they
depart and fall away from the Temple, the worship of God, and the priesthood
ordained by God at Jerusalem, so far as in them lay, they deprived themselves
both of Christ and all the blessings of GOD, which through Christ pertayned
unto them, An amplificatio^ of this their second falling away.
and finally from the covenant it self of God. Furthermore this second falling
away is amplified in this that they both most ingratefully or unthankfully
turned the benefits given unto them of God, as gold and silver, into the shame
and reproach of God himself whilst they make calves thereof: and also in this
that they make these Idols themselves, the which are but false Scarbugs, and
shapes of things altogether foolish, and unbeseeming God. Wherefore God
concludes that it shall come pass, that those judgments, the which he
denounced or declared before, shall fall out unto them, and that in such sort,
that these, two ways unfaithful and treacherous persons shall in the end be cut
off and destroyed.

Verse. 5. Thy calfe, O Samaria, has cast thee off: mine anger is kindled
against them: how long will they be without innocence?
The figure Hypophora, what it is, see Amos cap. 5. verse. 18.
THe figure Hypophora, or the answering of an objection, whereby he takes away
from these Israelitish Idolators the false show and color of security or not
fearing any danger, the which they imagined unto themselves, to wit, that it
should come to pass, that they should be defended of those their Calves. What
the figure Synecdois, see Amos cap. 5. verse 21.
Answer Nay, these Calves, which Samaria (and by the figure Synecdoche this
name of the head city comprehends all the ten tribes) which Samaria, I say,
had made unto it self, and does worship for gods, these Calves shall leave and
forsake Samaria. The reason is added, because the heavy displeasure and just
wrath of God shall pursue this people. And nothing can escape the hand of God
Psalm. 139. Wherefore neither shall these Calves of gold defend this people
given to Idolatry. Finally the most just cause of this anger of God is
expressed by an interrogation, or asking a question, to wit, because this
people it self has thus so long while given over both the service and worship
of God, and also the care and regard of holiness and innocence of life. For How
long (says the Lord) do these not care for innocence? Doubtless they have had
no regard of it now these many ages. Wherefore God is worthily angry against
them, and that most grievously, so that he will punish them, and that nothing
shall be safe and helpefull unto them. For if God be against us, who shall be
for us?

Ver. 6. For it came even from Israel: The workman made it, therefore it is not
God: but the Calfe of Samaria shall be broken in pieces.
A complain, amplifying the idolatry of the Israelites by three places.
A Ganaktesis, that is, a complaint, by the which these Israelites worshipping
of the Calves is amplified from three places. The first from the author. For
that this kind of idolatry is the proper and peculiar devise of the Israelites
themselves. For they invented and devised this kind of idolatry in the desert
or wilderness Exodus 32. For albeit that the Egyptians did worship oxen and
beasts, 1. From the author of it, to wit, themselves
yet they worshipped them not dead but alive. But this people worshipped a dead
Calfe, that is to say, represented in a golden image, and so consequently a
dead creature. Wherefore the idolatry of the Israelites was more shameful then
that of the Egyptians: and in this place it is truly said of them, that this
kind of idolatry was invented by the Israelites, and was not showed and taught
the^ from those nations whom they knew. Whereof it comes to pass, that this
their fault against God is the more shameful, and their rebellion less
excuseable.

2. From the manner of it, to wit, the art of the workman.
The second place of amplifying this their sin, is from the manner of the same,
the which is most manifest. For the workman framed, frames, makes, made that
caluish Idol. Therefore could they not be ignorant, by what means this new
god was made. For they all saw when it was made. Wherefore by this the mind of
these and of all other idolaters, appears to be the more blockish, who
worship, and reverence that thing for a God, that is, eternal, living, and
giving life unto others, the which notwithstanding they see to be made with
their eyes.

3. From the thing it self, and experience.
The third place of this amplification is from the thing it self, and from
experience. For this calfe which is worshipped of them, cannot be God: but it
is only an image of a bruit and beastly creature eating grass or hay, as the
Psalmist speaks of it Psalm. 106. ver. 20. where he says: Thus they turned
their glory into the similitude of a bullock that eats grass. Therefore so
much the more shameful is their idolatry, who compare God, or the nature of
God unto such a thing, and do suppose and judge it to be any such like matter.
Lastly, the proof of this whole thing is here set down, taken from the event
or falling out of the matter. For this Calfe of Samaria, and God of the
Israelites shall be broken into shards and pieces. By which words not only the
vanity of this idol is showed: but also the judgment of God the which shall
fall out upon the same idol, is declared: namely, that it shall come to pass,
that it shall be broken in small pieces, as a brittle, earthly, and vain
matter.

Verse. 7. For they have sown the wind, and they shall reap the whirlwinde:
it has no stalk: the bud shall bring forth no meal: if so be it bring forth,
the strangers shall devour it.
Another amplification of their idolatry.
ANother amplification of the idolatry of the Israelites by a similitude, the
which he takes from husband men, when as they sow and reap their fields. And
this does the Prophet set forth by a certain Sarcasmos, or sharp biting taunt
and mock.

Two parts of this verse.
And this verse has two parts. The first contains the amplification of their
idolatry described before. The second, the punishment of the same. 1. The
amplifying of their idolatry.
So then their idolatry is compared unto a wind, and unprofitable matter and
vain, the which notwithstanding in show carries a great pomp, buzzing, and
noise. So is idolatry it self, 2. The punishment of the same. 1.
and all the labor, counsel, endeavor, hope, and expectation of idolaters in
their gods. The which is proved to be true by the effects. For the thing it
self shows idols to be vain things, yea hurtful unto those themselves
which do trust in them. For they do reap of that their most bad sowing worse
fruits also, that is to say, from the wind by themselves sown they do gather
a whirlwinde, that is, they do pull upon themselves a tempest overthrowing and
destroying all things. For it is a thing most righteous and meet, that such as
was their sowing, such also should be their crop and harvest either good or
bad. So hereafter cap. 10. yer. 12. he says, That if they sow unto themselves
in righteousness, they shall reap after the measure of mercy. And therefore
the Lord by Jeremy wills the Jews to break up their fallow ground, and not
to sow among the thorns cap. 4. ver. 3. And contrariwise Prouer. 22. ver. 8.
Salomo^ shows bad fruits to come of bad sowing, saying: He that sows
iniquity, shall reap affliction, and the rod of his anger shall fail. As I
have seen, They that plow iniquity and sow wickedness, reap the same.
Neither makes that of the Psalm 126. ver. 5. They that sow in tears, shall
reap in joy, any thing against this. For that tearefull sowing, or sowing made
in tears by the godly, was the seed of that spiritual joy, which they reap
afterward, as coming and springing from true faith in God.

The second part of this verse contains the threatenings of God against this
idolatry. And the same are most great and fearful, the which do open and
make plain the sentence going before. For they are answerable unto the furious
or mad counsels of these idolaters. Therefore they also shall sow their
fields: but because they did it without the fear of God, they shall gather
nothing. For he labors and sows in vain, which calls not upon God, or
which despises God. And these shall gather nothing, both because the crop
shall deceive their expectation or hope in the fields, and also when it is
gathered in, it shall yield no meal: or else that meal which it does yield,
foreign and strange people shall devour, and the plowers, reapers, and
generally the Israelites shall eat none of it. And this is one of the plagues
among many other, the which God threatens unto the disobedient unto his word
and law Deuteronomy. 28. verse. 38. saying: Thou shall carry out much seed into the
field, and shall gather but little in: for the grasshoppers shall destroy it.
Therefore no labor of ours can be happy and have any good success, if God be
angry with us.

Verse. 8. Israel is devoured, now shall they be among the Gentiles as a vessel
wherein is no pleasure.
An amplisication of the former threatenings taken from the effects.
AN amplification of the former threatenings taken from the most fearful
effects which shall follow of the same. And first of all, Israel himself shall
be devoured of the self same strangers, as also their harvest, that is to say,
all their wealth shall be carried away by them, their cities shall be
destroyed, and the people slain. Therefore under this kind of speaking is
noted great misery, the besieging and taking of their city, their enemies
being stirred up unto this cruelty through the provocation of the Edomites,
albeit that afterward in their captivity some of them through God his great
mercy sped better. For herein the condition and case of the Israelites and
Jews was not all one, because these had not utterly and altogether cast off
the worship of God, as had the Israelites.

Verse. 9. For they are gone up to Asshur, as a wild ass caring alone for
himself: Ephraim has hired lovers.
A reason of their former punishment.
A Rendering of a reason of the former punishments, least that the Israelites
might complain of so fearful a judgment of God. For he amplifieth their
iniquity, as he terms it hereafter ver. 13. and shows that they have
utterly cast away the help of God, and despised the same, that in their
afflictions they might flee unto men, and the same such as were idolaters, and
covetous, and having care for none but for themselves. Therefore they had
clean forgotten the covenant of God, of the which the Prophet spoke before
cap. 5. ver. 1. and his promises, or else they thought them vain, or despised
them. So then in this place not only the distrust of the Israelites, but their
falling away, and their desperate fleeing and departing from God is
significantly described. They went up unto the Assyrians: therefore they did it
with great labor, seeking foreign and far off help, and the same
idolatrish: when as notwithstanding they had God present, and their helper at
hand, if they had called upon him, Who has set the wild ass at liberty? or
who has loosed the bands of the wild ass? And Iere. 2. ver. 24. the people
for their stubbornnes and unruliness are likened unto a wild ass, of whom he
says that they are as a wild ass, used to the wilderness, that snuffeth up
the wind by occasion at her pleasure, who can turn her back? All they that
seek her, will not weary themselves, but will find her in her month. And
Dan. 5. ver. 21. it is reported, that Nabuchadnezzar, when he was driven from
the company of men, had his conversation among the wild asses. Last of al, it
is here said of these Israelites, That they hired them with money, they had
them not freely, but paid roundly for their help: but God requires no reward
for his benefits. Wherefore (as James counsels) If any man lack wisdom
(or any other necessary grace) let him ask of God, which gives unto all men
liberally, and reprocheth no man, and it shall be given him. For God rather
respects the inward sincerity and purity of a faithful heart, then the
offering of outward sacrifices Psalm. 51. Further, these Israelites call unto
them the Assyrians whom they love, and whom the Assyrians love not again, so
that, as it is Ezech. 16. ver. 33. this people of Israel committing fornication
against God, besides the manner of all other harlots, does her self give a
reward unto her lovers, and receives none of them: the which is a most
plentiful witness of shameless lust, and of a common shameless harlot. The same
thing falls out to all those, which prefer the help of man before the
help of God in their troubles and miseries.

Verse. 10. Yet though they have hired among the nations, now will I gather
them, and they shall sorrow a little, for the burden of the King, and the
Princes.
The punishment for their forsaking of God.
A Punishment also shall pursue and follow after such sin of forsaking God.
Therefore it is showed in this verse, that it shall come to pass. The repeating
of the cause also carries with it a vehemency or force, to wit, in that
forsaking the true God and his help, the Israelites chose rather not only to
have the Gentiles and their profane and heathenish helps blaspheming God: but
also to hire them with reward, and with money. And this punishment is
answerable unto their sin. The Israelites hire strangers, and gather them
together: so shall they also be gathered together by God, and shall dwell as
captives by bands and companies among their enemies. They hire them with
money, and charge themselves with tributes, that they may have that King, to
wit, the king of the Assyrians for their helper: so shall God greatly burden
and charge these self same Israelites, because of this king of Assyria, and
for the burdens and tributes, the which they shall pay unto him. So then, they
have begun a little to burden themselves, but God shall load them more
heavily: the which is to be understood by the figure Aposiopesis, Aposiopesis,
or the holding back of something, is when as we leave some thing unspoken,
upon some affection or sorrow, the which may otherwise be easily supplied and
understood.
or holding back of some thing that was to be spoken, and the same appears
and is gathered by the fense and meaning of this place. Look therefore after
what manner we do sin and offend against God, after the same for the most
part are we punished by God.

Verse. 11. Because Ephraim has made many altars to sin, his altars shall be
to sin.
LIke as the Prophet has already described the rebellion of the Israelites
against God, in seeking help of men that were Idolatours, and also the
punishment which should therefore ensue: so does he now recite the shameful
and desperate idolatry of the same persons in the casting off of the true
worship of God (such as he himself has prescribed or appointed unto the^) and
in forging unto themselves a false worship; the which their sin no less also
then was their former, shall in the end feel and have no less punishments.
And first of all is set down the idolatry it self, 2 Parts of this verse.
and the furious or excessive and outrageous increase of the same among the
Israelites: secondly, the punishment the which shall immediately and worthily
ensue thereupon. 1 The bedlam idolatry of the Israelites.
Their idolatry was herein, for that they had builded up strange altars, that
is, such as God disallowed, to wit, in Dan and Beth el: their increase and
outrage, for that they had multiplied them, 2 The punishment of the same. 1 2
and daily also did increase them, and this to that end, that they might depart
the further from the true worship of God (the which was exercised at Jerusalem
according unto the appointment of the law of God) and sin the more grievously
against God. There followed this sin a most just punishment, namely this,
that these altars were an occasion unto them of greater rebellion against God,
and of more grievous transgression and more heinous sin against God.
Therefore they were unto them a snare and a trappe, from whence they could not
unwind and get out themselves: no not under Oseas their last king, who began
notwithstanding some little reformation of this idolatry, but it came in the
end to none effect. 2. King. 17. Now this punishment of God is most just, that
the same thing which men do frame and seek out unto themselves, wittingly and
willingly, as an occasion of sin, should ^urne and be unto them an occasion
of sin also, as David Psalm. 109. ver. 17. testifies that it falls out unto
the wicked, saying: As he loved cursing, so shall it come unto him, and as he
loved not blessing, so shall it be far from him. The like has Solomon, Prove.
29. ver. 6. where he says: In the transgression of an evil man is his snare
(meaning that his own sin intangleth him:) but the righteous does sing and
rejoice. It is therefore a punishment most meet and just, that men should eat
the beans that they themselves have threshed, that is, that they should be
beaten with their own rod.

Verse. 12. I have written to them the great things of my law: but they were
counted as a strange thing.
An amplification of the former wickedness, taken from the bounteousnes of God
toward them.
AN amplification of the former wickedness from the bounteousnes of God toward
them, whereby they are made utterly inexcusable. For they can not excuse
themselves with any pretense or cloak of ignorance, because that God had
abundantly or plentifully instructed them concerning the lawful way and manner
of worshipping him. For he himself had given and written them his law touching
this whole matter, Exodus 31. and had delivered vno them precepts, in the which
they were thoroughly taught concerning their duty toward God, as appears
Psalm. 19.119. and in the Psalm. 103. ver. 7. David affirmed of God, The dignity
of the law increased by the Prophet.
The he made his ways known unto Moses, and his works unto the children of
Israel. And he increases the dignity of this law and doctrine, for as much
as he says that in it were precepts either precious (the great things of his
law), such namely as were never given unto any other nation: or, as others
translate it (most large and plentiful) as which do contain, prescribe, It
is not called the kings high way, but the kings law. But the sense is all one.
For after a prouerbiall kind of speaking it is called the kings law, as the
high way is called the kings way, because like unto it, the law of God is
plain without crookes and turnings.
and evidently comprehend and teach all the points and parts of ordering and
leading of our life holily. In the first sense Moses extolleth the dignity of
the people of Israel above all other nations, Deuter. 4. ver. 8. in these
words: What nation is so great, that has ordinances and laws so righteous, as
all this law which I set before you this day? In the latter sense of the
largen^ and plentifulnes of the precepts in it contained, this law is called
perfect Psalm. 19. also by James it is called the Kings high way, cap. 2. ver.
8. His words be these: But if ye fulfill the royal (or the Kings) law,
according to the Scripture, which says, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy
self, ye do well. But what insued of all this, that God gave them so plain,
precious, plentiful, or perfect a law? The Israelites counted this so holy,
plentiful, and perfect law for a strange doctrine, and nothing appertaining
unto them, and despising it utterly, they ungodly framed unto themselves
another way of worshipping of God. The which is a token of extreme contempt of
God.

Verse. 13. They sacrifice flesh for the sacrifices of mine offerings, and eat
it: but the Lord accepts them not: now will he remember their iniquity, and
visit their sins: they shall return to Egypt.
THe consequence, the which contains both the condemning of this whole forged
and ordained worship besides and against the Law of God: and also a most
grievous punishment of those which follow that worship. 1 The condemning of
this their kind of worship.
As for the condemnation, it is contained herein, because that God neither
likes nor allows the sacrificers themselves, nor their sacrifices, albeit
they bring unto God never so great, vowed, and free will gifts, as it were over
and above the prescript or appointment of the law, and do eat the flesh for a
token of great joy of mind, and of their ready good will to God ward, whiles
they sacrifice after this manner: or as a sign of true thanksgiving, the which
in this sort they yield unto God. For the flesh of the sacrifices was eaten in
the sacrifices of thanksgiving. All these things, be they set out with never so
gay colored shows does God refuse Esai. 1. and also 66. And why so I pray
you? because these things are done besides his word, albeit under such
pretense, that he, which is God, be worshipped. So Paul 2. Colos. condemns
all will worship.

2 The punishment for the same.
Now the punishment shall follow, to wit, God being offended with these
sacrifices of theirs (the which are so many sacriledges or robbings of him of
his honor) shall in the end remember and call to mind all their iniquities,
wickedness, and sins, that he may punish them all at once. He will therefore
punish this contempt, God will visit their sins, and be avenged on them, in
so much that as they before-times in their afflictions were wont to flee unto
idolatrous people: so also when as they shall be thus punished by God, they
shall run unto the Egyptians, who themselves are idolatours also, The
Israelites destroyed for seeking help at Egypt.
so stubborn shall they be in contemning or despising the help of God. And
yet notwithstanding was this one chief cause of the destruction of this
people: for trusting unto the aids of the Egyptians, they rebelled against the
Assyrians. Herewith the Assyrians being provoked, did afterward lead away
these ten tribes captive into Assyria, and held them in miserable captivity
and bondage. So then, in the end there is a most heavy and sharp punishment
for idolatry, with how fair a pretense so ever it be cloaked, that we should
always flee from it.

Verse. 14. For Israel has forgotten his maker, an builds Temples, and Judah
has increased strong cities: but I will send fire upon his cities, and it
shall devour palaces thereof.
An amplification both of their sin, and also of their punishment.
AN amplification both of the sin of the Israelites, and also of their
punishment. The amplification is two-folde. First, from the greatness of the
wickedness. For the Israelites had forgotten their Creator and maker. The which
is a thing void of all natural affection, and against the very sense and
feeling of nature,

The amplifying of their punishment.
The punishment which shall ensue upon this sin, is here also amplified. For
it shall not only be upon the Israelites; but it shall reach also unto the
Jews, who suffered themselves to be corrupted by the Israelites. For their
strong cities and those palaces so laboriously and diligently built up, shall
be consumed with fire, as well as the munitions or fortresses of the
Israelites. Whereby appears, that unto whomesoeuer the infection of
idolatrous superstition does come, unto the same also in the end shall the
punishment of the same sin come, to the end that we should have the more
diligent and earnest watch over our selves to keep us from the same, a thing
whereof the holy Scripture does warn us, 1. Ioh. 5.

CAP. 9.
Verse. 1. Rejoice not, O Israel, for joy as other people: for thou have gone a
whoring from thy God: thou have loved a reward upon every corn floor.
The figure Hypophora. What it is, see Amos, cap 5. ver. 21.
THis is the figure Hypophora, or answering of an objection that might be made,
wherewith God answeareth the foolish security or carelesnes of the Israelites,
because that under Jeroboam the son of Ioas king of Israel, and some other
kings that followed him, they inioyed peace, power, and strength, and a
tolerable estate of things. And therefore they hoped that they should escape
unpunished; and made no great reckoning of the former threatenings, or stood in
any great fear of them. And this is a thing the which hypocrites are wont to
do, by the present reasonable estate of earthly things, and only for the
time, prosperous unto them, faining God also to be appeased with them, and
therefore sleeping in their sins. God therefore denies that joy of the
Israelites to be true joy, or to be such, as for the which they should flatter
them, selves, or rejoice in such sort as they do, the which enjoy sound joy.
Neither is the sentence once by God pronounced against the^, therefore revolted
or called back, because that for a little brunt and breath of time, they seem
unto themselves happy, and to be at rest and quiet. Therefore he says:
Rejoice not, O Israel, as other people, and as they do, who have true joy of
mind from God. For thou art not free from punishment. And surely when as the
ungodly cry peace, peace, then utter destruction hangs over their heads. 1 Thessalonians. 5. ver. 3. And therefore Ierem. cap. 8. ver. 11. the Lord complains of
those false prophets which have beguiled his people with sweet words and
promises of peace, hardening them thereby in their sin, where he says: They
have healed the hurt of the daughter of my people, with sweet words, saying,
Peace, peace, when there is no peace. And this in the end do the deceived
people find, and confess in the same chap. ver. 15. saying: We look for
peace, but no good came, and for a time of health, and behold troubles.

Further there is in this verse here set down a reason by way of answering of
the former objection, A reason, why they shall taste of this punishment.
why they shall feel that same punishment, the which was threatened unto them,
to wit, because that both before this time they had committed fornication with
idols: and do now also go on whoring after them, committing the same upon
every corn floor, for most filthy reward, that is, the reward of an harlot
being drawn and allured thereunto. For they had their idols, and their altars
in every corn floor, and in every wine press, in the which they did offer
sacrifice unto those their gods, that plenty and store of corn, wine, and
other things necessary for the life of man, might be given unto them. The which
was and is plainly the reward of an harlot, when as a reward is given unto
idols, that is, unto spiritual harlots. And all these things indeed are both
promised and also given by the only and true God, and not by idols, whatsoever
idolators do wickedly think and contend to the contrary. For says Paul 1. Cor.
8. verse. 6. There is one God, which is the father, of whom are all things. And
so is David persuaded, that howsoever or whence soever others look to obtain
their desires and things necessary for this life, he shall by the loving favor
and countenance of God toward him have more joy and comfort of heart, and
peace of conscience, then the ungodly in all their abundance, unto whomsoever
they impute the same the which comes only from the goodness and bounty of God
Psalm. 4. verse. 6, 7. Many say, who will show us any good, but Lord lift up the
light of thy countenance upon us. Thou have given me more joy of heart, then
they have had, when their wheat and wine did abound.

Verse 2. The floor and the wine press shall not feed them, and the new wine
shall fail in her.
A confirmation of the former the eatning taken from the effects.
A Confirmation of the former threatening and answer concerning the punishment
of GOD being not removed from their necks. And it is taken from the effects the
which the Israelites themselves shall shortly feel, and the which effects are
a revenge, and the same most righteous of the filthy whoredom and Idolatry by
them committed in all corn floores, and wine presses. What then are those
effects? Answer. The effects.
Neither shall the corn nourish them, nor the wine give unto them drink. For
there shall be none. Both the harvest and the vintage shall deceive them. They
shall gather no fruits, but as Aggeus threatens to those of his time, The
heavens over them shall stay themselves from dew, and the earth shall stay her
self from fruit cap 1. verse. 10. And as he says in the second chapter and
the seventeenth verse. When one came to an heap of twenty measures, there were
but ten: when one came to the wine press to draw out fifty vessels out of
the press, there were but twenty. Or if they gather any fruits, yet shall they
not be fed with them, either for that those fruits shall putrify and rotte,
or else the virtue or power of nourishing shall be taken from the meats by God,
as is like wise threatened by God in Aggeus cap. 1. verse. 6. Ye have sown much
(says he) but bring in little: ye eat, but have not enough: ye drink* but ye
are not filled: ye cloth you, but ye be not warm: and he that earneth wages
puts the wages into a broken bag. And to this effect God threatens them
by Moses Deuteronomy. 28 verse. 38. Thou shall carry much corn into the field, and
shall gather but little in: for the grasshoppers shall destoy it. Or finally, it
shall be taken away by the enemies, as was threatened before cap. 8. verse. 7. So
then God does chastise us after diverse manners.

Verse. 3. They will not dwell in the Lords land, but Ephraim will return to
Egypt, and they will eat unclean things in Asshur.
The punishment amplified from three places.
AN amplification of the punishment to ensue upon these idolators, and the same
taken from three places. First, from their banishment or captivity, and the
same most lamentable. For the Israelites shaldwel no longer in that land wherein
then they were, 1. From their captivity.
to wit, the land of God, and the blessed land: a land given them by God for a
sign of their adoption, and his peculiar covenant with them, but shall be cast
forth, and led away into captivity. The second place of this amplification is
from the place and people among whom the Israelites shall be in banishment and
captivity, 2. From the place of their captivity.
that is to say, among the Egyptians and Assyrians, their most mortal and
deadly enemies: yea and moreover they shall voluntarily and of their own
accord, go into captivity and banishment unto those their enemies the
Egyptians in especial, by reason of the intolerable miseries the which they
shall feel in their native soil and country, and in that land the which
sometimes was most blessed and happy. The third place is from the great want
of all things, or hunger, the which shall then sal out unto them, and from their
ungodliness. 3. From their ungodliness, and want of all things.
For there they shall eat meats polluted or unclean, and such as were of old
forbibden them, being both driven thereunto by necessity: and also of contempt
or despising of God. Whereof the godly Jews indeed, had always an especial
regard, so that they would not suffer themselves by any means to be drawn
to the eating of such things as by the law of God were unlawful, as may
appear by the example of Peter Act. 10.14. who being an hungry and falling
into a trance, whiles they made ready for him, and having all manner of meats
offered unto his view, and being by a voice from heaven willed to kill and
eat, makes answer, Not so, Lord: for I have never eaten any thing that is
polluted or unclean.

Verse. 4. They shall not offer wine to the Lord, neither shall their sacrifices
be pleasant unto him: but they shall be unto them as the bread of mourners:
all that eat thereof, shall be polluted: for their bread for their souls shall
not come into the house of the Lord.
The figure Hypophora, what it is, see Amos cap. ^. ver. 21.
THe figure Hypophora, or answering an objection that might be made. For if the
Israelites should take exception and say: We neuerthe les will sacrifice unto
God in our captivity in Egypt and in Assyria (as hypocrites are wont to imagine
unto themselves any thing to persuade themselves withal that they shall escape
the judgments of God, and have a most certain and assured way to appease him
be he never so angry with them) the Prophet makes answer after two sorts:
They shall not offer wine, that is to say, they shall not be able then to
sacrifice and make offering unto God, when as they shall be in captivity: nay
albeit they do offer and sacrifice, yet notwithstanding God will not there
accept of their offerings and sacrifices as welcome and pleasant unto him. For
they shall be unto him as the meats of those that mourn, and of those that
have touched a dead body, and by this means have polluted or defiled
themselves: which kind of meat is never brought into the temple of the Lord,
as being indeed polluted, or unclean, and not welcome unto God Deuteronomy. 12. For
those that had to do about dead bodies, or touched them either wittingly, or
unwittingly, as the preparers of their funerals, and dealers about their
burials, and such others which meddled with or about them, were for a time by
the law of God held for separated persons, and unclean, and whatsoever they
touched all that time, or did eat, or carry was reckoned unclean, polluted
and defiled, as we read Agge. 2. verse. 14. in these words, Then said Haggai, If
a polluted person touch any of these, shall it be unclean? and the Priests
answered, it shall be unclean. And in Numb. cap. 19. verse. 11. this is made
more plain, where we find it written thus, He that touches the dead body of
any man shall be unclean even seven days. And verse. 16. Also whosoever
touches one that is slain with a sword in the field, or a dead person, or a
bone of a dead man, or a grave, shall be unclean seven days, This is the very
same which is said here (Their sacrifices shall be as the meat of those that
mourn) the which is eaten whilst they are in preparing and setting forth of
the dead body, neither can it be brought into the temples of God, to wit,
because it is polluted, and forbidden to be offered. Therefore not whatsoever
any men offer unto God, is acceptable unto him, but only that which the godly
offer through Christ.

Verse. 5. What will ye do then in the solemn day, and in the day of the feast
of the Lord?
THe figure Epiphonema, or Acclamation, whereby in reciting of the sacrifices
and solemn feast days (the which were especially dedicated or appointed for
the doing of sacrifices) he bewayleth the miserable case of the Israelites in
that their captivity. The figure Epiphonema, what it is, see Jonas cap. 2.
verse. 9.
And this he takes fitly by the verse before going. For he shows that these
shall be most sorrowful in those days especially, because that living in
banishment they shall neither have place allowed them for the celebrating or
keeping of those solemnities, neither money wherewithal to make those feasts
in those days (as they were wont to do before, and as God also had commanded
the same to be done) and to recreate themselves before the Lord, or else before
their Idols, so short shall their things be, and so hard shall it go with
them, and so miserable shall they themselves be. Concerning the commandment of
God for the keeping of these feasts and solemnities, read Numb. 10. and Deuteronomy.
12. Further, the calling to remembrance of our happy and joyful estate the
which sometimes we had, uses to be sorrowful, especially in those places,
days and circumstances, the which do a fresh stir up and renew unto us the
memory and remembrance of that our former case and condition. For then do our
miseries and cares, and tears wax sore as it were again by this putting us
in mind of our former lost estate. And this does the most grievous and doubled
sorrow of the Godly show, at the sight of their dumb and still harps hanged up
upon the trees in Babylon, as it is in the Psalm. 137. And from thence
springs that same profane or heathenish saying of profane or heathenish
men, When as thou art not he whom thou wast, what cause is there why thou
should desire at all to be, that is to say, to live? For we ought to be,
and desire to be, so long as God does not call us from that place, wherein he
has set us: albeit that the remembrance of our happiness either lost, or
changed, be never so hard and grievous unto us.

Verse. 6. For lo they are gone from destruction: but Egypt shall gather them
up, and Memphis shall bury them: the nettle shall possess the pleasant places
of their silver, and the thorn shall be in their tabernacles.
An amplification of their misery, taken from three places.
AN amplification of this misery of the Israelites, the which they should
suffer in their exile or captivity, yea even in Egypt, unto which place they
did flee of their own accord, as it were unto a most safe and sure Sancturie.
And all these things are described or set out so lamentable, both because they
should in such manner come to pass: and also for that these hypocritical
persons, and such as had been now so long used and acquainted with idolatry,
could hard and scarcely be moved unto repentance by the earnest threatenings of
the true God. But the place of this amplification is threefold. The first from
the greatness of this affliction to come. For in that country of Egypt, 1. From
the greatness of the affliction.
and in that captivity or banishment they shall not live, but because of
miseries and want they shall go away there, that is, they shall die and
perish, and fail, and that in such heaps, the city Memphis (into the which
many Israelites after the destruction of Jerusalem had betaken themselves)
should bury and put into one grave a great number of them at an heap, and not
every one of them as they dyed, severally and in a grave by themselves alone.
Wherefore the miscries of the Israelites in those places must needs be great,
where they came to their end and dyed in such number and multitude. Confer
this place with the 43. chap. ter of Jeremy. The second degree of this
amplification is from the place it self, to wit, Egypt, and Memphis. For this
country, 2 From the country and place whither they should go.
and this city in the same did the Israelites especially make choice of, as
most strong, safe, and healthsom fortresses, in the which mourning after
Jerusalem was destroyed, they might live quietly and healthfully. But in as
much as this refuge was expressly forbidden them by God, it was accursed. And
therefore when as the people of Israel as it is Number. 14. ver. 3. would have
gone back again into Egypt, this fact marueilously displeased God, as also
Jeremy 44. verse. 7. he shows that the going of the people of that time down
into that land was the cause of their destruction, for that by committing
grievous idolatry in that place, they provoked the heavy wrath of God against
them. For thus does Jeremy say unto them: Thus says the Lord of hosts, the
God of Israel, wherefore commit ye this great evil against your souls, to cut
off from you man and woman, child and suckling, and leave you none to remain?
In that ye provoke me to wrath with the works of your hands, burning incense
unto other gods in the land of Egypt whither ye be gone to dwell, that ye might
bring destruction unto your selves, and that ye might be a curse and a reproach
among all nations of the earth. No marvel therefore if such a fleeing and
covert fell out there very hardly unto them, and that their dwelling was
noisome and infectious unto them. For when as God does curse the Assyrians, and
our aids because of our distrust in him: In the midst of Tybur (as one says)
we find Sardinia, that is, in places most pleasant the most cruel pestilence
does destroy us, and speedy and unlooked for diseases do there overtake us. 3.
From the adioints.
The third place of this amplification is from the adioynts. They themselves
shall not only be in this sort miserable: but also their own proper native
soil and country shall be turned into a wilderness. For both nettles, and
thorns, and briars, and bushes shall possess their kings palaces, and
gorgeous gilded houses, and it shall possess them as it were by inheritance,
that is to say, for ever. By which words no doubt the Prophet cutteth off and
takes away from them all hope of returning and enjoying agayine of those their
palaces.

Verse. 7. The days of visitation are come: the days of recompense are come:
Israel shall know it: the prophet is a fool: the spiritual man is mad for
the multitude of thine iniquity: therefore the hatred is great.
The conclusion of the former threatening and of the causes of the same.
THe conclusion and shutting up of the whole former threatening, and of the
causes thereof. Of the threatening, because that those judgments of God shall in
the end come to pass, and the same also most lamentable and heavy. Wherefore
that time is called a day of visitation, that is, of great and extreme
misery, the which the Israelites shall feel. For so is the word (visitation)
taken in this place, as it is also Sophon. 1. ver. 14. where he says: The
great day of the Lord is near: it is near, and hastes greatly, even the
voice of the day of the Lord: the strong man shall cry there bitterly. So is it
likewise taken Ierem. 49. ver. 8. in these words: Flee, ye inhabitants of Dedan
(they are turned back, and have consulted to dwell) for I have brought the
destruction of Edom upon him, and the time of his visitation. Thus then shall
these things fall out unto them most justly. For they are a just reward and
recompense of their ungodliness, iniquity and idolatry, and finally of their
contempt of God, whose true Prophets and doctrine these men refused, and
entirely embraced the false and lying prophets. Therefore the conclusion and
sum of the causes of this wrath of God against the Israelites, is
comprehended in these words, The days of recompense, the which causes by way
of explanatio^, but yet briefly, are afterward here set down: but they are
first recalled al of them unto their proper and true fountain, to wit, for
that they despising the word of God, followed the devises of men, and the
authors of those devises, namely the false prophets. Titles in this place given
unto the false prophets by the holy Ghost.
And these false prophets does the Spirit of God describe by sundry epithets
or titles, to the end they may be the more hated of all the godly, what
outward show so ever they do pretend or make of doctrine and holiness. He
calls them therefore in regard of their doctrine, fools and mad men,
namely as being such, who do feign that they hear and see the things the
which they neither see nor hear. Such a one in our time was G. Postellus, the
canker of Christianity; such at this day are the Papists, and those which at
the first sought the foundations of popish doctrine out of the apparitions or
appearings of the dead, and of revelations made unto them, and the speakings
of idols unto them. Last of all he calls them, full of wind, that is, of
vanity and lying. And as touching their manners, what these false prophets
were, and are, may casily be understood, and it is also set down in the verse
following, when as they are described to be the haters and persecutors of all
good men, and such as are in deed godly. Last of all, the prophet uses a
certain briefnesse and shortness of speech, and comprehending in few words
those causes of the judgments of God against them, says: That all these
former judgments of God against the Israelites, are worthily put in execution,
because of the multitude of their iniquities: and especially because of the
hatred of the said Israelites, both within them selves, and one against
another, and also against all the godly, and such as truly worship God. For
they hated them with more then mortal or deadely hatred, as the verse following
shows. For he which hates the godly, hates God him self.

Verse. 8. The watchman of Ephraim should be with my God: but the prophet is the
snare of a fouler in all his ways, and hatred in the house of his God.
A confirmation of both the sins of the Israelites, taken from the effects.
A Confirmation of both the sins, that is to say, both of the multitude of
their iniquities, and ungodliness of the Israelites, and also of their hatred
against all the godly. And it is taken from the effects and examples, the which
were every where seen in that kingdom and people. And first of all it hereby
appears, that all the Israelites were notoriously wicked and ungodly, in that
whole Ephraim, that is to say, the whole nation it self, and not only one or
two, watches, searches, inquireth, if any do cleave unto the true God, and
his pure doctrine, that they may afterward persecute and vex them. The which
no doubt is a sign of notorious and unrecoverable rebellion and iniquity
against God, and of a common and general conspiring among them selves against
the godly. The self same thing is done in this our time in Spain by the
Inquisitors, whom others call Inquinators of the Romish faith. For they
generally do slay the godly. As for the hatred of the said Israelites and
false prophets, especially against all holy men, there is hereof brought a
notable proof in this place, for that the self same false prophets, do not
only manifestly and openly persecute them, who profess them selves to be
godly: but do more over lay snares for the godly, that they may discover, and
catch them, if they any where lie hidden: and are the continual foulers,
hunters, and watchers of the godly, to do them some harm, as the 10. Psalm
verse. 7. describes such manner of persons, where it says of the oppressor,
His mouth is full of cursing and deceit and fraud: under his tongue is
mischief and iniquity. He lies in wait in the village: in the secret places
does he murder the innocent: his eyes are bent against the poor. For these
false prophets here spoken of do so exceedingly hate the godly, that they
utter and bewray their hatred against the true faithful openly in the mids
of the chapel of their idols, and in the Temple of their gods, whiles they
either excommunicate them from their company, or else rail against them like
mad men, as appears in the 7. chapter of Amos, or else do strike them
also, as Zidkiiah did the Prophet Micaiah 1. King. 22. ver. 24. So at this day
do the Popes and bishops of Rome, and their flatterers the Monks, handle
those that are in deed godly, and such as do profess the sound doctrine of
Christ, so that our age could not possibly be more lively described.

Verse. 9. They are deeply set: they are corrupt as in the days of Gibeah:
therefore he will remember their iniquity: he will visit their sins.
An amplification of their former iniquity.
AN amplification of the iniquity of the Israelites described before, the which
is taken from the degree or quality, the which may and is wont to be most
notorious and shameful in that kind. And God deals in such sort with them,
and with all stubborn sinners, whom in the end he most sharply punishes,
that they may understand that they are worthily paid with such a punishment:
because that unto their most grievous sins there are due also most grievous
pains and torments.

2. Parts of this verse.
But this verse has two parts; one wherein he does paint out this grieuousnes
of their heinous offenses: the other, wherein he also describes the
punishment the which shall ensue and follow for the same. 1 A painting out of
the grieuousnes of their iniquity.
As for that same highest degree of the iniquity of the Israelites, it is both
by the thing it self, and also by an example. By the thing it self, for it is
said to have bin a most deep and most advised rebellion and corruption: 2 The
punishment for the same.
they set them selves into a most deep corruption. So then, whatsoever
mischief, and how great soever may devised or done by most wicked persons, is
effected and fulfilled by these men: 1 The greatness of their iniquity.
how far soever the ungodliness of men is wont to spread it self abroad, so
far stretches the wickedness of these men: how deeply soever the most
desperate that can be, do plunge themselves into all notorious wickedness; so
deeply have these set themselves into all heinous offenses. Finally, this
verb (Schachat) signifies utterly and thoroughly to corrupt a man himself,
unto the which verb when as there is added gnamiku, Schachat gnamiku.
that is, (to pearse deeply) it appears, with how great vehemency and
force of words is showed the exceeding great either depth or height, unto the
which in the end the obstinate and wilful do either descend or ascend. And
that is likewise declared by an example, the which of all other was the most
foul and filthy, to wit, when as in the mids of the people of God, one
whole city committed adultery against their brother, and the same a Leuite,
yea and moreover their guest beside. Read the story Judge. 19. of the Levites
wife most shamefully abused by the beastly Gibeonites, in revenge of the which
villainous act, insued that most lamentable and bloody battle, which there at
large is mentioned.

The punishment of the same.
as it were of a flood or water ouerflowing all places. God will remember their
iniquity. The reason is, because God is Judge of the world. For if he remember
the sins of unfaithful and unbelieving persons, how much more will he call
to remembrance the sins of the faithful. Yea, (and he will punish this
iniquity.) For this iniquity is a most grievous sin, The sin of the
Gibeonites in most shameful abusing the Levites concubine.
as are those like there committed by the Israelites, whereof mention is made in
this place, and therefore such as do provoke the wrath of God against them,
and are to be punished. For against such wickedness the wrath of God is revealed
from heaven, as against all ungodliness, and unrighteousness of men, which
withhold the truth in unrighteousness, as Paul speaks 1. Romans verse. 18. And
for such things comes the wrath of God upon the children of disobedience Ephesians.
cap. 5. ver. 6. Wherefore David wills the worldly rich puffed up with
prosperity, to beware of this punishment, Psalm. 73. ver. 27. when he says:
For lo, they that withdraw themselves from thee, shall perish: thou destroyest
all them that go a whoring from thee.

Verse. 10. I found Israel like grapes in the wilderness, I saw your fathers as
the first ripe in the fig tree at her first time: but they went to Baal-peor,
and separated themselves unto that shame, and their abominations were according
to their lovers.
An other amplification of the former iniquity. What a Metaphor is, see Amos,
cap. 4.12.
AN other amplification of the same iniquity of the Israelites, and of all
others, which fall away from the true worship of God unto idolatry. And this
is taken from things compared together: For God compares his benefits bestowed
upon them, with their rebellion and stubbornness. But here the metaphors of
the words are to be marked, 2. Parts of this verse.
the which are not only pearls garnishing the sentence; but do also explane
or make plain, and set forth the thing it self very notably, 1 A rehearsal
of Gods benefits.
which God casts them in the teeth withal.

This verse therefore has two parts. First, a rehearsal of the benefits of
God: 2 The disobedience of the Israelites.
and secondly, the stubbornnes and disobedience of the Israelites, even from
their infancy, and when as at the first they began of God to be chosen for his
people, and were in a most desert, place, and as yet in a poor and afflicted
estate and condition. The benefit of God is threefold. First, God chose their
Elders, He chose them when as they were in the desert, and destitute or void
of all things, fugitives, poor, and lying open unto al injuries. These are the
benefits of God toward this people.

2. Their disobedience.
But what was the mind of this people, what was on the other side their
obedience? None at all, but their neck and their rebellion was untameable:
yea, and that from the very first beginnings of their adoption, when as men
notwithstanding, which have received a benefit at the hands of men, are wont
at the first time of their benefits bestowed upon them, to be thankful,
obedient, teachable, and finally dutiful unto those their benefactors and well
doers. But these Israelites rebelled by and by in Beel peor: separated
themselves from God: preferred before the true God a most beastly Idol
carrying the shape of the secret parts of a man. Last of all, they always from
that time, and continually according unto their own pleasure increased and not
amended that their idolatry, and rebellion. This is the iniquity of the
Israelites. Concerning this their ancient idolatry with that beastly Idol,
there is mention Numb. 25. ver. 3. in these words: And Israel coupled himself
to Baal peor: wherefore the wrath of the Lord was kindled against Israel. And
Psalm. 106. ver. 28. They joined themselves also unto Baal-peor, and did eat
the offerings of the dead.

Verse. 11. Ephraim their glory shall flee away like a bird: from the birth,
and from the womb, and from the conception.
A threatening of Gods judgment against their rebellion.
A Threatening of the judgments of God, and the same most grievous, because of
their rebellion described before. And briefly here in this place is foretold
the destruction or overthrow of the whole nation: and afterward answer is
made unto diverse objections, which were wont to be brought by the Idolaters,
or Israelites. The rooting out or destruction of the nation is contained in
this verse, The rooting out of the nation.
The glory of Israel shall flee away, as birds are wont to flee away out of
their cages. And this word (shall flee away) imports thus much: shall vanish
away, shall utterly perish, shall be no more at all. So David Psalm. 90. ver. 9.
speaks of the swift vanishing away of the years of man: For all our days
are past in thine anger: we have spent our years as a thought. Again, Psalm.
102. ver. 3.11. For my days are consumed like smoke, and my bones are burnt
like an herth. My days are like a shadow that fades, and I am withered like
grass. In deed all the outward glory and bravery of man does perish at the
last, and whatsoever in the Scripture is called grass, does wither, as Peter
speaks Epist. 1 cap. 1. ver. 24. All flesh is grass, and all the glory of
man is as the flower of grass. The grass withers, and the flower falls
away: but in this place there is a greater threatening described. And this
appears by these words following: even from the birth, from the womb, and
from conception. For in these words is a going up as it were by degrees, and
also an amplification of this punishment and destruction. For it shall be with
his beginning, middle, and end. It shall therefore be perfect, and not alone
begun, or else in some one part of it only. Further, by (glory) I understand
in this place the sons or issue of the Israelites. What is understood by
(glory) in this place.
For eu^^y son is called the glory or honor of his father. And therefore
David Psalm. 127. ver. 4.5. accounts the store of them for a singular
blessing, whereof a man ought to rejoice, and not to be ashamed, when he says:
As are the arrows in the hand of the strong man: so are the children of youth.
Blessed is the man that has his quiuerfull of them: for they shall not be
ashamed, when they speak with their enemies in the gates. And Solomon Pro. 17.
ver. 6. says: Childrens children are the crown of the elders: and the glory
of the children are their fathers. And so is this word glory here to be
expounded by the verse that follows. There were no doubt many notable things
in the Israelites, so far forth as they were the seed of Abraham: but this
same increasing and maintaining of the nation by the sons succeeding their
fathers, was an especial means of the preserving of the covenant of God among
them, nay in the world it self, the which questionles is to be accounted to
have been the singular glory of this nation. For by this means our Lord Jesus
Christ was borne of them.

Verse. 12. Though they bring up their children, yet will I deprive them from
being men: yea, woe to them, when I depart from them.
The figure Hypophora, or answering of an objection What this figure is, see
Amos cap. ^. ver. 21.
THe figure Hypophora, or answering an objection, whereby God answers a
certain objection of the Israelites, refuting and despising these threatenings
of God, to wit, that their children and issue shall not be destroyed in such
sort. For they will nourish and bring up their children. But the Lord
answers, I will kill and utterly destroy the self same your children or
sons, the which you shall bring up, so that there shall not any remain of
your twelve tribes, and nation. The reason is set down, because your estate
shall be in every respect most miserable, when as I shall be angry with you
because of your sins. Therefore when as I shall depart from you for this
cause, and shall not protect or defend you any longer with my favor, hand, and
power, your children shall be destroyed, that there shall not any more
afterward be any nation or body of a people of them, albeit that some of them
may remain and be lest alive. For the anger of God is the fountain of all
calamities and miseries, as his good will toward us through Christ, is the
welspring of all good things. So David confesses Psalm. 4. ver. 6.7. The text
of these quotatio^s are not here set down, because that they have been often
before alleged to like purpose.
that whencesoeuer the wicked and ungodly look to receive their hope good, he
is persuaded that the light of God his countenance toward his elect, shall
thoroughly furnish them with all heavenly and spiritual joy and comfort, and
consequently with all other things requisite and needful for the behoof of
this life, like as Psalm. 30. ver. 7. he also acknowledges all his prosperity
to stand by the strength of the Lord. Woe therefore be unto them, with whom the
Lord God is angry.

Verse. 13. Ephraim, as I saw, is as a tree in Tyrus planted in a cottage: but
Ephraim shall bring forth his children to the murderer.
Another objection of the hypocrites.
ANother answer to another objection of theirs, wherewith he beats back
another exception of the same hypocrites: namely, that the killing and rooting
out of their children shall not be so easy a thing to be performed. For this
kingdom of ours (say they) is so strong and well fenced, if the bounds and
borders thereof be considered, and especially of the tribe of Ephraim: as that
most noble city Tyrus is strong, the which was near and a neighbor unto
them. God answers, albeit as they suppose, God his answer to the former
objection.
nay in the judgment of all men, this country of the Israelies be as safe,
as is any the most strongest and most fenced city safe in the judgment of
men: yet shall her children nevertheless be slain and destroyed. For they
themselves shall bring forth their children unto this destruction. And this may
be understood to have been brought to pass two manner of ways: namely, either
whiles the fathers sent forth their children unto battles, so that
afterward they were slain: or whiles the fathers themselves being now
captives did bring forth their children, and showed them unto their enemies,
asking for them to put them unto death. The which latter interpretation I do
rather follow and embrace.

Verse. 14. O Lord, give them, what thou will give them: give them a barren
womb, and dry breasts.
The figure Epiphonema, or acclamatio. What this figure is, see Jonas cap. 2.
ver. 9
THe figure Epiphonema, or acclamatio, whereby the Prophet does very
affectionatly and pitifully bewail the estate of this people, even by making
prayer unto God, that they themselves being both idolaters and hypocrites, whom
so great a punishment did touch, might be warned, and repent from their
wickedness. It is therefore an earnest prayer of the Prophet, and full of
affection and pity toward his nation. For the Prophets were not void of all
affection and pity, albeit that boldly and without fear, according unto the
charge committed unto them by God, they did declare and utter the judgments of
God unto their people. Read both these places, which are to long here to set
down.
And I for my part do not think this to be a curse here in this place, as is
that which is contained in the Psalm. 109. from the 6. verse, and certain other
there following, where the Prophet David wishes destruction unto his enemies.
And as is that of Jeremy cap. 18. ver. 19. to the end of the chapter, where he
prays against his adversaries: but I take it rather to be a prayer wherein
the Prophet desires to have so great misery and punishment to be turned from
this people. And this shall so be, if God himself do rather lay or send
unfruitfulness and barrennes upon their wives: and not if he give their children
to be slain and miserably murdered of the cruel enemies: That which before
God threatened should come to pass. Wherefore he does not pray against the
punishment of so wicked men, although they be his country men: but that they
may rather be punished by God himself, then by men, because, as David said,
it is more tolerable and far better to fall into the hands of God, then into
the hands of men that are our enemies. And therefore when he had the choice
given him for a punishment of his sin, in causing the people to be numbered,
either of seven years famine, or three months fleeing before his enemies, or
of three days pestilence, he answered and said: I am in a marvelous strait:
let us fall now into the hand of the Lord: (for his mercies are great) and let
me not fall into the hand of man. Sam. 2. cap. 24. ver. 14. Therefore says the
Prophet, Lord, give what thou will give, that is to say, Chasten them both as
thou have threatened concerning the destroying of their children, and also as it
is meet that it should be done: but root thou out, O Lord, that nation thy
self, by laying barrennes upon their mothers, and not that the Israelites
should fall into the hands of their most cruel enemies, of whom thou have
spoken. For this is done to the laughing to scorn of thine own self, when as
profane, or wicked and heathen men do see themselves to have gotten the upper
hand, and do destroy thy Church.

Verse. 15. All their wickedness is in Gilgal: for there do I hate them: for
the wickedness of their inventions I will cast them out of mine house: I will
love them no more: all their princes are rebels.
Two parts of this verse.
A Garnishing and setting out of the matter, wherein he both repeateth the cause
of the former threatening, and also the threatening it self. Therefore this
verse has two parts. One, 1. The cause of the former threatening repeated.
wherein the cause is set down again. The other, wherein the same threatening
is repeated, but now more plainly, and by parts. For here he expressly
threatens the princes: in the verse following, the rest of the people: unto
all which he threatens utter destruction. 2. The threatening it self repeated.
And as for the cause of so great a judgment of God against all men, and at
that time against the Israelites, is, and always has been chiefly such
iniquity as reigned every where in Gilead or Galaad both in the city,
Idolatry. Cruelty.
Now this iniquity was of two sorts, to wit, idolatry and cruelty, as
appears both by the books of the Kings, and also by this Prophet before cap.
6. ver. 8.4. ver. 15. And hereafter cap. 12. ver. 11. Wherefore it is said,
That the whole sin or wickedness of this people was in Gilead. For there
more, then in the other provinces of the kingdom of Israel, abounded and
reigned both these iniquities, and every kind of heinous offenses as well
against God, as against men. Whereas therefore it is here said, That all the
wickedness was in Gilead, this must be understood comparatively. And thus much
of the cause of the punishments.

The hatred of God.
the which were hereupon to ensue. And the first is, Hatred of God. For God
hates all those which work iniquity and live wickedly, or ungodly Psalm. 5.
Secondly, the abandoning and casting off of the Israelites. For he threatens
that he will drive this part of the people out of his house, that is, out of
his inheritance, family, and people. Like as when God did acknowledge them for
his, and did love them, they were part of his family, and of God his peculiar
people. Therefore in this place I take the word (house) not for the Temple, not
for the worship of God, whereof they are said that they shall be deprived, but
for the inheritance, privilege and family, the which God had peculiarly
adopted or chosen unto himself in the feed of Abraham, and had promised unto
him. For when he calls him out of Vr of the Chaldees, he says thus unto him
Genesis 12. ver. 2. I will make of thee a great nation, and I will bless thee,
and make thy name great, and thou shall be a blessing. I will also bless them
that bless thee, and curse them that curse thee, and in thee shall all
families of the earth be blessed. And again cap. 15. ver. 1. it is said unto
him in a vision: Fear not Abraham, I am thy buckler, and thine exceeding gre^^
reward. And Exodus 19. ver. 6. God says thus of the children of Israel: Ye
shall be unto me also a kingdom of Priests, and an holy nation. To this
purpose read Psalm. 81. So we Christians, which through Christ have succeeded
or come into the place of their family, are called a holy nation, a people
whom God claims unto himself as his proper and peculiar people. And
therefore 1. Pet. 2. ver. 9. Peter says unto the faithful: Ye are a chosen
generation, a royal priesthood, an holy nation, a peculiar people, etc. And
Tit. 2. ver. 14. Paul teaches, that Christ gave himself for us that he might
redeem us from all iniquity, and purge us to be a peculiar people unto
himself, zealous of good works. Now both these punishments, namely, that GOD
should hate them, and also cast them off, are justly threatened unto them,
because that they can never be loved of God, who do live ungodly, nor yet be
by him acknowledged for his. And therefore Paul. 2. Tim. 2. ver. 19. says: The
foundation of God remains sure, and has this seal, the Lord knows who are
his, and, let every one that calls on the name of Christ, depart from
iniquity. And these effects are the first, and immediate, which do proceed or
spring from our sins, The hatred of God against us, and his casting of us
off. After these follows affliction, and our destruction.

The applying of the punishments first of all unto the princes.
But now in the last branch of this verse God applies those two punishments,
and the same indeed most grievous, unto the princes of the Israelites first of
all, whom he denies that he can love hereafter, because that they above the
rest were rebels, and disobedient. And it is a thing most meet, that those
which hurt others with their example, before whom they ought to shine in
holiness of life, should first feel the punishment of this their transgression,
and so consequently the hatred of God, and their casting off from him, and in
the end, most heavy punishments.

Verse. 16. Ephraim is smitten: their root is dried up: they can bring no
fruit: yea, though they bring forth, yet will I slay even the dearest of
their body.
The applying of the same punishments unto the whole people.
IN the second place the self same effects of sins are applied unto the whole
people, that they should not think themselves free from punishment, because
they followed the example of their princes. So when a blind man either choseth
a blind man for his guide, or follows him, both of the^ worthily fall into
the ditch, as Christ teaches Matthew. 15. ver. 14. when he says of the Scribes
and Pharisees: Let them alone: they be the blind leaders of the blind: and if
the blind lead the blind, both shall fall into the ditch. But God now dealing
with the people, does not only rehearse his hatred against them, and the
casting of them off: but also expresses the punishment it self, and the
affliction, wherewith he will punish them: because that the common people are
of a more gross and dull wit, the which is to be stirred up with the feeling
it self of the punishments. The punishment is here the same which was before:
but it is more distinctly declared, that it may the more easily be conceived
even of the people, albeit never so rude and gross. So then the punishment to
come is first of all set down generally in these words, Ephraim shall be
smitten by God. Secondly, by way of making the matter more plain, there is
added what manner of punishment it shall be, The root of them shall wither:
They shall bring forth no fruit, that is to say, the nation it self shall
leave no issue at all: nay it shall be put out, and utterly destroyed. Yea, if
there be some borne of them, how diligently soever they be kept by their
parents, tenderly brought up, and loved and looked unto by them, GOD
notwithstanding shall destroy those that are borne, or their sons, whom they
shall beget and bring up, that they be not any more one nation gathered
together, severed from other people, and one body. See before ver. 12.

Verse. 17. My God will cast them away: because they did not obey him: and they
shall wander among the nations.
The conclusion confirming the former threatenings.
THe conclusion, by the which all the former things are confirmed, namely both
the casting off of this people, and also their most miserable estate. God shall
despise, and hold for forsaken the Israelites, that is to say, those ten
tribe^, because as he said he will cast them forth of his family, and race
them out of his covenant. Therefore those which shall remain of them, before
they be utterly destroyed, shall be vagabonds, or wanderers too and fro among
the heathen, and Idolators. The reason of this so great punishment of this
people is, because this people obeyed not God, that is to say, obeyed not his
commandments, which they understood not. What then is there at this day to be
hoped for or rather to be feared of the rebellious world the which casts off
Christ, or falls away from his Gospel, we do easily understand by the
f^rmer threatenings, and examples of these Israelites: nay we have experience by
reason of our own sins. For in a manner all Christendom is now already
destroyed by the Turks for the same offenses, that is to say, idolatry and
cruelty.

CAP. 10.
Verse. 1. Israel is an empty vine, yet has it brought forth fruit unto it
self, and according unto the multitude of the fruit thereof he has increased
the Altars: according to the goodness of their land they have made fair images.
This chap. albe it that in many points it agree with the former, yet has
(...) something pec^^iar and preper, unto it self
ALthough this chapter do meruailously well agree with the former, as the
sermons of the Prophets have been like one unto an other, even as were the
manners of the corrupted people always the same, so also is one and the same
doctrine of repentance often to be repeated and to be beaten into their heads,
as Paul Philip. 3. verse. 1. witnesses, that he is not ashamed, or that it does
not grieve him to write the same things unto them, and for you (says he) it is
a sure thing. Yet has this chapter his certain peculiar argument or contents
diverse from that before going, namely, for that here the aids the which the
Israelites thought to be most sure and safe unto them, are threatened to be
taken from them, to wit, their Idols, and their kings. And moreover the Prophet
here in this chapter does also declare unto this people the same destruction
for their idolatry, and forsaking of the true God. Often admonishments for one
and the same thing are not in vain in God his judgment and purpose, howsoever
men may think the contrary.
Neither are they in vain so often admonished or warned of the self same
thing. For God by this means makes them inexcusable, and shows how great
his mercy and patience is even toward men that are most obstinate and
stubborn. And last of al we do learn by this example, how hardly and
scarcely, and almost not at al they are roused up and drawn from their vices,
the which have once given over them selves unto them, especially from idols, so
far doubtless have they swallowed down the bayte of this poison, that they
cannot afterward be rid of it, and cast it out of their mouth again. Now this
verse and it which follows, do contain the causes of God his judgment, the
which shall be declared afterward.

The sum of the wickedness of these Israelites.
As for this present verse it sets down the sum of their wickedness, that
is, their unappeased and mad mind, and earnestnes of this people never
satisfied in worshipping of Idols. The which thing we see even at this day to
be in the popish Idolators. For they make themselves utterly unapt to be
taught of GOD, and estranged from him, that they may wholly serve their Idols.
And questionles no man can at once and together obey or serve God and Satan.
For as Christ says Mat. 6. verse. 24. No man can serve two masters: for either
he shall hate the one, and love the other, or else he shall lean to the one
and despise the other. Israel an empty vine.
Wherefore Israel, that is to say, the whole nation and kingdom of the ten
tribes is here called an empty vine, as namely the which did not now bear any
fruit acceptable unto God Isai 5. But if it brought forth any, it brought it
forth liking to themselves only, and agreeable to their idolatry. Therefore
albeit that this people were as a vine, diligently dressed of God, yet it
brings no solace or comfort unto God, that is, unto their vine dresser and
husbandman: but all the works and fruits of this people do serve themselves
only, and the Idolatry and religion which they had forged and invented.

A proof of the unthankfulness of this people.
The proof of the great ingratitude or unthankfulness of this people follows.
For as they abound with wealth, fruits, and all kind of good things, so do
they multiply their Idol temples and altars, and appoint for their images
diverse worship and service, costly, chargeable and gorgeous, and do sacrifice
unto them sumptuously, according unto the abundance and store of the good
things, which they receive from the true God. So then the Israelites bestow
nothing upon the true God: but all upon themselue^ and their Idols, which
Israelites were notwithstanding a vine planted, plowed, and increased by God
and not by Idols.

Verse. 2. Their heart is divided: now shall they be found faulty: he shall
break down their altars: he shall destroy their images.
AN increasing of the former idolatry, for that they do not worship, and have
worshipped those false gods only outwardly with gifts and rewards, An
amplification of the former Idolatry.
but also with their heart and whole mind. In a word, they were wholly how
great and whatsoever they were, mere and filthy idolators both in body, and
also in mind, both inwardly, and also outwardly. But this sentence makes
nothing for this, that they should not be thought to sin, which cleave unto
Idols only with their bodies, and in outward show: but by this phrase or kind
of speaking God shows that the Israelites were fully and wholly worshippers
of Idols. But as for those, which deny themselves to be idolators, if they
serve Idols only with their bodies, let them hear Paul Romans 10. verse. 10.
With the heart man believes unto righteousness, and with the mouth confession
is made unto salvation. For he teaches that both are required, that is to say,
both the mind and the body, to serve God aright or well: And that worthily:
for God is the maker of them both in us. Thus then the Israelites bestowed not
only their outward goods upon their Idols: but also their mind and heart.
Whereupon now follows the most just sentence of God against them, whereby
they are first pronounced guilty: and secondly to be punished, as this their
wickedness deserves. Therefore, says God, These are faulty, or guilty, and
that in such sort and manner, as the most wicked offenders are wont to be
guilty. For thus much does the word Aschmah signify. Aschmah.
The faultines or guiltines goes before the punishment. For none are punished
by God, but such as are first in truth found guilty in themselves, and proved
by GOD so to be. The which is true, and to be understood both of actual and
also of original sin. For all infants are guilty in Adam, as they are also
accounted, as in their root: All infants guilty.
afterward there follows them as a punishment for this guiltines the
corruption and deprauation or making ill of their nature They are therefore
guilty: and consequently to be punished. And first of all the things themselves
shall be punished by the which both all men do sin, and have sinned, and
also the Israelites, so ungodly, wherein they do place so sure and strong an
aid: and secondly, they themselves, shall be chastised by God. The things
themselves, by the which the Israelites offended God, are these altars and
Images: in the which also they put their trust. Therefore both their altars and
their images shall be destroyed by God. And this thing came to pass partly
when as Josias the king of Judah brake down the altars of the Israelites, and
partly when as the people themselves were wholly carried away into captivity
2. King. 17. God shall behead their altars.
And whereas it is said that God shall break down or rather behead their
altars, this has a greater emphasis or force, and is spoken to strike the more
shame into them. For it is likely that these Altars must have had their
crowns, and proud pearching up pillars, the which God threatens that he will
throw down and break, that afterward they may appear maimed and curtold of
that proud head and ornament. The which was done both by Josias, and also
before by the Assyrians.

Verse. 3. For now they shall say, we have no King, because we feared not the
Lord: and what should a King do to us?
What the figure Mimesis is, see Oseas cap. 4. ver. 18.
A Making of the matter more plain, whereby God by the figure Mimesis, or
imitating and taking upon him their speech, does represent or show the
notorious wantonness of this people, and their retchles and unpunished
licentiousnes or over much liberty in running commonly unto all kind of
wickedness, to the end that his judgments, albeit never so heavy against this
people may seem the more just. First of all therefore he describes that their
unpunished and unbridled boldness to commit any evil whatsoever, and imitateth
or follows and takes upon him their words.

Their words were, We have no King, that can keep us under: he only has so
much power and authority over us, The bold words of the unruly people.
as we do yield unto him, and will and are contented that he shall have over
us. We feared not the Lord: What therefore may stay us now from the executing
and putting in practice of all kind of wickedness and heinous offenses freely,
and according unto our own hearts lust and pleasure? Doubtless nothing. Now
these were the speeches of the people, by the which is pointed out notorious
and desperate lewdnes of men, like unto that judge in the parable recited by
our Savior Luke 18. verse. 2. of whom he reports, That he feared not God,
neither reverenced man: Anarchie, or such an estate where there is no King, nor
governor, or being there, governs not, is the mother of all lewdnes and
loosenes of life.
also their anarchie or disordered life under no rule nor government, the which
is wont to be most hurtful, and not only the companion, but also the nurse
and mother of all enormitie and malapertnes. And therefore it is so often
repeated in the book of Judges, that such and such most outrageous offenses
reigned and were committed in the land, because there was no King in Israel, as
among the rest Judge. 19. verse. 1. we read thus: Also in those days when there
was no King in Israel, a certain Leuite dwelt on the side of mount Ephraim,
and took to wife a Concubine out of Beth-lehem Judah. And his Concubine played
the whore there, and went away from him, etc. So likewise cap. 21. ver. 25.
after the setting down of the great disorder of the Beniamites in stealing
away the maidens at the dancing in Shiloh, there is added as the cause: In
those days there was no king in Israel, but every man did that which was good
in his eyes. For we are held back as it were with a bit or bridle from the
committing of evil, either with the fear of God or terror of men: which, when
as they are either none at all, or broken in sunder by the violence and sway of
sins rushing in, there must needs be a most broad window set open unto all
lewdnes and iniquity. The which uses there to be done, wheresoever anarchi or
want of government reigns. Wherefore Peter 1. epist. cap. 2. verse. 17.
counsels very well, That we both fear God, and also honor the King, that we
may live godly. And finally, that is a notable saying of Chrysostom, That it
were better that there be some king among men, Chrysostom.
be he never so bad, then to have no King at all. And this was at that time
the most miserable estate of the Ifraelites, as appears. And this came to
pass among them hereupon, for that he which was the stronger got the
Kingdom: and for that Kings were not chosen among them after any lawful manner
and by due voices, but each thrust out and murdered other by arms and civil
wars, and did intrude or thrust themselves into that same sacred and holy
dignity. And therefore they ruled only according unto the pleasure and
appointment of the people, the which they do, that reign by violence, and not
by right, and therefore they do not that which is beseeming them, and
appertains unto the duty of a King.

Verse. 4. They have spoken words, swearing falsely in making a covenant: thus
judgment grows as wormwood in the furrows of the field.
An amplification of their un ru^^ boldne described before.
AN amplification of the malapert boldness described before, and the same also
reigning commonly among the people. It is taken from the effects, the which are
always wont to follow auarchi or want of government (that is, where no fear
of God, nor of the King, that is, a man does restrain us from evil) And this
verse has two parts, one, wherein these effects are recited: Two parts of
this verse.
The other, wherein the punishment that should follow; is described. As for the
effects of Anarchie, 1. The effects of Anarchie.
all the evils that follow the same, are not here recited: but only two, which
are especial and most grievous ones, 2. The punishment following the same.
and the which do draw after them infinite others. Of the which one is, That
all things then ouerflow with periuries among men, and first of all in private
contractes and affairs. So then these use swearing, 1. Swearing and perjury.
when as they deal for any thing privately within themselves, yea and adding
great execration or cursing thereunto, as it were giving themselves unto the
devil, or praying God to execute his judgments and plagues upon them if they
perform not their promises, and such like. For there are diverse kinds of
swearing, as you may read Mat. 26 verse. 72, 74. in the fact of Peter denying
his master first by simple affirmation, then by an oath, and thirdly by cursing
and banning of himself. Yet do they in those cases also forswear themselves,
neither do they keep their faith, nor perform their promises. Public
perjury.
The other evil is, that they use those periuries in public covenants and
bargainings, when as they make them with other nations: so that they keep not
their faith and promise made by oath, neither privately, nor publicly: but are
in all points and cases wicked, hated of God and men, perjured persons,
faithles, and covenant breakers. That such unfaithful and trothles dealing
reigns both in Anarchie or where there is no governor, and also in that
state where the people bear all the rule, as well the histories do testify, as
especially Zenophon lib. de Repub. Atheniens. And experience it self taught the
same among the Israelites, when as within themselves they kept not faith either
publi^ely, or privately, nor yet kept it with other nations, as with the
Assyrians for example. Whereupon they procured unappeasable wars with them,
against themselves, in the which in the end they utterly perished.

Judgment.
unto those great punishments, wherewith God in the end was avenged on that
their wantonness, Atheism or godlesnes, Anarchie, and periuries, yea and with
the which he does punish them even at this day: the which punishments God in
this place pronounces that they shall on every side flow and rush in upon the
Israelites, and that being most bitter, as is the herb Rue, or wormewoode. And
that this sentence of God is most just, appears hereafter in this self same
chapter ver. 13.

Verse. 5. The inhabitants of Samaria shall fear, because of the calfe of Beth
auen: for the people thereof shall mourn over it: and the Chemarims thereof,
that rejoiced on it for the glory thereof, because it is departed from it.
The first amplification of the punishment.
THe first amplification or explanation and making plain of the punishment. For
as he described the wickedness of the Israelites by parts: so does he also the
punishment hanging over their heads: that by both these means these idolatours
might be moved, although they were obstinate or stiff necked, and be called
back unto repentance of mind, if any way it may be. Further, God threatens
that the same hope which they propounded or set before them selves, as their
last anchor and refuge, shall be taken from them, to wit, their idols, on whom
they trusted, as their gods that should defend and keep them. And here is
lively, and by way of amplification described, how great a frightment of
hearts, and trembling of mind shall follow hereupon in this whole people:
whereby is gathered, that all sorts of men, and all degrees of this people put
the hope of life and of their deliverance in their idols at that time. All the
Israelites at that time hoped for de^iuerance at their idols.
For when as all shall mourn, lament, and be dismayde for the calves of
Beth-auen, that is, of Beth-el, that should be taken from them, it is
undoubtedly true, that all did trust in them. And first of all, and above all
the rest, the inhabitants of Samaria do fear, that is, of the head city of
the whole kingdom. What then, shall the citizens of less fortified and fenced
cities, and the dwellers in towns do? how shall they tremble? I expound (The
inhabitant of Samaria) to be spoken by an emphasis, or vehemency, to give them
to understand, that others then must much more fear. Secondly, after the
Samaritans, all they shall mourn which are the people of these heyfers (for so
in contempt he calls the calves, heyfers: like as to signify his lothing and
abhorring of the same, he calls Beth-el, that is, the house of God,
Beth-auen, that is, the house of iniquity) The people then of these heyfer
buddes are the citizens of Dan and Beth-el, cities, in the which these calves
were placed. Last of all, the priests of these calves shall mourn exceedingly,
as who by the overthrowing of them loose the stay and maintenance of their life
and living. And these Priests are called Camarim or Chemarims, either because
they did wear black apparel, Chemarims.
or else because they were al gathered together and dwelling in cloisters, like
unto our monks: or else because with loud voice they did yell out hymns unto
their gods in their idol-temples. Which three points are evidently seen in the
popish monks, and do very fitly agree unto them.

Verse. 6. It (or he) shall be also brought to Asshur for a present unto king
Iareb (or to the king that defends) Ephraim shall receive shame, and Israel
shall be ashamed of his own counsel.
The second amplification of the same punishment.
THe second amplification of the same punishment threatened against the idols of
the Israelites, taken from the place into the which they shall be carried, and
from the condition the which they shall be in. For they shall be captives, and
fall into the hands of their enemies, and finally like unto other spoils and
booties, they shall be brought unto the king of the Assyrians, even the self
same king, whom they notwithstanding shall one day choose, and had before
chosen for their defender and ayder. Wherefore the condition of these gods,
that is to say, of these idols, shall be most miserable. For they shall be
carried away, and go into captivity, even into Assyria, that is, into lands
most far off. Moreover, in those self same places they shall not be
worshipped as gods, but divided as spoils, and they shall not be given unto
the gods of the Assyrians, but unto the king, that is, unto a man only, and not
a god, as they fasly supposed their idols for to be: lastly the idols shall then
loose all that their deity, or godhead and majesty. And by these things is
understood both the vanity of idols (the which are not able to defend them
selves) and also their falsenes, as such, namely the which in the end do loose
their godhead at the pleasure of me^. I can not yet find how this quotation
can any way serve for to prove that, for the which it is quoted, unless it be
alleged to show that how so ever God for a time seem to have the foil in his
distressed Church, yet in the end he rises up like a mighty man, and is
avenged on his enemies, vexing the same, as in that place he was upon the
Philistims. The third amplification of the punishment of the Israelites God
only is to be trusted unto. The best men are vanity, and therefore not to be
trusled in.
Psalm. 78. ver. 65. Last of all, he concludes with a great auowing (the which
is contained in the repeating of the word, shame) that it shall come to pass
that Israel shall be confounded, and shall be ashamed, to wit, for this his
counsel in worshipping these caluish gods. For by this means they forsook
the true God, and became idolators. Which one thing especially was their
destruction, as it also is the overthrow of other men, and of most flourishing
kingdoms.

Verse. 7. Of Samaria, the King thereof is destroyed as the foam upon the water.
THe third amplification of the punishment against the Israelites, that is,
against idolators. And it is taken from the circumstance of the persons, whom
this punishment shall take hold on. The idols therefore of the idolators shall
not only be overthrown by God; but also the kings of those idolatrous people.
For they are an other help, that idolators rest upon. For they only look
unto earthly things, and put their trust in the arm of flesh, and not in God.
Yet is there another help prescribed or appointed unto us, and to be sought of
us, Psalm. ^0. verse. 7. where the godly say: Some trust in chariots, and some in
horses: but we will remember the name of the Lord our God. And Psalm. 62. ver.
7, 8, 9. In God (says David) is my salvation, and my glory, the rock of my
strength: in God is my trust. Trust in him always, ye people: power out your
hearts before him, for God is our hope. Yet the children of men are vanity,
the chief men are lies: to lay them upon a balance they are altogether lighter
then vanity. So then, the first foundation of the hope of these Israelites,
are their idols, and secondly their kings, and the power of men. But what shall
be done with these kings of theirs? They also shall be cut off, and that in a
moment of time, and with a light arm, or very easily: to wit, in such sort, as
the foam arising upon the waters cease to be, vanishes away, and is smitten
off. And verily, where as it is said, A man is but a bubble, even the same
appertains unto kings also: and therefore Esaias gives this counsel, cap. 2.
ver. 22. saying: Cease you from the man, whose breath is in his nostrels: for
wherein is he to be esteemed. And we have seen immediately before out of the
Psalm. 62. That the chief men are but vanity and lies: and Kings are as easily
thrown down by GOD, as other men. For Psalm. 76. ver. 12. David affirms,
That God shall cut off the spirit of Princes: he is terrible to the kings of
the earth: and therefore are they as easily cast down from their seats by God,
and also slain of him, as are any other men in like manner.

Verse. 8. The high places also of Auen shall be destroyed (even the sin
Israel) the thorn and the thistle shall grow upon their altars: and they shall
say to the mountains, Cover us, and to the hills, Fall upon us.
The fourth amplification of the punishment to come.
THe fourth amplification of the punishment to come, taken from the places them
selves, into the which it shall break. For not only the idols themselves shall
be destroyed, and the kings also; but the places in like manner, in the which
the idols were worshipped in the land, and in that kingdom of Israel, as are
their idol-temples, high places, altars, and such other like places. Surely all
color of escaping the judgment of God, must be taken away from idolators,
because that they imagine and forge unto them selves infinite exceptions and
defenses against it. Furthermore, al things must needs be rooted out and
taken away, the which have served to the hurting and dishonouring of the
majesty of God, as appears by the 40. chap. of Esaias, ver. 19, 20. But the
place cap. 30 ver. 22. is a great deal more plain for this purpose, as I take
it.
where God derideth the vanity of men in sparing for no cost, charges, and
labor in making of idols, which in their foolish opinion should not be moved
but stand sure for ever, whereas a little after he shows that both these,
and all that put their trust in them, when the Lord shall once blow upon them,
shall wither, and the whirlewinde shall take them away as stubble. Wherefore
the overthrow of the places, which have been dedicated to the worship of
idols, is here foretold, and the same signified to be most lamentable and
reprochful, setting down the cause hereof, to wit, for that they were the very
sin of Israel, that is, the sin of idolatry was contained in those places,
wherewith the Israelites and the same ten tribes did chiefly offend of God, and
provoked him against them, above the rest of their sins. For there was not
only idolatry among those ten tribes, but other offenses also reigned there,
as we have seen: but God was more angered with their idolatry, then with their
other sins: whereof it comes to pass, that these words (even the sin of
Israel) being set down by a parenthesis, and put in the same case with that
which went before, What Parenthesis is, see Oseas cap. 8. v. 2.
are of very great force and weight. Again, the whole ruin of these places is
threatened, and not in some part, and as I have said, it is threatened to be full
of reproach and shame. For the briars and thorns, and other like bad weeds,
which are heaths of desert places, and unpleasant, shall come up and grow upon
their ruinated and broken down altars. So Esaias cap. 5. ver. 6. God threatens
that he will lay his vineyard wast, that it shall not be cut nor dug: but
briars and thorns shall grow up in it. And c. 7. v. 24. he shows that the
whole land shall in his anger be so ouergrowne with the^, that it shall become
as it were a wilderness, and a covert for all wild and hurtful beasts, that a
man, except he be well armed, shall not be able to pass there, but with danger
of his life: and therefore he says: With arrows and with bow shall one come
thither: because all the land shall be briars and thorns.

Furthermore, this self same punishment shall be full of horror and sudden
fear, like to make them run mad withal, to wit, because it shall be
unlooked for of the idolators. The punishment shall be full of wonderful and
sudden fear.
Wherefore they shall be so awhaped and tremble at the same casting down and
overthrowing of their altars, that they shall prefer death before life: and
they shall be overtaken with so great terror and sorrow of mind, that they
shall say unto the mountains, Cover us, and unto the hills, Fall upon us. This
phrase and kind of speaking does Christ repeat Luc. 23. ver. 30. and the like
is Esaias 2. ver. 19. when as he describes or sets forth the exceeding
trembling and dismaying of mind that shall come to pass, the which men shall
conceive of the unlooked for and sudden judgments of God against them, and
when as he shows that they shall not be safe in any place. So when David will
signify his desire to have his enemies brought unto that plight, that they
shall be so feared as that they shall not know what counsel to take, nor which
way to turn them selves, he prays against them Psalm. 35. ver. 6. after this
manner: Let their way be dark and slipperie: and let the Angel of the Lord
persecute them.

Verse. 9. O Israel, thou have sinned from the days of Gibeah: there they
stood: the battle in Gibeah against the children of iniquity did not touch
them.
The rendering of a reason why they shall be so grievously punished.
THe rendering of a reason why God will so grievously punish the^, to wit, because
that of old they have begun to sin against God, and have not since that
time repented, although they have bin admonished or warned by the most manifest
judgments and threatenings of God. And here is a very long time rehearsed,
wherein the Israelites lived most wickedly, and against the commandments of
God, namely from the days in the which the Gabaonites, or Gibeonites committed
that most shameful villainy, the which is reported Judge. 19. This self same
fact was called before cap. 9. ver. 9. a most exquisite, rare or passing
wickedness, or most deep corruption. Doubtless it appears by this place, that
the same history is very ancient, and that the Gibeonites sinned in that sort
straight after that they were by Joshua brought into the promised land, and
inioyed the possession thereof quietly, that is to say, so great a benefit of
God, and the same so very lately bestowed upon them. For that which is there
reported, I judge to have fallen out before the government of Othoniel. R.
Solomo Iarchi writes that those things came to pass under the Judge Othoniel.
How soever it be, that lewd fact, and so cruel and wicked deed of the
Israelites is most old and ancient. The stubborn and disebedient nature of
these Israelites.
Therefore they do not now first of al begin to offend God in this manner,
without al sear; but even so soon as they entered into the self same land,
which they then possessed as yet. Afterward, their obstinacy and stubborn
nature is also declared, as namly being such, who were not brought unto
repentance, no not with those most grievous punishments, the which they saw by
God to be laid upon the Gibeonites because of that heinous offense. For
thereupon insued a most lamentable battle: the tribe of Benjamin was almost
utterly rooted out by God: the other eleven tribes were grievously slain, and
that twice. Yet did these men never call to mind those so great judgments of
God, that thereby they might become the better, and might learn to be wise by
their home punishments and examples. So then, that same so grievous war which
at that time was made against those sons of Belial, or wicked sons, that is
to say, against those lewd Gibeonites (in the which doubtless the most great
displeasure of God appeared most manifestly against the wicked) this war, I
say, moved not them, feared them not, that is, took not hold on them, to
wit, that they did think upon it, and called to remembrance that both
themselves, and those wicked persons were for this cause punished by God, and
therefore that they should abstain from sin hereafter. But from that day and
time they always waxed worse and continued in their wicked life. The which was
a most desperate boldness, and most stubborn rebellion against God.

Verse. 10. It is my desire that I should chastise them, and the people shall be
gathered against them, when they shall gather themselves in their two furrows.
A conclusion for their assured punishment, inferred upon the former verse, and
also their ungodly life. The punishment twofold.
A Consequence, the which out of the former verse, and their ungodliness justly
gathers and infers as it were for an overplus and advantage this
conclusion, to wit, that it shall come to pass, that like as these have lived
wickedly according unto their own mind and pleasure: so shall they be punished
by God according to his will and pleasure. And this punishment also is in this
self same verse more plainly laid out by way of explanation, and it is here
showed to be of two sorts. First, they shall be chastised (or bound) by God,
that they shall not be able to defend themselves against their enemies rushing
and breaking in upon them. 1. They shall be bound by God.
For they which have their hands tied, and which are bound, are not able to
defend themselves against strokes: but he open unto other men's injuries and
stripes, to be beaten at their pleasure. By this means God teaches that all
the aids, weapons, and furniture of war, diligently provided by the
Israelites, shall stand them in no stead, but shall be unprofitable unto them.

2. Sundry nations shall be gathered together against them.
The second punishment is, That sundry peoples, and not one nation only shall
by God be gathered together against them, that they may understand, that
albeit they were left loose and vnbou^d, yet that they should notwithstanding
be oppressed and overcome of so great a number of enemies. Further, to amplify
the matter withal, it is added by God, I will bind them in their lands,
grounds, furrows and dwellings, the which they possess, and plow, and where
they live and dwell daintilie. For the kingdom of Israel was partly on this
side the river Jordan, and partly beyond the river Jordan also. So then the
Israelites shall be punished by God, and that justly and worthily, in both
those countries beyond, and on this side Jordan, the which he compares to a
plowed field.

Verse. 11. And Ephraim is as an heifer used to delight in threshing: but I will
pass by her fair neck: I will make Ephraim to ride: Judah shall plow, and
Iaacob shall break his clods.
An amplification of the equity of this punishment.
AN amplification of this equity and justice in punishing of the^, because that
the Israelites contemned or despised all the labor of God in calling them
back, and dressing and tilling them as it were a field, and mocked even God
himself: the which is an ungodliness to be punished, and worthy of as great
punishment as may be. But because in the former verse God used the Metaphor of
furrows borrowed from husbandmen, and tillage, What the figure Metaphora is,
see Amos cap. 4.12.
and put in that place for dwellings: so he does now also continue the same in
this verse, as he does likewise in the verse following. For by this means and
similitude the great labor of God might the better be expressed and showed in
tilling, plowing, and cherishing both those kingdoms and people, to wit, that
of the Jews and Israelites, as appears by the parable of the vine Isai. 5.

Two parts of this verse.
This verse has two parts. The first appertains unto the kingdom of Israel.
The latter unto the kingdom of Judah. The whole kingdom of Israel is here by
the figure Synecdoche understood by the name (Ephraim) and the kingdom of
Judah, 1. Concerning the kingdom of Israel.
by these words ( Judah and Iaacob.) Therefore as concerning the kingdom of
Israel, or those ten tribes: 2. Concerning the kingdom of Judah. The figure
Synecdoche, what it is, see Amos cap. 5. verse 21.
first God shows what their disposition and nature was under the similitude
of an heifer, the which had rather to tread out or thresh the corn, then to
plow, that is, which was given to pleasure and ease, and would take but little
pain in doing her duty: but wished forthwith to redeiue the fruit of her
labor. For such are the cattle, which had rather to tread out the corn, that
is, quietly and eating to do some thing lightly under the roof and at home,
then to plow abroad and in the fields, that is, 1. The kingdom of Israel.
in the open air, and heat to take great pains and work. Thus then in these
words doubtless is described the nature of dissolute or loose and idle
persons, and such as are altogether given unto pleasures. And albeit these by
nature were such, yet GOD notwithstanding with great diligence dressed and
tilled them. For he used both his law, the which he gave them by Moses: and
also the labor and travail of diverse Prophets, the which he raised up unto
them, that he might ride upon them, and as an honorable Rider, sit upon them,
break them, beat down the fiercenes of their nature, and that he might rule
and reign in their hearts. And these things are declared and made plain by
the self same Metaphor borrowed from horsemen and plowers. Therefore the Lord
says, I have passed by the fairenes of her neck, that is to say, I have laid
an honorable yoke upon the^, and I my self would ride upon that people as upon
mine own peculiar and proper horse for honor sake decked and trimmed by me.
Wherefore these words (I have passed by the fairenes of her neck) are neither
spoken against them in despite, The words of the Prophet are spoken in the
honor of the Israelites, and not in their reproach.
nor yet as if God infulted or triumphed over them, as if God in contempt or
despite cast down, bruised, pressed and trod down with his feet the fair
necks of these men, like as that ungodly Pope of Rome Alexander the third in
reproach trod upon the neck of Frederick the Emperor: but there is in these
words rehearsed a singular benefit of God toward the Israelites, and an honor
for them, that God had them as it were an horse for his own saddle, made much
of them, handled and used them. And this do I refer unto that time, wherein
God gave his law unto all Israel, whereunto I am moved by the argument of the
verse following. For then God when he went about to bring that people under his
yoke, and when as it was at that time a most mighty and strong nation, it is
said then to have had a fairenes of neck, or a fair neck: whereby the nobler
and better kind of horses are wont to be known. Hereunto also appertains
that which is added, I have ridden Ephraim. For God by his Prophets the
interpreters of his law, has very often assayed thoroughly to break that
people, and to bring them in subjection unto him Isai. 5. And thus much of
Israel.

2. The kingdom of Judah.
Now Judah found and felt plentiful fruit by the self same travail and
labor of God. For God did plow and harrow them unto him. By the words of
(plowing and harrowing) I understand the docilitie or aptnes of Judah to
learn, and that same their obedience, whereby it came to pass, that this
kingdom both served God, and also received a most plentiful blessing of God,
and did very well provide for themselves. By which comparison the rebellion of
the Israelites is showed to be the greater. For Judah had no other precepts or
commandments then Israel: and the one was no more diligently dressed and
tilled by God then the other. And yet did not these things profit Israel,
because of the stubbornnes of his mind: but benefited Judah very much because
of his aptnes to learn, and heed taking.

Verse. 12. Sow to your selves in righteousness: reap after the measure of
mercy: break up your fallow ground: for it is time to seek the Lord, till he
come, and rain righteousness upon you.
A Making of the matter more plain. For GOD shows here what manner of riding
upon the necks of the Israelites, that of his was. Namely, that he gave unto
them his law, whereby they were taught to live godly and holily, to be obedient
unto him, and finally to seek and worship the true God. And hereupon there was
promised a great reward, as appears by the second, third, and fifth precept
of the Decalogue or ten Commandments. What the riding and sitting of God upon
us is.
Therefore the giving of the law, and the preaching of the word of God, was,
and is yet at this day that same riding and sitting of God upon us: the which
he that casts away and despises, casts away even God himself, as Christ
tells his Apostles Matthew. 10. ver. 40. saying: He that receives you,
receives me: and he that receives me, receives him that sent me.

Moreover, this verse has two parts. The one sets down that doctrine which
the law of God contains. Two parts of this verse.
And this is twofold. For first the law teaches precepts of the whole
righteousness, 1. The doctrine which the law contains being twofold.
that is, of living godly and justly, the which works the same law wills us
to sow, that is, in very act and deed to perform. The law then given by God
teaches to sow righteousness, and that wholly, that is to say, both that
righteousness, 1. Teaching precepts of al righteousness.
whereby we are commanded to love God with all our heart: and also that
righteousness, whereby we are commanded to love our neighbor as our selves,
that it may be a seed in us, and in our hearts, the which may fructisie or
bring forth fruit, and increase in every good work, as Paul wills the
Colossians cap. 1. ver. 10. where he shows, that he cease not to pray for
them, that they might walk worthy of the Lord, and please him in all things:
being fruit full in all good works, and increasing in the knowledge of God.
Secondly, 2. Promising all kind of good thin^s to the keepers thereof.
the same law promises unto the keepers thereof an harvest of mercy, that is,
every kind of good things, to wit, both spiritual, and also earthly, as Paul
teaches 1. Tim. 4. ver. 8. in these words: Godliness is profitable unto all
things, which has the promise of the life present, and of that that is to
come. And therefore the Psalmist Psalm. 31. ver 19. cries out, and says: How
great is thy goodness which thou have laid up for them that fear thee? and
done to them that trust in thee, even before the sons of men? And this is
more at large declared Deuteronomy. 28. and every wherein the holy Scripture under
the name of (peace.) The same law wills us to break up our fallowe ground,
that is, to cast off the oldeman, to put on the new, that laying aside our
former kind of life, we should consecrate and give over our selves wholly unto
God, and unto his will. For this was the end of the law and of the Prophets, to
teach us new works, that is, such as are contrary unto our corrupt nature, and
fight and strive against the same, the which works we are to do. This is the
fallowed ground of which the Prophet speaks in this place. See what Paul
writes to this effect 3. Colos. ver. 8, 9, 10. But now put ye away even all
these things, wrath, anger, maliciousnes, cursed speaking, filthy speaking out
of your mouth. Lie not one to another, seeing that ye have put off the old
man, with his works, and have put on the new, which is renewed in knowledge
after the image of him that created him. And thus much has the first part of
this verse.

The second part, co^taining a reason, why they ought so to sow and reap;
teaching two things.
The second part contains a reason, why they ought to sow in such sort, and
also to reap in such sort, that is to say, Because the time is come to seek
the Lord: and because that he comes, and will after this sort teach us
righteousness. By which appears two things. First, that God does not at all
times in this manner offer himself unto men, as a gentle Schoolmaster, and
Rider, and our plower, but when as it pleases him. 1. That the benefits of
God are then to be accepted, when they are offered.
Then we must not refuse so singular a benefit when it is proffered. For there
repentance will be too late, which despise the law of God, and his Prophets,
exhorting them unto their duty. And therefore God speaks unto the Jews to
this purpose Zach. 1. ver. 4, 5, 6. saying: Be ye not as your fathers, unto
whom the former Prophets have cried, saying, Thus says the Lord of hosts,
Turn you now (note that he says now, signifying that God his mercy is then
to be embraced, when as it is offered) from your evil ways, and from your
wicked works: but they would not hear nor hearke^ unto me, says the Lord.
Your fathers, where are they? and do the Prophets live for ever? But did not my
words and my statutes, which I commanded by my servants the Prophets take hold
of your fathers? and they returned, and said, As the Lord of hosts has
determined to do unto us, according unto our own ways, and according unto
our works, so has he dealt with us. Secondly, this part of the verse
teaches, that God does no otherwise till us, 2 God teaches us by no other way
but by his word.
no otherwise instruct and learn us, yea also that God is no otherwise found
of us, the^ by that his word, the which was written and delivered by his
servants, least any man should seek or imagine any other way of finding or
worshipping God, then that which appears out of his written word.

Verse. 13. But you have plowed wickedness: ye have reaped iniquity: you have
eaten the fruit of lies: because thou did trust in thine own ways, and
in the multitude of thy strong men.
The Israelites practice the contrary of that they were commanded.
AN Antithesis, or setting down of the contrary unto that which went before,
in the which the rebellion of the Israelites is compared with the former
precepts given by God. For so far off is it, that they obeyed them, that they
took altogether a quite and clean contrary way. For in stead of righteousness
commanded unto the^, they plowed wickedness, that is, they followed and
embraced wickedness in stead of righteousness. The like complaint does God
make against the Jews and Israelites his vineyard Isai. 5. ver. 7. in these
words: Surely the vineyard of the Lord of hosts is the house of Israel, and
the men of Judah are his pleasant plant: and he looked for judgment, but
behold oppression: for righteousness, but behold a crying. These Israelites
therefore of that their plowing do reap iniquity, as a crop springing of
that sowing, and that necessarily. For as James says cap. 1. ver. 27. Pure
religion and undefiled before God even the father, is this, to visit the
fatherless, and widows in their adversity, and to keep himself unspotted
of the world. And as he further writes cap. 3. ver. 15. The fruit of true
wisdom and righteousness is sweet, and every good work with peace. And as
it is ver. 17.18. The wisdom that is from above, is first pure, then
peaceable, gentle, easy to be entreated, full of mercy and good fruits,
without judging, and without hypocrisy. And the fruit of righteousness is
sown in peace, of them that make peace: but the fruit of unrighteousness is
most bitter, and every wicked work, and finally the terror and fear of
conscience. For as Isai says cap. 48. ver. 22. There is no peace unto the
wicked. Such then are the fruits of lying, that is, of idolatry, and such are
the effects of forged religion and doctrine, to wit, all unrighteous works, as
superstition, hypocrisy, denying of the true God, rebellion, and these fruits
proceed from the unclean and unbelieving, who, Though they profess that they
know God, yet (as Paul writes Tit. 1. ver. 16.) by works they deny him, and
are abominable, and disobedient, and unto every good work reprobate. And such
are the wil-worships and superstition of hypocrites, and such like, the which,
as it is Colos. cap. 2. ver. 23. Have in deed a show of wisdom in voluntary
religion and humblenes of mind, and n^^ sp^ring of the body, neither have they
it in any estimation to satisfy the flesh. The cause of the great wickedness
of the Israelites twofold.
Now the true cause and fountain of this wickedness and so great
ungodliness, which the Israelites practiced in stead of righteousness, is
here showed to be twofold. To wit, one, for that they trusted in their own
ways. And these so do, the which prefer the devises of their own mind,
and their good intents (as they call them) before the express word of God: 1.
They trusted in their own ways.
and which think that they shall be safe and happy besides or against the
word of God, to wit, by such means as they themselves have devised, and which
likes them. The second cause and fountain is, for that the self same
Israelites were addicted or stayed upon the multitude of their great and mighty
men, 2. They stayed upon the multitude of their mighty and strong men.
that is, they put their trust in an arm of flesh. The which two sorts of men
no doubt does prefer their own glory, and the glory, power, and wisdom
of men, before God himself, and so consequently do forsake God, cleave unto a
lie, live only after their own fashion and pleasure, not according unto God
his precepts and commandments. And hereof in the end springs all lewdnes,
all superstition, and all ungodliness. And therefore Jeremy 17. ver. 15 there
is a curse pronounced against those that trust in flesh, where he has these
words: Thus says the Lord, oursed be the man that trusts in man: and makes
flesh his arm, and withdraws his heart from the Lord. And Ioh. 5.44. Christ
asks the Jews, saying: How can ye believe, which receive honor one of
another, and seek not the honor that comes of God alone? And in the 12.
chap. ver. 43. John having showed that many of the rulers believing in Christ,
and durst not confess him, for fear they should be cast out of the Sinagogue,
adds this as a cause thereof: For they loved the praise of men, more then the
praise of God.

Verse. 14. Therefore shall a tumult arise among thy people, and all thy
munitions shall be destroyed, as Shalman destroyed Beth-arbel in the day of
battle: the mother with the children was dashed in pieces.
A threatening of most grievous punishments against the contemners
A Denouncing or threatening of most grievous punishments against such contemners
or despisers of God, and rebellious persons against his commandments. For
among them all things are pronounced to be miserably wasted, spoiled and
consumed, and that with civil wars: yea and all their most fortified forts
of that country, and castles built to keep away foreign enemies, shall be
destroyed: and that with civil wars, the which they themselves shall stir
up within themselves one against another. For so do I expound that which is
said, There shall a tumult arise among thy people. Therefore this spoil and
laying waste shall be committed not by foreign enemies, but by the inhabitants
of the country themselves: because the Israelites shall arise one against
another in civil war: the which is a most miserable kind of battle, and
punishment. For in civil wars all things always are most miserable. Yet
thus does God oftentimes punish idolatrous people, and Kings, to entangle them
with home-warres, and to set them together by the ears within themselves. And
that this so afterward came to pass, the history of the kingdom of Israel
does confirm or prove 2. King. cap. 14. and so following. Neither shall this
laying waste, ruin, and destroying of the whole country and the cities
thereof come to pass only by the means of civil wars: but it shall
moreover fall out to be so great, that there cannot any greater be made by any
enemy, be he never so mortal and deadly. For it shall be such, as was that of
the country of Arbel, the which overthrow was given by Salmanazar 2. King. 18.
ver. 34. for there the proud captains of Saneherib vpbrayed the Israelites with
that overthrow, when as they ask them, Where is the God of Hamah, and of
Arpad? Meaning that Arpad, in which Arbel was, was destroyed by Salmanazar.
Arbel was in a most fearful and cruel manner destroyed by Salmanazar, which
here is called Shalman, the fame of which overthrow was then fresh among the
Israelites.
And this country of Arbel is beyond the river Euphrates, and at that time the
fame of that overthrow was come unto the neighbor people and nations dwelling
near unto it, yea even unto the Israelites, as of a destruction and overthrow
of things very strange, fearful, and such whereof the like had not been
heard before. Finally, the mother with her children shall by the inhabitants
be dashed against the rocks and stones, the which is a kind of barbarous and
outrageous cruelty, such as the Babylonians in the taking of Jerusalem used
against the poor Jews, and therefore they pray unto God that he in his
justice will cause them to be requited and paid with the like Psalm. 137. ver.
8.9. O daughter of Babel, worthy to be destroyed, blessed shall he be that
rewards thee, as thou have served us. Blessed shall he be, that takes and
dasheth thy children against the stones.

Verse. 15. So shall Beth-el do unto you, because of your malicious wickedness:
in a morning shall the king of Israel be destroyed.
A reason of this their punishment.
THe rendering of a reason, whereby their idolatry set up in Beth-el is drawn
into hatred. For that is the cause of all this evil and punishment. Lastly,
the former punishment is here amplified. For because of it their kings also
shall be destroyed, and that in a moment, so that no hope shall remain and be
left unto them.

CAP. 11.
Verse. 1. When Israel was a child, then I loved him, and called my son out
of Egypt.
This chapter with those that follow somewhat differ in argument or matter from
the former.
THis chapter together with the rest that follow, contains another argument in
some sort diverse and differing from the former. For unto this place both the
judgments and also the threatenings of God have been rehearsed against the
Israelites because of their sins. But now henceforth even unto the e^^ of the
book the continual bounty, and immovable good will of God for his mercy and
covenant sake, is declared toward those which of those Israelites shall
repent, and fear God. And albeit in this chapter, as well as in those that
follow the Prophet do make mention also of the sins of the Israelites, and
likewise of the punishments hanging over their heads for the same: yet is this
done not principally, but by the way and by occasion: namely to this end, that
the mercy and grace of God may appear to be the greater, who nevertheless
saves such as they were, that is to say, persons so disobedient and worthy of
such a punishment. Further it may appear by the fifth verse of this chapter,
The time about the which this sermon with those that follow, was made.
that this sermon with those that follow, were made, after that the kingdom
of Israel was now become tributary unto the King of Assyria, the which was done
first by Manahem King of Israel, who yielded to pay a great tribute unto Pull
King of Assyria, coming up against him, as it is recorded 2. King. 15. verse.
19. in those words: Then Pull the son of Asshur came against the land: and
Menahem gave Pull a thousand talents of silver, that his hand might be with him,
and establish the kingdom in his hand. So then the former sermons seem to
have been before this time. And this whole place has a rehearsal of the
covenant of God with the Israelites, because that was the most true foundation
of this perpetual and continued good will of God toward this people
repenting, that is, toward the remnants thereof. For God for this cause out of
this most stubborn people chose some notwithstanding.

Two parts of this verse.
As for this verse, there are two parts of it: one wherein God shows his free
love toward that people: The other, in the which he rehearses a most assured
argument or token, 1. God his free love unto this people.
and a most notable effect of this his love. The love of God, and the same, as
I said, most free, is showed in these words: When Israel was yet a child, I
loved him. 2. A notable argument and effect of the same
For I take the hebrew word (ki) in this place not so much to note the cause,
as the time, wherein God showed that they were loved of him. He therefore loved
this people, when as it was yet a child. The word (child) by the figure
Metalepsis I understand of the miserable and servile or bond condition, 1 What
the figure Metalepsis is, see Oseas cap. 4. verse. 18. What the figure Metaphora
is, see Amos cap. 4. ver. 12.
wherein this people at that time was when as God began to love them: and
metaphorically also of the age and weakness of them in regard of their enemies,
to wit, the Egyptians. Therefore when as God at the first showed that he
earnestly loved these ten tribes (of the which the kingdom of Israel did
consist) they were among the Egyptians, weak, feeble, and impotent or without
strength like unto children, and were bond, and entreated hardly: for the word
(Nagnar) signifies also a servant and one that is bond, as also does the
word (puer) among the Latins, and (pais) with the Greeks. Israel then or at
that time was indeed a child, that is to say, both weak, and also a servant,
when as God loved him. Concerning this their estate, and God his then mercy
toward them, confer this place with that of the Psam. 81. verse. 6, 7. where
we find it thus: I have withdrawn his shoulder from the burden, and his
hands have left the pots. Thou calledst in affliction, and I delivered thee,
and answered thee in the secret of the thunder. And with Exodus 20. verse. 2.
where God himself puts them in mind both of their former condition, and of
his deliverance speaking to them in this wise: I am the Lord thy God, which
have brought thee out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage.

Now this was a most large and plentiful testimony or witness of his love, in
that he brought the self same tribes out of Egypt, having now adopted or
chosen them unto his sons. Which miracle and work of God is most known.
This place applied unto Christ.
But Math. cap. 2. ver. 15. applies this same unto Christ, whom God the father
for a time led aside into Egypt because of the persecution of Herod. In the
which it is true that the covenant of GOD with the Jews at that time seemed to
be utterly broken off, when as GOD because of their unthankfulness withdrewe
his son out of the whole country of Israel: and then it seemed to be
again restored, when as afterward he called the self same his son back
again into the same land of Israel. But, as I said, Matthew applies these
things unto Christ, because that the same thing was to be fulfilled in the
head, the which figuratively and in a shadow was done in the whole body.

Verse. 2. They called them, but they went thus from them: they sacrificed unto
Baalim, and burnt incense to images.
An amplification of the former benefit.
THe first amplification of the former benefit of GOD by the contrary, that is,
by the contrary stubbornnes of this people, who had received so great a
benefit from God. For albeit they were most often put in mind hereof by the
Prophets, to acknowledge the same, yet for all that did they not acknowledge
God, or consecrate and give themselves unto him: nay the more diligently they
were called back unto this duty, so much the more disobediently they
departed from him, and forsaking the same true God their benefactor, did cleave
both unto Baalims, and unto their images. This is the sum of the
amplification.

2 Things here to be noted.
But there are two things here to be noted. The one, to wit, that God was not
contented once, or to have bestowed one benefit only upon the Israelites, 1 The
bestowing and continuing of benefits upon them.
wherewith notwithstanding he called them as it were from death unto life: but
also continued them afterward. For he raised up unto them, and gave them
continually Prophets, and his servants, the which might put them in mind of
their duty toward God. And so God promises by Moses Deuteronomy. 18. verse. 15. That
he will raise up unto them a Prophet like unto him from among them: even of
their brethren, unto whom they should hearken. And Act. 7. verse. 37. this is
again confirmed by the Martyr Steven. And likewise Zach. 1.

2 That thereby they are not bettered, but wax worse and worse.
The other point to be noted is, that the Israelites all this notwithstanding
became the harder, and the worse, departed the farther, and the more from God,
by how much they were called back more nearly and often unto him, the which no
doubt is a show and a note of desperate, or unrecoverable and past and all hope
disobedience and stubbornnes of mind.

Verse. 3. I led Ephraim also, as one should bear them in his arms: but they
knew not that I healed them.
The second amplification of the same benefit.
THe second amplification of the same benefit, taken from the place: but the
person only by whom they were admonished or warned, is here changed. For in
the verse before he speaks of the Prophets, but in this place of God. The
Israelites therefore despised not only the Prophets of God, but also God
himself teaching them, and diverse ways going about to bring them into the
way again. Nay moreover (that which is a sign of brasen-faced shamelesnes,
and vnamendable rebellion against God) the more earnestly they were by God
brought into the way, and called back from idols, the more egerly and hotly did
they worship those their idols: and embraced them the more straightly and
sweetly in their arms and bosoms. Finally, they never acknowledged themselves
to have bin relieved by God in their greatest afflictions (for here he
compares afflictions unto most grievous diseases, and resembles the
deliverance from those afflictions unto the healing and medicine of a grief:)
but such was the obstinate and stubborn malice of their mind, and their
incurable idolatry, they attributed all benefits, all deliverances of theirs
unto their idols, as unto the authors of them, and for this cause sacrificed
unto them, This place especially concerns the enemies of God his people, but
generally all such as do imitate them in the like sins.
and not unto the true God, as has bin showed before cap. 4. ver. 14.8. ver.
11. And of this complains God against them by the Prophet Joel cap. 3. ver.
5. after this manner: Ye have taken my silver and my gold, and have carried
into your temples my goodly and pleasant things.

Verse. 4. I led them with cords of a man, even with the bands of love, and I
was to them, as he that takes off the yoke from their jaws: and I laid the
meat unto them.
The third amplification of the former benefit.
THe third amplification of the same benefit described before. And it is taken
from the entire or earnest and most loving affection of God himself. For there
could not any thing be done more kindly unto the Israelites, then it which then
was done by God unto them: neither could there any thing be performed more
lovingly unto them. For God witnesses that at that time he drew and brought
forth the Israelites by all those ways and means, whereby any thing is done or
bestowed upon any man heartily, lovingly, and friendly. For he defended them
against the Egyptians egerly pursuing after them, he fed them with meat from
heaven by the space of 40. years, he kept their garments whole and sound in
the wilderness, he saved them harmless from wild beasts, he led them in all
their whole journey with great carefulnes by a fiery pillar by night, and by a
cloud by day. And thus much does Moses testify of God in his song, Deuter.
32. ver. 10, 11. when he says: He found him in the land of the wilderness, in
a wast, and roaring wilderness: he led him about, he taught him, and kept him,
as the apple of his eye. As an egele stirs up her nest, fluttereth over her
birds, stretches out her wings, takes them, and bears them on her wings, so
the Lord alone led him, and there was no strange god with him. What then could
be done more kindly and courteously toward them? And truly Paul from this
place, terms that good will wherewith God loves us, philanthropia, or love
toward man. Tit. 3. v. 4. So then, God at that time brought them forth, and
afterward cherished them and made much of them with the cords of a man, or of
love, and the same most thick, that is, with most manifest and many signs,
ways, and tokens of his love: and did in like manner for them, as he that
takes the yoke from the jaws of a beast, that the yoke wring not, nor
strangle not the beast: and finally lays meat before it, which the beast may
eat. After this manner God relieved, delivered, and nourished that miserable
and poor people perishing with famine and labor in Egypt. By how much the
greater is their ingratitude or unthankfulness, who not only despised and set
at naught so great a benefit, but also bestowed upon them by God with so
loving a mind.

Verse. 5. He shall no more return into the land of Egypt: but Asshur shall be
his King, because they refused to convert.
A threatening of sundry punishments and miseries against the Israelites.
A Threatening, the which is made against the Israelites, because of the former
rebellion, and the same of many punishments and miseries. And first of all,
because they would not repent, and refused to return unto the true God, being
never so much warned thereunto, the Prophet threatens that it shall come to
pass, that they shall obey, and be subject unto strangers and foreign kings,
and those not their neighbors, or near unto them (as were the kings of Egypt)
but such as dwelt most far from them, and therefore such as should be most
fierce and cruel unto them, as the kings of countries lying most far from us
are wont to be, when as once they get the upper hand and soueraignitie over us.
For all things are disposed and ordered among us by their governors and
presidents, (who are wont to be most covetous and cruel) there is none or very
seldom fellowship and dealing of us with them, because of the difference of
language and manners: finally there is no love of them to us ward, whom they
suspect of rebellion. Therefore such kings do vex and burden the people
distant so far from them, both with garrisons and with tributes, that as much
as they can, they may diminish their strength, and take from them all
possibility of shaking off their yoke from their necks. Hereof it comes that
this kind of punishment is reckened up for a great curse Deuteronomy. 28. ver. 49.
etc. The Lord (says Moses) shall bring upon thee a nation from far, even
from the end of the world, flying swift as an egle: a nation, whose tongue
thou shall not understand. A nation of a fierce countenance, which will not
regard the person of the old, nor have compassion of the young. Wherefore here
is threatened a most grievous punishment, when as it is foretold the Israelites
that they must take upon them and come under the yoke and government of such
foreign kings, They shall not return into Egypt. Neither in deed should they
at any time have returned thither to stay there, or to seek aid thence, as it
appears Deuteronomy. 17. ver. 16. where among other things the which the king that
the Israelites should chose over them was to avoid, it is said: In any wise he
shall not prepare him many horses, nor bring the people again to Egypt, for to
increase the number of horses, seeing the Lord has said unto you, Ye shall
hence forth go no more that way. Again the Lord says unto them by Ierem.
cap. 42. ver. 14, 16. But if ye say, we will not dwell in this land, neither
hear the voice of the Lord your God, saying. Nay, but we will go into the
land of Egypt, where we shall see no war, nor hear the sound of the trumpet,
nor have hunger of bread, and therewill we dwell, then the sword that ye
feared, shall take you there in the land of Egypt, and the famine, for the
which ye care, shall there hang upon you in Egypt, and there shall ye die.
Likewise Esaias 31. They should not, I say, therefore at any time go into Egypt,
but trust and stay only upon the promises and help of God alone: yet
notwithstanding should their bondage and subjection be more tolerable under
their neighbors, with whom they had some traficke and dealing, then under
these nations so far distant from them, namely the Assyrians, whose
tributaries they now were, as we have seen but a little before 2. King. cap.
15.

Another just punishment.
Asshur shall be their King, that is, the king of the Israelites. And this also
is a just punishment of their disobedience and stubbornnes. For they were not
converted, or rather returned unto the worshipping of the true God by any
means, by any exhortations, by any care of God, or admonitions of his
Prophets. Wherefore they are justly thus punished by God. For like as they
took unto themselves a strange god, so shall they also have and feel a strange
king. Thus then being no way to be reclaimed, they are like unto those whom
Christ complains of Matt. 11. ver. 16, 17. when he says: But whereunto shall
I liken this genration? It is like unto little children which sit in the
markets, and call unto their fellows, and say, We have pyped unto you, and ye
have not daunced: we have mourned unto you, and ye have not lamented.

Verse. 6. And the sword shall fall on his cities, and shall consume his
bars, and devour them, because of their own counsels.
AN other kind of punishment, the which is threatened unto Idolatours, namely,
Another kind of punishment.
namely, that it shall come to pass, that their most fensed cities: and also
their members or bars shall perish. And by the name of members or bars, I
do understand both the citizens themselves, and also the villages, the which
belonged and were appertaining unto those fortified and fenced cities, as
appears Ios. 15. Therefore not only they themselves shall be pressed with
that foreign and heavy yoke; but also all their aids shall be laid wast:
which thing came to pass both by their civil, and also by their foreign
wars. Yea (they shall be consumed) that is to say, they shall not only be
destroyed in part, but they shall utterly be cut off, that they be not any more
a people. And this shall fall out (because of their counsels) to wit, their
idolatry and rebellion against God. See before cap. 10. ver. 6. So God
threatens them with utter destruction Deuteronomy. 28. ver. 20. where he speaks by
Moses: The Lord shall send upon thee cursing, trouble, and shame, in all that
which thou set thine hand to do, until thou be destroyed, and perish
quickly, because of the wickedness of thy works, whereby thou have forsaken me.

Verse. 7. And my people are bent to rebellion against me: though they called
them to the most high, yet none at all would exalt him.
A Rendering of a reason. For he shows why God will so punish them for their
counsels, to wit, A reason of their punishment.
because the people them selves that is, all of them remain turned away from
God, and do stick fast in the same stubbornnes of mind, how much so ever
they be admonished or warned to the contrary never so much, and sundry ways
by the Prophets and other the servants of God called back again unto the true
God. I expound the particle (vau) which some translate (and) by the word
(for.) that it be either a yielding of a reason, or else serve to lay out the
matter more plain.

3. Things to be noted.
But in this verse there are three things to be observed or noted. First, where
as it is said, My people are bent, or cleaves unto that rebellion, or turning
away from God, the which they have once made. 1 The word people.
For by the word (people) there is not only one or two understood, but all
of them are thereby noted and comprehended. This rebellion therefore of the
Israelites against God, as that of all idolatours is wont to be, was common and
general, which left but a few sound, free from that wickedness, and untouched.
One or twain may peradventure be excepted: but the greater part of the whole
kingdom is questionless here condemned, as Elias in his time seems to
complain unto God 1. King. 19. ver. 10. when he says unto him: The children
of Israel have forsaken thy covenant, broken down thine altars, and slain thy
Prophets with the sword: and I only am left, and they seek my life to take it
away. Hereunto also appertains that which follows by and by: They do not
exalt him at all, or together, or one with another. For this phrase or manner
of speaking shows, that there was but a very few left, the which in that
people did worship the true God. He therefore declares that there was a
departing made from God generally, and that idolatry was received every where
in all places, and of all persons. In the second place is to be noted, that it
is said, (My people.) 2 The word (my)
For this wickedness of the Israelites was so much the more foul and shameful,
in as much as God had chosen, vouchsafed and severed this people by an
especial covenant for to be his own proper, and for an inheritance unto
himself. And therefore God says unto the Israelites Exodus 19. ver. 5. Now
therefore if ye will he are my voice indeed, and keep my covenant, then ye
shall be my chief treasure above all people, though all the earth be mine. And
in consideration of God his especial favors vouchsafed this people before all
others, David also Psalm. 147. ver. 20. witnesses of God saying: He has not
dealt so with every nation, neither have they known his judgments. The third
thing to be noted in this verse is that which is added, 3. The rest of the
sentence noting the desperate stubbornnes of the whole nation.
Though they call them to the most high, yet they do not together, or at all
exalt God, or acknowledge him, forsaking and casting away their Idols. For in
these words is described the desperate stubbornnes and disobedience of this
people and nation. One or two peradventure were converted unto God by the
preaching of the Prophets: but the whole never a whit: neither was there any
Edict or Decree made by the Kings, that leaving and forsaking their Idols, they
should embrace and receive the true worship of God according unto his word, and
law given by Moses. There were then some godly left among them, and chosen of
God among that people, which were moved with his threatenings, and did convert
or turn themselves, but those were very few, and a small number. But the
body it self of the people, the public state and company of that whole
kingdom retained and maintained their idolatry: and mocked and condemned
those few godly persons. Thus doubtless did all evils grow and prevail among
the Israielites, and especially idolatry, that when as Osea their last king
would have taken it away, he could not. He did in some part diminish or lessen
it: but he took it not clean away. For it is said of him 2. King. cap. 17.
ver. 2. That he did evil in the sight of the Lord, but not as the Kings of
Israel, that were before him.

Verse. 8. How shall I give thee up, Ephraim? how shall I deliver thee, Israel?
how shall I make thee, as Admah? how shall I set thee, as Zeboim? mine heart is
turned within me: my repentings are rouled together.
A confirmation be^onging unto those few that repented at the threatenings of
the Prophets.
A Confirmation, which appertains unto those few which repented at the
threatenings of the Prophets, and were in deed godly: but this promise of God,
and so tender affection of mind belongs not unto the whole body of the
people. Therefore albeit that same small remnant deserved to perish also with
the whole body: yet because they retained the seed of true godliness, and
had not utterly cast away the remembrance of the covenant, as those other
wicked ones had done: so also does GOD promise that it shall come to pass,
that he will not destroy them, and utterly root them out, as he will those
obstinate and stiff necked ones, but will of his great mercy preserve them,
and for his own free promises made unto such godly persons.

Two things to be noted.
But in this verse there are two things to be noted. To wit, the promise of GOD
unto such as truly repent: and the phrase or manner of delivery of this
promise in words. As touching the promise, 1. The promise.
it comes in sum and effect to this point: That those which fear God,
albeit they be often punished, 2 The phrase or manner of speaking in the
delivery of the same.
are never notwithstanding utterly destroyed, or do perish. For GOD will have
his Church, whose members they are, to be perpetual, as it is in the Psalm. 89.
ver 29. where he promises that he will establish his covenant with David, and
with the godly of his posterity, saying: His seed also will I make to endure
for ever, and his throne as the days of heaven. And Psalm. 72. do the
faithful in the midst of all their troubles make their earnest prayers unto
God, assuring themselves, that how soever for their sins they are for a
season afflicted, yet shall they never finally and universally be consumed. So
then the godly are never in such manner destroyed by God, as was Sodoma, or as
was Seboim, or as Adama, the which cities were utterly destroyed by God as
appears Genesis 19. ver. 24, 25. Then the Lord rayned upon Sodom and upon
Gomorah brimstone and fire from the Lord out of heaven, and overthrew those
cities, and all the plain, and all the inhabitants of the cities, and that
that grew upon the earth. And Deuteronomy. 29. ver. 23. God threatens that all that
land (he means of the stubborn and obstinate sinners) shall burn with
brimstone and salt, it shall not be sown, nor bring forth, nor any grass
shall grow therein, like as in the overthrowing of Sodom and Gomorah, Admah
and Zeboim, which the Lord overthrew in his wrath and in his anger. Which
examples GOD would have to remain unto the ages to come of his fearful anger
against obstinatlie wicked sinners Amos 4.2. Peter 2.6. And most plainly in
the Epistle of Jude ver. 7. where, like as in the other places, it is expreslie
noted, that these fearful judgments are set forth to the terrifying of all
like obstinate sinners. As (says Jude) Sodom and Gomorrhe, and the cities
about them, which in like manner as they did, committed, and followed strange
flesh, are set forth for an ensample, and suffer the vengeance of eternal
fire.

there is no variablenes, nor shadowing by turning.

Verse. 9. I will execute the fiercenes of my wrath: I will not return to
destroy Ephraim: for I am God, and not man: the holy one in the midst of thee,
and I will not enter into the city.
A confirmation of the former promise, with a reason of the same.
A Confirmation of the former promise together with a reason of the same. God
therefore promises that he will not execute upon those remnants of Ephraim,
the punishments which they deserve, and that he will not be angry against
them, accordingly as their sins do provoke his wrath. He will indeed punish
them, but he will not overthrow them: the which notwithstanding the just and
righteous heat of the vengeance of God against al sins of men requires to
be done. God then will abate of his right, and in them the mercy of God shall
triumph above judgment. Finally, he will not enter into their cities, to
destroy them: but will suffer them both to be, and also to be inhabited by
them. These things first came to pass when as many of these ten tribes both
under Ezechias, and also Josias Kings of Judah went up to Jerusalem unto the
Temple of God 2. Chro. 30. and 34. Secondly, under the Gospel of Christ, when
as by his preaching God converted unto him and saved the Israelites, A twofold
reason of the confirmation of this promise.
and Galileans, and Samaritanes.

The reason of this promise follows, and the same twofold. First, from the
nature of the true God, It is God that speaks these things, 1. From the
nature of the true God.
and not man. And these two are opposed or set one against another, as
constancy against inconstancy, that which is unchangeable against that which
is changeable. And so does Samuel reason against Saul touching the certainty
of the renting of the kingdom from him, because God had so decreed, who is not
changeable 1. Sam. 15.29. For indeed (says Samuel) the strength of Israel will
not lie, nor repent: for he is not a man that he should repent. So then look
what God has once decreed touching the saving of his, the same is established,
and not to be moved or changed. For God does not change his sentence and
mind, as men change, and therefore Gods thoughts are not like unto men's
thoughts, as he himself witnesses Isai 55. ver. 8. where he says: For my
thoughts are not your thoughts, neither are your ways my ways. Finally, the
gifts of God toward his are without repentance, as Paul writes Romans 11. ver.
29. For the gifts and calling of God are without repentance. God therefore will
of his mercy preserve those that are his. Secondly, 2. By the declation and
laying open of this nature by two titles or porperties.
by the declaration of this nature of God is confirmed also that the remnants
of Israel shall be saved. For as Paul Romans 9. ver. 27. alleges out of Isai
cap. 1. ver. 9. Though the number of Israel were as the sand of the sea, yet
shall but a remnant be saved. For otherwise it should come to pass, that all
Israel by reason of their sins, should be as Sodom, and Gomorah, as Isaias in
the former place reports. This nature of God is here declared by two titles
and properties of the same, to wit: for that God is strong, and holy. He is
strong, as namely whose decree and will no creature can let, 1. God is strong.
no nor yet stay so much as one minute from execution in due and just time: for
he remoueth all impediments or lets forthwith. Secondly, he is holy, yea, and
that in the midst of them, to sanctify them, 2. God is holy.
and blot out their offenses by Christ. For their sins are they, which
otherwise do stay the effect of GOD his mercy and promise concerning the
saving of those remnants. But he which is holy, will sanctify those remnants:
for to that end he is said to be in the midst of his elect and chosen, that he
may sanctify them: and also that he may be sanctified by them, that is, be
served and worshipped. So then God will save, and does save them for the
keeping of his worship and glory. And these two titles are in this place
rehearsed very fitly, to answer the sundry objections, the which do come
into the minds and consciences of the godly, when as they do think of these
promises of preserving them in the midst of the ruin and going to decay of the
world.

Verse. 10. They shall walk after the Lord: he shall roar like a lion: when he
shall roar, then the children of the west shall fear.
The first amplification of the benefit ordained for the repentant.
THe first amplification of the benefit ordained for them that repent, and
described before. And this is taken from the adding or coming of another
benefit unto it. For God adds benefits upon benefits, and heapeth them
upon those that are his. Then the godly shall not be destroyed, that is, shall
not be rooted out: nay moreover they shall follow Jehovah, or walk after the
Lord. For God shall in such sort change their hearts, that they shall embrace,
profess, allow him, and his precepts and commandments both in faith, and also
in an holy life: for this is to walk after the Lord. Further, the manner,
time, and place of the performance of this benefit is here expressed. The
manner of this benefit.
The manner, for that God shall roa^e as it were a lion, to stir and rouse up
them to follow him, albeit they were never so drowsy and dead of sleep
before. And they shall tremble and fear, and be moved at that roaring of God.
They shall therefore awake being pierced with the fear of the judgments of
God, and shall at the last run unto God calling them. This was done
oftentimes: The time.
First, when as Ezechias, and Josias kings of Judah did by their letters and
messengers stir up those which were left of the godly of those ten tribes,
to worship the true God. Secondly, when as Judas Maccabaeus, and his father did
the like. Lastly, and most fully when as Christ himself did it by himself:
and also by his Apostles afterward, and through the preaching of the Gospel
made by them. The which time especially is here noted. For God threatened the
unbelieving world, and does threaten it, when as the doctrine of the Gospel
and of reconciliation is propounded or set forth unto it, if the world shall
then refuse and despise the same. The place.
Last of all the place is noted, from the sea or from the wrest, that is to
say, from the utmost parts of the promised land, the which was bounded and
enclosed with the west, that is to say, with the Syrian sea: and the lake of
Tyberias, the which also is called the sea. The godly therefore from all places
shall run unto God especially, when Christ preaches, being strooken with the
fear of the judgments of God: the like was done afterward at the preaching of
the Apostles: and last of all the same shall fall out, when as the same Jews in
the end of the world shall at the last be converted unto Christ.

Verse. 11. They shall fear as a sparrow out of Egypt, and as a dove out of the
land of Asshur, and I will place them in their houses, says the Lord.
The second amplification by the access or increase of a third benefit.
THe second amplification, by the adding or coming to of the third benefit,
and the confirmation of the former is set before by the earnest repeating of
the same. For otherwise this thing might seem a matter incredible or not to be
believed, when as those ten tribes were in such sort dispersed, and some of
them were in banishment and captivity in Egypt, and othersome in Assyria. But
the Lord will gather them unto himself both out of Egypt, and also out of
Assyria, to wit, by the preaching of the Gospel of Christ. And finally he will
add this third benefit unto them, that afterward they shall remain safe in
their own houses, that is, in the Church of God: and secondly in their own
land. Which came to pass when as they served God under Ezechias and Josias,
and afterward under Christ.

CAP. 12.
Verse. 1. Ephraim compasses me about with lies, and the house of Israel with
deceit: but Judah yet rules with God, and is faithful with the Saints.
The drift of this chapter is the same with that which went before.
FIrst I refer this verse, which in the chapter before going is reckoned for the
tweltfth, unto this place and chapter, as the beginning of the same. And as for
this chapter the drift and purpose of the same is all one with that which went
next before, namely, that God may witness his exceeding mercy and bounteousnes,
and the same free and perpetual toward the godly, and his elect, to the end
that they may trust in God, and turn unto him, and hope well in the midst of
affliction or trouble. And therefore the sins of men, as for example of the
Israelites, are in such sort set down in this place, that they be void of
all excuse: and on the other side the constant counsel and decree of God in
saving his, even out of that same wicked people is added that the grace of God
may appear to be the more excellent: and the more free without any deserving.
So that as Paul speaks Romans 5. verse. 20. Where sin abounded, there the
grace of God abounded much more. This is the drift of the whole chapter. But
God begins with the reckoning up of the sins of that nation or people, A
rehearsal of the sins of the Israelites.
to wit, of the Israelites, the remnants whereof repenting he spares
notwithstanding, yea, and yet now also he daily spares the godly sons of
ungodly parents, as us namely, which are borne of Idolatrous parents. Moreover
that he may show those sins to be most grievous, he does both set down
their antiquity, or the time and beginning of them: and also their most evil
effects, and by comparing of the Israelites, whom Oseas here reproves, with
their forefathers, of whom they did so greatly glory, he proves them to be
most heinous. As for the original or beginning of their sinning within
themselves it is very old and ancient: The Israelites sinners of old.
For these Israelites do not now first of all make a beginning to sin
against God, but have done it long ago, and that most faithlesly, and when as
they had as yet no home examples of public or general apostasy or falling
away from God. Where they themselves were the first authors of this evil unto
their brethren also, to wit, they were ringleaders unto the Jews to fall away
from the true worship of God. And therefore Ezech. cap. 16 verse. 46. tells
them, saying: Thine elder sister is Samaria, and her daughters that dwell at
thy left hand, and thy younger sister, that dwells at thy right hand, is
Sodom, and her sisters.

The time of their falling away, and their shamelesnes in the same.
Wherefore in this verse is set down both the time of this first falling away of
the Israelites from God, and the same public or general, that is to say, of
the whole nation: and also their unbridled shamelesnes, when as Judah at the
same time notwithstanding did as yet keep and generally retain the true
worship of God, and pure religion of their fathers and faith of the Saints
whole and sound. The Ephraimites compassed me about, that is, the whole house
or kingdom of Israel (the which comprehended the ten tribes) 1. King. 12.
ver 19, 20. compassed me about, and deceived me on every side, says the Lord,
with a lie and deceit. The metaphor is taken from the subtilty of those men,
What the figure Metaphora is, see Amos cap. 4 ver. 12.
which deceive a man, whom they make show, and feign that they would reverence,
entertain, and honor, most shamefully and treacherously under the color of
attending upon him, that is, under a show of duty, and as it were guarding and
defending of him. So the Israelites falling away from the kingdom of Judah,
from the true priesthood, the true worship of God the true Temple, would seem
notwithstanding most busily to worship God, and also most holily, when as they
set up and ordain the worship of the Calves in Dan and Beth^el 1. King. 12.
ver. 26. and so to the end of the chapter. But all this worship was but deceit,
the which was done unto God, when as in truth not he but Idols were worshipped
by them: it was a lie, because that then God was worshipped, not according to
his word, but according to the devises and dreams of men. Confer this place
with 2. King. cap. 17. verse. 9. and so following. All idolators under the show
of duty and religion do mock and deceive God.
So then under the color and show of duty and religion these Israelites and
all Idolators do most grievously, and shamefully lie unto God, and craftily
compass him about, as if they were his guarde, whom notwithstanding so much
as in them lies, they do herein deceive, mock, and rob of his honor. And
doubtless this sentence refuteth or overthrows all the reasons and good
intents of Idolators be they in show never so glorious.

The Israelites fall first away.
Moreover, these ten tribes then fell away at that time, when as Judah did yet
still lawfully hold that government and kingdom granted unto them by God:
and when as the whole nation remained, and continued constantly, yea and
generally, in the worship of God, and faith of their Elders, and of the Saints,
as were Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Moses, David, etc. Wherefore the beginning of
this falling away came first from the Israelites, and the same provoking and
stirring up themselves unto this departure or evil without any example of
their brethren, to wit, the kingdom of Judah, or of their ancestors and
elders. By how much the more shameful their wickedness appears for to be.
Thus Israel at that time fell away, when as the reign of Judah was lawful
over them (for by the appointment of the mighty God the house of David had rule
over them all) and also when as the worship of God was yet pure, and true faith
whole and sound in the other tribes, that is, in the tribe of Judah and
Benjamin.

Verse. 2. Ephraim is fed with the wind, and follows after the East wind: he
increases daily lies and destruction, and they do make a covenant with
Asshur, and oil is carried into Egypt.
The second amplification of the falling away of the Israelites.
THe second amplification of this departure and falling away of the Israelites,
taken from the most lamentable issue and effect ensuing thereupon, among
themselves first, and secondly among the Jews their neighbors, and imitating
or following their sins. And first of all among the Israelites themselves this
was a double effect of their departure from the worship of God, and kingdom of
Judah, 1. They multiply their lies.
namely, for that feeding themselves with those their vain devises they do
multiply, and daily more and more increase both their lies, and also their
misery and destruction: and secondly for that having now manifestly shaken off
the help of God utterly, 2 Forsaking God, they buy the help of Infidels, and
that most dearly.
they do seek the leagues of people that are infidels, as of the Assyrians
and Egyptians, unto whom they bring most large and precious gifts Ezech. 16.
Thus the sin of Idolatry in especial, never stands and stays in that
first degree, where it first began^ but daily grows and increases, until
that in the end it lead (...) wholly from God, and utterly destroy us. And
this is the cause of the growing of it from worse to worse, for that men do
feed themselves with the wind, that is to say, do please and like themselves in
their forged superstitions, and do think the same to be a most safe defense
against the threatenings of God the which are extant in his word against
idolators. Therefore whatsoever men forge and devise in the worshipping of GOD,
the same does the Prophet call The wind, and the East wind, that is to say, a
most pestilent and most hurtful, and vain invention. From that fountain do
daily spring greater and greater evils and sins. For deceits and lies do
increase daily both toward God and also toward men. For after that the fear
of the true God is taken away from men, there is now no conscience, as Varro
also affirms. Surely so that hypocrites may beguile men only, they have no
regard at all of God, whom they do not truly know any longer after they
have once cast away his true worship and word. But as they multiply lies: so
do they also their own destruction and misery: for according unto the
greatness of their sins, so also do the judgments of God therein become the
sharper, and are multiplied. Finally in the end they grow to this pass, that
these idolators do trust in men, and not any longer in God, seek the help of
then, and not of God: and procure the same unto themselves as things profitable
for themselves, with great sums of money, and paying well for them
notwithstanding. And so did the Israelites 2. King. 15. verse. 19. Then Pull the
son of Asshur came against the land, and Menahem gave Pull a thousand talents
of silver, Menahem redeemeth peace at the hand of the king of the Assyrians at
a great price, to wit, 2. hundred thousand pound at the least.
that his hand might be with him, and establish the kingdom in his hand. So
does Achaz king of Judah: and experience it self teaches this to be true in
other Princes at this day.

Verse. 3. The Lord has also a controversy with Judah, and will visit Iaacob
acording to his ways: according to his works will he recompense him.
Another most lamentable effect of the trasgression of the Israelites lighting
upon their brethren the Jews, imitating their sins.
ANother effect most lamentable of the same transgression of the Israelites
against God falling not upon themselves, but upon the Jews, a people near
unto them, to wit, their brethren, and who imitated or followed this Idolatry
of the Israelites, and therefore complaint is made against them 2. King. 17.
verse. 19. where it is said: Yet Judah kept not the commandments of the Lord
their God, but walked according to the fashion of Israel, which they vised.
Read before from the 13. verse of this self same 17. chapter concerning this
matter also. Wherein may seem to be the second amplification of the former
wickedness of the Israelites. So then the Jews also shall be punished by God.
And there is nothing more usual and more easy unto men, then to follow the
vices one of another: but God which is just punishes these also which are the
imitators and followers of other men's sins. For he hates sin in all men and
people whatsoever, whether it be in them by the imitatio^ of others, or by any
proper and free motion and inclination of him that so sins. Wherefore these
idolatrous Israelites sowed a controversy between God and Judah, or Jacob,
because they provoked the Jews to sin by their example. And sin stirs
up, and sows diuorcements and strifes or controversies between us and GOD.
And accordingly unto this does Isai cap. 59. ver. 2. teach the Jews, saying:
Your iniquities have separated between you and your GOD, and your sins have
hid his face from you, that he will not hear. And I do refer the name of
Jacob in this place unto the kingdom of Judah only, as appears that it is
sometimes so taken by that place of Genesis cap. 49. verse. 7. I will divide the
Levites in Iaacob, and scatter them in Israel. For there are two kingdoms
rehearsed, the which arose up afterward in those twelve tribes or families and
sons of Jacob, under Roboam the son of Solomon. And the Lord will not only
contend with Jacob or with the Jews: but will also punish them because of their
ways and works, that is to say, because of their Idolatry, the which they also
followed: but yet not so generally: nor yet so outragiously and stubbornly as
did the Israelites. Wherein there seems a reason to be drawn from the less
unto the greater. A reason from the less to the greater.
For how much more shall God contend with the Israelites, and punish them, if
God contend with the Jews, and punish them, which sinned less, and through
the example of the Israelites, according unto that saying: If this be done in
the green tree, what shall be done in the dry? Luke 23. verse. 31.

Verse. 4. He took his brother by the heel in the womb, and by his strength
he had power with God.
Another amplificatio^ of the same falling away of the Israelites.
ANother amplification of the same departure and most shameful falling away of
the Israelites from the true God. And it is taken from the indignity and
haynousnes of the matter, the which is showed by the comparing together of the
persons, to wit, of these with their father Israel, or Jacob. Therefore in this
place there is a comparison made of the posterity with their ancestors and
elders, and especially with Israel their father, of whom they were wont
greatly to glory and boast both within themselves, and also among other people.
Thus the^ is the offense of the Israelites showed to be so much the more
shameful and heinous, by how far away these do depart and swerve from the
virtues and steps of Jacob, that is, of their father a most holy man, and of
whom they do so well like and allow. Therefore taking occasion by the word
Israel verse. 1. and Jacob verse. 3. there is showed what he did, how much he
labored, how much he swet, that he might both serve and worship that God, The
virtues of Jacob.
whom these his posterity forsook and cast away. Finally, here is described
or set out with how great endeavor both of mind and body, yea and from the
very instant and minute of his nativity or birth, he diligently sued and sought
after that same friendship and good will of the true God, that these his
posterity may be made the ^^^le excusable. And the self same may readily be
objected against us, who do so coldly embrace the true light of the Gospel,
the which notwithstanding our ancestors so diligently sought after, Signs of
the carefulnes of Jacob to obtain the favor of God.
and followed.

Now there are three signs described, by the which it appears, with how
great earnestnes of mind Jacob or Israel (for these are all one Genesis 32.28.)
sought, embraced, and retained the good will, grace, and favor of GOD. The
first sign is, That when as he was yet with his brother Esau in the womb of
his mother, Afterward came his brother out, and his hand held Esau by the
heel. Namely as if Jacob thought very then when he was not yet borne into the
light, of the preventing or going before Esau in the friendship and favor of
God, and of getting the grace of God from him, with so great a desire soothles
was he holden even then (being as yet in the womb, and an infant) to win God on
his side, and to embrace him notwithstanding. For when as the blessing of God
by all likelihood was due unto the first borne, this privilege of the
birthright, Jacob went about to take from his brother even then, like as he
did afterward Genesis 25. ver. 31. When he said unto him coming hungry home: Sell
me even now thy birthright, that by this means also he might get the blessing
of God from his brother, and conueigh it unto himself. That which afterward
came to pass Genesis 27. And albeit these things so fell out by reason that God
had foretold that so it should be, as appears Genesis 25.23. The Elder shall
serve the younger, and by the election of God, who loved Jacob, and hated Esau,
Malach. 1. ver. 3. yet notwithstanding is it true that these things also were
done by Jacob in this sort when he was yet a child, according unto the
dispensation, and measure of his faith, the which being then an infant and yet
unborn, he had notwithstanding with God, like as it is written of John the
Baptist Luc. the 1. ver. 41. And of the Prophet Jeremy cap. 1. ver. 5. who
were sanctified in the womb of their mothers, and ordained unto those great
matters the which God effected afterward by their ministry. And all these
things do argue or prove the earnestnes of Jacob in getting the favor of God,
and as it were forestalling of his grace, even from his mothers womb, and from
the very first moment of his nativity or birth. The which notwithstanding
these Israelites, that is to say, his posterity did not imitate or follow: and
therefore are they so much the worse.

The second sign is, that the same Jacob, as a most valiant prince, and most
strong and stout champion, fought against the Angel himself, which seemed to
bring some let unto him, whilst he executed the charge of God concerning his
returning into the land of Chanaan. This is described Genesis 31. ver. 3. where
mention is made how God had said unto Jacob: Turn again into the land of thy
fathers, and to thy kindred, and I will be with thee. And again cap. 32. ver.
24. where Laban is charged from God not to hinder him in this course, and to
speak to Jacob naught save good. Whereby appears how great earnestnes of
mind there was in their father Jacob to serve God, to do his commandments,
and finally to keep his good will toward him continually. For he fought
stoutly for the executing of the commandment of God, and that against an
Angel, not only against a mortal man: he fought long and much, and therein
showed that he had invincible strength to serve God, and that no labor was
tedious unto him. Therefore in that fight he appeared as a prince, and a most
skillful and valiant captain, and not as a common soldier Genesis 32. ver. 28.
Whereupon his name is changed, for the Angel says unto him: Thy name shall be
called Iaacob no more, but Israel: because thou have had power with God, thou
shall also prevail with men. For in the end he obtained the victory and
upper hand even against that Angel. Therefore he ruled, or showed himself a
prince and stout wrastler, striving for the truth and promises of God against
the Angel. But this Angel was Christ, who also is called Jehovah hereafter ver.
5. For so is Christ often called the Captain of his Church, and an Head, and
an Angel. So Esaias 9. ver. 6. among other titles given unto our Savior Christ,
he is called, The prince of peace. So Judge. 6. ver. 22. he is called an Angel:
for there we find thus: And when Gideon perceived that it was an Angel of the
Lord, Gideon then said, Alas, My Lord God: for because I have seen an Angel
of the Lord face to face, I shall die. And this Angel fought with Jacob taking
upon him the shape of a man for a time. He fought with Jacob, that he might
first tempt him, and afterward confirm him in the faith of his promises, and
make him an invincible or unconquerable champion. And the Angel suffers
himself to be overcome, because he himself gave strength unto Jacob sighting
with him, to overcome him. Moreover Jacob became lame of that fight, to the
end he should understand that he overcame not by his own strength, or by his
own strength gat the upper hand of the Angel. Let us also hope for the same
things at the hand of God, so often as he fights lovingly against us. For he
does this to confirm or strengthen us: and not to bring us into tentation in
his just judgment, that we should be overcome of evil. And therefore David
says unto God Psalm. 26. ver. 2. Prove me, O Lord, and try me: examine my
reins, and mine heart. And James teaches the faithful that this kind of
tentation or trial which God uses toward those that are his, brings forth
patience. cap. 1. ver. 3.

Verse. 5. And had power over the Angel, and prevailed: he wept and prayed unto
him: he found him in Beth-el, and there he spoke with us.
A Repetition. For he continues in setting forth unto the Israelites the self
same earnestnes of Jacob, because that it was a thing both of very great
weight, and a most assured and certain token of his most zealous mind in
worshipping God: and briefly an home example, and that same very fact and
deed, for the which he was called Israel, which was before called Jacob.
Wherefore the virtues of our auncetors are diligently of us to be considered.
For they are home examples, the which do make us inexcusable, except we do
imitate or follow them. And it is the third sign, Israel, a very high and
royal name. The Prince, or Champion of God.
Neither was that same talk and testimony of God with Israel, given only for
the sake, or in respect of Israel, but also for his whole posterities sake
which should be borne of him, that his posterity might understand that they
also should be blessed of God, that they should be strong and happy in God, so
that they would show and retain the same earnestnes in seeking of God, the
which Jacob their progenitor and original of their stock used. Therefore
says the Prophet, Even then also God spoke unto us, The faithful posterity
of Jacob blessed in their father.
when as he blessed Jacob. For in him he chose us also his seed, and blessed
us, if we docontinue in the same faith toward God, in the which our father
Jacob lived.

Verse. 6. Yea the Lord God of hosts, the Lord is himself his memorial.
A Staying still in the same matter, A continuing in the same matter.
wherein the Prophet does declare both who that God was whom Israel so greatly
sought after, and moreover adds as it were for an advantage, a consequence or
conclusion at the length, to move and rouse up the Israelites. As for the
declaration and making plain, or showing who that God is, whom Jacob
followed, that is contained in this verse: and the consequence or conclusion in
the verse following. What God he was, whom Jacob so earnestly embraced.
That God therefore, whose good will Jacob or Israel did so earnestly embrace,
is both the God of hosts, and also is called Jehovah by his proper and
peculiar name. For this name did God him self show unto men, as his memorial
or remembrance, as the Greeks speak, to wit, that men might know the true
God by this name, Mnemosynon.
might remember him, might sever him out from idols, might acknowledge his
power to be infinite, and the cause of all things that are. And therefore
Exodus 3. ver. 14, 15. after that Moses has asked of God, what he should say
unto the Israelites his name to be, tell them says GOD, (I am) has sent me
unto you: this is my name for ever, and this is my memorial unto allages. For
he is that Jehovah, the which is both of himself, and by himself: and also
gives unto all things that are, their being, as Paul shows Act. 17. ver. 28.
For in him (says he) we live and move, and have our being. And Apocal. 1.8. I
am Alpha, and O Mega, the beginning and the ending. God then has reserved this
name unto himself, as his own proper name, I take this place to be miss
quoted, for Exodus 6. ver. 2.
and as his token and mark of himself. There is a like place, Exodus 13. ver.
3. Psalm. 68. ver. 4. And this explication or showing what God Jacob served,
does refute or overthrow and condemn all that worship which the Israelites
used unto idols. For Jacob did not worship idols, but the true God, the true
Jehovah. Therefore you do not imitate or follow your father Jacob. So says he
Aeneid. lib. 2. At non ille, satum quo te mentiris, Achilles
Talis in host fuit Priamo: --
Englished by Phaer thus: The words of Priamus unto Pirrhus.
Not so did he (whom falsely thou beliest to be thy sier):
Achilles with his enemy Priam deal: --


Verse. 7. Therefore turn thou to thy God: keep mercy and judgment, and hope
still in thy God.
The consequence or conclusion.
THe consequence or conclusion, wherein the Israelites are called back by the
example of Israel to worship the true God. And first of all by the precepts of
the second table: afterward by the sighs of the first table is showed, what
manner of persons they ought for to be. The second table sets down our
duty toward our neighbors, the which consists specially of these parts, of
Mercy, that is, free bounteousnes toward our neighbors: and Judgment,
whereby we give unto them those things, the which we owe unto them by
bargain and promise. The first table contains our duty toward God, the
which consists of faith in him, and of continual hope in his promises, that
we never trust in any other thing, or God: or set our hope any where else, but
only upon the true God, and therefore our self same hope comprehends the
calling upon God, and also giving of him thanks, the which hope rests on the
true God. And these are the parts of true repentance and amendment of life,
that is of our conversion or turning unto God, and the most certain notes, and
plentiful fruits, which ought to be in all those, which truly worship the
true God.

Verse. 8. He is Canaan: (or a Merchant) the balances of deceit are in his hand:
he loves to oppress.
A setting down of the contrary vices of the Israelites, unto those virtues
required of the^ in the former verse.
AN Antithesis, or setting down the contrary unto that which was required of
them in the verse before. For the Prophet opposethor sets against both his
former exhortation, and also the duty of the Israelites, their vices, and that
those which are against the Commandments of the second table. For there has
abundantly been spoken before of their idolatry, and sins against the first
table. And as before he made mention of Judgment and Mercy, the which by the
law of God we ought to perform unto our neighbors: so in this place he
rehearses the deceit of the Israelites, the which they committed and used in
buying and selling, and in other contracts: and moreover their oppression, the
which is opposed or set against mercy and gentleness, and free doing good. So
then Israel is Canaan, that is, a crafty Merchant, and Deceiuer, which uses
deceitful and false balances and weights, in his dealings and bargains
against the commandment of the law Deuteronomy? 25: ver. 13. Thou shall not have in
thy bag two manner of weights, a great and a small. And moreover these are
wholly bent and set upon this, how one of them may oppress another. Therefore
they do not only hurt one another by craft or deceits, but also by violence
and war, the which two kinds do comprehend the other vices contrary unto
our charity and duty toward our neighbors, as Paul also does 1 Thessalonians. 4.
ver. 6. when he wills, that no man oppress or defraude his brother in any
matter.

Verse. 9. And Ephraim said, notwithstanding I am rich: I have found me out
riches in all my labors: they shall find none iniquity i^ me, that were
wickedness.
An amplification of their former wickedness.
AN amplification of the former wickedness of the Israelites taken from a
reasoning, whereby they did diminish or lessen those their most grievous vices,
and did beguile and flatter themselves. To wit, for that using deceit and
violence against their neighbors, they did not (as they would have it thought)
sin so greatly, that their offense was to be termed wickedness, or
iniquity, sin, o^ any heinous transgression. Therefore if there were in
these their deeds or life, any blemish, spot, or fault, the same
notwithstanding they would have to be termed some light or small sin, All
hypocrites lessen their offenses.
but not so grievous, and such as God was greatly displeased withal. Thus then
did these hypocrites, like as all others are wont to do, lessen their
notorious and outrageous offenses. They dare not altogether deny that there is
any fault in those things (which in the eyes of all men appear to be
wickedness) or that there is no want or blemish in their charity or duty:
but they excuse themselves, as if this defect or want were not to be urged or
pressed, and followed so hardly, and in such sort to be condemned, that
therefore they ought to be judged worthy of some great punishment even before
God: finally, they deny that it is to be called an heinous offense or
mischievous deed So Psalm. 94. ver. 7. when as the ungodly murder and slay the
innocent, and otherwise most grievously transgress: yet they say, The Lord
shall not see: neither will the God of Iaacob regard it. But this their opinion
and reasoning they also go about to confirm and maintain, as other most
wicked hypocrites are wont wittingly and advisedly to dote and be mad, and to
chatter and churmer against God. The reason of the wicked, to prove their
dealings to be allowed of God.
They reason forsooth from the prosperous and happy success of their trafick
and merchandise, by the which dealing after this sort with their neighbors,
they grow rich notwithstanding, and gather together great wealth and substance:
which happiness and prospering, say they, is a toke^ that there is no fault in
their bargainings, buyings, and sellings, nor any thing in their life that God
hates: for God would not then bless them. In this doubtless they do well,
that they think all blessing and every good gift to be of God. For James 1.
ver. 17. teaches us, That every good giving, and every perfect gift is from
above, and comes down from the father of lights. And the Psalmist says,
Psalm. 127. etc. That, except the Lord build the house, they labor in vain
that* build it: except the Lord keep the city, the keeper watches in vain.
But herein they reason very ill, Wealth and store of worldly goods are not a
ways tokens of God his favor.
whiles they think and will have these riches and earthly goods to be always
a note and most certain token of the favor and good will of God toward men
waxing rich by any means whatsoever. Which thing Christ denies Matthew. 5. ver.
45. when he says, That God makes his sun rise as well on the evil, as on
the good: and sends rain on the just, and unjust. And Solomon Ecclesiast. 9.
ver. 1, 2. most evidently teaches the same in these words: I have surely given
mine heart to all this, and to declare all this, that the just, and the wise,
and their works are in the hands of God, and no man knows either love or
hatred of all that is before them. All things come alike to all: and the same
condition is to the just and to the wicked, to the good, and to the pure, and
to the polluted, and to him that sacrifices, and to him that sacrifices not:
as is the good, so is the sinner, he that swears, as he that fears an^th.

Verse. 10. Though I am the Lord thy God, from the land of Egypt, yet will I
make thee to dwell in the tabernacles, as in the days of the solemn feast.
AN Antithesis, or setting down of the contrary unto their deseruings,
expressed in the verse before. For to the end that the stubbornnes and
disobedience of the Israelites may appear to be the greater, God opposes or
matcheth against this their stiff neckednesse his own benefits, and the same
continual, and even from the first times already bestowed upon them. 1. The
antiquity of God his benefits toward them.
And first of all 02 the antiquity or ancientues of the benefits of God is
contained in this verse: and secondly the continuing of them is declared. The
antiquity, or so long beginning of them was, so far as their mind can look
back, or behold them from long time past: 2. The continuing of the same
so that they 02 no sooner began to be a people, and a notion severed from
others, but they straight felt those infinite benefits of God, the which were
done unto them by Pharao King of the Egyptians, as he himself does witness
Exodus 3. ver. 7.8. saying: I have surely seen the trouble of my people which
are in Egypt, and have heard their cry, because of their taskemasters: for I
know their sorrows. Therefore I am come down to deliver them out of the hand
of the Egyptians, and to bring them out of that land into a good land, and a
large, into a land that flows with milk and butter. For had not God defended
them, the children of Israel had utterly perished, and that an hundredth times
among the Egyptians, in as much as both the Egyptians, and also their King
hated them with more then deadly hatred, and bare such spite and envy even
unto the whole nation of the Israelite^, that they decreed at once to destroy
them all. And therefore Exodus 1. ver. 10. The King says unto his people: Come
let us work wisely with them, lest they multiply, and it come to pass, that
if there be war, they join themselves also unto our enemies, and fight
against us, and get them out of the land: but God did even then save them: and
afterward altogether delivered them and rid them from the government of the
Egyptians, bringing them out of Egypt, and that with a mighty, armed, and
strong hand, as it is in the Psalm. 105. ver. 23.24, etc. Then Israel came out
of Egypt, and Iaacob was a stranger in the land of Ham. And he increased his
people exceedingly, and made them stronger then their oppressors.

yet I made thee to dwell in tabernacles, as in the festival and solemn
days. The word (Gnod) the which they translate (yet) signifies rather in this
place (furthermore) that the Prophet may declare that God never cea^ed to
handle this people gently, from the time that he began to be their God. He
therefore cherished them, and that with a marvelous care and love. For when as
they dwelled in the wilderness, and in tabernacles or tents: yet
notwithstanding God nourished them there, as if they had dwelled in a soil
abounding with all store of things, and gave unto them all things, and in so
great plenty, as if it were in the solemn, and feast days, that is exceeding
great God then in the midst of the desert or wilderness provided for them,
entertained, and nourished them daintilie and cheerfully with birds, and
Manna, as it is in the Psalm. 105. ver. 37. and so to the end of the chapter.

Verse. 11. I have also spoken by the Prophets, and I have multiplied visions,
and used similitudes by the ministry of the Prophets.
A Staying in the rehearsal of God his benefits toward them.
A Staying in the same matter, wherein God proves the continuing of his
benefits toward the Israelites by the effects, and the same most excellent,
and unto Israel himself most healthsome. And these effects are, they raising
up of Prophets among the Israelites, by the which Prophets he sundry ways
taught these Israelites, awaked them, and called them back unto their duty,
and repentance of mind, and of life. And this questionles is a most singular
benefit of God, and greater then any earthly gift, and any fruitfulnes of the
earth whatsoever, to wit, when he sends his faithful servants and Prophets
unto us. And therefore the people grievously complain of this want unto God
Psalm. 74. ver. 9. where they say: We see not our signs: there is not one
Prophet more, nor any with us that knows how long.

Three ways of declaring the will of God by the Prophets.
But in this place God comprehends three kinds or ways, whereby the Prophets
declare and expound the will of God, and all the which he diligently, and often
used to convert, and draw back the Israelites: but all in vain. For he lost
his labor: for they continued in their old stubbornnes of mind, and kept their
old wont in serving of Idols continually. And so many ways does God reckon up,
lest he might seem to have ouerpassed any thing. The first way, 1. Simple and
plain speaking.
whereby God does co^municat, or impart himself unto the Prophets, and by the
Prophets unto us, is plain and simple speaking or delivery of the word,
whereunto neither any vision or similitude is added. The 2. kind is, when as
God speaks by some vision, that is to say: 2. When some vision is added unto
the word.
when God adds unto his word, and speaking, some external or outward shape,
wherein he appears, and the which does represent and resemble his majesty,
and finally some outward sign of his presence. So Numb. 12. ver. 6. God says:
Hear now my words, if there be a Prophet of the Lord among you, I will be
known to him by a vision, and I will speak to him by a dream. So Psalm. 89.
ver. 19. the Psalmist says: Thou spakest then in a vision to thine holy one.
And Matthew. 1. ver. 20. The Angel warns Iosepth in a dream, to take Marie for
his wife. So Ezech. 1. and 10. God speaks unto Ezechiel by sundry visions.
The third kind is, 3. When by some outward figure God by his Prophets
represents the thing, which he commands.
when God besides shows some figures and similitudes, the which do represent
the thing it self, the which he commands or will have to be done. So Isai.
20.2. The Prophet is willed to put off his sackcloth, and shoes, and to go
naked, and barefoote. So Ierem. 27. ver. 2. He puts bonds upon his neck,
and yokes, and sends them unto sundry kings of the heathen. The like is to
be seen Zach. 2. and 3. and 6. Of these things I have spoken in my notes
before these Prophets.

Verse. 12. Is there iniquity in Gilead? surely they are vanity: they
sacrifice bullocks in Galgal, and their altars are as heaps in the furrows of
the field.
A comparison showing the great unthankfulness of the Israelites.
A Comparison, whereby God shows the notorious ingratitude or unthankfulness of
the Israelites, and idolaters. For by this self same Antithesis, or
contrariety and comparison, the wickedness and transgression of the
Israelites against God is meruailously increased. It is increased also by the
kind of speaking it self, the which God uses, that is, by asking of questions,
and these answers the which he uses, and the which do the more convince and
assuredly prove their desperate, and graceles unshamefastness, and outrageous
stubbornnes, and show them to be inexcusable. God therefore demands, when as
I have showed my self such a one unto these, God his question.
and so loving and favorable, and that continually: what do these on the
contrary part in Gilgal, or in the whole country of Galaad or Gilead, and is
there any iniquity in that place committed by them, whereby they despise and
cast me off? And he answers, yea verily. For these do nothing in all that
country, but those things which are most wicked, His answer.
and most vain, and commit manifold iniquity. For they sacrifice bullocks
there, the which now is not lawful, albeit they did offer them unto the true
God, because such sacrifices ought only to be made in the Temple of Solomon,
according unto the commandment of God Psalm. 132. but they did not sacrifice
them unto God, but unto Idols. Finally, so mad are these Idolaters, that in
furrows, and every ridge of their sown or plowed fields they have those their
idolatrous Altars set up, and there do they sacrifice unto their Idols: by the
which the greater contempt or despising of God appears. For the more that
idolatry reigns among men, so much the more shamefully and manifestly the
true worship of God is either defaced or taken away, and the knowledge of the
true God is abolished. See before cap. 9. ver. 15.

Verse. 13. And Iaacob fled into the country of Aram, and Israel served for a
wife, and for a wife he kept sheep.
A reprehension showing plainly the great unthankfulness of this people.
A Reprehension, by the which is showed yet more plainly how unthankful these
are unto God, by the first and miserable estate and condition of their father
Jacob, of whom they boasted so greatly. For by how much the more vile, obscure,
and base the original and beginning of this people was (as may doubtless be seen
in Jacob or Israel, of whom they came) so much the more unthankful are these,
who through the only benefit of GOD grew and were advanced afterward into so
great dignity, and yet notwithstanding had cast off God the author of this
their happy estate. So Ezechiel 16. by the comparing together of the estate of
both this people, their great rebellion and wickedness is showed. So the first,
and the same Idolatrous and miserable estate of Abraham is set forth, that the
benefit of God, the which from Abraham was spread abroad unto that nation, may
be declared to be the greater: Hereof does Joshua cap. 24. verse. 2. put the
Israelites in mind saying unto them in the person of God: Your fathers dwelt
beyond the flood in old time, even Terah the father of Abraham, and the father
of Nachor, and served other Gods. So Psalm. 105. verse. 12.13. God puts them
in mind of their first poor and base estate promising them the land of Canaan
for the lot of their inheritance, Albeit they were few in number, yea very
few, and strangers in the land and walked about from nation to nation, from
one kingdom to another people. So Isai 51. ver. 2. the Prophet says unto
them: Consider Abraham your father, and Sarah that bare you: For I called him
alone and blessed him, and increased him. So Iuuenal Satyr. 8. (albeit in an
unlike matter) speaks unto the Romans glorying and being proud of their
Ancestors and of their deeds after this manner: Et tamen vt longerepetas,
longeque reuoluas,
Nomen, ab infami gentem deducis Asylo:
Maiorum primus quisquis fuit ille tuorum,
Aut pastor fuit, aut illud, quod dicere nolo.
In English thus: And yet although that thou from far,
A place in Rome much A like unto our Sanctuaries, founded first by Romulus,
and privileged for the safety of al bad persons and malefactors to flee unto.
The base estate of Jacob.
And high do fet thy name,
0103 0207 V 2 Thou from Asylum have thy stock
A place of sorry fame.
Whoeuer in thy pedigree
Were first, and bare the bell,
A shepherd was, or else the thing,
The which I spare to tell.


Further this vile condition and base estate of Jacob, is showed by two
reasons. The one, for that he was a fugitive in Mesopotamia, Genesis 28. The
other, for that he was servant unto Laban, yea and a Pastor or shepherd: and
not such a servant as was Usher of the hall, 1 In that he was a fugitive.
or porter, or steward, or placed in any other charge and office of reputation,
and good account in service, but appointed only to keep the flocks of sheep.
2 In that he was a servant.
In a word, Jacob was reckoned and served among those servants the which were
but of mean account and regard, and that for a wife, that is, that he might
geete a wife. So base no doubt was he judged, that he could not get and seek
himself a wife by any other way, but by being a servant: not by riches,
dignity, flower of his age, nor briefly was he your first father Israel,
commended and set out with any other matters, whereby men are wont to procure
unto themselves other men's families, and get themselves wives, and marriages:
but as one that was most poor, and most base, and a servant, he was
constrained to get himself a wife by his own labor, and base service, and
as it were to buy her: when as other husbands notwithstanding are wont to be
bought with a dowry of their wives. Further, the service of Jacob for a wife
is twice set down in this verse, both to make the matter more plain, and what
kind of service it was: and also for as much as Jacob had two wives, he served
for them both severally, and at diverse times. Genesis 29. Now how miserable the
condition both of a fugitive and also of one that is a shepherd servant is,
experience it self does sufficiently teach: and hereby also it may be
gathered, for that banishment and bondage, are among men accounted as death.

Verse. 14 And by a Prophet the Lord brought Israel out of Egypt, and by a
Prophet was he reserved.
The second part of the reprehe^sio^ showing the benefits of God toward this
people coming of so base a father
THe other part of the reprehension, to wit, wherein are described the
benefits of God against a people borne of so base and poor a father at the
first. Therefore the name of Israel in this place is taken for the whole
nation, which came of that Israel, which was a servant and a fugitive. This
nation therefore so base did the almighty God notwithstanding choose unto
himself for his inheritance, took it for his own, cherished it most te^derly,
brought it out of Egypt, that is, out of a most filthy prison (wherein it was
shut up) and finally, preserved it in that long journey against all enemies,
and until he had brought them into that same promised land. He then reserved
them and brought them out of Egypt, and that by his Prophets Moses; and
afterward Joshua. Of this deliverance speaks David Psalm. 77. verse. 15.20.
where he says: Thou have redeemed thy people with thine arm, even the sons
of Jacob, and Joseph. Thou did lead thy people like sheep by the hand of
Moses and Aaron. And Psalm. 105. verse. 26. Then sent he Moses his servant, and
Aaron whom he had chosen, etc. And Hebr. 4. verse. 8. For if Jesus (meaning
Joshua) had given them rest, then would he not after this day have spoken of
another. And these are singular and especial benefits of GOD: chiefly, for
that God employed and appointed his Prophets (that is, his most choice and
dearest servants) unto the service and defense of this people. And our
unthankfulness which have the pure gospel, is no less, for as much as God also
stirs up his excellent servants to teach us, and has stirred them up now
these many years continually together. For as Paul writes to the Ephesians
cap. 4. verse. 11, 12. Christ gave some to be Apostles, and some Prophets, and
some Evangelists, and some Pastors, and Teachers, for the gathering together of
the Saints, for the work of the ministry, and for the edification of the
body of Christ, etc.

Verse. 15. But Ephraim provoked him with hie places: therefore shall his blood
be powered upon him, and his reproach shall his Lord reward him.
AN Antithesis, or showing of the contrary practice in the Israelites, being
not answerable unto the former benefits of God, whereby the wickedness of all
the Israelites, which despised the like bounteousnes of God, is amplified. Two
parts of this verse.
For this iniquity appears to be so much the more manifest and greater, by
how much on the contrary the rebellion of these men, 1. Describes the
wickedness of the Israelites. What the figure Synecdoche is, see Amos 5. verse.
21.
and the goodness of GOD toward them notwithstanding, are more nearly compared
and matched together. And this verse has two parts. The first sets forth
the wickedness of all the Israelites, who are here by the figure Synecdoche
comprehended under the name of Ephraimites, These notwithstanding (says he)
provoked God, and that most bitterly. After ward he shows this to have been
done two ways, both by cruelty or blood: and also by their reproach and filthy
Idolatry, the which they so outragiously followed, that they preferred and
judged the aids of idolatrous nations to be more safe and sure then the aid
and promises of God. The which thing in the end turned unto their destruction,
and so consequently unto their reproach and shame 2. King. 17. And last of all
it was the most true cause of their ruin and decay. And thus much does the
first part of this verse contain.

2. Shows the judgments of God against them for their cruelty, and idolatry.
The second part shows the judgments of God to ensue upon them for the same,
to wit, God will reward them their cruelty and blood, the which they have
shed. Before verse. 8. the Prophet made mention of the oppression, which was
committed by them: so then they were cruel against their neighbors and
brethren. Secondly, God and their Lord will reward unto them their reproach,
that like as with their distrust and idolatry they have reproached and shamed
God and their Lord: so they being by God laid open to the pray, and made void
of help and aid, shall become reproachful, and a laughing stock unto other
nations. Finally, they shall become a tale, and an hissing to the common
people, as the holy scripture speaks. So Jeremy 18. verse. 15.16. it is
said, that for the Idolatry of the people, and the seducing and leading them
out of the way by false Prophets, Their Land shall be desolate, and a
perpetual derision, so that every one that passes thereby, shall be
astonished, and wagge his head. For so is God wont to repay like for like unto
his enemies, and despisers, that he may punish them with equal or like
punishment, such as was their sin Psalm. 78. verse. 66. For as the Philistines
thought to have shamed the Israelites, and their God also: so were they plagued
with shameful diseases in their hinder parts.

CAP. 13.
Verse. 1. When Ephraim spoke there was trembling: he exalted himself in
Israel: but he has sinned in Baal, and is dead.
An other Sermon differing from the former in some particular contents, but
agreeing in the scope, and sum of doctrine.
THis chapter contains another sermon of Oseas, diverse from the former in
regard of some particular contents, yet most like unto that former in respect
of the drift and sum of the doctrine. For this whole chapter tends to this
end, to show that God will be favorable to the remnants of this people of
Israel, the which shall convert or turn unto God, and shall in the end gather
them together of his great mercy, and call them back again unto him, ver.
14.15. albeit that the most shameful and filthy sins of this people do not
at all deserve this, or persuade hereunto. In the mean season God by all
means, and by reasons taken from all places calls back all the Israelites,
that is to say, the ten tribes, the which had treacherously withdrawn
themselves from his true worship, that if by any means it might be, God might
save them all and not a part only, and remnant of them. And by these
admonitions or warnings so often repeated the Israelites are made the less
excusable, and their disobedience is showed to be the greater, and the more
stubborn. Wherefore in this chapter God exhorts and calls the whole nation
unto repentance: and in this verse he does it by the rehearsing of both their
estates, to wit, that in the which this people was, and flourished so long as
they served the true God, or was not so much given unto idolatry (as it was
then) and of that state, in which they now be, after that they have begun to
worship idols so outragiouslie, and those also of all sorts. The first estate
of the Ephraimites.
As for their first estate, it was happy: For then, When Ephraim spoke, and
gave sentence among the other tribes, they were feared. For they had gotten
unto themselves reverence and authority among all the Israelites, in so much
that they obtained the kingdom among those ten tribes, and that this tribe of
Ephraim made the other tribes to fear them, and ruled over them as their head.
For Jeroboam (which first ordained and set up the kingdom of Israel) was an
Ephraimite 1. King. 11. ver. 26. and he made the city Sichem the chief city
of that Kingdom, in mount Ephraim, in the which afterward he and Nadab reigned
and dwelled 1. King. 12.25. Then Jeroboam built Shechem in mount Ephraim, and
dwelt therein, and went from thence, and built Penuel. But after that the
family of Jeroboam was rooted out, and the kingdom taken by Baasa of the
tribe of Issachar 1. King. 15. ver. 27. the seat of the kingdom and the
chief city was Thersa or Tirza, ver. 33. And this Thersa or Tirza was beyond
Jordan, in the country of Galaad, or Gilead near unto Thapsus 2. King. 15.
ver. 16. And Thapsus or Tiphsah, (which of Stephanus is called Thapsacus, and
of Plinius lib. 5. cap. 24. Amphipolis) is situate by the river Euphrates, at
leastwise beyond Jordan 1. King. 4. ver. 24. For there it is said that Solomon
ruled in all the region on the other side of the river, from Tiphsah even unto
Azzah, etc. Wherefore the authority and pre-eminence of the tribe of Ephraim
was now in part diminished, The authority of the tribe of Ephraim in part
diminished.
when as the chief city of the kingdom was translated into another tribe.
And this came to pass, because those two Ephraimite kings, namely Jeroboam and
Nadab were idolators. And this was the first condition or estate of Ephraim,
and the same in deed happy, before that it fell unto idolatry.

But after that outrageous and filthy idolatry began among them, The second
estate of the Ephraimites.
and the worship of Baal, and all kind of idols to be received, and
worshipped for God, then began Ephraim to be most unhappy, to be counted
weak, and for dead, and of no authority above the other tribes. That which
happened first under King Achab. For he first brought Baalims into Israel
seeking to please his wife Iezabel of Sidonia 1. King. 16. ver. 31. Achab was
the first that brought Baalims into Israel.
For there by way of admiration it is asked thus concerning him: For was it a
light thing for him to walk in the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat,
except he took Iezabel also the daughter of Eth-baal King of the Zidonians to
wife, and went and served Baal, and worshipped him? And thus he worse provoked
God then all the former Kings of Israel. Finally, he opened a window unto all
kind of idolatry, were it never so absurd or against reason, and blasphemous.
For that which was ordained and set up by Jeroboam, might seem to have some
color and excuse, for that Aaron in the wilderness did set up and cast a calfe
for the Israelites, whom the people themselves worshipped Exodus 32. ver. 4.5.
For whon the molten calfe was made and showed them, then they said: These be
thy gods, O Israel, which brought thee out of the land of Egypt, when Aaron saw
that, he made an altar before it, etc. and they offered burnt offerings, and
brought peace offerings, etc. But the worship of Baalims could not be defended
by any home example of the Israelites, and it was altogether profane or
filthy, and heathenish. Whereupon even from that time especially the matters
and strength of the Israelites began to go to wrack and to be diminished and
troubled by the Syrians and Arabians. For Achab himself with his army was
slain by Benadad the King of the Syrians at the city Ramoth Gilead, Achab
slain at Ramoth Gilead, by Benadad King of Syria.
when as he would have taken it again, and recovered it out of the hands of
the Syrians, which had gotten and taken it before. Afterward also their power
began to decay under the other kings of the Israelites: there were civil
wars, and daily murtherings one of another among them: lastly, the estate of
this nation was miserable and pitiful, and they themselves were laid open for
a pray unto their neighbors. Their strength was so small, or rather none at
all, as is the strength of a dead man. Samaria in deed was always the chief
city of that kingdom 1. King. 16. This seems to have been situate in the
tribe of Ephraim: or at least wise in that country, the which was common unto
the tribe of Ephraim, and the half tribe of Manasses, and therefore a certain
kingly and royal dignity might yet still be thought to remain in the tribe
of Ephraim: but yet now at this time the strength of that kingdom was very
small. And therefore it was a name without a body, or only a bare shadow of a
great name, as one says of old Pompeius.

Verse. 2. And now they sin more and more, and have made them molten images of
their silver, and idols according unto their own understanding: they were all
the work of the craftesmen: they say one to another Or as some translate,
while men do sacrifice. The first amplification of the idolatry of the
Israelites, taken from three places
while they sacrifice a man, let them kiss the calves.
THe first amplification of the idolatry of the Israelites, that the complaint
of God, and the punishment of this sin may appear to be the more just. It is
amplified from three places, and showed how great hurt there comes thereby,
that the Israelites being warned by their own punishment and harm may be
called back unto repentance, if so be that they can be called back. 1. From
their continuance in idolatry.
The first 02 place is taken from their continuance in idolatry. For after
that they once took upon them the worship of Baalims, the Israelites grew and
waxed worse and worse. Thus doubtless do they always fall to worse and worse,
which have once cast away the true worship of God. They frame unto themselves
every day new idols, they be at new charges, they bestow wastefully upon these
superstitions every their best and most precious things. And finally this their
doing has no mean nor measure. For a window being once opened unto
idolatry, men run daily into new worshippings of new Gods: and as every new
religion best likes them, or is forged by them according to the pleasure of
their mind, so do they receive and set it up: as it is done at this day in
the popedom, where there are daily new orders of Monks, new feast days, new
Saints, new Patrons arise up, and are received. Therefore according unto their
understanding, and own pleasure, the Israelites do daily cast and melt new
images, and that of silver.

2. From the multitude of their idols.
The second place of amplification is from the multitude of their idols. For
they admit and receive every idol for God. For idolators are not content with
the Gods, which they already know: but by what kind of craftesman soever a
new form and shape of an idol is forged, painted, made, how fond, evil
favored, strange soever it be, the same notwithstanding do idolators allow by
and by, speedily take up and receive, and worship, although it be the work of
a man, yea and a mortal man, and also a dumme and a dead work. Psalm. 115.

3. From their excessive or outrageous affection, or superstition toward these
idols.
The third place is from their outrageous affection and love of them toward
these idols, or from their superstition. For whilst these men do offer
bullocks and sacrifices unto any idol, and do sacrifice, some of the
sacrificers or Priests do sit by, and are appointed to admonish or will
others to kiss the Calves made by Jeroboam, so desirous forsooth are they,
that honor should be given by any of the people unto their idols, and that
none should depart out of their idol Temple, having not saluted or worshipped
them. This kiss was a sign of reverence, as appears by the second Psalm
where they are willed to kiss the son, least he be angry, etc. Therefore the
rage and madness of these men was horrible in commending and worshipping their
idols. And for as much as idolatry once received, brings so many evils with
it, we must flee from it with all our might and maine: and if it have once
stolen upon us, we must hate it worse then dog and snake, and by and by
shake it off, and cast it away from us.

Verse. 3. Therefore they shall be as the morning cloud, and as the morning dew
that passes away, as the chafe that is driven with a whir lewinde out of the
floor, The second amplification of this sin by 3. similitudes.
and as the smoke that goes out of the chimney.
1. Of a morning dew, or cloud.
THe second amplification of the same sin, the which is taken from the
miserable estate, whereinto they were now fallen, the which is described by
three similitudes, the first of (a cloud) of the morning, 2. Of chafe carried
away with the whirlwind.
and presently vanishing away, or of the (morning dew) 02 which is by and by
scattered away by the Sun: the second, of (chafe) diversely carried and
driven away by a great wind, or whirlewinde out of the floor: 3. Of smoke
going out of a chimney.
The third, or smoke going out of a chimney, and the which straight perishes,
or passes away, and is no more seen. The like similitudes in a manner are 2.
Pet. 2. ver. 17. where he says that the false Apostles, and such other like
lewd persons, are wells without water, and clouds carried about with a
tempest. And Jeremy in the imperfection of his faith, and in his impatiencie,
not finding God his assistance at the present, as he would have had it,
compares God unto a river or water that fails, that is, that suddenly
rises, and suddenly falls again cap. 15. ver. 18. Why (says he unto God)
art thou unto me as a liar, and as waters that fail? What is signified by the
former similitudes
By these types or similitudes is showed that there was yet some glory and
beauty of this kingdom: but yet fleeting and such as quickly passed away, and
should forthwith perish. That which came to pass by reason of their mutual
civil wars one against another within themselves: and also by overthrows
received from forrainers and strangers, as from the Syrians, and Assyrians. In
sum, here is described the destruction of this nation, and the same near at
hand, howsoever yet now for a time by some means this kingdom did sustain or
uphold it self, and flourish.

Verse. 4. Yet am I the Lord thy God from the land of Egypt, and thou shall know
no God but me: for there is no Savior beside me.
A consutation of this their idolatry, the which confutation is manifold.
A Confutation of this idolatry, the which reigned among the Israelites then:
and does now also among men at this day. Wherefore men are now called back from
idols unto the true God, not only by the discommoditie and hurt which idolatry
brings: but also by their duty or office, and by reason it self, the which
does plainly overthrow idolatry, if so be that men will hear reason. And this
confutation is manifold. First, from the most ancient and peculiar, or
especial covenant of God with this people: and again from the most holy and
ancient promise of this people. For God had peculiarly chosen this people for
his own, and severed them out from others, and promised that he would be their
God, even from the very delivering of this people out of the land of Egypt: and
on the other side this people had by a mutual covenant and promise undertaken
that they would be the people of this God only. And therefore Exodus 20. ver.
3. God commands them saying: 1. From the covenant of God with them, and
their promise again unto him.
Thou shall have none other Gods before me. And again ver. 23. Ye 02 shall not
make therefore with me gods of silver, nor gods of gold: you shall make you
none. And from that time of their deliverance out of Egypt unto the time of
this Prophet, there passed between almost 800. years. Wherefore the more old
and ancient this covenant of God and the people within themselves was, so much
the more reverently and holily ought it of them to be kept, that this people
should not worship any other God. And therefore should cast away all idols. See
before cap. 12. ver. 10. And therefore Psalm. 81. ver. 8, 9, 10. God gives them
an earnest charge concerning this matter, and promises them plentiful
blessings, if forsaking all other gods they will cleave only unto him, saying:
Hear, O my people, and I will protest unto thee: O Israel, if thou will
hearken unto me, and wilt have no strange god in thee, neither worship any
strange god (for I am the Lord thy God, which brought thee out of the land of
Egypt) open thy mouth wide, and I will fill it. For, as I have said, then there
had passed a covenant on both sides between God and this people, a solemn
ceremony and oath being made between them, by how much the sin of this
people not keeping the promise by them so solemnly made, was the greater. And
God also in Christ has made a covenant with us at this day, and has chosen us
pecullarly for his people, which Christ (as Paul witnesses Tit. 2.14.) gave
himself for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purge us to
be a peculiar people to himself, zealous of good works.

2. From the benefits of God toward this people.
The second refutation of their idolatry is taken from the bennefites of God
toward this people. For this people never had or found any other Savior, any
other God, and Defender besides this God. Therefore idols ought to be removed
and put away, from whose hands neither the Israelites, nor any other men are to
look for any benefit, help, or salvation, neither can they obtain it from
them. And thus much does God most clearly and plainly teach us Deuteronomy. 32. ver.
39. when he says: Behold now, for I, I am he, and there is no gods with me: I
kill, and give life: I wound, and I make whole: neither is there any that can
deliver out of mine hand.

Verse. 5. I did know thee in the wilderness in the land of drought.
3. From a particular benefit of God toward them.
THe third refutation or overthrowing of their idolatry taken from a peculiar
and especial benefit of God toward this self same people, whereby God most
evidently showed himself to be the nourisher, keeper, father, and finally the
true God and Savior of this people. And the benefit (whereof mention is made
in this place) is the care the which God had over the^ dwelling in the
wilderness by the whole space of 40. years. For God fed the^ there by so many
years, and that with meat from heaven, he kept them in health safe and sound,
yea during all that long time and journey he saved their garments also and
their shoes whole, and from wearing. So Moses tells them Deuteronomy. 8. ver. 4.
saying: Thy raiment waxed not old upon thee, neither did thy foot swell those
forty years. And God himself cap. 29. ver. 5. in these words: And I have led
you forty years in the wilderness: your clothes are not waxed old upon you,
neither is thy shoe waxed old upon thy foot. The greatness therefore of this
benefit of God is declared by the circumstance of the place, and the same
twofold. For it was both a desert, and also a very hot and dry country. And
therefore when the people murmured for want of water for them and cattle to
drink, God commanded Moses to strike the rock, and water gushed out for the
people to drink Exodus 17. ver. 6. God nourished them notwithstanding in that
same desert or wilderness, to wit of Arabia, The desert of Arabia.
where want of all things and meats fears all men, and is seen. For among
all other deserts and rough untilled and barraine places of the whole world,
this one wilderness of Arabia is most terrible, huge, wide, and wanting all
things needful to live withal. So Moses describes it Deuteronomy. 8. ver. 15. when
he shows that God was their guide there in the great and terrible wilderness
(wherein were fiery serpents and scorpions, and drought, where was no water,
who brought forth water for them out of the rock of flint. With this agrees
Dionysius Alexander in his Description of the world, and Jerome in the life of
Hibarion, in so much that those which travail that way even at this day, are
constrained to carry with them so many days meat as the journey of that
wilderness is long. God gave the self same Iraelites drink in a land most
dry and thirsty, which has no waters, and opens no fountains. This
therefore was a singular miracle and benefit of God also, as who namely
delivered them so often from death, and the same most present death (to wit,
lest they should daily perish either for thirst or for hunger) as those forty
years had both hours and days, in the which they remained in that dry and
thirsty wilderness, and in that barren place, and void of all things. I
speak nothing of other dangers, into the which the Israelites might fall,
nay, into the which they did often fall, whiles they remained in the
wilderness, and by means whereof they might an hundred times have been
destroyed and consumed, unless they had by a certain especial care of God been
preserved, as for example, against wild beasts, serpents, and the Amalechites,
the inhabitants thereof.

Verse. 6. As in their pastures, so were they filled: they were filled, and
their heart was exalted: therefore have they forgotten me.
Two parts of this verse.
AN amplification of the benefit of God, against the which on the other side is
opposed or set the ingratitude or unthankfulness of the Israelites, 1 The
benefit of God.
that is, of all idolaters, and the same more then brutish and beastly. So
this verse has two parts. One, which contains that same benefit of God. The
other, the unthankfulness of the people. 2 The unthankfulness of the people.
As for the benefit of God, the same is showed to have been exceeding great
toward them hereby, because that God at the last placed them in that same
promised land, as in most plentiful and rich pastures, 1. The benefits.
where in stead of that that before they were abiding in a desert place, and
void of all things, they do now dwell in a most strong land, and abounding with
all things. So then under this one word (pastures) is described that same so
great commodity, the which the Israelites got and enjoyed in that land, God so
guiding and leading them thither. After their pastures, or as in their
pastures, says the Prophet, namely they now dwelt, that is to say, they lived
in that land joyful and happy, like as they do which possess meadows and
pastures, of the which without any labor of theirs they receive all the
commodities of this life. Therefore they are filled in such a country, into the
which God at the last brought them. For in that land they abounded with all
store of good things: for it was a land flowing with milk and honey Psalm. 81.
They were filled, I say. And this repetition does not only garnish and set out
the sentence, but also confirms or proves the great plentifulnes of that
land. And thus do these things increase and set forth the benefit of God
toward the Israelites.

On the contrary side, the lewdnes and unthankfulness of this people is proved
by a double argument or reason, 2 Their unthankfulness proved by 2. reasons*
one for that the heart and mind of these men was exalted, so that they
thought highly of themselves, and did claim those good things unto themselves,
and attribute them unto their own industry or labor and diligence: 1. Their
heart was exalted.
and did not account them as received from the favor and grace of God only.
Therefore they lifted up their minds, as if they had them of themselves.

2 They forgot God.
The other reason proving their unthankfulness is, for that they did forget God.
The which for the most part is wont to come to pass of that former vice, to
wit, pride of mind. And this is one of the vices that Ezechiel cap. 16. ver.
49. reckons up in the Sodomites as the ground of many others, as may appear:
Behold, this was the iniquity of thy sister Sodom, pride, fulness of bread,
and abundance of idleness was in her, and in her daughters: neither did she
strengthen the hand of the poor. For when as men do challenge or attribute
unto themselves those things which they have received of God, then do they
rob God of his praise, and in the end forget him. For at the last, as
Habacuc speaks, they sacrifice unto their net, and not unto God cap. 1.

Verse. 7. And I will be unto them, as a very lion: and as a Leopard in the way
of Asshur.
The threatening of a punishment against the Israelites.
THe threatening of a punishment, the which shall be laid upon the Israelites by
God, because of that their unthankfulness: and consequently upon all those which
slide and depart from the true worship of God unto idolatry, I will be unto
them, says God, as a Lion, and that an old Lion. For so do I translate those
verbes by the future tense. But as concerning Lions Plinius out of Polybius
lib. 8. Natural. Histor. cap. 16. writes, That they when they be old, do
greatly lust after men, because that strength fails them now to pursue and
follow after wild beasts. The Nature of an old Lion.
Wherefore it is not without emphasis or force, that God brings the
similitude of a lion, especially of an old lion, that is, one that is more
cruel unto men, that he may the more terrify and fear the Israelites, and
all Idolators.

The Lord adds: I will be unto them as a Leopard in their ways and
iourneyes. For I will lie in wait for them, and mark whither they go, and
which way, that I may set upon them, tear them, and slay them upon the
sudden, and privily before they be aware, as the Leopard uses for to do. The
Leopard*
And to this purpose does the prophet Jeremy use the similitude of a Leopard
cap. 5. ver. 6. where he says: A Leopard shall watch over their cities: every
one that goes out thence shall be torn in pieces, because their trespasses
are many, and their rebellions are increased. And Plinius lib. 10. Nature.
Histor. cap. 34. See Aelianus likewise lib. 2. de histor. Animal. where he
says, That the Leopard in taking of his pray is far more subtle and crafty
then the Ape. And by this double similitude which God brings, we understand
that God will not deal with them by open force only: but also as by lying in
wayt, that is to say, that he will steal upon Idolators upon the sudden, when
they think upon no such matter: that he may punish both them most sharply
because of their unthankfulness toward him, and also these their such
blasphemous superstitions. And therefore Psalm. 2. ver. 12. the Psalmist
exhorts that they yield and submit themselves unto Christ, least that
vengeance and destruction come suddenly upon them, before they think on it:
Kiss the son (says he) least he be angry, and ye perish in the way, when
his wrath shall sodaynely burn.

Verse. 8. I will meet them, as a Bear that is robbed of her whelps, and I
will break the kal of their heart, and there will I devour them like a Lion:
the wild beast shall tear them.
An amplification of the same punishment by a double similitude.
AN amplification of the same punishment. For God by a double similitude
painteth out the grieuousnes thereof, that Idolators, and men hardened in their
sins, at the length might be moved, and repent by some means at the horror
or terriblenes of so great a punishment. Moreover, I translate all these verbes
by the future tense, I will meet, I will tear, I will devour, that they may show
and contain a punishment to come, and not already past. The Lord therefore
says, I will meet them, as a Bear robbed of her whelps, at which time she
is already of her self a fierce and cruel beast, and becomes most furious
and eager. See AElianus de Histor. Animal. lib. 5. cap. 14. This similitude
Hushai 2 Samuel 17. ver. 8. uses of David unto Absalon, to signify the
fiercenes of him and his men in revenging the injury offered them by Absalon,
Thou know (said Hushai) thy father and his men, that they be strong men, and
are chafed in mind, as a Bear robbed of her whelps in the field. Finally, as
a Lion, says the Lord, yea as a great Lion and most strong, I will tear them,
and rent them, and devour their kall, or bowels, that is to say, I will deal
most cruelly against them, to wit, (for God himself does expound this in this
verse) by sending most cruel beasts in upon them, the which at the
commandment and appointment of God, shall execute all these things, by
tearing the Israelites in the ways, and by lying in wait for them and
devouring them in their iourneyes. To be short, wild and cruel beasts are
often in the Scriptures reckoned up among those four horrible and fearful
plagues, with the which God punishes wicked men Ezech. 5. ver. 17. God says
unto the Jews: So will I send upon you famine, and evil beasts, and they
shall spoil thee, and pestilence and blood shall pass through thee, and I will
bring the sword upon thee: I the Lord have spoken it. And cap. 14.21. For thus
says the Lord God, How much more, when I send my four sore judgments upon
Jerusalem, even the sword, and famine, and the noisome beast and pestilence,
to destroy man and beast out of it.

Verse. 9. O Israel, one has destroyed thee, but in me is thine help.
The figure Epiphonema, what it is, see Jonas cap. 2. verse. 9.
THe figure Epiphonema, or acclamation, wherein both the cause is showed of so
great miseries, the which shall fall out unto the Israelites: and all this
notwithstanding there is here also painted out the compassion of God toward
this nation perishing in their own wickedness. And this speech of the Prophet
consists upon sentences opposite or contrary one to another, by the which the
matter it self is made the playner. And briefly by this means the justice of
God is cleared from all cauilling, and false accusation, and men are showed in
truth to be the cause of their own destruction. Therefore that which
Augustine says, is most true, O man, it is of thine own, that thou art unto
thy self a devil, and author of death: but it comes from GOD, that thou art
saved* So then this course of thy wicked life has destroyed thee o Israel: For
that has brought thee into these miseries, because it has provoked the anger
and just judgment of God against thee, wherewith thou art undone, and in the
end shall utterly fall, and be destroyed. So Deuteronomy. 33. ver. 27. wherefore the
ungodly and rebels do pull upon their own heads the punishments, wherewith
they are punished, and that through their own fault, and willingly. Hereof
comes that Paradoxe or strange opinion in show, of Chrysostom, but otherwise
indeed most true, No man is hurt but of himself. For in truth men are causes
unto themselves of death and of punishments. That which the profane or heathen
Greek Poet, I mean Homer lib. 1. Odyss. does teach very well. But our help
and our salvation is from God only. And so do the godly confess and say
Psalm. 124. ver. 8. Our help is in the name of the Lord, which has made
heaven and earth. Wherefore I translate the word (ki) (but) that this sentence
following (but in me is thine help) may be opposite or contrary unto that
which went before, to wit, one (that is, thy wickedness) has destroyed thee:
and may make it plain by the aduersatiue particle (but).

Verse. 10. I am: where is thy King, that should help thee in all thy cities?
and thy Judges, of whom thou saydst, give me a King and Princes?
A twofold reason of the former sentence.
A Rendering of a reason of the former Epiphonema, or acclamation and sentence:
and the same twofolde. The one direct, as I may so term it, the which is
taken from the nature of God. The other indirect, 1. Direct.
the which is drawn from the removing or taking away of that same chief aid,
the which the Israelites had chosen unto themselves, 2 Indirect.
to wit, their king and Princes in whom they trusted very much. I will be, and
I am. So Exodus 3. ver. 14. God declares that his power, whereby all things
are, and have their being, and are vpholden, by the selfsame word, to wit, I
am. He is then: wherefore properly he cannot be the cause of not being unto any
thing. And this is the proper nature of GOD, and the first reason, the which I
called direct.

The latter reason refuteth all other foundations and grounds of their own
help, Synecdoche the Prophet may comprehend the rest, What the figure
Synecdoche is, see Amos cap. 5. ver. 21.
and by a reason from the greater unto the less show that they shall be
unprofitable unto them. The Israelites therefore desired for themselves a King,
and Princes to reign over them by a perpetual succession, the which after the
manner of other Princes, should have the superiority and rule over them,
should order their bottels, and defend them from foreign enemies, as if there
were not aid enough in those judges, the which God for the time raised up unto
them, that is to say, they did put more trust in mortal men, then in the one
and eternal God, and seek for more aid and help at their hand, then they
did from God. And therefore 1 Samuel cap. 8. ver. 20. being weary of their
judges, they make answer unto him, Nay, but there shall be a king over us, and
we also will be like all other nations, and our King shall judge us, and go
out before us, and fight our battles. But this thing displeased Samuel (as
appears before in the same chapter ver. 6.) When they said, Give us a King to
judge us: and Samuel prayed unto the Lord. And it has a great vehemency and
force, and a bitter mocking of them, in that God here asks them, Where is now
their King, and these deliuerers, whom they so greatly desired unto themselves,
as if they should always be safe under them? So Esai. 57. ver. 13. God mocketh
the idolators saying: When thou criest, let them that thou have gathered
together deliver thee: but the wind shall take them all away: vanity shall
pull them away: but he that trusts in me, shall inherit the land, and shall
possess mine holy mountain.

Verse. 11. I gave thee a King in mine anger, and I took him away in my wrath.
A Confirmation of the former sentence, whereby God will remove and take away,
A confirmation of the former sentence.
and does remove and take away that aid and help which the Israelites did
put in their Kings and Princes. And it is taken from the event or issue and
falling out of matters, the which was daily to be seen most lamentable among
them, and contrary unto that confidence and trust that the Israelites had in
their Kings and Princes. For it was a thing which was before the eyes of all
men, to wit, that God did give, remove, take away often and daily, not only
according to the pleasure of his mind: but also in his fury and hot wrath and
anger, those Kings and Princes, in whom these Israelites and all idolators do
so greatly trust. Isidorus lib. 3. cap. 4. de summo Bono. Moves this
question: They shall reign but not by me, and afterward by the same Prophet, I
will give them a King in my wrath? As if he should say, not from me being well
pleased, but from me being angry with them. of the world, to whom he will,
and governs and orders them by whom he will. And therefore the Prophet Isay
says of God, cap. 40. ver. 23. He brings the Princes to nothing, and makes
the judges of the earth, as vanity. And hereun to agrees the Psalmist Psalm.
76. ver. 12. speaking of God thus: He shall cut off the spirit of Princes: he
is terrible to the Kings of the earth. See more to this purpose Dan. 3. Thus
far then kingdoms and Kings do defend us, How far Kings can help, or not
help us.
can do some thing, are of force and power, as God will have them to be of
force, and our fortresses. But when as he decrees that they shall be of no
strength, they bring us no help or aid at all. Further, God pronounces or
says, that not only Kings are by him given and taken from these men, as
things during but a little while, frail, weak, bubbles, and such as cannot
defend and maintain themselves, much less others: but he further adds,
that this is done of him in his fury and hot anger, that is, after such sort,
as those things are taken away, the which God will have utterly to perish, and
to be holden accursed: and therefore consequently such as are to be avoided
and hurtful unto us, not only unprofitable unto us. And this was done by God
in the kingdom of Israel, especially in the civil wars: and also in
sundry foreign wars 2. King. 15. and 17. for when there was no certain
tribe in that kingdom, nor any certain family appointed by God, out of which
the Kings should be created and made: he that could do most by strength and
might, obtained the kingdom, and thrust the other from the throne.

Verse. 12. The iniquity of Ephraim is bound up: his sin is hid.
Another confirmation of the former sentence.
ANother confirmation of that which God said, that it should come to pass that
the Israelites should find no help in these Kings, but that these Kings
should perish in the fury and just anger of God. And it is taken from the
Antecedent, or that which goes before, to wit, for that God keeps the sins
of the Israelites, and has them laid up with himself, and not pardoned or
done away. And look whose sins God marketh and reteineth or keeps, with
those questionles he remains offended and angry, and therefore they are to
be punished, and cannot abide in saftie: for in the Psalm. 130. ver. 3.4. it is
said: If thou, O Lord straitely markest iniquities, O Lord, who shall stand?
But mercy is with thee, that thou may be feared. For our sins must first
be blotted out and buried with God, and utterly be forgotten, before we can be
saved, or be in saftie, and finally before we can feel any healthsome aid,
either from God himself, or from any other creature whatsoever. No help from
God, nor comfort from any other creature, until our sins be pardoned and done
away.
But if our sins be once pardoned, and the remembrance of them done away,
then as the Prophet Isay says cap. 1. ver. 18. Though they were before as
crimsin, they shall be made white as snow: though they were red like scarlet,
they shall be as wool. So long therefore as the cause of our miseries
remains, that is our sins, the effect also remains, to wit, the anger of
God toward us, and consequently the punishment must by and by follow. Further,
the Prophet uses a double similitude to show that the sins of idolators are
most diligently marked and kept by God, the which he will remember in his
time. The which thing Job complains to have been done concerning himself and
his sins cap. 7 ver. 21. saying unto God: Why do thou not pardon my
trespass, and take away mine iniquity? And again cap. 10. ver. 5.6. Are thy
days as a man's days? Or thy years as the time of a man, that thou inquirest
of mine iniquity, and searchest out my sin? For the sins of the faithful
are not sealed up with God to be kept, but are all blotted out by the blood of
Christ 1. John. 1. ver. 9. If we acknowledge our sins, he is faithful and
just, to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness.
Again cap. 2. ver. 1.2. If any man sin, we have an advocate with the
father, Jesus Christ the just. And he is the reconciliation for our sins:
and not for ours only, but also for the sins of the whole world. Only the
sins of the unfaithful are in such sort bound up in a fardle or bundle in
their time to be punished, because they are not cleansed by the blood of Christ,
because of their own infidelity or unfaithfulness, and therefore the Lord has
always his hand lifted up, and stretched out to strike them for ever, as he
had against the Amalekites, of whom, as it is in Exodus cap. 17. ver. 16. He
swore, that he would have war with Amalek from generation to generation.

Ver. 13. The sorrows of a travailing woman shall come upon him: he is an
unwise son, else would he not stand still at the time, even at the breaking
forth of the children.
The conclusion of the former threatening of God.
THe conclusion of the whole former threatening and reasoning of God, whereby is
concluded that the Israelites and all Idolators shall be punished. So then at
the length and at the last the Israelites shall sorrow and mourn, to wit,
because of the punishments, which in the just judgment of God they shall feel
against themselves. For these sorrows which they shall bear and feel, shall
be like unto the pains and throws of a woman in travail, and therefore they
shall be most sharp and grievous, and not common or light and easy to be
borne: because that the punishments of these men shall be most bitter, as
namely their sins and offenses are, and have been most heinous and shameful.
For by this similitude of a woman in travail are signified most great and
grievous pains, and so punishments, which shall bring unto them destruction.
The like similitude is Psalm. 48. ver. 6. They that trouble, shall be troubled.
Fear came there upon them, and sorrow, as upon a woman in travail. For the
punishment must be proportionable, and answerable unto the offense. And
therefore Paul 2 Thessalonians. 1. ver. 68. Tells the Thessalonians, That it is a
righteous thing with God to recompense tribulation unto them that trouble them,
rendering vengeance unto them that do not know God, and which obey not the
gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ.

The foolishnes of the Israelites does not excuse them.
Moreover the words following do ratify and confirm this conclusion of the
just judgment of God to ensue upon them. For (says the Prophet) this Israel
is an unwise son. Now this vnwisenes or foolishnes of the Israelites does not
excuse them, but it is here added the rather to accuse them the more, because
it proceeds of malice, and is not lawful ignorance. And this wilful
ignorance was reproved before by this Prophet cap. 4. ver. 6. where in the
person of God he complains of them, saying: My people are destroyed for lack
of knowledge. And all ignorance or foolishnes is such, that is, proceeding from
malice, when as men will not hear God offering himself unto them, and
teaching them: and when they will not obey and harken unto him calling them
back unto repentance. So it is said, The people perishes, because they are
without knowledge Isay. 5. ver. 13. And here is an argument or proof brought
of their purposed and malicious or wilful foolishnes. A note of the wilful
foolishnes and ignorance of the Israelites.
To wit, for because this Israel wittingly and willingly stands still in the
mouth of the matrix or womb, and in his so great sorrows and pains, when as
he might come forth by and by, that is, for that they remained obstinate and
stubborn so long a while in those their sins, albeit being admonished or
warned by God of the punishments to come and hanging over their heads for the
same, and so earnestly moved by God unto repentance, they might if they would,
or did believe God, deliver themselves from these dangers. The Prophet
therefore continues this similitude, the which he had begun from the pains
and travailing of women with child.

Verse. 14. I will redeem them from the power of the grave: I will deliver them
from death: O death, I will be thy death: O grave, I will be thy destruction:
repentance is hid from mine eyes.
A promise of help and deliverance.
A Promise of help, and deliverance unto those, which shall convert or turn
their mind unto God, both that these by this means may be stirred up unto
true repentance of heart: and also, that those faithful ones, which were left
in that people, might hope well in the midst of the afflictions or troubles of
the ungodly, and should not faint, and be discouraged. For God promises, that
it shall come to pass, that he will save them continually: and preserve them
against all danger and captivity, yea and finally against present death it
self. And this is the first promise of God toward the remnant of the
Israelites, and all those that repent, to wit, that when as others perish, they
shall be delivered and saved notwithstanding. For as Paul writes to the
Romans cap. 8. ver. 31, 36, 37. If God be on our side, who can be against us?
And albeit, As it is written, For thy sake are we killed all the day long: we
are counted as sheep for the slaughter: Nevertheless in all these things we
are more then conquerors through him that loved us. For as it is 1. Cor. 11.
ver. 32. When we are judged, we are chastened of the Lord, because we should
not be condemned of the world. For God will redeem the^ from the grave, and
deliver them from death it self, albeit that they seemed to be abiding in the
very jaws and mouth of hell. And this mercy of God toward himself does David
acknowledge Psalm. 30. ver. 3. saying unto God: O Lord, thou have brought up my
soul out of the grave: thou have revived me from those that go down into the
pit. The reason follows: because God shall be the death of death it self:
the destruction of the grave it self: and that for ever, and always, in the
favor of those that are his. So great doubtless is the power of God over all
things, that he has rule even over death it self, and the grave, and does
destroy them when he pleases, for the good and favor of those that are his.
And this do we that are the faithful daily feel, the whilst we are
delivered out of the midst of troubles and dangers, in the which we had cast
away all hope of deliverance, as Paul does witness of himself 2. Cor. 1. ver.
9, 10. in these words: Yea, we received the sentence of death in our selves,
because we should not trust in our selves, but in God, which raises the dead,
who delivered us from so great a death, and does deliver us, in whom we trust,
that yet hereafter he will deliver us. But this benefit of God shall then in
most full measure fall out unto us, when as we shall fully enjoy that eternal
and everlasting life after the rising again of our bodies by and through
Christ, as Paul expounds this place 1. Cor. 15. ver. 54.55.

Verse. 15. For he shall grow.
Though he grew up among his brethren, After that.
an East wind shall come, even the wind of the Lord shall come up from the
wilderness, and dry up his vein, and his fountain shall be dried up: he
shall spoil the treasure of all pleasant vessels.
Another promise of God toward the faith full.
ANother promise of God toward the self same godly, and men that from Idols
turn themselves unto the true God, and do repent. And this is a most excellent
increase unto the former benefit. The godly shall not only be saved by God
even in the midst of the punishments of the unfaithful: but also they the
self same shall in health and saftie fructify or bring forth fruit, and that
among their brethren, that is to say, among the other godly and elect of God,
whom they shall greatly edify and profit with their holiness and doctrine. And
this also may be referred unto the multiplying of the nation, and increasings
of that people: and not only unto the fruit, the which they shall bring forth
by their example, in stirring up and confirming or strengthening others unto
godliness. For this latter is the most true end both of our adoption made by
God, and also of our conservation, to wit, the edifying or profiting of others.
And so Christ Ioh. 15. ver. 16. teaches his Disciples That he has chosen
them, and ordained them that they go and bring forth fruit, and that their
fruit remain. So David testifies of himself Psalm. 32. ver. 8. that he will
instruct and teach others in the way of godliness, wherein they ought to walk,
when he says: I will instruct thee with mine eye. And this is a great thing
which is added, (among their brethren). For so much the more acceptable is this
fruit, because it redoundeth unto the Church also, and unto the edifying of
the godly. So by the self same reason does Paul praise the Colossians 1.
Colos. 10. when he prays for them, That they might walk worthy of the Lord,
and please him in all things, being fruitful in all good works, and
increasing in the knowledge of God.

Furthermore, the time also is added after which these things shall come to
pass. The time of the coming to pass of these things.
And this setting down of the time is indefinite or not certain, the which
comprehends a long space of time: and not the very moment, instant, and point
of time, as Luke 21. ver. 25. when he says, Then there shall be signs in the
sun, and in the moon, and in the stars, etc. So Matthew. 24. ver. 29.
Immediately after the tribulation of those days shall the sun be darkened,
and the moon shall not give her light, etc. Now this time was added in this
place, that the promise before going might appear to be more true and
certain, the time of the fulfilling whereof also is certain, set, and
determined with God. For these things shall not be done, before that the same
East wind, to wit, the Assyrian shall in such sort have afflicted or punished
the Israelites, that the fountains and veins, from whence the Israelites do
flow and spread abroad, may seem by him to have been stopped, and their
springs dried up, that is, before that he may seem by destruction utterly to
have blotted out that nation. For in such manner did the Assyrians waste the
Ephraimites especially (whereas the seat of the kingdom, and the kings stock
was for the most part) that they might seem to have taken from them all
ability and power afterward to grow up, increase, and bear fruit any more.
Whereby this benefit of God appears to have been the greater, in that the
Ephraimites shall bring forth fruit, and shoot up out of that dried up
fountain, as it seemed unto the Assyrians. Last of all, the former things
shall not come to pass, before that the Assyrians have spoiled them of al
their goods. And this self same wind and enemy is said to be of God, because
he was sent upon the Israelites in the just anger and wrath of God: and he is
said to be an East wind, that is, most troublesome and boisterous: yet but a
wind, the which in the end shall cease and vanish away.

Verse. 16. Samaria shall be desolate: for she has rebelled against her God:
they shall fall by the sword: Here begins the next chapter in most
translations.
their infants shall be dashed in pieces, and their women with child shall be
ripped.
Another noting out of the time of the coming to pass of these things.
ANother poynting out of the time, after which the Ephraimites are to be
multiplied. And this noting out of the time is added, not only that this
benefit of GOD may be perceived to be the more miraculous work of God, when
as out of so desolate a both nation and country, so many families
notwithstanding shall arise: but also, if the Israelites shall be stubborn,
that they may repent and change their life into the better, being admonished or
put in mind of so fearful a judgment of God to ensue upon them. Of the like
miraculous both preserving and also increasing of his Church does God speak
Isai. 6. ver. 13. thus: But yet in it shall be a tenth, and shall return, and
shall be eaten up as an elm, and as an oak, which have a substance in them,
when they cast their leaves: so the holy seed shall be the substance thereof.
And cap. 60. ver. 22. A little one shall become as a thousand, and a small one
as a strong nation: I the Lord will hasten it in due time. But here in setting
down the time of the fulfilling of these things, the Lord has respect also
unto this, that the Israelites, when these judgments of God shall begin to be
extant, or to come abroad, should not say, as they were wont proudly to boast,
we will build us up stronger places, then those which our enemies have
destroyed. For so they brag Isai. 9. ver. 9.10. They brickes are fallen, but
we will build it with hewn stones: the wild fig^^ trees are cut down, but we
will change them into cedars.

1. The destruction of Samaria.
But in this verse there are two things declared. The one is, the destruction of
Samaria. The other, the cause of this calamity or destruction. The destruction
shall be most lamentable: For Samaria it self the chief city of the kingdom
shall be desolated, 2. The cause of the same.
that is to say,

CAP. 14.
Verse. 1. O Israel, return unto the Lord thy God: for thou have fallen by
thine iniquity.
The last Sermon of Oseas.
THis chapter contains the last Sermon of Oseas, the which is wholly spent in
setting forth of the goodness and mercy of God unto the godly. Neither is
the former threatening, comprised in the 15. and 16. verses of the chapter going
before, against this. For there he speaks unto the whole body: but here,
only unto the remnants of that people, or that part which shall repent.
Therefore this is as it were a certain exception unto the general threatnyng
which was made before. So Isai cap. 1. ver. 25. when as the Lord had before
generally found fault with the ungodly, he returns unto the remnant and
says, Then I will turn mine hand upon thee, and burn out thy dross till it
be pure, and take away all thy tin. So cap. 10. verse. 20. And at that day
shall the remnant of Israel, and such as are escaped of the house of Iaacob,
stay no more upon him that smote them, but shall stay upon the Lord, the holy
one of Israel, in truth. For the Lord had at that time both in that people,
and has also now in many nations (the which seem utterly to have cast away
God) his elect or chosen, albeit unknown unto us, whom he forsakes not, and
which are taken out from the common destruction of the rest* But in this verse
the whole people indeed is exhorted unto repentance: and there is added a
reason of this exhortation: yet in very deed and in effect the elect of God
only are exhorted, the which only do feel the fruit and effect of these
exhortations of God: for in those only does the spirit of God work: and they
only do show themselves teachable and willing to hear. Yet does not God in
the mean season mock those other rebels, whom he exhorts, albeit they
repent not. For it comes to pass through their own fault, and not Gods,
that they are not converted, as who namely do not obey God warning them.

This verse has two parts: The first, wherein this people is called back unto
God. The second, Two parts of this verse.
which contains reasons of this calling back. Israel, that is to say, this
people, 1. The calling back of this people unto God.
are they that are called back, whom God adopteth or chooses unto himself by
an especial and peculiar covenant: as he has also chosen us afterward by
Christ, unto whom he has given the Sacrament of Baptism, 2. The cause of the
same.
lest we might think that this exhortation appertained not unto us. They are
called back unto Jehovah, that is to say, the true God, to wit, that casting
away their idols, they should hence forward worship that eternal or
everlasting GOD,

2 There are two causes of the exhortation taken,
The latter part comprehends the causes of this exhortation, and conversion:
and the same twain; of the which the first is taken from the duty of the
Israelites, to wit, because that this true God was peculiarly their GOD, 1.
From their duty.
and so consequently it was their duty to worship him. He says therefore,
Return unto the Lord thy God. For there is no doubt but that these words have
relation and respect unto that singular or especial covenant the which by a
solemn oath was made with Abraham between God and this people. So Exodus 20.
God says: I am the Lord thy God. The other or second reason is taken from a
most lamentable event or falling out of the matter, 2 From the lamentable
falling out of things unto them by their forsaking of God.
by trial and experience whereof they ought now to be wise. For they had now
already fallen in part, for that they had forsaken this God, which iniquity
of the Israelites is by a certain excellency called Iniquity, because
idolatry is and has been the greatest cause of all the iniquities of Israel,
and the chiefest cause of all other iniquities, and the which also even now at
this day does very greatly provoke God.

Verse. 2. Take unto you words, and turn to the Lord, and say unto him, take
away all iniquity, and receive us graciously: so will we render the calves of
our lips.
A Staying in the laying out more plainly of the former matter: for he does
not only exhort them unto repentance, A staying in the making more plain, of
the former matter.
but also describes what manner of repentance it ought to be, as Joel cap. 2.
Therefore there is here contained a full declaration of true repentance.
Moreover, the Prophet seems to speak of public repentance, and not of
private repentance only, albeit that private repentance has, and does bring
forth al these signs and tokens of it also. For in this place the Prophet does
not only require an inward feeling of sorrow, the which sinners do conceive
because of God whom they have offended, but words also, that is, he requires a
manifest protestation and declaration of this their mind, and inward sorrow.
Wherefore he says: Take unto you words: speak unto the Lord himself with
words, that is to say, let this your conversion or repentance, and turning
unto God, appear unto all men, both by inward and also by outward signs, that
it be not fained, nor unknown: but that ye may edify all, and by your
example call back others unto the same God. And these words which the Prophet
bids them to take, are a public prayer unto God, and such as must be made
in words, as may easily be gathered by the words themselves, the which the
Prophet here delivers unto them.

The prayer of the repentant contains two things.
This prayer of those that repent contains two things, first, that God would
forgive all their iniquities. For first there comes upon those that truly
repent, and arises in them a feeling and sorrow of sin, and therefore their
prayer begins at the begging of forgiveness of their sins, 1 A begging of
forgiveness of their sins.
as appears out of the fifty one Psalm verse. 2, 3. where David his words be
these: Wash me thoroughly from mine iniquities, and cleanse me from my sin.
For I know mine iniquities, and my sin is ever before me. And they desire
to have them forgiven them, that is, freely to be remitted or released and
taken away by GOD, because they know that they can bring no ransom unto God
for their sins of themselves: but in this, that they can pay for them, and
have to pay for them, that all the same is given them of GOD himself through
Christ, whose only death and blood, is the ransom, that is, the full price
for our sins 1. Tim. 2. verse. 6. Who gave himself (speaking immediately
before of Christ) a ransom for all men. Furthermore they pray, that al their
iniquity may be taken away, and not only some part of it, because they know
that there is no sin before God which deserves not everlasting death. For as
Paul writes Roman. 6. verse. 23. The wages of all sin is death. And thus much
has the first part of the prayer of the godly penitent or repentant.

2. Desires benefits also of God, and offers him praise and thanksgiving.
Now the latter part desires benefits of God also, and offers him praise
and thanksgiving. And here is the true nature of Christian repentance
described, the which expresses and resembles both the words, and manners, and
also the prayers of her mother, that is to say, our faith in Christ, from the
which no doubt it springs. For from whence comes this so great trust, that
I say not with Paul 2. Cor. 3. ver. 12. Boldness of sinners and miserable
wretchedmen, and accusing themselves of guiltines before God, that all this
notwithstanding, they do both crave and also look for benefits from the
self same God? It comes doubtless from faith in Christ, that is to say, from
that assurance of mind, the which the holy ghost gives unto them, that their
sins are freely forgiven them through Christ the son of God, and that they
are all released unto them, and that the same God whom they have offended, is
now through the same Christ become a God and a father favorable and loving
unto them, and not a Judge, so that they can say with Paul Romans 8. ver. 33. Who
shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods chosen? So David also repenting
beggeth benefits at the hands of God both for himself, and also for the
Church of God Psalm. 51. ver. 12. for himself: Restore me to the joy of thy
salvation, and stablish me with thy free spirit. ver. 18. For the church: Be
favorable unto Zion for thy good pleasure: build the walls of Jerusalem.
Wherefore their opinion is false which do separate or sever true repentance of
mind from faith: or do think that this virtue does spring from any other
place then the rest do, that is from any other fountain then faith. The godly
penitent therefore do say, and that the holy ghost by the Prophet so prompting
and teaching them: Lord bestow good things, or benefits upon us, to wit, such
as appertain unto our salvation, and earthly also, because they know him by
Christ to be reconciled or made friends, and appeased with them. For this is a
true saying, As often as a sinner shall sigh, I will no more think upon his
iniquity Ezech. 18. And this other Esai. 1. ver. 16.18. Take away the evil of
your works from before mine eyes, although your sins be as scarlet, they
shall be white as snow. Finally, God does cast them into the sea, that they
may not any where appear, or come up into remembrance before him. And these
things do the godly penitent ask of God.

The godly penitent do offer also unto God thanksgiving.
These self same also do offer thanksgiving, and the same not only conceived
in heart, but also witnessed and openly pronounced with the mouth and lips.
And this same thanksgiving they do call Calves, and sacrifices or offerings of
their lips. And so the writer to the Hebrews wills the faithful also for
to do cap. 13. ver. 15. saying: Let us therefore by him offer always the
sacrifice of praise to God, that is, the fruit of the lips, which confess
his name. The metaphor is taken from other sacrifices, the which were offered
unto God with the hands, What the figure Metaphora is, see Amos cap. 4. ver. 12.
and not with the lips, as were bullocks, and lambs, and calves. So David
repenting offers thanksgiving unto God Psalm. 51. ver. 15. Open thou my
lips, O Lord, and my mouth shall show forth thy praise. The which thing it
self, to wit, thanksgiving like as the former part of this sentence also,
namely prayer, springs from faith in Christ, the which the godly albeit they
be sinners have. For faith is the fountain of thanksgiving, the which is
given us by God, as it is also of our invocation or praying, as Paul witnesses
Romans 10. ver. 14. saying: But how shall they call on him, in whom they have not
believed?

Verse. 3. Asshur shall not save us, neither will we ride upon horses, neither
will we say any more to the work of our hands, ye are our gods: for in thee
the fatherles finds mercy.
Another part of the prayer of the godly penitent.
ANother part of the same prayer, which the Prophet teaches the godly, that
they may truly give testimony or witness of their repentance, both before
God, and also unto others in the Church. And this is such a prayer, as wherein
they do renounce or bid a farewell both unto all the aids and helps of men,
and also do abjure or forswear and condemn all their idolatry. For this is
another part of true repentance of mind, to wit, wherein we cast away and
detest our evil or sin. For we must not only embrace the thing which is
good, as for example, acknowledge God to be our father, praise him, give him
thanks: but we must also forsake all evil, and remove all rebellion away from
us. Now this evil, God is for the most part provoked unto anger two ways
wherewith God is especially provoked, is commonly twofold, to wit, For that
either men do trust in men, and make flesh their hope: or else they do make
unto themselves idols, 1. When men trust in men
the which they do worship and place in the stead of the true God. Against the
former God pronounces a curse Ierem. 17. ver. 5. in these words: Thus says
the Lord, Cursed be the man that trusts in man, 2. When in stead of the true
god they do worship Idols.
and makes flesh his arm, and withdraws his heart from the Lord. And
concerning the other Psalm. 81. ver. 89.10. The Lord by way of protestation most
earnestly prays and requesteth of the people that they will not receive any
strange God beside him, and promises a great blessing to them, if they
perform this his charge. These both twain, the most filthy fountain of
innumerable sins, 1. The godly are taught to forsake all man's aid.
the godly are here taught to condemn. And for the first, to cast away al
aids of men, even those, whom they thought most safest and surest, and before
most diligently and earnestly sought after them, these I say, they are taught
to forsake in these words: The Assyrian shall not be able to help us.
Therefore we will neither run unto him, dispatching by horses that long
journey the which is between us and him: neither will we hereafter ride upon
horses, to get him for to aid us. For the Israelites were always wont with
great labor and charges, to procure unto themselves the Assyrians, as such an
help as was invincible or vnouercomable, as I have showed before cap. 8. ver.
8. and cap. 12. ver. 2.

2. To cast away all idolatry.
And couching all idolatry (which is the fountain of this wicked trust in men)
they learn to abjure or forswear that in these words. We will not say any
more unto the work of our hands. Thou art our God. The reason is added, the
which is taken from experience it self, and from the nature of God, to wit,
for that the true God, is that one and only God, unto whom all men ought to
flee: and unto whom whosoever do go, albeit they be most weak, they do
obtain mercy, and consequently shall find aid and help against their most
mighty enemies. That which fatherles children by their example do teach,
Fatherles children find help of God.
who, when as they lie open unto the injuries of all men, and are most feeble,
yet are they by him defended against all men, which think to hurt them, or
spoil their goods, prevail they in authority never so much among other men.
And therefore David Psalm. 94. ver. 6.7.8. puts the merciles oppressors of
them in mind, that howsoever because of their inability to defend themselves,
and their right, they suppose that they may scotfree and without punishment
ouerrunne them, that the Lord does both see it, regard it, and will be avenged
on them for it. And Psalm. 146. ver. 9. he says: The Lord keeps the
strangers: he relieueth the fatherles and widdowe: but he overthrows the way
of the wicked. Therefore all others, if so be they flee unto God, ought to hope
for the like from the same God, and therefore to forsake the helps of idols,
and of men, and to hope and trust in that one God only and alone.

Ver. 4. I will heal their rebellion: I will love them freely: for mine anger
is turned away from him.
The answer of God unto the prayer of the penitent.
THis is an answer, whereby God witnesses that the repentance and prayers of
those that are his, are acceptable unto him. Therefore being now reconciled or
made friends with them, he answers their petition and prayer, as he had
often promised by his Prophets that he would do. So he promised in Isai. cap.
58. ver. 9. Then shall thou call, and the Lord shall answer: thou shall cry,
and he shall say, here I am, etc. So cap 65. ver. 24. Yea before they call, I
will answer, and whiles they speak I will hear. So Psalm. 89. ver. 26. He
shall cry unto me, Thou art my father, My God, and the rock of my salvation.
And hereby is showed how great the fruit of true repentance is, The great
fruit of repentance, and whence it has the same.
as which namely makes God so familiar and loving unto us, but not of any
worthiness of repentance it own, nor yet in respect that it is our work, but
for and by Christ, who by his spirit begets it in us.

Sundry kinds of the gifts of God toward the godly.
And now here at this and from this place begin the exceeding great promises and
graces of God by Christ toward those that are his, wherein consists the
shutting up or end of all the old prophesies. Therefore in all the rest of this
whole chapter are reckoned up sundry kinds of the gifts of God toward the
godly. And first of all those which go first in the order of nature, that the
rest may be given and added. And to the end that we may have God appeased with
us, 1. For giuenes of sins.
the forgiveness of our sins is the first in order of all God his benefits.
For so long as he remains offended with us, so long can we hope for no good
thing from him, albeit by nature he be never so bounteous. For Isai. 59. ver.
2. he says unto them: Your iniquities have separated between you and your God,
and your sins have hid his face from you, that he will not hear. And Paul
Romans 5. ver. 1. shows, that there is no peace between God and our
consciences, until we have the forgiveness of our sins sealed up by faith in
our hearts, that in Christ before him we be accepted for righteous. Then being
justified by faith (says he) we have peace toward God through our Lord Jesus
Christ. Again, ver. 9, 10. Much more then, being now justified by his blood,
we shall be saved from wrath through him. For if when we were enemies, we
were reconciled to God by the death of his Son, much more being reconciled,
we shall be saved by his life. And this forgiveness of sins here in this place
is described by a Metaphor taken from the curing of wounds. I will cure, What
the figure Metaphora is, see Amos cap. 4 ver. 12.
or heal their turning away, or rebellion, says the Lord, and their offenses,
be they never so grievous, and heinous, such as is that their turning away, or
rebellion, whilst men forsake God, and cleave unto Idols. Further, every sin
is a disease and wound of the mind, and the greater that the sin is, so much
the more greatly is our mind sick also. Therefore when as God of his only free
grace forgiueth us our sins, he then doubtless heals our wounds, but our
spiritual wounds. And so David speaks, saying of God Psalm. 147. ver. 3. He
heals those that are broken in heart, and binds up their sores. And after
that God for his own sake has done away our sins, 2. The love of God
toward us.
he begins for to love us: to wit, for that he does in Jesus Christ his only
begotten Son acknowledge us to be pure and unblameable. For his
righteousness does hide, clothe, and cover us Ephe. 1. And this love of God is
his second benefit toward us. For the good will and love of God follows the
forgiveness of our sins, and this second benefit comes in order unto that
former: but not contrary wise, that is, God first, forgiueth our sins, and
then loves us, and not, first loves us, and afterward forgiueth our sins.
And God loves us of his own accord, and not for any deserving of ours, or for
any excellency of our nature, or for any our virtues: but freely, and because
he will. Lastly, is added the third benefit, so verily God does heap
benefits upon benefits toward those that are his, 3. His anger is turned
away from us.
to wit, his anger is turned away from us, so that now he thinks not to
punish us, but minds and purposes to do us good. For where the anger of God
is, there also is punishment: where God is appeased and favorable, there
flows and is felt good will, and every kind of good thing, as appears by
the verses following.

Verse. 5. I will be as the dew unto Israel: he shall grow as the lilly, and
fasten his roots, as the trees of Lebanon.
A Staying still in the same matter. For other benefits of God are reckoned up
toward the godly, the which do follow after those former. And here first of
all in this verse and that which follows, is rehearsed the multiplying of
their seed, 4. Multiplying of their seed.
and fructifying or increasing of the nation. This promise was a token unto the
fathers of the spiritual grace of God, and of that same blessed seed, the
which was as yet then for to come, to wit, it was, an earnest, or pledge,
confirmation, and sign of Christ Deuter. 28. Further, the same is promised
under diverse similitudes: and that nothing here spoken should seem to be
impossible, because of the miseries and troubles the which should fall out in
this people, in the first place that is set down the which may take all such
difficulties or doubts out of the mind of men. 1. The similitude of dew.
To wit, that God himself, and the blessing of God shall be like unto a dew,
wherewith this nation being sprinkled shall spring and increase exceedingly,
how few soever shall be left alive in it. For the earth being moystened with
the dew of heaven, and with the showers of God: and also plants and trees being
watered with rain, do bring forth both their seed, and also their flower. So
the writer unto the Hebrews cap. 6. ver. 7. says, that the earth which
drinks in the rain that comes often upon it, and brings forth herbs meet
for them by whom it is dressed, receives blessing of God. And so the Psalmist
Psalm. 65. ver. 9. speaks of the fructifying of the earth by God his watring,
and blessing of it in these words: Thou visistest the earth, and waterest it:
thou make it very rich, etc. Wherefore when as God promises that he through
his favor will perform to this people and seed left, be it never so small,
the same thing, the which the dew gives unto herbs and trees, no man may
doubt, but that out of those remnants an innumerable people may come, and also
shall come. I will be a dew unto Israel, says the Lord. Whereof shall come to
pass, that Israel shall flourish and spring as a Lilly, and shall spread his
roots as Lebanon, that is to say, as the trees of the mountain Lebanus, the
which are most high and tall. 2. The similitude of the trees of Lebanus.
And look how trees are lifted up with their tops unto heaven, so much do
they go downward with their root into the deep of the earth, that is to say,
so much the greater roots do they send forth, whereby they may be vpholden,
as Virgil teaches, and that truly, lib. 4. Aeneid. Therefore it shall come to
pass, that the roots of this nation (albeit never so short) when as it shall
be converted unto God, shall be most broad and wide, and stretch out themselves
every way, and on every side. 3. The similitude of the Lilly.
Concerning the Lilly flower how pleasant and sweet he is unto us, the common
consent of all men does teach: as also for that of the most natural
Philosophers his flower (which is somewhat broad) is compared with the Rose.
And these sundry kinds of Metaphors does God use, both to confirm this
spreading abroad and increasing of this nation: What the figure Metaphora is,
see Amos cap. 4. ver. 12.
and also to show, and declare how joyful and wished for the same shall be.

Verse. 6. His branches shall spread, and his beauty shall be as the Olive tree,
and his smell as Lebanon.
An amplification of the former promise.
AN amplification of the former promise concerning the multiplying of the seed
of this nation, that the same may be the more confirmed against all the doubts
which might arise in the minds of men. The seed therefore of the godly, and of
such as do repent, and turn themselves unto the true God, and especially of
the Israelites, shall not only be manifold, and greatly increasing: but also
comely and beautiful, and odoriferous or well smelling. The boughs therefore
of this nation shall be spread abroad, after that it shall return unto God, how
tender, weak, and small soever they were before. So of the despised stock of
Isai, or Iesse was Christ borne, Isai. 11. ver. 1. And Paul Rom 11. shows
that these things shall come to pass in the last times of the world, and after
that the fulness of the Gentiles is entered into the Church of God. Therefore
these things are not only generally to be understood of any company of the
godly in any nation whatsoever: but especially of the Jews and Israelites,
when as by the preaching of the Gospel they shall be converted, and come unto
Christ. Their boughs therefore and branches shall be spread most far abroad,
as David under the similitude of a vine brought out of Egypt, speaks of the
increasing of the Church of the Jews and Israelites Psalm 80. ver. 10, 11.
The mountains were covered with the shadow of it, and the boughs thereof
were like the goodly cedars. She stretched out her branches unto the sea, and
her boughs unto the river. The same shall be comely and beautiful to look
upon, as the olive which is of a most pleasant color. So all do rejoice,
whilst they see the seed of the godly springing up. Lastly, the same boughs of
Israel shall be of a sweet smell, as the trees of Lebanus, the which do bear
frankincense, a gum most pleasant, delectable, and sweetly smelling. For
these trees I think to be understood in this place. For the smell of
frankincense is most pleasant, in so much that frankincense was wont to be used
of al nations in their holy service and Temples. And the same grows
plentifully in the mountain Libanus. Wherefore of that place Frankincense is
called in Greek Libanos. Frankincense in Greek called Libanos, and why.
Nothing could be said more elegantly, nothing more gravely, nothing to commend
and set forth the issue and increase of the Church more fitly, then these
amplifications and speakings here used. In a word, the seed of the godly, and
especially of the Israelites shall be spread far abroad, pleasant to behold,
most acceptable for their savor, and holy manners, and sweet smell of good
life, so that all men shall be edified by that seed, and rejoice of it, Psalm.
1.

Verse. 7. They that dwell under his shadow shall return: They shall live with
corn.
they shall revive, as the corn, and flourish as the vine: the sent thereof
shall be as the wine of Lebanon.
The third benefit: Tranquillity and peace.
THe third benefit distinctly or expressly set down by the Prophet, the
tranquillity and peace of the said godly, whom the Lord shall reserve and
multiply. This tranquillity is signified under the name of (the shadow of
God) in the which the Prophet promises that they shall sit, after that they
shall be returned unto God. Now the shadow of God in the holy Scriptures does
signify a most safe and strong tower, and defense. Psalm. 17. ver. 8. Keep me
as the apple of the eye: hide me under the shadow of thy wings. Therefore in
this shadow they shall sit quiet. And this unto the former benefits is such
an increase as is to be wished for, that this nation being multiplied, shall
moreover safely and quietly inhabit that country, into the which it shall by
God be called back again. The fou^^h benefit, They shall live with corn. 4.
The fourth benefit, plenty of sustenance to live withal.
Therefore they shall not only dwell safely: but they shall live also
commodiously, and they shall there be nourished or fed by GOD with very good
meat. Psalm. 23. and Psalm. 81. ver. 16. God tells the Israelites how he would
have maintained and nourished them, if they had walked in his ways, saying:
And God would have fed them with the fat of wheat, and with honey out of the
rock would I have sufficed thee. This plenty and store of sustenance to live
withal, is also a blessing of God toward those that are his, and a fruit of
godliness. For faith has the promises of this life present, and also of the
life to come, says Paul. 1. Tim. 4. ver. 8. And therefore David Psalm. 31. ver.
19. in admiration or wondering at the kindness of God in providing for those that
do fear him, says: How great is thy goodness, which thou have laid up for
them that fear thee? and done to them that trust in thee, even before the
sons of men? The fifth benefit, The flower, that is, 5. Their liuelines and
strength.
the strength and liuelines of this people, and their remembrance shall be
happy. As for their strength and liuelines it shall be as the vine, the
which, at what time it floureth, is of, so fresh a smell, and so lively a
state, that not only the vineyard it self, that is, the place in which the
vine is planted, smells most sweetly, and is filled with this savor: but
also the whole quarter that is near unto it, in so much that if there be any
serpents in those places, they are chased and driven away with the smell of the
vine: so wholesome and lively is the force and strength of the vine. So the
flower and strength of those godly, especially of the Israelites (when as by
the preaching of the Gospel they shall be converted unto Christ) shall be
sweet, and nevertheless firm and strong, that they may endure lusty a long
season, like as was the most fragrant and lively smell of the garments of
Iaacob, which when Isaac smelled, he blessed him, and said: Behold, the smell
of my son is as the smell of a field, which the Lord has blessed Genesis 27.
ver. 27. Their remembrance also (or sent) shall be most pleasant unto all men,
as is the smell of vines, or wine of Libanus, that is, it shall continue most
long and never be forgotten, as David also speaks of the remembrance of the
godly Psalm. 112. ver. 6 Surely he shall never be moved: but the righteous
shall be had in everlasting remembrance. For the kind of wine here spoken of
is most excellent and most strong, yet of most pleasant smell, the which of
Plinius lib. 14. Histor. Natural. cap. 7. is called Tyrian or Beritian wine,
because the Sailors (which carried that wine from countries beyond sea to Rome,
or into Greece) did difanker from the haven of Tyrus or Berytus, whereupon that
wine is called Tyrian wine.

Verse. 8. Ephraim shall say, what have I to do any more with Idols? I have
heard him, and looked upon him: I am like a green fur tree: upon me is thy
fruit found.
1 The phrase.
A Confirmation of all the former benefits, if so be that the Israelites do
repent. And here the phrase or manner of speaking is to be noted: 2. The thing
it self.
and also the thing it self. The kind of speaking is passionate, that is to
say, full of the singular affection of God toward the Ephraimites, under whose
name he comprehends all the Israelites, No man can serve two masters: for
either he shall hate the one and love the other: or else he shall lean to the
one, and despise the other. And therefore 2. Cor. 6. ver. 15. Paul asks: What
concord has Christ with Beliall? Wherefore that Idolators may earnestly
repent, let them hear this protestation and sentence of GOD concerning them,
That the true God has nothing to doewith Idols: that if they will have,
prefer, and choose him, they must utterly refuse and forsake them.

may live joyful and safe. For God will keep away from them all heat and
tempest, so that they may comfort themselves with that saying of the Psalm. 121.
ver. 5, 6. The Lord is thy keeper: the Lord is thy shadow at thy right hand.
The sun shall not smite thee by day, nor the moon by night. Finally their
fruit shall be ready and at hand from God, and shall by and by be found. For
nothing can let God bearing good will toward them, and desirous to do them
good, but that those things shall be fulfilled the which God has promised
before bounteously and largely.

Verse. 9. Who is wise, and he shall understand these things? and prudent, and
he shall know them? for the ways of the Lord are righteous, and the just
shall walk in them: but the wicked shall fall therein.
What the figure Epiphonema is, see Jonas cap. 2. ver. 9.
THe figure Epiphonema, or acclamation, whereby all men are both stirred up with
an carnest admonition to meditate or think upon, and embrace the former
promises of God: and also is showed, what difference there shall always be in
this world between the good and the bad. Finally, how ill the wicked provide
for themselves, whilst they refuse God his so loving calling them unto him, is
here also in like manner declared. Three parts of this verse.
Wherefore this verse has three parts. The first exhorts all men, in whom
there is remaining but one grain of true wisdom, 1. An exhortation to all
men to hear this so loving voice of God.
that they will give most diligent ear unto this so mild and sweet voice of
God. Who is wise? Let him then understand, mark, and consider the things
which GOD promises unto them that repent. So speaks the Psalmist Psalm. 107.
verse. 43. Who is wise that he may observe these things? for they shall
understand the loving kindness of the Lord. For God is angry and displeased,
when as men do show themselves brutish, and do despise those his most
sweet voices and admonitions. Of such kind of blockishnes and dulnes the
Prophet complains Psalm. 82. ver. 5. after this manner: They know not, and
understand nothing: they walk in darkness, albeit all the foundations of the
earth be moved. 2 A showing that those are justly punished, who re^use to hear
this his so loving voice.
And thus much contains the first part of this verse.

The second part gives unto God his righteousness, that a bit and snafle may
be put into the murmurings, and mouths of all men, and that men may understand
that in vain and wic^edly they do complain of god, when as they are punished
by him for their sins and for despising such his promises. For all the ways of
the Lord are right and just, Psalm. 25. ver. 10. All the paths of the Lord are
mercy and truth unto such as keep his covenant and testimonies. And therefore
it is said Psalm. 105. ver. 10. All thy works praise thee, O Lord, and thy
Saints bless thee. For albeit the ungodly do fret and fume against the
judgments of God, and accuse God of partiality, that is, as if he were an
acceptor of persons, that is, a maker more of the person of one then of
another: yet this sentence remains immovable, All the ways of the Lord are
right, and his wisdom shall be justified, that is, shall appear eueriewhere
to be just, that as it is in the Psalm. 51. ver. 4. He may be just when he
speaks, and pure when he judges. For (as Christ says) Luke 7. verse. 35.
Wisdom is justified of all her children. God therefore is to be heard, whose
voice and word if it be contemned and despised, men shall afterward be
grievously punished, and that justly. Wherefore it is said in the Psalm. 95.
ver. 7, 8. To day, if ye will hear his voice, harden not your hearts, etc. And
the punishment is set down in the last verse: wherefore I swear in my wrath,
saying: surely they shall not enter into my rest. The third part shows the
difference, the which is always seen between the good and the bad, 3. A
difference between the good and the bad in the hearing and not hearing of the
same.
when as God commands or counsaileth any thing, to wit, for that the just do
submit themselves and are obedient unto God: for they know that all his ways
are right. But the fallers back, that is, the sinners, and the wicked do
stumble and fall at the word of God, because they do despise it, nay, of
purposed malice they do break it, and so far as in them lies tear it in
pieces. Whereupon God is unto the^ a great hurt, even then when as he lovingly
exhorts them unto salvation, he is, I say, unto them a stone of offense, at
the which they stumble not of ignorance, but willingly, and do offend
wittingly, and therefore do provide very ill for themselves, whilst they will
not, and do refuse to understand and know those things, the which God speaks
unto them, and the which he teaches them. So Christ is called a stone of
offense or stumbling, namely, unto the wicked, and such as are rebels unto God
Isai 8. verse. 14. And he shall be as a sanctuary: but as a stumbling stone,
and as a rock to fall upon to both the houses of Israel, and as a snare, and as
a net to the inhabitants of Jerusalem. So Simeon prophesies of him unto his
mother Marie, Luke 2. ver. 34. Behold, this child is appointed for the fall
and rising again of many, and for a sign which shall be spoken against. And
so Peter speaks of him 1. epist. cap. 2. verse. 7, 8. Unto you therefore,
which believe, it is precious: but unto them which be disobedient, the stone
which the builders disallowed, the same is made the head of the corner, and a
stone to stumble at, and a rock of offense, even to them, which stumble at the
word being disobedient, unto the which thing they were even ordained. And those
which stumble wittingly at that word and stone, they are crushed in pieces, and
weyed and pressed down by it, as Christ himself teaches Luke 20. verse. 18.
saying: Whosoever shall fall upon that stone, shall be broken: and on
whomsoever it shall fall, it will grind him to powder. This then is the estate
and condition of wicked men, and such as rebel against God. Wherefore we must
desire of God by earnest prayer, that we follow not their steps.

Praise be unto God.
The Commentary of Lambertus Danaeus upon the Prophet Micheas.
CAP. 1.
The scope and drift of this prophet, twofold.
THe scope and drift of this Prophet, like as of the rest, is twofolde.
Threatenings, and the promises of God: and that against both the houses and
families of Jacob, 1. Threatenings.
that is, the kingdom of Judah, and the kingdom of Israel: 2. Promises.
albeit that many of the Prophets were severally sent, some unto the Jews, and
others unto the Israelites only: but this Prophet is sent unto them both. But
as concerning the promises, when as they appertain only unto those that are
godly or faithful indeed, or unto the elect of God, they seem rather to be
directed unto the kingdom of Judah, (in the which the Church was more pure)
then unto the kingdom of Israel, where the worship of God was utterly
overthrown, and a very f^w found truly fearing God. But as for the
threatenings, they are alike denounced or declared unto both kingdoms because
of their outrageous sins and deeds, the which were full partly of impiety
toward God, and partly of injustice toward men, and did swarm every where
without punishment in both those kingdoms. Therefore Micheas does call men
earnestly unto repentance, like as Amos does also: if not, then he threatens
unto them most grievous judgments of GOD, the which doubt^es came to pass
unto both those peoples, that we at this day ought at any hand to wax wise by
the example of these two nations. For A prudent man (as Solomon says Prouer.
22. ver. 3.) sees the plague, and hides himself: but the foolish go on
still, and are punished.

Verse. 1. The word of the Lord that came unto Micah the Morashite, in the days
of Iotham, Ahaz, and Hezechiah kings of Judah, which he saw concerning
Sam^ria, and Jerusalem.
Four parts of this verse.
THis verse has four things to be noted. First, the sum of this whole
Prophecy and ministry of Micheas. And this is, that he should show the words
and will of God extraordinarily revealed unto him, and not his own will, 1.
The sum of this prophecy.
or the will of any man else. This will of God he declares to have been
revealed unto him, and that extraordinarily, when he says (which he saw, or
which came unto him.) For this vision is not a seeing or beholding with the
eyes of the body: but a lightening and informing of the mind of man made by God
touching his own will, and that by an extraordinary manner, the which his will
God will have declared unto others by him, unto whom he does reveal or open
the same. And whereas this prophecy of Micheas is said to be both the word of
God, and also extraordinarily revealed unto him, it is commended unto us in a
double respect, and great authority is gotten unto it, that no man should
think that it can be contemned or despised without punishment. For it is the
voice of God himself, and not of man.

2. To whom this revelation was made.
The second thing here to be noted is, to whom this revelation was made, that
is to say, of the things to be declared afterward, to wit, unto Micheas, who
(to make a difference between him and others) calls himself a Morashite, to
wit, to distinguish or mark out himself from that Micheas the son of Imlah,
of whom mention is made 1 King. 22. ver. 8. and who was before this Prophet
certain ages. This Micheas therefore was of the tribe of Benjamin out of the
town Morastha, whereof mention is made hereafter verse. 14. Finally Jeremy
makes mention also of this prophecy cap. 26 verse. 18. saying: Micha the
Morashite prophesied in the days of Hezechiah king of Judah, and spoke to all
the people of Judah, saying: Thus says the Lord of hosts: Zion shall be
plowed like a field, and Jerusalem shall be an heap, and the mountain of the
house shall be as the high places of the Forest.

3. T^ whom this prophecy is directed.
The third point is, unto whom this prophecy is directed, to wit, unto both the
kingdoms of Judah, and Israel, the which were the tearings in pieces, the
pullings in sunder, and the renting of the one family of Jacob. And he first
makes mention of the kingdom of Israel, because it was more guilty before
God: and not because it was of greater dignity.

4. The time of this prophecy.
The fourth thing to be noted is the time of this prophecy. For he was latter
in age then Isaias: like as Isaias himself followed Amos, as I have showed
before in Amos. And this our Prophet prophesied under three Kings of Judah, to
wit, Iotham, Achaz, and Hezekiah, unto whose time Isaias came also, but not
Amos. Now this noting of the time brings credit unto this Prophet and
history. For under these Kings the state was most corrupt, and the manners of
both the Jews, and also of the Israelites most Iewde, as namely when as at
that time Zacharias, Sellum, etc. slew and spoiled by mutual civil wars one
against another in the kingdom of Israel. Secondly, it witnesses, the
providence and care of God for those that are his, who together and at the same
time used so many admonitors or warners to call again his people into the
right way. For by this do both the Jews and also the Israelites appear to be
inexcusable, being so often warned by God, and yet notwithstanding going on so
wickedly in their sins.

Verse. 2. Hear, all ye people: hearken thou O earth, and all that therein is,
and let the Lord God be witness against you, even the Lord from his holy
temple.
A confirmation of the foretelling of things ensuing, and of this prophecy.
A Confirmation of the ensuing prediction or foretelling of things, and of this
prophecy, the which is taken from a most earnest calling to witness of the
whole world against both these nations, least that either they should despite
it, and disdain to hear it, or else when they do hear it, should mock at
it, as vain Scarbugges, and threatenings not to be regarded nor accounted of.
For Micheas calls the whole world to witness, that both these things which he
speaks are of God, and also shall without all doubt come to pass unto them,
if they repent not. And why Micheas had need of so earnest a confirmation of
his doctrine, besides that (which is contained in the former verse) this is a
reason, for that he had to do with both kingdoms, and not with one alone: as
Amos dealt only with the Israelites, Sophonias only with the Jews. Either of
which people in as much as they were both proud, and also of an hard and
stiff neck, even when they were severally admonished and reproved: how much
the more stout and resisting may we deem them to have been against these
threatenings of God, being spoken unto and accused jointly? For such men or
people which severally and particularly are stout and bold, the same being
gathered and joined together, are altogether headstrong and impudent or
shameless. Wherefore first of all especial authority and credit was to be
won unto this doctrine. And this our Prophet does, from a double kind of
witnesses, which he cites for it, namely first, of the whole world: secondly,
of the true God himself, whom they might know to be the punisher of sins.

Two parts of this verse.
So then there are two parts of this verse. The first cites men for witness.
The second, God himself, and both these witnesses he brings indifferently as
well against the Jews, 1. Cites men for witness.
as against the Israelites. Further in citing of these witnesses of men the
manner of speech is to be marked, the which is as it were loose and unjointed,
2. God himself.
and not knit together with conjunctions coplatiue. For he stirs them up to
hear diligently and heedfully, because the matter is of great weight, the
which is here spoken of. And not only men themselves, but also the senseles
element of the earth is called to witness, by the figure Prosopopoeia, or
feining of persons, Prosopopoeia what it is, see Oseas cap. 6. ver. 1.
as it also is 1. Isai. But in God the witness, his majesty is to be noted, the
which is here, and in the verses following described. Here, when he is called
Jehovah the Lord, and said to come out of his holy temple, that is out of the
Temple of Jerusalem, where for the many signs and Sacraments of his presence
he is said for to dwell. And all these things do show this witness to be both
holy, and also true, and for to be feared. For nothing can be objected
against it, and the things are true, which are confirmed by such a witness. And
God is said to come out of his Temple, not, that he is not every where, and in
all places, but by reason of the especial experiment or proof and trial of
his justice or mercy, the which was done and felt in that place 1. King. 8. So
then this kind of feeling in respect of us is called the presence of God, and
his coming unto us from another place, where he was said to be before.

Verse. 3. For behold, the Lord comes out of his place, and will come down,
and tread upon the high places of the earth.
A staying in the setting out of the majesty of God full of terror, and fear.
A Staying in describing and setting out of the majesty of God, whom he cites
as a witness of his doctrine, to the end that this presence may the more stir
up both the Jews and also the Israelites to hear, and to repent, whiles they
understand that God himself is a witness of these threatenings against them, and
also of their wickedness. The figure Hypotyposis what it is, see Amos cap. 8.
verse. 12
And here by the figure Hypotyposis this coming forth of God out of his temple
(whether you will have it to be heaven, as Psalm. 11. it is taken, or the temple
of Jerusalem, as I said before) for both senses agree with this place) is most
lively represented, as if in a manner it were seen to be done with the eye, to
terrify wicked men, and to awaken the hypocrites. And moreover both his going
and coming is described full of fear and Majesty, as namely who marches
warlike upon the high places of the earth, as being higher and above all those
places, and carrying with him nothing that is low and base.

Verse. 4. And the mountains shall melt under him (so shall the valleys
cleave) as wax before the fire, and as the waters that are powered downward.
A continuing in the amplifying of the majesty of God his witness.
BY the effects, and those altogether miraculous he amplifieth yet still, and
confirms the same Majesty of God his witness: all things yield and fall away
under God, the mountains tremble, the hills melt, the valleys are cloven,
his sight is as fire, at the heat whereof all things wax feeble, and drippe
away as it were with sweating. Who then will not tremble at the sight of so
great a God, and witness, and will not be afraid of his judgment, and fear
his testimony or witness against him? Confer this place with that of the
Psalm. 18. ver. 7.8. Then the earth trembled and quaked: Other places in like
manner describing the s^arefull and mighty majesty of God.
the foundations also of the mountains moved and shook because he was
angry. Smoke went out at his nostrels, and a consuming sire out of his mouth:
coals were kindled thereat. And Psalm. 68. ver. 2. As the smoke vanishes, so
shall thou drive them away: and as wax melts before the fire, so shall the
wicked perish at the presence of God. Again Psalm. 97. ver. 5. The mountains
melted like wax at the presence of the Lord, at the presence of the Lord of
the whole earth.

Verse. 5. For the wickedness of Iaacob is all this, and for the sins of the
house of Israel: what is the wickedness of Iaacob? Is not Samaria? And which are
the high places of Judah, is not Jerusalem?
A narration of the things reuealedly God unto Micheas.
A Narration or plain telling of the things by God revealed unto Micheas, the
which he first declares unto the Israelites: and afterward unto the Jews, as
he also was willed to deliver them in this order, and as these things were
showed unto him before ver. 1. But in this Prophecy of Micheas, first, the
causes of the anger of GOD against them are set down: then the anger of GOD it
self, or the threatenings of GOD, and his judgments. Now in this verse are
contained the causes of the just anger of God, and the threatenings in the verse
following. But all the causes are not here reckoned up (for there shall be
others also added hereafter) but the chief cause, which is impiety or
ungodliness toward God, and the corrupting of his worship, yea and moreover the
abolishing or doing of it clean away, and the changing of it into mere
idolatry, the which to have been in both these nations, to wit, the
Israelites, and the Jews, this one verse alone does sufficiently prove and
show.

Two parts of this verse.
In this verse there are two things to be observed or noted. The fault common
unto them both is ungodliness, to wit, for that they were Idolators and profane
or wicked persons, 1. The fault common unto them both.
and open contemners or despisers of God himself, as namely who either
worshipped another God then the true God, such as were the Israelites, who set
up the Calves in Dan and Bersabe, in the stead of the true Jehovah: or else did
not worship the true God lawfully or rightly, as did the Jews, who in the high
places sacrificed unto God, against his commandment. For it is all one with
God, either not to worship him at all, or else to worship him otherwise then
he has commanded. For God holds for idolatry, whatsoever is done and
offered unto him after the only commandments and doctrines of men. For what
outward show soever they may seem to carry of holiness and religion and
humblenes of mind, and in not sparing the body, as Paul Colos. 2. ver. 23.
speaks, yet Christ shows Mat. 15. ver. 9. That in vain they worship him,
teaching for doctrines men's precepts. Further, both these impieties or
vngodlinesses, namely, to worship a false God, or to worship the true God
falsely, is noted by the name a word of most vile rebellion (Peschang) as 1.
Sam. cap. 15. ver. 23. For rebellion is as the sin of witchcraft, and
transgression is wickedness and idolatry. 2. The manner of speaking containing


The manner of speaking contains both an amplification, and also a most sharp
reprehension. An amplification, for that not every city whatsoever of both
these kingdoms is here declared and pronounced guilty of this wickedness, 1.
A^ amplification.
but the very chief cities of them both, as Samaria in the kingdom of Israel,
Jerusalem herself in the kingdom of Judah: the which cities notwithstanding
by their example and godliness ought to shine as lights unto the other cities,
and not to be ringleaders unto them unto sin. The reprehension is contained
in the interrogation or asking of a question, 2. A reprehension.
and in the answer unto the same. For he shows, that he called both men and
God to witness, because of their notorious ungodliness: and he does in such sort
set down the same, that he does ask them, that is, he stirs up, and
pricketh their consciences, that these men should not dare to deny the thing
that was known unto every man.

Verse. 6. Therefore I will make Samaria as an heap of the field, and for the
planting of a vineyard, and I will cause the stones thereof to tumble down
into the valley, and I will discover the foundations thereof.
A threatening of the anger of God against the Israelites.
AFter the showing of the causes of the anger of God, he describes the anger it
self of God against them: and first of all against the Israelites, whose head
was Samaria. For unto it he threatens destruction, or overthrowing of it
utterly. For both the city it self shall be pulled down into heaps of stone
and rubbidge, and these heaps of stone also shall be tumbled down into the
valley underneath it (for Samaria was seated on the top of an hill) that
there should not any sign or senfie of a city remain. Finally, the very
foundations thereof shall be discovered, and overthrown, least it might
afterward be reedified or builded up again. In a word, it shall be made a
place fit for the planting of vines, that is to say, it shall be utterly cleared
of houses, and rid and made void of palaces Isai. 15.

Verse. 7. And all the graven images thereof shall be broken, and all the
gifts thereof shall be burnt with fire, and all the idols thereof will I
destroy: for she gathered it of the hire of an harlot, and they shall return
to the wages of an harlot.
1. An amplification of the punishment.
AN Amplification with the answering of an objection that might be made. The
amplification of the punishment stands herein, that not only private and
profane or common things shall thus perish, but also those things, which among
them are counted for holy, and also testimonies and gifts of the favor of
God. So then God will destroy both things public, and also things private: both
their unholy things, and also their holy things, because of their impiety or
ungodliness, that they should not hope to have any thing left unto them, and
free from that just judgment of God. The answering of an objection.
The answering of an objection that might be made consists herein, that these
self same things, which they supposed to be holy things, and gods, and
rewards or gifts, and did think and call them witnesses of their thankefulnes
unto God, and tokens of the favor of God toward them, and therefore deemed
them to be sure and safe stays and defenses unto themselves: these things I
say, are Idols, and not gods: but false Scarbugs of men, not defenses against
calamities or troubles (for so are Idols called) they are rewards of harlots,
and most filthy, and not the sign of any favor of God, or pledge and witness
of any thankefulnes of men. Wherefore all these things shall nothing at all
help and defend them. Ose 9.

Verse. 8. Therefore I will mourn and houle: I will go without clothes, and
naked: I will make lamentation like the Dragons, and mourning as the Ostriches.
An earnest moving of affection
A Vehement or earnest moving of affection. For the Prophet to strike into them
who were to be destroyed, a fear of their destruction, does paint out unto
them that his sorrow, and the same most great by a certain Hypotyposis, What
the figure Hypotyposis is, see Amos cap. 8. ver. 12.
or lively describing of the same, that if it might be, or if any feeling of
salvation were left in them, they might be moved and repent, that is, be
converted unto God. For these things are neither spoken with a feigned mind by
the Prophet, nor excessiuely or beyond the truth, as Poets are wont to do:
but of an earnest consideration of so great evil or misery, the which tarried
for the Israelites, that is, men that were marked with the seal of the
covenant of GOD, to wit, circumcision. The mourning of the Prophet described.
But this his sorrow or mourning does the Prophet describe two ways. First
barely, that is, simply: afterward by comparison. Simply in such sort, 1.
Simply.
that nevertheless he shows that by the deep conceiving of the judgment of
God to ensue against them, he daily more and more lamenteth their case and
estate. For he uses such a kind of speaking, the which arises and
increases by degrees, and shows the sorrow to be the greater. For he says,
I will mourn, both in mind and gesture: secondly, I will howl. Now howling
is a crying and complaint of most bitter mourning: last of all, I will go
without clothes, and naked, the which the Prophets did, to lay before the eyes
of men the misery at hand, the which in their own persons they did represent
Isai 20.

2. By comparison.
Secondly, he sets out this his mourning by comparison, by the which he
declares an exceeding and fearful sorrow. For he will so mourn as the
Dragons being solitary, and void of all help, are wont to do, whilst they
seek their young ones which are flowen away, and being in fear make a great
noise, as Aelianus writes lib. 9. de Histor. Animal. So Job willing to
express his great sorrow and heauynes cap. 30. ver. 29. says: I am a brother
to the Dragons, and a companion to the Ostriches.

Verse. 9. For her plagues are grievous: for it is come into Judah: the enemy
is come unto the gate of my people, unto Jerusalem.
A rendering of a reason of this so great mourning of the prophet.
A Rendering of a reason of so great and heavy sorrow described before, and
taken upon him by the Prophet, lest he might seem in vain and without cause in
such sort to have afflicted or tormented and grieved himself, or be thought
that he would astonish the Israelites with a needles fear. And this reason is
taken from the cause. And affliction or trouble, is the cause of sorrow among
men. Wherefore the cause of this great sorrow of the Prophet, is the great
misery and affliction, the which hangs over the head of the Israelites,
howsoever it be not conceived or felt of them despising the judgments of God.

Now the greatness of this misery of the Israelites does the prophet describe
by the adioynts and consequents or things following after it, The description
of their great misery by the adioynts and consequents.
as is the spreading it adroade unto the neighbor nations, the most sorrowful
fame and report thereof, the great crying of men, their fearful fleeing and
running away, and such like other things, the which are reckoned up in the
verses following But here is an adioynt set down of great miseries, the which
consists herein, whilst the trouble and hurt of the neighbor people shall
reach unto other people near unto them, and certain pieces and sparks of this
affliction, as it were out of a dangerous fiering of houses joining together,
do fly unto the people adjoining, and do either scorch them, or else burn
them sometines also. That which shall come to pass in the same overthrow of the
Israelites. For the force and fall thereof shall reach and break out unto the
Jews, yea and moreover unto the very gates of Jerusalem, that is, the holy
city of God did this burning come. For albeit this flame did not burn the
gates of this city, yet it touched them, and burnt unto them. Wherefore this
misery of the Israelites was to be very great.

The calamity and misery of the Israelites reaches also unto the Jews, a
kingdom several and distinct from it.
And in the words, Judah my people, and Jerusalem, there lies great vehemency
or force, and amplifyings, and that by degrees. For it appears that the flame
of that Israelitish burning was great the which brake out even unto the
kingdom of Judah, that is, a kingdom altogether severed and diverse from this
kingdom of Israel, albeit in the situation of place, near unto it. For
wars are wont to be made and stayed, and kept within the borders of those
against whom they are taken in hand: and not to be spread out into the bounds
and borders of other nations and kingdoms, the which are not enemies: because
that anger and injury does for the most part pursue the autors and causers of
the same, and not others. But in this case that comes to pass which the Poet
speaks of. Mantua, vae miserae nimium vicina Cremonae:
Poor mantua, too nigh (alack) to wretched Cremone' Land.


The Poet lamenteth the case of Mantua, the which for that it was so near unto
the city Cremona, was spoiled also by the soldiers of the Emperor.
Further, this misery and overthrow of the Israelites appears 01 thereby also
to be the greater, because it redoundeth upon that people in like manner, which
is the people of God, that is, whom God uses with a certain especial care to
protect or defend, and not to join and mingle them with the ruin or fall of
other peoples. Last of all this self same overthrow is seen to be most great,
for that it ranged also even unto the gates of Jerusalem, that is, the holy
city, and always preserved by God. And all these things came to pass when as
Sennacherib, after that he had destroyed the kingdom of the Israelites,
besieged Jerusalem it self. For he was a king of Assyria, as was Salmanazar,
who overthrew the kingdom of Israel. For as it is 2. King. 18. verse 9. In the
fourth year of King Hezechiah (which was the seventh year of Hosea son of
Elah King of Israel) Shalmaneser King of Assyria came up against Samaria, and
besieged it. And as it is also in the 13. of the same chapter, In the
fourteenth year of King Hezechiah Sennacherib king of Asshur came up against all the strong cities of Judah, and took them. And this voyage of Sennacherib into
the kingdom of Judah, was as a continuing and pursuing only of the victory of
the King of Assyria, and of the overthrow of the Israelites. So we see how God
oftentimes does plague neighbor nations, as it were houses standing one unto
another, for the wickedness and ungodliness of those that dwell near unto them. So
great a commodity it is to have a good neighbor, either people, or private
person, that is to say, a man fearing God.

Verse. 10. Declare ye it not at Gath, neither weep ye: for the house of
Aphrah roll thy self in the dust.
THe second adioynt or consequent, whereby the greatness of the same overthrow
of the Israelites is declared, The second adioynt declaring the misery of the
Iraelites.
to wit, for that by this means they be utterly mocked and laughed to scorn
of their enemies, and profane or wicked neighbors. And therefore the Prophet
forbids that it should be showed or told unto any profane people, were they
never so near unto them, such as were the Philistines, which dwelled at Geth,
or Gath. For from the west that part of Palestina was nearest of all others
unto the Jews and also unto the Israelites. The like is 2. Sam. 1. ver. 20.
concerning the death of Saul, the which is forbidden to be told among their
neighbors the Philistines, lest they should triumph against them in these
words: Tell it not in Gath, nor publish it in the streets of Ashkelon, lest
the daughters of the Philistims rejoice, lest the daughters of the
uncircumcised triumph. It appears therefore that it should be a great
overthrow, whereof the enemies of the Israelites should be so glad and joyful,
and reprochful against the Israelites, as Psalm. 137. where the Edomites so
triumph against their brethren the Jews, and stir up the rage and cruelty of
the Babylonians the more against them.

For (or in) the house of Aphrah roll thy self in the dust. This is the
figure Hypophora, What the figure Hypophora is, see Amos cap. ^. ver. 21.
or answering of an objection, the which, like as the sentence before is added
by the Prophet to move affection, for the comforting and stirring up of the
Israelites. For when as he forbad the Israelites to mourn at Geth, or Gath, it
seemed that he forbade them all mourning, and that so he took from the
Israelites that which is wont to be a great easement and comfort unto men in
miseries. But he adds, that he does not forbid that they mourn not at all:
nay that he bids them do it, and that in as ample manner, as they are wont
to do, which are most heavy, and oppressed or overtaken with greatest sadness
and mourning. And therefore grants, that they wholly roll themselves in
dust and ashes: but in a place removed and far distant from those profane or
heathen nations and men, such a place as Aphrah is where also by the name and
signification of the word (which is dust) they are stirred up to that fame
rouling themselves in the dust, and most great mourning. Now this Aphrah is a
place in the borders of Benjamin, and signifies ( dust) Josh. 18. ver. 23. And
this granting, nay, exhorting unto so great lamentation made by the Prophet,
shows the greatness of this misery, when which he threatens unto them. So
Paul 1. These. 4. ver. 13. when he says, I would not, brethren, have you
ignorant concerning them which are asleep, that ye sorrow not even as others,
which have no hope: forbids not that they should mourn for the dead at all,
but that they should not mourn after the manner of infidels. So then moderate
mourning in miseries is granted unto Christians Ecclesiast. 3. Act. 8.

Verse. 11. Thou that dwell at In the fine place.
Shaphir, go together naked with shame: she that dwells at In the places
full of cattle.
Zaanan shall not come forth in the mourning of Places adjoining.
Beth-ezel: The enemy shall receive of you His standing.
for his standing.
A Staying in the further opening of this matter, the which by an Hypotyposis,
that is, a lively setting out of things done afterward, Hypotyposis, what this
figure is, see Amos cap. 8. ver. 12.
painteth forth and shows the greatness of the punishment that was to ensue
upon the Israelites, to the end that they themselves may feel and conceive
the same, and repent at the last, if it may be, being moved with the
grieuousnes of their own case. For there is no other end of this narration or
telling of things to come, which follows, then that the people of God through
the fear of their so great destruction, should turn themselves unto God: and,
that when these things should afterward come to pass, they might be
understood for their cause to come to pass in the just judgment of God,
because that they were foretold that they should fall out upon the impenitent,
or such as would not repent. This speech therefore is not a poetical
Hyperbole, or excessive, and beyond the truth, but a sorrowful description of a
most grievous ruin, which troubles the Prophet himself: but yet commanded by
God to be told in this sort, that the weight of the punishment may be showed
to be the greater, and consequently to be to be avoided. Moreover, this whole
oration following is full of Prosopopoeiaes, What the figure Prosopopoeia is,
see Oseas cap. 6. ver. 1.
or feining of persons by the Prophet directed unto the places themselves, and
towns and cities: and full of descriptions of places, and predictions or
foretellings of things to come, and counsels, that these men shall take to
help themselves withal: that these rebels might be the better touched, and
brought as it were into the view of the matter present before their eyes: and
finally that their passing misery might in a manner be laid plainly before them
for to see and behold.

Two things to be noted in this verse.
But this verse has two points to be noted. The matter it self, or the
Hypotyposis, or lively setting out of it painted forth by the figure
Prosopopoeia, or feining of person: and the Antithesis, or contrarieties to be
noted in the words of the Prophet full of great force and efficacy. 1 The
matter it self: to wit, the fearful fleeing of the whole nation.
As for the matter, it is the most fearful fleeing and running away of that
whole nation, sometime most brave and beautiful, and well tilled by the
Israelites. For I suppose the things which the Prophet here speaks to belong
unto the Israelites, and not unto the Jews. For their destruction, and not the
Jews, is here now properly described: yea, and whereas there is in this place
mention made of Jerusalem, and of the city Lachis, this is not rehearsed for
it self, but only to amplify the ruin of the overthrow threatened unto the
Israelites. Therefore the places which are here called both Saphirical, that is
to say, beautiful, pleasant, fine: and Zaanana, that is, pasture grounds, and
full of cattle, I do think the same to be to be referred unto the kingdom of
Israel, and not unto the kingdom of Judah, because that that the same kingdom
of Israel was also most rich, fruitful, and having store of all things, as was
also the kingdom of Judah. For it also was a part of the land promised by God
unto the children of Israel, and so consequently blessed, albeit that at the
same time the Israelites had cast away the true worship of God. It appears by
the division of the land described in the book of Joshua, and by cap. 4. of
the first book of Kings, that there were belonging unto this kingdom of
Israel, both most fruitful places, and also fine and beautiful places.

The Antithesis or contrariety, the which is manifestly seen in this sentence
of the Prophet, 2. The Antithesis or matching of contraries one against
another, expressly to be gathered out of the words of this verse.
is first in the word Saphir, the which signifies fine, and beautiful, and
fair: and in these words, naked with shame. So then the places, which before
were fine and fair places, and a pleasant dwelling, the same shall now become
naked, yea, and that with shame, because the fearful tokens of the most just
wrath of God shall be extant and remaining against that country. Again, there
is an Antithesis or setting of contraries one against another in these words,
go, or flee, and the inhabitant of the place that is full of cattle shall not
come forth to help thee, or to receive thee, or aid thee, that is no
husbandman, or farmer, albeit that he never so much have, or receive of thee
that his standing, to wit, both his house which he dwells in in the fields:
and the cattle themselves, which he feeds. For the farmers, and tillers of
farms in the country have them for the most part of the city owners hired
for a rent, or for a reward, unless that they themselves be rich, and the
owners of them. But the Prophets meaning is, that those farmers, which shall
hold these farms of them, shall not meet them when they flee away, that they
may refresh and help their Landlords. The reason is added, because that the
husbandmen being so awhaped, and frighted, shall not do it for fear, so that
they shall not dare to go out of their rocks, fields, and farms. For, says
the Prophet, there shall be mourning, and it shall be heard every where, both
in the places and houses, the which shall be adjoining, and near unto these
farms. Finally, both in the towns, and in the fields there shall be great
fear, great trembling, great dismaying and abashment, so that not so much as
the country servants, who in their farms have their food and dwelling of
their masters, shall come out of those their farms and houses to comfort and
meet their masters, nor to bring them any help at all, when as they slay, and
pass by that way. And this doubtless is a description of exceeding great
misery, and calamity or distress to be lamented, whereas for fear the very
laws of nature and humanity are altogether neglected and forslowed.

Verse. 12. For the inhabitant of Maroth waited for good, but evil came from
the Lord unto the gate of Jerusalem.
A yielding a reason of this so great abashment.
THis is a rendering of a reason of this so great an abashment, the which shall
be in the inhabitants of the pasture place, and full of cattle, that is to
say, in the husbandmen. For albeit that it was showed before that this should
come to pass, because of the fear of the husbandmen: yet here is now declared
how just this fear is, and that it cannot be accused, or found fault withal.
Therefore says the Prophet, the inhabitant of the place abounding with
cattle, the which is here called the inhabitant of Maroth, or of the rough
place, that is, of the rocks and mountains, (for in the mountains as well as
in the valleys there are wont to be places for pastures, and flocks, and
herds of cattle) that same inhabitant I say, that is, the husbandmen shall
mourn, and shall wonderfully be tormented with in themselves, and shall be
afrighted for the benefit and commodities of victuals, and of the country by
the enemies gotten from them, that is, taken away by force. And especially when
as they shall see this evil or punishment to be from God, and to have reached
and come even unto the gates of Jerusalem, that is, of that holy city. There
is a like place to cause the people to bestirre themselves, and look about
them Mat. 24. ver. 15. when they shall see the abomination of desolation spoken
of by Daniel the Prophet, standing in the holy place. For then (says he) let
him that reads consider it. We are taught by this example, that the
afflictions or punishments which God sends upon his Church, The judgments of
God upon his Church ought especially to be regarded.
are especially to be considered of us, and regarded. For they are most
assured tokens of his wrath against the world, and most true prognostications
of great miseries the which shall afterward ensue unto therest of mortal men
Ezech. 9. And therefore Peter says 1. Epist. cap. 4. ver. 17. If judgment
first begin at the house of God, what shall be the end of those that obey not
the Gospel of God?

Verse. 13. O thou inhabitant of Lachish, bind the charet to the beasts of
price (or dromedaries) she is the beginning of the sin to the daughter of
Zion: for the transgressions of Israel were found in thee.
THis is a descending or coming down unto particulars. For after that he has
generally showed the laying waste and destruction of the whole land to come, A
coming unto particulars.
that he might declare the greatness of this punishment and overthrow, he now
comes down unto certain places, and describes what trembling and misery
shall be in them especially: What the figure Prosopopoeia is, see Oseas cap. 6.
ver. 1.
as in this verse by Prosopopoeia, or feining of a person, the Prophet speaks
unto Lachish a city of the kingdom of Judah, the which he shows shall be
punished for the same impiety or ungodliness which was in Israel, that thereby
Israel himself may judge, that is, that kingdom, that he must be punished for
the like ungodliness.

Two parts of this verse.
Wherefore there are two things here to be noted. One, the speedy fleeing and
fear of the city Lachish, and of the citizens. The other, 1. Their speedy
fleeing.
the cause of the same. The fleeing, and that not only upon horses, such as
posts are wont to ride on, but also upon Dromedaries. And this is a kind of
beast most quick and swift, 2. The cause thereof.
far exceeding the swiftnes of horses, as writers of histories do affirm.
For they are called Dromedaries of their swiftnes in running. whereas it is
said that this calamity or misery shall make the city of Lachish it self
afraid, it appears to be great. Ierem. 34. ver. 7. Lachish and Azekah are
called strong cities of Judah.
For Lachish was a strong city in the kingdom of Judah, but yet such a city,
the which Sennacherib afterward won: as it is Isai. 36. ver. 2. and the
citizens thereof, as we see them here in this verse willed for to do, ran
away most fearfully, whilst Salmanazar takes Samaria, and spoyleth, and
wastes it. The reason and cause of this their punishment and fleeing away with
shame is, because this city was partaker and partner in those impieties, the
which were used in th^^ kingdom of Israel, to wit, that she might offer unto
God a strange worship. For the city Lachish sacrificed unto God in the high
places. Neither is she said to be partaker only of the same impieties, or
ungodliness: but she was the author and ringleader unto the kingdom of Judah,
yea, and unto Jerusalem it self, of receiving those idolatries: whereby
appears that she was the more justly punished.

Verse. 14. Therefore shall thou give presents unto Moresheth Gath: the houses
of Achzib shall be as a lie to the Kings of Israel.
A digression with an amplification of the misery of the city Lachish.
A Digression, wherein is contained by the way an amplification of the misery
or punishment, the which shall happen unto the city Lachish. For it shall send
presents unto cities most far off, that they would give her entertainment
when she flees, and let her have place to flee unto them, to wit, unto
Morestha or Moresheth (the which city is near unto the Philistims, and unto
their town Gath or Geth) shall Lachish humbly send gifts, that it may be
lawful for her to flee thither: so great shall be the fear of the citizens of
Lachish, and so wide their flight. But by the sentence following, the which is
contained in this self same verse, the Prophet seems to signify, that this
help sought after by them of Lachish, shall stand them in no stead, and be
unprofitable unto them. For the Prophet adds, The house of Achzib (the which
is near both unto Morestha and Maraschah) shall deceive even the Kings of
Israel themselves, unto whom notwithstanding this house shall promise aid, and
shall receive gifts of them, as Morestha did of thee, O Lachish. Whereby
appears that there shall at that time be a great abashment of all peoples
near unto the Israelites, when as none shall then dare to aid and help
either the Israelites themselves, or else one another for fear of the enemies.
Whereof may worthily be now understood and concluded, that this overthrow of
the Israelites shall be very great, the which God would have signified unto
them by these so many narrations and foretellings of things to come.

Why the Prophet makes mention of Achzib.
Further, the Prophet does very fitly make mention of the treachery and lying,
wherewith the inhabitants of Achzib deceived the Kings of Israel, to show that
this aid of them of Lachish should be but vain. Wherein also he pleasantly
alludeth and has resemblance unto the name of Achzib: for Chasab, from whence
it is derived, signifies a lie. Therefore these shall indeed receive the
wages, gifts and money given them by the Kings of Israel, yet shall they not
keep their promise, nor send soldiers, nor promised aids: but shall
disappoynt them. Now if these of Achzib being both farther off from the
kingdom of Israel, then those of Moresheth from the city Lachish: and being
of more power to defend themselves against the Assyrians, then they of
Moresheth: namely, when as they of Achzib are an whole house and family
possessing many towns, and a strong nation, and populous: and Moresheth (unto
which they of Lachish shall flee) is but one only town of Judah: finally, if
they of Achzib being both requested, and receiving gifts of the Kings of
Israel, deceived them notwithstanding, and were no aid unto them: what may
they of Lachish hope for at the hands of those of Moresheth? Just nothing. For
they of Moresheth are not more constant or true of their word then those of
Achzib: nor bolder then they, nor better, nor farther off from the danger of
that destruction, nay, these cities are near one to another, Morestha,
Marescha, Achzib, Josh. 15.44.

Verse. 15. Yet will I bring an heir unto thee, O inhabitant of Mareshab, he
shall come unto Adullam, the glory of Israel.
A particular showing what shall fall out unto Mareshah.
ANother descending or coming down unto particulars, the which describes what
shall come to pass peculiarly unto the town Mareshah (the which was near
unto Achzib, and Moresheth) as the Prophet showed before concerning Lachish.
And this also appertains to the amplifying of the greatness of the fall of the
Israelites, the which shall reach unto so many towns being far off from
them. How great therefore shall it be among the Israelites themselves, upon
whom the greatest weight and burden of this destruction shall lie? In the mean
season the Prophet teaches what punishments the Lord will send upon the Jews
also, because of their sins, that being admonished or warned by these
predictions or foretellings, they might repent and amend their life.

Two parts of this verse.
But this verse has two parts. One which threatens a punishment to come upon
them of Mareshah: 1. The punishment of Mareshah.
the other the Epiphonema, or exclamation of the Prophet in these words, O
glory of Israel, or the glory of Israel. The punishment of them of Marescha
shall be this, That both they and their borders shall be possessed of those
foreign enemies and peoples, 2. The exclamation of the Prophet.
the which by the Assyrians shall be brought as Inhabitants into the kingdom
of Israel, and Samaria. And the King of Asshur brought folk from Babel, and
from Cuthah, and from Aua, and from Hamah, and from Sepharuaim, and placed them
in the cities of Samaria in stead of the children of Israel: so they possessed
Samaria, and dwelled in the cities thereof. The Assyrians therefore at that
time when as they took Samaria, invaded also the town Marescha, albeit that
it appertained unto the kingdom of Judah Josh. 15.44. And they invaded also
the towns thereof, and the coasts and borders of that country even unto
Adullam: And those coasts they afterward retained, and replenished, or filled
with new inhabitants by them brought thither, the which new inhabitants, the
Prophet terms possessors, or heirs, that is, winners of Marescha, nay
inuaders of other men's goods, and not the lawful owners, and such as held
those places by good right. Whereupon they were afterward turned out of those
places by Josias King of Judah 2. King. 23. ver. 4.8. And these Assyrian new
possessors shall come as far as unto Adullam, and so they shall also get a
great part of the kingdom of Judah, because that the shardes of the ruin and
overthrow of Israel shall reach and leap out even into the kingdom of Judah.
For Adullam is in the tribe of Judah Josh. 15.35. and a stony and rough
country. And this is the punishment and overthrow, the which from that burning
and firing of the kingdom of Israel shall reach unto the city Marescha, and
the borders thereof.

2. What the s^gure Epiphonema is, see Iona. cap. 2. ver 8.
Now the Epiphonema or exclamation of the Prophet follows, (O glory of
Israel) namely, or as if he should say, how shall thou lie cast down, trodden
under feet, confounded, when as this calamity or punishment shall come upon
thee not repenting. This therefore is a deep sigh of the Prophet fet from the
bottom of his heart, whereby he witnesses that he is greatly sorry for the
ruin of the Israelites, that he might move them also. And this Epiphonema or
exclamation did Micheas add, both because he did behold in his mind the
whole destruction of the Israelites, which was to come, as if it had been
present before his eyes, and by and by at hand: and also because that here he
would as it were out of a bypath come into the way again unto the Israelites
themselves (for whose sake especially these things were spoken) out of that
same long digression, in the which he had showed and declared the punishments
of the towns and cities near unto the Israelites. Therefore the Prophet does
both himself from his heart lament, apprehending or conceiving so sorrowful a
destruction of the Israelites: and also by this exclamation stirs them up,
that they should understand, that all whatsoever was among them at any time
magnificent, or stately, glorious, to be feared, and accounted of, should
utterly perish, and vanish away at that time. Wherefore he says, O glory of
Israel, to wit, then lost, and utterly overthrown.

Verse. 16. Make thee balde: and shave thee for thy delicate children: enlarge
thy baldnes as the eagle, for they are gone into captivity from thee.
The conclusion of the whole former threatening.
THe conclusion of the whole former threatening against the Israelites, wherein
by the figure Prosopopoeia, or feining of the person, they are stirred up unto
great mourning, that they may understand, that their punishment shall be great
also. So hardly surely can men (whenas they sleep sweetly in their sins,
What the figure Prosopopoeia is, see Oseas cap. 6. v. 1.
and please themselves in them) be awaked, and consider into how great misery
they do cast themselves. Wherein the great mercy of God is seen even toward
those which willingly run headlong into their own destruction, who so often,
and diligently warns them, rouseth them up, calls them back again, if so
be that they had ears and an heart to hear Romans 2. Further, by the outward
gesture and behavior of those which are in great sorrow, here also is painted
forth, and foretold the great sorrow and mourning of the Israelites, which was
to come. And this was in old time the behavior of them that mourned and
lamented, Baldnes, that is, the making of their heads bald, the which they
procured unto themselves pulling off their own hair: Shauing, in token of
guiltines and sorrow. So then the Israelites are called unto such a kind of
mourning and lamenting, because that this land shall loose her most tender and
delicate sons. For they shall be carried away into captivity by the
Assyrians.

CAP. 2.
Verse. 1. Woe unto them that imagine iniquity, and work wickedness upon their
beds: When the morning is light they practice it, because their hand has Hebr.
is in power.
power.
The second sermon of Micheas.
THe second Sermon of the Prophet, wherein in like manner he thundreth, and
pronounces the threatenings of God, first, against the Israelites, and
afterward against the Jews. And against the Israelites from the beginning of
this chapter unto the tenth verse of the chapter following: but against the
Jews from the same tenth verse, and so forward. Further, he makes another
foundation and ground of this sermon, then of the former. For in the former he
showed that the idolatry of the Israelites was the cause of the wrath and
vengeance of God against them: but here he teaches, that God is angry with
them, and threatens them because of the neglecting or forslowing, nay the
notorious breaking of their duty toward their neighbors: so that the first
chapter respects the first table of the law, and this the second. For the
law contains both those kinds of justice or righteousness, the which God
requires of us, that is to say, both our duty unto God, and also toward our
neighbors Romans 13.

Moreover this verse briefly sets forth the singular wickedness of that
age, the which, as I said before, was seen indifferently as well in the Jews,
as in the Israelites, Two parts of this verse.
and was rife and common every where among them: and it has two parts. 1. In
the word (Woe)
The first is contained in this word (Woe) whereby the great indignation or
displeasure of God, and his most just prepared vengeance against either any one
singular or particular person, 2. In the rest of the verse briefly describing
the great wickedness of the Israelites by the effects, which are twain.
or else a whole company is signified every where: yea even in the new
Testament, as Matt. 23. ver. 14. Woe be unto you Scribes and Pharisees,
hypocrites: for ye devour widows houses, even under a color of long
Prayers: Wherefore ye shall receive the greater damnation, and so forth in all
the other Woes there mentioned. The second part is in the other words
following in this verse, wherein this wickedness and unrecoverable lewdenes is
summaerilie or briefly described. And it is described by the effects, the
which can and are wont to be only in those persons, who are utterly, and
notoriously lewd and wicked. And these effects are two: the one, for that they
which are such, not only in the day, but also in the night, and whilst others
sleep, nay, whilst they themselves are thought to lie to take their rest,
they notwithstanding in their rest think, devise, and study in their mind,
how and by what means they may hinder and hurt their neighbor. The which the
Prophet calls, to imagine iniquity, and work wickedness. For when they lie
in their beds, they do not only muse what course and way may be found out
and devised, whereby their neighbor may be hurt, as for example, to be spoiled
of his goods: but also they do debate and reason with themselves in those
their night meditations and studies, how they may put in execution and practice
against their neighbors, thinking nothing on it, that their by them devised,
lewd and wicked purpose o^ counsel, in so much that these wretched ca^tifes,
and wholly borne in lewdnes abuse unto the both inuenting and practicing of
deceit against their neighbors, that self same very time the which God has
given unto men for rest, peace, and quiet Genesis 1. Psalm 104 Contrariwise, the
godly use both the day and the night to the considering and rehearsing of the
benefits of God toward them, and the entering into a course with themselves
how to help their neighbors. And therefore David Psalm. 1. ver. 2. says of the
godly blessed man, that his delight is in the law of the Lord, and that in his
law he does meditate day and night. And Psalm. 119. ver. 55. he affirms of
himself, saying: I have remembered thy name, O Lord, in the night, and have
kept thy law. Again ver. 62. At midnight will I rise to give thanks unto
thee, because of thy righteous judgments. This therefore is one notable effect
of the notorious and desperate lewdnes of men.

The other effect is, That forthwith early in the morning, and so soon as it
is once day, they put in execution those their devises and deceites, the which
in the night time they thought upon against their neighbors, for they have a
both hand and mind most swift, ready and powerful in such kind of actions
and wickedness, as namely being most exercised in them. Doubtless it is a sign
of notorious lewdnes, when as a man, so soon as the day begins to peep,
arises, and goes forth presently to practice that his wickedness, the which he
has devised in the night, that he may find those unready, and thinking upon
no such matter, upon the hurting of whom he studied in the darkness of the
night. So Isai 5. verse. 11. that same drinking early in the morning is alleged
for a sign of great drunkenness by the Prophet, Woe (says he) unto them that
rise up early to follow drunkenness, and to them that continue until night,
till the wine do inflame them. To be short, their hand in such matters is unto
power, that is, powerful, strong, and ready, to wit as being exercised and
acquainted with such matters. And therefore they do by these means show how
ready they are, and made unto such wickedness.

Verse. 2. And they covet fields, and take them by violence, and houses, and
take them away: so they oppress a man and his house, even man and his
heritage.
The former matter made more plain by two examples, declaring
AN explanation, and making more plain of the former matter. For that which he
had said generally before, he does now make plain, and lay open by setting
down of certain examples. And the same are two, the which do declare partly
their passing covetousness, and partly their cruelty and fiercenes against their
neighbors and those of their own stock and kindred. 1. Their covetousness
that can never be satisfied.
Their covetousness, and the same vnfilable, that so soon as they have once
coueted within themselves other men's goods, yea and that of their poor
neighbors, they shamelesly take them by violence, and carry them away boldly:
neither is it a little portion of the goods of their poor neighbors that
these so covet and take away: but their ground or ^^eldes, and whole houses,
that is to say, the self same things, which are the foundation and stay of the
whole living of the poor, and all their nourishment and maintenance. They
spoiled them therefore of their farms both in the country and also in the
city, that is to say, of their grounds, which brought them corn, of their
vineyards, Olive gardens, and the goods of their fathers and grandfathers. Such
an example there is of Achab toward poor Naboth 1 King. 21. And the Prophet
Isai pronounces a woe against such greedi-guttes cap. 5. ver. 8. saying: Woe
unto them that join house to house, and lay field to field, till there be no
place, that ye may be placed by your selves in the midst of the earth. And
these doings of both the Israelites, and also the Jews either princes or
private persons do declare their unrecoverable covetousness.

2. Their unmerciful cruelnes.
As for their cruelty and unmercifulness this verse shows, that, for because
these self same persons do oppress their neighbors with their hand, and by
violence: and not one or two alone: but the householders with their whole
families, that is, every man with his portion, to wit, not being content to
have done wrong or violence to one or twain: these barbarous and cruel persons
desire to overrun by violence, and to destroy his whole kindred, whom they
oppress. And this appears to be a cruel part, even when it is done unto
brute beasts, by that precept of God which forbids to take, or eat the
damme with her young ones Deuteronomy. 22. verse. 6. If thou find a birds nest in the
way, in any tree, or on the ground, whether they be young, or eggs, and the
damme sitting upon the young or eggs, thou shall not take the damme with the
young, but shall in any wise let the damme go, and take the young to thee,
that thou may prosper and prolong thy days. Further, as here in this place
the Prophet has joined covetousness and violence together as fellows, and
brother sins, so likewise does Paul couple them 1. These. 4. verse. 6. when he
wills, That no man oppress or defraude his brother in any matter.

Verse. 3. Therefore thus says the Lord, Behold, against this family have I
devised a plague whereout ye shall not pluck your necks, and ye shall not go
so proudly, for this time is evil.
Four things to be noted in this verse.
A Threatening of a punishment from God for the former sins. And here are four
things to be noted. First, who threatens. And it is Jehovah himself, true,
just, and almighty, who against their evil cogitation or devising matcheth his
just cogitation or devising. 1. Who threatens.
They think upon the evil of sin: but God against them thinks upon the
evil of punishment. So then look at what moment and minute of time we do
devise upon the committing of sins within our selves, GOD also does devise
with himself upon our punishment. Secondly, to whom this punishment is
threatened, 2. To whom this punishment is threatened.
to wit, unto the whole house of Jacob, and conesquently as well to the Jews,
as unto the Israelites: albeit that he begin first with the Israelites, as
being more manifestly guilty, and wicked. Thirdly, what evil, or what
punishment God threatens unto both peoples. 3. What punishment god threatens
unto them
And he threatens a most lamentable punishment, the which shall hold them as
it were by the neck, halter, and strangle them, that is to say, whereby they
shall perish miserably, and shamefully, howsoever they have lived licentiously
and atrandon before, as wanton against God, unbridled, and without any bands.
Again, out of the which (although they struggle and strive and assay never so
much) yet shall they not be able to get out, deliver and vnhamper themselves:
because they shall be held under by the hand of God, the which is most strong.
So that now, except they repent, all security and hope of escaping is taken
away from them. Fourthly, there is here also contained an amplification of this
punishment taken from the effect. And this is, 4. An amplification of this
punishment taken from the effect
that after this punishment they shall never go, or do so proudly as before,
and so renowned and glorious. For by this punishment the renown, strength,
name and glory of both these peoples shall be so cast down and darkened, that
neither people shall ever afterward be able to lift up themselves unto the old
dignity, which they had under their kings. Therefore I take the word (Romah)
in good part in this place. This to be true, that which fell out unto them,
has declared. For the kingdom of Israel utterly perished: and the kingdom of
Judah was never afterward restored unto his former glory and renown, no not
after their return from the captivity of Babylon, as may appear Ezechiel 21.
verse. 26, 27. of that which is threatened concerning the fall of Zedekiah, and
his Kingdom, never to be restored to his former dignity in these words: Thus
says the Lord GOD, I will take away the Diadem, and take off the Crown: this
shall be no more the same: I will exalte the humble and abase him that is high.
I will ouerturne, ouerturne, ouerturne it, and it shall be no more until he
come whose right it is, and I will give it him. The reason follows in our
Prophet, A reason of this so great punishment.
because all that time following shall be an evil time, and a time of
affliction or trouble. For albeit that the affliction of the Israelites, and
especially of the Jews, were eased, and diminished or lessened by GOD, and
their condition or estate changed: yet the print and token of this judgment of
GOD the which is now threatened against both those peoples remained and abode
still always, even very grievous, and are manifest also at this day. It shall
therefore be an evil time. By these so many true and earnest descriptions of
the punishment to, come the purpose of GOD was to recall them unto a better and
more sound mind, were they never so great Hypocrites, and stubborn.

the portion given them sometimes by GOD the Lord in token of his favor.

Verse. 6. They that prophesied, prophecy ye not. They shall not prophecy to
them, neither shall they take shame.
The figure Hypophora, or answering an objection. What this figure is, see Amos
cap. 5. ver. 21.
THis is the figure Hypophora, whereby he answers an objection or exception of
that stubborn people, especially the Israelites, and by the self same the
Prophet not only signifies, but also declares and lively painteth out as it
were in colors the impiety or ungodliness, and the more then brutish
contempt of God among them in this nation. This then was the exception of this
people, and the same springing from notorious impudency or shamelesnes and
contumacie or stubbornnes against God, to wit, The Prophets shall not prophecy
among us, that is to say, we will not suffer them to threaten these things
unto us, yea, if any messenger of such fear and threatenings shall come unto
us, we will send him packing, and will not suffer him to speak, to terrify or
fear our men. So Amos 7. ver. 12, 13. Amaziah says unto Amos, O thou seer,
go, flee thou away into the land of Judah, and there eat thy bread, and
prophecy there: but prophecy no more at Bethel: for it is the Kings chapel,
and it is the Kings court. So Isai. 30. ver. 10. The people say unto the Seers,
See not: and to the Prophets, prophecy not to us right things: but speak
flattering things unto us, prophecy errors. This was passing wantonness against
God, and blockishnes unheard of, as if God therefore could be let in his
work, because some stoppes and lets are laid in the way of his ministers, and
for that they are forbidden to threaten those judgments of God by the ungodly.
The Prophet therefore answers this disobedience two ways. 1. God his
Prophets shall prophecy, whether they will or no, that forbid the^
First, nay the Prophets of God shall preach and prophecy among you, in spite
of your teeth, and in your hearing notwithstanding. Hereof there is example 1.
King. cap. 22. ver. 8. in the Prophet Michaiah, who tells the truth,
notwithstanding the wicked King Achab hate him never so much, and cannot abide
to hear him. And Amos 7. ver. 16. the Prophet cease not to denounce God his
judgments against Amaziah the priest, albeit he were forbidden by him to
prophecy in the land of Israel. Secondly, albeit these Prophets of God preach
not, Though the Prophets being forbidden, prophecy not, yet shall not the
people therefore escape unpunished.
or prophecy not unto this people, shall this people therefore feel no
punishment? Therefore in my judgment the second part of this verse is an
interrogation, or asking of a question thus: If the Prophets prophecy not (to
wit, as being stopped and let by one means or other) shall they therefore
(namely the people) not take shame? And it is easily understood, what the
Prophet would have understood, to wit, This people shall not therefore be free
from the punishment to come, although they will not have the Prophets of God to
threaten the same unto them. The reason whereof follows in the next verse.

Verse. 7. O thou that art named the house of Iaacob, is the spirit of the Lord
shortened? are these his works? Are not my words good to him that walks
vprightlie?
A rendering of a reason of the former repreheasion.
THis is the rendering of a reason of the former reprehension, taken from the
nature of God, and the force and power of his spirit, the which by no means
can be let, changed, restrained, shortened, shifted off, or pent up, but that it
will effect or bring to pass those things which God wills, and has decreed,
howsoever men seek shifts and starting holes, Three parts of this verse.
and go about to mock and dally with God. And this verse has three certain
points to be noted. 1. The manner of speaking.
The first is the manner of speaking. The second, the epithet or title the which
is given unto the Israelites, unto whom the Prophet speaks in this place.
The third, the manifold reason, 2. The title given to the Israelites
for the which they are showed to be reproved worthily, and this their
cogitation or surmise and mocking of God declared to be altogether absurd or
foolish, and blasphemous. For the first, 3. Many reasons, why they are
reprehended.
the manner of speaking is an earnest interrogation or asking of a question, and
the same repeared, and such also they will have themselves accounted for to
be: yea they are so termed of other people. And by this name they do show
that they are come of Jacob the servant of God, and Patriarch, that they are
his seed and family blessed and chosen of God before or above others, and who
therefore ought the more to know and reverence God. But in this place there is
a certain secret Antithesis or contrariety between To be called the house or
family of Jacob, and to be so in deed. They are called so both of themselves
and also of others: 3. Three reasons of this reprehension.
but they are not so truth. Further the reasons of this reprehension, and of
their foolish surmise of God, nay of their blasphemous suttletie (whilst to
mock the threatenings of God, 1. The spirit of God is not bound though the
ministers thereof be so served.
they do forbid his Prophets to prophecy and to preach among them) are three.
The first, that the spirit of God cannot therefore be let or bound, albeit that
men his ministers and preachers be let and bound. And thus much does Paul
witness 2. Tim. 2. ver. 9. where he says: Wherein (to wit, in the gospel). I
suffer trouble, as an evil doer, even unto bonds: but the word of God is not
bound. For the efficacy or force thereof does not depend or hang upon the
power, or mouth of men the ministers, but God always wholly has the same in
his own power, and uncorrupted and undiminished. There it shall always be
effectual or of force, as Isai. 55. ver. 11. God himself does witness, saying:
So shall my word be that goes out of my mouth: it shall not return unto me
void, but it shall accomplish that which I will, and it shall prosper in the
thing whereto I sent it. 2 Their works are such, as god can never allow nor
bear
The second reason, because the works, for the which God threatens these
things unto them, are not the works of Jehovah, that is, such works, the
which God can at any time allow or bear with all, but works clean contrary
unto the justice or righteousness of God, and therefore such, as which (albeit
all his Prophets should for ever hold their tongues) God will punish, and be
avenged on. There in this place the works of Jehovah are by the figure
Metalepsis called such works, the which are acceptable unto God: What the
figure Metalepsis is, see Oseas cap. 4. v. 18
and the which do agree with his commandments. The third reason, is taken
from the wonted and usual manner of the working of God, the which is manifest
unto all men, and cannot be denied, to wit, 3. God is never sharp unto the
godly.
that God is never wont to be sharp and bitter unto the godly: for as much
therefore as he now shows himself to be such a one unto the Israelites, it
is a token that they are utterly ungodly, and consequently worthy to be
punished: albeit that among them his Prophets be silent and say nothing.
Wherefore by the works of God, and the feeling of them toward such as are in
deed godly, and fearing him, the Prophet shows that these men shall not
therefore be cleared, nor found just, albeit the Prophets hold their peace.
For if they were godly, the works of God also toward them should be joyful,
and full of peace, not of judgment. And even hereby he answers a secret
complaint of theirs, as if they were punished of God beyond their deserving.

Verse. 8. But he that was yesterday my people, is risen up on the other side,
as against an enemy: they spoil the bewtifull garment from them that pass by
peaceably, as though they returned from the war.
An amplification of the former reasons of the judgment of God against them.
AN amplification of the former reasons of the judgment of God against the
Israelites by the reckoning up of the sins, which they committed. And first
of all there are here recited two, namely covetousness and cruelty, and both of
them public, and commonly reigning among them without punishment. Their
cruelty, for that they rise up and set upon all men, as if they were enemies,
1. Cruelty.
looking for, thinking on, yea or deserving no such thing at their hands, as
were those, which lived peaceably and quietly with them. This saying of
Micheas seems to tax or reprove a public licentiousnes or over great
liberty in ranging against all men, the which at that time was unpunished
among the Israelites. For in that age especially wherein Micheas prophesied
the Israelites were accustomed unto civil wars among themselves. Further he
seems to call again to remembrance that example of cruelty, the which the
Israelites lately had showed against the Jews their brethren and neighbors,
when as they spoiled and carried away of them two hundredth thousand persons,
that is, of men, women, and children, one with another, without al pity or
mercy. Read 2. Chr. 28. ver. 8. Of this cruelty and sleaing and spoiling one
of another, Isai seems to speak cap. 9. ver. 20.21. when he says: Every one
shall eat the flesh of his own arm: Manasseh Ephraim, and Ephraim Manasseh,
and they both shall be against Judah. Therefore it is not without an Emphasis
or carrying a vehemency and force with it, when as Micheas says ( yesterday)
that is to say lately, and as yet in most fresh memory you showed your selves
cruel and rash against all men, yea even your brethren. For these things were
done under Achaz King of Judah, and Phasea King of Israel, under whom also
this our Micheas lived. 2. Covetousness.
Their outrageous covetousness is also described, in that they spoiled all men,
even those which among their neighbors were their fellows: finally they
robbed all their country men indifferently, so unbridled was then their
lewdnes and robbery. So commonly they use to do in Scotland and Aphrica. But
whereas he says, Ye have taken away the beautiful garment over against the
garment: He signifies that they took away from all men their best clothing,
as if it had been from their enemies, for these words to take away the cloak
(the which among those people was a most precious and beautiful kind of
garment) over against the garment, is as much to say, as to take away the
cloak or some such other upper garment, the which as the more costly, we use
to wear vpmost or over the rest. For that is said to be over against the
garment, the which is put over other apparel as the more handsome and cleanly.

Verse. 9. The Women of my people have ye cast out from their pleasant houses:
and from their children have ye taken away my glory continually.
An example of their cruelty and covetousness.
HEre is rehearsed a notable example both of this their cruelty, and also
covetousness: for that in the time of quiet and peace they notwithstanding
handled and used with all cruelty even women themselves and children, who
otherwise are wont to be privileged and go free in the time of wars and
battle. As for the women (a fearful and vnwarlie kind of people) they
thrust them out of their houses by force, or else carried them away from them
violently. The which seems to be referred unto the self same cruel part of
theirs, the which is 2. Chr. 28. ver. 8. of the great multitude of those of
Judah, led away captive, reported in that place thus: And the children of
Israel took prisoners of their brethren, two hundredth thousand of Women,
sons and daughters, and carried away much spoil of them, and brought the
spoil to Samaria. But these houses of theirs he calls the houses of
delites, or pleasant houses, in the which those women were from their
childehood most tenderly brought up, and therefore this trouble was so much
the more heavy and grievous unto them. For the woman kind it is mostlie to
keep the house and to be at home, and look what houses they have once and
from their childhood been used unto, they are greatly delited withal: and
therefore are they wont to be drawn from them with groat sorrow and heaviness.
So the^ these words ( Their pleasant houses, or the houses of delites) are set
down greatly to move affection. Further, these self same Israelites do
vncourteouslie and coueteously spoil or bereave the children whilst they are
yet most young and tender of their garments and clothing, the which (because in
that age they are wont to be given them somewhat trim and costly) they are
called in this place ( Hadari) that is, precious ornaments. And the Prophet
notes out little children, being as yet most tender, to the end that this
their covetousness may seem to be the more cruel. Last of all he adds ( for
ever or continually) that is, making no end of robbing and spoiling. The which
also does greatly amplify or increase their sins and wickedness. Confer
with this place that of the 12. Psalm. ver. 5. Now for the oppression of the
needy, and for the sighs of the poor, I will up says the Lord, and set at
liberty him, whom the wicked has snared. And Psalm. 146. ver. 9, The Lord
keeps the strangers: he relieueth the fatherles and widow: but he
overthrows the way of the wicked.

Verse. 10. Arise and depart, for this is not your rest: because it is polluted,
it shall destroy you with a sudden destruction.
The conclusion.
THe conclusion. Therefore these shall be punished, and that worthily, by God:
and shall of God be driven into exile or banishment by force, being spoiled of
all their goods, and led away from their own native country, like as they
spoil others, and draw them away from their country and houses. But here in
this verse there is contained a secret Hypophora, What the figure Hypophora is,
see Amos cap. 4. ver 21.
or answering of an objection. For when as the land wherein the Israelites
dwelt, was given unto them by God himself peculiarly for a possession, as the
godly do acknowledge Psalm. 44. ver. 3. They inherited not the land by their
own sword, neither did their own arm save them: but thy right hand, and
thine arm, and the light of thy countenance, because thou did favor them:
these took exception and objected, That therefore they and their successors
should be and dwell in it for ever. God therefore answers. Not so, for you
have polluted or defiled that land. Therefore it also shall spue you out, and
that most violently, and so the captivity or banishment of your whole nation
shall be most sorrowful, and universal. So God threatens the Israelites
Leuit. 18. ver. 25. saying: And the land is defiled, therefore I will visit
the wickedness thereof upon it, and the land shall vomit out her inhabitants.
Therefore certain countries, and certain cities are given us by God to be
inhabited, Why God gives us lands and countries to inhabit or dwell in.
that in them we should serve God holilie, not that we should with our sins
defile those lands. Wherefore Psalm 107. ver. 34. David teaches us, That God
turns a fruitful land into barrenes for the wickedness of them that dwell
therein. And ver. 39.40. that for the same cause Men are diminished, and
brought low by oppression, evil, and sorrow: he powers contempt upon
Princes, and causes them to err in desert places out of the way.

Verse. 11. If a man walk in the spirit, and would lie falselie, saying: I will
prophecy unto thee of wine, and of strong drink, he shall even be the
Prophet of this people.
Unto what contempt of God and his doctrine the Israelites were come.
NNow at the last God shows into what contempt at the length, or despising of
his Majesty and true doctrine these fellows are fallen, namely, that now they
would have no true Prophets: but would hear only false and lying Prophets,
and such as should feed men with wind, that is to say, mock them with vain
and feined promises. Of such speaks Jeremy cap. 22. ver. 22. The wind shall
feed all thy Pastors. And cap. 5. ver. 13. And the Prophets shall be as wind
and the word is not in them: thus shall it come unto them. Two things to be
noted in this verse.
And Hosea cap. 12. ver. 1. Ephraim is fed with the wind, and follows after
the East wind. So then there are two things to be noted in this verse. The
one, the phrase or kind of speaking, 1. The phrase. What the figure Mimesis
is, see Oseas cap 4. ver. 18.
the which describes or sets forth this disobedience of the Israelites. And
it is a Mimesis, or imitating and following of the words of the false
Prophets. For he expresses the words of the false Prophets, that he may the
more easelie lay the whole matter before their eyes, and show it to be true.
The words were, I will preach (said these false Prophets) or Prophecy unto
thee for wine, and for Sicera, that is, for every sweet drink, and strong,
such as will make drunk, the which shall be unto thee and grow this year.
For I think that in these words is not so much signified the price or reward
(the which notwithstanding these Prophets required, as namely being in deed
hirelings) as the thing it self to be noted, whose increase they promised
unto the Israelites as from the mouth of God, that they might turn them away
from the threatenings of the true Prophets, and from the fear of the judgments
of God. Example 1. King. 22. ver. 12. in all the false Prophets which agree
with Zidkiiah against Michaiah, and prophecy unto the King, saying: Go up to
Ramoth Gilead, and prosper: for the Lord shall deliver it into the Kings hand.
And ver. 24. When Zidkiiah smites Michaiah, and asks him, when went the
spirit of the Lord (which he never had) from me to speak unto thee? So Ierem
28. ver. 2. Hananiah the false Propher lies, and says: Thus speaks the Lord
of hosts, the God of Israel, saying, I have broken the yoke of the King of
Babel. And therefore against such in the chapter following ver 8. Jeremy says
thus unto the people: Thus says the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel, let
not your Prophets and your south sayers that be among you, deceive you, neither
give ear unto your dreams, which you dream. For they prophecy you a lie in
my name: I have not sent them, says the Lord. And ver. 21. setting down
particular examples: Thus says the Lord of hosts the God of Israel, of Ahab
the son of Kolaiah, and of Zedekiah, the son of Maaseiah, which prophecy
lies unto you in my name, Behold, I will deliver them into the hand of
Nebuchad-nezzar King of Babel, and he shall slaie them before your eyes.
Therefore concerning the Prophesies of such as these, it shall fall out as Paul
writes 1 Thessalonians. 5. ver. 3. When they shall say peace and safety, then shall
come upon them sudden destruction, as the travail upon a woman with child,
and they shall not escape. Wherefore the Prophet to show this humor of the
false prophets in preaching lies for gain uses the letter Lamed, and not the
word (gnal) that as I said, he might signify that these when afflictions or
troubles were at hand, setting themselves against them promised that all should
be well, but falsely notwithstanding.

2. A description of the false prophets by two titles.
The second thing that is here to be noted, contains a description or setting
out of these false Prophets by their epithets or titles, the which are here
twain: for they are said To walk in the spirit or wind, that is to say, to
seek after and boast of vain things. For the word spirit or wind in this
place, 1. That they walk in the wind.
and often else where does signify empty promises, smokie boastings, and
vain, as it does Oseas 8. ver. 7. For they have sown the wind, and shall
reap the whirlewinde. And Proverb. 11. ver. 29. He that troubles his own
house, shall inherit the wind. So then these false Prophets are but things
puffed up with wind, clouds without water, as Jude says in his epistle ver.
12. speaking swelling vanity, as Peter says Epist. 2. cap. 2. ver. 18. In a
word, great boasters, but vain. Also they are said to lie falsely. 2. That
they lie falsely.
For they are found to promise false things, that is to say, not ignorantly, as
it often falls out beyond our hope, but wittinglie and knowing of it, and
therefore to lie, that is, of set purpose to deceive men, whereby their offense
is showed to be the more shameful, and the less excuseable. After the same
manner, and with the same colors are false prophets painted out by Peter in
his second epistle cap. 2. and by Jude in his epistle. And therefore they are
most mad, and enemies unto their own salvation, which wish for such teachers,
follow them, or prefer them before the true prophets of God. The which thing
notwithstanding the spirit of God has foretold shall fall out unto us under the
gospel. 2. Tim. 3.

Verse. 12. I will surely gather thee wholly, O Iaacob: I will surely gather the
remnant of Israel: I will put them together as the sheep of Bozzah, even as
the flock in the midst of their fold: the cities shall be full of brute of
the men.
What follows their contempt of the truth and love of lying.
A Consequence, or showing what follows after these great sins. For the
Prophet shows, what follows worthylie of so notorious and shameless public
contempt or despising of the truth and loving of lying, to wit, utter
destruction of the whole nation, and the same also most miserable. So Paul 2.
These. 2. verse. 11, 12. teaches what should ensue upon those that received not
the love of the truth, that they might be saved, saying: Therefore God shall
send them strong delusion, that they should believe lies, that al might be
damned, which believed not the truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness. The
destruction of the whole nation of Israel
First then in this verse is set forth the fall and destruction of this whole
nation of the Israelites, the which is distinguished or severed out from the
Jews, because that God will gather together all Jacob out of every quarter of
theirs, and will assemble together the Israelites either lying hid and
scattered for fear of their enemies, or continuing and abiding yet by
companies, and commonly in their towns and cities. For the Prophet uses such
words as do contain all the kinds of gathering of a thing together, to wit,
( Asaph, and Kabats) God then will gather them together, not to save them, but
to slay them, as sheep of Bozra, that is, fat, and fit, and appointed for
the slaughter. For Bozra was a pasture country, and a rich, from whence most
fat sheep and meet for meat, were set to the shambles, and were killed.
And hereunto alludeth the Prophet Isai cap. 34. verse 6. when he says, The
sword of the Lord is filled with blood: it is made fat with the fat and with
the blood of the lambs and the goats, with the fat of the kidneies of the
rams: for the Lord has a sacrifice in Bozrah; and a great slaughter in the
land of Edom. So the^ the Lord will gather the children of Israel together unto
the slaughter: both all, and together, yea and even those which hoped that they
should be left and saved, at least wife had escaped many dangers. For GOD will
not spare even these, neither shall they therefore escape. To be short, they
shall be gathered together by God as a flock of sheep to be slain, and that
same multitude shall be great, the which in those places shall be gathered
together, and as a great flock, they that are gathered together and captives,
shall in the fold by reason of the multitude be in a tumult and uproar.
Therefore these so many threatenings the overthrow of this whole kingdom of
Israel be it never so grent is described.

Verse. 13. The breaker up shall come up before them: they shall break out and
pass by the gate, and go out by it, and their King shall be before them, and
the Lord shall be upon their heads.
The great misery of the ruin and destruction of this people.
NOw in this verse the great misery and most heavy plight of the overthrow and
destruction of the same people is lively described, as it were by a certain
laying of it open unto the eye to be seen: namely, that both they with so many
their miseries to come might be moured and repent: and we also which read
these things by this description or table of the judgment of God against the
rebels and ungodly and wicked men, might be afraid on our own behalf, and
therefore live holilie and justly: The description of their misery contains
sour things.
but the description of this misery seemoth to contain these four things.
First, the assault and breaking in of their enemies upon the^. For their
enemies are said that they shall be breakers up: 1 The breaking in of their
enemies.
for they shall not use the Israelites whom they shall take, gently and
courteously, but sharply, they shall handle them hardly and cruelly, and shall
lead them away, as those sometimes lead a way unto their quarries and mine
pits such as were condemned to dig metals. For the enemies as they go shall
break up all things before the Israelites, to show the furiousnes of their
minds, and their anger against them, the which is a most miserable thing unto
them that are now captives, 2 They shall go before the^, and lead them
through the midst of the ruins of their cities.
and brings great trembling and fear. Secondly, these enemies are said that
they shall march or go before the Israelites, and lead them through the
midst of the ruin of their cities, to wit, in despite and contempt, and to
increase and add sorrow unto them afflicted or troubled already. Therefore both
the enemies themselves shall pass through the gates of the cities, cast down
and broken by them, and also shall lead the captive Israelites in spite of
their teeth by the rubbish of them, miserable and lamentable to behold. This
may be the first sense or meaning: or also that the multitude of the captive
Israelites may be showed, Another meaning of this place.
the Prophet said that it shall come to pass, that the gates of their cities
shall be broken down because it would be too tedious or troublesome and long
to lead them through the gates by couples, and two by two: Therefore that they
may go gathered together, and by heaps and companies, the gates shall be
thrown down, and these poor miserable Israelites shall follow their enemies
going before them, as the flock or heard follows Polyphemus and their
hangman. Thirdly, 3. The king of the Israelites shall be among them
their King also is said that he shall be among them captive, and after the
manner and show of a triumph (the which by the enemies shall be made of them)
to be showed first of all, and to be led laden with chains and irons among the
other captives. The which sight and show of captivity is no doubt most
pitiful, to wit, when as not only the people, but also the king himself, and
the princes are seen to be in the same misery, yea and that foremost, 4 God
himself shall go before them, as Captain of their enemies band.
and put unto vile shame and reproach. Fourthly, it is added, God himself shall
go before, as the Captain of the enemies band, as Abd. cap. 1. namely, that
both the Israelites and also other men may understand, that these things came
to pass worthily for their sins, and that they are the vengeance of God
justly angry against them, from the which they cannot now deliver themselves,
when as God favors their enemies, and in his anger has forsaken them. These
questionles are fearful things, and to be trembled at, the which ought to
breed in our minds a wonderful and fearful conceiving of the judgments of
God: and so consequently to call us back by times, from all kind of
wickedness, least we fall into the same evils or punishments. That which the
Christian captives at this day have experience of under the Turks, as for
example the Hungarians.

CAP. 3.
Verse. 1. And I said, Hear, I pray you, O heads of Iaacob, and ye Princes of
the house of Israel: The third Sermon to the princes especially of the kingdom
of Israel.
should not ye know judgment?
THe third sermon, the which now appertains peculiarly unto the Rulers and
Princes of the people, and especially of the people of Israel: like as from the
first chapter ver. 6. unto the 10. verse of this chapter, he denounces
threatenings unto the kingdom of Israel: and from the tenth verse which
follows, unto the kingdom of Judah. Although it appear out of other
Prophets that the same vices reigned also among the Jews, as David Psalm. 14.4.
complaining that all things generally were out of frame in all estates, says:
Do not all the workers of iniquity know that they eat up my people, as they
eat bread? they call not upon the Lord. Now Micheas in order after that he
has generally described the sins of the whole people, now shows
peculiarly the notorious wickedness of the Princes, unto whom therefore he does
also threaten the greater and more heavy judgments of God. For princes by
their virtue and godliness ought to shine as lights unto the people. And
therefore Jeremy cap. 5. verse. 5. when he has found things far amiss
among the vulgar and simple people, thinking to find the case better among the
great ones says: I will get me unto the great men and will speak unto
them: for they have known the way of the Lord, and the judgment of their God:
but these have altogether broken the yoke, and burst the bands. Wherefore the
higher that these be above the rest, the more foul are their vices, and give
unto others an example and boldness to sin. So that such men need an especial
reprehension, and the same more sharp then the rest of the people. But in this
place there are reckoned up two sorts of men, the which are above others, to
wit, the politic magistrates, and the Prophets as they were then called. And
first of all he sets upon the magistrates: and afterward these prophets.

1 What is spoken.
Now in this verse there may be noted three things. First what is spoken:
Secondly, who speaks it: Thirdly, to whom he speaks it. Concerning that
which is spoken, 2. Who speaks.
it is said to be the duty of the Nobles among the people of the magistrates
of the Rulers and Princes, and that above and before the rest, To know justice,
3. To whom he speaks.
or righteousness, and indeed to perform and execute the same. Thereof they
are called Mischphatim, Judges. For Mischphat, To have known God, To have
learned Christ, where, with the knowledge of the truth, and of faith, the
practice also, and the same sincere or sound is joined.

Verse. 2. But they hate the good, and love the evil: they pluck off their
skins from them: and their flesh from their bones.
A showing of the contrary vices to be in these Rulers, unto those virtues,
which in the verse before were required of them
AN Antithesis, or showing of the contrary to be in these Princes and Rulers,
unto that, which in the verse before going was required of them. For against
the true office of good Magistrates and Rulers of the people, such as he
described before, he opposes or matcheth the manners, life, and public and
manifest deeds of these, whom he now speaks unto, that is to say, their
heinous sins, the which are contrary altogether unto that due^y set down
before. For if it be considered what they are in themselves, they do not only
hate that which is good, that is to say, those things which are holy and just:
but also love with all their heart that which is evil, that is to say,
whatsoever is both impious or ungodly against God: and also unjust against
their neighbors or men. And this is the description or setting out of these
men, whereby they are showed to be utterly strangers from the same both
knowledge, and also life, the which as Citizens, as men, as Israelites they
ought to lead and have. But if they be weighed according unto the person laid
upon them by God, that is to say, as they are Magistrates and Rulers of the
people, they are in this behalf worse also then others. For they do not only
utterly neglect, or take no care nor keep of the people at all committed unto
them, and are given to the feeding of themselves alone Ezech. 33.34. but also
they miserably devour that self same people, that is to say, the sheep
wherewith they are put in trust, and they do not only fleece them, but also
flay them, and devour, and snatch unto themselves the flesh of them so flayen,
plucked off from their bones. Wherein is lively painted forth both the
vnfilable covetousness of these Magistrates, and also their very tyrannous
cruelty.

Verse. 3. And they eat also the flesh of my people, and flay off their skin
from them, and they break their bones, and chop them in pieces, as for the
pot, and as flesh within the caldron.
An amplification of the vices before described.
AN amplification of the vices described before in all the heads of this people.
And this amplification is made both of the quality of the people, the which is
so cruelly spoiled by them, and also of the cruel manner, after which they are
spoiled. As for the people whom these do handle and spoil after this sort, it
is the people of God himself, his inheritance, his own peculiar portion. So
Peter calls the faithful Epist. 1. cap. 2. ver. 9. But ye are a chosen
generation, a royal Priesthood, an holy nation, a peculiar people. And Paul.
Tit. 2. ver. 14. says, that Christ gave himself for us, that he might redeem
us from all iniquity, and purge us to be a peculiar people unto himself. So
to come more directly to this people by the cruelty and covetousness of these
bad rulers thus abused God himself says of them Exodus 19. ver. 5.6. Ye shall
be my chief treasure above al people, though all the earth be mine: ye shall be
unto me also a kingdom of priests, and an holy nation. Thus then was
committed unto the charge and trust of these heads and governors not a
company of men of base regard and account, as other people were over whom God
sets Kings or Princes. Wherefore these men committed a double sacrilege:
first, in that they rob and spoil a people by God committed unto them to
keep: and secondly, because they spoil that people, which is God his own
peculiar people. And the manner of this spoiling, the which by them is used, is
most cruel and barbarous. For they tear away the skin, and the flesh, and
the bones of the people, as butchers and slaughter men do, and when they cut
them, they tear them asunder with a noise and rattling, and slay them with
violence and force, as the most cruel butchers, and Cooks are wont to do. So
then they break the bones of this people, and chop them in pieces, as is used
to be done when as flesh is put into the caldron to be sodden, and eaten
afterward. And these things were done of these heads and princes, when as in
the courts of law, After what manner the rulers are said to have committed the
former cruelties.
and seats of judgments, they oppressed the poor under pretense or color of
law, spoiled them of their goods, set justice to sale, and did other like
things most wickedly, which Amos sets down cap. 5. ver. 11. and cap. 8.
Isai. 1. Ierem. 5.

Verse. 4. Then shall they cry unto the Lord, but he will not hear them: he
will even hide his face from them at that time, because they have done wickedly
in their works.
The threatening of a punishment for these sins.
A Threatening of the punishment, the which shall worthily follow their so great
sins. And it is in a word, That they also because of these their wickednesses
shall be forsaken of God in their most afflicted or troubled estate, albeit
they call and cry unto God never so much. For such a crying is like unto the
tears of Esau, as namely, being caused of the only feeling of punishment, not
of any faith, or love unto God: not springing of any earnest motion of
penitencie, or affection of repentance: and therefore it is not heard of God.
So speaks the writer to the Hebrews of the counterfeit tears of Esau
proceeding not from true repentance, but from grief that he was prevented of
the blessing cap. 12. ver. 17. For ye know how that afterward also, when he
would have inherited the blessing he was rejected: for he found no place to
repentance, though he sought the blessing with tears. And so James teaches
why we often are not heard in our prayers cap. 4 ver. 3. Ye ask (says he) and
receive not, because ye ask amiss, that ye might consume it on your lusts.
Moreover, this is a punishment of all others the most grievous, namely, to be
forsaken of God, and that in the most hard time of our affliction. For so are
we shown to be both cast off of God, and hateful unto him because of our
wickedness: and therefore to perish for ever both in soul and body. So
Ierem. 11. ver. 11. the like is threatened in these words: Therefore thus says
the Lord, behold, I will bring a plague upon them, which they shall not be able
to escape: and though they cry unto me, I will not hear them. And Zach. 7.
ver. 13. Therefore it is come to pass, that as he cried, and they would not
hear, so they cried, and I would not hear, says the Lord of hosts. And
therefore David Psalm. 55. ver. 1. prays unto God against this, saying: Hear
my prayer, O God, and hide not thy self from my supplication.

Verse. 5. Thus says the Lord, concerning the Prophets that deceive my people,
and bite them with their teeth, and cry peace, but if a man put not into their
mouths, they prepare war against him.
THe second sort of those which excel, or are in authority among the people,
to wit, those which either are in deed Prophets, or else at least wise in name,
as these, whom in this place he reprehendeth, would seem to be. Moreover,
Three parts of this verse.
this verse has three things to be noted. First, who speaks: God Jehovah,
that these threatenings might have their authority and credit against the never
so colorable, 1 Who speaks.
and stubborn thwarting and exception of these men, 2. To whom he speaks.
unto whom they are denounced or threatened. Secondly, to whom he speaks:
namely, unto the false Prophets, whom he described before cap. 2. ver. 11. and
in this place calls liars, and authors of the error of the people. Thirdly,
why God reproves them, to wit, 3. Why God reproves them.
because they altogether abused his word, and so holy a vocation or calling,
as they falsely and rashly took upon themselves, namely, the calling of a
Prophet. There is then a double cause of the reprehension: one, for that they
deceive, and cause men to err: an other, for that these men, whom they so
deceive, are the people of God, whom God commanded, and will have to be
instructed truly out of his word, and not lyingly out of the dreams of men.
Further, the course that these false Prophets take in their dealing and
preaching is here also by an Hypotyposis, What the figure Hypotyposis is, see
Amos cap. 8. ver. 12.
or lively description painted forth, as if it were in a manner to be seen
with the eye, wherein their mere covetousness, and mockery of the word of God,
is most impudent and shameless. Which two vices Peter also has noted in false
Prophets 2. Epist. cap. 2. ver. 3, 13, 14. of whom he says: And through
covetousness shall they with feined words make merchandise of you, and shall
receive the wages of unrighteousness, as they count it pleasure to live
deliciously for a season: they have hearts exercised with covetousness. And as
for the covetousness which here he reprehendeth in these false Prophets, it
appears herein, for that they threaten boldly terrible cursings, and
destructions to come unto men that offer, and give them nothing. So then they
prophecy for rewards, as hereafter ver. 11. and Ierem. 5. And concerning their
manifest mockery of the word of God, and of so holy a calling, the same is in
this, that when as they are well fed of any man, they promise unto him, as it
were out of the mouth of God, peace, and all most happy things. The manners,
gurmandise, and begging, and covetousness of Monks and Friars, especially the
begging ones, as they are called, could not possibly be described and set out
more truly and better, according unto that old saying. O Monachi, vestri
stomachi, sunt amphora Bacchi:
Vos estis, Deus est testis, certissima pestis.
In rude like meeter thus: O monkish asses, your bellies which passes, are
iollie wine glasses:
Ye are, God says so, without any no, a most certain woe.


Verse. 6. Therefore night shall be unto you for a vision, and darkness shall be
unto you for a divination, and the sun shall go down over the Prophets, and
the day shall be dark over them.
A threatening of punishment unto these false prophets.
A Threatening of punishment, the which altogether agrees with the wickedness
described before, that is to say, the abuse of the office of a Prophet. And
this is, that it shall doubtless come to pass, that they shall manifestly be
found to be void and without the gift of prophecy, and trifelers, and lying
mates, who have seen and heard nothing from God, and therefore neither can,
nor could prophecy. Further, this punishment is described with many Metaphors,
and similitudes of things the which are taken from things bodily, What the
figure Metaphora is, see Amos cap. 4. ver. 12.
and which may be seen unto things without body, and invisible, or which
cannot be seen, because that prophecy is every where in the holy Scripture
called a vision. So then this darkness, dimnes, night, the which shall come upon
these Prophets, do signify and betoken both a wanting of God his inspiration,
and also the passing ignorance of these men, which call themselves Prophets, in
matters appertaining unto God, the which ignorance is called both night, and
also thick darkness. For God did not furnish them with his Spirit, nor will
furnish them to prophecy, and this shall all men indifferently know. Wherefore
they shall detest and abhor them as liars and deceivers, and find them to be
most ignorant.

Verse. 7. Then shall the Seers be ashamed, and the South sayers confounded, yea
they shall all cover their lips: for they have no answer from God.
An amplification of the former punishment
AN amplification of the punishment threatened before, the which is taken from
things adjoined with it, or waiting upon it, to wit, their shame and reproach.
For it shall come to pass that their subtletie and deceiving shall be so
manifestly found out, that they themselves also shall wonderfully be ashamed of
it. Therefore they shall cover their beards, that they may not be thought to
be Prophets any longer, for sorrow and heaviness Leuit. 13. to wit, the which
they shall conceive and feel in their mind, for that they are known and
found out to be such.

Verse. 8. Yet notwithstanding I am full of power by the spirit of the Lord, and
of judgment, and of strength to declare unto Iaacob his transgression, and to
Israel his sin.
The figure Hypophora what it is, see Amos cap. 5. ver. 21.
THis is the figure Hypophora. For he answers an objection, the which might
be made out of the former verse: namely, if our Prophets shall have no answer
nor vision from God, and shall be ashamed, shall not thou also be so: or what
is the certainty and assurance of thy prophecy above theirs? Micheas
therefore answers by way of Antithesis, or setting down in himself the
contrary virtues unto their former vices, opposing or matching himself and
his calling against them utterly, and against their office of Prophets. Two
things to be noted in this matching together of contraries.
Wherefore there are two things to be noted in this comparing and matching
together of contraries: one, which notes out their persons: the other, the
which appertains unto the office of a Prophet, the which was attributed unto
them both. Their persons are noted out in this word (I) the which has an
Emphasis, 1. Concerning their persons.
or vehemency and force in it, and is opposed or set against the fifth verse
but a little before, and the word Prophets, which deceive, 2. Concerning their
office.
etc. For the Prophet Micheas when he says in this verse, Yet notwithstanding
I, etc. does separate himself from these false Prophets: and that worthily, as
he proves by the diverse calling of them both: Verily I suppose that I was not
inferior unto the very chief Apostles, etc. Ephe. 3. ver. 4. Whereby when ye
read, ye may know mine understanding in the mystery of Christ, etc. Philip.
3. ver. 4. Though I might also have confidence in the flesh: if any other man
thinks that he has whereof he might trust in the flesh, much more I, etc.
But first of al Micheas shows that he was sent, Micheas proves his calling
and has that which he does, and teaches, 1. In that he was sent.
by the spirit of God, and not of himself, as Isai 59. ver. 21. also cap. 61.
And Luke 4. ver. 18. Christ himself alleges the testimony of the Prophet
Isai to prove the lawfulnes of his calling, where he says: The spirit of the
Lord is upon me, because that he has anointed me, that I should preach the
Gospel to the poor: he has sent me, that I should heal the broken hearted
that I should preach deliverance to the captives, and recovering of sight to
the blind, that I should set at liberty them that are bruised, etc. 2. By the
effects of the same, to wit, the gifts of God toward him.
Secondly, he confirms it by the effects; that is, the manifest gifts of GOD
toward him. So Paul 2. Cor. 10. But we will not rejoice of things which are
not within our measure, but according to the measure of the line, whereof God
has distributed unto us a measure to attain even unto you. And cap. 12. ver.
12. The signs of an Apostle were wrought among you with all patience, with
signs and wonders, and great works. Now these effects of the calling of our
Prophet are generally the fulfilling thereof, that is, That Micheas has gifts
necessary for that charge. And particularly, understanding, or judgment, and
constancy, and both these from the spirit of God. Whereby is gathered, that in
respect of judgment or understanding; the true Prophets of God did speak
far more certainly, distinctly, plainly, and clearly, then the false
Prophets did speak. In respect of their constancy, they had not the people so
favorable unto them, as the false Prophets had. For these false Prophets
soothed the people in their sins, and therefore were acceptable unto them:
but the true Prophets did earnestly and sharply rebuke vices, and therefore
they were counted troublesome, and hated. For it is an old saying and true,
Flattery gets friends, but truth hatred And Paul 2. Tim. 4. ver. 3.
teaches, That the time will come, when they will not suffer wholesome
doctrine: but having their ears itching, shall after their own lusts get them
an heap of teachers and shall turn their ears from the truth, and shall be
given unto fables. Wherefore Galat. 4. ver. 16. he asks them, saying* Am I
therefore become your enemy because I tell you the truth? So^then the true
Prophets had need of constancy.

Further, in this self same verse there appears a manifest example of this
judgment, An example of that judgment which the prophet says was given him
by God.
the which Micheas says to have been given him by God, whildst that he does
not call the iniquity of Jacob, that is, of the Jews, and that of the
Israelites, al by one name: but says that in these there is only sin, in the
other also wickedness, that is, greater sin. For the fault of the Jews
sinning against God, was greater then the Israelites: because that there
remained a greater light among the Jews, and that the benefits of God were
more in number toward them, then toward the Israelites. Therefore this so
perfect and true distinction or difference of sins in both people, argues or
shows that the discretion, knowledge, and understanding which by God was
given unto Micheas, was very great, and consequently that he came unto this
office taught and instructed by the Spirit of God. No which like thing
appears in the salse Prophets, but they confound and huddle all things
together, either they make things small which are great, or contr^riwise make
things great which are small.

Verse. 9. Hear this I pray you, ye heads of the house of Iaacob, and Princes
of the house of Israel: they abhor judgment, and pervert allequitie.
A confirmation of the former sentence.
A Confirmation of the former sentence by a proof and example of the same* He
said that he was called of God, to declare unto both people their sins: now
he performs the same. So Paul tells the Corinthians Epist. 2. cap. 13. ver.
3. That they shall have experience and trial of Christ that speaks in him.
And Epist. 1. cap. 4. ver. 21. asks them, What will ye? shall I come unto you
with a rod, or in love, and in the spirit of meekenes? Therefore in this place
Micheas directs his words unto them both, whom he makes guilty of the same
crimes. And those are, that they do not only with themselves loathe and detest
(albeit they be the heads and governors of all the people) judgment, that
is, the thing which is done, or ought to be done justly, and holily: but also
do pervert or let it, if any go about to follow, establish, or commend the
things which are holy and right. So we see that the Princes, and heads of the
people turned away from the true worship of God many otherwise godly Kings, as
Asa, Ioas, and others more. For they seem especially to have been authors of
Idolatry. And therefore the Prophet Isaias also inueigheth especially against
them cap. 1. But Micheas sets upon the heads themselves, and not only upon
the common sort and people, to show that he does his duty without accepting
of persons, that he is the servant of God, and not of men, as those false
Prophets were: finally that he is endued with that true constancy, of the
which he spoke in the verse before.

Verse. 10. They build up Zion with blood, and Jerusalem with iniquity.
An amplification of the sin of the Rulers.
AN amplification of the crime whereby the self same thing is proved; the which
verse 8. he said to be in the Jews, to wit, that there is in them wickedness,
and not only sins, as in the Israelites. And therefore he shows the
grieuousnes of the sin, the which was peculiarly committed by the heads of
the kingdom and people of Judah. Further he accuses them for that they builded
with blood, and that oven Sion or Jerusalem it self, that is, the city of
God, the which always in every part of it ought to be holy. Wherein Micheas
condemns these governors of the people both of cruelty, and also of
covetousness: and the same sacrilegious, in that they used both these sins
unto the dishonor of the city of God, and of that place (where the divine,
that is, the pure Temple was builded) that is to say, unto the manifest reproach
of God himself. See in every respect the like complaint of God against this
people Nah. 3. verse. 1. in these words: O bloody city, it is full of lies,
and robbery: the pray departs not. Also Ezech 24. verse. 9. Woe to the
bloody city, for I will make the burning great. So Habac. 2. verse. 12. Woe
unto him that builds a town with blood, and crecteth a city by iniquity.
And in this word (builds) he answers a secret vain excuse of theirs: for
they defended themselves under this pretense or color, that this which was
found fault withal, turned unto the ornament and garnishing of the City of
God. And therefore that their enterprise was rather to be praised then
accused. The Prophet answers, that God will have no such ornaments of his
city, nor any such building. For God delights not in any injustice and
cruelty Psalm. 5. and they which do so, and spoil others under a pretense or
color of religion, they make God a fellow and partner of their robberies. See
Isai 66. verse. 2, 3. Mar. 7. ver. 11, etc.

Verse. 11. The heads thereof judge for rewards, and the Priests thereof teach
for hire, and the Prophets thereof prophecy for money: yet will they lean
upon the Lord and say, Is not the Lord among us? No evil can come upon us.
A particular setting down of the sins of every order of governors among
them.
A Laying out of the matter more plainly. For he now shows particularly, how
these heads, or every order of these heads deal ungodly and wickedly, and use
themselves every man in his charge. Wherein he distinctly describes or
sets out, and increases the proper wickedness of every one of them by
contraries. Further, he makes three kinds or orders of these Heads or
Governors, namely, Judges, Priests, and Prophets. It is the part of Judges to
abstain from gifts, that they may give judgment, 1. Judges.
and minister law holily, and not be corrupted. So Iethro, when he shows unto
Moses what Judges he should make for his help and ease in the burden and
charge of the common wealth of Israel, among other points requires especially,
that they be such as hate covetousness. Exodus 18. verse. 21. Moreover (says he)
provide thou among all the people, men of courage, fearing God, men dealing
truly, hating covetousness, and appoint such over them, to be rulers over
thousands, rulers over hundreds, rulers over fifties, rulers over tennes. But
these Judges of whom Micheas speaks, receive gifts, and accordingly as any
thing is given them, judge in favor of this man, or that man: the which is a
great sacrilege or notorious offense against God. And under the name of
Judges, all politic Magistrates are generally comprehended. There follows
the order of Heads or rulers of the people, or of Church-gouernours, as I may
so call them. And these are of two sorts, to wit, ordinary, as in times past
the Priests, and Levites, now Pastors and Doctors in the Church of God: and
extraordinary, as in times past the Prophets, the which are now either none at
all, or very tare and seldom. The Priests, or ordinary governors of the
Church did teach for reward, the which is not only most filthy, 2 Priests.
but also sacrilegious. For accordingly as every man gave them a reward for
their service, so did they set down and determine every man his sins to be
great or small, and did not follow the determination of the law of God without
respect of persons. For such the Priests ought to be, not swaruing one whit
from the truth and equity of the law of God, as it is Malach. 2. verse. 6. The
law of truth was in his mouth, and there was no iniquity found in his lips
(speaking of the Priests office) he walked with me in peace and equity, and
did turn away many from iniquity. 3. Prophets.
The extraordinary governors of the Church, as the Prophets: even they also
prophesied for money. And therefore their couertousnes and sacrilege is more
manifestly described then that of the former. For there was some color of the
Priests and Magistrates in these words, (rewards, gifts, or hire:) but in the
word money, and in Prophets there is none at all, nay there is an open mart
and merchandise of the word of God, such as Peter epist. 2. ver. 3. and 15.
finds fault withal in the false teachers of his time, of whom he says,
Through covetousness shall they with feigned words make merchandise of you, and
forsaking the right way, have gone astray, following the way of Balaam, the
son of Bosor, which loved the wages of unrighteousness. And the saying of
Christ Mat. 10. is to be applied unto this place, Ye have received freely,
give freely. And yet for all this is not the due and reasonable wages of the
Pastors and teachers in the Church condemned, as Christ himself teaches in
the same place Mat. 10. Paul 1. Cor. 9. Finally, to the end he may paynt out
the filthy covetousness and ungodliness of these false Prophets the more clearly
(who at that time as the Monks at this day, greatly deceived the people) the
Prophet by the figure Mimesis, What the figure Mimesis is, see Oseas cap. 4.
ver. 18.
or imitation, sets down their wicked words, when as they had received money
for their divination or prophesying. For they prophesied that it should come to
pass, that GOD would be with them, which gave them money.

Verse. 12. Therefore shall Zion for your sake be plowed as a field, and
Jerusalem shallbe an heap, and the mountain of the house, as the hie places
of the forest.
A threatening of a most grievous punishment
THe threatening of a most grievous punishment against the Jews for their former
sins. For not only the houses of private persons, but also the whole city
it self: and that not every city whatsoever, but that very same Sion and
Jerusalem (which verse. 10. before, they said they did build) and not only in
that city those parts and quarters, in which profane houses, that is, the
houses of men are: but that self same part also wherein is builded the temple
of God it self, that is, the holy house of God shall be utterly overthrown
and destroyed, so that in the end it shall wholly be brought into rubbish, and
into woody, and desert places and fit only for wild beasts. All and singular
which things do declare that there was a great judgment of God prepared
against the Jews. See Ierem. 26. verse 18. where mention is made of this verse
in these words: Michai the Morashite prophesied in the days of Hezekiah king
of Judah, and spoke to all the people of Judah, saying: Thus says the Lord of
hosts, Zion shall be plowed like a field, and Jerusalem shall be an heap, and
the mountain of the house shallbe as the high places of the forest.

CAP. 4.
Verse. 1. But in the last days it shall come to pass, that the mountain of
the house of the Lord shall be prepared in the top of the mountains, and it
shall be exalted above the hills, and people shall flow unto it.
AFter the denouncing of threatenings the Prophet adds promises, after the
manner usual unto al Prophets. Promises unto the elect.
But these promises appertayned, and do appertain only unto the godly and the
elect or chosen: and not generally unto every one the which in the congregation
of the Church did profess themselves to be Christians, or then the people of
God. For in Isaac only is the seed of the Church called, neither are all they
which are the seed of Abraham, the Sons of Abraham, as it is Romans 9. verse. 7.
and partakers of these promises of God. For those only, which are indeed godly,
do earnestly repent at the threatenings of God. Now this promise was set down
to lift up or comfort the minds of those godly ones. And it is most clear and
notable: for it contains a renewing and restoring both of the Temple, and also
the true worship of God far more excellent then it was in the former time: lest
that therefore because they heard before that it should be destroyed, they might
think that it should utterly be overthrown and for ever. Nay it shall be
restored, and that more gloriously then it was Agg. 1. and 2. For unto this
second temple shall the Gentiles which dwell most far off, come. All which
things no doubt are to be understood of the kingdom and Temple of Christ,
that is, of the Church and worship the which has bin restored by the preaching
of the Gospel 1. Pet. 2. And hereof it is spoken Hebr. 10. ver. 16. in these
words: This is the Testament that I will make unto them, After those days,
says the Lord, I will put my laws in their heart, and in their minds I will
write them.

Three parts of this verse.
This verse has three parts. The first poynteth out the time, wherein these
things shall be done, to wit, after that both people shall have been punished
in such sort as was foretold, 1. The time, wherein these things shall come to
pass.
and the Temple of God pulled down. That which first notes the times of the
captivity of Babylon. Secondly, those times, wherein this Temple of Jerusalem
was destroyed by Titus the son of Vespasian the Emperor. For after that
overthrow of the Temple especially, the glory of Christ, and the power of the
doctrine of the Gospel shined forth, and the Gentiles were commonly called,
yea, and came also unto Christ, and unto the knowledge of the true God, of the
which manifestation and openly showing of Christ as well unto the Gentiles as
unto the Jews, Paul 1. Tim. 3. ver. 16. writes: And without controversy,
great is the mystery of godliness, which is, God is manifested in the flesh,
justified in the spirit, seen of Angels, preached unto the Gentiles, believed
on in the world, and received up in glory. And Colos. 1. 2. The promise it
self of the restoring and building again of the Temple, and worship of God
The second part of this verse contains the promise it self, not only of the
restoring of the Temple and worship of God, but of the building of it up again
far more gloriously then it was before. The which thing Micheas sets forth
and describes Metaphorically under the exalting or setting up on high of the
mountain Sion, on the which the Temple was builded: he does I say set out
these things under these Metaphors, unto those men, to wit, as being such who
were wont to look unto that earthly Temple, and unto that mountain Sion. So
then this mountain Sion shall in dignity excel other mountains, and
consequently shall be higher above them. And therefore David Psalm. 68. ver. 16.
speaks of it thus: As for this mountain, God delights to dwell in it: yea,
the Lord will dwell in it for ever Isai. 2. 3. The effects of the dignity of
the Temple.
The third part of this verse now shows the effects of this dignity, that is
to say, proves it by the effects, of the which one is rehearsed in this place,
to wit, for that the Gentiles (the which hated it before) shall then by heaps
flow unto it, 1. The Gentiles shall by heaps come unto it.
and shall run unto it, being moved with godliness of mind, and reverence
toward that Temple. Therefore this Temple shall now be reverenced and haunted
of more, then that first Temple was. Wherefore it shall be of greater dignity
then that former. And this is to be understood of the spiritual Temple of God,
that is, of the Gospel of Christ, and of his Church gathered together by the
Gospel.

Verse. 2. Yea many nations shall come and say, Come, and let us go up unto the
mountain of the Lord, and to the house of the God of Iaacob, and he will teach
us his ways, and we will walk in his paths: for the law shall go forth of
Sion, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem.
An amplification of this coming of the Gentiles unto the Temple of God.
AN amplification of this flowing and coming together of the Gentiles, who
before were turned away from the true worship of God, and now desirous to
learn it. And it is taken both from the cheerefulnes of their mind, and also
from the multitude of them. For many nations, which before were idolatrous,
shall come unto the true knowledge of God, and his spiritual Temple, and not
only one or twain. Again, they shall come also with great cheerefulnes of
mind, not constrained, nor against their wills, but of their own accord being
moved by the spirit of God, and true godliness, they shall come unto God by the
restoring of the Gospel, that is, of the second Temple. But here by the way,
The nature of true faith and godliness.
the nature of true faith and godliness is to be noted, which does not only
worship some certain God, but the true God, to wit, the God of Iaacob: and
has attained unto the not only knowledge of his will, but also performs
obedience unto the same. For true godliness is not contented to be taught, that
is, with the bare knowledge of the heavenly truth, but also walks in that
doctrine which it has learned out of the word of God, that is to say, he that
is in deed a godly man, reformeth his whole life according unto the will of
God, and walks in the ways prescribed by his word even unto the end of his
life, Psalm. 1.

A reason why the godly must come unto the Temple of God*
For the law shall go forth of Sion, etc. This is a rendering of a reason, why
all those which are desirous to be taught and learned in the true fear of
God, must especially, nay necessarily come unto that Temple, to wit, because
that out of that place only comes the true doctrine of godliness, and the
word of God, and is in place of the world else besides. For at that time unto
the Jews only were as it were in trust committed the Oracles of God, and the
true doctrine of faith, and of everlasting salvation was among them alone. So
speaks the Psalmist Psalm. 76. ver. 1. God is known in Judah, his name is
great in Israel. And Psalm. 147. ver. 19, 20. He shows his word unto Iaacob,
his statutes and his judgments unto Israel. He has not dealt so with every
nation, neither have they known his judgments. So Paul Romans 3. ver. 2. says,
that the preferme^t of the Jews is much every way, for chiefly because unto
them were committed the oracles of God. Whereby appears that true faith, and
the right and lawful worship of God must of us be fet and drawn only from the
alone word of God written, Isai. 2. And here also is reckoned up the second
effect of this Temple, 2. The second effect of the spiritual Temple is, that it
only contains true faith.
that the preaching of the Gospel, and the same only shall contain true
godliness.

Verse. 3. And he shall judge among many people, and rebuke mighty nations a
far off, and they shall break their swords into mattocks, and their spears
into siethes: nation shall not lift up a sword against nation, neither shall
they learn to fight any more.
3. The third effect of the dignity of this Temple.
THe third effect, by the which the dignity of this restored Temple, that is,
of the Gospel, is showed to be most great, for that by this doctrine of the
Gospel of God, he shall judge and rebuke many nations, how strong and stout so
ever they be. These words therefore of ( judging and rebuking) do betoken those
judgments, the which God did exercise: first, in the consciences of the
Gentiles, reproving them of their idolatry and ungodliness: secondly also of
the manifest or open punishments, that in the end being tamed and mastered,
they might be brought unto God. So the word judgment is taken Ioh. 3. ver.
19. And this is the judgment, that light is come into the world, and men loved
darkness rather then light, because their deeds were evil. And the Gentiles
themselves at the first did not show themselves so meek and ready to be
taught, but afterward, when as they were with diverse punishments and miseries
justly punished of God for their ungodliness, as Christ himself teaches Matthew.
4. ver. 16. The people which sat in darkness saw great light, and to them which
sat in the region and shadow of death, light is risen up. And Paul shows
Romans 1.18. how great tokens of his wrath God powered out upon the heathen for
their disobedience unto his truth, saying: For the wrath of God is reueiled
from heaven against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men, which with hold
the truth in unrighteousness. And the self same appears throughout the whole
Apocalips. But this effect is not to endure only for a time, but continually,
and for a long season. For God by little and little has called, and will call
unto the knowledge of his truth at the last, one while this nation, another
while that nation, which he has afflicted or punished.

And they shall break their mattocks into spears.) The fourth effect joined
with the former, to wit, a most great peace of the world at that time embracing
Christ, the which shall ensue and be, 4 Great peace among the godly
but yet between those only which shall believe in Christ. For they shall be
so tied one to another in mutual charity and love, that no man shall hurt his
brother, no nation embracing Christ shall make war upon another nation
embracing the same Christ. Nay, as Isaias says, those which before were most
cruel, and most enemies within themselves, shall be made friends, and shall be
so gentle, friendly, and meek as sheep. So great a force is there doubtless of
true godliness, that it will bring al men unto mutual concord, or agreement one
with another, Philip. 2. Ephesians. 4. Isai. 2. and 11. ver. 6.7. The woolfe also
shall dwell with the lamb, and the leopard shall lie with the kid, and the
calfe, and the lion, and the fat beast together, and a little child shall
lead them, and the cow and the bear shall feed: their young ones shall
lyetogether: and the lion shall eat straw like a bullock. So the Scots and
English men: again, English men and French men are made friends together, who
before were most deadly enemies.

Verse. 4. But they shall sit every man under his vine, and under his fig
tree, and none shall make them afraid: for the mouth of the Lord of hosts has
spoken it.
The making more plain of the matter before.
A Laying open of the matter more plainly* For he shows by an amplification,
both what manner of peace, and how great the same shall be in the Church of God,
nay in the whole world, when as the doctrine of the Gospel shall be received
of the Gentiles. And this verse has two parts to be noted. One, Two parts of
the this verse.
a description of this peace: another, the confirmation of the same against
those which are either altogether unbelievers, 1. A description of this peace.
or else such as do make some doubt of so great a promise of God, and quiet of
the Church to come. The description of this peace promises first home
agreement, and security or safety among the godly. 2. A confirmation of the
same.
For at home, that is, every godly man in his own country shall be most safe
among his own people: both under his own vine, 1 Peace at home.
and under his own fig tree he shall live at home quietly, to wit, no man
offering him any wrong. So is it reported of the great peace in Judah and
Israel all the days of Solomon 1. King. 4. ver. 25. And Judah and Israel dwelt
without fear, every man under his vine and under his fig tree, from Dan even
to Beer-sheba, all the days of Solomon. Leu. 26. Isai. 11. Secondly, it
promises peace also from foreign enemies. Peace from abroad.
For no stranger shall put the Church of God in fear. So Psalm. 144. ver. 14.
it is a part of the prayer of the faithful, the which by the conclusion and
shutting up of that Psalm it may appear that God sometime grants unto them:
That there be none invasion, nor going out, nor crying in our streets. And
then they conclude: Blessed are the people that be so, yea blessed are the
people whose God is the Lord. So it fell out under Constantine the great. Apoc.
8.1. So Act. 9. ver. 31. it is said, The Churches of God had peace. But albeit
these calm days and quiet times last not long with our enemies abroad, yet
that peace of mind, the which a true faith in Christ brings, can never be
taken from them, of the which Paul speaks Romans 5. ver. 1. Then being
justified by faith, we have peace toward God through our Lord Jesus Christ:
And ver. 11. We also rejoice in God through our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom we
have now received the atonement. And in this peace properly consists the
kingdom of God.

Furthermore, the confirmation of this promise follows, taken from the nature
or person of the promiser: and he is God, who can not lie, but is always true
of his word, and his mouth is always true Tit. 1. It is added, that the which
promises, is the God of hosts, that is, almighty, whom nothing is able to any
effect to resist, but that his will is fulfilled. For he does whatsoever he
will Psalm. 115. Neither is there any thing impossible with him.

Verse. 5. For all people will walk every one in the name of his God, and we
will walk in the name of the Lord our God, for ever and ever.
A confirmation of the former promise taken from the comparing of the true God,
and other gods together.
A Confirmation of the same promise, the which is taken from the comparing of
the true God with other gods of this people, and other people. For it is most
meet, that if other people do trust every man unto his God: that you
Israelites and true Jews do trust also in your God: not for a time only, but
for ever, and in those things also, the which ye do not yet see with your
eyes, but the which are yet to come, and promised by him. So then Micheas
compares these two things together, other people with this people: the
majesty and power of other gods with the majesty of the God of Israel, that
is, the true God. For the majesty and power of those gods, in whom other
people do trust and stay, is none at all: but the power of the true God is
most great, and unconquerable, whom nothing is able to withstand Psalm. 95. ver.
3.4. For the Lord is a great God, and a great King above all gods, in whose
hands are the deep places of the earth, and the heights of the mountains are
his, etc. And Psalm. 135. ver. 15. concerning the gods of the heathen: The idols
of the heathen are silver and gold, even the work of men's hands. But touching
the great and fearful majesty of the true God Psalm. 29. ver. 8. he says,
The voice of the Lord makes the wilderness to tremble, the Lord makes the
wilderness of Kadesh to tremble, etc. Other people feel not either any favors
at all, or else no continual favors of their gods toward them (for they are
but the sleights and fetches of Satan, whatsoever happy things for a time the
heathen do often find at the hands of their gods and idols) but that God
whose people ye are, is your God, whom you always have found to be true.
Therefore you ought to trust in him, and to rest in his promises, and that
continually, and for ever.

The comparison contameth also an exhortation.
Moreover, this comparison is in such sort set forth, that by the very phrase
and manner of speaking it contains also an exhortation unto the same godly, to
worship that same true God, and by faith to walk in his precepts and promises.
For this our such knowledge of God, and meditating or thinking upon his power
ought not to be content with the only bare theorie, or speculation of the thing
it self: but in the same is the practice of godliness set before us, that
therefore we might serve God the more willingly.

Verse. 6. At the same day says the Lord, will I gather her that halteth, and I
will gather her that is cast out, and her that I have afflicted.
A making of that more plain, the which was spoken ver. 4. Three things
proving the restoring of the church to be easy.
AN explanation, or making of the matter more plain, the which by the reckoning
up of the parts, shows that which ver. 4. was said before, to wit that the
estate of the church should be happy, and that it should be restored at the
coming of Christ, and by the preaching of the gospel. But here are three
things reckoned up, the which how far past recovery soever the state of the
church might seem to be in affliction or trouble, do show notwithstanding
that the renewing of it, and the restoring of it unto the old estate, shall be
easy. The first is, that look what things were in it before maimed, out of
joint, weak, torn and lame, 1. All imperfections shall be cured.
the same shall be restored, gathered together, be healed, and shall not
perish, nay they shall abide and remain found and strong. And therefore they
pray Isai. 35. verse. 3. Strengthen the weak hands, and comfort the feeble
knees. And cap. 66. verse. 20. And they shall bring all your brethren for an
offering unto the Lord out of all nations, upon horses, and in chariots, and in
horse litters, and upon mules and swift beasts, to Jerusalem mine holy
mountain, says the Lord, etc. This has Christ performed, first bodily, then
spiritually, healing all, whosoeuerby faith came unto him Mat. 8 verse. 16.17:
where it plainly appears that he healed all that came unto him, in these
words. When the eeuen was come, they brought unto him many that were possessed
with devils, and he cast out the spirits with his word, and healed all that
were sick, that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by Isaias the prophet:
He took our infirmities and bare our sicknesses. And cap. 9. verse. 35. we read
how by preaching he cured their souls, and by working of miracles healed their
bodies: for thus he writes: And Jesus went about all cities and towns,
teaching in their sinagogues, and preaching the gospel of the kingdom, and
healing every sickness and every disease among the people. The second thing
is, that he shall gather together into one, 1 The scattered shall be gathered
into one.
those that are cast out, and his that are scattered abroad, from whence
afterward shall arise a greatnation, and not one, but many nations. So is it
said Psalm. 107. ver. 2.3. Let them which have been redeemed of the Lord show
how he has delivered them from the hand of the oppressor, and gathered them
out of the lands, from the East, and from the West, from the North, and from
the South. So then there shall not only some few remain, which shall be
healed, but also they shall make a most strong body of a people. The which
came to pass, both when they returned from Babylon Esd. 2. and also when as
the Gentiles came unto the church of God through the preaching of the gospel,
the which may also be gathered out of the revelation of S. John cap. 7. verse.
9, where he says: After these things I beheld, and lo, a great multitude which
no man could number of all nations and kindreds, and people, and tongues, stood
before the throne, and before the lamb, clothed with long white robes, and
palms in their hands.

Verse. 7. And I will make her that halted a remnant; and her that was cast far
off a mighty nation: and the Lord shall reign over them in mount Zion, from
hence forth even for ever.
3. God shall reign as a King in the midst of his Church.
THe third point is contained in this seventh verse, to wit, that the Lord
himself will reign in the mids both of them, and also in mount Sion, the
which without all doubt did represent the true church of God. In which third
point the stedfastnes, glory, and full happiness and restoring of the church is
contained. For what can be more happy, and safe, then when as God not only
dwells in the midst of us, but also reigns, and as a King has care of us?
And this cheerefell favor of God toward his, and the assured persuasion
thereof was it which more rejoiced the heart of David, then all other earthly
blessings could do the worldlings, insomuch that Psalm. 4. verse. 7 he says:
Thou have given me more joy of heart, then they have had, when their wheat and
their wine did abound. Concerning this restoring and protecting of the church,
read Zach. 2. Further, that the godly might hope and believe, that these
things although they be wonderful, and almost incredible or vnbeleeueable in
so great ruins of the church, that they shall notwithstanding most assuredly
come to pass, there is added a necessary preface or forespeech, That these
are the promises of the eternal GOD and his saying: not the words of Idols,
nor of men, and to the end that the greatness of this happiness of the
church might be esteemed of us accordingly, and draw us into an admiration or
wondering thereat, it is said, that it shall be perpetual, that is, for ever,
and beyond. For God will not only gather together and defend those that are his
here upon earth, but also in the everlasting and heavenly life, the which is a
most singular benefit, so that, as Paul writes unto Timothy 1. cap 4 verse.
8. godliness has the promise of the life present, and of that that is to come.

Verse. 8. And thou, O tower of the flock, the strong hold of the daughter
Zion, unto thee shall it come, even the first dominion, and kingdom shall come
to the daughter Jerusalem.
An amplification of the former benefit.
AN amplification of the benefit going next immediately before. For God himself
shall not only then reign in the Church, when as he shall restore the same,
but the Church her self also together with him, shall obtain a kingdom and
government, and that such as it had before, wonderful and to be marueiled at
of the gentiles: the church herself I say, Two parts of this Verse.
and Jerusalem the daughter of her, the which was before in such sort
destroyed, and wasted by the enemies. But in this verse there are two things to
be observed or noted: the one, the thing it self which is promised: The other,
1. The promise it self.
the phrase or manner of speaking, whereby it is promised. 2 The manner of
promising the same.
Concerning the matter it self, it is a promise of the former estate and
kingdom of the church to be restored. Wherein God does not only promise unto
her a kingdom, but also such a one as it had before, to wit, under David and
Solomon. For Saul is not here to be reckoned among the kings, when as he was
not given of God, but set up, and asked by the people. So then it shall be a
notable kingdom, most large, flourishing, rich, peaceable, fearful unto the
nations, nay such also as shall subdue the nations, and bring them under her
subjection. The Church long sithence has enjoyed these things, and does also
at this day enjoy them through Christ, and by the preaching of the Gospel Psalm.
2. And Luke 1. verse. 32, 33. the Angel does foretell of this flourishing estate
of Christ his spiritual kingdom, saying: He shall be great, and shall be
called the son of the most high and the Lord God shall give unto him the
throne of his father David, and he shall reign over the house of Jacob for
ever, and of his kingdom shall be none end. And this is signified also by the
submission and reverence of the 24. Elders Reuelat. 4. verse. 10. The four and
twenty Elders feldown before him that sat on the throne, and worshipped him
that lives for evermore, and cast their crowns before the throne, etc. And
this so happy an estate is not promised unto every company of men, The true
church marked out from other assemblies of men by sundry titles.
but only unto the true Church of GOD. Therefore it is here by the Prophet
diligently distinguished or marked out from other congregations of men by
sundry epithets or titles, to wit, it is called The tower of the flock,
because that in Jerusalem 02 the same tower was then chiefly to be seen above
others, being situated near unto the market and gate of the sheep, and the
poole of the sheep, 1 The tower of the flock.
(whereof mention is made John 5. verse. 2.) and the situation of the whole
city it self was on a high place. Therefore both of the situation of the place
and also of this part the whole city of Jerusalem is called a tower, and
therefore the true Church of God is signified thereby, whereof Jerusalem was at
that time the house, and a figure of the Church of the Gospel which should be
afterward. So Esai 29 Jerusalem of the form of the city, is called Ariel,
that is, a Lion. Also the Church is called here The mount of the daughter Sion,
because that the same hill of the which he now speaks, 2 The mount or strong
hold of the daughter Sion.
was the highest place of the whole city known unto every man, and compassed
and closed about with a wall for the defense and strengthening of the city 2.
Chron. 27. verse. 3. and 33. verse. 4. Nehem. 3.26. Last of all, the Church is
here called the daughter of Jerusalem, and not the daughter of every city
whatsoever. Thus therefore is the glory of the Church described, 3. The daughter
of Jerusalem.
that only the godly and faithful alone may understand, that this kingdom
appertains unto Christ, and by Christ unto them. And thus much concerning the
thing it self.

Concerning the phrase or manner of speaking, it appears thus, first, that it
is a Prosopopoeia, or fayning ^f a person, What the figure Prosopopoeia is, see
Oseas cap. 6. v. 1.
wherein the Church of God is spoken unto by name, that, as I have said, that
company, unto whom these things are promised, might certainly be noted out from
others: and that the Church her self might be stirred up with the
consideration of so great a benefit. Secondly, it appears also that in this
place there is an antithesis, or matching together of contraries between these
words, The first kingdom, and The tower of the flock, The mount, The
daughter of Jerusalem. For these three latter, The tower, The mount, The
daughter, seem to have nothing answerable unto that royal magnifice^ce or
sumptuousnes, nor to promise any thing the which may give any hope of obtaining
so great and notable a kingdom. Yet notwithstanding the Church shall reign,
howsoever her matters may seem past all hope by means of affliction or
trouble. Therefore these words are of set purpose used by the Prophet, to meet
with or answer the diverse cogitations or thoughts of men, yea even of the
godly, who only should see, and did behold the ruins and weakness of the
destroyed city: and did not think upon the omnipotency or almighty power of
GOD that makes the promise, nor upon his love toward his church.

Verse. 9. Now why do thou cry out with lamentation? is there no King in
thee? is thy counselor perished? for sorrow has taken thee, as a woman in
travail.
The answering of an objection.
THe answering of an objection, wherewith he asswageth the sorrow and
lamentation of the godly, such as both then they felt by the conceiving of the
judgments of God threatened against them: and also afterward had experience of
being in the misery it self Psalm. 74. Psalm. 102. And first of all by the
figure Hypotyposis he paynteth forth the thing it self, that is to say, What
the figure Hypotyposis is, see Amos cap. 8. ver. 12.
their most just sorrow, and the most weighty causes of the same sorrow. The^
in the verse following he sets down a comfort. As for the sorrow, or
lamentatio of the Church, it was an howling: not only a cry, a most sorrowful
crying out for the burden of the most grievous misery, and not only a
lamenting. And because these things are set forth by the Prophet, as if he
himself were present in the matter, therefore he adds (Now): albeit they
themselves did not yet indeed feel the same sorrow. Finally, this sorrow was
as the sorrow of a woman in travel, that is, exceeding great. And this
similitude is in other places else where used in the holy Scriptures to like
purpose: for hereunto is the state of the poor city of Jerusalem most hardly
besieged by Senneherib, resembled Isai 37. verse. 3. when as the messengers of
Hezechiah say unto the Prophet, This is a day of tribulation, and of rebuke and
blasphemy, for the children are come unto the birth, and there is no strength
to bring forth. And cap. 26. verse. 17. Like as a woman with child, that
draws near to the travel, is in sorrow, and cries in her pains, so have we
been in thy sight, O Lord. Again John 16. verse. 21. A woman, when she
trauelleth has sorrow, because her hour is come: but as soon as she is
delivered of the child, she remembers no more the anguish for joy that a man
is borne into the world. And these things the prophet speaks in a fellow
feeling of their troubles, and not by way of insultation or triumph and
rejoicing against them, or mocking them in these miseries.

The causes of the great sorrow of the church.
As for the causes of so great sorrow, and so great outcrying, they are many, as
in this verse, for that then, that is, when as the church is in such sort
afflicted by God, and the Jews afflicted also, there was no King of theirs,
nor any Counselor, or Prince, the which had any care of them. And so God by
Ezechiel threatens to take away their kings cap. 21. verse. 26. saying: Thus
says the Lord God, I will take away the diadem, and take off the crown: this
shall be no more the same: I will exalt the humble and abase him that is high.
For the safety and presence of the King is a great hope time there were no
kings left and remaining unto the Jews Isai 5. For the Jews lived under the
dominion or rule of others, that is, of the Babylonians (by whom they were
taken captives) albeit that the Lord for their defense and comfort advanced
Daniel unto the government of the kingdom of Babylon: but yet he himself was
a subject unto the Kings of Babylon, and as a subject obeyed them.

Verse. 10. Sorrow and mourn, O daughter Sion, as a woman in travail: for now
shall thou go forth of the city, and dwell in the field, and shall go into
Babel, but there shall thou be delivered: there the Lord shall redeem thee
from the hand of thine enemies.
A granting joined with a comfort.
A Granting, whereunto is joined a comfort. And the granting is, that the church
may indeed lamentably mourn and sorrow, as he that most may mourn, and is in
most heavy sorrows, such as is a woman in travail. For the Prophet confesses
that they have most just causes of so great sorrow, the which in this place he
reckons up others, then in the verse before, to wit, for that the Church
shall then be carried away from her country, and when she shall be carried away,
must live also in the fields under the open air, not in towns: finally, that
she must be carried into countries most far off, namely, even as far as into
Babylon Psa. 137. Al which things are most lamentable, especially if we
consider that the promised land was not only the native soil and country
unto the Jews: but also a sign and figure of the heavenly and eternal life.

It is a godly point to be touched with the feeling of punishments sent by God.
Further, when as the Prophet grants the church, that she may mourn in her
affliction or trouble, he shows that it is the part of men, nay, that it is
godly, to be touched, and that earnestly with the feeling of the miseries sent
of God: and that for a man to harden himself against them, is not man-like,
and ungodly. And therefore Job in his sixth chapt. and 12. verse. asks If his
strength be the strength of stones? or his flesh of brass? that he should not
be moved with the feeling of his miseries. And this was the affliction or
trouble of the Church.

A comfort for the church.
Now follows the consolation or comfort of the same. For she shall be
delivered out of that misery, nay, she shall be delivered out of the hand of
her enemies, even there and in that place, that is, in Babylon, where she
seemed to be utterly lost, and dead Ezech. 37. So then the Church shall be
raised, and is raised as it were out of a sepulcher or grave, when as she is by
God delivered out of the hands of her enemies. The which thing falls out very
often, yea and has done often in this ourage, as we our selves have seen.

Verse. 11. Now also many nations are gathered against thee, saying, Sion shall
be condemned, and our eye shall look upon Sion.
A confirmation of the former comfort.
A Confirmation of the former comfort by way of answering such objections as
might be made to the contrary. For he puts away those difficulties and
doubts which did arise in the minds of the godly, because of the great number
of their enemies, and the same most strong, who seemed likely to hinder this
deliverance, and withstood them also when they were now delivered Esd. 4. Nehe.
4. He grants therefore that nations, and the same many in number, shall bring
as great let, and hinderance, as in them lies: but the which God shall remove
and take away. So then they shall be gathered together, to keep the Church of
God always under oppression. They shall wish with all their hearts, that Sion
may remain polluted, that is, profane, desolate, reproachful, wasted: and
that they may see this with their eyes, and may enjoy this pleasure for the
name of God contemned or despised, and that they may rejoice for the Church
thus miserably vexed.

Verse. 12. But they know not the thoughts of the Lord: they understand not his
counsel: for he shall gather them as the sheaues in the barn.
An answer against the attempts of the enemies of the Church.
AN answer against those attempts or endeavors, and wishes of the nations which
are enemies unto the Church: for these are enemies of the Church. And the
effect of this answer is, that God, albeit he sometime used those nations to
correct and chastise his Church, yet had not any such intent or purpose in his
mind, either utterly to destroy his Church, in such sort as they wish: or to
keep it always oppressed or under the cross. Wherefore the mind, and the
end of these profane or wicked nations far differs from the purpose of
GOD, whilst they afflict or punish the Church of God. For they desire utterly
to destroy the people of God: but God his meaning and purpose is, only to
chastise and correct them. Thus these men the enemies of the Church understand
not at all the counsel of God. So God by the Prophet Isai reproves the
intention of the King of the Assyrians contrary unto his purpose in punishing
his people cap. 10. ver. 7.8. where he says of him and his doings thus: But he
thinks not so, neither does his heart esteem it so: but he imagines to
destroy and to cut off not a few nations. For he says, Are not my Princes
altogether Kings? So in Zachariah cap. 1. ver. 15. he is greatly offended with
the heathen for their immoderat cruelty in vexing his Church, saying: I am
greatly angry against the careless heathen: for I was angry but a little, and
they helped forward the affliction. Neither shall that come to pass which the
enemies go about, but which God has decreed: neither shall they go any
further, or can they, in vexing of the Church of God, then the will of God will
suffer. Nay further God retorteth or turns back the endeavors of these men
upon themselves. For God for this purpose gathers together into one the
enemies of his Church, that when as he has gathered them together as it were
in one bundle and sheafe, he may together and at once destroy and utterly root
them out, as it is here plainly set down. And Psalm. 76. ver. 10. it is showed
how the rage and cruelty of the enemies turns unto the praise of God, who
restrains the same, as best pleases him: Surely (says David) the rage of
man (speaking against the cruelty of Sanneherib in the siege of Jerusalem)
shall turn to thy praise, the remnant of the rage shall thou restrain. God
therefore shall deliver his Church.

Verse. 13. Arise, and thresh, O daughter Zion: for I will make thine horn
iron, and I will make thine hooues brass, and thou shall break in pieces many
people: and I will consecrate their riches unto the Lord, and their substance
unto the ruler of the whole world.
A confirmation of the former sentence.
A Confirmation of the former sentence touching the destroying of the enemies of
the Church, and that by the Church her self. And he confirms it by the
power, the which God himself will give unto the Church. This power does GOD
describe by diverse Metaphors, that it may appear to be the greater, What the
figure Metaphora is, see Amos cap. 4. ver. 12.
as of an ox treading out the corn, whose horn is of iron, and his hooues
brass. Confer this place with others of like sense, as Psalm. 68. ver. 22.23.
where is spoken of the mighty deliverance of the Church: The Lord has said, I
will bring my people again from Bashan: I will bring them again from the
depths of the sea: that thy foot may be dipped in blood, and the tongue of thy
dogs in the blood of the enemies, even in it. And Psalm. 149. ver. 6.7. thus
we read of the power that God shall give unto his Church: Let the Saints be
joyful with glory, let them sing (...) For here by the figure Synecdoche
under one kind of contumely or despitefull usage (which is to strike the
cheek with a rod) all other kinds are comprehended. What the figure
Synecdoche is, see Amos cap 5. ver, 21.
And this is a notorious and shameful kind of despite to be boxed about the
ears, or stricken on the cheek. Hereof Job complains cap. 16. ver. 10.
saying: They have opened their mouths upon me, and smitten me on the cheek in
reproach. And this reproach David acknowledges God to have paid his enemies
home withal Psalm. 3. ver. 7. saying: Thou have smitten all mine enemies upon
the cheek bone. And thus despitefully was the Prophet Michaiah used by the
false Prophet Zidkijah before two Kings, 1. King. 22. ver. 24. This was
fulfilled in King Sedechias, and other princes of the Jews, who were
despitefully used by the Babylonians 2. King. cap. 25. ver. 7. where it is said
of them, That they slew the sons of Zedekiah before his eyes, and put out the
eyes of Zedekiah, and bound him in chains, and carried him to Babel. This also
came afterward to pass just according unto the letter in our Savior Christ
the true Captain of his Church Matthew. 26. ver. 67. of whose vile usage it is
there written thus: Then spate they in his face, and buffetted him: and other
smote him with rods. In a word, there is in these words expressed exceeding
great misery and trouble of the Church.

Verse. 2. And thou Beth-leem Ephrathah art little to be among the thousands of
Judah, yet out of thee shall he come forth unto me, that shall be the ruler in
Israel: whose goings forth have been from the beginning, and from everlasting.
A Comfort, or an answer, lest the misery and punishment described in the
verse before, A comfort for the godly.
might seem to remove and take away the deliverance of the Church: for it
shall not be able to do it. For there shall arise up a Captain and deliverer
unto Israel, out of a most small town (if ye consider it as it was in the time
of the Prophet) to wit, out of Beth-lehem, which shall deliver the Church out
of these miseries, namely, that same everlasting unconquerable Captain of his
Church, appointed of God unto this purpose from everlasting, he, I say, shall
arise and be borne out of that town. Wherefore here also are two things to
be considered. The one, what God promises: 1 What God promises.
the other, in what phrase and manner of speaking. He promises that there shall
come a Captain unto his Church, 2. In what manner of speaking.
and such a one as has bin appointed unto the same long sithence, my one that
is from everlasting, who shall deliver the same. And he adds the place also
from whence he shall come, to wit Beth-leem Ephratah, that is, which is in the
tribe of Judah. Neither ought the sight and condition of the place, as it then
was, to terrify or dismay them. It was in deed a small town at that time,
among the Captains, tribes, and other towns and cities of Judah: nevertheless
notwithstanding out of it shall that same Captain which shall be the deliverer
of the people, be borne Mat. 2. ver. 4.5 6. Where the chief Priests and
Scribes of the people assembled by Herod, and demanded of the place of the
birth of Christ, make answer, that it should be in Beth-leem. And for proof
thereof do cite this place of our Prophet. For so do the counsels of God
differ from the counsels of men, and God choseth those things which are abject
or base and of small accountes among men. For as he teaches us by his Prophet
Esai, cap. 55. ver. 8. His thoughts are not our thoughts, neither are our
ways his ways.

Christ the foundation of all the promises of God toward his church.
Furthermore in this place is set forth the foundation and ground of all the
promises of God toward his church, to wit Christ. For in him, as Paul
witnesses 2. Cor. 1. verse. 20. All the promises of God are yea, and are in him
Amen, unto the glory of God through us: who has delivered his church, by whose
Spirit they were strengthened, who both before these times, and also afterward
delivered the same, as in times past the Judges and Kings: and after the
captivity of Babylon Zorobabell, Iesuah, the Machabees. Finally this self
same is from everlasting, both in that he is equal unto his father, and also
in that he is appointed the mediator and head of his church. And thus much of
the matter or thing it self.

2 What the figure Apostrophe is, see Amos cap. 8. verse. 4.
As for the phrase, or manner and kind of speaking, it is an Apostrophe, or
turning of speech, wherewith by way of contrariety GOD in the person of the
Bethleemites does especially stir up, and comfort those that are his, matching
that contemned village against the great troops and bands of strong and
mighty enemies mentioned before, and their deliverance through the means of
that eternal Savior, and consequently in their persons ministering comfort and
hope of like help unto his poor afflicted Church in all ages. And therefore I
read and translate this sentence by the aduersatiue conjunction (But) after
this manner, But thou Beth-leem Ephrathah art little, etc.

Ver. 3. Therefore will he give them up, until the time that she which shall
bear, shall travail: then the remnant of their brethren shall return unto
the children of Israel.
What the figure Hypophora is, see Amos cap. 5. ver. 21.
THis place also is an hypophora, or answering an objection, lest the godly
Jews should in the mean season faint and be dismayed in mind, until that
same promised Captain do come forth out of Beth-leem, because that in the
mean while they shall suffer and feel great miseries. For the prophet
grants that this shall come to pass: but out of which they shall be also
delivered by God, so that those which have lived in that captinity and misery
of Babylon shall return unto their own, and shall either themselves, or their
posterity remain alive. And the confuting or overthrowing of this objection
was necessary, because that even the godly were greatly troubled, whilst they
felt those bitter miseries, when the city Sion was destroyed. Wherefore a most
assured remedy, to wit, this redoubled promise was to be opposed or set
against this their doubting and combat.

Two parts of this verse.
Further this verse has both a recital of that most hard affliction, the which
the Jews suffered afterward at the hands of the Babylonians, and also a
promise of comfort. 1 The affliction of the Jews.
The affliction is described in these words, that the Jews are to be given
and delivered up into the hands of the Babylonians, 2. A promise of their
deliverance.
until they shall have suffered under them most grievous troubles, yea and
such as women great with child do suffer, whilst they are in travail. For
so is the whole time of their captivity called, The sorrow of a woman in
travail. So in the 12. of the Revelation of Saint John ver. 2. the afflicted
estate of the Church is resembled unto a woman with child, and crying in
travail, and being in pains ready to be delivered.

The remnant of the brethren of this captain which is promised, shall return
unto the Sons of Israel. Now the brethren of this promised Captain are the
Jews themselves, of whom is Christ according unto the flesh Romans 1. ver. 3.
Where Christ is said to have been made of the seed of David according to the
flesh. And cap. 9. ver. 5. it is written, That of the Jews are the fathers,
and of whom concerning the flesh Christ came, etc. These therefore, not all of
them in deed, but a remnant, that is, those whom God shall cause to be left,
shall return unto the sons of Israel, that is, unto their own people, and
into their country, the which was done by Zorobabel, and afterward under the
captains Esdras and Nehemias.

Ver. 4. And he shall stand, and feed in the strength of the Lord, and in the
majesty of the name of the Lord his God, and they shall dwell still: for now
shall he be magnified unto the ends of the world.
A confirmation of the former comfort by three effects taken from Christ the
author of the same.
THe first confirmation of the former comfort, taken from the power and from the
person of this Captain, who is the author thereof. And this power and strength
of this promised Captain, is described three ways, or by three effects. The
first, That he shall stand, that is, shall have a firm or sure and unremovable
kingdom and government, and everlasting authority, not momentarie or such as
shall continue but for a very little while, the which shall perish by and by,
or may be overthrown. 1. His kingdom shall be immovable.
So then the deliverance of the church shall be firm and sure. The second
effect is, That he shall feed, and govern and defend his people or church. And
that not only by the strength of man: 2. He shall feed and defend his people.
but also being endued with the strength and power of the true God himself, by
whom Christ in that he was man, was anointed, that he should feed then, and
might feed also now at this day his church most mightily: for Christ shall not
feed his church after the common and usual maner^ but notably above and beyond
the prophets, and in the excellency of the name and power of God, the which
shall shine forth in the works and doctrine of Christ, more then in the
ministry of any Prophet. And therefore is it said of him John 3. ver. 13.
That no man ascends up to heaven but he that has descended from heaven, the
Son of man, which is in heaven. And ver. 31. He that is come from on hie, is
above all: he that is of the earth, is of the earth, and speaks of the earth:
he that is come from heaven is above all. So Mar. 1. ver. 22, it is recorded,
That they were astonished at his doctrine. For he taught them, as one that had
authority, and not as the Scribes. And Heb. 12. verse. 25: See that ye despise
not him that speaks: for if they escaped not which refused him, that spoke on
earth: much more shall we not escape, if we turn away from him, that speaks
from heaven. And by the word feeding is understood both the government and also
the defense of the church, and not only the instruction or doctrine the which
Christ shall deliver. Moreover those which under Christ do lawfully bear rule
in the church, they also have the same spirit of God, wherewith they are led:
but granted unto them by Christ himself, and not in the same measure which
Christ had it: for (as it is John. 1. verse. 16.) Of his fullness all we have
received, and grace for grace. The third effect is, The most great fame and
name of this Captain, is here described; the which, because of his sundry
works, the which shall be done in his name altogether by the power of God, His
name shall be spread abroad unto the ends of the world.
shall be spread abroad unto the ends of the world. And therefore Act. 1. verse.
8. Christ at his going up into heaven tells his disciples, saying: Ye shall
receive power of the holy ghost, when he shall come on you: and ye shall be
witnesses unto me both in Jerusalem, and in all Judea, and in Samaria, and unto
the uttermost parts of the earth. Whereby appears that these effects are
properly to be referred unto the preaching of the gospel, and the fruits of
the same.

Verse. 5. And he shall be our peace, when Asshur shall come into our land: When
he shall tread in our palaces, then shall we raise against him seven
shepherdes, and eight principal men.
ANother confirmation of the former comfort, the which is taken from the
removing or keeping under of the enemies, An other confirmation of the former
comfort.
by the which the Church was troubled before. In the which selfsame there is
secretly made an answer unto an objection and doubt of the church demanding,
whether then also, that is, after that this Captain shall come, she should
have peace, in as much as there should never be Assyrians wanting, that is,
most wicked and noisome enemies unto the Church. The Prophet makes answer,
that the Church shall then have peace, and that the Assyrians, that is, these
enemies shall be under the power of this Captain, whom being quiet he shall
quietly govern and keep under: but those which shall rebel and resist, he
shall bring down and correct by force, and by the sword, that they shall not
be able to hurt. So has been showed before cap. 4. And so Act. 9. ver. 31.
Luke makes mention, That the churches had rest through all Judea, and Galile,
and Samaria. And Paul Romans 16. ver. 20. comfort the faithful with this,
That the God of peace shall short lie tread down Satan under their feet.
And 2. Cor. 10. ver. 4. he shows That the weapons of their warfare are not
carnal, but mighty through God, to cast down holds.

This verse has a promise of peace, and the most mild and gentle governing of
those (who when as they were before the enemies of Christ, 1. A promise of
peace.
yet notwithstanding they shall afterward yield over themselves unto him to be
governed quietly.) 2. The mild governing of those which sometimes were the
enemies of Christ.
Therefore after the Assirians shall have spoiled the holy land, yet shall they
nevertheless be subject unto God, and Christ his captain, the keeper and
Savior of that land and of his church. And he shall govern them, setting over
them seven or eight, that is, a very few rulers: namely so easy shall they
show themselves to be taught by the Spirit of God, and so obedient, and those
rulers shall also be taken from out of the people and common sort of men, such
as are for the most part and have been the preachers of the gospel, by whom
God has overcome and converted unto him those which were before his most
cruel enemies, to wit, by the preaching of the gospel. Thus then shall these
at the first in deed be his enemies, but then converted unto Christ, they
shall, I say, be so gentle, that is, so easy and ready to obey: and so fearing
God, that they shall not despise the base flock of those (by whom through the
guidance of Christ, they shall be truly fed and governed) nor disdain them
for their Pastors and Shepherds. See Isai. cap. 11.

Verse. 6. And they shall destroy Asshur with the sword, and the land of Nimrod
with their swords: thus shall he deliver us from. Asshur, when he comes into
our land, and when he shall trade within our borders.
The Rebels shall be conquered by force.
But the rebels, the which shall continue resisting and striving against Christ
(the which are here signified under the name of Assyrians and Nimrodians)
Christ shall master by force, and subdue them by the sword: partly in deed by
the spiritual sword, by the Pastors and true teachers, whom he shall then
raise up: partly by the godly and christian Princes, whom he shall arm
against such enemies of his church, that they may keep away their force from
the church. So God has given unto his Church Constantinus the great, and
Theodosius the elder, Martianus, and other godly Princes.

Verse. 7. And the remnant of Iaacob shall be among many people, as a dew from
the Lord, and as the showers upon the grass, that waits not for man, nor
hops in the Sons of Adam.
A third confirmation of the former comfort, taken from the power and
authority of the church.
THe third confirmation of the same comfort and promise, taken from the power
and authority of the Church. For not only Christ, but also the Church has
authority and government. But Christ of himself as God, has it. But the
Church as receiving it from Christ. And by the authority of this rule and
power, the Church shall both defend those that are obedient unto her, and shall
break in pieces those that resist against her. For the Pastors have, as Paul
says, both the spirit of mildenes, and also a rod, the which they can use. And
therefore he asks the Corinthians 1. Cor. 4 ver. 21. What will ye? shall I
come unto you with a rod, or in love, and in the spirit of meekenes. And 2.
Cor. 10. ver. 4. cited before ver. 5. Also Mat. 16. ver. 19. where Christ says
unto Peter, I will give unto thee the keys of the kingdom of Heaven, and
whatsoever thou shall bind upon earth, shall be bound in heaven: and
whatsoever thou shall loose on earth, shall be loosed in Heaven. Wherefore the
Prophet now in this place recites both effects of this power, the which by
Christ is given to his Church. And in this verse, that which shall appear in
those that show themselves willing to be taught: and in the verse following,
the other effect, which is to be seen in the rebels.

This verse has three things to be noted. First, to whom this power is
promised, 3. Things to be noted.
to wit, to the remnant only of Jacob, and not unto that whole people, which
boast themselves to be the seed of Jacob. 1 To whom this power is promised.
For not whosoever are of the seed of Jacob, the same are the Sons of Jacob
Romans 9. ver. 6.7. But they which embrace the faith of Jacob, and those are they
which are in deed godly and faithful, the which both in this place and every
where in the holy Scriptures are fignified under the name of a Remnant, least
the hypocrites might suppose the promises, and this power to appertain unto
them. Secondly, there is to be noted what he promises in this place, 2. What
is promised.
namely, a most sweet effect of the power of the church toward those that
are godly in deed in every nation. The which consists herein, that the
Church, or God by the spiritual word does in all places nourish them, feed
them, give them strength to increase, comfort them: Finally, performs the
self same uses toward them, the which the rain or small dew, and glistering
in the fields brings either unto the grass, when it first peepeth out of
the ground, or when as it is already grown forth. The like similitude is else
where used in the Scriptures, as Psalm. 72. ver. 6. He shall come down like the
rain upon the mowen grass, and as the showers that water the earth. So Psalm
65. ver 9. Thou visitest the earth, and waterest it: thou make it very rich:
the River of God is full of water: thou preparest them corn: for so thou
appointest it. Thou waterest abundant lie the furrows thereof: thou causest
the rain to descend into the valleys thereof: thou make it soft with
showers, and blessest the bud thereof. And this does the Church perform unto
the godly, by the disposing and preaching of the word of God, whereof it is the
keeper and pillar, as Paul speaks 1. Tim. 3.15. and in respect that it has
the external or outward ministry thereof, to wit by ordeining of true and
faithll Pastors. These things if thou do says Paul, thou shall save thy self
and others. 1. Tim. 4. ver. 16. And Romans 1.16. The gospel is the power of God
unto salvation. Otherwise the power and virtue it self, which inwardly does
nourish us, comfort us, and gives increase, is properly from God, and is the
Spirit of God, and comes not from the church as Paul teaches 1. Cor. 3. ver.
7. saying: So then, neither is he that planteth any thing, neither he that
watreth, but God that gives the increase. And the Prophet amplifieth this
effect of the power of the church toward the godly from the kind of rain
whereunto he compares it: For this power of the church is like not unto every
rain: but unto that which alone without the labor of men, that are vine
dressers, gardeners, and husbandmen, without their travail and diligence I say
nourishes, brings forth, and strengthens the grass and herbs that
spring out of the earth. The which doubtless is a most powerful and plentiful
virtue of rain. So does the Church feed the godly with the word of GOD
alone, not mingling therewith, or using any doctrine of men. Otherwise as
touching the service and ministry of men that preach the gospel, the same
doubtless is necessary in the church of God, and at no hand to be taken away:
neither is it in this place condemned. For how shall they hear except there
be those that preach, says Paul, how shall they preach, except there be some
ministry ordained? But in this place is showed that the word of God alone is
sufficient thoroughly to nourish the godly, to shut out any other kind of
doctrine whatsoever, such as are the traditions of men: and not to take away
the means of expounding the same word of God, such as are the faithful
Pastors: For things contained one under another are not contrary. Thirdly, 3.
Among whom the Church shall have and show this power.
it is to be noted, among whom the Church shall have and show this power, to
wit among the nations, that is, people strangers before from true faith, and
the heavenly doctrine: nay moreover resisting and striving against it, yea and
that among many nations, that is, diverse or many, that is, strong and more
honorable then others. Truly the Gospel when as it was preached did win and
bring unto Christ both many nations, and the same also most mighty, as for
example, the kingdoms of the Romans, and Persians.

Verse. 8. And the remnant of Iaacob shall be among the Gentiles in the midst of
many people, as the Lion among the beasts of the forest, and as the Lions
whelpe among the flocks of sheep, who when he goes through, treads down
and teareth in pieces, and none can deliver.
The second effect of the power given by Christ unto his church.
THe second effect of the same power, the which by Christ is given to his
church, to wit, against the Rebels. And that is such, that the Church as a
ramping lion shall crush them, and as easily tear them in pieces and consume
them, as he is wont to do a flock of sheep. So Paul 2. Cor. 10. verse. 4.
speaking of the power and force of the word of God, says, For the weapons of
our warfare, are not carnal, but mighty through God, to cast down holds. And
Christ says unto Peter, and in his person unto all other his true ministers
Matthew. 16. verse. 18. I will give unto thee the keys of the Kingdom of heaven,
and whatsoever thou shall bind upon earth, shall be bound in heaven: and
whatsoever thou shall loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven. For either
Christ, or the Church throws down his enemies by the power of his word: and
that in such sort, that he taking away, none can deliver them, and save them
out of his hands, as David complayneth of the cruelty of his enemies, comparing
them unto a roaring Lion, from whom none can deliver, if God should not stand
on his side, and therefore he craves earnestly his aid Psalm. 7. ver. 1, 2.
saying: O Lord my God in thee I put my trust: save me from all that persecute
me, and deliver me, lest he devour my soul like a Lion, and tear it in
pieces, while there is none to help.

Verse 9. Thine hand shall be lift up upon thine adversaries, and all thine
enemies shall be cut off.
The conclusion by the figure Epiphonema, which what it is, see Jonas cap. 2.
ver. 9.
THe conclusion by the figure Epiphonema, or acclamation, that it shall come to
pass, that in the end the church shall get the upper hand against her
enemies. The which also makes plain by an Antithesis, or matching together of
contraries: and by the kind it self of the ruin or overthrow of the enemies
of the church. The antithesis is, where he says, Thy hand shall be lift up, and
Thine enemies shall be cut off, and so consequently cast down. The kind of
destruction is exceeding great, for they shall be cut off, that is, they shall
perish and utterly be destroyed and rooted out: and shall not only be
afflicted, or have their estate in part diminished: but utterly overthrown.
And to the end this conclusion may be the stronger, and take the deeper root
in their minds, and that he may comfort them the more, it is confirmed by the
person of the promiser. For it is God which promises, and in deed the
Jehovah, not any feyned God, nor any mortal man, such as were also even the
Prophets themselves.

Verse. 10. And it shall come to pass in that day, says the Lord, that I will
cut off thine horses out of the midst of thee, and I will destroy thy chariots.
The manner and time of the former comfort and promise.
A Laying open of the matter more plainly: for he shows the manner, and the
time wherein the former comfort and promise shall come to pass unto his
church. The which also is a confirmation of it, that the godly and faithful
may be most assured of it, whatsoever fall out unto them in the mean season,
and albeit that their condition and estate may seem to be very bad. And first
the time is expressed: and afterward the manner. And the manner is also
manifold. For there are three reckoned up in this place in order, to wit, the
casting down and spoiling of the aids, whereon the church seems to stay:
the putting away of Idolatry which reigned in it before: the overthrow and
destruction of the enemies of the church. But this verse has three things to
be noted. First, Three parts of this verse.
a description of the time, 1. A description of the time of the fulfilling of
the former deliverance.
wherein the fulfilling of the former deliverance and lifting up of the Jews
or of the church shall be. And it shall be in that day, that is, in that time:
For a day in this place does not signify the space of 24. hours, but a long
time, yet a certain time, and a time set by God. And indeed after that the
Lord God shall have taken away from his church both the aids of men, and also
shall have rooted out of her false doctrine and ungodliness, that is, shall have
wasted the country of the Jews by the Babylonians, and shall have carried
them away captives into Babylon. For then at the last God shall cut off, and
shall overthrow the enemies of his church. So then that time may easily both
now be observed or noted: and also in times past might have been noted by the
falling out of things foretold here in this place.

2. This promise shall be fulfilled, how incredible or contrary soever it seem
to be.
The second thing here to be noted is, that albeit in this place a thing never
so much incredible or not to be believed, and in show seeming to be contrary,
be promised: yet nevertheless it is promised that it shall most assuredly come
to pass. For it is God which promises and foretells these things. This is
said and spoken, that is, a determined sentence of Jehovah, and such as is
irreuocable, or cannot be called back. And yet this seems utterly an absurd
thing, or contrary to reason, and impossible, that then at last God should
restore his Church, when as he shall have taken away from it all helps and
aids. But God has a reason of his counsel and doing, the which we will anon
declare.

3. The taking away of the aids of men.
The third thing to be noted is, the taking away of the aids of men, the which
the Jews, that is, the Church seemed for to have, the which when as they are
sundry and manifold, they are only in part rehearsed in this verse, to wit,
the aids of war, as are horses and chariots, wherewith the Jews did fight
against their enemies: and such other things necessary unto war, the which
God will take away from the Jews before he deliver them. And why, I pray you,
will GOD do this? To wit, that they may understand, that this their
deliverance is indeed the work of GOD, and to come from GOD alone, not from
themselves, not from man's, or any earthly aids, and that therefore they may
acknowledge the praise thereof to be only to be given unto God, and wholly
unto God. Again, because that whilst these ordinary aids are before their
eyes, men (such is the corruption and vanity of the nature of man) do rather
settle and stay themselves upon these, then upon God, as it is in the Psalm. 20.
verse. 7. Some trust in chariots, and some in horses. To the end therefore that
we should accustom our selves to lift up our eyes unto God himself, these
aides of men must be taken away from us, A lesson for the church of God at all
times.
and that for our safeguard. Further, that which is here said of the Jews, that
they shall then at the last be delivered, when as they shall be destitute or
void of all aids, ^ppertaineth unto the church of God at all times, whom God
uses for the most part then at lenghth to help, when as it seems utterly to
be lost and past all hope of help, that by this means he may the better
declare both his power, and also his mercy and goodness toward those that are
his.

Verse. 11. And I will cut off the cities of thy land, and overthrow all thy
strong holds.
An amplification of the taking away of their aids.
AN amplification of this manner, or of the taking away of their aids. For God
does not only take away from those that are his their horses and chariots,
that is, their aids of war, even then when as he will deliver them: but also
their cities and munitions, that is, their home aids, and places of refuge.
Then therefore the face and show of the church seems to be most miserable,
when as it has no aids nor helps of man, neither at home, nor abroad,
neither in peace, nor in war. And this also proves the more the deliverance
of the church to be indeed the work of God, not of men. Finally, it teaches
us, that we should not despair, no not in cases most desperate, or where all
hope is past. For then was Moses sent, when as the people of GOD might have
been deemed to have been utterly opp^^^^^d and undone: and when as the
brickes, and their burd^^^ were doubled Exodus 1. and 2. So Isai 54. we may
read that then God promises most certain deliverance of his church, and the
restoring of her unto greatest beauty and glory, when as it seemed to be
brought most low, and to be most deformed and miserable ver. 11, 12. O thou
afflicted and tossed with tempest, that have no comfort, behold, I will lay
thy stones with the carbuncle, and lay thy foundation with Saphires. And I will
make thy windows of emeraudes, and thy gates shining stones, and all thy
borders of pleasant stones, etc.

Verse. 12. And I will cut off thine inchanters out of thine hand: and thou
shall have no more soothsayers.
The second manner or way of God his fulfilling his promise in delivering those
that are his.
THe second manner or way whereby God will execute that his promise concerning
the deliverance of those that are his, to wit, he will take away from them all
true lettes of his help and aid, as is all kind of idolatry, like as it is
here described by diverse sorts of the same: and he will also remove our other
sins, the which keep back the benefits of God from us, or else do make a
wall and closure of partition between God and us Isai 59. For there is no
doubt, but that in this place by the figure Synecdoche, What the figure
Synecdoche is, see Amos cap. 5, ver. 21.
under the reciting of one sort of sins (the which are committed against the
first table) he comprehends all other vices and sins also, the which close
and shut up the way of God his bounteousness toward us. Therefore here in this
place he reckons up idolatry in especial, and that the same most filthy
idolatry, the which does utterly deny God to be the governor and ruler of
this world. And this is belonging unto them, which seek counsel for the doing
of things from the Planets, foothsayings, and other altogether devilish arts,
who herein this place are called Inchanters, and Soothsayers, and Planetaries
or Mathematicians, against whom God speaks Deu. 18. ver. 10.11. saying, Let
none be found among you, that makes his son or his daughter to go through
the fire, or that uses witchcraft, or a regarder of times, or a marker of the
flying of fowls, or a sorcerer, or a charmer, or that counsels with
spirits, or a soothsayer, or that asks counsel at the dead. And 1. Sam. 15.
ver. 23. the Prophet Samuel shows how detestable these sins are, when he
says, For rebellion is as the sin of witchcraft, and transgression is
wickedness and idolatry.

Verse. 13. Thine idols also will I cut off, and thine images out of the midst
of thee: and thou shall no more worship the work of thine hands.
A second kind of idolatry.
A Second kind of idolatry, and the same both most manifest, and also most
filthy and shameful, when as men do worship the work of their own hands,
as Idols by them graven, painted, standing upright, lying along, and by what
name soever they be called, or after what manner soever they be made. For the
kind it self is wholly condemned by God, and is altogether blasphemous.

Verse. 14. And I will pluck up thy groves out of the midst of thee: so will I
destroy thine enemies.
A third kind of idolatry.
A Third kind of idolatry, not indeed so vile and filthy as the other, but yet
idolatry notwithstanding: to wit, when as men albeit they have a purpose, and
endeavor to worship the true God, yet notwithstanding do they it after another
manner, then he has appointed. The which thing also is akinde of idolatry, and
will worship: for God will not be worshipped as we please, but only as he
himself prescribes. And therefore is Saul sharply reproved by Samuel in that
contrary unto God his commandment, he spared the fattest of the cattle of
the Amalekites under the pretense and color of saving them to do sacrifice
unto God withal, but he hears from God by the mouth of Samuel 1. Sam. cap.
15. ver. 22.23. Has the Lord as great pleasure in burnt offerings and
sacrifices, as when the voice of the Lord is obeyed? Behold, to obey is better
then sacrifice, and to hearken is better then the fat of rams. For rebellion
is as the sin of witchcraft, and transgression is wickedness and idolatry.
And Paul Coloss. 2. ver. 23. condemns all such kind of superstitions and
devises of men, what show of wisdom soever otherwise they may seem to
carry. Those that worshipped the true GOD in wooddes and grouse, are condemned
because they worshipped him in places which he had in his word forbidden.
Such was the worship of the true God in groves and woods, that is, out of the
place appointed by God himself, to wit, out of that only Temple of Solomon
chosen by himself, Psalm. 132. Deuteronomy. 16. Whereof it comes to pass that every
where in the Scripture those Kings are condemned, which pulled not up and
destroyed those groves, albeit that otherwise they have their due praise and
commendation for godliness, as Asa, and others 1. King. 15. ver. 13.14. where
Asa is commended for putting down Maachah his mother from her estate, because
she had made an idol in a grove, and the vprightnes of his heart to Godward
all his days: yet is it notwithstanding to his reproof in the same place set
down, That the high places were not taken away.

The third way of God his fulfilling of his promise.
And I will destroy thine enemies.) The third way, by the which God will
fulfill his promise, namely, That God will utterly destroy the enemies of his
Church, and pluck them as it were up by the roots, that they shall never grow
again. For after God shall have removed and taken away from her those lets and
stays of his grace and favor toward her, then will he settle himself unto
her deliverance, and will earnestly set upon her enemies, and destroy them. But
in this place there is noted such a kind of destruction, the which is called
Aphanismos, or a blotting out and utter racing and defacing, whereas no remnant
or senfie of a thing remains, as it is more plainly declared Psalm. 101. ver.
8. where David says: Betimes will I destroy all the wicked of the land, that I
may cut off all the workers of iniquity from the city of the Lord. The which
is a most sharp revenge of the wrath of God.

Ver. 15. And I will execute a vengeance in my wrath and indignation upon the
heathen, which they have not heard.
An amplification of this third way of God his fulfilling his promise
AN amplification of this third way, taken from the great earnestnes Church. The
which thing also confirms those threatenings of God against the enemies of his
Church, and does more plainly testify or witness their overthrow to come. God
therefore shall destroy the enemies of his Church, and he shall do this with
great earnestnes and fervent zeal, and love of mind, the which he bears
toward those that are his, as he himself witnesses Zach. 8. ver. 2. where he
says, I was ielous for Zion with great jealousy, and I was ielous for her with
great wrath. This earnestnes of God fighting for his Church against the enemies
thereof, is called wrath, indignation, or rage of mind, attributing unto God
the passions and affections of men, not that (to speak properly) there is in
God any perturbation or distempered motion and anger, because that he is by
nature unchangeable, as with whom, as James speaks cap. 1. ver. 17. there is
no variablenes, neither shadowing by turning: but that it may be showed how
greatly he loves those that are his, and how especially he does defend them.
And the Prophet adds why he will punish the enemies of his Church so severely
or sharply, namely, because they have not obeyed that same doctrine, the which
the Church offered unto them. For they received not the dew and heavenly
rain, wherewith God would feed and nourish them by his Church. Wherefore I
refer these words ( not to hear, or they have not heard) unto the doctrine
of salvation, and of the Gospel, the which the enemies of God and of the
Church either do not at all receive: or receiving it, take it for a matter to
laugh at, and despise it. Of which fault many people in the world are guilty
at this day.

CAP. 6.
Verse. 1. Hearken ye now what the Lord says, Arise thou, and contend before
the mountains, and let the hills hear thy voice.
Another most vehement or earnest Sermon against the Israelites.
IN this Chapter is contained a most earnest Sermon and protestation of Micheas
against the Israelites, whereby he makes them altogether vnexcuseable before
God. And God his purpose was in admonishing or giving them warning so often by
one Prophet, and not only by diverse, that hereby he might witness and show
unto them earnestly that their sins did displease him, and were most
grievous: and that by this means, as I have said, he might shake off from them
all excuse, and sluggishnes and dulnes. For this so often repeated reprehension
might have rouzed up even the most sleepie among the^. So Paul stirs up his
Ephesians Ephe. cap. 5.14 in these words: Wherefore (he says) awake thou that
sleep, and stand up from the dead, and Christ shall give thee light. So Isai
awaketh up the Church cap. 26. ver. 19. Awake, and sing, ye that dwell in dust,
etc. And cap. 60. ver. 1. Arise, O Jerusalem: be bright, for thy light is come,
and the glory of the Lord is risen upon thee. So finally it grieved not the
Apostles to rehearse the same things often, as Paul writes Philip. 3. ver. 1.
It grieueth me not (says he) to write the same things unto you and for you it
is a sure thing. So Peter says Epist. 2. cap. 1. ver. 12. Wherefore I will not
be negligent to put you always in remembrances of these things, though that
ye have knowledge, and be stablished in the present truth. This also appears
by the co^paring of the 2. chap. of the 2. epistle of S. Peter with the epistle
of S. Jude: so sloware we doubtless in the acknowledging of our sins, or to
repent also. Now this verse, with that which follows, contain a preface of
the protestation to ensue, the which is added, that they may now understand
that there is a matter of great weight and earnestnes in handling concerning
them, and therefore that the Israelites should give diligent ear unto it. So
Psalm. 81. ver. 1. the Prophet stirs up the godly to pray God with all
diligence, saying, Sing joyfully unto God our strength: Sing loud unto the God
of Iaacob. So Isai cap. 1. ver. 2. he calls the heaven and earth to hearken,
saying: Hear, O heavens, and hearken, O earth. So Exodus 20. Deuteronomy. 32.

This verse has two parts. The one, 1. What he is to speak.
what the Prophet ought now to utter or speak. The other, unto whom. And as
concerning the first, the Prophet shall indeed not only utter or speak the
word of God, but also after such a manner and form, 2. Unto whom.
that all men may understand that God stands upon very good ground,

Now the Prophet is commanded to speak unto the mountains, 2. Why the
creatures void of reason are called to be witnesses of this controversy
between God and the Israelites.
little hills, and strong foundations of the earth, the which self same
things and creatures are exhorted for to hear. And he speaks unto them as
witnesses, nay as Judges of this controversy of GOD with the Israelites: so
known doubtless was the righteousness and equity of the cause of GOD unto every
one, and unto the whole world, that not only men endued with reason, but also
the unreasonable creatures might be witnesses and judges of the same.
Furthermore, these men of Israel are by this means accused of wonderful
dulnes and blockishnes, as if they knew not those things, the which the bruit
and dead elements do know notwithstanding: or that they may be accused of
injustice, who in judging keep not that equity and truth in condemning
themselves, and justifying of God, the which bruit beasts do observe and
keep. And therefore that it were more meet and better to plead these things
before the mountains and hills, then before men. And these words, mountains,
hills, and strong foundations of the earth, are al one Psalm. 18. Moreover this
whole preface, to the end it might more deeply pearce and prick the minds of
the Israelites the hearers, is set forth under a Prosopopoeia of God speaking
unto both the Prophet, What the figure Prosopopoeia is, see Oseas cap. 6. ver.
1.
and the mountains, and also the people.

Verse. 2. Hear ye, O mountains, the Lords quarrel, and ye mighty foundations
of the earth: for the Lord has a quarrel against his people, and he will
plead with Israel.
THe second part of the preface, wherein is showed against whom God contendeth
or pleads. The second part of the preface, showing against whom God pleads.
He said before that he pleaded before the mountains as Judges: and now he
declares against whom he laweth, to wit, not against all persons whatsoever,
but against that his own people Israel, that is by him adopted or chosen above
and before the rest, of his only and especial grace and favor, whom in this
place he proves guilty of notorious ingratitude or unthankfulness. The kind
also of the controversy and quarrel is here showed, to wit, such a one as is
openly made in words, that all men may hear it, and understand it. For so does
the word (iakach) signify. And these words (Hear, O ye mountains) are
repeated again, that all men might be the more stirred up, because that God
deals in earnest: and not that the bruit or senseles creatures be not ready
also to yield obedience unto God, every one in his kind, as at large appears
Psalm. 147.

Verse. 3. O my people, what have I done unto thee? or wherein have Igrieued
thee? testify against me. Verse. 4. Surely I brought thee up out of the land of
Egypt, and redeemed thee out of the house of servants, and I have sent before
thee, Moses, Aaron, and Miriam.
A Making plain of the matter ensuing. For God shows and declares the cause
that he will plead before the mountains, and before all the world, namely,
that he will condemn that same his people Israel of brutish unthankfulness. 1.
A most mild Prosopopoeia, what this figure is, see Oseas cap. 6. ver. 1.
And this verse with that which follows has two things to be noted. First,
the phrase or kind of speaking, the which is a most mild Prosopopoeia, or
feining of a person, that God with this his lenity or mildenes, might wound
them the more: or else allure and draw on those that were obedient: yea and
there is further a matching together of contraries to be noted, in that God
calls this so unthankful people, his own people, that is, his own
purchased inheritance, that even hereby the people may appear the more
unthankful.

2. The state of the controversy.
Also in the second place here ought to be noted the state or ground and
principal point of this quarrel and controversy of God with this people. The
state is, whether the Israelites did sin ungodly and vnexcusablie against
God, The Intention.
so that they are altogether to be condemned. The intention or charging them
with the fault is, but they have sinned: they have offended God vnexcusablie.
The Depulsion.
The depulsion, or denial of this charge: they have not offended. The proof
of the intension or charge.
The proof of the charge: He that offends him, of whom he has received
great and continual benefits, he sins vnexcusablie, and is altogether to
be condemned: The benefits of God toward the Israelites.
but the Israelites have in such wise offended God, therefore they have sinned
vnexcusablie against God, and are to be condemned. And he proves the
Israelites to have dealt so with God. 1. Their deliverance out of Egypt.
The which that he may the more certainly obtain and show, he first recites
the benefits of God toward the Israelites, and the same both exceeding great,
and also continued or perpetual, 2. Out of the house of bondage.
of which sort there are three reckoned up in this place. The deliverance of
this people out of Egypt, and that at the same time, when as Egypt was most
cruel unto them, and a House of bondage. Finally, for that unto the same
people, 3. He gave his prophets to be their Rulers.
for that unto the same people, whom he delivered from that place, and hell, he
gave his Prophets to be Rulers, Moses, Aaron, Marie. Psalm. 77.

Verse. 5. O my people, remember now what Balack King of Moah had devised, and
what Balaam the sonnne of Beor answered him, from Shittim unto Gilgal, that ye
may know the righteousness of the Lord.
AN amplification of the benefits of God both exceeding great and also
continued toward the Israelites, An amplification of the benefits of God
toward them.
by the reckoning up of the fourth and fifth benefit the which is done in this
place. The fourth benefit was, that God not only defended them against the
open violence, 4. He defends them against the crafty devises of their
enemies.
and manifest weapons and wars of the Egyptians: but also against the subtle
and crafty devises of other enemies, whereof we read Number. 23. and the which
are here mentioned. For Balac hired for a reward Balaam a notable Soothsayer or
Prophet among the profane or heathen men at that time, to curse and banne the
Israelites, and to provoke God against them. The which was a most crafty
devise, to wit, to stir up God against them rather then men: and to procure
and bring against them the wrath of God, rather then earthly weapons. Which
counsel and devise of Balac God withstoode, and turned it into a blessing unto
the Israelites. 5. He continues his benefits toward them from time to time.
The fifth benefit is, for that the course and order of these benefits of God
toward the Israelites in the wilderness was perpetual and continued from time
to time. The which time is described by the place, and by the things that fell
out in it. For from Sittim unto Gilgal there do pass 40. years, in the which
the Israelites lived in the wilderness. Balaam comes to Sittim against the
Israelites: in Gilgal is the covenant of God renewed with the Israelites Ios. 5.
Confer this place with Psalm. 78. Psalm. 91. ver. 10.11. and 106. So then all
that time of their being in the wilderness the course of God his benefits was
perpetual and continual toward them.

Verse. 6. Wherewith shall I come before the Lord, and bow my self before the
high God? Shall I come before him with burnt offerings, and with calves of an
year old?
The figure Dialogismus or communing and reasoning with our selves is, when as
we as it were dispute and debate with our selves, what is to be done, or not to
be done, as in this place the people evidently do.
THe figure Dialogismus or a co^muning and reasoning of the people within
themselves, by the which the manner of the stubborn and hypocritical people
are expressed. For here now in this place neither does God nor the Prophet
speak in his own person: but this people, which was condemned before, is
brought in co^muning and reasoning in great hypocrisy, what is the way to
appease God toward them, to alter and change their life, and finally to avoid
and escape this judgment. Neither does the people ask this, as if they meant
to do it, but as to find fault with God himself, whom they cannot now
pacify, albeit they should never so much offer all things. But after the manner
of hypocrites they stay only in external or outward ceremonies, and in them
do imagine and place the whole way and means of their reconciliation or
growing into favor with God. Unto whom afterward ver. 8. the Prophet
answers in the name of God, and shows their hypocrisy, and vain care.

Three outward ways of worshipping God.
But this verse has three kinds of worshipping of God, yet externally or
outwardly only, the which this people shows himself ready to offer unto
God: but of faith, of true repentance, of Christ not one word. Against such
outward hypocritical dissembling God complayneth Isai 29. verse. 13.14. saying,
Because this people come near me with their mouth, and honor me with their
lips, but have removed their heart far from me, and their fear toward me was
taught by the precepts of men, therefore behold, I will again do a maruailous
work in this people, even a maruailous work, and a wonder: for the wisdom
of their wise men shall perish, and the understanding of their prudent men
shall be hid. Which former verse is cited by our Savior Christ against the
hypocrisy of the Scribes and Pharisees Matthew. 15. ver. 8. The first kind of
their outward worshipping of God is, Bowing. The second is, Burnt offerings. 1.
Bowing.
The third, especially of a Calfe and the same of an year old, 2. Burnt
offerings
for the sentence increases, and arises as it were by degrees, that they
might seem, that they would spare nothing of theirs, nor any cost, 3. A Calfe
of an year old.
so that they might find God reasonable, who would admit or receive some
thing, wherewith he might be pacified and appeased. But woe be unto the
hypocrisy of men, the which bearing a show that it would feign worship God and
pacify him, ungodly and manifestly accuses him of cruelty, as these men do.

Verse. 7. Will the Lord be pleased with thousands of rams, or with ten
thousand rivers of oil? shall I give my first borne for my transgression, even
the fruit of my body, The hypocrites amplify their desire to win the favor
of God.
for the sin of my soul?
AN amplification made by these hypocrites, of their earnest desire and will in
reconciling or winning of God to be favorable and friendly unto them. If, say
these hypocrites, those former things which we offer, do not satisfy or
content God, as proceeding from too much sparing and niggardnes, and being too
little, behold greater matters, to wit, A thousand rams for sacrifice: yea
ten thousand tons and rivers of oil. Further, if these be not enough,
behold we now offer our very first borne, and out sons unto the slaughter, if
so be that God will suffer himself to be pleased with these, and not rage
against us so unmercifully. See how hypocrifie seeks out all other things,
save the true remedies of reconciliation or winning the favor of God. For
hypocrites imagine and devise upon such things, which only carry a great pomp,
show, and glory, and are outward, they are void of faith, and they neither
have nor promise any earnest feeling of their sins, or alteration and changing
of their living.

Verse. 8. He has showed thee, O man, what is good, and what the Lord requires
of thee: surely to do justly, and to love mercy, and to humble thy self, to
walk with thy God.
The answer of the prophet unto the former demaundes of the hypocrites.
THe answer of the Prophet, wherewith he shifteth off those vain remedies of
hypocrites, and sets down a true remedy, and such a one as is ordained by
God himself, whereunto he calls them back, as David does Psalm. 50. and
Psalm. 51. ver. 17. Where he shows what are the true sacrifices, wherewith
God is well pleased, saying: The sacrifices of God are a contrite spirit: a
contrite and a broken heart, O God, thou will not despise. And his answer in
some is, that they walk before God according to the law by himself
prescribed or appointed. The which he shows to be the only remedy to
pacify God, not devised of his own head, but declared unto men by God
himself. And this contains true repentance of mind, the which cannot come
but from faith.

1. The co^me^datio^ 2. Description 3. Kinds
of this remedy.
This verse has three things to be considered, to wit, a commendation of this
remedy, a description of the same, and sundry kinds of it. For the first,
this remedy has his commendation from the author thereof, God himself. For
God has showed it unto thee. force that the Prophet says here in this place,
O man, God has showed thee. For the majesty of God is manifestly opposed or
set against the condition of man. And it is a mere sacrilege of men, or a
robbing of God of his honor, when as men reject or cast away the things which
God speaking plainly from heaven has taught, and do follow their own
devises, or had rather have and do prefer other things before them, as being
more true then they. Wherefore that form, after which the law of God teaches
that we ought to live, is a most true remedy of changing of our life, and of
appeasing and pacifiyng of God. And the Prophet adds a reason, whereby men
may be brought hereunto, to wit, if they be humbled before God, and become
subject unto him, namely, laying aside all pride of mind, and that same
carnal wisdom, wherewith they swell, and by means whereof all hypocrites do
please themselves in their vices, and wicked life. The law of God abridged by
the Prophet unto two points.
For when as the law of God has many heads and branches, and precepts or
commandments, the Prophet brings all unto two points, lest they might
complain, that the same were too hard, or dark, 1 Judgment.
or manifold and doubtful. Now these points are Judgment and Mercy: and God
commands them both, that we should both do them, and love them, 2. Mercy.
that is, perform both these points not unwillingly, but of says, and with a
willing mind. Under the name of Judgment he comprehends whatsoever we men
do owe unto men by bargain, promise, covenant, or by the law written. He
calls clemency or Mercy, whatsoever men do owe unto men by the general
duty of humanity or manhood, in respect that they are men, and faithful
Galat. 6. Romans 13. verse. 8. as Paul wills saying: Owe nothing to any man, but
to love one another: for he that loves another, has fulfilled the law.

By Mercy, I say, he understands whatsoever we do owe one to another even
without any especial or peculiar covenant, bargayne, and contract. And these
indeed are works of the second table, the which notwithstanding are
testimonies of our true faith, and of the first table. So does Paul Rom 13.
verse 9. fseaking of the fulfilling of the law by love reckon up the works and
precepts of the second table only, saying: For this, Thou shall not commit
adultery, Thou shall not Kill, Thou shall not steal, Thou shall not bear
false witness, Thou shall not covet: and if there be any other commandment,
it is briefly comprehended in this saying, even in this, Thou shall love thy
neighbor as thy self. This place of our Prophet is cited by Christ Mat. 9.13.
where he says to the Scribes and Pharisees, Go ye and learn what this is, I
will have mercy and not sacrifice. For it is like unto the place of Oseas 6.
There is a like place Psalm. 50. ver. 12, 13, 14. If I be hungry, I will not
tell thee: for the world is mine, and all that therein is. Will I eat the
flesh of bulls? or drink the blood of goats? Offer unto GOD praise, and pay
thy vows unto the most high. And Psalm. 51. verse. 17. The sacrifices of God are
a contrite heart: a contrite and broken heart, O God, thou will not despise.
Again Psalm. 40. verse. 6. Sacrifice and offering thou did not desire: (for
mine ears have thou prepared) burnt offering and sin offering have thou not
required.

Verse. 9. The Lords voice cries unto the city, (and the man of wisdom shall
see thy name) Hear the rod and who has appointed it.
The application of the answer of the Prophet.
THe application of the former answer unto the people of Israel, whereby
Micheas teaches, that they are worthylie punished of God, for that they have
not kept the commandments of God appointed in his law. Therefore the whole
oration and speech following does consist in denouncing or threatening of the
judgments of GOD, and in fitting them unto the former doctrine, that by this
means we might understand, how we ought to play the Philosophers, or to gather
unto our selves wisdom out of the threatenings of God against us and other men.
For we must not refer them unto the disposition of the stars, destinies,
and times appointed unto all other matters, neither are they by them to be
measured, but by the contempt or despising of the law of God. Further, this
speech and denunciation or threatening following has this verse as a preface
before it, whereby they might the more diligently give ear unto the
threatenings of GOD following, and unto the causes of the same.

Four things to be noted.
This verse contains four things to be noted. The first, who speaks, namely
Jehovah, or the Lord, albeit he used the mouth and ministry of Micheas. 1.
Who speaks.
Whereof is that saying, He that despises you, despises me. Mat. 12. The
second, to whom he speaks, to wit, 2. Unto whom he speaks.
unto the city indefinitely, not naming any particular or especial person, that
is, unto every city or town of the kingdom of Israel. For so in this place I
take the word (City) generally, not for Jerusalem alone, whom the Prophet does
not here speak unto: nor for Samaria, the which was the head of that kingdom
of Israel: but for all the towns and cities of that body. So also do I take
it hereafter verse. 12. The rich men of which city, that is, of which cities,
etc. The third point, what he speaks. He promises a rod, 3. What he speaks.
and afflictions, or troubles, and God does assuredly prepare, and ordain, and
decree it for them. For by the word rod, are signified afflictions or troubles
Psalm. 2. and 89. ver. 32. Then will I visit their transgression with the rod,
and their iniquity with strokes. And by the word promises or appoynteth, What
the figure Metaphora is, see Ames cap. 4. ver. 12.
is metaphorically signified the assured and ready decree of God, except they
repent. So then the Israelites are commanded to hear, that is, to give
diligent ear, both what is threatened unto them, and also who threatens, that
at length they may be moved, and fear. 4. The certainty of this threatening.
The fourth thing to be noted is, the certainty of this threatening, the which
is confirmed by a Parenthesis from the testimony of the wise and godly, who in
the same do manifestly see and acknowledge the majesty and name of God, nay
God himself truly speaking and justly being angry, What a Paren thesis is,
see Oseas cap. 8. v. 2.
and threatening these things. For this do these words put in between
signify, ( And wisdom, that is, the wise, sees and acknoledgeth thy name.)
So Psalm. 107. verse. 43. Luke 7. ver. 35. the godly are said to judge otherwise
then the ungodly. This is added, that both the obstinate and froward men may be
made inexcusable, who despise these judgments of God, as if they heard the
voice of men, and not the voice of God himself, when as they despise his
Prophets declaring these things even at this day.

Verse. 10. Are yet the treasure of wickedness in the house of the wicked, and
the scant measure, that is abominable?
The cause of the judgments of God.
AN explanation or making more plain of the former matters. For he shows the
cause of the judgments of God, whereby the application of the former answer
unto the manners of the Israelites is understood. And like as in the eight
verse he in the first place did set down judgment to be contained in the law
of God, that is, faithfulness and upright dealing in promises and bargains: so
he now first shows, that the same judgment was utterly broken by them, as
namely being such who beguiled their neighbors the which we are to use in
bargaining, and wherewith in traffike faithful dealing is vpholden. Wherefore
in this place under one kind of most shameful and wicked deceit (wherein our
neighbor does not only suffer loss but also public faithfulness and
authority is broken, whereby weights, balances, and such like measures are
made) under one kind, I say, most manifest and known, then all other sorts of
deceit whatsoever, the which are used in bargaining and dealing, is understood,
and condemned. For thus we read in Deuteronomy. cap. 25. ver. 13.14.15. concerning
these matters: Thou shall not have in thy bag two manner of weights (he
means of one kind, as a little pound, and a great pound, etc.) a great and a
small, neither shall thou have in thine house diverse measures, a great and a
small: But thou shall have a right and a just weight: a perfect and a just
measure shall thou have, that thy days may be lengthened in the land which the
Lord thy God gives thee. Further, he does both press them with an
interrogation or asking of a question, that they should not dare to deny that
which their conscience did witness to be true, and to be done of them
wickedly: and also shows that this is often done by them, because that by
such deceit they had gotten unto themselves treasures in their houses, and
heaped up together great riches.

Verse. 11. Shall I justify the wicked balances, and the bag of deceitful
weights?
An earnest charging of the^ with that set down before.
HE urges that which he set down before, both by the same former of
interrogation or asking a question: and also continuing still in the self same
wicked crime of theirs in false dealing, the which he comdemned in them. And by
the way of matching together of contraries, he opposes or sets against
their dealings the nature of God, which speaks in this place. For when as in
their bargainings they deal with craft and subtlety, God doubtless cannot hold
them for just. For he judges according unto truth, and without the accepting
or regarding of the person of any man.

Verse. 12. For the rich men thereof are full of cruelty, and the inhabitants
thereof have spoken lies, and their tongue is deceitful in their mouth.
The second branch of the law of God.
THe second member or part of the law of God, the which verse. 8. before, was
placed in the exercising of mercy toward their brethren: the which in like
manner, God proves to be shamefully and in every respect broken by them. And
because that this kind of mercy is due especially from the rich unto the
poor and needy, therefore God directs or bends his speech against them
also. For these he shows in every city, to have been deceitful, oppressors,
and liars. This verse therefore has three kind of vices, Three vices
contrary unto mercy.
the which are contrary unto that same mercy which is commanded by God. The
one, robbery or pillage, when as by violence a thing is taken from him, the
which owes not the same, 1. Robbery or pillage.
whether it be done by open violence, as thieves do in the woods: or whether
it be done by secrets or privy violence, as when one that is of more might
gets or takes away any thing from a poor body for fear of his power and
authority. The other is lying, 2 Lying.
wherewith they beguile the simple sort, as for example, when as in buying and
selling they praise their wares, in bargaining they promise one thing, and
perform, or would have another thing to be brought to pass and done. The
third is Deceit, wherewith even without words, 3. Deceit.
with wonderful fetches and crafts they get into their hands the goods of
their neighbors, and that not one or two of them does this: but the
inhabitants, that is, all of them, and in every city and town. Yea, and
moreover they do these things in such sort, that they show themselves most
skillful, and their crafts-masters in these sleights and suttleties. And
therefore their tongue is said to be full of deceit, to be ready and nimble
unto such wickedness, and that it is in their mouth. So David speaks of the
wicked Psalm 52. ver. 2. Thy tongue imagines mischief, and is like a sharp
rasor that cutteth deceitfully. And Psalm. 57. ver. 4. My soul is among lions:
I lie among the children of men, that are set on fire: whose teeth are as
spears and errowes, and their tongues a sharp sword.

Verse. 13. Therefore also will I make thee sick in smitting thee, and in
making thee desolate because of thy sins.
Two parts of this verse.
THe threatening of a punishment because of the former sins, the which is
declared afterward. And this verse has two things to be noted. First a
reason, the which is set down in these words: 1. The reason of the punishment.
Therefore will I also make thee sick. For I take the particle (van) for
Therefore. Again, it is threatened them because of their sins, that is, not
for one sin only, but for infinite sins. 2. The bunishme^t it self, being
^wo fold.
The second thing contains the punishment it self the which is threatened,
whereof there are here rehearsed two kinds. 1. Sickness of body.
The first is sickness of the body. So does God by Moses threate^ the
Israelites for their disobedience unto his commandments Leuit. 26. ver. 16.
Then will I also do this unto you, I will appoint over you fearefulnes, a
consumption, and the burning ague to consume the eyes, and to make the heart
heavy, and you shall sow your seed in vain: for your enemies shall eat it.
The second is desolation, 2. Laying waste of their country.
or spoil, and laying waste of their country. The like is threatened among the
other plagues to be sent among them for their sins Deuteronomy. 28.

Verse. 14. Thou shall eat, and not be satisfied, and thy casting down shall
be in the midst of thee, and thou shall take hold, but shall not deliver: and
that which thou deliuerest, will I give up to the sword.
An amplification adding a threefold punishment unto the former.
AN amplification, whereby he adds another kind of punishment unto the
former. And this punishment is threefold. First, Famine. Secondly, the loss of
their even most precious goods: and their contempt, or being despised in the
midst of their land, country, and city, to wit, after they shall have thus
been vexed both with famine, 1. Famine.
and spoiled also of all their goods. The famine is here described or laid forth
to be wonderful, 2. Spoil of their goods.
not such a famine as comes of the barrennes of the fields, but such as
falls out by reason of the want of strength of the meats that are eaten in
great plenty and abundance notwithstanding, 3. Contempt.
as namely whose staff, and that strength, which God has put into the bread
to nourish us, is taken away, so that it cannot now sustain or feed us. Such
a famine David records to have by God been sent upon the land Psalm. 105.
ver. 16. in these words: Moreover he called a famine upon the land, and utterly
brake the staff of bread. Read Deuteronomy. 28.

Verse. 15. Thou shall sow, but not reap: thou shall tread the olives, but
thou shall not anoint thee with the oil, and make sweet wine, but shall not
drink wine.
A Third kind of punishment.
A Third kind of punishment, and the same also contained in the law of God Deuteronomy.
28. To wit, when as all our labors are utterly in vain, not of themselves I
confess, but are unprofitable unto us which have labored, as namely when as
others, and those our enemies, have them unto themselves, and we receive not
the fruits of them. And the feeling of this punishment is the more grievous,
because that it does wonderfully vex us, and cause us to fret, when as we
seeing and knowing of it, others do enjoy our labors, yea our continual and
long labors, and that in spite of our teeth, and whether we will or no. Which
kind of punishment falls out unto those on whom God is avenged, and punishes
for the contempt or despising of his name. Further, there are three examples of
this punishment set down, to wit, in the Harvest, Olive, and Vine, Corn.
Olive. Vine.
the which are tilled with most great labor, and the fruits whereof are most
desired, and very necessary for the life of men that till the fields, and yet
notwithstanding shall these be disappointed and beguiled of them.

Verse. 16. For the statutes of Omri are kept, and all the manner of the house of
Achab, and ye walk in their counsels, that I should make thee waste, and the
inhabitants thereof an hissing: therefore ye shall bear the reproach of my
people.
A reason of the former punishment.
THe rendering of a reason of the former so grieous punishment, for that the
Israelites were notorious, and stubborn Idolaters. And this place shows that
these threatenings do properly appertain unto the Israelites, and not unto the
Jews. For they, and not these diligently followed and embraced the impiety or
ungodliness of Ambri, or Omri, and Achab, as namely being their Kings. And the
Prophet rehearses these twain by name, and their decrees, or public edicts,
and statutes: also their crafts or counsels in spreading abroad and
establishing of idolatry: because that among all the rest of the Kings of
Israel idolaters, these twain were most shameful and rank idolaters, for of
Omri the father it is recorded 1. King. 16. ver. 25. That he did evil in the
eyes of the Lord, and did worse then all that were before him. And in the same
chapter ver. 30. it is written of Achab his son, that he was yet worse then
his father. Kings then do in such manner rage against true godliness, either
openly, to wit, by force and violence, or else making edicts and statutes
against it: or privily honoring those which are idolaters and ungodly, and
preferring them before those that are godly in deed. Both which things Ambri
and also Achab did.

A confirmation of the former threatening.
Wherefore I will make thee waste.) A confirmation of the former threatening, by
repeating of the sum thereof in this place, and the equity whereof now
appears, by this comparing of the idolatry of the Israelites and the
punishments ordained against them, together: the which is done in this v^rse.
In sum, the Israelites the inhabitants of this country and of the cities
therein, shall feel and bear the reproach of the people of GOD, that is, such
a reproach as God has peculiarly decreed against his rebellious people, for
that, when as they said themselves to be the seed of Abraham and Jacob, and
consequently boasted that they appertained unto the inheritance of God, they
lived and were notwithstanding so obstinatly stubborn and rebels against GOD,
in the which sin and vice they continued and remained.

CAP. 7.
Verse. 1. Woe is me, for I am as the summer gatherings, and as the grapes of
the vintage: there is no cluster to eat: my soul desired the first ripe
fruits.
A confirmation of the former accusation.
A Confirmation of the former accusation set forth by God against the
Israelites, the which is now made by the testimony or witness of the godly
which were among them, the which, that it might carry the more emphasis or
force, the Prophet has expressed in his own person. Wherefore now is
described the corruption of al orders and degrees of men, and the same most
known and public. But this verse has two things to be noted: One, the phrase
or manner of speaking which the Prophet uses: Two parts of this verse.
the other, the thing it self which the Prophet writes of himself. 1. The
phrase.
The phrase or kind of speaking both here, and in the verses following is
altogether patheticall or full of affection, 2. The thing it self.
whereby the indignation or grief of the people is painted forth to be the
greater: and it is also Prosopopoeiticall, and Metaphorical, 1. What these
figures are, see O^eas cap 6. ver. 1. and Amos cap. 4. ver. 12.
that is, full of feining of persons and Metaphors, to the end that both all
the readers and also the hearers may be the more stirred up to hear this
testimony or witness. Now the thing it self the which in this place is set
forth, is the person of the Prophet representing ^he whole company of the true
faithful, burning with exceeding great desire to find some one good and godly
man among the Israelites: filthy, wicked, and consequently most worthy of
that same hard judgment of God. And first of all the Prophet metaphoricallie
expresses his desire to find out some one good man in these words: My soul
has desired some fruits in this people, albeit never so untimely, and bitter
as yet, and little or small. Then he adds. None are found. For, says he, I am
such a one, and in such sort conversant and abiding among this people, as if a
man were remaining in a corn field after harvest: or in a vineyard after the
vintage. At which time no ears, or no clusters are found and remain fit to
eat. Under this metaphor therefore is signified, not only the rarenes or
scarsenes of godly and good men in this people, but as I may so term it the
nullitie or nonenes. So that same made Diogenes lighting a candle at noone day
in the mids of the market place at Athens, and when as it was full, and
crowded with people, seeks notwithstanding for a man. So does God at Sodom,
but for ten good men only, whom he finds not. So David Psalm. 12.
complains of his age.

Verse. 2. The good man is perished out of the earth, and there is none
righteous among men: they all lie in wait for blood: every man hunteth his
brother with a net.
An answer unto the former desire of the prophet.
THis is an answer, where withal the desire of the prophet (the which was
described in the verse before) is answered, and the corruption, wickedness, and
public and miserable lewdnes of this people is confirmed. And first of all
generally in this place, and afterward in particular, that is, in every degree
of this people. 1. The general condemnation.
And there are two things here to be noted: first, the general condemnation:
afterward the cause of this condemnation. 2 The cause of the same.
The general condemnation is contained in these words: The just man is
perished out of the land of these men, there is none that is righteous among
them. So then in this place the self same party is called good and just or
bounteous. For these only are right or good in heart, and blouddy, and also
crafty and deceivers of their neighbors, and every one of his brother. Thus
he makes them guilty of a double sin, to wit both of cruelty, and also of
deceit toward their brethren: that is, against those which every one of them
ought to hold most dear. And this reason is also metaphorical.

Verse. 3. To make good for the evil of their hands, the Prince asked, and the
Judge judges for a reward: Therefore the great man he speaks out the
corruption of his soul: so they wrap it up.
The application of this general condemnation unto every degree of the
Israelites.
THe application of this general condemnation unto every degree of the
Israelites: and first of all unto the princes of the people, the Judges, and
such as were among them accounted to be of greater dignity and countenance,
whom he here calls Great men. 1 Generally they were evil.
And first of all the prophet generally pronounces of these three sorts of
men, that they were lewd and wicked as it were to strives, who should in
lewdness exceed other, and that every one of them did exercize his hand
lustily and well, 2. He recites their peculiar vices.
thatis, stoutly and strongly in the doing of every evil, that is in cruelty,
and deceit against their brethren. Secondly he rehearses and reckons up the
peculiar vices of every order or degree of these me^ named before. 1. Of the
princes, rulers and Judges.
And first the vices of the princes or heads of the people and Judges. Secondly
of those who seemed to excel the people and common sort in dignity. And
concerning these princes and Judges the prophet says, 2. Of others that
excelled the common sort.
that they are manifestly and notoriously covetous and extortioners in their
offices. For without all shame they beg money for doing of their office, 1.
The princes and Judges are covetous and extortioners.
the which they ought to do freely, that is, for the giving of Judgment, to
wit, to pronounce a good cause, a good cause: and a bad cause, abad cause:
otherwise they would say and pronounce, that to be a bad cause, which is a good
cause: and contrariwise, that to be a good cause which is a bad cause. Finally
they sell the law, the which is a most cruel sacrilege or detestable sin. So
then these both chiefest, and also inferior Judges are here described to be
most manifestly covetous and most shamels beggars. But by the way there is
added or set down an honest pretense or excuse wherewith they did cover this
their sacrilege, to wit, for that they called those things the which they
took for their selling of Justice, a reward or recompense, as it were the hire
and wages for their work and labor. It is I grant a thing very meet, that
Judges and Rulers, and all others that do service in the common wealth, should
have honest and reasonable wages allowed them out of the common Treasury, or
else according unto the appointment of laws should demand it of private
persons: but not for this cause that they should pronounce that which is law:
not that they should say that cause to be the better and the just cause, which
otherwise is an unjust cause. The which fault is here condemned in these
persons. And these things did both the chief and also the inferior Judges and
magistrates of the people of Israel.

2. The great men as bad as they.
Now those which were no magistrates, and yet were of some countenance,
authority, name and power among the people, that is, Great men, they were
never a deal better then the magistrates, nay after their shameless example
they themselves also were shamles. For they dare to tell and boast of their
deceitful counsels, and to open and make known their practice which they have
used in oppressing and wronging of their neighbors. To be short, openly to
brag of their lewdnes which they practice, and yet they go scotfree with it.
So David reports of the shameless boldness of the great ones of his time Psalm.
73. ver. 8. They are licentious (says he) and speak wickedly of their
oppression: they talk presumptuously. Whereof it comes to pass that the
counsels of these Great men are wicked, wrapped up together to do all kind of
injury and wrong unto their neighbors, which are poor. For the similitude
of cords twisted, together shows that the counsels and doings of the men of
whom he here speaks, are strong deceites, entangled, sundry, manifold devises
and fetches, hard to be unfolded; and prevailed against. All which things do
show that the bridle was let loose unto all lewdnes among the Israelites, and
that their wickedness was outrageous.

Verse. 4. The best of them is as a bryer, and the most righteous of them is
sharper then a thorn hedge: The day of thy watchmen, and of thy visitation
comes: then shall be their confusion.
The conclusion of this part, showing the whole state of the rulers and great
men to be most corrupt.
THe conclusion of this part, whereby the order or state of the rulers or
magistrates, and of those which were of some power among the people is showed
to be most corrupt, and far out of square, to wit, that he which among them is
counted the best, and the most upright and just, is notwithstanding as a sharp
holly tree, or thorn tree, that is, is such a one with whom no man can or will
have to do without great hurt or loss. Therefore the most praise worthy among
them does the prophet notwithstanding prove by the testimony or witness of all
men to be corrupt, crafty, covetous. Wherefore hereby may be coniectured or
gessed, what manner ones the rest in this people were. Such does the Psalmist
speak of Psalm. 58. and Psalm. 53. ver. 21. Who albeit they outwardly gave never
so fair a show of courtesy and mildness, yet were they in deed most sharp and
cruel: The words of his mouth (says he) were softer then butter, yet war
was in his heart: his words were more gentle then oil, yet they were swords.

The punishment of the rulers and great men.
Now follows the punishment also against those Magistrates and great men, whom
he calls one with another, Watchmen of the people. For I rather refer this
word unto those magistrates, of whom he spoke before: then unto the Prophets,
of whom as yet he has spoken nothing, unless peradventure a man would
comprehend them under the name of Great men. The Magistrates then are the
watchmen of the people, unto whom now the judgment of God is threatened because
of their former sins. And this judgment is called a day, that is, a short
time and a certain, decreed by God assuredly to come to pass. A visitation,
that is, a great affliction or punishment, and that from God being wroth
against them, into whose hands to fall it is a fearful thing Heb. 10.31. And
their confusion, that is to say, such affliction and misery, that all their
dignity shall utterly perish, a great plague and punishment shall fall upon
these Judges.

Verse. 5. Trust ye not in a friend, neither put ye confidence in a counselor:
keep the doors of thy mouth from her that lies in thy bosom.
ANother application of the former accusation of the Israelites made by the
Prophet, Another application of the former accusation of the Israelites unto
private persons of all degrees and sexes.
to wit, unto private persons of every sex and degree, in all which there is
described a certain notorious wickedness, the which does violate or break even
all the sense or feeling and affection of humanity and nature. To be short by
these examples, the which are now set down, the cruelty, treachery, and
lewdnes of this people appears to be exceeding great. And there are in
sundry kinds of persons set forth sundry examples of these vices. 1. Friends.
The first is in those, which are privately joined together in friendship and
league, as are friends. The second, in those which are honored of us as more
wise and witty then our selves, 2. Counselors.
and used of us for counsel in our affairs. Who in deed ought to deal
vprightlie and unfeignedly with us in regard of the trust and good accounts
which we do make of them. 3. Wives.
The third is even in our own wives, the which by us are nourished in our
bosoms. But men lie in wait one for another, deceive and beguile one another.
And of a wife so unnatural see an example in the wife of Sampson Judge 14. v.
17. Where with great importunity and tears, having learned out his riddle,
she bewrays the same unto the children of her people.

Verse. 6. For the Son reuileth the Father: The Daughter rises up against her
Mother: The Daughter in law, against her Mother in law: And a man's enemies
are the men of his own house.
The fourth example of those which ought to love.
THe fourth example of those who by the instinct or teaching of nature, and by
the motion of natural affection, are wont to love us, as the son, daughter,
daughter in law: and final, those of our house and family. These also are
fierce, deceitful, and cruel against those whom they ought to love, as their
Father, Mother, Mother in law, and the householder, or good man of the house.
This also does Christ apply unto the times of the gospel Matthew. 10. But as
things which come to pass and fall out through the fault of men that rebel
against the gospel, and not through the fault of the doctrine of the gospel.

Verse. 7. Therefore I will look unto the Lord: I will wait for God my
Savior: my God will hear me.
THis is an Epiphonema, or acclamation, wherewith the Prophet does stay and
comfort himself and the rest of the godly, The figure Epiphonema, what it is,
see Jonas, cap. 2. ver. 9.
in so great and unbridled a company of wicked men. So does David Psalm. 55.
ver. 16. But I will call unto God, and the Lord will save me, and ver. 23. And
thou, O God, shall bring them down unto the pit of corruption: the bloody and
deceitful men shall not live half their days. To wit, he cries out, and
teaches, that both he and also other godly men must lift up their eyes unto
God, and that they must depend or stay upon him, and hope for deliverance and
salvation. So David arises up unto God, being in the midst of the companies
of wicked men, yea, even when they raged and were fierce against him Psalm. 12.
And this verse has three things, Three parts of this verse.
the which by the holy ghost, are be gotten and wrought by order in the hearts
of the godly whilst they do fortify or strengthen themselves against so many
encombrances. 1 The godly look unto God.
The first is, that they do look unto God, and do call to remembrance his
promises made unto his church, that is, unto themselves the godly. Therefore
they cast their care upon God Psalm. 37. For this is that which the Prophet
said, that they looked or watched unto God, that he might allude or have
resemblance unto those same evil Rulers and watchmen of the Israelites ver. 4.
2. They wait for the fulfilling of his promises.
The second is, they wait and look for the fulfilling of those promises of
God, howsoever the rest of the world be chastened, and do perish through
their own fault 1. Cor. 11. verse. 32. But when we are judged, we are
chastened of the Lord, because we should not be condemned with the world. So
Psalm. 73. verse. 17. the Prophet shows that albeit at the first he could not
conceive of the great prosperity which the wicked often enjoy in this world
far above the godly, yet when he entered into the Lord his Sanctuary, it was
showed him what should be their end, and that their prosperity should be
turned into adversity, as contrariwise that the sorrows of the godly should
end in joy and gladness. And Psalm. 34. ver. 4. he acknowledges that God, when
he sought unto him, heard him and delivered him: I sought the Lord (says
David) and he heard me: yea he delivered me out of all my fear. Therefore the
godly do call God in whom they trust, the God of their salvation, that is, him
who shall deliver, and defend them at the last. The third thing is, they
conceive most assured trust in mind against all tentations by means of those
promises of God toward them. 3. They conceive out of those promises an assured
hope of being heard.
For they know that they are heard, and shall be heard of God in such
afflictions as they foresee shall fall upon the ungodly: because God calls
himself their God peculiarly, and is so indeed. These three things do
thoroughly not only recreate, but also consume the godly, and do stay and hold
them up even in the most just destruction of all the world besides.

Verse 8. Rejoice not against me, O mine enemy: though I fall, I shall rise:
when I shall sit in darkness, the Lord shall be a light unto me.
A confirmation of the former ho^e. What the figure Apostrothe is, see Am^s cap
8. verse. 4.
A Confirmation of the former hope, which the godly have in God, the which is
drawn from the nature of GOD, and his most sure and especial promises, but it
is propounded or set forth by the Prophet, by an Apostrophe, or turning of
speech unto the enemies of the church, that they may the rather know this
comfort of the church to be most certain, and that they should not think that
the church and the godly either to have perished, or shall perish, if at any
time they be chastised by GOD. Three parts of this verse.
And this verse has three things to be noted. First, the kind of speaking,
which is an Apostrophe or turning of speech, whereby the godly, 1. The kind of
speaking.
or the church speaking to their enemies in the singular number, does insult or
triumph over them through that their assured trust of mind in God, and hope of
their salvation and deliverance, as David Psalm. 3. verse. 7. in the midst of his
troubles turns his speech unto God, craving his defense against all his
enemies, saying: O Lord, arise: help me, my God: for thou have smitten all
mine enemies upon the cheek bone: Thou have broken the teeth of the wicked.
And therefore in the assurance of God his assistance against them Psalm. 27.
verse. 3. he says, Though an host pitched against me, mine heart should not be
afraid: Though war be raised against me, I will trust in this. Now the
foundation of this so assured and unconquerable hope of the godly is faith, as
it is 1. John 5. verse. 4. This is the victory that overcomes the world, even
our faith, the which is grounded upon such promises as are contained Psalm
91.93. and such other like.

Further, this whole place with that which follows is full of figures of a
sentence, as Prosopopoeiaes, Dialogismes, Anthropopatheia is the attributing
unto God the parts, properties, passions and affections of men.
Anthropopatheiaes, and such like, the which do partly garnish the things here
set forth, partly more lively represent them as it were unto our eyes and view,
and do move men to obey, and rest in the word of God and in his promises.

2. Whom the godly speak unto.
The second thing to be noted in this verse is, whom the godly do speak unto,
to wit, their enemies, whom the Prophet does represent under the name and
person of a knappish and ill tongued woman, that their doggish madness against
the church may be understood and painted forth. The third point is the thing it
self, or the comfort, the which the godly set forth. 3. The comfort here set
forth.
They will therefore that their enemies be not glad, nor rejoice in mind as of
their fall and ruin. For they answer: nay, the same shall not be, or come to
pass. But because exception might by and by be taken: yes, thou O church of
God shall be afflicted or ^unished by God himself (the which thing both the
Prophet d^^^^^w should come to pass, and also the godly do well enough (...)
and that because of their sins it shall come to pass) the (...) godly
answer unto this also, namely, that it is true indeed, that they shall be
chastised, but yet they shall not therefore be destroyed, or the church of God
be cast away. For God does chastise and correct those that are his with the rod
of a father, and of a man only, and not with an iron rod, as he uses to do
the reprobate or offcasts. So then this third part of this verse does consist
of an Hypophora, or answering of an objection, What the figure Hypophora is,
see Amos cap. 5. ver. 21.
wherein the Church does grant that she shall indeed be chastised, but she
denies that she shall be rooted out, the which thing her enemies hoped for,
and thereof rejoiced. And therefore the Lord by his prophet Zachary cap. 1.
verse. 15. shows himself to be very angry with them for that they were
excessive in punishing of Jerusalem more then he would they should have done.
For says he in that place: I am greatly angry against the careless heathen: for
I was angry but a little, and they helped forward the affliction. The Church
then sometimes falls by means of afflictions, but afterward through the
grace and favor of God she rises up again Ierem. 7. The church sits in
darkness when as she is afflicted, but yet is she not wholly deprived of the
light of God, but does even then in part feel the same. In a word, the Church
of God cannot perish Psalm. 72.

Verse. 9. I will bear the wrath of the Lord because I have sinned against him,
until he plead my cause, and execute judgment for me: then will he bring me
forth to the light, and I shall see his righteousness.
Another comfort of the church.
ANother comfort of the Church. For it is so far off that the Church can
perish by and through afflictions, that she bears the same with joyful and
contented mind, and patiently. That the church cannot perish has bin showed
in the verse before: now in this verse is declared, that she bears the
judgments of God patiently, and with a quiet mind. Therefore whereas she
says, I will bear the wrath, that is, those judgments of God the which thou,
o mine enemy, threatnest shall come to pass unto me, it is to be understood
of that sufferance of mind, the which quietly submits or yields it self
unto God, Three reasons of the Church her patience.
a pattern of which patience appears in Job cap. 2. But the church yields
a threefolde reason of that her so quiet and contented patience. 1. She has
sinned against God.
First, for that it is meet and right that she should be so punished. For
she has sinned against God. For this is the first reason and preparation of a
mind submitting it self unto the judgments of God, namely, earnestly and
truly to acknowledge his sins, and to be displeased with it self for the
same. For this sense or feeling of sin causes, that we murmr not against
God, but that we bear his wrath with a quiet mind. 2. The punishment shall
not be perpetual.
The second reason of this comfort and patience of the Church is, because this
punishment shall not be perpetual, but only until such time as God show
himself a pleader and Judge between his church and the enemies thereof. For
then will he acquit his church in regard of her enemies, and will condemn the
enemies of the same. So speaks David of GOD his judging of his cause against
his enemies, and the enemies of his church Psalm. 7. verse. 7, 8. Awake for me
according to the judgment, that thou have appointed. So shall the congregation
of the people compass thee about: for their sakes therefore return on high.
The Lord shall judge the people: judge thou me, O Lord, according to my
righteousness, and according to mine innocence that is in me. This the church
calls her judgment, that is, the gayning and winning of her cause and the
time of her deliverance, when as God himself shall pronounce or give sentence
of the cause of his church, and her enemies. The third reason of the patience
of the church ^s, 3. God shall bring forth the righteousness of his church into
the sight of al men.
that GOD shall bring forth that same righteousness of his church into the light
and eyes of all men, that she may be acquired and justified of every body.

This is a most singular comfort of the godly, and a true foundation of
patience, for that God at the last, and in the end, notwithstanding those that
be his be never so much afflicted by the ungodly, will show and declare that
they were just and guiltles in regard of their enemies that afflict them. Then
therefore shall the Church see and perceive her own righteousness, not in
respect of GOD, but in respect of her enemies and of men that vexed and
afflicted her.

Verse. 10. Then she that is mine enemy shall look upon it, and shame shall
cover her, which said unto me, where is the Lord thy God? Mine eyes shall
behold her: now shall she be trodden down as the mire in the streets.
An amplification of the former patience and comfort of the church.
AN amplification of the former patience and comfort the which is felt by the
Church by means of her justification, to wit, because in the end the very
enemies of God themselves shall acknowledge and confess the same righteousness
of the Church. This shall come to pass both in the last judgment: and also it
does com to pass, as often as God by the preaching of his word does make it
known unto the world, that the doctrine of his church is the truelight of the
Gospel and heavenly godliness. And now out of this confession and acknowledging
of this righteousness wherewith the Church was endued, and the which is made by
the enemies, follows the shame and reproach of the said enemies: and that
especially in those scoffs and taunts, wherewith they sharply and bitterly
laughed to scorn the hope which the Church did repose or put in GGD, demanding
of the poor afflicted church, Where is thy God? And after this sort do the
wicked gibe and floute the godly Psalm. 42. and 43. Finally, The great shame and
reproach of the enemies of the Church.
how great this shame and reproach of the enemies of the church shall be, is
declared by a double effect, namely, both for that the church her self shall
see with her eyes, and also even in this world that same exceeding confusion of
her enemies: and the enemies themselves shall be despised of all men, and be
trodden under foot of every one, as the mire in the streets. These things no
doubt come to pass, when as God opens the light of his truth unto the world.
Then the enemies of the church are most abject and contemned, as we see in
these our days, when as popery is banished and cast away, in this year of
the Lord 1582.

Verse. 11. This is the day that thy walls shall be built: this day shall
drive far away the decree.
An other confirmation of the comfort and hope of the Church.
ANother confirmation of the comfort and hope of the church, the which is taken
from GOD himself promising the same. For here now is GOD brought in by the
Prophet, promising help unto those that are his, and pronouncing their
deliverance from misery. So then these words, The day to build, and the
verses following unto the 18. verse are the words of God speaking, and showing
him self unto his Church trusting in him, and most fully comforting her.
First, GOD himself promises and declares that it shall come to pass that
the Church shall be builded up again, and that assuredly, and within a short
time. For the people was in the captivity of Babylon but only seventy
years, Ierem. 25.

Verse. 12. In this day also they shall come unto thee from Asshur, and from the
strong cities, and from the strong holds even unto the river, and from sea to
sea, and from mountain to mountain.
They shall come unto the church from all places and countries.
SEcondly, he promises that it shall come to pass, that they shall come unto
her from all places even by public commandment, and that from out of Assyria,
Euphrates, Egypt, and other countries. The which thing came to pass both under
Cyrus and Darius, when as the Temple of God was renewed and restored by public
decree: and also as often as before Christ was borne and made man, God did
help his Church, as under the Machabees: and lastly under the Gospel of
Christ, when as all nations came running unto the true Church of God, the which
were profane, or wicked before, and also enemies unto the name of God.
Furthermore and now also when as the Gospel is preached unto the world.

Verse. 13. Notwithstanding, the land shall be desolate, because of them that
dwell therein, and for the fruits of their inventions.
THis is the figure Occupatio, The figure Occupatio what it is, see Amos cap.
5. ver. 3.
or preventing an objection, the which the Lord adds, least that the godly
because of the affliction of this people the which was very shortly to ensue,
might despair of the former promises. Therefore that both they might be
stre^gthened, and also that he might moderate their joy, God did put in this
mention of the laying waste of the land, which was to come. And this verse has
two things. First, 1. The laying waste of this land.
a threatening of the laying waste of the nation, and of this land, that is, of
the Church, the which laying waste was for to come. Secondly, the cause of this
punishment, which were the sins of this people, and the most bitter fruits,
2. The cause of the same.
the which this vineyard brought unto God the husbandman, or her vine dresser
in stead of good fruit Isai. 5. And this cause was set down, that the godly
should not murmur against God, but that they should understand that they were
justly punished by him.

Verse. 14. Feed thy people with thy rod, the flock of thine heritage, (which
dwell solitary in the wood) as in the midst of Carmel: let them feed in
Bashan and Gilead, as in old time.
A comfort against the former affliction.
A Comfort against the threatening of the former affliction or punishment, to the
end the godly may be the more strengthened in the former promises of God. Two
parts of this verse.
And this verse or comfort contains two parts: the one, wherein God
commands the heads or rulers of the Church to seed their people in or with
their rod, 1. A commandment to feed their people.
that is, according unto the authority and dignity the which was left unto
them by God in the midst of their affliction and poor estate notwithstanding.
The kingdom, I confess, ceased among the Jews in those afflictions, and also
a long while afterward, accordingly as the Lord threatened them by Ezech. cap.
21. ver. 26. saying: I will take away the diadem, and take off the crown:
this shall be no more the same: I will exalt the humble, and abase him that is
hie: but yet all policy, or government, power and dignity, did not therefore
cease in that people For they had Rulers or Governors of their nation, and the
Synedrion or Consistory of Elders, or chief men. Therefore according unto
that authority and power which was left unto them God commands the Rulers,
that they nourish, govern and preserve the people of the Church: and not that
they cast them away and utterly forsake them. And why I pray you does he this?
To wit, for because how forsaken soever, solitary, afflicted, and small this
people were, God nevertheless would preserve the^: and out of the self same
people afterward gather unto himself a most great Church, as shall anon be
showed ver. 15 and 16. Further, God exhorting the Pastors and Rulers of this
people to look unto it, defend, and feed it, calls this people, their
people flock and heritage, not in contempt or reproach: but that by this name
and relation they may understand, that this which they are commanded for to
do, cannot by them be ouerpassed and forslowed without a great offense. For
this is belonging unto their duty. For God has committed this people unto
them for to feed. Hereupon is there a mutual band, by reason of these words,
between the Rulers and the people given unto them by God. This is one part of
the comfort set forth by God in this verse.

2. A promise concerning the deliverance and restoring of this people.
The second part of this verse is a promise of the full deliverance and
restoring of this people into their own seats and home, as before, how
greatly soever the land were laid waste before, and the nation carried unto
another country. For this land and this nation shall be restored. This people
shall feed as before, and shall possess Basan, and Galaad, and their other
countries.

Verse. 15. According to the days of thy coming out of the land of Egypt, will
I show unto him marvelous things.
A confirmation of the latter promise of the full restoring of this people.
A Confirmation of the latter promise of the full restoring of this people, that
is, of the Church of God. For by a similitude he shows after what manner, and
how great it shall be: nay how miraculous. For it shall be such, as was that
whereby this people at the first was delivered out of Egypt, and that
miraculouslie. And truly the deliverance of this people out of the captivity
of Babylon was altogether miraculous also, so that this comparison in
resembling it unto that of Egypt is truly made also, of the manner whereof the
Lord speaks by his Prophet Isai cap. 27. ver. 12.13. thus: In that day shall
the Lord thresh from the channel of the river unto the river of Egypt, and ye
shall be gathered one by one, O children of Israel. In that day also shall the
great trumpe be blown, and they shall come that perished in the land of
Asshur: and they that were chased into the land of Egypt, and they shall
worship the Lord in the holy mount at Jerusalem.

Verse. 16. The nations shall see, and be confounded for all their power: they
shall lay their hand upon their mouth: their ears shall be deaf.
An amplification of this deliverance.
AN amplification of this deliverance, taken from the marvelous astonishment
and wondering of men that were Infidels, because of the same: in so much that
they shall be ashamed, for that they do not serve God, but others: and they
shall not move their mouth nor their cares for wondering: so miraculous
doubtless and wonderful a work of God unto the wicked and ungodly is the
deliverance of his Church, as may appear Psalm. 126. ver. 2. where the very
heathen themselves do confess and acknowledge the mighty power of God
shining so clearly forth in that most wonderful deliverance of his people.
For thus do the godly delivered in that place testify: Then said they among
the heathen, The Lord has done great things for them.

Verse. 17. They shall lick the dust like a serpent: they shall move out of
their holes like worms, or serpents: they shall be afraid of the Lord our God,
and shall fear because of thee.
Another amplification of this wonderful deliverance.
ANother amplification of the said miracle or wondrous deliverance, and of the
astonishment and fear of the heathen, because of this work of God, to wit,
taken from the most humble submission, fear and trembling, which shall then
be of those nations before the Church it self. Therefore whatsoever the
Church shall then command, they will do it, not daring to do anything, or to
stir against it. So then not only the astonished mind of the infidels is in
this place described, but also this miracle of God in delivering those that are
his, is amplified by their gesture and fear of mind, and also by the
similitude taken from the fear of serpents. Of the like humbling and
submitting of themselves unto Solomon, the true figure of Christ and his
Church, is spoken Psalm. 72. ver. 9. where it is said: They that dwell in the
wilderness, shall kneel before him, and his enemies shall lick the dust.

The great fear of the heathen at the deliverance of God his church
Further, that which is here said and alleged of serpents, painteth out a
wonderful trembling and fear of the unfaithful and unbelieving nations before
the Church. For serpents stir not out of their dens but in great fear, and
because of their fear of men they come forth of them. So Exodus 11. ver. 6.7.8.
it came to pass in the deliverance of the children of Israel, all Egypt was
afraid, and the nations near unto it.

Verse. 18. Who is a God like unto thee, that takes away iniquity, and passes
by the transgression of the remnant of his heritage? He retains not his wrath
for ever, because mercy pleases him.
THe figure Epiphonema, The figure Epiphonema, see what it is Jonas ca. 2. ver.
9.
or an acclamation, wherein the Prophet either in his own person, or in the
person of all the godly, through the admiration or wondering at the former
promises of God toward his Church, does generally describe the bounteousnes
and goodness of God toward the same, such as it at al times appears for to
be. 1. The kind of speaking.
And also he confirms the same promises last rehearsed, by the nature of God.
But both the phrase or kind of speaking, 2. The matter it self.
and also the matter it self which is contained in this verse, is diligently to
be noted. 1. What the figure Apostrophe is, see Amos cap. 8. verse. 4.
For the kind of speaking is both an Apostrophe, or turning of speech unto God,
and also an interrogation, or asking of a question, with both which manner of
speaking men are more stirred up, and also the matter it self the which is set
forth, is showed to be the more certain, yea and moreover to be the more
confessed and acknowledged of all men. The matter it self, He indureth but a
while in his anger: but in his favor is life: weeping may abide at evening,
but joy comes in the morning. A definition of the mercy of God.
Further this mercy of God is defined, or it is here declared what this mercy
of God is, that is, the free pardoning of the sins and offenses of the
Church, for of what sort soever those be, whether they be greater or smaller
sins, God takes them al away, and ouerpasseth them, that is, freely pardons
them, albeit notwithstanding he knows them to be in us: but he looks upon
us and beholds us both by Christ, and in Christ his only begotten son, in
whom and through whom he sees not our sins, though otherwise they be still
in us, but covered, and for his sake not laid to our charge.

The manner of God his pardodoning the sins of his church.
Now whereas it is added, Not retaining his wrath for ever, he shows hereby
that the sins of the Church are in such sort pardoned, that God
notwithstanding would not therefore have us bold to sin. For he also
chastises those which are his, when they sin, but lightly, and not long. The
cause of the same.
The cause also of this pardoning and mercy is expressed, to wit, the most
loving and bountiful nature of God. For God is delighted with gentleness and
mercy toward all his creatures, and especially toward his elect and chosen.
So then, this promise of the mercy of God, of which the Prophet here speaks
does not appertain, and is directed unto all men, but unto the remnant of the
heritage of God, that is, unto the Church only, least that the hypocrites might
deceive themselves, and account themselves in that number.

Verse. 19. He will turn again, and have compassion upon us: He will subdue
our iniquities, and cast all their sins into the bottom of the Sea.
An amplification of the loving nature of God taken from sundry effects of the
same.
AN amplification of the most loving and courteous nature of God described
before, taken from the effects the which are here reckoned up diverse, and
most full of comfort, and being notable testimonies or witnesses of the most
singular mercy of God toward those that are his. The first of them is in this
place recited, 1. God will return unto those that are his.
That God will return unto those that are his. By which self same is showed,
that God was for a time absent from that his heritage, and Church, to wit,
according unto the sense or feeling of the judgment of man, during the time
that he afflicted or punished the same. And therefore Psalm. 80. ver. 2. the
Prophet prays that God would stir up his strength for the safeguard of the
remnantes of his Church, thereby giving us to understand, that in the sense and
feeling of the Godly he seemed to have been, as it were a sleep, and to have
forgotten them, whilst he deferred to help them, therefore he prays, Before
Ephraim and Benjamin, and Manasseh stir up thy strenght, and come to help
us. Wherefore in that which went before, there is no such mercy and favor of
God promised toward his Church, the which should remove and take away all his
judgments (for it is profitable even for the Church, that she should be
chastized of God Psalm. 119) but such gentleness, whereby the godly, even
whilst they are corrected by him, remain notwithstanding the sons of God,
and acceptable and well thougth of of him through Christ: Finally having
obtained mercy for their sins, they come unto life everlasting. For such
afflictions or troubles of the Church are not a punishment satisfying for their
sins: 2 He will have compassion on his Church.
but only a medicine and bridle, holding hardly in the wanton assaults
thereof.

The second effect of this mercy of God is, That he will be moved with
compassion toward us. For the bowels of God are moved for his Church. This
therefore is a singular affection of God toward us. 3. He will tread down our
iniquities.


The third is, He shall tread down our iniquities, as we are wont to do those
things, the which we now will have to be made no reckoning of to be taken for
things naught set by, and forsaken.

The fourth, He will cast all our sins into the bottom of the Sea, that they
may not any more any where appear, or that he should not any more remember
them. So God by his Prophet Esaie does in like manner most comfortablie promise
his Church cap. 1. ver. 18. saying, Though your sins were as Crimsin, they
shall be made as white as Snow: though they were red like Scarlet, they shall
be as Wool, And by this place appears, that faith applies unto every
faithful person those promises of salvation generally set forth, through
Christ. So does Paul Romans 8. Galat. 2. ver. 20. in these words: Thus I live
yet, not I now, but Christ lives in me: and in that I now live in the flesh, I
live by the faith in the son of God, who has loved me, and given him self
for me.

Verse. 20. Thou will perform thy truth to Jacob, and mercy to Abraham, as
thou have sworn to our fathers in old time.
The conclusion of this place and Chapter.
THe conclusion of this whole place and chapter, the which also contains a
reason and cause of this bounteousnes of God taken from his express, nay
repeated word. Gods promise called
unto whom long since the promises concerning Christ, and so consequently of
the perpetuity or continuance of the Church, have been either made or repeated
and rehearsed again. Mercy.
And they are called the Mercy or benefit of God, if both the cause of them,
and also the matter it self, which they comprehend, be considered. For the
free goodness of God is the cause of them, and that self same thing which these
promises contain, Truth.
is a singular benefit of God toward the godly. They are also termed the
Truth of God, if the certantie of these promises be looked unto. For they are
most true, and altogether and in every respect to be in deed and truth in
their due time fulfilled. For God which cannot deceive, has promised them with
an oath. So the Author to the Hebrews cap. 6. ver. 18. Says, that God willing
more abundantly to show unto the heirs of promise the stablenes of his
counsel, bound himself by an oath, that by two immutable things, wherein it is
impossible that God should lie, we might have strong consolation, which have
our refuge to hold fast the hope, which is set before us.

FINIS.
The Commentary of Lambertus Danaeus upon the Prophet Nahum.
The Argument.
FOr as much as the kindome of the Assirians endured and continued from the
year of the destruction of the City of Samaria achieved by Sennacherib
about the first year of Nabuchadnezzar, (by whom the Assirians were utterly
deprived of their Empire, and brought into the form of a province) by the
space almost of 108. years, to wit, The time of the Prophet Nahum.
from the sixth year of the reign of Ezechias king of Judah, unto the fourth
year of king Ioacim, this Prophet Nahum without all doubt was, and lived in
this mean time. But unto many this seems to be more likely to be true,
namely that he prophesied about the beginning of the reign of Josias king of
Judah, God now being appeased and pacified with the Jews, as appears cap. 2.
ver. 2. Others refer this prophecy unto the beginning of the reign of
Ioacim, yet before the fourth year of his reign, as seems may be gathered
by the 3. cap. ver. 8. that is to say, before the beginning of the reign of
the Babilonians or Chaldees, to wit, when as yet the Monarchy or Empire of the
Assirians flourished and stood under Asarhadon or his successor, Josephus.
of whose beginning of his reign mention is made 2. Kings cap. 19. ver. 37.
Esdr. 4. ver. 2. And nothing less might be feared then the overthrow of the
same. Joseph lib. 9. Antiq. Iudaic. cap. 12. writes, that Nachum set forth
this prophecy and foretelling of the overthrow of the Assirian kingdom by the
commandment of God, anon after that Teglath Phalasar king of Assyria had
carried away captive the ten tribes of Israel. At which time surely the state
of that Empire of Assyria was most mighty, and it seemed incredible, or not to
be believed, that this so great a kingdom should be overthrown. And these
things fell out under Ezechias king of Judah 2. kings cap. 17. at which time
Nahum prophesied a little after the death, namely of Oseas and Micheas, whom he
succeeded, and that next of all. Which judgment I like, moved with the reason
of the 15. ver. in this first chapter. Before this time I grant, and about the
very beginnings of the reign of Jeroboam the son of Ioas king of Israel,
the Lord would have destruction threatened unto Niniue by the prophet Jonas: but
because the Ninevites repented, Jonas threatens destrustition unto Niniue.
God refrained from the destroying of that city. Further in this Prophet the
destruction is threatened not only of that one City, the which Jonas did
before (although it were the head City of the whole Empire of the Assyrians,)
but also of the whole kingdom of the Assyrians, the which afterward was in
deed performed by the Chaldees, as appears by the 23. cap. of Esaie, ver. 13.
Behold the land of the Chaldeans: this was no people: Asshur founded it by the
inhabitants of the wilderness: They set up the towers thereof, they raised the
palaces thereof, and he brought it to ruin.

Three chief causes of the destruction of the Assyrians.
Now the cause or reason, why this Empire should by God be utterly destroyed
was manifold, but especially threefold. First, the conspiracy and hatred of
the Assyrians against the people of God. Secondly, The principal points of this
prophecy.
and taking beginning from them. And first of all God shows and describes
his surpassing might and power.

Verse. 1. The burden of Nineveh. The book of vision of Nahum the Elkeshite.
1. The sum of the Prophets charge.
THis most short verse comprehends three things. First, the sum of his
charge. For he declares against Nineveh the most grievous threatenings of God.
Secondly, 2. The name of the Prophet.
the name and noting out of the Prophet by his country Helkos. Thirdly, the
certainety of this prophecy, or of his calling, in that it is a vision from
God. And under the name of Nineveh, 3. The certainty of his prophecy What the
figure Metonymia is, see Oseas cap. 4. ver. 1. What the figure Synecdoche is,
see Amot cap. 5, ver. 21.
according to the rule of the figure Metonymia, I do not only understand the
citizens themselves, but also I do comprehend the whole kingdom and country
of Assyria (how far soever at that time it did stretch) by the figure
Synecdoche, of the which kingdom the city Nineveh was the head and chief
seat. For the threatenings and judgments which are here denounced or declared,
do contain also the destruction of the whole Empire of the Assyrians, as well
as of this City.

Verse. 2. God is jealous, and the Lord reuengeth: the Lord reuengeth: even the
Lord of anger, the Lord will take vengeance on his adversaries, and he
reserueth wrath for his enemies.
He extolleth the justice and the power of God.
THe Prophet being to threaten unto a most great and mighty Monarchy or Empire
at that time, destruction, the which should be performed by God, does first
preach of both the justice and also the power of God the which he does highly
and with great majesty extol and set up above all humane power. And first of
all of his Justice, for that when as God is most holy, he cannot but most
greatly and justly be moved with the sins of men, conspiring against him, and
the laws which he has given unto mankind, (whom so conspiring he calls
here his adversaries and enemies) he cannot but be angry with such wicked
persons, and in the end most severely, or sharply punish them, but he
reserueth or keeps the effects of that his anger toward them unto a fit time
and season, albeit he seemed altogether to have forgotten their heinous
offenses. Wherefore this thrice repeated mention of revenge and vengeance, and
the hotenes and force of his anger (wherewith Nahum says that God was taken)
is not an unadvised or mad hastines, but an exceeding great hatred of God
against the ungodliness of al men, albeit that he bear long with it
notwithstanding, to wit, that men should repent Roman. 2. or be made
vnexcuseable.

Verse. 5. The mountains tremble for him, and the hills melt, and the earth is
burnt at his sight, yea, the world, and all that dwell therein.
An amplification of the former effects.
AN amplification of this effect. For God does not only mow down the flowers,
and the blossoms, and the ornaments of the mountains: but also moves and
shakes the mountains themselves, that they both tremble and totter in their
places, and are carried into other places, and finally are melted, and do
perish utterly, howsoever they may seem with most strong roots to be grounded
in the earth, and to be altogether immovable. But why should not God do these
things, who in the name of Christ has given unto his elect, and faithful men
the power to bring this thing to pass? For Mat. 17. ver. 20. Christ says unto
his disciples, Verily I say unto you, If ye have faith as much as is a grain
of mustard seed, ye shall say unto this mountain, Remove hence to yonder
place, and it shall remove: and nothing shall be impossible unto you. And of
this great power of God we have also Psalm. 29. verse. 5.6. The voice of the
Lord breaks the Cedars: yea, the Lord breaks the Cedars of Lebanon. He
makes them also to leap like a calfe: Lebanon also and Shirion like a young
Unicorn. Further, there is an example of this thing recited Exodus 19. verse.
18. of the trembling, smoking, and shaking of mount Sinai at the giving of the
law, the which is also repeated afterward again Psalm. 68. verse. 8. and Psalm.
114. verse. 4. There are also many such like things reported by Plin. lib. 2.
Not. Hist. and by other Hystoriographers, and writers of natural matters.
Moreover, the other parts of the earth, nay the whole world inhabited is
brought forth also for a witness of this surpassing power of God. For when as
God pleases, the earth it self burns, nay flameth, the which both fell out
in the destruction of Sodom, and also at other times: and has in like manner
been often seen in the mountain Aetna, and Vesuuius, and Plin. lib. 2. Not.
Hist. cap. 106. recites other examples of this thing. Thus God has power over
all elements, yea heaven it self, as Peter teaches 2. epist. cap. 3. ver. 10.
where he says, But the day of the Lord will come as a thief in the night, in
the which the heavens shall pass away with a noise, and the elements shall
melt with heat, and the earth, with the works that are therein, shall be
burnt up. Because he is the creator of the whole world, and all the parts and
elements thereof. Of which things there are examples in Christ, commaundnig both
the winds, and the waters Mat. 8. ver. 27. Where after his miraculous calming
of the rage of the sea and of the winds, the men marueiled, saying, what man
is this, that both the winds and sea obey him?

Ver. 6. Who can stand before his wrath? or Who can abide in the fiercenes of
his wrath? his wrath is powered out like fire, and the rocks are broken by him.
The conclusion.
THe conclusion. Therefore nothing can stand against the so mighty power of God,
being angry with the Assyrians. Nothing can abide before him in his wrath.
Finally, nothing can ever lift it self up, when as he presses down. Wherefore
those forces of the Assyrians fearful unto the world, and at the which it is
astonished, shall not let, but that they, and their Empire shall be overthrown
by God, and fall. So David speaks of God his power to bring his enemies to
nothing Psalm. 68. ver. 2. As the smoke vanishes, so shall thou drive them
away: and as wax melts before the fire, so shall the wicked perish at the
presence of God. And Psalm. 130. ver. 3. he cries out, If thou, O Lord,
straightly markest iniquities, O Lord, who shall stand?

1 The conclusion confirmed by a Similitude.
Moreover this conclusion is confirmed by a similitude. For the anger of God is
most like unto fire and a flame, the which being kindled, forthwith is
scattered abroad on every side, breaks forth and raungeth, so that many times
but one little spark of it consumes and burns an whole wood, as James
speaks cap. 3. ver. 5. Behold how great a thing a little fire kindles.
Lastly, God is called a consuming fire, Deuteronomy. 4. ver. 24. 2 By the effects.
Again, this selfsame is proved by the effects. For the rocks themselves
(which are the hardest kinds of things) do leap and melt and cleave a sunder,
when God is angry, and so commands. Example in the death of Christ, Mat. 27.
ver* 51. And at other times also, and ages, in the which the selfsame thing
has come to pass, that is to say, the rocks have bin cloven by God, and by
his lightning.

Ver. 7. The Lord is good, and as a strong hold in the day of trouble, and he
knows them that trust in him.
A comfort of the godly
A Comfort of the godly, that is, of the people of GOD, for the strengthening
and upholding of whom only, God would have this prophesy of the overthrowing of
the Assirians (as who namely afflicted or troubled the Israelites) to be
preached and extant or remaining. To the end therefore that the godly should
not be terrified or dismayed with such and so fearful a description of the
power of God, Nahum does comfort them, and shows that God will deal
otherwise for those that are his, which do serve and worship him; then he
threatens that he will be unto his enemies, that is the Assirians. For God
defends those that are his, with the self-same his surpassing might and
power, wherewith he breaks his enemies in pieces. The Angels that terrify
the ungodly warders of the sepulcher, comfort the godly women, that come to
seek Christ.
So the Angels being heavenly soldiers do make afraid the ungodly, keeping and
watching the sepulcher of Christ, but do comfort the godly women, and do speak
courteously unto them. Mat. 28. ver. 4.5. For the soldiers for fear were
astonished and became as dead men, at the sight of the Angel. But he answered
and said to the women, fear ye not, etc. God then, which will be so terrible
or fearful unto the Assirians, and his enemies, he the self-same will be
gentle, favorable, good, unto his people, and the men that do fear him, and
will acknowledge them for his, and will mark them out in the midst of the
miseries and afflictions of the ungodly, that they fall not together with them.
Xenophon.
Xenophon in his books of the education or bringing up of Cyrus writes, how
that when Babylon was taken by Cyrus, commaundment was given, that the Syrians
and Jews (which were the people of God) should be spared, and that the
Chaldees should be slain. God therefore is good toward those which by a true
faith trust in him, that is, he is merciful unto them and saves them: he is
an aid unto them, and at hand in time of trouble to succor and help them.
Finally, he does acknowledge them, that is, he does sever them and mark them
from those whom he destroys. So he preserved and kept Lot safe and sound out
of the midst of the destruction of Sodom, Genesis 19. ver. 29. But yet when God
destroyed the cities of the plain, God thought upon Abraham, and sent Lot out
from the midst of the destruction, when he overthrew the cities, wherein Lot
dwelled.

Ver. 8. But passing over as with a flood, he will utterly destroy the place
thereof and darkness shall pursue his enemies.
The figure Hypophora. See what it is, Amos cap. ^. Ver. 21.
HYpophora, or the answering of an objection, or else it is a threatening, and the
same a very sharp one against all the enemies of God, least, because that God
shows himself merciful and gentle unto those which are his, these his
adversaries might suppose that they should escape the judgments of the true
God, whom they provoke and offend. For they shall not escape them, nay they
shall utterly be consumed of God being angry, and the judgments of God shall be
unto them as a flood and ouerflowing of waters, the which shall ouerwhelme
them, as it was done in the flood in the time of Noah. And God shall utterly
destroy these Assirians, and Nineveh, yea and that in her own place, that is,
in the very self-same place, in the which this so wealthy a city was builded.
For it was in such sort destroyed that there remained no token nor senfie of it
by the space of many years afterward, as in the time of Plinius, as appears
by his sixth book. Histor. Nature. cap. 13. There was also (says he) the city
Ninus (or Niuiue) built by the river Tygris, looking to the going down of the
sun, the which was sometimes a most famous city. Yet notwithstanding it
appears that it was afterward renewed, and also accounted a large city, by
the 14 book of Ammianus Marcellinus, and by his 18. book. Lastly darkness,
fear, and trembling, and such things as are wont to follow those that are
appointed unto destruction, shall pursue the enemies of God. So speaks David
Psalm. 11. ver. 6. Upon the wicked he shall rain snares, fire and brimstone,
and stormy tempest: this is the portion of their cup. Again Psalm. 35. ver. 6.
Let their way be dark and slippery, and let the Angel of the Lord persecute
them.

Ver. 9. What do ye imagine against the Lord? he will make an utter destruction:
affliction shall not rise up the second time.
A reason why they are so sharply threatened.
THis is the rendering of a reason, why God threatens so great and so bitter
judgments unto the assirians, and will execute the same; to wit, because that
of purposed and set malice, they have imagined, assaied, and indeed have gone
about to overthrow the true God, and his glory, and people. The time when the
Assyriant imagined these things.
And these things did the Assyrians then especially imagine, when as they carried
the children of Israel from their own home, unto theirs, and other countries,
that they might replenish that land, in the which the true God was worshipped
before, with idolatrous nations, with the which thing God was greevously
offended. 2. King. 17. ver. 24. where we read thus concerning the placing of
idolatrous people, in the rooms of the transported Israelites: And the king of
Asshur brought folk from Babel and from Cuthah, and from Aua, and from Hamath,
and from Sepharuaim, and placed them in the cities of Samaria in stead of the
children of Israel: so they possessed Samaria, and dwelt in the cities
thereof. And at the beginning of their dwelling there, they feared not the
Lord: therefore the Lord sent Lions among them, which slew them. Secondly, when
as Sennacherib besieging Jerusalem by Rhapsaces his captain notoriously
blasphemed God, and went about to make his glory contemptible or to be despised
of the Jews themselves. Of this matter we have Isai. 36. and cap. 37. ver. 14.
it is declared how grievously the good and godly king Ezechias did take their
blasphemies and reproaches, when he had received that most despightful letter.
For when he had red it he went up into the house of the Lord, and spread it
before the Lord and prayed, etc. Such reproachful dealings of god his enemies
against the church, God sees and hears, and in his time will be avenged on
them for it, as he witnesses in the like misusages of the Moabites and
Ammonites Zephaniah 2. ver. 8.9. against his people: I have heard (says the
Lord) the reproach of Moab, and the rebukes of the children of Ammon, whereby
they vpbraided my people, and magnified themselves against their borders.
Therefore, as I live, says the Lord of hosts the God of Israel, surely Moab
shall be as Sodom, and the children of Ammon as Gomorah, even the breeding of
nettles and salt pits, and a perpetual desolation, etc. Thus then these
Assirians imagined evil against God. These self-same threatenings of God shall
reach unto al his stubborn enemies, and haters. So then they shall be
destroyed, in so much that they shall be rooted out utterly, and shall not in a
certain measure be punished by God only, that they may repent, after which
manner the godly are wont to be afflicted. So says God also of the utter
destruction of the Assirians Isay cap. 10. ver. 23. Affliction shall not rise
up the second time in what sense it is spoken.
For the Lord God of hosts shall make the consumtion, even determined in the
midst of the land. Affliction therefore shall not return unto them twice,
because that they shall utterly perish in that same first destruction, the which
the Lord shall send upon them.

Ver. 10. For he shall come as unto thorns folden one in an other, and as unto
drunkards in their drunkenness: they shall be devoured as stubble fully dried.
The conclusion made plain by three Similitudes.
THe conclusion, the which is made plain and also confirmed by three
similitudes. The conclusion consists in this, that God for the former cause
pronounces that he will take punishment upon the Assyrians, and that in such
sort as he has threatened before ver. 8. and. 9. namely, as by the which
punishment both they, and also their Empire shall utterly be destroyed and
perish. For God says, The Assyrians shall be devoured. And to the end that all
men should believe the more assuredly that this shall come to pass, it is
confirmed and laid open by three similitudes. To this effect is that also of
Sophon. cap. 2. ver. 13.14. And he will stretch out his hand against the North,
and destroy Asshur, and will make Nineveh desolate, and waste like a
wilderness. And flocks shall lie in the midst of her, and all the beasts of
the nations: and the Pellicane, and the Owl shall abide in the upper posts of
it: the voice of birds shall sing in the windows, and desolation shall be upon
the posts: for the cedars are uncovered. Likewise that of Isai. 33. ver. 12.
And the people shall be as the burning of lime: and as the thorns cut up*
shall they be burnt in the fire.

1. Of thorns folded one within another.
The first similitude is taken from thorns folded one in another, that is,
gathered together in a bundle, and bound up, the which are then most easily
burnt all up, although there be a great heap of them: for they do one burn
another of them. David also uses this similitude of thorns Psalm. 58. ver. 9.
2. Taken from Drunkards.
The second similitude is taken from Drunkards, who so long as they lie
overcome with wine, they are easily slain. So easily shall the Assyrians be:
for they shall be killed by their enemies, like as men unarmed, and fast on
sleep. The third similitude is drawn from most dry stubble, 3. Taken from
dry stubble.
the which without any trouble is set on fire and burned. So shall the Assyrians
be, how well fenced soever, or warlike they suppose themselves to be. Finally,
nothing can withstand God, but that he will take punishment and vengeance on
his enemies.

Verse. 11. There comes one out of thee that imagines evil against the Lord,
even a wicked counselor.
Why the Assyrians shall be thus punished.
A Rendering of a reason, the which contains the same cause, the which we have
seen before verse. 9. to wit, that from out among the Assyrians have come the
counsels of overthrowing the worship of God, of the utter destroying of his
people, to be short, of the blotting clean out of the memory or remembrance of
God. Therefore out of the people, and Kings of Assyria came those, which did
imagine and attempt or enterprise every the most wicked and the most vile
things against God, that is, against the worship of God, the glory of God, and
the people of God. For here that serves, He which touches you, God, in
himself cannot be hurt, but he is said so to be in his members.
touches the apple of mine eye, Zach. 2. ver. 8. Wherefore he does hurt or
wrong unto God himself, which does hurt or wrong unto his people. And
therefore by his Prophet David he wills them Psalm. 105. ver. 15. saying,
Touch not mine anointed, and do my Prophets no harm. Otherwise God himself
of himself, is (as they say) without all danger of gunne shot, howsoever
wicked men with all their might and maine do shake and flourish that their
dart and spear against heaven it self. But such counsel giuers, and
counselors also, who either themselves do devise or imagine such wicked
counsel of the glory of God, and taking away of his true worship, or else give
it unto others, are called the counsailors of Belial, that is, wicked
counsailors, to wit, as being such, who can devise nothing else but that which
is wicked: and yet for all that shall never arise, nor profit. Further, this
cause is here again repeated, that this wickedness and counsel may be
understood to be most heinous and lewd, albeit that the Idolaters do think
it either to be no sin, or else an acceptable sacrifice unto God, to wit,
when as they do slay the godly, and the true servants and worshippers of God.
And so Christ prophesies that it should come to pass, as he forewarneth his
Disciples Ioh. 16. ver. 2. saying: The time shall come, that whosoever kills
you, will think that he does God service. Otherwise thus


Verse. 12. Thus says the Lord, If they had kept peace, they should also have
been many, or so cropped, that he should have passed by: though I had
afflicted thee, I would have afflicted thee no more. The figure Hypophora, see
what it is Amos cap. 5. ver. 21. The objection. God handles his own people as
hardly as he does his enemies, and therefore there is no truth in his
promises, or threatenings.
though they be quiet, and also many, yet thus shall they be cut off when he
shall pass by: though I have afflicted thee, I will afflict thee no more.
THis is an Hypophora, or preventing of an objection, whereby God answers a
secret objection of quarrellous persons: and by the same answer are his former
threatenings against the Assyria^s confirmed. Touching the objection, it might
arise in their minds after this manner, That God handled his own people never
a whit more mildly then his enemies, and these Assyrians. For when as the
condition and estate of the people of Israel was most miserable and afflicted,
as who had not once only, but twice been almost utterly destroyed by God:
First, when as those three tribes of the kingdoms of Israel, which were beyond
Jordan, were carried away into captivity by Teglathphalasar king of the
Assyrians 2 King. 15. ver. 29. Secondly, when as the tribes which were left of
the same kingdom, were by Salmanasar king of the said Assyrians carried into
Media 2. King. 17. ve. 3.6. when as, I say, these troubles and miseries fell
out unto the people of Israel (which was the seed of Abraham, that same
peculiar people of God) and that from God, by what means (ask the men that
are hypocrites, ungodly, and profane or wicked) may God be said to entreat
his sons more gently then his enemies? And so consequently they indifferently
scorned and mocked these threatenings of God against the Assyrians, and also his
promises toward his elect, to be short, the ungodly despised the whole word
of God, and said that it was vain, and had no truth in it. God answers,
that these things fell out unto the Israelites for the self same cause, The
answer of God unto the former objection of the ungodly and hypocrites.
for the which he would destroy the Assyrians, to wit, because the Israelites
would never obey God, nor keep the peace and covenant made with him: but
through those their most wicked counsels were at enimitie with God. And
therefore imagined to have blotted out the glory of God, and finally devised
most lewd things against Jehovah, like as the Assyrians do. Wherefore for this
cause the Israelites were destroyed, much less therefore shall the Assyrians
escape scotfree. For if these things be done in the green tree, what shall be
done in the dry? Otherwise God would have handled the Israelites most gently,
if they would have done their duty, and have stood to their covenants with
God, and have kept peace with him. For they should have remained many, and a
great multitude, and should not have been broken, and lessened, and almost
destroyed, as they then were, and now are. But this have the Israelites
deserved because of their evil counsels against the Lord, and therefore has
it thus fallen out unto them. Wherefore much more shall the same come to pass
unto the Assyrians, They should have been cropped, and skoured only: but not
cut off, destroyed, flayed, as they now are. Wherefore I keep the signification
of the preterperfect tence in all this first part of this verse.

He adds, I would indeed have afflicted them: yet but once, and only to heal
them; not twice: or I would not have strooken them again, and afresh, as I
have done, as it were to destroy them, that is, of a purpose to destroy them.
Thus doubtless says God, should the Israelites have kept peace with me, and not
enmity and hatred, Psalm. 60. ver. 4.5.

Verse. 13. For now will I break his yoke from thee, and will burst thy bands
in sunder.
A Comfort. A comfort.
For God promises that it shall come to pass, that he will for all this
deliver out of the hands of the Assyrians, the self same Israelites, whom he
has so grievously afflicted. And that in a word, A difference between the
afflictions of the godly and the ungodly.
that there may appear a manifest difference between the afflictions of the
godly men, and those that be ungodly, and the judgments of God against them
both. For the godly, how hardly soever they be stricken, and pressed down by
God, yet nevertheless they are delivered in the end, and are healed by him:
but the ungodly are utterly cut off, and plucked up by the roots. The first
part of this difference is here described: the latter in the verse following.
Therefore, says the Lord, I will break the yoke of the Assyrians, wherewith
they oppressed and kept under the Israelites, as if they had been beasts,
handling them most cruelly and sharply. Such a bondage and yoke shall not
always lie upon thy neck, O Israel. So is it in the Psalm. 125. ver. 3.4. The
rod of the wicked shall not rest on the lot of the righteous, left the
righteous put forth their hand unto wickedness. And Zach. 10. ver. 10. God
promises his poor captive people after this manner: I will bring them again
also out of the land of Egypt, and gather them out of Asshur: and I will bring
them into the land of Gilead, and Lebanon, and place shall not be found for
them.

When this was fulfilled.
I will break thy bands in sunder, that thou may rid, and deliver thy self
from the government of these wild beasts. That which came to pass, when as the
Monarchy, or Empire of the Assyrians was overthrown by the Chaldees. For the
Israelites carried away by the Assyrians, were more courteously handled by the
Chaldees: and their case and condition under them was more tolerable. Nay
moreover, they afterward obtained liberty of Cyrus King of the Persians to
return home also into their own country, if they would. For so we read
Esdr. 1. ver. 3. Who is he among you of all his people (says King Cyrus) with
whom his God is? let him go up to Jerusalem, which is in Judah, and build the
house of the Lord God of Israel: he is the God, which is in Jerusalem. And this
self same is mentioned 2. Chron. 36. ver. 22.23.

Verse. 14. And the Lord has given a commandment concerning thee, that no
more of thy name be sown: out of the house of thy Gods will I cut off the
graven, and the molten image: I will make it thy grave for thee, for thou art
vile.
A confirmation of the former promise.
A Confirmation of the former promise of God concerning the deliverance of
Israel out of the hand and power of the Assyrians, unto whom they were then in
miserable bondage. For the Assyrians shall be utterly destroyed, and their Empire
shall be rooted out, The afflictions of the ungodly.
so that there shall not remain so much as the name of a nation, or a branch
of it. In the which self same is declared the condition of the ungodly, when
as they are afflicted by God: and it is showed to be far diverse from the
condition of the Godly when as they are afflicted, who are never utterly
destroyed by God. So then this verse appertains unto the Ninevites of
Assyrians, Three things threatened unto the Assyrians.
whom the Prophet speaks unto. And God threatens three things unto them, the
which by this preface of the Prophet are understood, that they shall most
certainly come to pass. The Lord has commanded against thee, that is to say,
he threatens and has decreed these things against thee, who is both most
true, and also most mighty. And therefore as the Prophet Esaye speaks Cap
14. ver. 27. Because the Lord of hosts has determined it, who shall disanull
it? And his hand is stretched out, and who shall turn it away? 1. The whole
people of Nineveh shall utterly be destroyed.
But first of all Nahum pronounces that there shall be a destruction and
overthrowing of the whole people of Nineveh, so that not so much as the name of
these Citizens shall remain, nor any of their seed be left, or to be
continued and spread abroad.

2 All their Gods shall be destroyed.
Then secondly, he threatens that all their Gods also shall be destroeyd, the
which is a most grievous punishment in the judgment of Idolators. The third
thing is, He foretells that it shall come to pass, that before these things
fall out unto them, they shall become vile among other Nations, 3. They shall
wax vile am^ng other nations, where they s^metime were famous.
among whom both the Ninevites and also the Assyrians were famous and renowned
before. So does GOD by his Prophet Esaie cap 10 ver. 12 etc. threaten to bring
down the pride of the king of Assyria, and to turn their glory into shame,
saying: But when the Lord has accomplished all his work upon mount Sion and
Jerusalem, I will visit the fruit of the proud heart of the King of Asshur,
and his glorious and proud looks, etc. Therefore shall the Lord God of hosts
send among his fat men leannes, and under his glory he shall kindle a burning
like the burning of fire. The like is in Jeremy cap. 49 ver. 34 etc.
Concerning the Medes and Persians unto whom the Lord threatens like shame and
confusion. But as touching the Assyrians, the dignity and honor of that
kingdom especially began to wax vile after that overthrow, which Senacharib
king of the Assyrians received in Judea, when as he besieged Jerusalem, whereof
God prophesies by Esaie cap. 14. ver. 25. in these words: I will break to
pieces Asshur in my land, and upon my mountains will I tread him under foot,
so that his yoke shall depart from them, and his burden shall be taken from
of their shoulder. And cap. 37. ver. 37 is expressed his departure with shame
from Jerusalem, after that the Angel of the Lord had slain so many thousands
in his Camp, in one night: So Saneherib King of Asshur departed, and went away
and dwelt at Nineveh. For the strength of the Assyrians began to be deminished,
their power to be despised, yea their Royal authority to be contemned, and
ciuell wars arose among the Kings sons, the which afterward were the
utter overthrow of that nation, and laid them open as a pray unto the Kings
of Babylon, Xenophon.
as Xenophon also teaches in his books of the education or bringing up of
Cyrus.

Verse. 15. Behold upon the mountains the feet of him that declares, and
publishes peace: O Judah, keep thy solemn feasts, perform thy vows: For
the wicked shall no more pass through thee: He is utterly cut off.
What the figure Epiphonema is, see Jonas, cap. 2. ver. 9.
THe figure Epiphonema, or acclamation, whereby both the former deliverance is
confirmed unto the Israelites, and Judah also, that is, the brethren of the
Israelites are for this cause exhorted to rejoice. For as yet the kindgdom of
Judah was safe and untouched. But they are stirred up to rejoice at this so
happy a condition which should be of Israel, as of their brother: and at the
fall of the Assyrians, as their common enemies, as a thing most assured and
certain. For no man is in vain or to no purpose exhorted by God to give
thanks, sing praises, and to rejoice, but for that the same thing shall
altogether come to pass, What the sigure Apostrophe is, see Amos cap. 8. ver 4.
for the which these things are commanded of God to be done. This therefore is
a mostapt and fit Apostrophe or turning of speech unto the Jews, that they
also may rejoice at the destruction of their common adversaries. For the
Assyrians were enemies unto the Jews also, that is, unto the kingdom of Judah,
as appears in the history of Ezechiah the king 2. Kings. Yet out of this
place cannot be gathered that Nahum prophesied under Ezechias king of Judah, at
that time after that Jerusalem was delivered from besieging, that is, after
that it was delivered out of the hands of Senacherib king of the Assyrians. For
here he foretells things to come, the which notwithstanding (after the manner
of other prophets) he sets forth as if they were all ready fulfilled, for
the greater certantie of the thing to come. This place is like unto that of
Esaie cap. 52. ver. 7. How beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of him,
Three kinds of joys.
that declares, and publishes peace: that declares good tidings, and
publishes salvation, saying unto Sion, thy God reigns.

1. Tidings of peace.
But here in this place of our prophet Nahum are reckoned up three sorts of
joys. First an happy and joyful tidings, and near at hand concerning peace
that was to ensue unto the land of Judah, because the enemies of that kingdom,
to wit the Assyrians, are destroyed. For the feet of the men and messengers
signifiyng and bringing the same, 2. The keeping of their solemn feasts.
did even now appear in the mountains near unto them, so that the Jews
should by and by hear the same. The Second, the most free holding and keeping
of their feasts, the which was an holy and solemn, and most great and
lawful joy of the Jews. The third, the paying of their vows, that is, the
acknowledging and confessing of extraordinary benefits of God, the which was
done by the performing of vows, 3. The paying of vows.
and by the offering of Sacrifices of thanks giving. The reason of this joy is,
because that there is now ordained sure and certain peace for the Jews by
God: for as I have said, he has clean taken away their enemies the Assyrians,
so that they shall now no more come into the lands of the Jews.

CAP. 2.
Verse. 1. The destroyer is come before the face, keep the munition: look to
the way: make thy loins strong: increase thy strength mightily,
An other Sermon, containing the utter destruction of the Assyrians.
AN other Sermon of Nachum aiming unto the same mark, whereat the former also
did, namely, to threaten utter destruction unto the City of Nineveh, and unto
the Assyrians: But in this the execution of the same judgment of God is so
lively described, and by particulars laid before the eyes and view of men by
the figure Hypotyposis, What the figure Hypotyposis is, see Amos cap. 8. ver.
12.
that the thing it self may seem now not to be told, but to be done. And
this God does to this end, first, that this threatening of punishment may be
believed to be true, when as all the circumstances thereof, how far off
soever it may seem to be, hypotyposis or lively description as is set down in
this whole chapter shows, that this is not only easy and ready unto him,
but also lays down the means and way (which was to come) of performing and
executing the same, both to comfort the godly and his people, which were
afflicted by them: and also to terrify or make afraid the ungodly, and the
Assyrians, unto whom nothing can be safe, God being wroth and angry with them.

Two parts of this verse. 1. A destroter shall come unto the Assyrians.
This verse has two parts: in the former he shows the Assyrians, that there
shall come those which shall destroy them: he calls them destroyers, or
scatterers. Others notwithstanding translate the word Mephits, a club. The club
is come up against thee, O Niniue, that by this kind of armor might be
signified, what manner of enemies they are, and from what countries they should
come, namely, Chaldees. For Herodotus in Polymn. or libr. 7. writes that the
Chaldees in wars used this kind of weapon, as also shieldes and spears.
Doubtless the Prophet Isai writes that the Empire of the Assyrians was chiefly
destroyed by the Chaldees, cap 23. verse 13. Behold (says he) the land of the
Chaldeans: this was no people: Asshur founded it by the inhabitants of the
wilderness: they set up the towers thereof: they raised the palaces thereof, and
he brought it to ruin. And of these Chaldean enemies I take this whole chapter
to entreat. For whereas Herodotus in his Clio, The error of Herodotus.
or first book says, that the besieging of Nineveh was first attempted by
Phraortes the king of the Medes, but was continued by his son Cyaxaris, and
Nineveh taken, and that finally the Empire of the Assyrians was destroyed by
the same Cyaxares, I avouch and say, that the Medes are there taken for the
Chaldees. For we must rather believe Isai the Prophet of God cap. 23. then
Herodotus. And it is an usual thing with the Greek writers, commonly under
the name of the Medes to understand the Chaldees and Babylonians: wherefore the
Chaldees and the Babilonians the enemies of the Assyrians, and which shall be
their destroiers, shall come up against Nineveh. Now how this was brought to
pass by Arbaces King of the Chaldees, through the connsel of Belesus, bringing
first the Persians, Arabia^s and Bactrians into his society and co^federacy,
and withdrawing them from the rule and dominion of the Assyrians, Diodorus
Siculus teaches, lib. 3. Biblioth. cap. 7. For we have no records now
remaining which are more ancient then those histories. So the^ the first part
of this verse shows, that the Chaldees shall come against Nineveh.

2. Encourages the Assyrians unto their own desence and the defense of their
city Nineveh.
The second, exhorts and encourages the Assyrians to defend themselves in
their city Nineveh: but in mockage. For the Assyrians shall not thereby
escape. So Malach. 1. verse. 4. You shall build and I will destroy, says God.
But by this means is declared that the Assyrians shall not be negligent or
slothful in defending of themselves. Finally, the same Diodorus Siculus cap. 7.
lib. 3. writes, that Sardanapalus king of the Assyrians fought thrice against
Arbaces going about to take the Empire from him and from the Assyrians.
Therefore the Ninevites (when as these destroyers shall come up to besiege
them) shall diligently keep their towers (which they had many, Nineveh had in
it a thousand and fifty towers
and to the number of one thousand and fifty, as the same Diodorus reports
lib. 3, cap. 1. toward the end) shall fortify their city with a trench,
walls, bulwark: shall look to the ways of their enemies, to wit, that if
there be on that side any entrances, or breaches unto the city, or to pull
down the walls, they may repair and make them up again, stop the passage
unto their enemies, and that the Ninevites may gather their forces unto them on
every side: Lastly, they shall encourage one another of themselves, and every
man shall make himself ready to defend and fight for his country, and shall
bring with a manly courage, shall make strong his loins. And by this phrase or
kind of speaking, according unto the use of the hebrew tongue, the force and
strength of the body is wont to be signified. And therefore by the trembling
of the loins, weakness and faintnes of the body on the contrary is noted, as
where David says Psalm. 69. verse. 23. Let their eyes be blinded that they see
not: and make their loins always to tremble.

Verse. 2. For the Lord has turned away the glory of Iaacob (or, The Lord shall
cause the excellency of Iaacob to return) as the glory of Israel, (or, and as
it were excellency unto the Israelites:) for the emptiers have emptied them
out, and marred their vine branches.
Why the Assyrians shall not be able to defend themselves.
THis is the rendering of a reason, why the forces of so mighty an Empire (as
that of the Assyrians was at that time) shall nevertheless not be able to
defend themselves, I answer: because God shall take vengeance on them, and
that for the sake of the Jews and Israelites, whom they most miserably and
most cruelly afflicted. Therefore God shall cause the excellency of Iaacob to
return: and as it were excellency unto the Israelites, and shall not be angry
with them any more, but shall show his favor toward both those peoples, the
seed of Abraham. Wherefore he shall bring to pass that they which before
seemed utterly to be offeasts, captives, miserable, and were so: shall now be
made manifest, shall be delivered from that bondage, in the which they were,
and shall be taken and acknowledged for excellent people, and people
acceptable unto God. For this is the excellce^ie both of Jacob, that is of the
kingdom of Judah; and also of Israel, that is, of the kingdom of Israel,
namely, to have God merciful, favorable and loving unto them. For then
appeared the dignity, greatness, strength, authority, and commendation of that
nation above others, even then when they were captive, the which also in a
manner had the government of the Empire of the Chaldees (under which the Jews
were captives, as Daniel among the Babylonians, Nehemias among the Persians) So
then God will cause, that this his favor shall appear toward this people,
and that the excellency and preciousnesse of this people shall return unto
them, as namely being now pacified and appeased with them. This self same
thing does Isaias teach cap. 10. ver. 12, 22, 25. It shall come to pass that
when as the Lord shall have made an end of his work in Sion, he will visit
the proud heart of the Assyrians. Further, the prophet speaking of the kingdom
of Judah, said fully, The excellency of Jacob, but when as he speaks of
Israel, that is, of the other kingdom of that nation, he said, diminishingly,
as if it were the excellency, because that the chief favor of God appeared
toward the Jews, and he cherished them most especially, because they had
retained and kept still his worship, and law, and sacrifices, the which the
Israelites had despised, and cast a side. Therefore God overthrew both the
Assyrians, and also the Babylonians afterward, rather for the Jews sake, then
for the Israelites.

Now the cause of this anger of God against the Assyrians is, The cause of this
anger of God against the Assyrians.
because they spoiled, or emptied both the Jews and also the Israelites, so
far as in them lay, utterly corrupted and cut off their branches and issue
that was to come, that there should no hope be left of stock or nation of them
hereafter to be restored. And this cruelty is set down also for one of the
causes, why God destroyed Babylon Isai 47. ve. 6. I was wroth with my people: I
have polluted mine inheritance, and given them into thine hand: thou did
show them no mercy, but thou did lay thy very heavy yoke upon the ancient.
As for these Assyrians, they went about utterly to destroy the whole seed of
Abraham without any mercy or compassion.

Verse. 3. The shield of his mighty men is made red: the valiant men are in
scarlet: the chariots shall be as in the fire and flames in the day of his
preparation, and the Or, the ash trees.
fur trees shall tremble.
A description of the enemies of the Assyria^s. 1. Their shields red.
A Description of the enemies, whom before the Prophet named scatterers or
destroyers of Nineveh. And first of all their apparel and altogether warlike
furniture is set forth. Their shield shall be colored with red, as namely,
painted with vermilion, or some such other color. And that the Chaldees in
wars used shieldes and spears we have showed before out of Herodotus. The
Lacedaemonians also when they went unto wars, being valiant soldiers indeed,
were delighted with red color, as were other nations also: that their wounds
which they received in battle might by this means be the more easily covered.
So also did the Chaldees use this color in battle, as appears by this
place. And not only their shieldes, 2. Their apparel also was red.
but also the apparel and garments of the men themselves, and especially of
their captains in war was And by (Men) I understand the Captains of their
armies, their standard and ensign bearers, who had rules of their bands, or
part of them. All these the Prophet shows used and were delighted with this
color also, to wit, the red color For reason both had and also has her
color, the which she uses peculiarly both in war and also in peace. 3. Iron
chariots.
And among armor, are hooked or iron chariots also to be numbered, which they
of old time used in battles long ago, and both before the days of Homer, and
also in his age Josh. 17. verse. 16.2. Sam. 10.18. Horner also in his Iliads
every where, whence is that saying also of Virgil lib. 1. Aeneid: Instabat
curru cristatus Achilles. By Stanyhurst thus: In coach runs helmed Achilles. In
english by Phaerthus: Here they of Troy be chased before Achilles wild in
chare. And these charrets of the Chaldees shall be fearful, both for their
swiftnes, and also for their brightness, and terror, which they shall strike
into them. For they shall fear men like unto burning torches, and shall dazell
the sight of the eyes, that no Assyrian shall be able to abide the brightness
and glistering of this kind of armor, when as they shall come unto the
battle, and fight, and the armies of the Chaldees shall be set in array, and
armed, and ready to give the onset in battle. Thus then it appears that the
Chaldees then excelled in this kind of furniture above other peoples, namely in
the swiftnes of hooked or iron charets, and in diligence in arming them, and in
skilfulnes in turning and driving them. Finally when as the Ashes shall tremble,
that is to say, the Ashen spears shall be shaken and tossed by them, 4. Their
Ashen spears.
the Assyrians shall take such a fear, that they shall not dare to stand against
them. Therefore there is no credit to be given to Diodorus Siculus, who cap. 7.
lib. 3. says, that the Chaldees were thrice overcome in sight by the
Assyrians, when as they came in arms to besiege Nineveh. For here it appears
that the Assyrians were forthwith afraid of the army of the Chaldees, and that
they durst not often to go against them.

Beroschim. What the figure Metonymia is, See Oseas cap 4. ver. 1.
Moreover I translate the word (Beroschim) Ashtrees, and not Fur trees. Then
by the figure Metonymia, I take Ashetrees for Ashen weapons, that is, for
spears and pikes, the which Herodotus lib. 7. writes that the Chaldees and
the Babylonians used in battle and in fight. For that place of Herodotus
shows what the word (Ashtrees) here means. And the Ash, as Plinius says,
is an high tree and a tall, of a white wood, somewhat soft, and shaking,
strong, and without knots, of which stuff at this day notable spears and
pikes are made, whereof also Homer says that Achilles his pike was made.
Therefore when as those Ashen spears or pikes shall be shaken in battle by
the Chaldees, the Assyrians shall flee, like as no nation at this day can
easily abide and stand against the Heluetian army of pike men: but all men
give place unto it.

Ver. 4. The chariots shall rage in the streets: They shall run to and fro in
the high ways: they shall seem like lamps: they shall shoot like the
lightning.
An amplification of the former fear.
AN amplificatio^ of the former fear, which those chariots of the Chaldees
shall strike into the Assyrians. Whereof is to be gathered, therefore the
Assyrians shall easily be overcome by their enemies, how mighty and warlike
soever they seem now for to be. For then they shall not be able to bear the
assault and force of their enemies weapons. In a word, it is true that the
Chaldees were more skillful then other nations in this kind of warlike
furniture here mentioned by our prophet. And then is every nation most chiefly
feared, when as he fights with those weapons, wherein he excels above
others, as the French in horsemanship, the Heluetian in footemanship, the
English with the bow, the Scot in skirmishing. These warlike chariots
therefore of the Chaldees shall be fearful, and they shall make an exceeding
great slaughter both by means of the cunning and skilfulnesse the which the
Chaldees have, to rule them: and also by reason of the manner of their making,
so that whereas other chariots are unprofitable, there these notwithstanding do
very great service.

The Chaldees shall make a great slaughter with their chariots.
These chariots of the Chaldees shall rage in the streets, so great a slaughter
doubtless shall the Chaldean enemies make with them, when as they are once
entered into the city. For C. Caesar lib. 1. de Bello Alexand. about the end
writes that the most valiant souldiars are troubled with these kind of
chariots. They shall run two and fro by the high ways, namely they shall be so
cunningly ruled and feately made, that these chariots may be driven and turned
by the Chaldees sitting upon them, even in those places, which are wont to be
straight and narrow.

They shall be like burning lamps, and the said chariots shall shine, being so
scoured, so yroned, to wit they shall be all over so bright and shining. And
this so glistering a show does dazell the eyes of those that look against
them, that men can scarce be able to abide it: or else the eyes are so dimmed
that they can not see to avoid the strokes. So Anniball in the fight at Cannae
turns the Sun upon the eyes of the Romans. Finally, they shall strike the
eyes like lightnings, and with their sparkling and light they shall glister,
and they shall dim the light and hinder the sight of the Assyrian enemies. To
be short: the fear of the Assyrians shall be great by means of them.

Ver. 5. He shall remember his strong men: they shall stumble as they go: they
shall make have to the walls thereof, and the defense shall be prepared.
A partition. A Partition. The Prophet before spoke of the enemies of the
Assyrians, what manner of men they should be: At thy rebuke, O God of Jacob,
both the chariot and horse are cast asleep: appears in all those, whom God
in his just judgment will punish, to wit, that howsoever they take pains in
defending of them selves, bestur them, and seem to be wise and courageous: yet
when as they come to the point, and unto the fight they are vanquished: yea and
that so easily, as if they had bin in a dead sleep, and could not then find
their hands, albeit they were most excellent warriors. Therefore the king of
Niniuch shall remember, or reckon up his strong men, and his warriors: he shall
muster them: he shall gather an army: he shall moreover fortify himself. But
what of all this? yet shall he not escape. For these strong and valiant men
mustered by the king of the Assyrians, shall stumble and fall down, as they
go: because that God shall take from them strength and heart, that they shall
not then be able to stay up them selves for fear and trembling. They shall
make have unto the walls to man them, and to defend the bullwarke, that the
city be not taken: they shall prepare stuff and lining or covering for the
walls against the slings, or battering instruments, or fires of the enemies,
that the walls be not cast down, battered, or set on fire. Caesar libr. 2.
Bell. Civil. speaking of Massilia, Caesar.
witnesses, that they of old time in the defense of their walls used these
kinds of couerings of their walls, which they called quilting or matting of
them. For with these they let the darts, and such instruments as they cast
stones withal, from battering of their walls, and kept them from firing, A.
Gellius.
the which A. Gellius lib. 15. Noct. Attie. cap. 1. writes to have been done
by Scylla at the besieging of Athens. But all these things notwithstanding
cannot deliver the Assyrians out of the hands of the Chaldees.

Verse. 6. The gates of the rivers shall be opened, and the palace shall melt.
A reason, why the Assyrians shall not escape from the Chaldees.
THis is a reason, because the Ninevites shall be taken at that side of the
city the which they judge to be most strong, to wit, both where the palace or
kings court is builded, and the river Tigris runs into the city. For those
gates and closures, by the which the stream runs into the city, shall be
broken up, and opened with the violence of the ouerflowing waters: and the
palace it self near adjoining unto those gates and sluices of the river shall
be thrown down, and shall be broken, as namely being shaken with the force of
the said waters. So then at that place especially shall the Chaldees break
into the city. So when as God fights against us, God fighting against us,
all things are weak: he fighting for us, all things are strong.
nothing can be safe: and he fighting for us, nothing can be weak. For as it
is Romans 8. ver. 31. If God be on our side, who can be against us? Further, the
things which are here written, do agree with Diodorus Siculus, who libr. 3.
Biblioth. cap. 7. writes thus: When as the siege of Nineveh had continued two
years, the third year, the river growing and increasing beyond measure by the
means of continual showers, ouerflowed that side of the city, brake down
the walls by the space of twenty furlongs. Concerning the palace set on fire
by the King of the Assyrians himself, read the same Author.

Verse. 7. And she that sat quiet at home.
And Huzzab the Queen shall be led away captive, and her maids shall lead
her as with the voice of doves, smiting upon their breasts.
The first amplification of the misery of the Assyrians taken from the persons
of those that shall sustaiue the same.
THe first amplification of the trouble and misery, the which, the city
Niuiueh being taken, shall fall out unto the Assyrians. And this amplification
is taken from the persons, the which by reason of their sex, or kind, are in
miscrie it self more miserable then others: such as are women, and those
especially which are honorable and noble, as is the Queen for example. This
verse therefore is a vehement moving of affection, that the very Assyrians
themselves may be moved with the consideration of the misery, which was to
fall upon them, and may understand that they shall not escape, in as much as
they cannot deliver their Queen out of the hands of the Chaldees, for whom the
Kings and the Subjects are wont to fight most egerly. Finally, that God may
comfort his, whom the Assyrians handled so hardly, and unmercifully, this self
same is rehearsed by the Prophet. So in the Revelation cap. 18. ver. 6. the
godly are willed to reward the whore of Babylon, even as she has rewarded
them, and to give her double according to her works, and in the cup that she
has filled unto them, to fill her the double.

The figure Periphrasis or circumlocution, is, when as we speak that in more
words, the which might be uttered in one, or in fewer, as, the Redeemer of
mankind, for Christ. And here (as he translateth it) she that sat quiet at
home, for, the Queen.
Further, the Queen the wife of the King of Nineveh is here described by the
figure Periphrasis, or circumlocution, to the end that by the comparison and
condition of her captivity that was to come, her calamity or misery may
seem to be the greater, and more miserable. Therefore she that before stood
quiet at home, to wit, the Queen, and other honorable and noble women the
wives of the great men and rulers, shall beled away captive. For these are wont
to keep themselves within the bounds of their palaces, that they may be the
more dainty and fair: they feel no heat, they are not bitten with cold: but
they live at home, compassed and enclosed about with a train and flock of
maids, as it is Psalm. 45. These notwithstanding shall be led away into
captivity, yea and that, captive captivity, that is, most hard captivity. So
much the more lamentable and miserable shall their case be: for they poor
souls were not acquainted with these troubles. Their company and train also
which they shall have with them, is here added, whereby the grieuousnes of the
punishment, and of this captivity is the better described. For their maidens
shall lead them with mourning like doves, that is, with secret sobs, and
sighings, and with mourning kept in. For the maidens shall not dare to shriech
out, cry, and with great howling lament that so miserable condition and plight
of their Ladies and Mistresses. The which thing notwithstanding women are wont
to do in their great sorrows. For they let loose the raines unto their tears,
cryings, and complaints, except they be restrained for fear. Finally, the
same maids shall wayle, and smite their breasts, namely, in token of their
most great and hidden sorrows, the which they shall not dare to break forth.
And this striking of the breast is commonly a companion of these mournings and
sorrows, especially among heathen and profane persons.

Verse. 8. But Nineveh is of old like a poole of water: yet they shall flee
away. Stand, stand, shall they cry: but none shall look back.
Another amplification of the same misery of the Ninevites.
ANother amplification of the same overthrow of the Ninevites, taken from the
greatness of the city, the which shall then fall down, and utterly vanish
away. Nineveh therefore was sometimes as a poole of water, abounding in all
things, wherein men, like as fish do in the water, might live daintilie,
easily, and idly. For I think the same comparing of Nineveh with a poole of
water, to appertain hereunto, namely, that it may be understood that there
was in that city both plenty of all things needful to live withal, and also
great easines to get a living. Wherefore Nineveh was a most large city, nay,
larger by a great deal then Babylon, as Strabo writes, lib. 16. Geograph.
Herodotus also lib. 1. reports that the soil it self, or country of
Assyria, wherein Nineveh was built, was most rich in Corn, had great store of
Millet, and Sisam grain: might compare with other countries of the world also
in plenty of figs, wine, oil. So then there was a most fit place to dwell
in, Nineveh a most dainty place to live in.
and seat to live in. Whereupon the territory and country of Assyria is
called most rich and fruitful by Isaias cap. 10. ver. 18. where GOD
threatens, that he will consume the glory of his forest, and of his
fruitful fields both soul and flesh. And indede this city stood a great
while, as appears Genes. 10. whereupon it was full of men also: but this
dignity, commodiousnes, and greatness of this city shall perish: and shall
not let, but that these judgments of GOD shall come to pass and be fulfilled.
The reason is, none shall then defend the city egerlie and stoutly, no not the
citizens themselves. For they shall all flee away trembling and in fear,
albeit there be some present, which shall encourage them to stand against their
enemies, yet shall they not look back: but shall flee away with great
trembling. There shall then be some, which shall heart them on to defend their
city, and to abide the assault of their enemies, and shall say unto them,
stand, stand: but all in vain. For the citizens shall not thereby take any
courage, nor be caused to stay: but shall run away as fast as they can fling.

Verse. 9. Spoil ye the silver, spoil ye the gold: for there is none end of
the store, and glory of all the pleasant vessels.
What the figure Prosopopoeia is, see Oseas cap 6. ver.
THis is a Prosopopoeia of God encouraging the enemies of the Assyrians unto the
pray. But it is added, that it should be the third amplification of the
miserable estate of the city Nineveh, when as it shall be taken. 1. The third
amplification of the misery of the Assyrians.
For the Chaldees shall steal and take unto themselves every the most precious
things out of it, albeit that there were in it an infinite mass of goods a long
time stolen and horded up together from all places by the Assyrians. And by
this kind of speaking is showed, that God is the author of this destruction of
Nineveh: and that not only the Chaldees would have it so. Finally that is
confirmed, which I have said, namely, that no forces of the Assyrians, no
wealth of theirs, no power could let, but that they must feel and undergo
these judgments and punishments of God, because of their cruelty against the
people of God. For God will encourage their enemies both unto the fight, and
also unto the pray, and will make them unconquerable. There is a like place
Isai. 10. ver. 6. when as God sends the Assyrians to vanquish the Jews: I
will send him (says God, speaking of the Assyrian) to a dissembling nation,
and I will give him a charge against the people of my wrath, to take the
spoil, and to take the pray, and to tread them under feet like the mire in
the street. Yet are not the Chaldees hereby excused, that they should not be
condemned of covetousness in that same spoiling of the Ninevites. Though God be
the author of the spoiling of the Ninevites, yet are not the Chaldees, which
spoiled them, excused.
For they behaved themselves after this manner, not of any mind to obey God, but
to rob and steal: neither did they carry away those riches of the Ninevites
of faith in God, but of a greedines of mind, which was insatiable, or could
not be filled: albeit by the privileges of war, those which do overcome have
much liberty over those whom they do thus overcome, and may do very many
things unto them.

Two things to be noted.
Further this verse has two things to be noted. First the kind of speaking,
the which for the more earnest encouragement sake contains a repetition of
the same word of spoiling, 1. The kind of speaking.
Spoil ye, Spoil ye, says the Lord. Secondly the thing it self, which is
commanded, and shows that the spoiling of Nineveh, which was to ensue, should
be most miserable, and exceeding great. 2. The thing it self.
For both the gold and silver of the Ninevites shall be taken away: and also
that endless furniture of theirs, and heap of riches, and other things, by
succession of so many ages gathered and horded up together. For the Assyrians
never made any end of heaping up of goods, so couetuous, and such robbers of
the world were they. Last of all, the Chaldcans shall pull away and take unto
themselves what so ever dainty and precious thing shall be hid up in all the
vessels, chestes, and whole household of the Ninevites. For these things also
were the pray or spoil of the Assyrians: hereafter 13. And all these things
do show and describe the ransacking and spoiling of this City, be it never so
wide or large, that it shall be maruailous great.

Verse. 10. She is empty, and void, and waste, and the heart melts, and the
knees smile together: and sorrow is in all loins, The author translateth all
these verbs by the future tense. The conclusion showing the estate and
condition to come, of the city and Citizens. Two parts of this verse.
and the faces of them all gather blacknes.
The conclusion, which shows the state and condition of the City Nineveh it
self, and also of the Citizens, what it shall be in the end. Therefore I
translate all these verbes by the future tence, and not by the present tence.
For the Prophet speaks of a thing, which shall come to pass afterward.
Wherefore there are two parts of this verse. The one speaks of the City, and
the other of the Citizens. As for the City of Nineveh it self, the same shall
be emptied and utterly made void and spoiled by the Chaldees, and other
enemies, by whom it shall be taken. 1. Of the city
Whereupon it shall be left naked, and empty of goods, riches, gold, silver, 2.
Of the Citizens.
and household. The which was necessarily to follow of the threatening and
meaning of the former verse. As for the Citizens themselves and the Soldiers,
the which when it is besieged, whole face and countenance, in their knees. For
there, that is, in these parts especially, most assured testimonies or
witnesses of our fear are to be seen. The heart therefore of the fighters for
Nineveh shall melt and vanish away, so that they shall utterly be out of hope
that it may be preserved by them. And the signs and tokens of this their
despair (for Nineveh was taken, not so much through fault or want of
munitions, as betrayed, that is, not defended, through a sudden fear, where
with they were stricken that should have defended it.) The tokens, I say of this
fear shall be, their knees smiting together. Such a sign of fear was in
Belshazzar at the sight of the writing hand upon the wall, Dan. 5. ver. 6. Then
the kings countenance was changed, and his thoughts troubled him, so that the
joints of his loins were loosed, and his knees smote one against another.
Again an other sign of their fear shall be a sorrow or pain in their loins:
For they which are afraid, have a chil and cold trembling over their whole
body, and hairs, because that in this fear the natural heat conueigheth and
betaketh it self out of the whole body unto the heart, leaving the other
parts cold. Hereof are wont to grow gripinges and pains of the colic in
such tre^bling and troubling of the humors: hence also springs pains of the
loins and looseness of the belly, because that whilst we are in fear, cold
does possess the rest of the body. Last of all the countenance, and the face
gathers blacknes, and many times fear, to wit, the veins being destitute or
void of their blood, and heat (the which flees into the inner parts.) So
Joel 2. ver. 6 it is said: Before his face shall the people tremble, all faces
shall gather darkness.

Verse. 11. Where is the dwelling of the Lions, and the pasture of the Lions
whelps? Where the Lion and the Lioness walked, and the Lions whelpe, and none
made them afraid.
A triumphing over the Assyrians, confirming the former threatening of the
Judgments of God. Demand of the Prophet.
THis is an insultation or triumphing over the Assyrians, and Nineveh, whereby
the former threatening of the Judgment of God, and of the destruction of
Nineveh is confirmed. For the Prophet being most assured, and thoroughly
persuaded of the overthrowing of that City, does demand as if the matter were
al ready now fulfilled, where therefore is that nest of the Lions? that is,
where the kingdom of the Assyrians now remains and appears? So the people
and nations overcome by him, insult and triumph over the King of Babylon Isai
14. verse. 10. saying: The answer supplied.
Art thou become weak also as we? Art thou become like unto us? The answer is
now to be set down and understood, to wit, this, It is now no where, this
nest or rather den of these wild beasts, which spoiled the whole world, is
perished, is destroyed.

Two things to be noted.
But there are two things here to be noted: one, that he calls Nineveh, that
same city of the king, or the head city of the Empire of the Assyrians, an
house, and a den, and pasture of lions: 1. That Nineveh is called a house a
pasture, a den.
yea and that an house or a dwelling (the which the Latins in reproach call a
den, as Sextus Pompeius writes) because unto that city as unto their head
and chief city the Kings of Assyria came, and betook themselves, and there
dwelled safely, as wild beasts in their bowres and dwellings. The which self
same thing the prophet in this same verse makes more plain, when he adds,
Whither the Lion came, or where the Lion walked, that is, betook himself, as
unto his proper palace, and that No man making him afraid. For Nineveh was a
most safe seat and dwelling unto the Kings. So the harbors of thieves and
cruel oppressors are called dens, and couerts of wild beasts Psalm 10. ver.
9. He lies inwaite secretly, even as a Lion in his den: he lies in wait
to spoil the poor: he does spoil the poor when he draws him into his net.
The self same city Nineveh is here called the pasture of the said Kings, and
of the whole family of the king: because that there both the Kings, and also
the sons of the Kings of Assyria were sumptuously and dayntily brought up,
with their whole household and train, as namely, in the head city of the
kingdom. For under the name of pastures in this place is signified sumptuous
and most dainty cheer and living, as it is also Psalm. 23. These things are
first here to be noted.

Afterward and secondly it is here to be marked, that he calls the Kings
Lions, 2. The Kings called lions. Their children lions whelps.
and the Kings sons and daughters Lions whelps, and young Lions. So by
Daniel the four Empires are compared unto wild beasts. Whereby the nature and
fiercenes of the Kings which ruled the Assyrian Empire is gathered. For they
were in such sort brought up, and that from their youth, who were to reign
and rule, that they were like unto Lions, that is, they did breed stately and
high minds: but ravenous, cruel, and fierce toward all men, such as is the
nature of Lions, and of Turks. Further, that which in this place the Prophet
has said of the Kings of Assyria: the same writes Plato in his Politic. of
many magistrates, and rulers of his time in these words translated into Latin
by James Serranus my friend, a man singularly learned. Socrat. Plato.
Whom speak you of? Hosp. Of certain wonderful and strange men. Socrat. Why
so? Hosp. For when as I now well bethink me of the matter, the kind of these
seems to be of diverse shapes and forms: For many men are become like unto
lions and Centaurs, and such other like: and many are like unto Satyrs, and
weak beasts, and of sundry shapes. And these things has Plato said very
truly, the which we also at this day by experience do find to be true in many
princes.

Verse. 12. The Lion did tear in pieces enough for his whelps, and woried for
his lioness, and filled his holes with pray, and his dens with spoil.
A making more plain of that which has been said before.
A Laying open of that which was said before, more plainly, wherein the
Prophet shows, why he called the Kings of the Assyrians Lions, and what manner
of living their life was, to wit, full of cruelty and violence. Nemrod, by whom
this Empire is supposed to have been first founded, is called a mighty hunter,
Genesis 10. ve. 9. because that he was both cruel unto other men, and also got
booties and prays from other nations. For after this sort he first framed and
ordered his rule bearing: the which course and manner of living and rule
bearing it is likely that his successors followed afterward. Finally, when as
there was no fear of the true GOD among those nations, what else was that same
Empire of the Assyrians, albeit that it stretched never so far and wide, but
a great the every? For says Augustine, what else are great Empires without
justice, but great the eueries? Whereupon that same Alexander the great,
Lucanus.
is by Lucanus called the Great thief of the world. And surely a people can
hardly arise up, and get dominion over others without great force, injury,
violence, and robbery, the which must be done unto other nations. For it must
needs be, that such a dominion must increase by the falls and ruins of other
nations, as first, of those which are near and adjoining unto it, and
afterward of others farther off. Such therefore were the Kings of the Assyrians
also. Wherefore they are worthylie called Lions: and their sons Lions
whelps: their houses, Caves and dens of Lions: lastly, their goods by them
heaped together, booties and spoils. And with the same punishment, wherewith
the Assyrian kings are punished, shall those kings and princes also at this day
be punished by God, which in manners and nature are like unto the Assyrians, and
ravenous and cruel lions. So Judge. 1. verse. 6. Adoni-bezek a cruel and bloody
king, has the thumbes of his hands and feet cut off, like as he served many
others before. So Isai 33. verse. 1. they are threatened to be repayed with the
law of reqnitall, who have been spoylers and wicked doers unto others, in
these words: Woe to thee that spoylest, and wast not spoiled: and do
wickedly, and they did not wickedly against thee: when thou shall cease to
spoil, thou shall be spoiled: when thou shall make an end of doing wickedly,
they shall do wickedly against thee. And these are most excellent myrrours and
looking glasses of God his judgments for other men to view and behold, if
they learn not to forgette their cruelty and robbery.

Verse. 13. Behold, I come unto thee, says the Lord of hosts, and I will
burn her chariots in the smoke, and the sword shall devour thy young lions,
and I will cut off thy spoil from the earth, and the voice of thy messengers
shall no more be heard.
The conclusion of this sermon.
THe shutting up of this whole former threatening, the which is contained in all
this chapter. And by this conclusion is confirmed, both how great, and what
manner of destruction there shall be of this kingdom, and herewithall is in
like manner declared, wherefore it shall come to pass. So this verse has
three parts. Three parts of this verse.
The first, which contains a confirmation of this whole second sermon and
threatening made by the Prophet, 1. A confirmation of this whole Sermon.
the which confirmation is taken both from the person of God that speaks, and
also from the speedines of the coming to pass of the matter. And he which
threatens these things unto the Ninevites, is GOD, and that even he which is
bath Jehovah, that is, the true God: and also the Lord of hosts, that is, most
almighty, so that nothing is able to withstand his decree and will. And these
things shall come to pass most speedily: For Behold me, says God, prepared
against thee, or, Behold I come against thee: as if I were even then coming at
the doors, and drawing forth these my judgments, to wit, least the ungodly
might think themselves to have escaped, because of these judgments prolonged,
and not forthwith put in execution.

2. The manner of their destruction.
The second part describes briefly what manner of destruction and overthrow
there shall be both of this City, and also of this kingdom and power. The
chariots of the Assyrians, and all their munition and furniture for war shall
be burnt with the smoke of fire, that is, with a most bitter and soft fire,
that they may be the more grieved, and the more tormented in it. Their young
lions, that is to say, as well the kings stock, as also the Nobles of the
Assyrians, namely their whole families shall the sword consume and waste.
Therefore the sons of the king and of his nobles shall be slain and killed
with the sword by the enemies, lest any afterward might think of the
recovering of their kingdom again. So likewise does God threaten him by his
Prophet Isai cap 31. ver. 1. Then shall Asshur fall by the sword, not of man,
neither shall the sword of man devour him, and he shall flee from the sword,
and his young men shall faint. And he shall go for fear to his tower, and his
Princes shall be afaide of the standard, says the Lord, whose fire is in Zion,
and his furnace in Jerusalem.

The voice of the messengers of Nineveh shall no more be heard, to wit, of his
Ambassadors, and presidents, whom the kings of Assyria did send into the
provinces to govern them, and to execute the commandments of their Kings.
This is as much as if GOD should say, the dignity of the Empire shall be
taken away from thee, thou shall now obey thy self, and no longer have rule
over others. And thus much contains the second part of this verse.

3. The cause of this punishment
The third part does most briefly contain the cause of this punishment,
namely, because all this whole Empire, all these riches of the Assyrians are
nothing but a pray, spoil, and robbery, and are not goods lawfully gotten.
And this pray God will have to be cut away and taken from the thief, and the
thief himself to be punished, as appears Isai cap. 33. verse. 1. which
place has been cited but immediately before in the exposition of the twelfth
verse, toward the end. And this is the third part of this verse.

CAP. 3.
Verse. 1. O bloody city, it is all full of lies, and robbery: the pray
departs not.
The last sermon of Nahum confirming the former judgments of God, and showing
causes of the same.
THe last or third sermon of the Prophet, wherein both the former threatenings of
God against the Assyrians are confirmed, and also the causes are showed of so
sharp judgment of God against them. And in this sermon also does Nachum use
the figures Hypotyposis and Prosopopoeria, What these figures are, see Amos cap
8. ver. 12. and Oseas cap. 6. ver. 1.
to represent the thing to come unto the eyes and sight of the godly
Israelites: and that therefore they should the more assuredly believe that
these things should come to pass, how mighty and unconquerable soever the
strength of the Assyrians and their Empire might seem at that time for to be.
But this verse has two parts. First, the threatening of an horrible or very
fearful punishment against the Ninevites. Two parts of this verse.
And the same is sufficiently signified cue^ by this one particle (woe) in
hebrew (Gol) in Latin (Vae) in Greek (ouai) as may appear almost by infinite
places of the holy Scriptures. 1. The threatening of a fearful punishment.
For whatsoever in the punishment of men is wont to be seen horrible, to be
feared, hard, sharp, and heavy, with the like is all contained and noted in
this one word (Woe.)

The second part of this verse declares two causes why the Ninevites are thus
punished: 2. Two causes of this punishment
there shall other causes follow afterward. The causes are, the Cruelty of
the Ninevites, and their Covetousness. Their cruelty, and the same most
barbarous, is noted in these words, The city of bloods, or the bloody city.
For by this means is showed, that not only one or twain, 1. Cruelty.
but all the Ninevites indifferently and one with another were delighted and
inured with blood, slaughter, and murders, and that this course of living and
dealing was continued a long season among them without any punishment. The
which is a thing common and usual among proud nations and conquerours of the
world, such as were the Ninevites, and afterward the Romans, to rejoice in
blood. To be short, great Empires were never founded at the first, nor
established afterward without great cruelty and shedding of blood of other
peoples.

2. Covetousness.
Moreover, the notorious covetousness also of this people is declared in these
words, It is wholly made and full of that which is torn away, or robbery, and
lying: nay they never cease from stealing, albeit that they be most wealthy and
full of riches and goods. For the Assyrians had stolen all from other nations:
wherefore, the Assyrians when as they overcame other nations, did not only
rob them: but also by their presidents of provinces, by their tributes laid
upon them, and by such other occasions daily spoiled and flawed them, whom
they had once ouercomen. The which thing was practiced also afterward by the
Romans. Further, Lying helps forward their Covetousness: for they which have
a purpose to spoil one under some honest pretense, and not by open violence,
deal by suttleties and deceits. Now, that which is torn away, and robbery,
are two kinds of taking away of other men's goods. Understand by that which is
torn away, when as some part only is taken away, because the whole could not
be gotten. Robbery is, when as the whole goods of another is stolen away, and
haled into our hands by unjust means.

Verse. 2. The noise of a whippe, and the noise of the moving of the wheels,
and the beating of the horses, and the leaping of the chariots.
A confirmation of the punishment threatened before.
THe confirmation of the punishment threatened before, taken from the manner after
which the Assyrians shall be punished. For it shall be done by the Chaldees,
the which shall break in upon the Ninevites with their chariots and horsemen,
the which the Ninevites shall not withstand. And this force and power of the
chariots and horsemen of the Chaldees is lively by the figure Hypotyposis
represented, What the figure Hypotyposis is, see Amos cap. 8. ver. 12.
as it were unto the view and sight, That the Assyrians because of their wealth
and strength of war should not think these things to be vain, or the godly
doubt of the issue and falling out of the matter, whom God would comfort in
this place, by threatening the destruction of the enemies which afflicted or
troubled them. Therefore both their whippes, wherewith they shall rule their
horses of their chariots, shall make a noise, and fear the Assyrians, and the
wheels of their chariots shall be moved with such a force and violence, that
nothing can stand against them. The horses themselves shall stamp with their
feet, the which is a token of courageous and warlike horses: and lastly, The
chariots drawn by the horses shall leap, and break all things. And these
things are in such sort set forth, as if the enemies were even now at the
gates, and hard at the heels of the Assyrians.

Verse. 3. The horseman lifts up both the bright sword, and the glittering
spear, and a multitude is slain, and the dead bodies are many: there is none
end of their corpses: they stumble upon their corpses.
An amplification of the manner of their punishment.
AN amplification of the said manner of their punishment, and a more plain
declaration of the same. For he spoke before of their chariots of war, and of
their horses: now he entreats of their horsemen, and of their furniture, the
which also he will paint out before their eyes fearful, and such as the
Assyrians and Ninevites shall not be able to abide. All which things make, and
are spoken for the confirmation of this punishment. The horseman, namely, not
he which fights out of the chariot, but from his horse, The horsemen.
shall bring forth, or shall cause his horse to go up into every place, never
so high and rough: he shall so skilfully turn him: and shall drive him being
taught and made unto all points of war with horse, and unto the fight: as of
good Riders their horses are wont to be taught and made before hand unto all
turnings and fears. That which Homer teaches also in his Iliad. lib. 7. And
such shall the horsemen, that is, the soldiers that fight on horseback be.

Their furniture.
Their furniture also shall be terrible or fearful. For their swords shall
shine like fire, they shall be so bright, and ready unto slaughter: their
spears with their iron points shall glister like the lightning in the air.
Last of al, the multitude of the slain Ninevites shall be so great, that there
shall be no number of them: and those which shall go in the streets, shall
every where stumble upon them. The which are the signs and tokens of an
exceeding great slaughter, and received overthrow, such namely as shall fall
out unto the Ninevites. Therefore they shall not abide their enemies: but the
Assyrians shall be overcome, how unvanquishable soever they be now thought for to
be.

Verse. 4. Because of the multitude of the fornications of the harlot that is
beautiful, and is a mistress of witchcraft, and sells the people through her
whoredom, and the nations through her witchcrafts.
A rendering of a reason of their so great punishment.
A Rendering of a reason. For he yields a reason of so great punishment which
should come upon them, to wit, for that the Ninevites infinite ways committed
fornication, and used witchcrafts, and furthermore infected other nations of
the world with these most filthy vices, and made them afterward subject unto
them, and made merchandise of them at their pleasure. But here seem two other
causes to be brought then were before, namely idolatry and witchcraft, of
both which vices the Assyrians were Schoolemasters unto other nations of the
world. For I take fornications in this place for idolatry. Epiphanius writes,
Epiphanius.
that idolatry began in the world in the days of Their the father of Abraham,
and first among the Assyrians, and from thence came unto other nations.
Whereupon in this place Nineveh is called the mistress of these vices,
especially of Sorceries, that is, of witchcraft. For albeit Plin. libr. 3. Not.
Histor. in the preface do write, that so detestable an invention began first
in Persia, and names Zoroastres the author thereof: yet he in the same place
does confess that the Medes and the Assyrians were the more ancient writers of
the same art, whose works are lost: but Zoroastres his remained. This self
same thing does Cicero confirm lib. 1. de Diuinat. which fetches it, and the
authority of it from the Assyrians, as the first inuentors of it. Lastly it is
apparent by Isai cap. 2. ver. 6. and cap. 47. ver. 13. that the East people,
among whom doubtless are the Assyrians, were the finders out of al forbidden
Divination, that is, Astrologicall, Magical, and all such other Diuinations.
And these are two notorious crimes, with the which the true knowledge and
worship of God was utterly abolished and done away, namely, idolatry and
witchcraft: the which vices the Assyrians spread abroad into other nations, and
therefore are become guilty of the corrupting of the whole world. Moreover,
they bought and sold, and made merchandise of all nations and families,
bewitching them with these corruptions, and bringing them in subjection unto
them. For this buying and selling, or making merchandise of them, is not only
to be referred unto the deceits, wherewith the Monarchs, or Emperors for
their profit and gain did deceive, sell unto others, and beguile the
inferior nations: but also unto the gain which the Kings of Assyria got by
such idolatry and witchcraft, the which they taught unto other peoples. For
so, and under this pretense and color they stretched out their Empire, and
defended the same, as if they taught the true religion unto other nations. For
thus are men easily deceived, as it is 2. Pet. 2. ver. 3. who there reports
of false prophets and teachers, that they shall through covetousness with fained
words make merchandise of men. So did the Roman Empire increase, the which was
an example and provocation unto other people of all superstitions.

Verse. 5. Behold, I come upon thee, says the Lord of hosts, and will discover
thy skirts upon thy face, and will show the nations thy filthiness, and the
kingdoms thy shame.
The conclusion.
THe conclusion. It shall therefore come to pass, that God for this cause will
grievously punish the Ninevites, the which punishments he does severally set
down here, and in the verses following. And God confirms the event or
falling out of these punishments by his own majesty and power, when as he
calls himself the Lord of hosts, as before cap. 2. ver. 13. First of al then
in this verse is threatened unto the Ninevites shame and reproach, namely, for
that their spoiled and naked city, and bereaved of al her goods and Empire,
shall be set forth to be laughed to scorn of other nations, as they also
themselves have robbed other people, and made them to become a laughing stock.
So does God threaten, Isai. 33. ver. 1. alleged before in the exposition of
the 12. verse of the second chapter. And so Isai. 21. ver. 2. says, A grievous
vision was showed unto me, The transgressor against a transgressor, and the
destroyer against a destroyer. Further, the gesture, condition, and manner of
this filthiness and shame of the Ninevites which was to come, is described as
significantly, and with as great Emphasis or force as may be, the which like
description is to be found every where also in other Prophets, as Ezech. 16.
Isai. 47.

Verse. 6. And I will cast filth upon thee, and make thee vile, and will set
thee as a gasing stock.
The former reproach amplified by the greatness of the same.
THis self same reproach of the Ninevites to come is amplified by the greatness.
For it shall be so great, and so well known unto the world, that she shall be
a looking glass and an example unto other people, of the judgments of God
against covetous persons, idolaters, cruel men, and witches or Southsayers.
Moreover, every punishment, either upon any one man, or upon a company of me^,
or some nation, is so much the more grievous and hard to be borne, when as it
is an example: that is, taken or executed in such sort, that the same is a
public example unto others: for this is a most great shame. Further, God shall
bring upon the Assyrians, and especially the Ninevites all kind of reproach and
shame: for he shall cast upon them al kind of loathsome and filthy things. And
whatsoever thing among men is wont to be counted most shameful, foul, and
reproachful, all that same shall fall out unto the Ninevites: and that from
every where, and on every side. To this purpose tend these speeches, I will
throw upon thee filthy things, and will bring shame upon thee, that the
Ninevites and these sorcerous fellows should not think that there should be
any kind of reproach, which should not be brought upon them.

Verse. 7. And it shall come to pass, that all they that look upon thee, shall
flee from thee, and say, Nineveh is destroyed, who wi^ have pity upon her?
Where shall I seek comforters for thee?
An amplification of the greatness of this punishment taken from the effect of
the same.
THe same greatness of the punishment and reproach of the Ninevites is again
amplified by the effect, or fear which it shall strike into all that do behold
it. In conclusion it shall be so great, that there shall want comforters to
comfort the Ninevites, because of the greatness of this punishment which they
shall suffer, and the bitterness of their sorrow. Finally, no man shall sorrow
with them, as if the affliction and misery of the Niniues should exceed all
feeling and degree of man his mourning and sorrow. For men do sorrow with other
men sorrowing in those matters, the which we may conceive in the feeling and
estimation of men. But whereas the sorrow is so great, and so bitter and so
fearful, that no man would wish or think it could come to pass unto any man,
Job his comforters.
except it be such a one as God does utterly hate and will have to perish, then
they do cease from sorowing with, and comforting such a person. So they which
came to comfort Job, when as they did behold with their eyes the greatness of
his punishment and affliction, they left off to comfort him, and to sorrow with
him. For they held their peace, nay rather they began to accuse Job, and to
find fault with him, and blame him, as a man forsaken of God. For such shall be
their slaughter and overthrow, that it may plainly appear to be an
extraordinary Plague of God: and therefore all men shall confess that they
are not to be comforted, and that no man ought to sorrow with them, as namely
being such, as with whom God is vnappeasablie angry, that is to say, The
horror or loathing that men shall conceive at the sight of the miseries of the
Niniuttes, described by two effects.
whom God does not punish as other men, to wit, whom he will have left to live,
but whom he has decreed utterly to destroy and root out. Therefore all men
shall rather detest the Ninevites then comfort them: other men and people shall
rather hate them then pity them. In a word, the punishment laid upon the
Ninevites by God shall rather strike into those that behold it a loathing, then
a compassion toward them, because that it shall be a judgment of men hated of
God, and consequently most wicked. 1. All that see them, shall flee from them.
And in this place, this lothing of them is described, by these two effects,
the which are taken and noted from the common manner of men. First whosoever
shall see the Niniues, or their City so spoiled, shall flee from them, and
shun them as men accursed, that is vowed unto Hell, and destruction, and by
keeping company with whom, others may fear, least they pull upon them selves
ruin and destruction. Therefore all men shall get them far off from that
City, and from the Citizens thereof thus afflicted, or punished. The second
token of this horror or lothing of them is, That no man shall sorrow with them,
or sick* comforters for them: as being such who are punished by God above the
common and usual manner: and consequently for whose punishment men ought not
to be sorry, as who have deserved such destruction: and whose sorrow is not to
be demini^hed or eased, as who were judged of all men to be most worthy of
this sorrow because of their notorious offenses.

Verse. 8. Art thou better then No, Or which is the nource or mother city?
which was full of people? that lay in the Rivers, and had the waters round
about it: whose ditch was the Sea, and her wall was from the Sea.
A Confirmation of the former punishments by the example of No, a^most great
City. And this verse is as it were an Hypophora, A confirmation of the former
punishments. The figure Hypophora what it is, see Amos cap. ^. ver. 21.
or answering of an objection, wherewith answer is made, either unto the
Ninevites themselves, or unto others shifting of the former judgments of God,
because of the greatness and power of Nineveh. Nay says the Prophet, they
shall come to pass, and this is proved by an example of things already done,
whereby God shows that he is able to overthrow all Cities, and be they never
so mighty: therefore he is also able to destroy Nineveh. Two parts of this
verse.
Moreover there are in this verse two things to be marked: To wit the kind of
speaking, and the matter it self. The kind of speaking is full of Emphasis,
or vehemency and force. 1. The kind of speaking. What the figure Apostrophe
is, see Amos cap. 8. ver. 4.
For the Prophet uses interrogations or asking of questions, and by Apostrophe
turns his speech unto the Ninevites, that he might stir them up the more to
consider the example laid before them: and that he might the more shake off
from them their vain trust: So the infedels or unbelievers and hypocrites must
be sharply and roundly dealt withal. For otherwise they take their rest
without fear and are lu^sed a sleep in their sins.

2. The matter itself.
The matter or thing it self, the which is set before the Ninevites as an
example to behold, is the destruction or overthrow of the city No whose
forces, munitions, and power are first described, and afterward the most
miserable and lamentable destruction of the same. And it is set forth as a
fresh and famous example at that time. But this (No) was a city of Egypt, and
not the same with Noph, the which also it self was a city of Egypt as
appears Ezech. 30. ver. 13. Thus says the Lord God, I will also destroy the
idols, and I will cause their idols to cease out of Noph. There is mention made
of this No Ierem. 46. ver. 25. Thus says the Lord God of hosts, the God of
Israel, I will visit the common people of No, and Pharaoh, and Egypt with their
gods, and their kings, even Pharaoh, and all that trust in him. And Ezech. cap.
30. ver. 15. God says, I will power my wrath upon Sin, which is the strength
of Egypt: and I will destroy the multitude of No. This No was more populous or
full of people then the other cities of Egypt, and it seems also to have been
the chief, and metropolitan or head city of all Egypt. For Ierem. 46. Parhho
is called the nurse of No. And in this place No it self is called the mother
or nurse of other cities of Egypt, the which titles for the most part, belong
unto the mother city or the chief or head city. It was seated by the sea, or
by the waters: and as here appears, was flowed with the sea, or waters round
about. Some will have this city to be it which afterward was called
Alexanderia, of Alexander the great which renewed it. It was a most wealthy city
by reason of the commodiousnes of the place, as it is also here described, and
truly Plinius lib. 5. Nature. histor. cap. 10. writes of Alexandria, that it
had above thirty thousand gorgeous or princelike houses in it. But the same
Plinius lib. 6. cap. 29. makes mention among the cities of Egypt of a city
called Noa, which seems rather to be our city No, then Alexandria, and the
name does rather agree with that of Pliny, and for that it is written to have
bin defended by the Ethiopians, unto whom this Noa, that is, our city No was
near. peradventure it was that same city Thebes with an hendreth gates, of
which Homer speaks.

The judgment of this author concerning the time of the destruction of this
city No.
But now concerning the time wherein this city No was in such sort destroyed, as
is here written, it is a question. I for my part by comparing the 20. cap. of
Isai. with the 9. verse of this chapter do judge it may be gathered that No was
destroyed by the Assyrians, before that their king Sennacherib made that noble
voyage into the Jews, whereof we read Isai. 36. Nay moreover before he
reigned, yet notwithstanding after that the ten tribes of Israel were carried
away captive by Salmanazarking of the Assyrians. For between Salmanazar and
Sennacherib kings of Assyria I place Sargon in the middle, of whom is mention
Isai. cap. 20. by whose authority and appointment, but under the conduct or
leading of Tartan a noble man of his, the Philistines were first overcome and
afterward the Egyptians, to wit, three years after, and the city No then
taken. For they which think that the Empire of the Assyrians did not reach
unto Egypt are deceived, as appears by the 7. of Isai. ver. 18.19. where God
says: And in that day shall the Lord hiss for the fly that is at the
uttermost part of the floods of Egypt, But the Assyrians conque^ing the
Egyptians is more p ai^ly expressed Isat 20.
and for the be which is in the land of Asshur, and they shall come, and light
all in the desolate valleys. and in the holes of the rocks, and upon all
thorny places, and upon all bushy places.

The multitude of the citizens o^ No, with their munition and situatian of
their city to what end mentioned.
Further here are rehearsed the multitude of the citizens, and the munition and
situation of this city, whereby it might seem unable to be won: to beat
down the pride and security or carelesnes of the Ninevites. It was a populous
city or very full of people, and the mother, or head city of the rest: it was
situate between the partings or mouths of the river Nilus. Some hold that it
was situate at the mouth or entry of Canopus one of the streams that falls
into the river Nilus near unto the lake Mareotis, and the Island Pharus. Some
think it was seated in an other place by the Ila^d Meroe. Last of al, it was
on every side compassed and fortified with the sea, or with the waters.
Whereupon (if it be taken for the city Alexandria, the which was restored for
No), it was hard to be comen unto, having entrance only by three chanells of
the sea, as writes Plinius lib 5. Nature. histor. cap. 10. and out of him
afterward Solinus Poly. histor. cap. 35.

Ver. 9. Ethiopia and Egypt were her strength, and there was none end: Put and
Lubim were her helpers.
An amplification of the strength of the city No.
AN amplification of the strength of the city No, by the inhabitants and other
powers which did aid and help it, that the Ninevites should not think
themselves safe against GOD by means of their own forces, and also the aides
of their confederates. So then when as No was besieged, all Egypt it self did
help it: so likewise did the Ethiopians near unto it, and the people of Lybia,
and the Nigrites, or Cyrenians, the Ammonites, that is, the dwellers on the
sands. What this people are, must be learned out of Genes. cap. 10. that we
may be the shorter.

Ver. 10. Yet was she carried away, and went into captivity: her young children
also were dashed in pieces at the head of all the streets, and they cast lottes
for her noble men, and all her mighty men were bound in chains.
The d^st^uction of this ^^m^us city No, (...) whose lame^ta^^e overthrow there
are hear ^e^ down four tokens.
THe destruction of the said City No, and the same most miserable, that the
Ninevites may be terrified or feared with this judgment of God, and understand
that nothing can withstand God, nor that any forces, nor princes, nor great and
mighty men may be excepted from these punishments. Moreover there are in this
verse set down four tokens of extreme misery. The first is captivity or
carrying away of all the people from their own homes unto strange countries.
It is an hard thing to be a captive: but much more hard is it to be carried
away, 1 Captivity.
and being robbed and spoiled of all our goods to be led into unknown lands,
to be a slave there, the which is wont to be the condition and case of a people
carried thus away by enemies from their own country. The second thing is, 2 The
dashing in pieces of their children.
The dashing in pieces of their children at the heads of all their lanes and
streets. This no doubt was a token of notorious cruelty showed by the enemies
against the inhabitants of the city No, and a sign of exceeding great misery,
and wasted strength of so great and mighty a city, when as the fathers were
constrained to behold and suffer their children in such sort to be torn in
pieces, to be so dashed with stones, to be so cruelly slain and murdered, and
to suffer and let them lie so, as if they had no care of them. The third point
is, 3. They cast lottes for the noble men.
the most honorable personages of this city No, were used of the enemies like
slaves, to wit, when as they divided them among them selves by lots. Neither
did their dignity, nor degree, nor power, nor wealth privilege or keep free
the nobles and great men of No from this punishment. The fourth token is, Their
great men also were bound with chains, 4 The great and mighty men were bound
in chains.
as well as the common sort and basest of the people. These things ought to
terrify or fear both the Ninevites, which used a cruel government, and our
selves also, when as we obey not God: and all princes which are cruel unto
their people: that all men may fear and know that God will be a revenger and
punisher of their sins.

Verse. 11. Also thou shall be drunken: thou shall hide thy self, and shall
seek help because of the enemies.
The application of the former example unto the Ninevites by three effects.
THe applycation of the former example unto the Ninevites, from whom also he
takes all hope of escaping or of help. And in this verse he threatens alike
punishment unto the Ninevites as fell out unto the citizens of No, and that by
a three fold consequent or effect, the which he rehearses, first, 1. Niniue
shall be drunken.
Thou also shall be drunken, O Nineveh, says the Prophet: wherein is
diligently to be noted, that the Prophet does not pronounce or show that
Niniuch shall only drink or lightly sippe at this cup of affliction, and
punishment, but that it shall come to pass that she shall be drunk with that
cup, that is, she shall drink of it unto her destruction, and so consequently
shall be grievously afflicted. So all the wicked are said that they shall
drink of that same cup Psalm. 75. verse. 8. In the hand of the Lord is a cup,
and the wine is red: it is full mixed and he powers out of the same: surely all
the wicked of the earth shall wring out, and drink the dregs thereof. And of
this cup shall they drink will they, nill they, and in spite of their teeth,
albeit they never so much refuse to do the same. For thus is Jeremy from the
Lord willed to say unto all the Princes of the heathen concerning this matter,
cap. 25. verse. 27, 28. Therefore say thou unto them, Thus says the Lord of
hosts, the God of Israel, Drink, and be drunken, and spew, and fall, and rise
no more because of the sword, which I will send among you. But if they refuse
to take the cup at thine hand to drink, then tell them: Thus says the Lord
of hosts, ye shall certainly drink. Thus then shall Nineveh be handled by
God, as No of Egypt was before. And it is also earnestly to be marked here,
that the Prophet turns his speech unto Nineveh, that this threatening may
seem to be the more forcible, and may the more press, fear, and strike the
Ninevites. 2 They shall hide themselves.
The second consequent or effect of this punishment is, that Nineveh, that is,
the citizens of Nineveh shall hide them for fear and trembling. For they shall
seek unto themselves couerts, whereinto they may run because of the cruelty
of the Chaldees, as the woods, rocks, rough and unpleasant places, so great
doubtless shall be their fear and flight. The third, 3. They shall seek help,
They shall seek help also, and gather together and crave power from every
place, because that they see their enemies, namely, the Chaldees, to be in
strength too mighty for them: and for that they do stand wonderfully in fear
of them, whom notwithstanding the Assyrians despised before. Thus does GOD fill
their hearts with fear whom he will have to be ouercomen, and furnishes
their hearts with constancy and bold^es whom he has decreed shall be
conquerours and get the upper hand. So David Psalm. 59. comfort himself
with the assurance of God his help against the power and strength of Saul his
enemy verse. 9. He is strong: but I (says David) will wait upon thee: for God
is my defense. And on the other side Psalm. 78. verse. 9. he shows that the
Ephraemites being armed, and well prepared to the battle, were strooken with a
fear, and ran away: The children of Ephraim being armed, and shooting with
the bow, turned back in the day of battle.

Verse. 12. All thy strong cities shall be like fig trees with the first ripe
figs: for if they be shaken, they shall fall into the month of the eater.
NOw he takes away from the Ninevites all hope of escaping. Wherefore there
follow sundry Hypophoraes or preventing of objections, What the figure
Hypophora is, see Amos cap. 5. ver. 21.
wherewith the Prophet answers diverse their objections, trusting in them
selves and in their own aids and helps. And first of all in this place that
same vain trust which they conceived of the munitions and sortresses adjoined
unto their city. For they shall all be unprofitable unto them, and of
themselves most weak. For they shall be as subject unto falling, and as easily
thrown down, as the first figs when they be shaken, fall down from the
tree. And they fall most easily, and are most pleasant to eat. So under the
similitude of a basket of first ripe figs very good and pleasant to be
eaten, GOD signifies unto Jeremy cap. 24. the return of some of the people
of the Jews from the captivity. Plinius lib 16. Nature. Histor. cap. 26.
calls them soon ripe. And Columella lib. de arbor. cap. 21. writes that
this fruit must be taken before the rain come. Finally, the fig tree of all
other trees for the most part does easily loose his fruit, as the writers of
natural things do teach. So then the munitions of the Ninevites shall be like
unto these falling figs, namely, such as at the first shogging or shaking by
the enemies shall be thrown down and wasted. Wherefore in vain shall help
be sought for in them.

Verse. 13. Behold, thy people within thee are women: the gates of thy land
shall be opened unto thine enemies, and the fire shall devour thy bars.
A Staying in the same matter. For the Prophet takes away from the Ninevites
other grounds and foundations of their vain trust also, that they may
thoroughly resolve with themselves, that these judgments of GOD shall fall out
unto them because of their heinous sins rehearsed before. This verse
therefore also is an Hypophora, or the answering of an objection. The
couragiousnes and number of the Ninevites shall nothing prevail them.
And first of all he shows that the hope which the Ninevites had to defend
themselves by reason of the disposition and number of their people, is foolish
and false. For albeit the Ninevites before time did seem to be of a warlike
courage, whilst they bring so many nations of the world under their
subjection: yet at that time when they must grapple hand to hand with the
Chaldees, they shall be quailed, faint hearted, and fearful like women, yea
even in the midst of the city Nineveh, that is, when as they shall be
shut within the walls, and in their fortes and fortresses: yet at that time
those that otherwise are by nature somewhat fearful, do in some sort by
reason of their munitions pluck up a good heart, and take a good courage unto
them. When as therefore they are to fight for their country, yea when as these
Ninevites shall be in the midst of their own most strong and defenced city,
albeit they be never so many in number, yet shall they wax faint hearted, and
tremble like women, so that for fear they shall not be able in arms to defend
themselves.

Their holds and forts shall not help them.
Afterward the Prophet takes away from them another help, the which they hoped
they had in those munitions, towers, and holds, the which the Ninevites had
builded up in the borders of their country, to wit, in the territories of
Nineveh. For it is likely that they were provident to foresee the danger that
did grow by fortaine invasions, as being warriors, and well exercised and
acquainted with such matters, when as they knew by what means they themselves
had taken and won other lands vnwarded, and often times had invaded or broken
in upon their neighbors thinking on no such matter, under a color of selling
wares unto them, as Xenophon teaches in his books of the education or
bringing up of Cyrus. Therefore they had placed most strong holds at the
entrances of their country against all falling out of danger that might ensue,
the which fortes and aids the Prophet calls Gates and bars of the
territory of the Ninevites. So the most strait and strong entrances of the
Caspian sea are called the Caspian gates, by the which they might come into
Assyria out of Media, and from the North parts, the which gates God says
shall be opened and unlocked, to the end that Nineveh should not trust in
those her fortes a far off in her borders without the city. For of the
fortes and holds about the city he has spoken in the verse before.

Verse. 14. Draw thee waters for the siege: fortify thy strong holds: go
into the clay, and temper the mortar: make strong brick.
Sarcasmos is a figure whereby we do give a sharp and bitter taunt in great
disdain and reproach, as the Jews did unto Christ when as they bid him come
down from the cross, and as here the Prophet does in this place, signifiyng
that all their labor shall nothing avail them. What the figure Synecdoche is,
see Amos cap 5. ver. 21.
THe figure Sarcasmos, or a most bitter and biting taunt and mock, whereby the
Prophet laugheth to scorn the munitions of the Ninevites, and their diligence
and providence in defending themselves. For he grants that it shall come to
pass, that they shall seek out and prepare all things which are necessary for
the holding out of a long siege: nay the Prophet exhorts them that they will
do it very diligently: but he shows afterward that al these things shall be
vain and unprofitable unto them. And because that there is need of water both
for drink, also to seethe meat, and likewise for other uses unto men that are
besieged, therefore mention is made of them: as also of other munitions, the
which are made of brick or of stone. Therefore albeit the Ninevites prepare and
make ready all these things, yet shall they be destroyed notwithstanding.
Further, under these does the Prophet by the figure Synecdoche comprehend the
rest, which are necessary for men besieged. And by the self same word
(Waters) he teaches, that albeit they be most continent, and endure to live
most hardly all the whole time of the siege, and be content to drink nothing
but water: yet shall they notescape, or break up the siege. And by all these
things appears that nothing is safe unto us, nay in a word, that the
wisdom and diligence of men, be it never so provident and forecasting, shall
nothing avail them, whereas GOD does curse their enterprises Psalm. 127.

Verse. 15. There shall the fire devour thee: the Sword shall cut thee off: it
shall eat thee up like the locustes, though thou be multiplied like the
locustes, and multiplied like the grasshopper.
A reason of the former bitter taunting.
A Reason of the former bitter taunting, and of the laughing to scorn of this
so great diligence of the Ninevites, to wit, for that all these things shall be
unprofitable unto them: nay even in the midst of the plenty of these things
necessary for men besieged, God shall overthrow and destroy them. For (there)
shall God destroy them, that is to say, in that same very place, into the
which they shall carry all these things, namely, in the midst of Nineveh,
where they shall have all these things prepared, and in a readiness. For there
shall the fire devour them, to wit, that fire the which God himself shall
send upon them. By fire in this place may be understood either of diseases or
else wildfire.
And under the name of fire are understood, either diseases, wherewith the
besieged Nininites were taken in the mids of the City: or else fires indeed
thrown and cast by the enemies into the holds and City, wherewithal they
burned up both the holds themselves, and also those that did fight in them,
and in the towers and Castles for the defense of the City. That which is wont
to be done and come to pass in the besieging of towns and Cities. These
fires are called Greek fires, or wild fires, and artificial fires by our
men, the which fires will catch most sure hold, and whose use is very great
in the winning of Cities. So then the munitions and turrets built up, or
repaired by the Ninevites shall not keep them in saftie. There shall the sword
of their enemies consume them. For the enemies shall win those holds.
Finally, the number of those enemies that shall fight against the City of
Ninueh and take it, that they shall be like unto locusts and grasshoppers, the
which shall by and by devour and eat up all the leaves of the Trees, and
grass and herbs of the field, Joel. 1. So shall these Chaldean enemies
consume and destroy that same great multitude of Ninevites fighting for their
City. Albeit that the same City shall at that time have gotten unto her self
never so great a company, and shall have gathered together her Citizens, or
prepared and assembled foreign Soldiers, and shall have mustred a mighty
army.

Verse. 16. Thou have multiplied thy merchantes above the stars of heaven: the
locust spoyleth and flies away.
What the figure Hypophora is, see Amos. cap. 5. ver. 12.
HYpophora, or the answering of an objection, whereby the Prophet overthrows
and scorneth other grounds also of the vain confidence or trust of these
Ninevites. And these are, The multitude of the mercha^ts which then the
Ninevites had gotten into the City to defend them selves withal. Now whether
this be to be understood either of money, the which they had gotten together
every where at the hands of merchants, or whether it be to be understood of
other people: (for money is the sinews or strength of wars,) or of the hired
soldiers or nations the which the Ninevites had gotten to help them, it is
all one. All the aids sought out and gotten by them, be it money, or armies to
help them, or people that were in league with the^, shall perish, and stand
them in no stead: nay that which more is, like unto locusts or grasshoppers,
they shall spoil the Ninevites them selves, that is to say, the aids and
confederates by them procured, shall rifle them, and afterward shall fly and
run away from them. The Idumeans.
So the Idumeans at the siege of Jerusalem being hired by the Jews, when as
Vespasian fought against them, did spoil them, and rob them of their money,
and by and by gat them away and helped them nothing at all, as Iosepus writes
in his books of the wars of the Jews. See Apocal. 18. ver. 7.15. where the
multitude of Merchants that before were great friends unto it, does behold and
laugh at the kingdom of Antichrist and of Rome falling, and going to decay. For
nothing can profit nor do us good, if God be wrath and angry with us, and our
aids and helps, as appears Agg. 1, For as Paul says Romans 8, ver. 31. If God
be with us and on our side, who can be against us? And consequently if he be
against us, who can be with us, or do us any good?

Verse. 17. Or thy crowned.
Thy Princes are as the Grasshoppers, and thy Captains as the great
grasshoppers, which remain in the hedges in the cold day: but when the Sun
arises, they flee away, and their place is not known where they are.
The Lord takes away the hope the which they did put in the number and
strength of their Captains and princes.
ANother hypophora, or aunswering of an objection, the which takes from the
Niniuits the hope, which they had conceived in their mind of the strength and
number of their Captains, and Princes. For God would especiallie^ have all
things taken away, that the faithful might assuredly persuade themselves, that
nothing should let or hinder, but that the enemies of his Church and of his
name should most sharply, and most easelie be overthrown. And the like we
have to hope of the kingdom of the Turk, that in the end and at the last it
shall be destoyed by God, the which in all points in a manner may very notably
be compared unto the Assyrian kingdom, whether his blasphemy against God or
his power be considered. Thus then Captains and valiant Princes are great
helps and aids in every commonwealth and people, and arguments to make us
hope well. Wherefore the Ninevites when as they had before time stout and
valiant Captains of war and Princes, and that sundry and diverse, they hoped
well. But the Prophet answers that they all at that times shall be like unto
locustes that fly away, the which in the time of cold do come together in
great numbers in the hedgges: but when the Sun arises, they vanish away by
and by and are not to be seen, so that there appears not one of them:
neither can their place be known. Wherefore by this comparison is easily
understood, that the confidence or trust of the Ninevites in this behalf is
vain, and that they shall not be defended by their Princes.

The Prophet comprehends all the governors of the Assyrians both high and
low.
But now because there is not only one kind, or one degree, or a like and equal
dignity of those, which bear rule either at home or abroad, that is in
war, but some are inferior then othersome, some higher then other some. The
prophet seems to have comprehended all the kinds of those that bear rule,
whether they have anthoritie and office in any high degree at home or a broad,
or whether they be inferiors, or under officers. The higher degrees of
government seem to be contained under the name of Diadem, as is the King, the
Viceroy, the Lieuetenent of the province, the King his chief ambassador, or
general in the army, or Camp. The inferior Governors, are comprehended
under the name (Thaphsarim.) He therefore compares them unto the locustes the
which wander and run up and down in the fields, and these inferior ones
unto the grasshopper the which dwells in holes, and lies still hid in them,
whom the Frenchmencall Grillus. So the higher governors and rulers of the
Army of the Assyrians shall wander up and down, and fly away scattered,
because they shall not dare to show their heads unto the Chaldeans their
enemies. And the inferior Captains in the same Camp shall lie hid like
grasshoppers, and keep themselves within their holes. See what Sedechias and
the princes of the Jews did, when Jerusalem was taken Ierem. 39. ver. 4. 2.
King cap. 25. where you shall find that the King with the chief of his Nobles
and Captains, and warriors fled away through the breach of a wall in the
kings garden by night, but it nothing auailed them. For they were pursued after
by the Chaldees and taken, and a great many of them very vilely and shamefully
used and entreated.

Verse. 18. Thy shepherds do sleep, O King of Asshur: thy strong men lie
down: thy people is scattered upon the mountains, and no man gathers them.
What the figure Apostrophe is, see Amos cap 8. verse. 4.
AN Apostrophe, or turning of speech unto the King of Assyria himself, whom the
Prophet shows shall be forsaken of his own Captains and Princes, to the end
their fear and dastardlines in forsaking the rest of the common people may be
the better confirmed and known. For if there be any whom in the peril and
danger of war all men would have to be saved, this is only the King in
especial, who when as he is forsaken of the Captains of the Army, much more
shall the rest also be forsaken. Vain therefore is the hope which the
Ninevites shall conceive of these Captains. And hereby also is confirmed the
threatening of the destruction of this Nineveh: nay, of the overthrow of the
whole kingdom of Assyria, for that they which have the rule and authority to
defend it, shall not execute their office and charge: they shall then sleep,
when it behooved them most especially to be awake. Finally, they shall lie
either in their beds, or else drowned in their delights and pleasures, when as
they were to think upon the defending of the kingdom. Sardanapalus.
This do the historians report of Sardanapalus, whom they make the last king
of the Assyrians, namely that he was at that time in the midst of his banquets,
and flocks of his harlots, overtaken and drunken with wine, when as Nineveh
was besieged of the enemies. Read Dan. 5. ver. 30. what fell out unto
Balthafar King of the Babylonians, Two parts of this verse.
whose like negligence, sluggishnes, and carelesnes is there described.

1. The negligence of the governors.
Further, this verse has two parts. The first contains the negligence of the
Rulers, Presidents, and great men of the kingdom of Assyria. 2. The fear and
flying of the people.
The second shows the fear and fleeing away of the whole people into the
mountains. The overmuch sluggish and shameful negligence of the governors of
the kingdom appears in this, That they are said that they shall at that time
sleep, They shall fly unto the mountains.
The people shall fly into the mountains, the which are both near unto the
city it self, and also unto the borders of the kingdom. These mountains
which he notes are the Caspian mountains, into the which the Assyrians being
overcome did fly, and lie hid, as before ver. 11. Again, They shall fly in
great abundance.
This people shall be scattered or abound, the which shall flee, and the which
is thy people, that is, the which is to be defended by you, and by thee being
King, and by whom thou did hope that thou thy self should have been
defended. They shall not be then a small company, but many, who if they were
gathered together, would make a good army, and would hold some part of the
Empire: or at least wise save themselves and the King Whereby the negligence of
these princes appears to be the greater, who saved not so many subjects that
remained and were left: or did not muster them, and gather them together to
fight, Darius.
as Darius the last king of the Persians did, who thrice gathered together the
remnants of his army, and fought against Alexander the great. No man gathers
them together.
Thirdly, there is added, There is no man which gathers together these
remnants, albeit that many, and a great number of them be left alive, and a
very great many have escaped the slaughter. So then all things at that time
shall be as it were desperate, and as it were betrayed by their princes, so that
thereby may appear, that the hope is vain which is put in them. Let us then
follow the counsel of the Psalmist, who Psalm. 146 ver. 3.4.5. teaches us,
saying: Put not your trust in princes, nor in the son of man, for there is no
help in him. His breath departs, and he returns to his earth: then his
thoughts perish. Blessed is he that has the God of Iaacob for his help, whose
hope is in the Lord his God.

Verse. 19. There is no healing of thy wound: thy plague is grievous: all that
hear the brute of thee, shall clap their hands over thee: for upon whom has
not thy malice passed continually?
THe figure Epiphonema, Epiphonema, what this figure is, see Jonas ca 2. ver. 9.
or acclamation, whereby the Prophet does both confirm all the former
threatenings against the Assyrians, and proves the Assyrians to be miserable,
and describes the miserable condition of the Assyrians, and finally repeateth
the cause of their so great miseries. Three parts of this verse.
And therefore this verse has three parts, besides the phrase or kind of
speaking it self, the which is most vehement and full of force and efficacy,
to terrify or fray the Assyrians, and to comfort the faithful as touching the
punishment of the wicked which was to ensue. 1. That these threatenings of God
shall ass^redly come to pass.
And first of all he teaches, that these threatenings of God shall be ratified
or certain, whereas it is said: There is no healing, or gathering together of
thy wound, and breach, that is to say, there is none which can bind up those
thy wounds, and turn the wrath of God away from thee: there is no comforter
unto thee in thy miseries, as before verse. 7. Finally, there is no remedy left
for thee, or set forth, wherewithal thou may pacify and comfort thy self,
and ease thy misery and distressed estate. And even in this very point their
case seems now to be most miserable. 2. Their case shall be most miserable and
h^rd to bear.
Yet is the same moreover hereby described to be most pitiful because this
plague, the which cannot now be assuaged or healed, is said furthermore to be
full of pain, or grievous. It shall therefore be very hard to be borne, and
continually shooting and pricking, as are such wounds and sores as are to be
lanced or cut, the which are full of matter and corruption, and do every foot
stir up pain and griefs. Lastly, None shall pity them but rather laugh at
their troubles.
but rather whosoever shall hear of the same and report of them thus wasted,
captives, slain and murdered, shall clap their hands, and mock them, and
shall say, that these things have fallen out unto them worthily. For this
clapping of hands is also a sign of joy and gladness, the which all men shall
conceive, which shall hear of her overthrow. Doubtless this is the highest
degree of miscrie, namely, in the midst of afflictions to have none that will
be grieved and sorry with thee, to comfort thee, to take part of thy burden
upon himself, but to behold all men triumphing over thee, heaping afflictions
unto thee that art afflicted, and rejoicing moreover of thy misery. So do the
godly complain Psalm 88. ver. 18. Thou have put away from me my lovers and
friends, and mine acquaintance hid themselves. So was Christ afflicted or
punished for us and our sins, that he could find none to comfort him, no not
then when he did hang upon the cross, but had al men his enemies, and mocking,
and reuiling him, Matthew. 27. ver. 39.40.41.42.43.44. where we find that those
that passed by, that the Priests, the Scribes, the Elders, the Pharisees, the
thieves that suffered with him, did mock, scorn, and revile him. Woe
therefore be unto our sins: for our affliction is made most light and easy,
when as we have those that will sorrow and mourn with us. And this is the part
and duty of a Christian, in the sorrow and heaviness of others, accordingly as
Paul wills Romans 12. ver. 15. saying, Rejoice with them that rejoice, and
weep with them that weep. This comfort did I my self find at Orthesium the
five and twentieth day of the month of December in the year of the last time
1583. at the which very day and time I being a stranger, Comfort that this
author a stranger found in a strange country.
and in a foreign country lost my most well beloved little daughter named
Anne. Her being but only four years old God called out of this earth into
heaven, unto whom even then believing in Christ, and religiously according unto
the capacity of those years calling upon God, he will give a crown of
immortality, as unto all those also which are adopted or chosen through
Christ, as Paul speaks 2. Tim. 4. ver. 8. For henceforth (says Paul) is laid
up for me the crown of righteousness, which the Lord the righteous judge shall
give me at that day: and not to me only, but unto all them also that love his
appearing. But in that my heaviness there came unto me so many godly men of
Orthesium to comfort me, that they did meruailously assuage and lessen the same
unto me.

Now this Orthesium of Bearne (called sometime Bearne, Orthesium
as it is in the Chronicle of Antoninus) is a famous town or city, where at
the first there was a School erected or founded by Ioane the Queen of Navarre
of blessed memory. A School scu^ded there by the Queen of Navarre, and
afterward by her son Henry the second made an University. The cause of this
so heavy judgment of God against the Assyrians.
Afterward the same School the self same year in which I wrote these things,
was advanced unto the dignity of an University by Henry the second the most
courteous and godly, and indeed Christian King of Navarre, the son of the
said Ioane.

Furthermore, the cause of so great a judgment of God against the Assyrians is
repeated, namely, their cruelty, covetousness and fiercenes against all men,
and people, and countries of the world. Therefore there was no corner of the
earth into the which the cruelnes of these lions and thieves had not ranged.
Wherefore all men do worthily rejoice at the ruin and fall of the Assyrians.
For in the end these cruel princes, kings, and peoples must perish and be
destroyed, as it is Psalm. 9. ver. 17. The wicked shall turn into hell, and all
nations that forget God. The which both the Empire of the Turk, and also the
faction or crew of Antichrist shall feel and find in the end to be most true.
Amen.

FINIS.
The Commentary of Lambertus Danaeus upon the Prophet Joel.
CAP. 1.
Verse. 1. The word of the Lord, that came to Joel the son of Pethuel.
Diverse opinions of the time, wherein Joel prophesied.
THe opinion of men is diverse, at what time Joel prophesied. Some think that he
lived under Ozias, or Azarias King of the Jews, and under Jeroboam the second
of that name, King of the Israelites. The Jews hold that he prophesied under
Manasses: I for my part, without the prejudice of others, will set down my
opinion also as it were my shot toward this reckoning. For after that I have
accounted all things, and diligently considered the calamities or punishments,
the which are threatened by this Prophet, I do think that he lived under Ammon
King of the Jews: but prophesied under Josias a little before that same most
sore and grievous famine (the which was foretold also by Jeremiah cap. 14.) fell
out in Judea, unto whom he prophesies, and there raged, and was very great and
extreme. A general rule to be observed for the finding out of the time of the
prophesying of some Prophets.
For this I set down for a general rule, that those Prophets, which make no
mention at al of the kingdom of Israel (as is this our Prophet) lived and
prophesied after that kingdom was utterly destroyed and overthrown. Wherefore
in my judgment this prophecy cannot be referred unto those first or former
times, the which went before the destruction of the kingdom of Israel. So then
Joel lived, or at least wise prophesied after Jonas, Amos, Isias, Oseas, in the
time of Jeremy, and under King Josias.

The contents of this Prophecy.
This prophecy contains the foretelling and rehearsing of two punishments,
the which self same are to be found also in Jeremy, namely of a great famine in
this chapter, and the fearful coming of the Babylonia^s, in the chapters
following, in respect of both which plagues the Prophet exhorts and stirs
up the Jews unto a public and solemn repentance, the which also be
describes: and it is very likely that it was used and holden among the people
under the godly king Josias. Wherefore this book, as the writings of the other
Prophets, contains both the threatenings of God, because of the sins of the
people, and also his free promises in Christ toward his elect. A peculiar and
especial point to be noted in this Prophet.
And this is in our prophet a peculiar and especial point, that look what
things and discomodities or adversities and falling out of matters, profane
or heathen and wicked men do refer unto either fortune, or unto the course of
nature, or unto the moving of the planets, or unto the extraordinary means of
the seasons of the year, and unto the disposition of the heavens and of the
stars, we are taught to refer the same unto the most orderly and just
providence of God, and out of them to mark both his anger, and also his good
will toward us.

But this verse has two things to be noted. 2 Parts of this verse.
The one a confirmation of his whole prophecy and discourse to ensue, taken
from God the author of the same. For this is the word not of man but of God
himself, 1 A confirmation of this prophecy.
although it were delivered and uttered by man. The other thing is the name and
stock of this Prophet, whose service and ministry God uses, the which his
stock was the^ famous and known, but now is somewhat obscure or dark unto us,
because of the antiquity and oldnes of things. 2 The name and stock of the
prophet.
This prophet then is Joel, and that not every Joel (for it may be that at the
same time there were many famous and known men of that name) but he which was
the son of Pethuel, and so consequently most known among others of the same
name. For I think the name of the Father added here in this place, and
elsewhere by the Prophets, to show that they (for as much as they were of an
honest and known family or house) were void of all suspicion, as if after the
example of the false Prophets, they did preach for covetousness and gain: or
did any thing of flattery and for vaineglory sake: or took upon them to deal
publicly: but God in such sort moving and commanding them.

Ver. 2. Here ye this O Elders, and hearken ye all inhabitants of the land,
whether such a thing has bin in your days, or yet in the days of your
fathers.
The proposition by way of amplification. Insect a, are a kind of small vermin
divided in the body between the head and the tail having no flesh, blood,
sinnues, etc. as are flies, gnats, bees, antes, waspes, hornets, and such like.
THe Proposition or priucipall point by way of amplification. And this
amplification was needful because of mockers and scorners of God. For when as
the Prophet was to speak of locusts, palmer worms, grasshoppers and
caterpillars (which are filly creatures, and of the kind which they call
insecta) and of their power against men, and the kingdom of Judah, he should
by and by move laughter unto these scoffers, in that he should thunder and so
greatly, go about to fray men so exceedingly with so small and light matters. He
does therefore by the effects describe the matter it self, both as in part it
was every where felt already, and was more to be perceived yet hereafter, and
shows that it is a most grievous and fearful judgment of God, the which
they otherwise peradventure would have contemned or despised. So Exodus it
appears that God by locusts overcame the Egyptians. And this plague among the
rest is reckoned up Psalm. 105. ver. 34 in these words, He spoke and the
grasshoppers came, and caterpillars innumerable. So 1. Kinng 8. ver. 37 such
kind of creatures and beasts are reckoned up among the most bitter scourges and
whippes of God. And elsewhere they are called the great army or host of God. For
nothing is light or weak the which God armeth against us.

1 Who are stirred up to hear.
This verse has two things to be noted. For we must mark both whom he stirs
up to hear, and why he stirs them up. And first of all he stirs up
those, who among that people are Elders in age, 2 Why they are stirred up.
and might have noted and marked both more and greater judgments of God by
reason of the length of their years. Secondly, all the rest of the inhabitants
of the land of Judah, the memory or remembrance of those which were alive, or
else in the times of their elders. For where as it is said of the grasshoppers
which God in his anger sent upon Pharao and his land, that they were such, as
neither their fathers, nor their fathers fathers had ever seen upon the earth
unto that day, that makes nothing against this which is here spoken. For there
he speaks not of the multitude of those kind of creatures but of the
greatness of them, that there should never after be the like of them, that is,
so big, and great in the quantity of their bodies, as those then in Egypt
seemed and were. Exodus 10. ver. 6.14.

Ver. 3. Tell you your children of it, and let your children show to their
children, and their children to an other generation.
A Confirmation of the greatness of the danger, and of the extraordinary matter
which was to come. A confirmation of the greatness of the danger.
And it is taken from the commandment of God, who will have it told unto
posterity unto the third and fourth generation for the praise and glory of his
power and Justice toward men, and for the fearing of his church hereafter,
that they should not in such sort offend God, as they had offended him, who
were punished after these so fearful ways and manners. For God will have the
notable and extraordinary testimonies or witnesses, especially both of his
Justice, and also of his mercy to be remembered and kept among men. And
therefore it is said Psalm. 22. ver. 31. They shall come and shall declare his
righteousness unto a people that shall be borne, because he has done it. And
Psalm. 135. ver. 13. Thy name, O Lord, endures for ever: O Lord thy remembrance
is from generation to generation. And yet are not the daily and ordinary
examples of them both, that is, of his justice and also of his mercy therefore
of us to be forgotten, or neglected and not cared for, or to be passed over
with blind eyes.

Verse. 4. That which is left of the palmer worm, has the grasshopper eaten,
and the residue of the grasshopper has the canker worm eaten, and the residue
of the canker worm has the caterpiller eaten.
A Making plain of that which was set down before. For now in bare and simple
speech he lays forth the matter it self, the which is to be heard, and not
any more in figurative speaking, as he did in the former verses. He says
therefore, See before ver. 2.
that in the just judgment of GOD there was a most grievous famine brought
into all the land of Judah by these four kinds of creatures called Insecta,
or divided, the which in this place are recited, namely, the Palmer worm, the
Grasshopper, or Locust, the Canker worm, or the Melolontha (which is also of
the greater sort of Locusts) and the caterpiller. All these sorts and kinds
of Insecta do croppe the fields, eat the grass, and devour the corn, hurt
the harvest, and the grain, waste the fruits, and all leaves of trees.
Whereupon Plinius lib. 17. Nature. Histor. cap. 28. and other writers of
natural things do report that medicines and remedies have been invented
against these beasts, and wasters, and spoylers of corn and trees. Yea
moreover, the same Plinius lib. 11. cap. 29. does write, being otherwise a
profane or heathen man, that the multitude and great numbers of these insecta,
and especially locusts, is a sign of the anger and wrath of God: but he wrote
these things truly, being compelled thereunto through the force of the truth,
and general confession of all men.

Now to declare and set down how these are bred, and severed one from another,
appertains unto those that write of natural matters: but concerning these
here spoken of, I do judge that they were made at that time by God after an
extraordinary manner, both in respect of the number of them, and also of this
their such power and so great devouring and eating up of things. Neither was
this famine caused and brought forth in four diverse and continual years
(namely, in the first year by the palmer worm, in the second year by the
locust, and so forth) but I think that all these were together, and came in
one and the same year, and caused the famine. And first, the palmer worm
hurt the corn and the trees: then the locust or grasshopper: thirdly came the
canker worm, and fourthly the caterpiller. For all these Insecta do use to
breed in one and the same year, partly by too much showers, and partly by the
over great heat of the sun. And there are diverse diseases of trees and
fruits as it were natural: and besides these, others extraordinary, as blasting
with cold, blasting with heat and drought, and wasting or spoiling by such
vermin as these, as Plinius teaches lib. 17. cap. 24.25. And which things
ought to call us back unto the feeling of our sins, when as we are punished
with these discommodities.

Verse. 5. Awake ye drunkards, and weep, and howl all ye drinkers of wine,
because of the new wine: for it shall be pulled from your mouth.
An amplification of the anger of God. What the figure Prosopopoeia is, see
Oseas cap. 6. v. 1.
AN amplification of this anger of GOD, and of this famine, by the particular
rehersall and reckoning up of those things which these creatures did hurt. And
first of all here is in this place rehearsed and recited wine, the which that
year was utterly lost: but the description of this punishment or plague is in
such sort set forth, that by a Prosopopoeia unto the drunkards or wine
bibbers, this misery is augmented or increased.

This verse has two things to be noted. The first is, this prosopopoeia. The
second, Two parts of this verse.
the making more plain of the thing that is lost. 1 The Prosopopoeia.
The Prosopopoeia, or feyning of persons is made both to rouse up the
drunkards, that is, those that do ouerloade themselves with wine: and
generally also unto all persons, which are delighted or in love with wine more
then they ought to be, 2. The laying open of the thing lost
albeit they become not drunken therewithal. For both these are stirred up
because of the loss of the wine the which was hoped to have been gathered,

barrenness then of the vines is doubtless a most just punishment of
drunkenness, and of the abuse of wine.

Verse. 6. Yea a nation comes upon my land, mighty, and without number, whose
teeth are like the teeth of alyon, and he has the jaws of a great lion.
A reason why this scarcity should be.
THe yielding of a reason. For he shows by what means this either has in
part already come to pass (if we will have Jonas to have prophesied the
famine being now already begun) because that it continued many years: or else
why it should come to pass, if we be of opinion that he foretold unto them a
famine the which was immediately to ensue. Lest therefore this threatening might
seem vain unto them, especially by reason of the multitude of the vines,
wherewith all Judea did abound, he shows how great the number of these
forenamed beasts wasting the vines shall be, and how great plenty there shall
be of them, What the figure Metaphora is, see Am^s cap. 4. ver. 12.
and that by a Metaphor taken from some mighty people or army of men gathered
together. The multitude therefore of these creatures, albeit in themselves they
be never so small, shall be so great, that they may in number match a nation,
yea and that a mighty nation, whose teeth are like the teeth of a lion, and
consequently wost strong, and devouring and eating up all things. For a Lion is
a beast most ravenous, and also most strong, who with his teeth breaks and
teareth in^peeces the bones that are even most hard. And therefore the good
king Hezechiah in the feeling of his frail flesh, thinking his visitation
wherewith GOD in hs sickness did for the time exercise him, to be very hard and
extreme compares it unto a Lion breaking his bones, Isai cap. 38. ver. 13.
saying: I reckoned to the morning, but he brake all my bones, like a lion: from
day to night will thou make an end of me.

Verse. 7. He makes my vine waste, and pilleth off the bark of my fig tree:
he makes it bare, and casts it down: the branches thereof are made white.
A second hurt by the forenamed creatures.
A Second kind of harm and loss caused by these beasts, namely, the utter
eating up of the vines themselves, that there should be no hope left of
gathering in of wines against the years to come. A third kind, the spoiling
of the fig trees, The third hurt
the breeding of worms in them, the pilling of the bark, and blasting of
them. The which diseases and faults are wont especially to be in fig trees
and figs. For the fig is of that sort of trees the which easily loses her
fruits: and yet besides it has these peculiar diseases Plinius lib. 17. Not.
hist. cap. 24. Of worms that are in figs, some do breed of them, others
the worm Cerastes ingendreth, yet they all do turn into the Cerastes. Again,
it is proper unto blasting, when as graffed and young plants die, especially
figs and vines. Finally, the same Plinius says: There are for the same cause
(when as showers or heat do abound, or are altogether wanting) Cankers
breeding, an harmefull creature, and they eat up the leaves, and some the
flowers, and leave the tree which they have eaten in an ill favored sight to
behold and look upon. Thus much has he, which I judged not unfit for the
laying open of the meaning of this place: albeit, as I have said, I do easily
grant that in this multitude there was some thing extraordinary.

Verse. 8. Mourn like a virgin girded with sackcloth for the husband of her
youth.
THe figure Epiphonema, Epiphonema, what this figure is, see Jonas. ca 2. ver.
9.
or acclamation, wherewith the whole land of Judea the which was to be
scourged with this rod of GOD, is moved by the Prophet unto most grievous
mourning: and so consequently unto an earnest feeling of the judgments of God,
and unto an earnest repentance of their former life. But here are two things to
be noted, whereby no doubt the greatness of the sorrow, and of this judgment of
God is declared. Two parts of this verse.
The first is, the kind of mourning, 1. The kind of mourning.
It is a crying out, and not only a simple lamenting or mourning, whereunto
the prophet exhorts men. Secondly, a similitude taken from a wife lately
married, but being now bereft of her husband. 2. A similitude.
For this sorrow is most grievous. So are the Jews also willed to mourn, that
is mos^ grievously, because of the judgment of God, which did hang over their
heads. The like similitudes are used in other places of the scripture, and made
more plain to express the greatness of heaviness and sorrow. As Psalm. 35. verse.
14. of one that mourns for his mother: I humbled my self mourning as one
that bewayleth his mother. So David 2. Sam. cap. 1. verse. 26. in most pitiful
manner bewaileth the death of Jonathan, saying, Woe is me for thee, my brother
Jonathan: very kind have thou been unto me: thy love to me was wonderful,
passing the love of women: how are the mighty overthrown, and the weapons of
war destroyed?

Verse. 9. The meat offering and the drink offering is cut off from the house
of the Lord: the Priests the Lords Ministers mourn.
An amplification of the former misery, taken from a most lamentable effect.
AN amplification of the former misery taken from a most lamentable effect. For
this scarcenes and penury or want of things shall reach not only unto the
life of men, but also unto the worship of God, and unto his Temple. For by this
means the offerings and sacrifices commanded by God to be offered, shall cease
to be made in the Temple, because that both corn, or flower, and oil, and
wine, and other such things, whereof offerings and sacrifices were wont in the
service of GOD to be made, shall fail, of the which read Leuit. 2. and 7. and
every where in the book of Numbers, as cap. 6.18.25. Wherefore this sorrow
shall come not only unto private persons, but also unto the Priest themselves,
and the ministers of the Lord. For they shall not be able to keep and
exercise the outward service of God, and to fulfill and discharge that their
holy ministry because of the want of things necessary and belonging
thereunto. The which no doubt was a most rare thing to come to pass, in that
people especially, and in so great a blessing or fruitfulnes of that land, by
how much the greater and more fearful this judgment of God appears to
have been, albeit the Lord brought it upon them by these silly creatures only:
It has therefore a great efficacy or force to set the weight of this anger of
God before their eyes, where the Prophet says: The meat offering, and the drink
offering, that is, the whole outward worship and service of God, and not only
some one part thereof cease. What the figure Synecdoche is, see Amos cap 5.
ver. 21.
For so I understand it by the figure Synecdoche, a part being put for the
whole. For albeit the sacrifices or beasts remained, yet could not they be
offered without their meat offering, and their drink offering. Further, whereas
he adds: The Priests the Ministers of the Lord Jehovah, that is, whom the
Lord has appointed Stewards unto his own self, and not unto men, they also
shall feel this judgment of God in the worship and service of God.

Verse. 10. The field is wasted: the land mourns: for the corn is destroyed:
the new wine is dried up, and the oil is decayed.
A reason of the former verse and sentence, why the meat offerings and drink
offerings should cease.
THis is the rendering of a reason, and the same most plain, of the former verse
and sentence, to wit, why the meat offerings and drink offerings shall cease to
be made in the temple of God: namely, because all those things shall fail,
out of the which both those meat offerings, and also those drink offerings were
to be offered by the commandment of God. For the meat offerings were commanded
to be made of sine meal, that is, of the most pure and clean flower of corn:
and the drink offerings of oil and wine. But both all the corn was withered
away (for the fields were spoiled both with over much wet, and also over much
parching of the Sun, and such other extraordinary ways) and also the wine
and the oil. In the which third, The fourth commodity, namely oil, hurt by
the forenamed creatures.
to wit, oil, is the fourth kind of things contained, wherein evidently
appeared the harm caused by these beasts called Insecta, to wit, Grasshoppers,
Locusts, Caterpillars, and the like. So then the Caterpillars, and those other
silly creatures had eaten up the corn, or the fields: the wine, or the vines:
the figs and the olives. Whereupon is added to move affection, and to stir
up men be they never so dull and senseles, The land it self mourns, that is,
the soil it self, and dead or senseles element of the earth, because of this
so manifest anger and fearful punishment of God. Wherefore much more ought men
themselves, for whose sins these things come to pass, to mourn, to be
moved, and touched.

Verse. 11. Be ye ashamed, O husbandmen: howl, O ye vinedressers for the
wheat, and for the barley, because the harvest of the field it perished.
What the figure Prosopopoeia is, see Oseas cap 6. ver. 1.
THe application or exhortation by a Prosopopoeia, and comparison unto men
themselves endued with reason, and whom these evils do touch more nearly. The
which is not rashly or unadvisedly done by the Prophet: but upon just causes,
as also whereas he seems afterward to repeat the self same thing in other
words, or rather often to inculcate or beat it into their heads, Causes why
Joel uses often to repeat one thing.
the which he had said before of the Vine, the fig tree, the drink offering,
the meat offering, as hereafter ver. 12.13. First, for that we are so dull by
nature, 1 Because of their dulnes.
that we hard and scarce give any heed unto the judgments of God be they
never so fearful. Secondly, for that the things which are here by Joel reckoned
up for manifest and extraordinary testimonies or witnesses of the wrath of God,
2. Because men refer his judgments unto natural causes.
men are wont to refer the same unto natural causes, and not unto the
threatenings of God. Thirdly, for that such was the love of Joel toward this
people (which was the people of God, and the Church) he could not sufficiently
witness his care for them, and content himself, until he might see them to
be touched with an earnest feeling of the judgments of God, and so
consequently to repent. 3. That they might be touched with an earnest feeling
of the judgments of God. Two parts of this verse.
These are the causes why he was not contented to have said once, That the
fields were wasted, etc. but he repeateth the self same things with great
vehemency, earnestnes, and amplifying of the matter to fear the hypocrites
and to call back the godly from their wickedness. And the Prosopopoeia is here
evident, with the which men are wont, and may also greatly be pressed and
provoked. For they are roused up, and spoken unto as it were by name. The
comparison is gathered hereby: If the earth it self mourn because of her
barrennes, 1. A Prosopopoeia.
much more ought you to mourn, who are both men, that is, 2. A comparison.
endued with reason: and Husbandmen and Vinedressers, whose hope, labor,
feeds, travail, victual and meat is utterly perished. Therefore this
admonition, and exhortation appertains unto husbandmen, and vinedressers, and
other laborers about corn and fruits. For both the wheat and also the
barley is perished: in the which latter the fifth kind of hurt and harm is
expressed, to wit, in the loss of their barley being eaten up by those little
vermin.

Verse. 12. The Vine is dried up, and the fig tree is decayed: the pomegranate
tree, and the palm tree, and the apple tree, even all the trees of the field
are withered: surely the joy is withered away from the sons of men.
Other kinds of things, which shall be eaten up by these small beasts.
OTher kinds of things are reckoned up, in the which there should be hurt and
harm sustained by means of these small creatures, and famine, and great
scarcity brought in, to the end they should understand that this no doubt is
an extraordinary judgment of God, and the same also most hard, when as they
are utterly void of al things of al kind of meat, of all sorts of fruits.
Wherefore in this place besides the former kinds there are reckoned up three
other, The Pomegranate tree, or the Pomegranate, the Palm tree, and the common
apple tree. Finally, all trees generally, with the fruit whereof men are
delighted, and the which they use to eat: al things which by God are given
unto men for pleasures sake. These things therefore are showed by the Prophet
either to have withered, and to have been unfruitful, and spoiled of their
fruit, or that they shall so be, that the greatness of this famine may be
understood. See Iere. 14. for the like description of a most grievous famine.
Moreover, the vine and the fig tree are here again repeated, because that
these kinds of plants, like as the Pomegranate, the common apple, the palm
tree, are trees given unto men for pleasure and joy: al which the Prophet would
in this place comprehend at once and together. Whereupon we gather by this
place, and by the verses before, as 7.9. and hereafter 16. that concerning the
things which God in this world has given unto man to use, that the same do
appertain, or in old time did appertain partly unto the worship of God, of
which sort are those whereof drink offerings and meat offerings were made:
partly unto the necessary food of men, without the which this life cannot be
sustained at all, as are corn and grain: and partly unto the pleasure and joy
of men: as wine, and oil, and figs, Psalm. 23. And Psalm. 104. ver. 15. the
Prophet acknowledges the bounteousnes of God, who bestows upon men not only
things necessary, but also such as serve for joy and pleasure, as wine that
makes glad the heart of man, and oil to make the face to shine: so over
liberal forsooth is God toward men, and so exceeding frank and bounteous:
for all which thanks are of us to be given and rendered unto God, who has
created them, as all other meats to be (as Paul teaches 1. Tim. 4. ver. 3.)
received with giving thanks of them which believe, and know the truth.

Verse. 13. Gird your selves, and lament, ye priests: howl ye ministers of the
altar: come and lie all night in sackcloth, ye ministers of my God: for the
meat offering, and the drink offering is taken away from the house of your God.
A putting the^ in mind of their duty.
AN admonition or putting of them in mind of their duty. That which was
altogether needful to be added. For this is as it were the medicine of the
wound and sore laid upon them, and a most excellent remedy for the disease
specified before. And it is an earnest conversion or turning unto God. The
which is here described or set forth by outward signs: and unto the which the
Prophet exhorts all sorts of men (unto whom those judgments are foretold).
And first of all the Priests themselves, then old men, afterward the rest of
the inhabitants of that country. The Priests first, The Priests.
because that in regard of their office they ought to shine forth as lights
unto others, unto this same earnest repentance of mind, both privately, and also
publicly, as who namely are the ministers of God peculiarly chosen of God
himself to move and stir up the rest in doing their duty toward God.
Secondly, because God peculiarly did punish them also whilst he took away
those his sacrifices from them, and whilst the meat offerings and drink
offerings ceased to be offered by them, the which were wont to be done in the
Temple of God.

The repentance whereunto the Prophet exhorts, is public, and described by
the outward signs thereof.
Further, this repentance, as I have said, and turning unto God, is described by
the outward signs thereof, the which men that are in deed and truly penitent
or sorry, are wont to use publicly and after a solemn manner: and are here
severally expressed. Wherefore this is a public and solemn repentance, and
not only private: it is extraordinary, not ordinary. In it therefore first
the priests themselves must repent, as the guides and ringleaders unto the
rest. Their repentance is described, namely, The outward signs of the
repentance of the Priests.
that they first of al make have and speed to show unto others the signs and
tokens of a mind truly penitent or repenting. Let them therefore lament, and
let them not only lament, but also let them howl at the earnest feeling of
their sin. Let them come into the Temple of GOD, where they do this, and
that openly, and the whole congregation seeing the^, and being witness of the
same. Let them lie in the Temple all night, and that in sackcloth, hair,
ashes, and tears, the which in times past were outward signs of public
repentance in the church. Moreover, when he adds, (The ministers of my God)
the Prophet does both note their peculiar office: and also witness his good
will toward them, as those namely whom he loves, as peculiarly the servants of
God, yea and that his God.

Verse. 14. Sanctify you a fast: call a solemn assembly: gather the Elders,
and all the inhabitants of the land into the house of the Lord your God, and
cry unto the Lord.
The duty of the Priests concerning the Church in this matter of public
repentance.
THe duty of the Priests so far forth as it concerns themselves, has been
showed before: now is declared what their duty is concerning the residue of
the Church, and the other parts and tokens that remain of publik and
extraordinary repentance are described. Now this was the duty of the Priests
concerning others, to exhort and stir them up unto repentance, and therefore
that they should sa^ctifie a fast, that is, that they should pronounce some day
to be holy, and appointed unto God extraordinarily, in the which the people
should fast extraordinarily and publicly, and in the same day they should
ordeine and command those things to be observed or kept, the which the Jews
were commanded by God to keep on the Holy-daye, that is, on the Sabbath day.
By this and the like places appears that the appoynting of a fast
appertains not only unto the godly magistrate, no though it be the chief
magistrate: but also unto the pastors of the Church: for they ought to be
called unto council in this matter, because it is an ecclesiastical or Church
matter, and the which ought to be established and appointed according unto the
word of God. Wherefore those magistrates take too much upon them, who
themselves of their own authority do appoint publik fasts without the
knowledge of their pastors, nay do not so much as call them and ask their
advise at all.

Secondly, it is the office of the pastors of the Church to call the
congregation extraordinarily called. First to gather to gather the elders or
old men, afterward the rest into the temple or holy place, and not into the
Tavern, or Ale house: that the old men may be an example of godliness unto
others, and that the rest may follow them. The company of the Church being
called and gathered together, To cry unto God for themselves, and for the rest
of the people, is the duty of the same Ministers of God, or Pastors of the
Church, as it here appears.

Verse. 15. Alas for the day for the day of the Lord is at hand, and it
comes as a destruction from the almighty. Epiphonema. See what this figure
is, Jonas cap. 2 ver. 9 Two parts of this verse.

THe figure Epiphonema or acclamation, whereby Joel shows the necessity of
proclayming this public and extraordinary repentance by the greatness of the
judgment of God that hunge over their heads. 1. The Phraise.
Wherefore this verse has two things to be noted. The one is the Phrase or
manner of speaking full of moving affection, 2 The causes of this repentance,
which are twain.
and of the good will of the Prophet toward the Church of God, the which he
would have to be rouzed from their sins. The second, is the causes the which
are alleged of his repenpentance. And these are two, both of them painteth
forth the greatness of the former threatenings. It is the day of the Lord.
The first of these causes is, for that this day of threatenings and
punishment, is the day of God, and consequently to be feared, and horrible, or
to be trembled at. For this God is the true Jehovah, and almighty, whom
nothing can withstand, or prevail against. Wherefore this punishment is the
more to be feared, because it is from almighty God. For as it is Hebr. 10.
ver. 31, It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God. And
as Peter writes 1. Epistle cap. 4. ver. 17. If judgment begin at the house of
God, what shall be the end of them, which obey not tho Gospel of God? The
second cause or reason is, 2. The same day is near at hand.
because the same day is near and even by and by at hand, and hanging over
the head of the Church. We must therefore presently, and setting aside all
delays stop this anger and fire of God with the waters of repentance, and
tears. By this place appears, that at that time this judgment of God was
not yet fully executed, but that there was a greater famine foretold by Ioell,
the which was yet now behind.

Verse. 16. Is not the meat cut off before our eyes? and joy and gladness from
the house of our God?
A confirmation of the said judgments of God by effects of two sorts.
A Confirmation of the greatness of the said Judgment of God by those effects,
the which they did even then see with their eyes and, feel, and yet
notwithstanding they were to feel greater. And thee effects were of two
sorts, to wit, they concern both men, and also God himself. For to this
point is reduced and brought whatsoever Ioell has threatened before. 1.
Concerning men.
As concerning men, the judgments of God touch them most grievously, because
all their food was then already cut off from them. 2. Concerning God.
They concern GOD, because that all those holy feastings, the which were wont
to be made at their sacrifices of thanks giving, were taken away from out of
the Temple of their God. For now the things were wanting wherewith all they
were to be made, namely fine flower, wine, wherewith they did offer oil, and
such other things necessary in these holy feasts by the commandment of God.
But to the end that he may the more sharply move and touch them, he says, are
not these things cut off from the house of our God? God says he, is so angry
with us, because of our sins, that he has taken away from us even those
things, the which he commanded by us to be offered unto him of the fruits,
that we should rejoice with him. The which no doubt is a great sharpness or
bitterness of punishment.

Verse. 17 The seed is rotten under their clods: the garners are destroyed: the
barnes are broken down, for the corn is withered.
THis 17. verse may easily be understood and expounded by the former which have
been opened already in this Chapter.

Ver. 18 How did the beasts mourn? the herds of the Cattle pine away,
because they have no pasture, and the flocks are destroyed.
An amplifiation of the severity or sharpe^ies of God his judgment against
them. What the figure Synecdoche is, see Amos cap. 5. v. 2.
AN amplification of this sharpenes of the judgment of God against them, for
that not only they which have sinned, do bear and feel the same: but also
all sorts and kinds of their Cattle, the which afterward are comprehended
under the name of Oxen and Sheep, by the figure Synecdoche, as which namely
are more necessary for the food and use of men, then the other beasts. The
reason of the mourning of these beasts is, because they have no pasture, for
through the over great barrennes of that year, and because of the extreme
drought or heat of the Sun after those continual showers, the grass also
was withered away in the fields, meadows, mountains, and other pasture places,
so that there lacked meat as well for beasts, as for men, and therefore they
were comprised under the same plague and punishment, The brute beasts punished
for the sins of men.
albeit themselves had not sinned: but they were punished for the sins of
men, unto whom by God they are made subject, Which creatures after their manner
do groan with the children of God, and travail in pain (as Paul speaks R^.
8. ver. 20. etc.) Waiting when the sons of God shall be reueiled. Because the
creat ure also shall be delivered from the bondage of corruption into the
glorious liberty of the sons of God. Because the creature is subject unto
vanity, not of it own will, but by reason of him that has subbued it (namely
God) under hope. Wherefore they also did mourn, the which is spoken by an
Anthropopatheia, or attributing unto beasts the affections of men,
Anthropopatheia what it is, see Mic. cap. 7. ver 8.
albeit after a sort by their outward sound or noise and bellowing they also do
witness and bewray their want, and their affections among us. Under the name
(Behemah) If any man in this place will understand the wild beasts also, I
will not be against it: that by this word the wild beasts may be noted: and by
the name of Oxen and Sheep, the home and tame beasts. Questionless it is
true, that the wild beasts them selves at that time wanted not their mourning.
For they also did lack food, the which are fed with herbs, as the Hearts.

Verse. 19. O Lord, to thee will I cry: for the fire has devoured the pastures
of the wilderness, and the flame has burnt up all the Trees of the field.
The conclusion co^firming that this publik repentance is to be proclaimed.
THe conclusion, whereby he confirms that the same public and solemn
repentance is to be proclaimed, that men may turn unto God, earnestly call upon
God, and pacify and appease him. He concludes therefore that God is to be
called upon both of men and also of beasts, because that both men and beasts
are stricken by the hand of God. As for men, that God is to be called upon of
them, that he will ease and take away this his rod from them, he shows by his
own example: and that he is to be called upon of the beasts, he declares in
the verse following. Wherefore here is plainly showed the end of all
punishments and plagues which GOD does send upon men, to wit, that men should
be called back unto God, from whom they had departed, The end of God his
punishments sent upon men.
and fallen away: should call upon him, whom they had now forgotten: cry unto
him, as unto the governor of this world: that from him alone they should look
for the easement of al their evils. The reason therefore of this extraordinary
crying unto God, is, the laying wast of the ground, the barrenness of the
year, the judgments of GOD in the pastures and Trees, the which also appeared
and were in the desartes and tilled fields, and did minister and find food
unto men and beasts.

Ver. 20. The beasts of the field cry also unto thee: for the rivers of
waters are dried up, and the fire has devoured the pastures of the wilderness.
The brute beasts after their manner cry unto. God.
AFter the same manner, that men: in like sort also says the prophet by an
Anthropopatheia, or attributing unto beasts the affections of men, must the
brute beasts cry unto God, as also Psalm. 145. ver. 15. the Psalmist says, The
eyes of all wait upon thee, and thou give them their meat in due season: to
the end that by this comparison of them with brute beasts the dulnes and as it
were the senslesnes of obstinate or wilful persons may be understood. For they
after their manner, cry unto God, and call upon him, when as they are pressed
or bitten with hunger: how much more therefore ought men endued with reason do
the like, being in the same state and penury. Further, the same cause is here
again repeated, the which was set down before ver. 18.19. and has already
binne there by me expounded. Hereby also appears that the beasts themselves
are nourished by God. And therefore Mat. 6. ver. 26. Christ to pull out of the
hearts of his disciples heathenish distrustfulnes, sends them unto the fowls
of the air, whom they see without their toil and labor to be fed by God,
saying: Behold the fowls of the heaven: For they sow not, neither reap, nor
carry into the barnes: yet your heavenly father feeds them. Are ye not much
better then they?

CAP. 2.
Ver. 1. Blow the trumpet in Zion, and shoute in mine holy mountain: let all
the inhabitants of the land tremble: for the day of the Lord is come: for it is
at hand.
An other prophesi threatening a more heavy judgment then the former.
AN other prophecy of the same Ioell, wherein he threatens unto the Jews from
God a more heavy judgment then the former, namely from the Chaldees, whom God
at the length would send upon them, like as it was also foretold unto the king
Josias, under whom Joel lived, and often times also by Jeremy, before whom our
Prophet was, has the self-same binne repeated unto the kings of Judah of his
time 2. King. cap. 23. ver. 26.27. And Ier. 6. ver. 22.23.24.25. Thus says the
Lord, Behold, a people comes from the north country, and a great nation shall
arise from the sides of the earth. With bow and shield shall they be weaponed:
they are cruel and will have no compassion: their voice roareth like the sea,
and they ride upon horses well appointed, like men of war against thee O
daughter Zion. We have heard their fame, and our hands wax feeble: sorrow is
come upon us, as the sorrow of a woman in travail. Go not forth into the
field, nor walk by the way: for the sword of the enemy and fear is on every
side. With this agrees that which is Isay. 5. ver. 26. and that which is
heareafter ver. 17. whereby is showed that this place does not appertain unto
the Locusts (of which he spoke before cap. 1.) But that this wholly is
concerning an uncircumcised nation, the which the prophet in this chapter
threatens shall come upon them. Whereof it comes to pass that the Prophet
does now much more earnestly stir up the Jews unto repentance, the^ he did
before: for as much as he threatens greater punrshments unto them. Wherein
Joel in this chapter also, as well as in the former witnesses his good will in
preserving this people and church of God.

1 An exhortation.
But this verse has two things to be noted, first an exhortation made by Joel,
secondly a most weighty cause of the same. The exhortation shows both whom he
exhorts, 2 The cause of the same.
and whereunto he exhorts, and unto what place. He exhorts the Jews, yea
and that all of them, and not only one or twain, 1 Who are exhorted.
Whereunto. Unto what place.
because that all of them were guilty before God, of infinite sins, as is
showed 2. King cap. 23. ver. 26.27. 1 All the Jews.
It is true in deed that this commandment of gathering the people together is
properly directed unto the priests, and magistrates: (whose especial office it
is to do the same), yet when as this assembly is commanded to be proclaimed
for public repentance sake, not only the priests and magistrates, but also
the whole people are exhorted and stirred up thereunto. But, as I have said
they are called together unto the showing of a public repentance, the which in
this place Joel briefly describes both by the inward, and also by the outward
form or manner of the same. The outward manner is declared by the sound and
noise of a trumpet, that is, by the great and earnest signifying of the same by
the Levites, the proclaimers thereof. For after this manner the people was
called together by the sound of a trumpet both in the proclaiming of the
public extraordinary assemblies: and also in the ordinary. So the meeting of
the people together is summoned for the keeping of the feast of blowing the
trumpets Number. 29. ver 1. So when they are called together to war against the
Midianites, Phine has the priest goes with them, with the trumpets to blow in
his hand, Number. 31. ver. 6. And unto this order has the prophet David
resemblance, when as exhorting to praise God for his benefits Psalm. 81. ver.
3. he says. Blow the trumpet in the new moon, even in the time appointed, at
our feast day. Nehem. 8. Ezra the Priest gathers the people together to the
hearing of the law. 2 To serve God.
But our Prophet in this place calls them together to worship God, to call
upon God and to reverence God, unto the temple of God, and mount Sion, not into
the tauernes, not into the bouling allies, not into the alehouses, as men are
wont to abuse these days (when as there is a public meeting for the service
of God) and to come together about bad exercises.

3 To the temple of God.
Now the cause of this so earnest an exhortation unto repentance, and the same
public, is, because The day of the Lord is come and is now even at hand, 2 The
cause of this exhortation.
that is to say, that day in the which God will punish the sins of this
people, does even now hang over their necks, and will not be long or it come,
as hypocrites do imagine. And look how much the moreneere the danger is, so
much the more heedfull, and wary, and ready ought we to be to turn it away
from us.

Verse. 2. A day of darkness and of blacknes, a day of clouds and obscurity,
as the morning spread upon the mountains, so is there a great people, and a
mighty: there was none like it from the beginning, neither shall be any more
after it, unto the years of many generations.
What manner of day and how fearful this day of the Lord^s.
A Laying open of the matter more plainly. For he shows what manner of day,
and how fearful this day of the Lord is, to the end he may shake off from
them all sluggishnes and dullness be they never so drouzie, and never so great
hypocrites. And first of all the bitterness of that day is set forth by the
Prophet under sundry similitudes, the which are taken from things most horrible
and fearful, that he may the more easily strike into them a fear of the
judgment of God being yet absent and to come, and to express the nature
thereof. For this day is said to be like such a day, wherein for light there
appears darkness: for the pleasant brightness of the sun, blacknes is
every where spread over all: for the fairenes and clee^enes of the day, there
is a black cloud, and that such a one, as is wont from the morning, and very
early to arise upon the mountains, with the which the whole day appears unto
men cloudie, The Chaldes, which should come against the Jews, described and
set out after sundry manners.
and lowering, and without light. These things therefore do paint forth this
day to be a most sorrowful and heavy day, and express the most woeful plight
and show of this judgment of God. Secondly, the thing it self is evidently
declared. For he shows the coming of a most cruel and mighty people wi^h
shall be their enemy. 1. By comparing them with other people.
And first of all he does by way of comparison describe this people to be a
most great and strong people, such a one as there has been no other before:
neither shall be in many years afterward. And this people whom he means was
the people of the Chaldees, unto whom afterward the Lord translated or
conueighed the Monarchy, or Empire. For that Empire in Daniel is compared unto
gold, and it was most mighty both in number of men, and also in strength of
army.

Verse. 3. A sire deuoureth before him, and behind him a flame burns up: the
land is as the garden of Eden before him, and behind him a desolate
wilderness, so that nothing shall escape him.
2. By the effects unlooked for.
SEcondly, he describes the said enemies and Chaldees by the effects, and those
unlooked for, but yet such as shall be unto the Jews most sorrowful, and
inevitable or vnescapeable, because that the Jews shall not be able to
withstand so great strength. For God does in such sort arm those whom he will
have to be the ministers of his justice, that they shall not be able to be
ouercomen: but will leave and scatter abroad their fear in every place where
they shall come. Wherefore in this place also there is a similitude taken from
fire, the which like as it burns up all things which come in the way of it,
so also shall the people of the Chaldees, like unto a fire and flame, that is,
like a burning and most flaming fire, devour and consume the enemies which
shall stand against them, yea and that in such sort, that the country the
which before was most flourishing (as the land of Judah then was) shall
afterward become most desolate or waste, when as they shall have entered and
ranged in it: and to be short, none of them shall escape their hands, so
diligent shall they be in searching out their enemies. Further, in this place
every flourishing country is understood by the name of (Eden) as it is also
often in the holy scripture else where, as Genesis 13. verse. 10. where the
country which Lot chooses after his departure from Abraham, is said to be
like unto Eden, or the garden of the Lord.

Verse. 4. The beholding of him is like the sight of horses, and like the
horsemen, so shall they run.
3. By their valiantnes and stoutnes.
THirdly, he describes the Chaldees by their valiantnes and stoutnes, the
which shall appear both in their countenance, and also in their swiftnes. For
their look shall not be as the look of men, but of horses, that is, they shall
be men that are to be trembled at, and to be feared. For here he speaks of
great horses, or of war horses, which with their eyes and look do strike a
terror and fear into men, and breath forth war. Their swiftnes shall be in
this, that these the self same enemies shall run, as most excellent and swift
horsemen are wont to do, such as they shall be. And truly those countries of
the Assyrians, Medes, and Chaldees did abound with valiant horsemen, as they now
also do abound under the name of Persians. The particle or word (like) in the
latter part of this verse, where it is said, like horsemen, so shall they
run, does not lessen, but make plain the signification of the word horsemen.
As in that place of John, We have seen the glory of him, like or as the glory
of the only begotten of the father.

Verse. 5. Like the noise of chariots in the tops of the mountains shall they
leap, like the noise of a flame of fire that deuoureth the stubble, and as a
mighty people prepared to the battle.
The swiftnes of the Chaldees described and confirmed by the effects.
THe same swiftnes of the Chaldees is described and confirmed by the effects.
For that nothing shall let or stay them, neither mountains nor any rivers, nor
munitions, nor holds made against them. Wherefore they shall to the great
terror or fear of their enemies overcome all these things, so that albeit they
be but horsemen only, they shall notwithstanding seem so terrible and
fearful, as are chariots and armed wagons, the which should be seen in the
mountains. In a word, this people shall be stout indeed, valiant, and made,
borne, and most prepared unto war and battle: wherefore this word ( like, or
as) is added, that nothing should be supposed to be feyned here, but their true
swiftness to be set forth.

Verse. 6. Before his face shall the people tremble: all faces shall gather
blacknes.
A confirmation of the valiantnes and stoutnes of the enemies.
A Confirmation of the same valiantnes and stoutnes of the enemies, the which
God will send upon the Jews, taken from the fear wherein all people shall
stand of these men and enemies. For there shall be no people which shall not
fear them, and tremble at their coming: yea and that so greatly, that by
reason of the same over great fear and a bashment they shall all gather
blackenes, which shall see and behold these so terrible enemies. For men are
wont to wax black through fear and abashment, because that when they fear,
their natural heat does fail, and therefore their members are void of blood
and heat, as those that write of natural causes do teach. So in the Psalm.
68. ver. 13. by blacknes, such as slaves and scullions do gather by lying
among the pottes, and smokie and sootie chimnie corners, is signified the great
and exceeding fear, trembling, misery, trouble and affliction the which the
children of God are often in, and from the which in the mercy and goodness of
GOD they are when it pleases him, delivered. Wherefore to comfort them, the
Prophet there says: Though ye have lain among pottes, yet shall ye be as the
wings of a dove that is covered with silver, and whose feathers are like yellow
gold.

Verse. 7. They shall run like strong men, and go up to the wall like men of
war, and every man shall go forward in his ways, and they shall not stay in
their paths.
4. By the strength of their body, and skilfulnes in feats of war.
FOurthly, he describes these Chaldees by the strength of their body, and
skilfulnes in the knowledge of war: in both which respects our enemies are
wont to be fearful unto us. As concerning the strength of their body, they
shall be like Giants, nimble, and ready. For the most strongest soldiers are
wont also to be swift and nimble in running, because that in them their
sinews are very strong, as Achilles is every where by Homer called podas okus,
that is, swift of foot. For where this strength of sinews is, there also is
swiftnes: as for their knowledge in war the same in them shall be very
singular. For in their pace and marching every one shall keep his order, and
in the fight and battle shall straightly observe the laws and rules of
military discipline, or training up to war.

Verse. 8. Neither shall one thrust another, but every one shall walk in his
path: and when they shall fall upon the sword they shall not be wounded.
Every one shall keep his place and order.
ONe shall not thrust another, every one shall stand in that place and order
wherein he shall be placed by his General or Captain. Now both silence and
also keeping of order in battle is a great virtue of Soldiers, and
furtherance unto the victory, and the same does show a great skilfulnes of
points of war in such an army, as Xenophon teaches in his books of the
education or bringing up of Cyrus.

5. By their vnfeareful mind, or courage.
Fifthly, he describes them by their unfearful mind or courage: for they
shall run upon the drawn swords bent against them, as namely, not fearing
death: the which is a point and sign of great boldenes in a soldier, and
enemy. And they shall venture upon the weapons set against them, as if they
were such as could not be hurt and vnwoundable.

Verse. 9. They shall run too and fro in the city: They shall run upon the
wall: they shall climb up upon the houses, and enter in at the windows like
the thief.
6. By their desire of victory.
Sixthly, He fears the Jews, and describes the Chaldees by the greediness or
desire of victory, wherewithal these men shall be enflamed. For this desire
and greedines of victory is wont also to be considered in a good Soldier. For
it makes him bold, venturous, manly, and diligent and eager in pursuing and
searching out his enemies. And this also without al doubt strikes a fear into
the enemies, when as they see, or hear that they have or must have to do with
such kind of enemies. So then they shall run too and fro in the city which
they have taken, to catch and slay their enemies: they shall climb up by the
walls: they shall enter in at the windows like thieves to kill and steal:
they shall omit or leave nothing undone for the getting of the full victory.
So Alexander the Great was excellent in the sealing of walls in towns and
cities. So David Psalm. 18.

Verse. 10. The earth shall tremble before him, the heavens shall shake, the
Sun and the Moon shall be dark, and the Stars shall withdraw their
shining.
The conclusion.
THe conclusion, whereby appears what is the scope or drift of this whole
former description. For otherwise it might seem over large and long, and
curious: to wit, when as he being the Prophet of God, and a man that was no
warrior, has nevertheless prosecuted or handled these things so by piece
meal, and in every particular. But this was the mind, and this was the drift
of the Prophet by the appointment of God, that the Jews by these so many
ways and miseries laid before them, might be put in fear, and being put in
fear, might truly and from the bottom of their heart repent, call upon God,
and abstain from their sins, for the which these so sharp and heavy
judgments of God are threatened unto them, and might in the end convert, and
turn themselves unto God. Briefly he shows that these enemies of the Jews
shall be such, that they shall make all things afraid of them, be they low,
or be they high in this world: yea, that the whole world shall tremble at the
sight of them. Now the terror and exceeding great fear which they shall strike
into them, is showed in these words, shall tremble, shall shake, shall loose
their brightness. For this shaking, trembling and starting, has always joined
with it exceeding great fearefulnes and perplexity, or anguish of mind, and
the changing of the old countenance and cheerefulnes, as it were the loosing of
the former lightsomnes and brightness. And unto all things does Joel threaten
that this fear shall come, both to the smallest and least, which here are noted
in the word (earth) and also unto the greatest and highest, What is meant by the
earth, the Sun, the Moon, the Stars.
the which in this place are comprehended under these words, the Sun, the
Moon, the Stars. And such were the Chaldees unto the Jews at that time. And
such afterward were the Turks and Saracens unto the christian Churches, which
they have destroyed, and do destroy. And such finally are all those whom the
Lord also stirs up at this day against his Church.

Verse. 11. And the Lord shall utter his voice before his host: for his host
is very great: for he is strong that does his word: for the day of the Lord is
great, and very terrible, and who can abide it.
A reason why the Chaldees shall be so mighty.
THe rendering of a reason, whereby he teaches why the Chaldees shall be so
mighty at that time, and that against the Jews the people of God: to wit,
because that God shall use their ministry or service to execute his
judgments upon the Jews. Therefore he shall so strengthen them, make them
stout, valiant, warlike: finally God himself shall make himself their
captain: wherefore nothing shall stand against them. Wherein also there is a
certain Hypophora, What the figure Hypophora is, see Amos cap. 5. ver. 21.
or answering of an objection, least the Prophet might seem to have reported
things increadible, or not to be believed concerning them, and such as cannot
fall out unto any kind of men, or army. Yes they shall be such: for they
shall be made such by God. Three reasons why the Chaldees shall be so strong.
Wherefore here are three reasons alleged. The first, because these are the
tents of God, and not of men. Therefore they shall be valiant and strong. For
God is wont to furnish and fortify his hosts and armies with all things
necessary unto the victory and terror of their enemies, 1. Because these are
the tents of God, and not of men.
as strength and swiftnes, and such like. For God himself shall command these
tents to be gathered in his name, Isai. 7. And the armies of the Chaldees are
not called the tents of God in respect of the Chaldees themselves, but in
respect of God, who used them not knowing of it for the executing and bringing
to pass of that his work. 2. Because they must do the work of the Lord.
The second reason is, because these shall then do the work and commandment
of God. Therefore they must be strong, that in that work they may be let by
no man. For as he is accursed which does the work of the Lord faintly Ierem.
48. ver. 10. so God does give an heart, and power, or strength unto those whom
he uses as his ministers or servants unto that his work. The third reason is,
because this shall be the day of the Lord, 3. Because it shall be the g^^at day
of the L^^d
and that a great day, not a common day, but a terrible or fearful day. For
God being angry, shall fearfully execute his extraordinary judgments upon
his Church. Therefore there must the^ ^ose effects appear, the which must show
those extraordinary judgments of God: again, those men must needs be stirred
up to execu^^ them, and that such men, who indeed are endued with extraordina^^
power and strength. Otherwise this terror or fear of the day of the Lord
should be none at all, or should not be seen. Finally he concludes:
Therefore the Jews must tremble at that day of the Lord, unless indeed they
will be stocks, blocks, ungodly, desperate, and utterly perish without all
hope.

Verse. 12. Therefore also now the Lord says, Turn you unto me with all your
heart, and with fasting, and with weeping, and with mourning.
The second part of this sermon, containing the only remedy against the former
threatened heavy judgments of God.
THe second part of this Sermon, in the which he brings forth a remedy
against those heavy judgments of God threatened by him, and the same the only
remedy, out of the mouth of GOD himself, unto the embracing, and earnestly
following of the which he does first exhort them. And this remedy is an
earnest repentance of the mind, the which must be done, not privily, but
openly, not by one or two only, but by the whole people: finally, not
slightly or lightly, but after a solemn and most exquisite and diligent
manner. Wherefore the Prophet prescribes, and describes this repentance, and
the form or manner thereof, to take away al excuse from them neglecting or
forslowing to execute the same, as who namely knew both what was to be done,
and also after what manner, that they might have God favorable and merciful
unto them.

Three parts of this verse.
But this verse has three parts. The first contains the person of him that
speaks. And this is God himself, to the end namely that this medicine here
set forth, 1. The person of him that speaks.
may appear to be the more certain, the more true, and the more wholesome:
and consequently may be heard of us more heedfully with the greater faith, and
may be used with the more cheerful courage and endeavor. 2. The circumstance
of the time.
The second part shows the circumstance of the time: that even yet now there
remains hope of obtaining pardon, if they will turn unto God. And truly all
that whole time the which comes between the threatenings of God denounced or
uttered, and the execution of the same, is granted unto us by God to repent, if
we be wise, how greatly soever we have sinned before. For all that time as
yet is acceptable, that is, wherein we, if we repent, may be accepted or
received of God. For God then, of his great mercy, wayteth and tarrieth yet
for us, so that if we turn and repent, that may be verified of us, the which
God by his Prophet Isai, in another respect, speaks of Christ, cap. 49. ver.
8. In an acceptable time have I heard thee: and in a day of salvation have I
helped thee: and I will preserve thee. And Paul Romans 2. ver. 4. teaches, that
the bounteousnes, patience, and long suffering of God ought to move us unto
repentance. And 2. Cor. cap. 6. ver. 2. he alleges the former place of the
Prophet Isai to stir them up unto godliness and holiness of life, and to
embrace the grace of God even then when as it was offered, saying: Behold now
the accepted time: behold now the day of salvation. The third part contains
the medicine it self, 3. The medicine if self.
most necessary for us in turning away all the threatenings of God from us: and
that is earnest repentance of mind, the which is here briefly described or set
forth partly by the inward, and partly by the outward form of the same. The
inward form of repentance.
By the inward, when as it is called a turning unto God with the whole heart.
For the force and pith of true repentance is in the altering or changing of our
mind, that is, in the sincere and true turning from our sins unto God, and
not in the fained, not in the counterfeit, The outward form of repentance is
of diverse sorts in regard of 1. our selves. 2 of others.
not in the half or part turning. The outward form of true repentance is
manifold, or of many sorts. For some things in it are required of us in regard
of our selves: and other some in regard of others, especially in a public,
solemn, and extraordinary repentance, such as is in this place proclaimed.
And in regard of out selves it is required, namely, that being well prepared,
yea even according unto the outward form, we do turn unto God, and earnestly
repent. There is required of us moreover, fasting, weeping, and mourning, that
is, abstaining from our ordinary meats, yea even moderate, with inward
sighing and sadness, the which may bewray and show forth it self with mourning
and outward tears, that by the outward form the inward repentance may be
understood to be truly in us. So Isai cap. 22. ver. 12. testifies, that in
the day of affliction the which his Church should taste of for their sins,
the Lord looked that by these outward signs they should witness their inward
heaviness, saying: In that day did the Lord God of hosts call unto weeping and
mourning, and to baldnes and girding with sackcloth. And truly when as God did
pursue the Jews not only with famine, but also with the sword of their enemies,
they were both to fast, No comfort besides Christ in our afflictions, who is to
be sought unto by true faith.
and also to call upon God, which is the chiefest refuge that me^ have to
betake themselves unto in such lamentable cases. And therefore Isai 51. ver.
19. the Prophet says, These two things are come unto thee: who will lament
thee? desolation and destruction, and famine, and the sword: by whom shall I
comfort thee.

Verse. 13 And rent your heart, and not your clothes: and turn unto the Lord
your God: for he is gracious and merciful, slow to anger, and of great
kindness, and repents him of the evil.
A making more plain of the inward repentance.
A Laying open of the former matter more plainly which shows the chiefest part
of repentance, and teaches the same to be inward that is, to be placed in the
inward feeling and lothing of a man his sins: and not in a certain outward
renting of clothes: such as was indeed wont to be used of the Jews in great
mourning: but feynedlie and hypocriticallie many times: and when as they did
signify that they did greatly detest or loath any thing So Job expresses his
sorrow cap. 1. ver. 2. where it is said, that he arose and rent his garments,
and shaued his head, and fell down upon the ground and worshipped. And Mat.
26. ver. 65. The high priest renteth his clothes pretending in hypocrisy great
sorrow, for that Christ (as he blasphemously charged him,) had blasphemed.

Two Parts of this verse.
This verse has two parts. First a description of this inward repentance, by
way of contraries matching it with the false. For in the false the heart is not
inwardly rent before God, 1. A description of inward repentance.
but the garments are torn outwardly, only before men But in the inward
repentance, the heart especially is humbled unto God, and broken before him,
that is, is pressed, troubled, and afflicted of our selves, with great sorrow,
the which we conceive for the sins, the which we have committed. So Paul 2.
Cor. cap. 7. ver. 11. attributes unto true and inward repentance these
effects, Care, indignation, punishment. And David Psalm 51. ver. 3. says: I
know mine iniquities, and my sin is ever before me. 2. The foundation or
ground of true repentance.
The second part of this verse, shows the foundation or ground of true
repentance, that is, both of our feeling, or sorrow: and also of our true
turning unto God. And this is true faith, whereby we do acknowledge God to be
our father in Christ. Otherwise we should be lost through despair, neither
would we ever return unto God, when as we feel our sins to be so grievous
against him: But (like unto run away servants, which look for no hope of
pardon at the hands of their masters,) we would quite and clean and every day
depart always further from him, and would never turn or flee unto him. This
appears by the true patterns and examples of repentance, as of David, who
that he might earnestly repent, does set before himself the mercy of God,
that is, his fatherly mind toward him, Psalm 51. and of Peter also, who
remembering the saying of Christ, wept bitterly Mat. 26. ver. 75. For then the
feeling of the good will of Christ did strike the heart of Peter. Lastly the
parable of the prodigal son Lu. 15. ver. 18.21. So then faith, which lays
hold upon, and sets before us this mercy of God in Christ toward us, does
also bring us unto God, whom we have offended. For it teaches, what, and after
what manner of sort the mind of God is toward us peculiarly, by the means of
his covenant: and consequently assures us that God will be favorable unto us,
that is, easy and ready to pardon our sins. For through Christ he is
merciful, long suffering, rich in kindness toward those that are his, whom
according unto his covenant he has adopted or chosen for his sons. Finally,
who also does often call back again the sentence of his judgment, God
sometimes calls his sentence back again toward those that are his, and
when.
when as it has been given against those that are his, namely, because it was
not given as of his decree, and unspeakable purpose, but only of a mind to
threaten them, that by this means he might make them afraid. So to the
Ninevites, so to King Ezechias death is threatened.

Furthermore, the word repenting is said of God by an Anthropopatheia,
Repentance how it is attributed unto God.
or attributing unto God the affections of men, that is, not in respect of God,
as if he did alter or chaung his mind and sentence: but only in respect of us,
who feeling diverse effects of the providence of God, What Atuhro popatheia is,
see Mich. cap. 7. ver. 8.
do think that God has altered his sentence, and consequently that he does
repent.

Verse. 14 Who knows, if he will return and repent, and leave a blessing
behind him, even a meat offering and a drink offering to the Lord your God.
AN instance, for he urges the same his foundation, and the same his
exhortation, grounding it upon the nature of God, who wholly and all together
is so bounteous and merciful (not toward al men, but toward his elect or
chosen only) and ready to forgive. This God his kindness in doing good to
his people though they through their rebellion, and daily vexing and grieuing
him deserved no such thing, the Prophet Isai recounteth cap. 63. ver. 11.12.13.
after this manner: Then he remembered the old time of Moses, and his people,
saying, where is he that brought them up out of the sea, with the shepeard of
his sheep? Where is he that put his holy spirit within him? He led them by
the right hand of Moses with his own glorious arm, dividing the water before
them, to make himself an everlasting name. He led them through the deep, as
an horse in the wilderness, that they should not stumble.

But there are two things in this verse to be observed. First, 1 The manner of
speech.
the manner of speaking. Secondly, the thing it self which is here propounded
or set forth. 2. The thing it self.
The kind of speaking is in show of a man doubting: but in deed and truth it
is the speech of one earnestly affirming and auouching. For after this manner
by way of interrogation or asking a question, 1. A show of doubting.
the Hebrews are wont to utter those things, which they do affirm. For this
phrase or kind of speaking is not here to be taken in such sort, as that is 2.
Sam. 12. ver. 22. And he said, while the child was yet alive, I fasted, and
wept: for I said, who can tell whether God will have mercy on me, that the
child may live? The thing it self which is here set forth, 2. God is most
bounteous unto those which are his.
is in a word, that God is most bounteous and merciful unto those which are
his. Therefore if they repent and seek him, it will come to pass, that they
shall find him, that he will turn unto them, that he will spare them, and
minister or give unto them such things as are necessary for his worship and
service even in that same threatened barrennes and scarsity. The which
doubtless shall be a sign and token that God is now pacified and appeased
with them. For even after that same spoil made by the Locustes, he will leave
a most large testimony or witness of his blessing toward them, to wit,
things necessary for his service and worship at the least wise: and
consequently will show himself to be reconciled or made friends with them. And
all these things appertain unto the exhortation. The other parts of this
Sermon do partly describe the form of that repentance which he requires at
their hands, and partly set forth unto them most assured comfortes and
promises of God. Concerning the repentance which is required, it is public,
solemn, and extraordinary the which the verses following do declare.

Ver. 15. Blow the trumpet in Zion, sanctify a fast, call a solemn assembly.
ANd first of all they show the place: then the fast adjoined unto it:
afterward the assembly: last of all the public prayers. 1. The place. 2. The
fast. 3. The assembly.
In this verse are contained the place, the fast, the assembly. The place is
Sio^, that is Jerusalem. For by the mountain, or one part the whole city is
understood by the figure Synecdoche. What the figure Synecdoche is, see Amos
cap. 5. ver. 21.
But here mention is made of Sion, because the first warning of the fast, and
the proclaiming of that solemn and public repentance ought to be made in the
temple, and by the council of the priests which had the rule of holy things,
and that with a trumpet, after a solemn manner, that afterward it might be
proclaimed in the other cities of Judah. Yet was it not needful, that
whosoever would then fast, and use that public repentance, should come to
Sion, but every one might do that abiding in his own city, after the public
fast proclaimed, and every one fasted that day, in the which that action was
proclaimed, and commanded to be done. For Leuit. 23. ver. 31. it appears
that the feast of reconciliation (and so consequently other the like) was to be
held the tenth day of the seventh month not only at Jerusalem, but also
throughout all their dwellings. But at Jerusalem the Jews are commanded to
come and be joined together, into the Temple: but at other places, into their
Synagogues in the day of the fast, and of the solemn and public repentance:
and not into the alehouses and tauernes, and into their shops to use
merchandise and feastinges at that time, as now adays they do every where
when a public fast is warned. And in this place a fast is commanded to be
proclaimed, An holy fast.
and that an holy fast, the which must be referred unto the preparing of the
minds of the parties, that they may serve God the more earnestly. For there
are many kinds of fastes, and many ends off eastes. One kind may be
constrained, Many kinds of fastes.
as in a time of famine: an other may be a medicinal fast appointed by
phisitio^s for health sake: an other by means that all appetite and desire of
meat is done in us: and lastly, an other is a religious fast, the which is
made, that we may the more cheerfully give and apply our selves unto prayer,
may the more acknowledge our selves to be guilty before God, and cast down and
humble our selves. The which last end, for as much as it is an holy end, for
the same also public abstinence from moderate and ordinary meat is commanded:
or else is privately for a time willingly and of our own accord taken upon us:
and then is it indeed a sanctified fast: and not if it be held to be a
meritorious or deserving work of ours. The which is flat blasphemy. Moreover
here also is mention made of the assembly of the people, the which in the verse
following is more at large declared and expounded.

Verse. 16. Gather the people: sanctify the congregation, gather the elders:
assemble the children, and those that suck the breasts: Let the bridegroom
go forth of his chamber, and the bride out of her bride chamber.
A Laying out of this matter and manner of fasting yet more playner. For he
shows what, He shows what manner of assembly ought to be at this public
fast.
Therefore he especially rehearses those sorts of men, which at that time
ought and are wont to be gathered together in the Temple, and in the Synagogues
unto extraordinary prayers, and to hear the word of God.

Two parts of this verse.
But here are two things to be noted in this verse. The one, the kind of
speaking which the Prophet uses, the which is as it were loose and without
joints, 1. The phrase or kind of speaking.
or not knit together with copulative conjunctions, and often repeating the
same commandment of gathering them together, that by the self same phrase or
speech of the Prophet men might be the more urged, and understand that it is
highly needful for them to come together to pray unto, and entreat God, and
to fast together. The second part contains the persons which were at that
time to assemble and come together, not all, I confess, but the chief. 2. The
persons that are to assemble together.
And first and foremost all the people, that is, whether Kings, or subjects:
whether masters, or servants, whether rich, or poor, they are commanded to be
joined together. Afterward the old men by name, Old men.
that they by their example may shine before others, and because that by reason
of the multitude of their sins, they are the more guilty before GOD. For the
longer that they have lived, the more also have they offended God. Lastly, that
all excuse may be taken away from others, which are lustier and stronger of
body, if they fast not, or be not present, old men are expressly cited and
bidden both to come together with the rest of the people, and also to fast. The
young infants.
In the third place the litile young infants, who as yet do suck the breasts
of their mothers and nurses, both because that they even now as little and as
young as they be, are notwithstanding guilty before GOD, (for as Paul speaks
Ephesians. 2. ver. 3. We are all the children of wrath, as will as others) because of
original sin: And because also they are a part of the family or household of
their fathers, who have sinned in actual sins. Their children are their
goods, wherefore their owners or fathers being guilty of punishment, they also
are guilty of punishment, as Paul also teaches Romans 8. ver. 2. that for man
his sake, God has made the creatures of the world subject also unto vanity,
etc. And this self same thing falls out and comes to pass in the case of
treason committed against man, much more then in treason against God, that the
children also do bear the punishment of their parents.

Furthermore, because of the sin of man, the whole world is subject unto
sin, and lies in wickedness 1. John 5. In the fourth place, the bridegroom
and the bride are exhorted unto this repentance, who albeit they be discharged
of other burdens (as from war) in the year wherein they are first and newly
married, The Bridegroom and the Bride.
yet notwithstanding are they here also commanded the self same day, and also
the day following, wherein they were married to come forth of their
bridechamber, that is, their marriage chamber, and to be present with the rest,
to pray unto GOD, and to humble themselves because of their sins.

Verse. 17. Let the Priests, the Ministers of the Lord weep between the porch
and the altar, and let them say, Spare thy people O Lord, and give not thine
heritage unto reproach, that the heathen should rule over them. Wherefore should
they say among the people, where is their God?
AFter that he has declared these three things, to wit, the place, the fast,
and the public asse^bly, now the Prophet shows what manner of prayers the
prayers of this assembly of men, Three parts of this verse.
of that day and public fast ought to be unto almighty God, a form whereof is
here set down. 1. The place of these prayers.
But in this place there are three things declared: namely, in what place in
the Temple these prayers ought to be made. 2. By whom they are to be made.
Secondly, by whom they ought to be made. And thirdly, what manner of prayers
they ought to be.

For the first, they must be made between the porch where the people was, 3.
What manner of prayers they ought to be.
and did stay, and the altar of burnt offeringes. For the people did not enter
or com into any of the three distinct or severed parts of the Temple, to wit,
neither into the porch of the Priests, where was the brazen altar of
Sacrifices: where the slain beasts were sacrificed. Here therefore were the
public prayers made, that they might be heard of all the people, to wit,
between the porch of the people, and that same first porch of the Priests,
where the altar was.

will have women to keep silence in the Churches. And 1. Tim. 2. ver. 1. He
wills that supplications, prayers, intercessions, and giving of thanks be
made for all men.

3. The priests must pray in an earnest feeling of their own sins, and also of
the sins of the people.
Thirdly, it is here also showed, what manner of prayers these both public and
also extraordinary prayers ought to be, namely, first, that the Priests in an
earnest feeling both of their own sins, and also of the sins of the people
should cry and call unto God being now manifestly angry with his Church.
Secondly, that in sum and effect they pray in such sort, that they ask
mercy and pardon of their sins at the true God, for his only mere grace,
covenant, and glory sake. The word Spare, or be favorable, 2. They must pray
for pardon and mercy. A double foundation of their prayer.
shows that pardon must be begged of God, for the people. The foundation
whereupon being grounded, the Priests and the people ought to be in hope of
this pardon, is twofold. First, the glory of GOD, the which shall utterly be
contemned or despised, and scorned at among the heathen, and unbelieving
people. 1. The glory of God.
If they may once see this people of his, (the which is his peculiar people and
heritage) to be over thrown. For the heathen will accuse the true God of
weakness, and of lying, as if he were such a one as is not able to defend those
that are his. And this is the ground of Moses his prayer unto God also Exodus
32. verse. 12. to spare his people that had grievously offended by worshipping
the golden calfe, lest the Egyptians should speak and say, He has brought
them out maliciously for to slay them in the mountains, and to consume them
from the earth. The second foundation of these prayers, 2. The covenant or
only mere grace of God.
is the covenant or mere and only grace of GOD, whereby he chose the Jews
for his own peculiar people in regard of his covenant made with Abraham.
Wherefore he promised that he would also be their defender and patron.
Therefore God in our prayers is to be prayed unto for this self same thing,
namely, that he will defend those that are his.

Verse. 18. Then will the Lord be jealous over his land, and spare his people.
A comfort for the truly penitent, of the which there is a double ground.
THere follows a comfort, wherewith not every one indeed in this people, but
only those which shall turn and repent truly among them, are lifted up, or
comforted, and unto them are set forth the help of God, and most large and
excellent promises. But of this comfort there is also a double foundation or
assurance, lest they might think it to be vain or false. 1. The nature of God.
The first, to wit, the nature of God himself, or a general reason, the which
is taken from the property, and as it were the office of God him self. The
second, the express promise, 2. The promise of God.
band, and covenant of God. And both these foundations does the Prophet show
and set forth in this, and the verse following. 1. The general nature of God.
And first of all in this place, that which is taken from the general reason
or consideration of the nature and office of God. For this is the general
nature of God, to be indeed generally merciful, one that loves his own work,
bounteous unto all. For as it is Mat. 5. verse. 45. He makes his sun to
arise on the evil, and the good, and sends rain on the just, and unjust.
And as it is Psalm. 145. verse. 9. The Lord is good to all and his mercies are
over all his works: but especially he is doing good unto his church,
favorable unto it, and burning with emulation or jealousy toward it. And
therefore Psalm. 145. verse. 18. when the Psalmist had said, The Lord is near
to all that call upon him, he adds, yea to all th^^ call upon him in truth.
And Zach. 8. ver. 2. the Lord says, I was jealous for Zion with great
jealousy, and I was jealous for her with great wrath. For the church is the
peculiar inheritance of GOD, his purchased people, whom God will defend,
cherish, and gently entreat of duty, and by reason of the mutual debt, band,
and relation the which is between the Lord or owner, and the thing or goods of
the Lord and owners. So 2. Tit. ver. 14. Christ is said to have purged us to be
a peculiar people unto himself. And 1. Pet cap. 2 ver. 9. The faithful are
called a chosen generation, a royal priesthood, an holy nation, a peculiar
people. And God will never forsake his inheritance, as David teaches Psalm. 94.
ver. 14. saying, Surely the Lord will not fail his people, neither will he
forsake his inheritance. Wherefore this is a great, and an assured foundation
of the comforting of the Church (which is the people, the land, and inheritance
of God) to wit, the general affection or love of God toward all his works,
and his especial and peculiar affection toward those of his whom he has
chosen, for whom he is jealous, and unto whom he is always favorable, gentle,
and merciful unto their sins.

Verse. 19. Yea, the Lord will answer, and say unto his people, Behold, I will
send you corn, and wine, and oil, and you shall be satisfied therewith: and I
will no more make you a reproach among the heathen.
2. The second foundation of the former comfort, to wit, the peculiar promise
of God.
THe second foundation of this comfort, to wit, the peculiar and especial
promise of God (yea after that he had threatened those his former judgments)
concerning his gentleness and mercy toward the Church repenting, and toward
this his people, the which promise of God Joel had received, that he should
deliver and declare the same, as the answer of God unto this people asking
pardon for their fault, to the end they might know, that their repentance was
not unprofitable before God, and that the exhortation of the Prophet made
thereunto in the beginning of this chapter, was not in vain neither.

Two parts of this verse.
But this verse contains two parts. One has this answer of God, and the
second foundation of the promise set forth by Joel. The other contains a
particular and peculiar laying open of this promise more at large. And this is
such, 1. The answer of God.
that like as the people was put in fear with a double kind of punishment,
namely of famine, 2. A particular laying out of the points of this answer more
plainly.
in the first chapter, and of the sword of the enemy, in this chapter: so
there is now promised a double help from God, and a double comfort: one, by
which that famine shall be taken away. For God shall give or restore unto them
corn, wine, oil, the which in the chapter before he threatened that he would
take away from them because of their sins. The second part of this comfort
set forth and delivered by God in the verse following, To wit:

Verse. 20. But I will remove far off from you the Northren army, and I will
drive him into a land barren and desolate, with his face toward the East sea,
and his end to the utmost sea, and his stink shall come up, and his corruption
shall ascend, because he has exalted himself to do this.
GOd shall deliver them from that enemy, the which he threatened before that he
would send against them, that they be not a reproach unto the heathen, or among
the profane or wicked heathen. But here God promises two things, when as he
says, that he will deliver his Church. 1. God will scatter the enemies of his
Church into the four quarters of the world.
First, that it shall come to pass, that he will scatter into the four
quarters of the world all that same host of the Chaldees, that is, the armies
of the enemies of his Church, to wit, that they shall not be able to be
gathered together again now against the same. So then this army, which was
gathered together out of the Northren countries (for both the Assyrians and
also the Chaldees were situated unto the Jews Northrenly, or toward the North)
shall be scattered or driven away, namely, one part of them unto the South, or
into a dry land: for the dry country is South unto the Jews. The other part
of them, or the first band of them shall be driven into the East. The latter
into the West. These things came to pass, not only when as God overthrew the
Monarchy or Empire of the Babylonians, that is of the Chaldees by the
Persians, but also when as the power of the Babylonians to take Syria, and
consequently to invade Iewrie, In that place of the Kings there is no mention
made of the Syrians but of the Assyrians.
was scattered by King Necao, 2. King. cap. 23. ver. 29. Concerning the
overthrow of the Chaldees by the Medes or Persians (for they are often taken
the one for the other) thus the Lord threatens by his Prophet Isai cap. 13.
ver. 17. Behold, I will stir up the Medes against them, which shall not
regard silver, nor be desirous of gold. And Babel the glory of Kingdoms, the
beauty and pride of the Chaldeans, shall be as the destruction of God in
Sodom, and Gomorah. The place of Isai cap. 31. ver. 8. prophesies of the
destruction of the kingdom of the Assyrians in these words: Then shall Asshur
fall by the sword, not of man, neither shall the sword of man devour him, and
he shall flee from the sword, and his young men shall faint. But cap. 48. ver.
20. the Jews are willed to get them out of Babel, and to flee from the
Chaldeans, whereby is signified the overthrow of that city by the Persians,
from the which the people of God are willed to flee, lest by tarrying they
should be partakers of their plagues.

2. These enemies shall be lothed and abhorred of all men.
Secondly, God threatens that it shall come to pass, that when as he shall
after this manner scatter the enemies of his Church, those self same enemies
shall be an horror and a curse unto all men: for their bodies shall lie
unburied, and therefore their stink shall come up, and they shall now smell
lothsomely unto all men, who before were so greatly feared of al men. The
reason is, because namely they have exalted or magnified themselves to do
this, that is, they have labored (and with all the might they could possibly)
have endeavored utterly to destroy the Church of God. For so I do expound this
sentence: God would make a determined or limited correction and chastising of
his people only: but these enemies went about utterly to root them out.
Wherefore the Lord by his Prophet Isai cap. 47. ver. 6. signifies his wrath
against the Babylonians for this their unmercifulness and excessive cruelty
toward his people, saying: I was wroth with my people: I have polluted mine
inheritance, and given them into thine hand: thou did show them no mercy,
but thou did lay thy very heavy yoke upon the ancient.

Verse. 21. Fear not, O land, but be glad, and rejoice: for the Lord will do
great things.
A confirmation of the former promises of God.
A Confirmation of the former promises of God by the gladness, or sign of
wonder, whereunto the Church repenting is exhorted by God himself. And to the
end that this help and comfort promised by God, may be understood to be most
plentiful, both those, whom God at that time shall comfort, are rehearsed: and
those things also are reckoned up, the which God will give for the comforting
of his Church in such manner: and these are partly earthie, Two parts of this
verse.
and partly spiritual. The earthie are first declared, and those especially,
1. An exhortation unto joy.
the which did assuage and ease the misery at that time threatened by the
Prophet.

2. The cause of this exhortation. What the figure Metonymia is, see Oseas cap.
4. ve. ^
But this verse has two parts. The first contains an exhortation unto
wonderful great joy. The second, the cause of the same exhortation. Now the
land it self is exhorted to rejoice, under which word we do first of all by
the figure Metonymia understand the dwellers in the land, and that all in
general, that is, the mighty, and the poor: the males, and the females: the
masters and the servants: these of riper years and bigger growth, and the
little infants. For as before verse. 16. all were exhorted unto sorrow and
mourning: so likewise are all now stirred up unto joy and gladness. Secondly, by
this self same word land, is signified the element of the earth it self. For
the same it self shall then be made partaker of this blessing of God, as it is
made now of the curse because of the sins of the people. So before cap. 1.
ver. 10. the earth is said to mourn. And it is exhorted unto all kind of
gladness, fear and dread being banished before, the which doubtless might be a
let or hinderance thereunto. So be the words of this verse: first, Fear not,
then, be glad and rejoice. For here both inward and also outward joy is
described by the Prophet by the words of being glad, and rejoicing.

Antithesis, or matching together of contraries, between the endeavor of God,
and of the enemies of his Church: his in comforting: theirs in overthrowing of
the Church.

Verse. 22. Be not afraid, ye beasts of the field: for the pastures of the
wilderness are green: for the tree bears her fruit: the fig tree and the
vine do give their force.
An amplification of the former exhortation unto joy.
AN amplification of the former exhortation unto gladness, whereby not only
men themselves: but also beasts are stirred up unto joy, because of God being
pacified, and because of his blessings upon his land, and upon the Church. So
Psalm. 147. the Prophet proves all creatures to praise the Lord, because of his
great mercy and goodness toward the same. After the same manner before cap. 1.
ver. 18.20. the beasts of all sorts are said to mourn because of the wrath of
God. There is here added a cause of this joy, or exhortation unto joy,
contrary unto that for the which they did mourn. For then all kind of
fruits, either natural (as are herbs, which do grow in the deserts, and
mountains, and pasture grounds) or else such as are sown and planted, as are
wine, oil, figs, shall abound, and be enough, fit and sufficient for the
nourishing both of beasts and also men. Hereby appears that the fruitfulnes
of the earth, and of plants, nay, that all fruits of the earth, do come of the
only blessing and good will of God toward men, and not from the stars, or
fortune, Psalm. 107. Matthew. 5.

Verse. 23. Be glad then, ye children of Zion, and rejoice in the Lord your God:
for he has given you the rain of righteousness, and he will cause to come
down for you the rain, even the first rain and the latter rain in the first
month.
An amplification of the former exhortation unto the church.
AN amplification of the former exhortation or comfort unto the Church it self,
the which is now her self spoken unto by name, and exhorted expressly to be glad
and rejoice, because of the blessings of God to come toward her. And first of
all the earthly blessings are set down unto the 28. verse: and afterward the
spiritual blessings. But this verse contains three things. One, a
description of the Church in these words, ye children or sons of Zion, that
is, Three parts of this verse.
O ye the issue and offspring of the Church, 1. A description of the church.
and of that people and place, whom God has peculiarly chosen unto himself,
and taken by covenant for his own people and inheritance. The second, a
declaration of that joy, the which the Prophet requires of the Church, 2. What
manner of joy their joy must be.
to wit, that it be holy, not profane or worldly: spiritual, not carnal:
true, not fained: profitable, not hurtful. So then he will have that the godly
rejoice in Jehovah, that is, in the true God: and that in their God, that is,
in this respect and for this cause, for that he is their God, he is their
father, he is their patron or defender peculiarly. Joy then, as also sadness,
is twofold, that is to say, godly, and worldly, as appears concerning sorrow
expressly 2. Cor. cap. 7. ver. 10. For godly sorrow causes repentance unto
salvation, not to be repented of: but the wordly sorrow causes death. 3. The
cause of this joy.
The third shows the cause of this joy, to wit, God pacified toward his, and
so consequently now exceeding loving and bounteous. Of which thing this is a
witness: first, the earthly blessing, the which God will bestow on his
Church, clean contrary unto that judgment, the which was a sign of God
being angry with her. For then was threatened that there should be a barrennes
of all things necessary to live withal, and consequently a famine: but now is
promised great fruitfulnes, and that men shall sow. Therefore God shall give
rain of righteousness, that is, both seasonable or the morning or first rain,
as James speaks of the husband man patiently waiting until he receive the
former, and the latter rain cap. 5. ver. 7. and also the latter or just rain,
that is in such measure and moderation as shall be needful, neither too much,
nor too hasty. For unseasonable and overmuch rain makes things sown and
corn, rotten cap. 1. ver. 17 and corrupts or spilleth it. The like blessing
God promises unto the lovers and such as are obedient unto his law Deuteronomy 11.
ver. 14. I also will give rain unto your laend in due time, the first rain,
and the latter, that thou may gather in thy wheat, and thy wine, and thine
oil. And because God is the giver of these things, his people are commanded
to crave them at his hands Zach. 10. ver. 1. Ask you of the Lord (says the
Prophet) rain in the time of the latter rain: so shall the Lord make white
clouds, and give you showers of rain, and to every one grass in the field.

Verse. 24. And the barnes shall be full of wheat: and the presses shall abound
with wine and oil.
The first amplification of the former benefit taken from the extraordinary
manner of performing the same.
THe first amplification of the former blessing, and promised abundance of
things necessary to live withal. And it is taken from the extraordinary
manner, after which it shall be done, and that in every kind of fruit. For
then the garners or barnes shall not only have great store of wheat, of dry
fruits of all sorts, but also shall be filled full. Their wine presses, and
other presses (which are the instruments to make other liquid or moist
commodities withal) shall even flow and run by the streets, so great
plenty certainly shall there then be of all fruits both dry and also moist.
And this is also a blessing which God promises to bless the obedient unto his
voice with all Deuteronomy. 30. ver. 9. for thus speaks Moses in that place: And
the Lord thy God will make thee plenteous in every work of thine hand, in thy
fruit of thy body, and in the fruit of thy cattle, and in the fruit of the
land for thy wealth: for the Lord will turn again, and rejoice over thee to
do thee good, as he reioysed over thy fathers. See Deuteronomy. 28. more at large to
this purpose.

Verse. 25 And I will render you the years which the grasshopper has eaten, the
canker worm, and the caterpiller, and the palmer worm, my great host, which I
sent among you.
The second amplifiction of the former blessing by comparing the plenty now
with with the scarcity before.
THe second amplification of the former earthly blessing by comparing the
extraordinary famine and barrennes described before cap. 1, with the plenty
and store which now is promised. For this store and plenty, shall restore
whatsoever that barrennes shall have taken away. Compare this verse with the
first Chapter before. ver. 4.6.7. Wherefore this plenty shall be so much the
more joyful and great, because it shall leave no sign nor senfie of the
former misery. On the contrary Genesis 41. there is a barrennes foretold of
seven years to come, the which should devour the plenty of the seven years,
which went before: that we may know and understand that both plenty and
scarsitie of all things are of and from God.

Verse. 26. So ye shall eat, and be satisfied, and praise the name of the Lord
your God, that has dealt marvelously with you: and my people shall never be
ashamed.
The third amplification, taken from the use, which God gives of these
benefits.
THe third amplification, taken from the use of so great benefits the which God
will adioyne and grant unto them. For both earthly gifts are the gift of
God, and also the ability and power to use them: This may appear by the
contrary, when God gives gifts, and not power to use them, of the which
Solomon complains Eccles. 6. ver. 1.2. There is an evil, which I saw under
the Sun, and it is much among men: A man to whom God has given riches and
treasures and honor, and he wants nothing for his soul of all that it
desires: but God gives him not power to eat thereof: but a strange man
shall eat it up: this is vanity, and this is an evil sickness. The
contrary blessing God promises unto his Church Isay 62. ver. 8.9. The Lord
has sworn by his right hand, and by his strong arm, surely I will no more
give thy corn to be meat for thine enemies, and surely the sons of the
strangers shall not drink thy wine, for the which thou have labored: but
they that have gathered it shall eat it, and praise the Lord, and the
gatherers thereof shall drink it in the courts of my Sanctuary. So then, I
say not only all power and ability to use and inioye the blessings of God,
is the gift of God: but also such power as is here in this place described.
Thus the jews shall eat the fruits of the earth, and shall be satisfied, or
filled with them: and they shall not be hunger staruen as they were before.

Further the scope or end of the use of these gifts of God is added, The end
of the use of all God his gifts toward us.
that men in so great plenty and store of things (the which is a thing which
easelie comes to pass) should not forget God: or that they should not abuse
or mispend the gifts of God: or attribute the cause of them unto any other, to
whom they should stand beholding for them, then only unto the grace of God.
For commonly men do attribute the cause of them either unto the diligence and
painefulnes of the husbandmen, or of them selves, or unto the disposition of
the Stars, and the temperature of the heaven and of the air, or unto the
fatnes of the doung laid upon the ground. For after this manner do profane
men, or wordlinges use to speak. The scope then or end both of this so great
plenty of the gifts of God, and of the use of them (which is of God granted
unto us) is, that we should bless the name of God therefore: give him thanks
with our whole heart: and confess and acknowledge him to be in deed our
father. So Paul 1. Tim. 4. v. 3. teaches, that all the creatures of God are
good, and ought not to be refused, but are to be received with thanks giving of
them whih believe and know the truth. Lastly the Prophet teaches that out of
the same plenty they are to gather a testimony or witness of the grace and
favor of God toward them. For it should be so great, that all men should then
easelie perceive and know that God did in deed miraculously give and bestow the
same.

Verse. 27. Ye shall also know, that I am in the midst of Israel, and that I
am the Lord your God, and none other, and my people shall never be a shamed.
The fourth amplification of this blessing.
THe fourth amplification of the said earthly blessing by the most holy and
reverend signification thereof. For the same shall plainly show and witness unto
the Jews the singular favor of God toward them, that is, toward his
Church. Therefore he says, by this blessing ye shall know that God is loving
unto you and bears you good will. And this is a great comfort, when as those
earthly blessings are in such sort given unto us of God, that they may
plainly appear to be signs and tokens of his love toward us: otherwise, by
this kind of things it can hardly be judged or discerned between the love
and hatred of God: also between the good or the elect, and between the evil
or Reprobate. For as it is in Mat. cap. 5. ver. 45. God makes his Sun to
arise on the evil, and the good: and sends rain on the just, and the
unjust. And Solomon Eccles. 9. ver. 1. teaches, that the just, and the wise,
and their works are in the hand of God: and no man knows either love or
hatred of all that is before them.

Three effects of God his favor toward his Church.
But this peculiar or espcial favor of God toward his Church is described by
three effects of the same, to wit, that God will be in the midst of them. Now
God is said to be in the midst of them whom he defends from all miuries or
wrongs, 1. He will be in the midst of it.
and governs by his spirit, and ^rameth them unto his obedience. Secondly,
that the true God, yea and that he alone shall then be acknowledged of the
Church to be their God. And this is then done, both when as all idolatry is
driven and banished out of the Church, 2. That the true God only is
acknowledged by her.
and when as his right and lawful worship is given unto God according unto his
word, and retained and kept in the Church.

3. That she shall not be ashamed.
Thirdly, that this people shall not be ashamed. And of this the Church has
proof and experience, when as God casts down, and overthrows her enimes,
and delivers her being afflicted or in trouble, and makes her to be a
conqueror before the world, that all men may know that she rules over her
enemies, and is cherished and maintained by God. So God promises for his
Church Isaie cap. 60, ver. 12. of whose enemies he says. For the Nation and
the kingdom, which will not serve thee, shall perish: And those Nations shall be
utterly destroyed. And ver. 16. he promises her abundance of many rich
blessings, saying: Thou shall also suck the milk of the Gentiles: and shall
suck the breasts of kings: and thou shall know that I the Lord am thy Savior,
and thy Redeemer: the mighty one of Jacob. And these are the earthly
blessings the which God bestows upon those that are his.

Verse. 28. And afterward will I power out my spirit upon all flesh: and your
sons and your daughters shall prophecy: your old men shall dream dreams,
and your young men shall see visions.
The second part of the comfort of the Church containing Spiritual promises.
THe second part of the comfort of the Church, the which contains the
Spiritual promises of God, and the same also most plentiful, like as the
first part did set forth most singular earthly blessings. And where as the
Spiritual promises are delivered in the second or latter place, this is don in
regard of our imbecilitie or weakness, namely, because that by these earthly
things we are to be led as it were by the hand to the tasting and understanding
of the spiritual. So in the Lord his prayer the petition for our daily bread
goes before it, which is of the forgiveness of sins. Furthermore the
circumstance of time was by the Prophet observed in this place, as appears.
For first God gave and imparted unto the Jews those earthly blessings, before
he bestowed on them these spiritual graces of the which he here entreats.
Moreover this so large and rich a promise is propounded or delivered unto the
Church with great garnishing or eloquence and fine setting out of the same,
both because we are wont coldely and slenderly to regard and esteem this kind
of the graces of God, (and therefore we are earnestly to be spurred up to the
consideration of the price and value of them) and also for that, if those
earthly gifts be described or set forth unto us with so great amplifiyng and
laying out of the same, how much more ought these spiritual benefits to be
commended unto us? Three parts of this verse.


This verse has three things to be noted, namely, the time wherein these things
are promised that they shall be: 1. The time.
secondly, the thing it self which is promised: 2 The thing promised.
and thirdly, the persons unto whom it is promised.

As for the time, there is a certain time assigned, yet no time near at hand,
3. The persons to whom it is promised.
or short time, for the Jews must first be delivered out of the captivity of
Babylon, the Babylonians themselves must be overthrown, and the marvelous
works of God (such as were in the times of the Machabees) appear in the
preserving, 1. The time.
feeding, and defending of his church. Wherefor there is in this place noted a
long time, and far to come, and many ages distant from the time of this
prophet, to wit, the time of the coming of Christ, and bestowing these gifts
upon his church, as Peter does expound it Act. 2. ver. 16, 17. where he cites
this very place of our Prophet to confirm the myraculous and extraordinary
graces of God his spirit in the feast of Pentecost powered out upon them. And so
does Paul also take the same Ephesians. 4. ver. 7. where he speaks of the
diversity of gifts by God bestowed upon the ministers of his church for the
good of the same saying: When he ascended up on high, he led captivity
captive, and gave gifts unto men. This place of Joel agrees with that of Isai
cap. 44. verse. 3. I will power upon the thirsty, and floods upon the dry
ground: I will power my spirit upon thy seed, and my blessing upon thy buddes.
And with that of Zach. 13. verse. 1. In that day there shall be a fountain
opened to the house of David, and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem, for sin
and for uncleanness. So every where in the prophets long times and greatly
distant one from another, are joined together, as Isai 7. verse. 8 14. because
that all the whole space the which passed from the time of the prophets until
the incarnation of Christ, is compared only unto the first part of a day. Nay
moreover, in the verses following is declared by the Prophet what shall be the
estate of the Church, and of the whole world until the consummation and ending
thereof. Wherefore these words, And it shall afterward come to pass, do
contain that same whole time, the which passed until the coming and death of
Christ, and the visible sending of the holy Ghost, of the which there is
mention Act. 2. And thus much concerning the time.

2. The thing promised.
The matter or thing it self which is promised, is a spiritual grace, and the
same most abundant and plentiful toward al kind of men, the which shall be
members of the church. God therefore is said that he shall not only give, but
also power out most largely. For albeit before the coming of Christ God gave
unto the fathers his holy spirit, as for example, unto the Prophets, and other
the godly: yet was that grace as a small part and certain little drop, as a
little portion of faith, and knowledge of salvation of Christ, and of the
secret of God, in comparison of that which both the Apostles and also others
received on that day of Pentecost, or Whitsontide: and also in comparison of
that which the Church now has and receives through the benefit of Christ.
For he that is less in the kingdom of God, and under the preaching of the
Gospel, is greater even then John Baptist himself, much more therefore then
the former Prophets Mat. 11. ver 11. So then this pouring out and this so great
light of the knowledge of God, and of faith imparted and bestowed upon the
godly, is to be understood in a certain respect, namely, by the comparing
together of the spiritual gifts of God, and of the same knowledge made of God
unto the church before the coming of Christ. And therefore Ephesians. 3. verse. 4, 5.
Paul speaking of these two times of knowledge says, that the understanding of
the mystery of Christ in other ages was not opened (...) tiles converted unto
Christ: and that here also is taken away difference of uncircumcision, and of
circumcision, because without all doubt he speaks of the Kingdom of Christ,
where there is now no such difference. For as Paul witnesses Galat. 6. ver.
15. In Christ Jesus neither circumcision avails any thing, nor
uncircumcision, but a new creature.

Verse. 30. And I will show wonders in the heavens, and in the earth: blood and
fire, and pillars of smoke.
A continuing of the comfort of the godly, by setting down an history of such
things as should fall out even unto the end of the world. It was very
requisite, that the Church should be instructed in the state of the world to
come.
A Continuing of the comfort by the order and history of things to come, the
which is in this place briefly made until the last day of the Lord comes.
And there is showed what the Church of God, and every one of the godly ought to
do in the mean season, upon what foundation to rest, and where to seek their
deliverance and salvation, to the end that this history should not rather
trouble them, then comfort them. Wherefore this verse with that which
follows, contains, but most briefly, what shall be the state of this
world, after those gifts given unto men by God. For in as much as the Church
must needs have her being in this world, she was also to be put in mind of
the state of this world which was to come, that she should not therefore be
dismayed, when as there should be, and were to come, so many and great
alterations and changes of things, so fearful miseries, ouethrowings of
kingdoms, civil wars of nations within themselves. And this place is
plainly expounded by Christ Mat. 24. ver. 6. when as he shows his disciples
also, what should be the state and condition of the world before the end
thereof, saying: Ye shall hear of wars, and rumors of wars: see that ye be
not troubled: for all these things must come to pass: but the end is not yet.
For nation shall rise against nation, and realm against realm, and there
shall be pectilence, and famine, and earthquakes in diverse places. And ver. 29.
And immediately after the tribulations of those days, shall the Sun be
darkened, and the Moon shall not give her light, and the Stars shall fall
from Heaven and the powers of heaven shall be shaken. So Zach. 14. ver. 13. But
in that day a great tumult of the Lord shall be among them, and every one shall
take the hand of his neighbor, and his hand shall rise up against the hand of
his neighbor. See further concerning these matters Reuelat. cap. 6. cap. 7.
etc. Briefly in this place of Joel there is M^taphoricallie described an
history of things to come after Chr^^^ his being showed unto the world, the
which is horrible and fearful I confess, yet most just, because of the
Gospel of Christ despised and refused by the world, and also because of the
persecuting of the same with sundry persecutions by the Kings of this world.

Further, this whole description is Metaphorical, What the figure Metaphora is,
see Amos cap. 4. ver. 12.
by the recital of those things, the which are wont to make men most afraid,
that the judgments of God may be understood to be the greater against the
world, for as much as the world persecuteth, or despises Christ. Therefore
there shall be fear in every place, whither so ever men do turn their eyes,
either in heaven, or in earth. For so does the world deserve, when as it
casts aside the truth of God. Then also the outward sight, and as it were
the face of things, the which shall then be done and seen, shall appear most
fearful, dreadful, and afraying all men. For it shall be such, as if men
every where and in all places did behold and see blood, fire, and darkness set
and cast before their eyes. And by this kind of speaking, no man doubts soul
discomfitures, cruel plagues, and wonders, that is, signs and tokens
altogether fearful, and testifying or witnessing the wrath and anger of God,
to be signified and understood.

Verse. 31. The Sun shall be turned into darkness, and the Moon into blood,
before the great and terrible day of the Lord come.
The misery of those days amplified in regard
AN amplification of the said misery taken both from the persons themselves,
the which shall then be afflicted or troubled and punished, and also from the
length of time. The persons which shall be afflicted, are in this place no
doubt signified that they shall be of great place and authority. 1. Of the
persons afflicted.
For the Prophet notes them under the name of the Sun and the Moon, as Genesis
37. ver. 9. by the Sun and the Moon and the eleven Stars in the dream of
Joseph, were understood his father and mother and eleven brethren. Therefore
like as the Sun and the Moon are in comparison of the other Stars in
heaven: so are these great personages in respect of other men on the land and
earth, who notwithstanding shall themselves also be most hardly afflicted. Thus
perished and ran to ruin the Roman Empire for despising the name of God, and
persecuting the Gospel of Christ: Thus also at this day do most flourishing
kingdoms, and Kings and Common wealths perish for the same cause.

2. Of the length and continuance of time.
The length of time also is added, These things shall endure and continue in the
world, both before, and also until that same gre^^ and fearful day of the
Lord shall come, that is, that same last day of the world, where Christ shall
appear in judgment, as Christ tells his Disciples Matthew. 24. ver. 34.
saying, Verily I say unto you, thi^ generation shall not pass, till all these
things be done. For the Church of God has oftentimes Halcyon days in this
world, that is, rest and quiet for a season, but never true and continual
peace, no not for any long time neither: which thing is signified Apoc. 8.
ver. 1. when John says, that at the opening of the seventh seal, there was
silence in heaven about half an hour. And cap. 12. ver. 1. by the vision of
the woman clothed with the Sun, and the Moon under her feet, etc. And
Micheas cap. 4. ver. 4. having before spoken of the kingdom of Christ, and
felicity of his Church, shows that the same shall not be without her rest
and peace sometime, when he says, that they shall sit every man under his
vine, and under his fig tree, and none shall make them afraid.

Verse. 32. But whosoever shall call upon the name of the Lord shall be saved:
for in mount Zion and in Jerusalem shall be deliverance* (...) the Lord has
said, and in the remnant whom the Lord shall call.
An adomonitio^ for the godly.
AN admonition. For the Prophet admonishes or warns what is to be done of
every godly man in so great confusion of ^he world, and hurly burly of things,
that he be not swallowed up, or perish with the world, but may be delivered,
and himself escape safe out of so great shipwrackes, to wit, that he truly
call upon the name of God according unto true faith, and according unto the
commandment of God. So Christ having preached of the same afflictions,
teaches that this only remedy is then left unto those that are his, namely,
that by true faith, patience, and with fervent and earnest calling upon the
name of God, they do adioyne themselves unto the hearing of the true doctrine
of the Gospel, as the Eagl^^ do unto the dead carcass, Matthew. 24. ver. 28.
And cap. 10. ver. ^^. she shows, That he which indureth to the end, shall be
saved. A^^ Luke 21. ver. 19. he says unto his Disciples, By your patience
p^ss^^^ your souls. The reason why they shall be delivered.
The reason is added, because every one, that is, whi^^ out of any nation shall
call upon the true God, to wit, by true fa^^^ (for otherwise he cannot truly be
called upon) the same shall (...) saved by God, and shall escape safe out of so
many shipwrackes, whether he be a Jew, or of the Gentiles. So does Paul expound
this place Romans 10. ver. 13.14. For this promise, whereof he speaks now, is
general, and appertains generally unto all nations, and not unto the Jews
alone: but unto all the true remnants of the Church, out of what nation soever
the Lord shall call them unto himself, and unto the true knowledge of him, as
the Prophet himself does expound it, and Peter also Act. 10. ver. 35. when he
says: In every nation he that fears him, and works righteousness, is
accepted with him. So then, there is here both a remedy set forth unto the
godly, and also a cause of this remedy.

Two things yet to be noted.
Further, there are yet two things added in this verse. One, the foundation of
this cause: the other, the place wherein this true calling upon God is: and
consequently the salvation of men. 1. The foundation of the former cause.
The foundation of this cause is the free promise of God. For God will in such
sort do this, because he has freely so promised: and calls those, whom he
desires to save. 2. The place where this invocation must be.
For here the Prophet speaks of an effectual calling of God, whereby men are
truly converted unto God through faith, the which faith it self also is
merely free, as is also the promise of God, of the saving of some certain
men, Romans 11. ver. 5. Even so then at this present time there is a remnant
through the election of grace. 1. The free promise of God.
So then the mere or only mercy and grace of God toward men, is the
foundation of this salvation and hope of the godly.

2. The place Zion and Jerusalem, that is, the true church of God.
The place is added, in the which God is truly called upon, and consequently
where there is true salvation and escaping, not so much indeed of the body, or
out of the dangers and afflictions of this life, as of the soul, and from
everlasting damnation, the which (...) most fearful death and punishment, and
most especially of all men to be dreaded, as Christ teaches Matthew. 10. ver.
28. where he says, Fear ye not them which kill the body, but are not able to
kill the s^^le: but rather fear him which is able to destroy both body and
soul in hell. Now this place is Sion, and Jerusalem, that is to say, the
Church of God, the which is governed and grounded upon his word. For in this
place Sion and Jerusalem are set against the kingdom of Israel, and the
infidel kingdoms, the which, how honorable, wealthy, and great soever they
shall then be, yet if they shall not have the pure word of God, there shall be
in them no salvation for men: but salvation only shall be in the city of God,
and in Sion, the which (...) the pillar and keeper of his truth. There then
shall be the salvation of men, yea and that only, where there shall be true
invocation, or calling upon the name of God. Wherefore the word Sion, does not
restrain this promise of God unto the Jews only dwelling in that ear^hly Sion
(for then should not this grace of God be general, as it is not^ithstanding)
but under this name Sion, is signified the Church of God at all times, and into
what parts and quarters of the world soever it shall then be scattered. For
there is salvation of souls, because that there is true faith, and the true
Christ, and consequently there is the true God, and grace and forgiveness of
sins.

CAP. 3.
Verse. 1. For behold, in those days and in that time, when I shall bring
again the captivity of Judah and Jerusalem.
A confirmation of the former promise, taken from the removing of the lets or
enemies of the Church.
A Confirmation of the former promise of the safety of the Church of God to
come, even in the midst of those troubles, and hurly burlies of the world, the
which were described in the chapter before. And it is taken from the removing
away of the lets or enemies of the Church, whom God will overthrow, be they in
number never so great, and never so much to be feared. Wherefore nothing shall
let God, from performing that his promised deliverance and safety unto his
Church. So Amos 9.15. So Mich. 7. ver. 8. And such repetitions as these, and
such comforts are very necessary and needful for the godly, least they faint
by reason of the continuance of the evils and troubles, or be feared with the
multitude of the enemies, and so be brought into despair. In a word, through
this whole chapter is promised the overthrow of the enemies of the Church, and
of such as do afflict or trouble it.

The time, in the which God shall perform these things.
But this verse contains the noting out of the time, wherein these things
shall be done by God, namely, when as God shall bring again the captivity of
Judah, that is to say, when as he shall gather together his scattered Church.
For this promise is general, and comprehends the whole time, in the which
there shall be or ^^maine any Church in this world. For albeit God sometime
have gathered his Church more nobly and with greater renown o^^ of her
miserable scattering into other countries, as after the captivity of Babylon,
under the Machabees: and especially by the preaching of the Gospel after the
coming of Christ: yea, and no^ in these last times does gather it together, of
his great mercy restoring unto us and renewing the light of the Gospel: yet is
it notwithstanding most true, that God is always present with his Church, and
does keep it, and break the power of the enemies thereof, that they destroy
it not utterly. Wherefore how often soever God will restore it, then also do
those most assured judgments of God against the enemies of his Church, which
are here threatened, appear, and are executed by him.

Verse. 2. I will also gather all nations, and will bring them down into the
valley of Iehoshaphat, and will plead with them there for my people, and for
mine heritage Israel, whom they have scattered among the nations, and parted my
land.
1. The place. 2. The persons. 3. The cause.
THis verse comprehends three things, the which without all doubt do declare
the destruction to come to the enemies of the Church. The first contains the
place. The second, whom God will punish. The third, for what cause. 1. The
valley of Iehoshaphat.
The place is said that it shall be the valley of Iehoshaphat, to wit, by the
figure Metalepsis (which what it is see Oseas cap. 4. ver. 18.) that look
what, and what manner of benefit of God the people of the Jews did once feel
in that valley when God gave that mighty overthrow unto his enemies the
Moabites and Ammonites 2. Chro. 20. the like shall the church always feel,
when as it is delivered by God, namely, that he will in a moment destroy all
the enemies thereof, although they have never so much conspired together, be
never so diverse or many in number. See Psalm. 83. Now they which shall be
gathered together, 2. The unbelieving people and nations whatsoever.
judged and punished by God, are the Gentiles, that is, men and people which
remain infidels and unbelievers. For as for those which shall turn unto the
true God, and shall receive Christ by faith, they shall not be destroyed by God,
nor be inwrapped in this judgment. Therefore the unfaithful only shall be
gathered, and that all of them, that is, out of every nation, and people, which
have afflicted the Church of God. Lastly, the cause is added, namely, 3.
Because they have scattered the people of God among the heathen, and have
divided their land.
for that they have both scattered the people of God among the Gentiles: and
also moreover have divided their land among themselves, and have robbed and
spoiled it: yet both this people, and also this their land was the people and
inheritance of God himself only. Wherefore those infidels shall justly be
punished by God, in regard of a double sa^^ledge or theeuerie to Godward,
namely, because they robbed and spoiled both the people of GOD, and also the
land of God.

Verse. 3. And they have cast lots for my people, and have given the child for
the harlot, and sold the girl for wine, that they might drink.
An amplification of the despite and injury offered by the heathen unto the
people of God:
AN amplification of this villainy or despite and wrong done by these heathen or
infidels, not unto men, but unto God himself, which amplification is taken
from this notorious despite of theirs. For these Gentiles breaking both that
privilege and authority which God had peculiarly over this people: and also
the general laws and teaching of nature and humanity, handled and used the
Church of God most shamefully, nay most cruelly. For they did not only make
that whole nation captives, and divided them among themselves by lot, as
covetous Soldiers are wont to do their pray and booty, and as they did with
the garments of Christ Matthew. 27. but also they entreated the godly so
despitefully and villanously, that they sold the boys and the girls as the
dross of the world, for a most small and low price, the which afterward they
converted or turned unto lewd and wicked uses, as namely into whoredom and
drunkenness. The Sardians.
So in times past the captive Sardians in reproach were called Saleable, or (as
we may term them) dog-cheap slaves, who because of their cheapenes, and great
numbers of them were sold for a farthing a piece, or for a matter of nothing.
And truly in such sort commonly do the ungodly handle the godly, when as they
fall into their hands, that they esteem not so much of them, as they do of
other slaves of other infidel and unbelieving nations: nay, many times they
make not so good reckoning of them, as they do of most vile and filthy
dogs. But because of such cruelty of men against men, God is most grievously
angry Amos cap. 1. and 2. So one day will God destroy the Turks, because of
the like cruelty against Christians.

Verse. 4. Yea, and what have you to do with me, O Tyrus and Zid^^, and all the
costs of Palestina? will ye render me a recompense and if ye recompense me,
swiftly and speedily will I render your r^compence upon your head.
An application of the former despite unto 3. several peoples.
AN application of the former injury and despite done agay^^^ God, and the
people of God. First unto the Tyrians: after^^^^^ unto the Sidonians, and
lastly unto them of Palestina, or the Philistims. All these God accuses of a
three fold crime, 1 Injustice. 2 Sacrilege. 3 Cruelty.
and the same most heinous, that is to say, of injustice, sacrilege, and
barbarous cruelty. Of injustice in this verse. 1. Injustice.
For they thus afflicted or plagued the church upon no cause, in as much as
they were no way provoked by her, but made unjust war against the church of
God, being moved thereunto through the hatred of God only. Therefore says the
Lord, there is no just cause of this punishment by you laid upon my church.
There has no occasion bin given you. Therefore you can pretend or allege no
recompense, that is, no requittance of any wrong done unto you before, for the
cause of your cruelty against my church. Therefore you are in this point
altogether unjust and wrongful dealers. But I when as I shall punish you,
shall be just even therefore, or in so doing. For I shall justly pay home upon
your own heads the price of this your wickedness. For I shall give unto you a
reward of your so great injustice.

Ver. 5. For ye have taken my silver, and my gold, and have carried into your
temples my goodly and pleasant things.
SEcondly he accuses them of sacrilege, 2 Sacrilege.
or the every against God, to wit, for that they have taken from him, that is,
from the true God, an holy thing, or such goods as were appointed for his
service, and have converted or bestowed them upon the worship and temples of
their idols, wickedly profaning or vnhalowing divine and holy things, or such
as were ordained unto holy uses. So does Balthazar with the vessels of the
temple Dan. 5. Which thing is a notorious sacrilege or robbery against God.

Ver. 6. The children also of Judah, and the children of Jerusalem have you
sold unto the Grecians, that you might send them far from their border.
THirdly he accuses them of barbarous cruelty, namely, 3 Cruelty.
that they were not content to carry away captive the children of Judah, and of
Jerusalem, that is such men and people as both were neighbors unto them, and
also peculiarly dedicated or appointed unto God, and to sell them as if they
had bin brute beasts: but also through singular cruelty they did seatter them
into the farthest countries, that possibly they could, as namely selling them
unto Grecians and Barbarians, and men dwelling beyond the sea, to that end that
the Jews should by no means be able to redeem or ransom themselves
afterward, and to return unto their native soil, or country where they were
borne, by reason of the distance of places, and straungenes and cruelty of the
men, unto whom they were in bondage. So then their purpose was to keep them
bond slaves for ever, so far as lay in these Sidonians, Syrians, and
Philistims. So Amos 1. ver. 6. the Philistims are accused for that they sold
the captive Jews unto people that were greatest enemies unto them. Furthermore
by these words the sons or children of Judah and Jerusalem, I doubt not but
that the treachery or unfaithfulness of the Tirians, the old and ancient
confederates of the Jews is reprehended, as who namely had so most cruelly
broken the old leagues between their kings and the kings of the Jews, as
ancient as from the times of Solomon and Hiram, as may appear 1. King. 5. and
had forgotten the same.

Ver. 7. Behold, I will raise them out of the place, where ye have sold them
and will render your reward upon your own head.
A confirmation of the former promise the which is twofold.
A Confirmation of the former promise and comfort, the which was set forth unto
the Jews or church of God. This confirmation is twofold. The one is taken from
the restoring of the Jews themselves: the other from the overthrow of the
enemies of the church. The renewing and restoring of the Jews, or scattered
church, 1 Taken from the restoring of the Jews.
is contained in this verse: the overthrow of the enemies in the verse
following. God then promises that it shall come to pass, that he himself
will gather his church, albeit that the same by them be never so much
scattered: yea and that out of what place soever, into the which they have
strowed and scattered them. So Psalm. 107. ver. 3. David wills those whom God
has gathered together from the lands of the East and of the West, and of the
North, and of the south, to praise the Lord. Wherefore there are two things
here to be noted: one, the person of him that gathers them together. And that
is God himself, the Lord almighty and true. I, says he, will raise them up
and bring them again. The second thing is, that he says, out of what place
soever ye have sold the Jews. For nothing can withstand the grace and power of
God, that he should not fulfill his promises toward his church. Let this
therefore always comfort the godly in what place soever they shall be.

Ver. 8. And I will sell your sons and your daughters into the hand of the
children of Judah, and they shall sell them unto the Sabians, to a people far
off: for the Lord has spoken it.
2 From the miserable overthrow of their enemies.
THe overthrow of the enemies of the church, and the same most lamentable. For
they in the just judgment of God shall fall into the self same miseries, the
which they have devised and procured for the church. So then God requiteth unto
his enemies the self same mischief the which they have cruelly invented
against the church: and renders unto them like for like, as he smote the
Philistines in the hinder parts, and put them unto a perpetual shame, Psalm.
78. ver. 66. who had shamefully used God his people, and sinned foully against
him in beastly idolatry. For the same in the end reboundeth upon their own
parts, the which they had framed against the godly, and men fearing the Lord.
So David speaks of the ungodly, Psalm. 7. ver. 15.16. He has made a pit, and
dug it, and is fallen into the pit that he made. His mischief shall return
upon his own head, and his cruelty shall fall upon his own pate. And this is
a most just punishment of these wicked men, and enemies of God, that they
themselves feel and suffer the harm and misery the which they do forge and
go about for others. The which in this place God threatens, shall fall out
unto the enemies of his church. The punishment here threatened contains three
things.
Therefore this punishment threatened by God contains three things. First,
that it shall come to pass that their sons and daughters also shall be sold
for captives into bondage, as they namely sold the sons and daughters of
Judah. The second, 1. Their sons and daughters shall be sold.
that they shall be sold, and carried away into captivity by the Jews
themselves, as they sold them, and held and kept them captives. The third, 2.
They shall be sold by the Jews.
that they also themselves shall be sold by the same Jews unto the Sabeans,
and people far off, that they may serve a perpetual and most miserable bondage
beyond all hope of being redeemed and ransomed afterward, 3 They shall be
sold unto nations far off.
like as they sold the Jews unto the Grecians and nations far off into
perpetual and miserable bondage. And this is a just requitance of punishment.

Verse. 9. Publish this among the Gentiles: prepare war: wake up the mighty
men: Let all the men of war draw near and come up.
A confirmation of this overthrow of the enemies of the Church.
HE confirms this overthrow of all the enemies of the Church by the issue or
falling out of the matter which was to come. For the former punishment seems
properly to appertain unto the Tyrians, Sidonians, and Philistims only: but
this which now follows, concerns all the enemies of the Church of what
nation, stock, sex, and condition soever they be. Which thing because it is
incredible unto the enemies themselves, or such a thing as they cannot believe,
when as they are so many in number and so mighty, yea this self same point
seems oftentimes hard and cumbersome unto the Church her self, which
co^pareth her strength with the strength of her enemies: therefore does God now
in such sort represent and describe or set forth this his judgment against
all these so many and so mighty people and his enemies, that none may now
hence forth doubt of it for to come. For under a very necessary and needful
Hypotyposis or most lively laying of the matter as it were open unto the view
of the eyes, What the figure hypotyposis is, see Amos cap. 8. ver. 12.
there is set forth, how great the preparation of God shall be in this war, and
ouerco^ming of his enemies: how great shall be his strength and power: what
manner of host or army: how great his might: both that he may prevent or
answer a doubt, which might be made by his church, and also to shake off the
careless co^sidence or foolehardines of his enemies. Wherefore this whole place
is a needful Hypotyposis.

Two Parts of this verse.
But this verse contains two things. The first the denouncing or threatening of
war, 1 A proclamation of war.
and the same most just war against those enemies of his Church. For it is
commanded to be published, or to be denounced or showed by the Prophets, as it
were by Heralts unto these Nations which have afflicted the Church. For in such
sort ought lawful wars to be made, that they be first proclaimed unto the
enemy, and that it may be showed that he deals with a bad conscience, if
being spoken unto, he render not right, and that which is answerable unto law.
The war is commanded to be sanctified, that is, that there be a just cause
thereof declared: yea and declared that it shall be a war, that is a most
cruel war, and most lamentable, and full of blood. The word (Sanctify)
therefore does declare the lawfulnes of the war. For no wars are at any
time to be taken in hand, if they be not just and lawful. And all lawful wars
are holy, and the battles of God, and not of men. So Abigail acknowledges the
wars of David to be just, and that he fights the Lords battles 1. Sam. 25.
ver. 28. So 2. Chro. 20. ver. 15. Iahaziel the Leuite enspired by the Spirit of
God comfort Iehoshaphat and the people against the huge host of the Moabites
and Ammonites, and says: Fear you not, neither (...) afraid of his great
multitude: for the battle is not yours, but the Lords. The word (war or
battle) shows the sharpenes of this war, and bloody fightes.

2 What manner of men the Souldiars shall be.
The second part of this verse contains, what kind of men shall war in the
tents for God, and shall come together against the enemies of the Church,
namely stout and mighty men and good warriors, yea and that all of them, and
not only one or twain shall war unto God, or for God.

Verse. 10. Break your plowe shares into swords, and your siethes into
spears: Let the weak say, I am strong.
A description of this preparation unto battle.
NOw the great preparation of this war is described, the which might both
strengthen the Church: and also terrify or fear the enemies. For all things
shall do God service in this war. Their plow shares and siethes shall be
turned into swords and spears most willingly by them all against the enimes
of God. But where the peace of God reigns, the contrary is done: For then
all weapons are turned into siethes and plow shares. Isa. 2. Mich. 4. Finally
there shall none be willing to have himself excused, or privileged from this
war. For the weak shall then be strong and valiant for the fighting of this
battle. And therefore he shall come into the Tents of God. For God shall make
them all strong and lusty at that time, as he did the Israelites, when he
brought them out of Egypt, of whom David says Psalm. 105. verse. 37. He brought
them forth also with silver and gold, and there was none feeble among their
tribes.

Verse. 11. Assemble your selves, and come all ye heathen, and gather your
selves together round about: Or cause there thy mighty men, O Lord to come
down.
there shall the Lord cast down thy mighty men.
IN the third place is briefly, but yet lively described the readiness,
obedience, and order of the Souldiares in this host of God. 1 Readiness. 2
Obedience.
Their readiness, in that when as the Lord shall say (gather your selves
together) they shall by and by and forthwith be gathered together. Their
obedience also is declared: in that they shall come round about or from all
places, and not from one place only: but look how many, and from whence
soever shall by God be bidden and called vntoth is war, they shall give in
their names by and by, and come into the tents of God, to fight against his
enemies. Lastly their order is signified by the word it self of gathering
together, 3 Order. By the exposition of this verse it seems that the Author
translated it thus: Assemble your selves and come al ye Nations: and they shall
gather them selves together round about: there shall the mighty men of the
Lord come down.
and for that the mighty men of God shall come down, that is, they shall march
every man in his order, as becomes good and skillful Soldiers. Now these
mighty men are said by some to be the good Angels of God, the which do fight
for the Church of God: but of others they are said to be the self same, who a
little before were called mighty men, and men of war. I had rather
understand it of the good Angels, albeit I shut not out men. For both Angels
and men are the ministers of God, to punish the wicked. Of the Angels Jude in
his Epistle speaks, when he says ver 14. Behold the Lord shall come with
thousands of his Saints, to give judgment against all men, etc. And Psalm. 68.
ver. 17. The chariots of God are twenty thousand thousand Angels, and the Lord
is among them, as in the Sanctuary of Sinai.

Ver. 12. Let the heathen be wakened, and come up to the valley of Iehosaphat:
for there will I sit to judge all the heathen, round about.
A confirmation of the former promise of the deliverance of the Church,
containing the manner, place, and time of the same.
HYpophora, or the answering of an objection, whereby GOD meets with a great
doubt, the which might hereby rise in the minds of the Godly: because that at
that time when as these things were threatened and uttered by Joel, the whole
world was quiet: nay conspyred unto the destruction of the Church: to be short
there appeared nothing in any Nation, the which might raise up, or cause this
hope of the sturring of Nations against the enemies of the Church. God
therefore answers, that they shall notwithstanding be raised up, and that
assuredly: but then at the length, when as God will in deed exercise these
judgments against them, and when as the measure of their iniquity, and of
their cruelty and malice against the Church shall be filled up. Therefore this
verse contains a confirmation of the former promise, that is, of the
deliverance to come of the godly from their enemies, and the manner, place, and
time of the fulfilling of the same. The manner is, that God will raise up the
Nations out of their seats, albeit they be now quiet: and they shall obey God
calling them. 1 The manner.
For they shall come up and that armed and gatherd to gether against the enemies
of the Church. The place is the valley of Iehoshaphat, whereof has been spoken
before in this Chapter ver. 2. the time is, 2 The place.
when as God will in deed judge those his emmies, and defer, 3 The time.
or put off their punishment no longer, as then he did, namely in the time of
Joel: but afterward God will sit on his throne as a judge to condemn them. In
this consideration, that the Lord will one day judge the cause of his against
their enemies, David does both comfort himself and also prays unto God often
in the P^almes to perform the same, as Psalm. 7. ver. 7.8, So shall the
congregation of the people compass thee about: for their sakes therefore
return on hie. And Psalm. 10. ver. 12. Arise O Lord God, lift up thine hand:
forget not the poor, etc. Let this therefore comfort the true Church of God at
this day also, especially that in Flaunders, which is most miserably
afflicted.

Verse. 13. Put in your siethes, for the harvest is ripe: come, get ye down,
for the wine press is full: yea the wine presses ran over, for their wickedness
is great.
A Making of the former matter more plain. For he shows both how and after
what manner, Two parts of this verse.
or with what sign GOD wilrayse up those Nations: and also why he does defer
it or puts it off for a time. The sign is set forth metaphorically, 1 With
what sign God will raise up the Nations.
taking a similitude from the sieth of the mowers, as it is also Apoca. 14.
verse. 15.16. where the Angel crying alowd to him that sat on the cloud,
says: Thrust in thy sickle, and reap: for the time is come to reap: for the
harvest of the earth is ripe. 2 Why he def^rreth.
And he that sat on the Cloud, thrust in his sickle on the earth, and the
earth was reaped. God then sends his sieth, and gives a sign, the which
being given, all the Nations of the world are stirred up to execute the
judgments of God. This sign is perceived of us by the event or falling out
of the matter afterward, and after the deed done, as they call it: that is,
after that we see nations thus gathered together. Confer this place with that
of Mat. cap. 13. ver. 39. where a like similitude is used.

The cause why God deferreth, it is his merciful justice, for he waits
patiently for sinners for a time, that either they should repent: or else fill up
the measure of their sins: and consequently that the most righteous judgment
of God may then appear, that is, worthelie bestirred up against such, and so
stubborn sinners: for the obstinate or stifnecked ungodly ones appear like
unto the harvest that is to be cut down, and their wickedness in the end is so
great, that like unto a most full wine press it does run over into the
streets, that is, may be seen openly, and must of necessity be punished. So
Genesis 15. ver. 16. God shows unto Abraham that the wickedness of the Amorites
was not yet full. GOD therefore does justly defer or put off, and delay his
judgments.

Verse. 14. O multitude, O multitude: come into the valley of thresshing: for
the day of the Lord is near in the valley of thresshing.
A confirmation of the former judgment against the enemies of the church.
ANother confirmation of the former judgment threatened against the enemies of
the church ver. 9. taken from their great overthrow, that is, from the effect,
the which in the end shall appear fearful. For there shall lie heaps of
them that are slain, that is, their dead bodies shall lie every where, so
great a slaughter, murder, and overthrow doubtless shall there be of them. And
these things shall be done in the valley of cutting off or of thresshing, the
which is now so called, of the effect: like as before it was called the valley
of Iehosaphat, Where the val ley of Iehoshaphatis.
of the judgment which God will use there. But this is no one certain place
in the land of Judah: but every country, where God does thus overthrow and
cast down his enemies, when he has cut them off or thresshed them, is thus
called the valley of cutting off or of threshing. Finally, whersoeuer the day
of the Lord, that is, the time of his judgment against the wicked approaches,
there by and by is prepared this valley of cutting off, or of thresshing, and
of Iehosaphat, where God does punish and cut off the wicked with a foul
slaughter and overthrow.

Verse. 15. The sun and moon shall be darkened, and the stars shall
withdraw their light.
The first amplification of thie fearful overthrow.
THe first amplification of this event and fearful overthrow, by the adioynts.
For then the sun and the moon shall loose their brightness: also the stars
shall withdraw their light, that is, all the powers of the world, the kings,
all highnesses against GOD, shall be thrown down, and the state of this world
shall be horrible, and full of fear and terror. What is meant by the sun,
moon, and stars loosiug their light, and brightness.
This afterward came to pass in the world oftentimes, and shall also come to
pass unto the end of the world. For both when God punished the Jews for the
crucifiyng of Christ: and the world for the Idolatries of the former time
under the Emperors of Rome, Otho, Vitellius, Vespasian: and also the contempt
or despising of his name afterward in the East, Thracia, and Grecia, by the
Saracens, Turks, and Mahometists; doubtless many Kings and Princes perished:
and the suns of the world, and the moons, and many stars lost their
light, that is, Kings and Queens and great States perished. See before cap. 2.
ver. 13.

Verse. 16. The Lord also shall roar out of Zion, and utter his voice from
Jerusalem: and the heavens and the earth shall shake, but the Lord will be the
hope of his people, and the strength of the children of Israel.
Another amplificatio^ of the former destruction.
ANother amplification of the said destruction and overthrow of the enemies of
the church, taken also from the adioynts, but diverse from the verse before
going, namely, from the wrath of God against those his enemies, and the same
most hot and fierce, such as is that of a Lion roaring for his pray. For then
shall that voice of God being angry, and pursuing them, strike an exceeding
great fear into the ungodly. So is God his coming against his enemies full of
fear and terror described Psalm. 18. ver. 8, 9, 13. Smoke went out at his
nostrels, and a consuming fire out of his mouth: coals were kindled thereat. He
bowed the heavens also, and came down, and darkness was under his feet. The
Lord also thundered in the heaven, and the highest gave his voice, haylestones
and coals of fire. So is Jeremy willed to describe God to the terrifiyng of
all the inhabitants of the earth cap. 25. verse. 30. Therefore Prophecy thou
against them (says God) all those words, and say unto them: The Lord shall
roar from above, and thrust out his voice from his holy habitation: he shall
roar upon his habitation and cry aloude, as they that press the grapes
against all the inhabitants of the earth. And there shall be so great trembling
of all things hereupon, that both the heaven and the earth it self shall be
moved. But the Lord Jehovah will be therefuge, and strength unto his people.

A comfort for the churah.
This is a comfort unto the Church, the which is opposed or set against the
former threatenings against the enemies thereof, that the godly may understand,
that they in the so great destruction and misery of the ungodly shall be safe
and sound notwithstanding, nay untouched, when as God shall in such sort
thunder and lighten from heaven: and when as the heaven and earth it self
shall tremble.

The reason is added, because then God shall be the hope or refuge, The reason
of the same comfort.
and strength of his church, the which he calls both his people and also the
sons of Israel. The sons of Israel are all the godly, because of their
faith common unto them with Israel. They are also the people of God, because of
the peculiar covenant of God made with them. Hereby appears how exceeding
great the force and power of the faith of the godly is, as which namely being
grounded upon the promises of God by Christ, is not shaken, no not in the midst
of the terror or fear of the whole world. For this faith is our victory
against the world, and the devil, and hell, Mat. 16. and 1. John. 5.

Verse. 17 So shall know that I am the Lord your GOD dwelling in Zion mine holy
Mountain: then shall Jerusalem be holy, and there shall no strangers go
through her any more.
THe conclusion, that God will be the protector or defendor of those that are
his: The conclusion
and therefore that he will dwell among them, or in the middle of them: and that
he will then purge or cleanse his church, and establish it, even against all
the ungodly, and strangers. Finally, by so manifest signs and tokens, that all
the godly may easily acknowledge it. This is the sum of this pillar and most
great and sure foundation of our salvation, the which is grounded and stands
wholly upon the mere and only grace of GOD. And there are two things here to
be noted, the one a manifold testimony or witness of God toward those that are
his. Two things to be noted.
The other, the acknowledging and observation of the same, 1. A manifold
testimony of God toward his.
the which must be done of us, that we may be thankful unto God. For it is a
shame to shut our eyes at the manifest testimonies of the mercy of God toward
us, 2. The acknowledging of the same by the godly.
and that which the sense it self of our body, and experience may teach us,
nay does teach us, yet neither to observe not note the same in our mind unto
the glory of God, and setting forth of his mercy toward us: but (after the
manner of those that play winking) to pass over the same with blind eyes, or
seeing them, not to have any care or keep of them. The which doubtless is a
notorious unthankfulness and treachery of men toward God. This unthankfulness
does David cast in the teeth of the Israelites Psalm. 1^6. ver. 7, 8, etc.
saying: Our fathers understood not thy wonders in Egypt, neither remembered
they the multitude of thy mercies, but rebelled at the sea, even at the red
sea. Nevertheless he saved them for his names sake, that he might make his power
to be known, etc.

A fourefold testimony of God toward those that are his.
Now the testimony or witness of God his especial favor toward those that are
his is here reckoned up to be fourefolde. The first, that he which is the most
high, and only, and true, and eternal, and almighty God, or Jehovah, is
peculiarly their GOD, and not only in such sort as he is the God of other men
also. 1. God is the God of his church after a peculiar and especial manner.
This do the faithful acknowledge Psalm. 105. v. 7. when as they say, He is the
Lord our God: his judgments are through all the earth. And more plainly yet
does David express the same Psalm. 147. ver. 19.20. in these words: He shows
his word unto Iaacob, his statutes and his judgments unto Israel. He has not
dealt so with every nation, neither have they known his judgments.

The second testimony is, that the same God dwells in the midst of them, the
which dwelling in regard of that time he calls, 2. God dwells in the midst
of his church.
To dwell in Sion his holy mountain. For so is the church allegorically or
mystically and figuratively defined, namely, that it is said to be that same
holy mountain in the which God dwells Psalm. 24. Psalm. 68. ver. 16. As for
this mountain, God delights to dwell in it: yea, the Lord will dwell in it for
ever. And GGD dwells in his church after a peculiar and especial manner,
because of those Sacraments of his presence, the which he has given peculiarly
unto it: as is the preaching of the pure and heavenly doctrine, the
administration of the sacraments, and the manifest pouring out of divine graces
upon it. This is the second sign of the favor of God toward those which are
his. The third, 3. God does santifie his church.
that he makes the same his church holy, and does daily sanctify it, to wit,
through forgiveness of sins, and regeneration or new birth, the which does
daily mortify or kill in us the kingdom of sin. The fourth testimony is,
that strangers, that is, those that are without, or Infidels, 4. He does defend
it against the violence of strangers, or Infidels.
and his enemies tread it not under their feet at their pleasure, but he
keeps, or drives them away from it, whilst he does defend it against their
force and violence.

Verse. 18 And in that day shall the mountains drop down new wine, and the
hills shall flow with milk, and all the rivers of Judah shall run with
waters, and a fountain shall come forth of the house of the Lord, and shall
water the valley of Shittim.
An amplification of this comfort by the effects thereof.
AN amplification of this comfort and favor taken from the marvelous and
wonderful effects of the same both toward the church, and also toward the
enemies thereof. Toward the church, for that it shall then abound with all
kind of good things, when as GOD shall manifestly show himself unto it, and
does show himself. But these good things and gifts of all sorts by reason of
the infancy of that people at that time, and of things wherwithal they were
acquainted, are set forth under the name of things, or earthly blessings, as of
Must, or new wine, Milk, water springing forth of the house of God, daily
watering it as a valley planted and full of most choice and dainty Cedars Psalm.
92. Yet God then gave unto his true church, and now also gives and bestows
upon it not only earthly blessings, but much rather spiritual gifts and
graces.

Vert. 19. Egypt shall be waste, and Edom shall be a desolate wilderness, for
the injuries of the children of Judah, because they have shed innocent blood in
their land.
2. Toward the enemies of the church.
NOw Joel declares those effects which shall be showed against the disobedient
and stubborn enemies of the Church, to wit, they shall utterly be rooted out,
and perish. For so much do these words signify, shall be waste, and a desolate
wilderness. And here under the name of Egypt, and of the Idumeans are
described not every kind of enemies whatsoever, but most obstinate and cruel
enemies. For these two nations were always most deadly enemies unto the Jews,
and in a manner irreconcilable, or such as could never be made friends with
them: yea and moreover most cruel toward the same Jews. For as it is Psalm.
137. ver. 7. the Edomites at the taking of Jerusalem by the Babylonians stir
up the enemies to use all kind of cruelty toward both the poor Jews, and
also against their city, for vengeance whereof they there ma^e this prayer
unto God: Remember the children of Edom, O L^^^ in the day of Jerusalem, which
said, raze it, raze it to the foundation thereof. And as for Egypt, that is
said to have bin an iron furnace unto the Jews. Therefore besides their
obstinacy and stubbornnes of mind against God, their cruelty also is here
added. For they the self-same do shead, and have shed the blood of the godly,
yea and that their giltles blood: that is to say, they have cruelly murdered
the godly deserving no such thing at their hand: yea even in the very land of
the children of Israel, that is in their own native foil or country where
they were borne. That which increases the barbarousnes of the enemies of the
Church.

Ver. 20. But Judah shall dwell for ever, and Jerusalem from generation to
generation.
A second amplification of the favor of God toward his Church.
A Second amplification of the same comfort, or especial favor of God toward
those that are his, to wit taken from the continuance or rather the perpetuity
or euerlastingnes of the same. For this favor of God shall not only be most
singular and most healthful unto them: but it shall be also perpetual, or
everlasting, because it shall never be taken away from them. The which thing
doubtless is also true of the spiritual joy of the godly in this world: but in
deed most true of that everlasting life in the world to come. For the godly
shall feel and also do feel both these joys to be perpetual unto them.
Therefore like as the favor of God is perpetual toward his church: so also
shall the church it self be perpetual: not in this world, I grant, but in
the world to come or in heaven. Indeed the church of God in this world, is
often invisible, or can not be seen, but yet does it not therefore cease to be
a church. But in heaven it shall not only be a church: but always visible,
and always blessed and flourishing with God and the man Jesus Christ our Lord
being her head.

Ver. 21. For I will cleanse their blood, that I have not cleansed, and the Lord
will dwell in Sion.
The third amplification by way of comparison, and setting down the cause of
so great benefits of God toward his church.
A Third amplification with the setting down of the cause of so great benefits
of God toward those that are his. The amplification is here made by way of
comparing of things together. For that the gifts of God afterward shall be
greater, and more plentiful toward his church, then they had bin before, or in
times of old. What the figure Synecdoche is, see Amos cap 5. ver. 21.
That which is here by the figure Synecdoche expressed under one kind of
ceremonies in steed of the rest. I will cleanse, says the Lord, their blood in
her, the which notwithstandding I did not cleanse in her. Thus then the grace of
God afterward shall be more excellent toward his church, then it was before, as
namely the which shall take away al kind of uncleanness, yea even that which he
did not cleanse before. But this is referred unto the ceremonies of the law, the
which at that time were in use among the people of the Jews, by the which
every blood was not cleansed. For albeit the blood of terms, of beasts, of
murders unawares, were cleansed, under the law by certain rites and
ceremonies: yet was not the blood which was willingly shed in the murder of
men, cleansed by any ceremony. Genesis 9. Therefore that which in the church of God
under the law could not be washed away by the washinges and sacraments then
ordained, the same afterward shall wholly be washed away and cleansed, the grace
of God being enlarged, by the coming of Christ, as the author to the Hebr.
writes cap. 7. ver. 19. saying, The law made nothing perfect, but the bringing
in of a better hope, made perfect, whereby we draw near unto God. And cap. 9.
ver. 13.14. He shows the blood of Christ to be of much more value above the
sacrifices of the law to purge our consciences from dead works to serve the
living God. A very profitable note.
And this here spoken, is not referred unto God, as if that then under the
law, of a certain weakness or want of power he were not able to purge or
cleanse those things, the which he says that he will cleanse afterward: neither
yet does it properly appertain unto the forgiveness of sins the which even at
that time by God was performed unto the godly. For as unto us, so likewise unto
those fathers even before the coming of Christ God forgave all their sins,
yet through him notwithstanding, as he pardons all unto us for the self-same
Christ. 1. Ioh. 1. ver. 9. Apocal. 13. ver. 8. But this comparison pertains
only unto the sacraments of the fathers, Whereunto this comparison pertains.
and our Sacraments, and unto the rites or ceremonies under which that benefit
of God was then showed unto them, and is now represented unto us. For unto us
now through Baptism, and the Lords supper, the benefits of God, and the
forgiveness of our sins, yea even all of them, are more clearly and fully
sealed, then in the old time under the law.

The cause of these so great benefits of God toward his church,
Now the cause of this so great, and enlarged a benefit of God toward us, is the
dwelling and presence of God in his church. And this dwelling is properly to be
referred unto Christ, and unto his incarnation or taking of flesh upon him, by
the which he dwelled among us, and lived visibly or to be seen in the mids
of his church, namely being God then manifest in the flesh, as John in his
gospel speaks hereof cap. 1. ver. 14. saying, The word was made flesh, and
dwelt among us, (and we saw the glory thereof, as the glory of the only
begotten son of the Father,) full of grace and truth. Accordingly whereunto
writes Paul. 1. Tim. 3. ver. 16. And without controversy, great is the
mystery of godlynes, which is, God is manifested in the flesh, justified in the
spirit, seen of Angels, preached unto the Gentiles, believed on in the world,
and received up in glory. Thus therefore I do expound this last verse of our
Prophet Joel of the coming of the Son of God, and our Lord Jesus Christ into
the flesh, and of the benefits through him bestowed upon the Church.

Praise be unto God.
The Commentary of Lambertus Danaeus upon the Prophet Sophonias.
CAP. 1. The Argument.
THis Prophet contains partly threatenings, and partly comforts. Threatenings
of God touching the destruction of the city of Jerusalem very shortly to
ensue, and touching the most grievous punishments of the nation of the Jews,
both for their incredible and notorious impiety or ungodliness toward God, and
also their injustice toward me^. Yet because the Lord gave some spare time
notwithstanding in the mean space, therefore the Prophet exhorts the Jews
unto earnest repentance, Sophonie exhorts unto earnest repentance.
and that they should mitigate or assuage the wrath of God by changing of their
life. This self same Prophet also does comfort the Church, in that by
revelation made unto him from God, he promises that God will not utterly cast
it away and destroy it, but will leave some seed of it, because he had decreed
also to enlarge it, and to scatter and spread it abroad unto the Gentiles. And
consequently that both in Christ, and for Christ his sake it should afterward
be restored, and sanctified, and that indeed after a more excellent manner then
ever it was before. In the end he promises in the person of God, that the
enemies of the Church shall be taken away, and at the last be utterly
destroyed. This book has three Sermons, the which are comprised in so many
(that is to say) three chapters. Three Sermons of this Prophet.
The Prophet Sophonie lived and prophesied under the King Josias, to wit, The
life and prophesying of the Prophet Sophonie.
more then thirty years before the destruction of the (...) foretold by him,
when as the state of the kingdom of Judah ^^med as yet to be flourishing
enough, and mighty, and so consequently much rather to be a tolerable estate,
and the quiet and dignity of the city Jerusalem to be in safety, and without
danger* Yet notwithstanding long before him did Isaias also prophecy that it
should be destroyed, as appears 2. King. cap. 20. ver. 16.17.18. in these
words: And Isaiah said unto Hezekiah, hear the word of the Lord. Behold, the
days come, that all that is in thine house, and whatsouer thy fathers have
laid up in store unto this day, shall be carried into Babel: nothing shall be
left, says the Lord. And of thy sons, that shall proceed out of thee, and
which thou shall beget, shall they take away, and they shall be Eunuchs in the
palace of the King of Babel. Some will have this Prophet to have prophesied with
Isaias: others, that he prophesied three years before Jeremy. For that Jeremy
began to prophecy in the 13. year of the reign of Josias, and Sophonias in
the 10. Therefore he is to be conferred with the Prophet Jeremy unto the 20.
chapter. Now where he prophesied, is not expressed, whether in the city it
self, as Jeremy did, or whether abiding in some other place: yet
notwithstanding in the land of Judah did he both live, and also prophecy.

Verse. 1. The word of the Lord which came unto Zephaniah the son of Cushi,
the son of Gedaliah, the son of Amariah, the son of Hizkiah, in the days
of Josiah the son of Amon King of Judah.
The first Sermon. Three causes of the destruction of Jerusalem.
THe first Sermon of the destruction of the city Jerusalem, and the wonderful
spoiling and laying waste of the same, which was to ensue, whereof there are
here reckoned up three causes. First, the outrageous and horrible idolatry of
the Jews. Secondly, the contempt or despising of the true God, and of his
threatenings, yea,

Three parts of this verse.
This verse contains three things. First, a commendation of the doctrine
following, and a declaration of the calling of Sophonias. Secondly, the stock,
kindred, and noble and renowned house and family of this Prophet, both for
godliness, 1. Commendatio^ of doctrine.
and also for service in the Common wealth, 2. The stock of the Prophet.
the which was now known unto all men by singular duties toward the Common
wealth. For as God had Amo^ Shepherd to his Prophet: so also had he this and
other Prophets, which came of great and noble houses. The third thing is the
time wherein he prophesied, 3. The time of his prophecy.
namely, under Josias King of Judah, when as the state of the Jews was not
only tolerable, as I have said, but also as yet flourishing, and when as
godliness it self and the worship of God seemed to be restored, least that we
our selves being lulled a sleep with the happiness of things present, should
either forget our sins past, or else imagine God to be contented with a slight
and outward godliness, performed as it were for fashion sake only, such as was
then used among this people, as is to be seen 2. King. cap. 23. ver. 25.26.
where albeit Josias have his singular commendation for his rare godliness and
forwardnes in religion, yet it is said, That the Lord notwithstanding turned
not from the fiercenes of his great wrath, wherewith he was angry with Judah,
because of all the prouocations, wherewith Manasseh had provoked him. And
Jeremy cap. 17. ver. 1. complaining of the disorderednes of the people, says,
That the sin of Judah is written with a pen of iron, and with the point of a
diamond, and graven upon the table of their heart, and upon the horns of their
altars. So the Prophet Hosea reports of the people of his time, saying, cap.
5. ver. 4. They will not give their mind to turn unto their God: for the
spirit of fornication is in the midst of them, and they have not known the
Lord. And 2. Chron. cap. 34. ver. 24.25. Huldah the Prophetisse returns
answer unto the messengers of Josiah in the name of the Lord in these words:
Thus says the Lord, Behold, I will bring evil upon this place, and upon the
inhabitants thereof, even all the curses that are written in the book which
they have read before the king of Judah: because they have forsaken me, and
burnt incense unto other gods, to anger me with all the works of their hands,
therefore shall my wrath fall upon this place, and shall not be quenched.
Sophonias prophesied before the death of Josias.
To conclude, Sophonias prophesied before the death of Josias, namely, after
the purging of the Temple, and the holding of that famous Passover, the which
fell out after the 18. year of the reign of Josias, 2. Chron. 34. ver. 8.

Verse. 2. I will surely destroy all things from off the land, says the Lord.
The sum of this Sermon.
THe sum of the Sermon following, to wit, that God does earnestly threaten
destruction unto the whole land of the Jews, that is, unto all both men, and
also other things, the which are in it. God therefore would have first of all
even the very dullest (...) this people to be roused up with this thunderbold
as it were, and to awaken at his threatenings.

Verse. 3. I will destroy man and beast: I will destroy the fowls of the
heaven, and the fishes of the sea, and ruins shall be to the wicked, and I
will cut off man from of the land, says the Lord.
A making more plain of the former verse.
A Making more plain, or rather a garnishing of the verse before, whereby the
Prophet by his members and parts expounds and lays open the former
sentence, namely, that the judgment of God shall be so horrible or fearful
against this people, that through the same judgment both men, and beasts, and
also the fowls them selves shall perish. Nay, moreover the wicked ones
themselves, which securely or carelessly despise God, and which seem that they
cannot be touched by God, shall fall into his nets and hands, so that they also,
howsoever before they were thought to be firm and stable, are nevertheless
to fall and be drawn into the same destruction.

Verse. 4. I will also stretch out mine hand upon Judah, and upon all the
inhabitants of Jerusalem, and I will cut off the remnant of Baal from this
place, and the name of the Chemarims with the priests.
The particular applying of the former threatenings.
THe applying of the threatenings generally set down before unto the Jews,
according unto the meaning of God. For the Prophet denounces or threatens the
former judgments and menacings of God not only unto them all in general, but
also particularly unto the citizens and inhabitants of Jerusalem it self, that
is, of the mother or chief city. The cause is added, to wit, their outrageous
idolatry, the which they had not a little set up in the holy city it self,
The cause of these threatened judgments.
the which was especially dedicated and reserved unto God: for as much as in
it, after the example of profane or heathen men, and such as were notorious
idolaters, they had both their Baalims, that is, dead men and forged Idols: and
also their Chamarims, that is, the Chaplains and Keepers, and Priests or
Sacrificers of these Idols at Jerusalem. Finally, for that they readily and
most exactly or perfectly retained all those things, the which wicked and
heathen men had ordained for the worship of their Idols, for that I say the
citizens of Jerusalem observed all these things, the which other places of the
Scriptures do make more plain, being as it were an exposition unto this
verse. For concerning these Chemarims and their office we read 2. King cap.
23. ver. 5. That Josiah put down the Chemarims, whom the Kings of Judah had
founded to burn incense in the hie places, and in the cities of Judah, and
about Jerusalem, and also them that burnt incense unto Baal, to the Sun and
to the Moon, and to the Planets, and to all the host of heaven. And for this
purpose makes that of Jeremy cap. 2. ver. 20* where he casts the^ in the
teeth, that like an harlot, they ran about to commit spiritual fornication
and whoredom upon all hie hills, and under all green trees. And in the same
chapter ver. 28. more plainly, when he says: Where are the gods that thou have
made thee? let them arise, if they can help thee in the time of thy trouble?
for according unto the number of thy cities, are thy gods, O Judah. See Ezech.
9.

Verse. 5. And them that worship the host of heaven upon the house tops, and
them that worship, and swear by the Lord, and swear by Malcham.
The second kind of most wicked idolatry.
THe second kind of most wicked, and most open idolatry, but yet most ancient,
and long since condemned, the which was most usual among the Jews
notwithstanding, by imitating or following of profane or heathen nations, to
wit, the serving and worshipping of the Stars, and heavenly bodies, as
appears by the place of the Kings alleged in the former verse, and also
Jeremy 44. ver. 17. where the people answer the Prophet, saying: We will do
whatsoever thing goes out of our own mouth, as to burn incense unto the
Queen of heaven, and to power out drink offerings unto her, as we have done,
both we and our fathers, our Kings, and our Princes in the cities of Judah, and
in the streets of Jerusalem: for then had we plenty of victuals, and were
well, and felt none evil. A third kind of idolatry.
A third kind of idolatry, but more colorable is set down in the end of
this verse, whereby as if they worshipped the majesty and power of the true
God they did swear by him: but they joined other gods with him also, by whose
power and Godhead and name also they did commonly swear. The which honor
notwithstanding is to be reserved unto the alone true God, Exodus 20.

Ver. 6. And them that are turned back from the Lord, and those that have not
sought the Lord, nor inquired for him.
A briefnes and shortness of speech, whereby he declares in one word, as it
were in a certain conclusion, Briefenes,
the great ungodliness of the Jews, namely that they had in such sort departed
from GOD, and from his worship, that they did not so much as once think upon
repentance, that is, upon restoring, and calling back of the same again.

Verse. 7. Be still at the presence of the Lord God: for the day of the Lord is
at hand: for the Lord has prepared a sacrifice, and has sanctified his
guests.
Destruction threatened unto the Jews and also unto Jerusalem it self.
LEast the Prophet might seem to threaten these things only to fear them
withal, and not in earnest, he shows that God has fully decreed to destroy
the Jews, and also Jerusalem it self, and that they in deed and truth shall
shortly feel the same, namely after the end of 30. years. And here is
partly an Apostrophe or turning of speech of the Prophet speaking unto the
godly, and forbidding them to ask, Apostrophe, what it is, see Amoscap 4.
ver. 4. Metaphora what it is, see Amos cap 4. ver. 12.
or to doubt any further of that matter, the which should immediately be in
deed extant and in practice: and partly a Metaphor taken from holy feasts and
banquets, the which shows that there shall be a great slaughter of the Jews,
and so consequently a dainty banquet of all kind of men and flesh to be
prepared by God for the fowls, and for the dogs (whom in this place he
calls his bidden, and guests) that with this stinging kind of speaking, and
such as lays out the matter unto the view of the eyes, even those which are
most sluggish, and men that are most given unto vices, and do sleep in the
same, might the more earnestly be rouzed up, and the godly also be provoked
unto earnest repentance.

Verse. 8. And it shall be in the day of the Lords sacrifice, that I will visit
the princes, and the kings children, and all such as are clothed with strange
apparel.
A Garnishing of the matter, the which conteyneth the order and description of
this feast, of the which he made mention before. The first sort of Ghests The
Kings. The Kings children. The princes. The Courtiers and brave Gallants.
For first of all he rehearses the most dainty and costly kind of flesh, the
which he will give and set before the fowls, namely of the kings themselves, of
the kings children, of the princes, of the Courtiers and nice gallantes which
ouerflowed in wealth and too much riotousnes, and were not contented with honest
and godly apparel, and such as was their own Country apparel: but brought in
foreign defilementes, and strange and sumptuous apparel into the manners and
usage of the Jews.

Verse. 9. In the same day also will I visit all those that dance upon the
threshold so proudly, which filtheir masters houses by cruelty and deceit.
The second sort of Ghests and the same of Servants of two sorts
IN the second place the Lord will give the flesh of Servants also unto the
fowls, to wit, least any kind or sort of men should think themselves free
from this iudegment of God, because that all had defiled them selves with
wickedness. And he describes two sorts of Servants, the one, of those which
with dancing and skipping (as players or iesters do delight their masters,

Ver. 10. And in that day, says the Lord, there shall be a noise, and cry
from the fish gate, and an howling from the second gate, and a great
destruction from the hills.
Hypotyposis. What this Figure is see Amos cap. 8. ver. 12.
THe figure Hypotyposis, or a lively setting out of the matter, whereby he
describes the greatness of the punishment by the representation or showing of
the cry and howling which shall then be. For he declares that not only no
part of the City shall be free from great cries and howlings, by reason of the
greatness of the miseries the which they shall feel: but also that the near
places shall not be void of this calamity or punishment. For albeit they be
without the City, yet because they are full of Hills (as it is Psa. 125. ver.
2. As the mountains are about Jerusalem, (...)) these howlings (as the sound
is wont to be given back ag^^^ from the hills and mountains) shall from these
hills be doubled, and scattered abroad more widelie and fearefullie by means
of the beating back and breaking of the air* And he reckons up two chief
and most famous quarters of the City Jerusalem, Two chief quarters of the
City.
namely the Fish gate, whereby a great part of vitailes was brought into the
City: and also the second gate commonly so called, for it was famous through
the exercizes of the schools, and was most frequented or full of people, as
being about that part of the City where the Temple of the Lord was. And least
that these so unlooked for or sudden and wonderful evils might seem to be
but fables or tales, and to be threatened in vain, Sophonias affirms these
punishments to be the Oracle or saying of God himself.

Verse. 11. Howl ye inhabitants of the low place: for the company of the
merchants is destroyed: all they that bear silver are cut off.
An amplification.
AN amplification, whereby is showed that the Jews shall not only feel those
most grievous punishments, and they especially which dwelled in the more
populous and open places of the City: but also those which in the low and
hollow places, and as it were more safer, seemed to be hidden and covered as it
were with darkness. And because that in the same quarter of the City Jerusalem
dwelt the merchants, and such as served them, Nehem. cap. 3. ver. 8. Therefore
these especially are called unto howling, because not one or two of them, but
all: and not scatteringly, but commonly and by heaps, and companies: and not
only are to be punished and spoiled in part, but also utterly to be
destroyed and rooted out.

Verse. 12 And at that time will I search Jerusalem with lights, and visit the
men that are frosen in their dregs, and say in their hearts, the Lord will
neither do good, nor evil.
THis is the figure Hypophora, or answering of an objection, What the figure
Hypophora is, see Amos cap. 6. ver. 21.
least GOD might seem too severe or sharp unto his people, who will chastize
them so hardly. For under an elegant or fine Metaphor is showed, how
obstinatlie and carelessly wicked, and stubborn against God that people was:
obstinate or stubborn, because that they were utterly hardened, and as it were
frose^ in their dregs and those sins, What the Figure Metaphora is, see Amos
cap. 4. ver. 12.
without any more feeling now of any conscience at all. Careless also was the
same people, because that what soever the Prophets threatened, and laid before
them the word of God concerning his menaces and promises, all this did the Jews
despise, and scorn, and wickedlie spoiled and robbed God of his providence.
The which thing albeit that it seemed of them to be done secretly and very
covertly, yet shall the Lord uncover it, and searching most diligently shall
in the end lay open all their secret sins, yea those things which are most
hidden. And this does the Prophet set forth under a familiar example and
Metaphor of Searchers, the more to rouse up and awaken their hypocrisy and
drowsines.

Verse. 13. Therefore their goods shall be spoiled, and their houses wast: they
shall also build houses, but not inhabit them: and they shall plant vineyards,
but not drink the Wine thereof.
Their goods, houses, and other substance shall nothing a uaile them.
A granting and yielding unto them, which carries a show of preue^ting an
objection, that the Lord may take from them all vain hope of trust: albeit
that there be here also both a description, and also an amplification of the
misery to come. God therefore grants unto them both riches, and houses, and
other commodities of life, all which men are wont to oppose or s^t against the
threatenings of God, as if therefore they were safely shrouded with them, as
with a shield against these threatenings. Therefore he teaches that all these
things shall nothing avail them: nay they shall be their enemies. And so he
shows that the labor and pains taking of men in hoording up of riches, in
building of houses, and gathering together of other commodities of this life,
shall be all in vain, when as God is angry with us. For all these things
shall be taken from them. And in this doubtless is contained an amplification of
the misery of the Jews and of the greatness of the judgment of God against
them. This agrees with the rule of Deuteronomie cap. 28. ver. 30. Thou shall
betroth a wife, and an other shall lie with her, thou shall build an house, and
shall not dwell therein thou shall plant a vineyard, and shall not eat the
fruit. And with Leuit cap. 26. To conclude: this verse is notable for the
knitting of the members and parts of it together with many copulative
conjunctions and matchings together of contraries, as building, and not
inhabiting; planting a vineyarde and not drinking, etc.

Verse. 14. The great day of the Lord is near: it is near and hastes greatly,
even the voice of the day of the Lord: the strong man shall cry there
bitterly.
A description of the day of the Lord.
THis is a garnishing and fetting out of that same judgment of God the which he
threatened before, to take away from hypocrites, and all others, both their
overmuch security or sluggishnes, and also their contempt or despising of the
word of God. Wherein appears how great both the love of God has been, and
also is unto men perishing through their own fault: and also how great the
stubbornnes of men in such sort perishing has been, and daily is. Therefore,
The day of the Lord, yea the great day, that is a certain and set time
appointed by God, wherein he will do, and show upon them wonderful strange,
and great things. Secondly he amplifieth the fame by the circumstance of time.
2. An amplification of this day by the circumstance of time.
For this day of the Lord is not only near, but every foot speeding and
hastening more and more, in so much that the voice of it is even now heard,
that it may take hold on the Jews. Thirdly, he describes it by the effects.
3 By the effects.
The feeling of it shall be most bitter and sorrowful, and the misery, which
it shall bring shall be most sharp, insomuch that those which suppose
themselves to be strong and stout to bear and suffer any thing, shall then
cry out, and be impatient through over much pain. And here it has a great
force and weight, for that the sentence is as it were unjointed and not knit
together with copulative conjunctions, as it is also in the verse following.
For so it does the more urge and press them, and heapeth up together as it
were an huge weight and mass of evils, to the end that men that are rebellious
against God, and hypocrites may be terrified and put in fear.

Verse. 15. That day is a day of wrath, a day of trouble and heaviness, a day of
destruction and desolation, a day of obscurity and darkness, a day of clouds
and blacknes.
The figure Synathroismos, which is an heaping up together of words of diverse
signification, as is evident by the many sundry words heaped together in this
verse.
THis is the figure Synathroismos, or heaping up together of diverse things,
whereby the fearefulnes of this judgment of God is fourthly amplified or
increased, by reckoning up of sundry both effects, and also adioynts of the
same. The effects are, heaviness, affliction, desolation. The adioynts are,
tumult, obscurity, darkness, a cloud: all which this day shall bring forth,
because this is a day not only of anger, but of burning anger, that is, this
day is a day of the burning wrath of the Lord. Now this burning anger, is a
more vehement and hot anger. And this heaping together of words and the
doubling and repeating of the word day, makes unto the meaning and drift of
the Prophet. For by these so many words heaped up together God would terrify
or afray them, and so consequently earnestly rouse them up, and awaken them.
Finally, that which is brought of glumnes and darkness, is a similitude taken
from those days, in the which by reason of the sadness and lowering of the air
and heaven, we also are wont to be sad and heavy. For every word here set down
is made plain most easily by his contrary. As for example, a day of wrath, and
not of love: a day of sorrow, and not of gladness: a day of trouble, and not a
day of peace and quiet, etc.

Verse. 16. A day of the trumpet and alarm against the strong Cities, and
against the hie towers.
The putting them in fear with the sound of the trumpets of their enemies
IN the fifth place the Prophet reckons up another adioynt, the which is wont
to strike very great fear into men, (least he might seem to have omitted, or
let pass any thing) to wit, the sounding of the trumpet of their enemies. For
men are wont to be amazed with that so fearful a sound. For in this place the
Prophet speaks not of the trumpets of the Jews, wherewith they were wont to
be hearted on, and encouraged unto battle, but of the trumpets of the enemies
wherewith they shall be put in fear. He further amplifieth or increases this
fear, for that these terrible trumpets of their enemies shall be heard even in
the midst of the cities of the Jews, yea in their most fenced cities, and
castles, when they shall be taken. Wherefore hereby is signified the victory
of the enemies, and the fear and trembling of the Jews. To be short, al their
hope is taken away from the Jews, and the trust which they reposed or put in
those their munitions against their enemies, for that the hope, and confidence
or trust of the Jews in them should be utterly vain, and stand them in no
stead.

Verse. 17. And I will bring distress upon men, that they shall walk like
blind men, because they have sinned against the Lord, and their blood shall
be powered out as dust, and their flesh as the doung.
THis verse is an Hypophora, or answering of an objection, as is also the verse
following. For in the end, except they repent, What the figure Hypophora is,
see Amos cap. 5. ver. 21.
the Lord will have all hope, yea and thinking to escape this his judgment to
be taken clean from them: nay moreover he does so depresse or throw them
down, that by a double similitude, to wit, the one taken from dust and the
other from doung, he does here threate^ that nothing can be more despised the^
these, nothing more vile, nothing finally more base then they. A threefold
answer of the prophet unto their objection.
And the answer of the Prophet in this verse unto the vain boasting of
obstinate or stubborn men, and such as despise the judgments of GGD, is three
fold. First, that God himself who can be resisted or withstood by no force,
will be the author of this their affliction or trouble. Secondly, 1. God shall be
against them.
that these rebellious persons shall wander up and down hither and thither,
like unto blind men, and such as are void of all counsel, 2 They shall be
void of all counsel.
so that in this their distressed estate they shall not know what counsel to
take for themselves. Thirdly, that the cause of their punishment is such, that
God ought not to ouerpasse it, namely, 3 God cannot over pass the cause of
their punishment.
for that these men have sinned obstinately against the living. God himself,
and which is the revenger of all wickedness. Wherefore albeit they boast of
their stock, that is, of the blood and seed or flesh of Abraham, for that they
are the blood of Abraham: and for this cause do daintily and tenderly with
great carefulnes make much of their flesh, yet shall their blood be powered and
sprinkled on the ground like unto the dust of none accoum: and their flesh
shall be cast forth, as most filthy and stinking doung.

Verse. 18. Neither their silver nor their gold shall be able to deliver them
in the day of the Lords wrath, but the whole land shall be deueured by the fire
of his jealousy: for he shall make even a speedy riddance of all them that
dwell in the land.
He takes away the help, which they thought to have by their riches.
FVrthermore, because they reposed aid in those their riches and great wealth
(for money is the sinews and strength of war to hire soldiers) this
selfsame also does the Prophet take away from them, both by comparing the
strength of man, and earthly help with the power of God, yea and of GOD being
angry, and pouring out his whole force against a man: and also by laying before
their view the fearful punishment and overthrow which was to come, the which
like unto a fire should consume and waste not only that one city, but also
the very whole country of the Jews, together with the inhabitants themselves.

CAP. 2.
Verse. 1. Gather your selves, even gather you, O nation not worthy to be
beloved,
An exhortation unto earnest repentance.
AN exhortation unto earnest repentance and amendment of their former life, to
the end they may escape all the former evils. For those whom God chideth, except
the fault be in themselves, he means to save. August. Let men change their
deeds, and I, says the Lord, will change my threatenings. And this exhortation
is often repeated in this chapter, to the end that those which remained
obstinate and stubborn, might be made vnexcuseable. And first of all it is
repeated in this verse for the vehement affection or desire both of God, and
also of the Prophet to save the Jews. And for this cause is the word
(Gatherye) repeated. And the cause is added, Why the Jews ought to think
earnestly on repentance.
why the Jews ought now to think earnestly on this admonition unto repentance,
for that they are in such a case, that as they now are, and after the manner
that they now live and behave themselves, they do utterly displease God, and
are not to be loved, that is to say, such as God cannot love. Neither does one
or two of them live thus wickedly: but the whole nation generally. By how much
the mercy of God appears to be the greater, who is very careful to save
those whom he now might worthily destroy. Further, there is here expressed
and set down the first part of true repentance, to wit, the examining of a man
his own self, and the ripping up of his former life, to condemn and amend
the same. So John the Baptist also begins with this part Mat. 3. v. 6, 7.
where he says: And they were baptized of him in Jordan, confessing their
sins, etc.

Verse. 2. Before the decree come forth, and ye be as chafe that passes in a
day, and before the fierce wrath of the Lord come upon you, and before the
day of the Lords anger come upon you.
He urges the^ unto repentance taking occasion upon the circumstance of time.
HE urges them by the circumstance of time, by the which he shows that their
repentance shall yet now be in season, the which afterward, yea and that in
short time, shall be altogether too late, unprofitable, and unseasonable, or out
of time. For that same decreed day shall come most speedily, like unto chafe
and stubble tossed with the wind, the which both quickly, and on a sudden
flies away as has been said before cap. 1. verse. 14. For the Prophet uses a
similitude taken from chafe and stubble, because that in the verse going
before he had used a verb of the same signification, namely derived of stubble.
Raschasch.
Therefore while as there is yet time given unto repentance, we must make haste
unto it. For it is then too late when as the Lord now has put his hand unto
the execution of his judgments, and his threatenings are now no longer menaces
and threatenings only, but a decreed and already passed sentence upon us. And
to the end that God of his love, which he bears toward us, may the rather
move and stir men up by his prophet, he uses also not an idle heaping up,
and repetition of words, but to the end the horror or fearfulnes of that time,
wherein God cortecteth, may be expressed and sot down, he shows by this
sentence as it were loose and not knitte together with copulative conjunctions,
and by the repeating of these words (before it come) the which kind of speech
does the more generally and certainly move us, that there is an appointed and
set time to repentance in due season.

Verse. 3. Seek ye the Lord all the meek of the earth, which have wrought his
judgment: seek righteousness, seek lowlines, if so be that ye may be hid
in the day of the Lords wrath.
A repetition of the same in effect, the which was said in the first verse of
this chapter.
SEcondly, for the great affection and love which he has to save them,
especially the faithful (for these also by reason of their sins were worthily
wrapped and entangled in the same judgment of God with others) he repeateth
the same thing which he had said in the first verse of this chapter. Wherefore
the word (seek ye) is so often repeated. He therefore by a note of separation
marketh out the true godly from the contemners or despisers of God. For this
exhortation unto repentance was to take place, and have effect only in the
godly, albeit notwithstanding it be offered unto all the Jews in differently.
God spares the world for the small number sake of the godly.
And doubtless unless there remained some small seed of the godly upon earth,
God would forthwith overthrow and destroy the whole world with due punishments,
but for their sake God deferreth it, that he may give unto them a time to
repent, the which they do greedily take. But those which are the true godly the
Prophet describes or sets out two manner of ways, first, when as he
calls them humble or meek, as Christ also speaks of himself Matthew 11.
verse. 29. 1. Meek and lowly.
when he says, Learn of me that I am humble and meek. Secondly, when as he
says that they do the judgment of God, 2. That do the judgment of God.
that is, that they look unto the law and rule appointed by GOD to live godly
and holily, and aim at the same: albeit that they cannot fulfill it. For if
they did so live, they should not be punished by God.

Moreover, here is also showed whereupon we ought to stay and rest, when as we
will have God to be appeased with us, namely, upon his justice and meekness,
Justice.
or mercy and gentleness. Justice or righteousness therefore in this place is
called not the same whereby God punishes the sins of men: but whereby, when
as he promises that he will be favorable and merciful unto those that
call upon him, he is faithful and true, and a keeper of his promise. Meekenes.
Meekness also in this place is not called humility or lowlines, as in the
first part of this self same verse: but clemency or gentleness, the which
either takes away and pardons the due punishment: or else does diminish and
lessen the the same. The hardness of saving the godly.
Lastly, the Prophet shows the hardness of the matter, if the godly enter into
consideration of themselves, when as he says (if so be that, or if
peradventure) not that it is unto GOD a thing either uncertain or else hard to
pardon and forgive: but for that if they consider their owo sins, they
themselves also deserve destruction, and that they should be comprehended
together with the wicked and ungodly.

Ver. 4. For Azzah shall be farsaken, and Ashkelon desolate: they shall drive
out Ashdod at the noone day, and Ekron shall be rooted up.
The Jews are put in fear by the examples of others. The Philistines
THirdly he does terrify, or make the Jews afraid by sundry examples, that at
the leastwise they may learn to be wise by the example of others, and to fear
the judgments of God. Therefore first of all he alleges unto them the example
of the Philistines, a people bordering upon them toward the West, whom God will
destroy for their wickedness, albeit they seemed never so mighty, and wealthy,
and strong a people. And these things does God rehearse both for that he would
recall those which were his unto better thrift by all means possible: and also
because that same overthrow of the Philistines should go before that of the
Jews, as it also fell out Ierem. 47. that the Jews as it were by this token
or sign might understand also that the judgments threatened unto them, did
presently hang over their own heads. And therefore that they should then at
leastwise repent, that is, they should both besory for their sins, and also
convert or turn unto God. What the figure hypotyposis is, see Amos cap. 8.
ver. 12.
And that he may the rather move them, he does by a certain Hypotyposis or
lively description severally in this place reckon up the cities of the
Philistines, which were to be destroyed, and by a notable allusion and
resemblance unto the names of every one of them, shows what should
particularly come to pass, and fall out unto them. And of Ashdod he says
especially, that it shall come to pass that they of Ashdod shall be carried
away, and driven out of their seats, and led away by their enemies at noone
day, that is, in the sight of all men, and when as the journey shall be most
hard and painful, by reason of the heat and parching of the Sun.

Ver. 5. Woe to the inhabitants of the sea cost: the nation of the Cherethims,
the word of the Lord is against you: O Canaan, the land of the Philistims, I
will even destroy thee without an inhabitant.
Destruct^on threatened unto the whole land of the Philistines.
A Garnishing and setting out of the matter, or else a conclusion, wherein he
threatens unto the whole nation of the Philistines or Palestines the judgment
of God, and the same most grievous, least because but four, albeit the chief
cities of theirs, were reckoned up, the rest of the Philistines might suppose
that they should be free from these plagues, and punishments: Therefore the
Prophet does in this place comprehend all Palestina, the which also he
describes by the situation of the same, to wit, because it was a land by the
sea coast: and also by the peoples or provinces of that nation, the which were
near unto the Jews, such as were the Cherethims, Ios. 13. ver. 3. and as were
those Cananites, which had departed and comen into their jurisdiction. But
these at that time were by the Philistines taken away from the people of Israel
(unto whom they did by the promise of God appertain and belong. Genesis 10. ver.
14.)

The greatness and certainty of God his judgment.
Further the greatness and certainty of this judgment of God against all these
is added also, and expressed. And the greatness is expressed both by this
exclamation (Woe) the which is a threatening of great misery and punishment to
come: and also for that all these Philistines are said that they shall in such
sort be rooted out, 1 The greatness
that none shall afterward inhabit that land as his certain and settled seat,
and where he either has or will have his appointed house and family. The
certainty of this judgment is showed by this one thing, 2 The certainty.
because that for vehemence and more force sake it is here expressly repeated,
that this threatening is the word of the Lord: albeit notwithstanding there
could be no doubt of it when as the Prophet of God (of whose calling assured
trial had bin made before) did speak it.

Two reasons of the so long staying in the description of the destruction of
the Philistines.
Now why the Prophet does make stay so long in the describing or setting out of
this ruin and overthrow of the Philistines, there is a double reason: the one,
that when it shall come to pass it may be observed or marked the better to be
the judgment of God. And so consqeuently the same might the more easily be
noted by the Jews,

Ver. 6. And the sea coast shall be dwellings and cottages for shepherds and
sheepefoldes.
An explanatio^ of the former verse.
A Making more plain of the former sentence, whereby the wonderful desolation
or laying wast of the land of the Philistines at that time most flourishing and
populous or full of people, is described, Now therefore is showed what the
Prophet meant, when he said that no man should afterward dwell there any more:
to wit, that none should abide and remain there, as in his fixed or settled
home and seat: but if any be found there, they shall be as vagrant or wandering
shepherds, the which for a time have cottages, foldes, and closures there,
only to feed and keep in their sheep. Therefore under the name of
sheepefoldes and closures (the which have no firmnes, or soundnes in them) a
wast and untilled country is described. These things, if at any time, are at
this day most especially to be seen in that land of the Philistines: and long
since have they bin fulfilled by the Chaldees.

Ver. 7. And that coast shall be for the remnant of the house of Judah, to feed
thereupon: in the houses of Ashkelon shall they lodge toward night: for the
Lord their God shall visit them, and turn away their captivity.
A comfort for the Church of God.
A Comfort, but by way of digression, or going aside from the matter, that God
might cheer up and comfort his church. For he shows by the way, and briefly,
unto whom in the end this land of the Philistines shall come, after that it
has by him in such sort been destroyed because of the sins thereof. For it
shall come unto the church, and unto the Jews, the which shall be left alive
out of that destruction, the which the Lord threatened unto them before. So then
the Lord promises both that there shall some Jews be left alive, that is,
some godly, and that they also shall possess the gates and land of their
enemies. Wherein appears the infinite or endless goodness of God toward his
church. 1. The freedom of the Church of God in those places.
But first of all the Prophet describes or sets forth, how free and out of
danger the possession of the church of this place and land shall be, namely,
that the church of God in those places shall freely feed her flocks, nay that
it shall both in the evening, and also in the night rest there in safty, and
without danger. Secondly, 2 Why this shall fall out unto the church?
he shows why that shall fall out unto the church, to wit, through the only
goodness and mercy of God toward it, because God shall visit her, and have
mercy upon her. Lastly he adds or sets down, 3 When this shall be?
when this shall be: After that the Lord shall have visited his church again,
and shall have brought back and delivered the captives. All which things first
of all and literally or according to the letter, 1. Literally.
albeit they be to be referred unto the time of the return of the Jews from
out of the captivity of Babylon: yet in as much as all those things then were
types and figures of our deliverance also by Christ, and of the settling of the
spiritual kingdom of Christ in the world by the preaching of the Gospel
afterward, 2. Spiritually.
these things also are mystically, and spiritually to be understood of the
kingdom of the Gospel. The Jews therefore in this place do signify the
true Church of Christ. The Philistines betoken both those which are the true
Philistines, and also all the Gentiles. By the word feeding, no doubt is
signified the preaching of the Gospel: and by the word visiting, the coming
of Christ, and the preaching of his doctrine. Therefore after the death of
Christ, and the preaching of the Gospel, these things also were especially
fulfilled, like as literally they were fulfilled after the return from Babylon.

Verse. 8. I have heard the reproach of Moah, and the rebukes of the children of
Ammon, whereby they vpbrayded my people, and magnified them selves against
their borders.
The second example of the judgments of God upon the Meabites and Ammonites.
THe second example of the judgments of God set before the Jews, to wit, of
the Moabites and Ammonites, and this for two causes. First, that by this
example the Jews may understand, that God is the revenger of his own majesty
and Godhead, and of his commandment in all nations, and therefore among those
will he especially revenge that people, the which do confess themselves to be
the people of God, that is, chosen peculiarly to worship God, such as were the
Jews, the which were called the seed of Abraham, and we also at this day are.
Secondly, that by this example also of the judgment of God against the enemies
of the Jews, God does not cast away his Church, when as he does sharply punish
the same.
that is, of his Church, God might comfort those that are his, and teach, that
they are not cast off by him, no not at that time, when as he does chastise
them for their sins, although he do it hardly and sharply, like as there is
such a punishment threatened unto them.

The cause of this punishment of the Moabites is twofold.
But in describing or setting forth of the punishment of the Moabites, first God
rehearses the cause for the which he punishes them: both that the rest of the
enemies of the Church may fear the like unto themselves, when as they do the
like: and also that it may appear unto all men that God is a just God. And the
cause of this judgment of God against the Moabites is twofold, to wit, their
reproach and violence against the people of God. 1. Their reproach against the
Jews.
The reproach is showed by the Ammonites and Moabites done unto the Jews both
in deed, and also in words. Therefore the Prophet names it reproach, in regard
of the deeds, and rebukes or despite, Cherpah. Gidduph.
in respect of the words, if the use of the Hebrew tongue be considered. Then
force or vicle^ce against them.
in that they magnified or enlarged their borders, taking away the countries,
and removing the bounds, which God had promised, and set unto that his people.
And it makes unto the declaring and laying out of the hainousnes of the
inuirie, and of the iniquity, that they are significantly called the sons of
Moab and Ammon, because that by the only calling to mind of their original of
their kindred or stock, they did know that they were joined unto the Jews by
the friendship of blood, and not only for that they were near unto them in
regard of their country and dwelling. Lastly God says, I have heard, least
that same long patience and sufferance of God might be thought to be the
casting off of his people, or least, whilst the ungodly do thus wax fierce
and play the wantons, they might suppose that God did not see them.

Verse. 9. Therefore, as I live, says the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel,
surely Moah shall be as Sodom, and the children of Ammon as Gomorah, even the
breeding of nettles and salt pits, and a perpetual desolation: the residue of
my folk shall spoil them, and the remnant of my people shall possess them.
The greatness of the punishment of the Moabites and Ammonites: a comfo^t of the
godly: The state of the country of the Moabites in the end.
IN the second place is described the greatness of the punishment of the Moabites
and Ammonites, whereunto by the way is a dioyned a comfort of the people of
God, and what in the end shall be the estate of that country. The greatness of
the punishment, for that they shall be overthrown, both utterly, and also for
ever. Utterly, the which the Prophet shows by the example of Sodom and
Gomorah, and also by the rehearsal of nettles that should grow there, and of
the wonderful laying of it waste: finally, by the mention of a salt pit, the
which thing signifies, that no profit shall be gathered of that foil at that
time, but that then the barrennes of that land shall be most miserable. For
saltnes destroys all fruits, yea even the grass it self. The truth of this
prophecy, and the fulfilling of the same, if at any time else, appears
especially at this day in those countries. But to the end that the flourishing
wealth and mighty estate of the Moabites and Ammonites at that time, should
not make either themselves, or others hearing these things secure or careless
against the judgments of God, or persuade them, that these things could not
come to pass, God rehearses both his infinite power, when as he calls
himself the God of hosts: and also the equity of this his vengeance to be
taken upon him for the Jews sake. For God is the defender and keeper of
Israel. And that these things may be believed the rather to be true, he adds
an oath also, (As I live). The comfort of the Church.
As for the comfort of the Church, it is herein, for that the Jews (those I
mean, which shall continue in the fear of God, and not all of them) are said
that they shall take the spoil of the goods of the Moabites and Ammonites, and
shall enjoy their possessions. Which thing appertains both unto the return
from out of the captivity of Babylon, and also unto the times which followed
after that return even unto the coming of Christ: and unto the preaching of
the Gospel of Christ, by the which they came unto the inheritance of God, and
spiritual riches of the Church (as the rest of the Gentiles did) namely, when
as those nations were converted unto the true God, I mean, the God of Israel,
as appears by the eleventh verse.

Verse. 10. This shall they have for their pride, because they have reproched
and magnified themselves against the Lord of hosts people.
What the figure Epiphonema is, see Jonas cap. 2. ver. 9.
THis is the figure Epiphonema, or acclamation, whereby is repeated not only the
cause of so severe or sharp judgment of God against the Moabites and
Ammonites, that men might remember it, but also the vengeance of God against
them is showed to be most just by the mutual comparing and valewing together
of the fact of these nations, and of the punishment by God laid upon the^ for
the same. For the Prophet weighs them both together as it were in a balance.
Therefore like as the wickedness of the Moabites and Ammonites was not only
manifold, but also most shameful: so also ought their punishment to be great,
and such as the punishment for many and most grievous sins uses for to be.
Their wickedness is showed to be manifold, and not one only, because that
their both despite, and also force and violence, and the same public, was
extant toward the Jews. For they have reproched them, says the Prophet, that
is to say, they have commonly in great blasphemy cast despitefull speeches
upon the Jews, and have invaded or broken in upon their borders with force and
arms. And these sins were most shameful, because they committed these
things against the people, yea and peculiar inheritance of the Lord of hosts
himself, that these injuries and despites done unto the people of the Jews,
that is, the Church of God, might light and rebound rather upon God himself
then upon men Finally, the Moabites and Ammonites brought and committed these
inco^modities or harms upon them, of great pride and contempt or despising of
the prerogative of the people of God, and did it not of ignorance, or being
provoked and having cause given them by the Jews thereunto. Wherefore it
appears unto al men, how great the equity of God is in punishing both of his
enemies, and also of the enemies of his Church.

Verse. 11. The Lord will be terrible unto them: for he will consume all the
gods of the earth, and every man shall worship him from his place, even all the
Isles of the heathen.
That the forethreatned judgments shall assuredly come to pass.
THis is the conclusion, whereby the Prophet confirms that these threatened
judgments shall be and come to pass unto them, and that by the infinite
power of God himself decreeing and pronouncing these things, the which is
intermedled and put in in this place, lest the Moabites might suppose that they
could escape them by matching contrary strengths against them. And he
expresses this power of God three ways. First, when as he calls God
terrible, that is, fearful, whose strength no man is able to abide. Secondly,
when as he says, that God will consume, or make lean (for so the word does
properly signify) even those which upon earth are counted gods, yea and that
all of them. And to make lean, Razah.
is to take from them all service and worship. For the sacrifices which are
offered unto Idols, are said to be their meat, the which being taken away,
such gods as these must needs become lean and rugged, as having their meat
withdrawn from them. By this Metaphor therefore he shows that all honor and
worship shall be taken from them. In the third place when as he says, What the
figure Metaphora is, see Amos cap. 4. ver. 12.
That every people, nay, that all Islands of the Gentiles, and that all nations
shall worship the true God in their own countries, that is, that this God of
the Jews is in all places to be worshipped, and that his knowledge shall be
spread ^brode into all lands. The which no doubt is to be referred unto the
preaching of the Gospel, and unto the spreading out of the kingdom of Christ
unto the Gentiles. And therefore this place shows how the verse before, and
also the 7. verse is to be understood of the Gentiles, which in the end should
come into the dominion and jurisdiction of the Jews, that is, of the Church of
God.

Verse. 12. Ye Morians also shall be slain by my sword with them.
The third example of the judgments of God upon the Arabians or Morians and
Ethiopians.
A Passage unto the third example of the judgments of God, the which the Lord
shall show upon the Arabians (whom some do here translate Morians, or
Ethiopians) a people not far distant, and removed from the Southern coasts
of the Jews. And this example is propounded or set forth by speaking unto the
Arabians themselves, to the end that they themselves also might be stirred up,
and understand, that they, how fierce and stout soever they be, must
notwithstanding appear before the tribunal or judgment seat of God. This
place and history agrees with that of the 49. chapter of Jeremy ver. 28. and
so following, where Kedar (the which as Stephanus notes, and as it is Psalm.
120. ver. 5. is the palace or chief city of Arabia the happy, or fruitful)
is by the Prophet reckoned up among those nations, whom Nabuchadnezzar shall
destroy, and not only overcome. Now the Prophet shows two things: First,
against whom. Secondly, when these things shall come to pass. Those therefore
unto whom this judgment of God is threatened, are the Arabians. But when shall
these things come to pass? To wit, after that God shall have wounded through,
and overthrown the Ammonites and Moabites by the Arabians themselves, whom
first Nabuchadnezzar shall have in his host as hired soldiers: and whose
service he used afterward to the ouercomming of other nations near unto
Arabia.

Verse. 13. And he will stretch out his hand against the North, and destroy
Asshur, and will make Nineveh desolate, and waste like a wilderness.
The fourth example of God his judgments.
THe fourth example of the judgment of God, wherewith both the enemies of the
Church o^ God are terrified or put in fear, and also the Church it self
recemeth comfort. They are put in fear, because that the Lord shall execute
his judgments against that same very city which at that time was the
Empress of the world, to wit, Nineveh it self, and against a Nation that was
most mighty, and not only against these small peoples (which were rehearsed
before.) And here doubtless the Church of God is comforted, because that she
understands that by this means the enemies of God are oue^ thrown: and by
these same examples also, as by most profitable admonitions or warnings she
learneth to fear God, and to stand in awe of his threatenings. Moreover, the
Prophet makes stay in describing or setting out of this judgment of God,
because this thing seemed utterly impossible because of the power of the City
Nineveh: and also for that this Nation of the Assyrians being pricked forward
thereunto by others, did most greatly above other Nations molest or trouble
the people of God. First of all therefore it is say de that the Nation it self
shall be punished, and the punishment it self to come upon them, is briefly
expressed. The Nation, were the Assyrians, Assyria.
Nineveh at that time flourishing in wealth and the head of all the kingdoms of
the East, and of all those Countries, Nineveh.
was their mother or chief City Neither is it any let or hinderance here unto
that these Assyrians are people of the North far distant from the Jews, (which
are situate in the South, and whose God this God is which threatens these
things.) For the hand of the Lord is mighty, and is stretched out as well
against the North as against the South. For this true God is both the Lord and
also the creator of all people. And the sum of the punishment here
comprehended, shows that the same punishment shall be most grievous. For
Nineveh it self which is the chief City of the Assyrians, shall after this
sort be made desolate and wast, and not only some small villages or towns of
the Assyrians, and shall become like a barren and wild wilderness. Further more
the Empire of the Assyrians was utterly over thrown and translated unto the
Chaldees, The Empire of the Assyrians destroyed by Nabuchadnezzar.
and Nineveh wholly destroyed by Nabucadnezar, which followed after the times
of king Josias, as appears by this place and by other Prophets, and
especially by the third Chapter of Daniel. Hereby it is evident that the
Prophet Nahum prophesied concerning Nineveh not long before these times.

Verse. 14. And flocks shall lie in them iddest of her, and all the beasts of
the Nations, and the Pelican, and the Owl, shall abide in the upper posts of
it: the voice of birds shall sing in the windows, and desolation shall be upon
the posts: for the Cedars are uncovered.
A most lamentable description of the destruction of Nineveh.
THis is a making more plain of the verse going before, and a description of
that destruction, the which the Prophet in the former verse threatened unto
Nineveh the City of the Assyrians, in the which there is a setting out of a
most miserable and cruel laying wast of a City. Neither yet is there any thing
in this place feined hyperbolicallie, or above the truth, but all things did
fall out and are even at this day extant in such sort, as they have here bin
foretold. But so much the more lamentable and great destruction fell out unto
this City, by how much it was accounted the more famous and invincible among
men, that all men may understand that no power of any Nation whatsoever, no
rule of any City never so gorgeous, and Lady of all things, can let God
from executing his just judgments upon it. And the Prophet painteth out unto
us, and unto the Church that same miserable desolation of Nineveh, by the
reckoning up of sundry circumstances and things, the which are wont to fall
out one lie unto the wilderness, and most vaste deserts. Therefore he says
wild beasts, and unlucky, such as are some here rehearsed, as also Isaie 13.
and 14. and not gentle and tame, shall afterward dwelin that place and City.
And not only one or two, but by companies: and not of one kind only, but of
all kinds and of all sorts what soever are found among all other people,
shall repair and run together unto that place. And they shall not sit also in
some one part of the City the which of old time was little used and occupied,
but they shall make their nestes in the very midst of the City, which once
was most populous or full of people, as in the Pome granattrees and most
curiously dressed Orchards and gardens of the Ninevites, nay in their very
Cedred and most dainty houses: so great assuredly shall the desolation and
destruction of that city then be. Finally the self same beasts shall not be
there for the space of an hour only but shall dwell there without fear, and
lodge there a long season, and the voices of them singing shall be heard in the
windows of those sumptuous houses, because they shall there without all fear:
and those cruel beasts shall rest themselves there. So great solitarines shall
there be of those houses, and destruction of the posts. For none shall go
into those houses, none shall come forth of them, none at all shall inhabit
them: but there shall be great solitarines every where as I have said: no man
shall drive away from thence these birds although they be unlucky and dismal.

Verse. 15. This is the rejoicing city, that dwelt careless, that said in her
heart, I am, and there is none besides me: how is she made waste, and the
lodging of the beasts! every one that passes by her, shall hiss, and wag his
hand.
The figure Sarcasmos, what it is, see Nahum cap. 3. ver. 14.
THe figure Sarcasmos, or a most bitter taunting, wherewith God laugheth to
scorn the vain confidence or trust, bosting, and despights of this most proud
and injurious city against other nations, and shows that she is chastised by
himself, especially does he laugh to scorn those reproaches the which she
without any stay or rule of her self had spued out against God and his church.
Therefore by way of matching together of contraries he sets against her
miserable estate the proud voices of this nation, and braggings of her self:
to wit, that all men may understand that pride alone and vain confidence
especially is the cause of the ruin and overthrow of most wealthy and peopled
nations. Three proud tricks of the Ninevites.
So then the Prophet reckons up three proud tricks of the Ninevites. First,
their vain confidence and security or carelessness, This is the rejoicing
city, 1. Their vain confidence.
etc. The second, the intolerable pride of her mind, which would have her
self alone to be called and taken for the city above and among all people and
other cities of the earth, 2. Their intolerable pride.
as if she were the pillar of the whole world, she said, I am. Thirdly the
despising of other nations, there is not any besides me. And on the contrary
side, 3. The miserable estate of this city.
he^ miserable estate is by and by set down: first, for that this proud city
cannot be able hereafter to be so much as a lodging for men, but only a den
of wild beasts. Secondly, for that not only whole nations shall despise her,
shall pass by that way, and shall see her rubbish and ruins or destruction,
in contempt shall behold that her vanishing and brittle glory, and hiss at
it, as a thing (the which in truth was of no value in her) and shall point at
it, that is, shall laugh it to scorn.

CAP. 3.
Verse. 1. Woe to her that is filthy and polluted, to the robbing City.
The third and last sermon of this Prophet.
THe third and last sermon of this Prophet, wherein like as in the former, both
threatenings of God and also promises are contained. The promises are most
excellent, and most large touching the kingdom of Christ to be spread abroad
throughout al nations. But the Prophet begins with threatenings, because that
God will first have men to be amended in their life and conversation, before
they hear or feel his benefits. These threatenings also are in this place
conceived against the Jews, and this is the third threatening of the judgment
of God made against the^, even by this one Prophet. For they remained both
stubborn and stiffenecked in their sins: whom the Lord notwithstanding would
not have to perish, if they had had any heart or mind at all. Wherein
appears how great the patience and goodness of God is in bearing with those
that are his, The order of the Prophet in delivering the threatenings of God.
and in calling them unto earnest repentance. And after this course does the
prophet proceed in laying down of these threatenings, that first he reckons
up the causes of GOD his punishments, and afterward the punishments themselves
which were to ensue.

Touching the causes, they were most weighty, to wit, both their ungodliness
toward God, and also their injustice toward men: albeit that the Prophet
begin with their injustice, because the same may more easily be discovered,
and whose effects are better known unto men themselves. Furthermore these
causes and so great sins are first shown to have bin in the whole people
themselves. Secondly, in their rulers, both of the commonwealth; and also of
the Church. And this is the order of this place.

This first verse and that following lay down the corruption the which was
most known, and most great in the whole people: and therefore under the name
City, does the Prophet Sophonias speak unto the whole city. He begins
with a great and fearful Woe, Woe.
to make them attentive or to give ear unto the sermon following, and to show
that he will speak of the wrath of God against them. And thus he briefly
comprehends the sum of the whole sermon ensuing. As for this first verse
the same shows the great injustice of the whole city against men. The great
injustice of the whole city.
For first of all she is said to be filthy and polluted utterly and in every
respect with all sins and vices, and is so called in the great indignation of
the Prophet. Secondly, one kind of these sins, Covetousness.
and such as was most common among them at that time, is reckoned up, namely,
Covetousness: for they beguiled their brethren of their goods by all means,
both by violence, and also by deceit. Ianah.
For the word which the Prophet uses, betokens both these kinds of
deceiving.

Verse. 2. She heard not the voice: she received not correction: she trusted
not in the Lord: she drew not near to her God.
Their ungodliness.
NOw follows the ungodliness of the Jews or of men toward God, the which is
first set down in general, and afterward by parts, such as it then
especially appeared for to be. Generally for that they give not ear unto the
voice of God, that is, they obey not God, the which is indeed impiety or
ungodliness. Of which thing these parts of impiety are witnesses. First their
rebellion, Witnes^es here of.
and disorderousnes, when as they do not receive the discipline, 1. Their
rebellion, and disorderousnes.
judgments, and rule of God appointed in his law for their salvation, and
amendment. Secondly, their distrust. For they do not trust in the words and
promises of God, but do either utterly despise them, or laugh them to scorn.
Thirdly, their obstinacy, 2. Their distrust.
or stubbornnes, or impenitencie, or unrepentance in their sins. 3. Their
impenitencie.
For they do not return nor draw near unto God, yea and that their own God,
who does so lovingly call them unto him. And there is in this verse a great
vehemency or force of speech, the which in a kind of speaking being as it
were loose and not tied together with copulative conjunctions, does reckon up
so many vices, as it were by the way of a certain amplification.

Verse. 3. Her princes within her are as roaring lions: her judges are as
woolues in the evening, which leave not the bones till the morrow.
The princes and rulers themselves
FRom the whole people the Prophet comes now in order unto the Princes
themselves of the Jewish nation, because that in these there ought to be
greater shamefastnes both by reason of their dignity: and also greater fear
of God, for as much as they are chosen to govern others, and to keep them in
the fear of God.

Rulers, 1. of the church 2 of the commonwealth.
There are two sorts of Princes or rulers of the people: for some are Rulers of
the commonwealth: and othersome are Rulers of the Church. First of all
therefore he sets upon the Rulers of the commonwealth, of the which also he
makes two degrees, one of the higher and chiefer Judges, Rulers of the
commo^wealth, 1. Princes or chief Judges. 2. Inferior Judges.
whom he calls Princes: the other, of inferior Judges, whom he simply names
Judges. And both of these he accuses both of violence, and also of manifest
and most notorious covetousness Of force or violence, for that they take away
all things by might after the manner of lions, that is, of most cruel wild
beasts: Of insatiable or vnfilable covetousness, for that by and by they devour
all things, lusting and longing for them with a most greedy desire, and such
as can never be satisfied, and for that they are bribe takers, swallowing up
all things like unto evening and hunger-starued woolues, which leave not the
bones so much as until the morrow. And these so grievous and heinous sins,
The former vices amplified by the Prophet.
and contrary unto the office of Judges (who are ordained by God for the
preservation of Justice among men, that is, to keep away both violence and
also wrong) does the Prophet* amplify or enlarge, when as he says that these
things are committed of these Princes and Judges, to wit, in the midst of the
city: and not in some Shire of the land: all men knowing of it, not in the
darkness: in the open light, not in a corner.

The second sort of Rulers, to wit, the priests, and their vices, of the which
in this place he reckons up four.
Verse. 4. Her Prophets are light and wicked persons: her Priests have polluted
the Sanctuary: they have wrested the law.
THe second kind of Rulers of the people, namely the Priests, who^ themselves
also the Prophet makes guilty of great crimes, and such as are utterly against
their office. And here are four things reckoned up, which are most grievous,
especially in Priests, unto whom was committed by God himself the judgment of
things most doubtful, the looking unto, or the ministry of the Sacrifices and
Temple, and finally, the interpretation or expounding of the law of GOD. But on
the contrary part they are here condemned, 1. Lightness.
first, of most manifest, and most known futilitie or lightness, who did and
answered all things rashly and unadvisedly. Secondly, 2 Treachery.
of treachery, which keep not their promises and faith given. Thirdly, for
that they pollute both the Temple of God it self, 3. Polluting of the Temple.
the which is holy, and also all other things. Fourthly, for that with their
false gloses and expositions they do wrest the law of GOD, turn it from the
true meaning and offer violence unto it. 4 Wresting of the law.
All which things do bewray in them manifest impiety, or ungodliness, for the
which both the name of God is blasphemed, and in the end his worship and
service also despised.

Verse. 5. The just Lord is in the midst thereof: he will do none iniquity:
every morning does he bring his judgment to light, he fails not: but the
wicked will not learn to be ashamed.
An amplification of the former vices by setting against them the contrary
virtues in God.
AN Antithesis, or matching of the contrary virtues in GOD against the former
vices in the Priests and other Rulers, the which amplifie^h the causes of the
judgment of God rehearsed before. For against the former ungodliness of all
estates, the which is manifest, be matcheth the manifest justice of God, the
which cannot, especially in his own people, and in the midst of that city
(the which he has chosen unto himself, as wherein he dwells and lives, to
be holy, and consecrated unto himself) suffer these sins, and leave them
unpunished, ^east by winking at them, himself might seem to be a companion of
wicked persons, and to be delighted with iniquity as well as they. Wherefore
he sets down three things, first, the justice of GOD, when as he says, 1.
The justice of God.
The just Lord. Secondly, the work and making manifest of the same justice,
the which shall be done both forthwith, 2. The work of the same.
and also evidently, when as he says, He shall bring forth judgment into
light, and that he will do it quickly and speedily, Morning, morning, that is,
every morning. Thirdly, 3. The stubbornnes of the wicked.
the obstinacy or stubbornness of the wicked in the mean season. Further, by
the way of confession or yielding so much unto them, he confesses that GOD
is and dwells among them, to wit, because of the Temple, and the rest of the
worship and service of God, the which by God was delivered only unto the
Jews (which thing they had as a defense for all their sins, and a ready
exception against all the threatenings of the Prophets. But the Prophet turns
back the self same thing upon their own heads, when as he teaches, that
God himself which dwells among them, cannot show himself unto them to be a
partaker of their vices: nay that he will be a revenger of the sins, which
they committed.

Verse. 6 I have cut off the Nations: their Towers are desolate: I have made
their streets waste, that none shall pass by: their Cities are destroyed
without man, and without inhabitants.
A diligent description of the stubbornees and wickedness of the Jews.
A garnishing of the matter, that is to say, a diligent description or setting
out of the obstinate or stubborn mind of the Jews and of their desperate or
unrecoverable malice and wickedness, that how great the patience and sufferance
of God was toward them, and how great his equity and justice in punishing of
the^ might appear to be. 1. The Jews were warned by sundry examples of other
nations.
And the Prophet does set forth this after two sorts: First, for that the
Lord has warned them before by sundry examples of other Nations, which thing
is contained in this verse: So then the Lord does witness that he punished not
only one Nation, but many, for the like sins which the Jews committed,
they themselves beholding the same, that, had they not been past grace, they
might have looked at so many examples. Secondly, 2. The said nations were not
punished lightly.
he punished those same Nations not with a light judgment (the which might
either be naught set by, or not easily noted of men) but with a most grievous
judgment, the which ought to terrify or make a frayde the Jews. And therefore
they were to give heed unto it. For God both had overthrown and will also
overthrow the inner parts and things of those countries by that his judgment,
to wit, both the streets themselves and villages, towns and cities, and all
other places where men are wont to dwell, in such sort among the Nations known
unto the Jews and chastized by God, that no man now dwelt in those Countries
and places, so well kept and dressed before, the which then were desolate and
waste. And these judgments of God appeared, when as the Assyrians first, and
afterward also the Babylonians invaded and overthrew the Nations near unto the
Jews.

Verse. 7 I said, surely thou will fear me: thou will receive instructions: so
their dwelling should not be destroyed howsoever I visited them, but they rose
early and corrupted all their works.
The earnest desire of God to have the Jews repent.
ANother place of the former garnishing and setting out of the judgments of
God, namely the vehement and earnest desire of God him self, to have the
Jews repent, and so to escape their destruction except they were utterly
void of al hope and thinking upon better thrift and amendment. And this desire
is set forth by attributing unto God the affections of men, to the end the
fatherly meaning of GOD touching the Jews and his mild affection and love
toward them, might be the better expressed. But the Jews contemned or
despised all that same care and most gentle affection of God toward them: nay
moreover they disappoynted God himself of his hope of them, like unto
unthankful and utterly disobedient Children. So then here are two things set
down by way of matching together of contraries, first the mind, meaning, and
affection of GOD toward the Jews: 1 The mind of God toward the Jews.
secondly, on the contrary part, the stubbornes of the Jews against God. As
for the mind and meaning of God toward the Jews, the same was twofold, first,
2 Their stubborn against God.
that they by repenting might escape this scourge, being warned by the
overthrow and ruin of other nations. And repentance in this place is described
by two parts thereof, to wit, by the fear of GOD, works, that is, dealt
wickedly: but they corrupted all their works, that is to say, they openly
showed themselves unto all men to be lewd and wicked. And that with no small
endeavor, but with a most earnest and continual desire, in so much that they
rose early and made have to commit those vices, as if the whole pleasure and
drift of their life were set thereupon.

Ver. 8. Therefore wait ye upon me says the Lord, until the day that I rise
up to the pray: for I am determined to gather the nations, and that I will
assemble the kingdoms, to power upon them mine indignation, even all my fierce
wrath: For all the earth shall be devoured with the fire of my iealousy.
THis is the figure Hypophora, The figure Hypophora what it is see Amos. cap.
5. ver. 21.
or answering of an objection, least for the deferring of the judgments of
God, either the Jews or others might think these threatenings to be vain and
noughtworth, as if it were certain idle feare-bugges or scar-rowes. He
answers therefore that they must yet patiently wait for that day, in the
which the Lord will execute those his threatened judgments. Wherefore to show
them to be true, the Prophet teaches two things. pray, and of God rising,
also of fierce wrath and indignation, wherewith (...) ^^arth shall be devoured,
least they might suppose God to have threatened more things, and more heavy and
sharp then he was able to perform, and bring to pass. And that not only one
nation but many shall be punished by God, these words do declare, I will
gather the nations, I will assemble the kingdoms, etc.

Ver. 9. Surely then will I turn to the people apure language, that they may
call upon the name of the Lord, to serve him Or with one shoulder.
with one consent.
THis is a comfort wherewith after the threatninge of so many miseries, A
comfort for God his people.
the Lord does cheer up the hearts and minds of those that are his, that
they should not faint. The sum of the comfort is, that for all these miseries
the church shall not yet perish, or cease to be a church, wherein the name of
God is both truly and also purely called upon: nay that it shall then at the
length be amplified or enlarged, that it may appertain and be spread abroad
not only unto one nation of the world as it did before: but unto all people
indifferently: 3. Things to be noted in this work of God.
And in the reporting of this so wonderful a work of God the prophet teaches
three things. First, by whom this so wonderful a work shall be done, namely
by God himself. Secondly, after what manner it shall be done, to wit, 1. By
whom.
by turning and changing the persons themselves wholely, that they may both in
heart conceive and think of God aright, 2 After what manner.
and also in lips speak of God aright. For both these ways are men vnpure
by nature. For he says that he will change the lips or language of the
nations, signifying thereby, by the figure Synecdoche, What the figure
Synecdoche is, see Amos cap. 5. ver. 21.
the conversion of the whole man, as he also does under the name of lips Isay
6. ver. 5. where the Prophet says, Woe is me, for I am undone, because I am a
man of polluted lips, and I dwell in the mids of a people of polluted
lips etc. Thirdly, what shall be done, namely the nations, 3 What shall be
done.
yea and that all nations, and not one only as in times past the Jews alone,
but all the old difference between circumcision and uncircumcision being
taken away, shall call upon the name of the Lord, by the part understanding the
whole worship and service of God, by the figure Synecdoche. And therefore to
make this the more plain he adds, They shall serve Jehovah, that is the true
God, and not their idols any more: nay they shall cast them away into holes and
dens, and shall detest and curse them, yea and all of them shall do this with
one shoulder, that is, they shall do it with one consent in one faith and
charity, as Luke speaks of the disciples and other the godly, Act. 1. ver.
14. That they continued with one accord in prayer and supplication, etc. and
cap. 2. ver. 46. That they continued daily with one accord in the temple, etc.
For the word shoulder figurative or metaphorical, signifies a consent in
faith and charity, and one common endeavor, as God speaks of his people
Ierem. 32. ver. 39. when he says, I will give them one heart, and one way,
that they may fear me for ever for the wealth of them, and of their children
after them. But the accomplishment and fulfilling of this prophecy was by the
preaching of the gospel after the passion or suffering of Christ.

Verse. 10. From beyond the rivers of Ethiopia, the daughter of my dispersed,
praying unto me, shall bring me an offering.
An amplification of the former benefit by the farnes of the place, from whence
they shall be called unto the Church.
AN amplification of the former benefit by the rehearsing or reckoning up of the
place far off, and of those which shall then be called unto the Church. For
even from that same Ethiopia, the which is beyond the river, namely, beyond
Nilus (for in this place I think that Ethiopia, and not Arabia to be
signified) shall sacrifices be brought unto God by those people, which shall be
there: and so also by others which shall every where be scattered over the face
of the earth, and so consequently the Ethiopians, like as other people of the
world shall serve God. Wherefore I refer the word (dispersed) unto all
nations of what place soever professing the true God: and not unto the Jews
alone scattered through the world. And there is mention made by the Prophet of
the daughter of the dispersed affectionatly, namely, both to describe the
earnestnes of the nations in serving God, and that this so godly and joyful a
spectacle, or sight of women worshipping and serving of God, and of virgins
especially, might stir up and move affections.

Verse. 11. In that day shall thou not be ashamed for all thy works wherein
thou have transgressed against me: for then will I take away out of the midst
of thee them that rejoice of thy pride, and thou shall no more be proud of mine
holy mountain.
THis is a staying still about the same matter, in the which is reported the
greatness of the benefits of God toward his Church to come after such a sort
and manner, the which is wholly contrary unto the shame, misery, and infamy
or reproach of the Jews described before, Two notable benefits of God toward
his Church.
to the end that by this matching together of contraries, the grace and mercy
of God toward those that are his, may appear to be the more singular and
excellent. And here are two notable benefits rehearsed, and described by the
adioynts, that is to say, 1 Forgiveness of sins.
partly by the consequents or things following after, and partly by the
antecedents, or things going before. First, remission or forgiveness of sins:
2. Holiness of life, or regeneration.
afterward holiness of life, or regeneration which should afterward ensue. And
first forgiveness of sins, by this that God himself promises that it shall
come to pass, 1. Forgiveness of s^nnes.
that the things which the Church has committed shamefully against her self,
yet shall they not bring any shame upon her, no not before God himself,
because her sins shall be forgiven her. So then the benefit of forgiveness of
sins is described by the consequent: for shame or blushing is the reward of
sin. What these figures are see Amos nap. 5 ver. 21. and cap. 4. ver. 12.
And under this name both Synecdochically, and also Metaphorically, is the
horror or fearfulnes, and also the shamefulnes of sin described. Furthermore,
the greatness of this benefit appears by this, for that God promises that he
will wipe away not only one or two sins, but all sins, and not only those
which the Church has committed of ignorance, but also those which she has
committed through rebellion and frowardnes or stubbornnes of mind: for so much
does the word import, Pas^hang.
the which the Prophet uses. So great certes is the benefit of God toward his
Church by and for Christ, so great is his love, and so favorable and merciful
is he. For in Christ, as Paul writes Ephesians. 1. ver. 3.4. has God blessed us
with all spiritual blessing in heavenly things, as he has chosen us in him,
before the foundation of the world, etc. And as it is Colos. 1. ver. 22. In the
body of his flesh through death has he now reconciled us, etc.

Now, as for regeneration of life, the same also is described in this place
both by things going before, and also by things following. 2. Regeneration.
By things antecedent or going before, when he says, I will take pride out of
the midst of thee; that is, from the very bottom of thine heart, and those
which stir thee up thereunto, will I root out. By the consequents or things
following, when he says, Thou shall not add to be proud, or, Thou shall not
be proud any more, that is, thou shall not sin of contempt, or despite of my
word, and sooth or flatter thy self through pretense or color of my Temple.
So then, the first word pride shows the cause of sins, namely, Pride.
loftines of mind, which makes us to despise God. And the latter sentence
contains the effects of this pride. Wherefore both of them are away from the
truly regenerate or newborn, if not wholly, yet at the least wise it is
daily mortified in them, to wit, both the pride of mind it self against God,
and also the effects of this pride.

Verse. 12. Then will I leave in the midst of thee an humble and poor people:
and they shall trust in the name of the Lord.
A commendation of the benefit of God toward the church to come.
This verse tends to the same end that the former, to wit, that the Prophet
might show and commend the benefit of God toward that company of the elect of
God, which is the Church, should be longed for, sought after, and desired of
all men. And the Prophet sets down two things. 1. What manner of company
the Church of God shall be.
First, what manner of assembly or company that same flock of God shall be.
Secondly, he shows that the same shall be most safe and out of danger.
Concerning this company to be gathered together in the Church of God, 2. They
shall be in security or safety.
if they be esteemed according unto the judgment of men, they shall be humble
and poor, because that the riches of the Church be heavenly and not earthly.
So Christ calls his Church Luke 12. ver. 32. when he says, Fear not little
flock: for it is your fathers pleasure to give you the kingdom. And so is the
word (poor) taken Isai 11. verse. 4. But with righteousness shall be judge the
poor, and with equity shall be reprove for the meek of the earth: etc. But
if it be considered according unto the judgment of God, the self same flock
is the church, the riches and peculiar people and inheritance of God himself.
For so writes Paul to Titus cap. 2. ver. the last save one: Christ gave
himself for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purge us to
be a peculiar people us himself, zealous of good works. Moreover, this
company shall be godly, because it shall flee unto God himself in most
assured hope, which it shall put in him. And it shall be most safe and without
danger, although it be little, because it does trust in the Lord, Luke 12.32.
And therefore Iere. 46. ver. 27.28. does GOD most comfortablie use this sweet
speech unto his Church, saying: Fear not thou, O my servant Iaacob, and be not
thou afraid, O Israel: for behold, I will deliver thee from a far country,
and thy seed from the land of their captivity, and Iaacob shall return, and
be in rest and prosperity, and none shall make him afraid. Fear thou not, O
Iaacob my servant, says the Lord, for I am with thee, and I will utterly
destroy all the nations, whither I have driven thee: but I will not utterly
destroy thee, but correct thee by judgment, and not utterly cut thee off.

Verse. 13. The remnant of Israel shall do none iniquity, nor speak lies:
neither shall a deceitful tongue be found in their mouth: for they shall be
fed, and lie down, and none shall make them afraid.
An amplification of the former benefit by making more plain of the same.
AN amplification of the former benefit, by the making more plain of the same,
and that by the way of answering an objection. For least the condition of the
Church might seem to be the worser, because that it was little, and afflicted,
and poor, he shows with how great other benefits God will recompense that
loss of multitude, to wit, with a double gift of holiness and safety. God
recompenceth the smalnes, poverty, and affliction of his Church with other
greater spiritual benefits, as among the rest with holiness and safety.
Of holiness, because that those remnants, in whom alone the Church shall
consist, shall do none iniquity. Of safety, because that every one shall
dwell and rest in safety in his own place. And both these benefits of God
ought to be understood by way of comparison, in regard of the condition and
estate of the old Church, the which removed so often, and was carried from her
own seats and home: but simply and absolutely, when as we shall be in heaven:
for then shall we be safe in our place. But this holiness does the Prophet
describe by the contrary, namely, sin or iniquity, and first generally:
afterward by certain particulars of that general. The general is
(iniquity): the particulars or kinds of the same are lying and deceit
especially, the which appears in the tongue, under which two the other vices
are comprehended by the figure Synecdoche. What the figure Synecdoche is, see
Amos cap. 5. ver. 21.
Psalm. 15. Iam. 3. ver. 2. If any man sin not in word, he is a perfect man,
and able to bridle all the body. Finally, he alleges the cause of this
safety, because none, says he, shall make her afraid any more: for God shall
keep her, and fence her about on every side.

Verse. 14. Rejoice, O daughter Zion: be ye joyful, O Israel: be glad and
rejoice with all thine heart, O daughter Jerusalem.
A confirmation of the former promises by a sign of joy and gladness. Three
things to be noted.
A Confirmation of the former promises taken from a sign or token, that is to
say, from joy, yea and the same both general, and also very great, unto the
which God does exhort the Church, as if she did now presently in deed and
truth enjoy it, the which afterward it shall obtain and have most assuredly.
And here are three things to be noted. First, the manner of speaking it self
being loose and unjointed, or not knit together with copulative conjunctions,
1. The manner of speaking.
the which makes also unto the rousing up of the drousie: and the repeating of
diverse words signifying diverse kinds of joy, that none should be omitted, but
that godly men should be stirred up unto all kinds of joys, as of a thing
most to be wished for, and assured unto them. The second thing to be noted is,
2. Who are exhorted to rejoice.
who are exhorted to rejoice. And that is indeed the Church, but the whole
Church, under the name of Israel, Sion, Jerusalem: and that under a most sweet
and gentle speech, when as it is exhorted expressly by the name of daughter. For
this is to move and stir up affection, and not to restrain the speech, or
joy of the Church unto may dens only. The third thing is the great joy to be
noted, 3 The exceeding great joy.
whereunto the Prophet does exhort us, as the which the Church shall signify
and declare not only with the heart or voice, but also by gesture, and moving
of the body, that we may judge her to rejoice withal her heart. For this does
the word Gnalaz set in the last place signify, Gnalaz.
the which the faithful interpreters of this place have translated to triumph,
or as it were to leap for joy.

Verse. 15. The Lord has taken away thy judgments: he has cast out thine
enemy: the King of Israel, even the Lord is in the midst of thee: thou shall
see no more evil.
Four causes of the former joy of the Church.
A Yielding of a reason. For he brings four causes, why the church of God
ought to rejoice after the same manner, as I have said before, all which hang
upon the mere and only free good will of God toward it: and not upon the
works of the Church. And the cause which is here first rehearsed, is the
foundation and ground of the rest, 1. Forgiveness of her sins.
to wit, forgiveness or doing away of her sins, yea and that of all her
sins, the which, if it went not before, God would bestow no other benefits
upon us. And this forgiveness is the free pardoning of the judgments, or just
vengeance of God against us, to wit, by reason of the pardoning of all our
sins for and by Christ, in whom God has chosen us before the foundations of
the world, that we should be holy and blameles before him in love, etc. Ephesians.
1.4. This benefit therefore of forgiveness is described by the effects, or
consequent, when as the Prophet says, He has taken away thy judgments. 2.
Deliverance from all her enemies.
The second benefit and gift of God toward his Church, is the deliverance of
her from all foreign enemies, whom God says, that he has dispatched or
emptied, or cast out. Wherefore whether the inward quiet, that is, of
conscience: or the outward, from the fear of our enemies, be considered, the
Church of God is altogether without danger and happy or blessed. For as it is
in Luke cap. 1. ver. 74. We are delivered by Christ out of the hands of all our
enemies, 3. The presence of God in the midst of his Church.
that we should serve God without fear, all the days of our life, in holiness
and righteousness before him. The third benefit is, the presence of God himself
in the midst of it, who does both govern and defend it. For albeit that the
Lord be every where, yet is he not in such sort every where, 4. The perpetuity
continuance of these benefits.
as he is in the Church. The fourth gift in this place rehearsed, is the
perpetuity or continuance of these benefits: because that the Church shall not
any more see, or feel any evil, or any misery: for God shall defend her.
All these things cannot be understood except through Christ, of his heavenly
kingdom, and of the state and saftie of the Church under him, the which do
here, that is to say, on this earth fall out unto us but in part: but fully
and thoroughly when as we shall be received in heaven So then let us suppose
and think the promises of God toward those that are his to be especially
heavenly: and therefore let us set our mind on life everlasting, and there
look to inioye them most fully.

Verse. 16. In that day it shall be said to Jerusalem, fear thou not O Zion,
let not thine hands be faint.
An amplification of the former benefits taken from the public gratulation of
all men unto the Church.
AN amplification of the former benefits taken from the public gratulation, or
thankeful rejoicing of all men, the which shall then be done unto the Church.
Wherefore these self same things also do confirm that promise. And this
gratulation, or thankful rejoicing has also an exhortation of all men, the
which shall be made unto the Church. For all men shall see the Church to be of
a quiet mind: and shall encourage her to go forward and to serve God boldly
and without fear: and that her hands wax not slow, to wit, in setting forth
the work of the Lord: but that they constantly persevere or continue in the
journey and holy purpose already begun and taken in hand, both in
worshipping God, and laying open of his doctrine. Whereunto the rest and quiet
of the Church is to be employed.
Thus then the quiet and rest of the Church is not to be applied unto
deliciousnes: but to be employed unto holy works, namely unto the enlarging
of the kingdom of God by the preaching of his word, and the examples of an
holy life.

Ves. 17. The Lord thy God in the midst of thee is mighty: he will save, he
will rejoice over thee with joy: he will quiet him self in his love: he will
rejoice over thee with joy.
An other amplificatio^ of the state of the Church by the reckoning up of
sundry benefits of God toward the same.
AN other amplification of the state of the Church which was to come, and to be
gathered together in Christ, taken from the reckoning up of the sundry gifts
of God toward the same. And in this verse he describes or promises four
especial benefits, the which abeit they were bestowed upon the old Church also
by God through the same Christ, yet were they given neither in so great
measure, as they are unto the Church raised up by the preaching of the Gospel:
nor yet so cleerlie or evidently, as unto us; but far more darkly: namely by
the shadows and sacraments of earthelie things, as it were spreading of a
veil over them: 1. God will alwies be in the midst of his Church.
the first gift reckoned up in this place is first also by nature, and going
before the rest. And it is, that Jehovah, that is, that everlasting and true
God (who does witness himself to be the God, father, and defender of his Church
peculiarly) will not now be absent and away from it, but will be perpetually
or always abiding in the midst of it: So then God promises his presence
unto his Church peculiarly, and the same spiritual, that is, which shall be
felt by the power of his spirit: and not any carnal or fleshly and bodily
presence. 2 He will defend it from spiritual and earthly dangers.
The second benefit is a consequent or such a one as follows the former, to
wit, that God will be the Savior of the said Church both from spiritual
evils, and evils of the mind, (such as sins are:) and also from earthly
dangers, and dangers of the body (such as are afflictions.) The which thing
that he may be understood to be able to perform (albeit his Church have never
so great and deadly enemies) God in this place is called strong, 3 The joy and
gladness of God over and toward his Church.
or mighty: the third benefit is the joy or gladness of God over the church,
the which is tickled up in the very inner parts of the heart, and the which
God does openly testify or witness by sundry effects and sundry gifts of
his. To this purpose seem unto me the words of triumphing or shooting for
joy, and also the words of joy and gladness ought to be referred, that the one
might signify the inward, and the other the outward and open joy of God, and
his glad mind toward his Church by a figurative kind of speaking. 4. The
continuance of God his love to-his Church.
The fourth, wherein is an heap and increase of all gifts, is the continuance
of this good will of God toward his Church. For God will quiet himself in
that love, as the husband in his love toward his wife, the which he loves both
alone, and also entirely. All these things fall out unto the Church by and
for Christ alone, our GOD, through whom the godly are reconciled or made
frindes with his father, and justified before him.

Verse. 18. After a certain time will I gather the afflicted that were of thee,
and them that bare the reproach for it.
The answering of an objection.
THe aunswering of an objection, whereunto is added a most assured confirmation
of the former promises. The objection is that men, which are over quick and
hasty should not think these foretellings of the Prophet to be vain, because
the church is not forthwith gathered together, or helped, the which at that
time was afflicted or in trouble, that is to say, because those promises are
not fulfilled out of hand. The Prophet therefore answers, that they are
indeed to be fulfilled, but in their due and set time, and the same appointed
by God. For the word Mogned, is the fulness of time, as Paul speaks Galat. 4.
ver. 4. of the time of the incarnation of Christ, where he says: When the
fulness of time was come, God sent forth his son made of a woman, etc.
Therefore that work of God is to be waited for of us with patience. And in
this self same answer there is a repetition and a confirmation of those
promises. Likewise he adds a reason, why God one day will gather them
together, how afflicted and forsaken soever they seemed at that time for to be:
and why he will in such sort refresh them, who at that season were worn away
with so great sadness, or rather mourning because of their sundry afflictions,
and especially such as were hyd upon them by the Babylonians (the which he
threatened unto them before): because says he, they also are of thee, or are
thine, The cause why God will one day gather together and help his church.
O my spouse and Church, the which certes are in this sort afflicted.
Therefore all the godly are of the family or household of God albeit they be
most afflicted, because they are a part and members of the church, also because
the burden and affliction, the which by the ungodly is laid upon the church,
does turn unto the reproach of God himself. God therefore will put away the
affliction, and will not suffer his church for ever, or continually to be
molested or grieved.

Vert. 19. Behold, at that time I will bruise all that afflict thee, and I
will save her that halteth and gather her that was cast out, and I will get them
praise and fame in all the lands of their shame.
The conclusion.
THe conclusion, with a great increase also unto the former benefits. Therefore
in this and in the verse following the Lord at the last pronounces, that he
will be the deliverer of his church, An access unto the former benefits by
three gifts more from God unto his church.
how great soever the lets may seem to be that are laid in the way to stop
this work. The access or increase unto the former benefits is in a certain
threefold gift, the which he offers unto the said church besides the
benefits before rehearsed. First, he promises that he will not only repress
or keep back all her enemies (who hardly afflicted and utterly threw her
down before) but also that 1. He will utterly destroy all her enemies.
he will quite and clean destroy them, and altogether root the^ ou^* 2. He
will remove a^l hi^drances of gathering his church together.
The second is, that he will take away all lets of gathering together his
church, yea even those the which were sticking in the church her self, that
they also shall not at any hand hinder any more, that she may not be gathered
together. Therefore neither shall those which were halt, cease for this cause
to come: nor those that are cast out, to be gathered together with the rest of
the body. The third is, 3 He will give unto them honor and renown.
God also shall give a name, and an honor, and fame unto the company ga^hered
together by him. Wherefore they shall not only be a certain multitude of men:
but honorable, yea and that among all nations: even in the self same places in
the which before they lived in reproach and shame. And all these things were
then at length in that time fulfilled, wherein God in Christ by the preaching
of the Gospel scattered his Church throughout the whole world, that is,
gathered it together.

Verse. 20. At that time will I bring you again, and then will I gather you:
for I will give you a name and a praise among all people of the earth, when I
turn back your captivity before your eyes, says the Lord.
A repetition.
THis is a repetition, to the end that the former benefits might be the more
certain and assured among all men. For here is a confirmation of them. Two
things to be noted.
And in this place there are two things to be noted. First, the phrase or
kind of speaking not knit together with any copulative conjunction ( In that
time) the which brings a weight and dignity unto this sentence, 1. The kind
of speaking.
and causes that these things, which he has promised unto his church, men
might understand the same to be the more fastly settled, and to stick more
surely in the memory of God. 2. The saying of God himself.
The second, the saying of God himself, lest because this thing is judged past
hope in the opinion of men, the promise might seem to be vain. For it shall
be done, and fulfilled, which God has promised unto his church, because that
both God has said that it shall come to pass: and also has him self upon
just cause decreed that it shall be done, who can ne^ be deceived, nor let.

FINIS.
The Commentary of Lambertus Danaeus upon the Prophet Abdias.
The Argument.
THe Prophet in one Sermon threatens destruction unto the Idumeans, as if they
being sufficiently convicted or proved guilty, needed not any longer
accusation. The causes are, their pride and cruelty against the Israelites
their brethren. Like unto this is the prophecy of Ezechiel cap. 35. and Amos
cap. 1. Psalm. 137. The life and prophecy of Abdias.
This Prophet seems to have lived not only after that the Egyptians, king
Nachao being their captain, had taken and destroyed Jerusalem with the help
of the Idumeans, that is, after the death of Josias King of the Jews: but also
after the first captivity of Babylon, the which fell into the 4. year of
Ioacim king of Judah, and into the first year of Nabuchadnezzar. For then did
the Idumeans insult or triumph over the Jews being most sorely afflicted or
troubled, and rejoiced at their destruction. For which cau^^s the Lord also by
other Prophets threatens to be revenged on ^^em, as Ierem. 49. verse. 14. where
he uses the very self same beginning against them in a manner, as this our
Prophet Abdias does, saying: I have heard a rumor from the Lord, and an
ambassador is sent unto the heathen, saying, Gather you together, and come
against ^er, and rise up to the battle. And Ezech. 24. verse. 12, 1^. The cause
of the destruction of Edom.
Thus says the Lord God, Because that Edom has done evil by taking vengeance
upon the house of Judah, and has committed great offense, and re^enged
himself upon them: therefore thus says the Lord God, I will ^lso stretch out
mine hand upon Edom, and destroy man and beast out (...) it, and I will make it
desolate from Teman, and they of Dedan shall ^^^ll by the sword.

The briefnes of Danaeus upon this Prophet, may be supplied out of the
Commentaries of Gualter, which are in English.
Verse. 1. The vision of Obadiah. Thus says the Lord God against Edom: we have
heard a rumor from the Lord, and an ambassador is sent among the heathen:
arise, and let us rise up against her to battle.
FIrst of all he avouches and ascertaineth his calling, the which he teaches
to be from God. He shows his calling to be from God.
And he shows that his prophecy shall forthwith be fulfilled in deed and in
truth, for as much as the soldiers themselves mustered and gathered together
by God, are now already set in battle array, and ready to give the onset upon
them.

Verse. 2. Behold, I have made thee small among the heathen: thou art utterly
despised.
Utter destruction threatened unto the Idumeans.
THe sum of the vengeance and punishment the which God threatens unto the
Idumeans, namely, their utter destruction.

Verse. 3. The pride of thine heart has deceived thee: thou that dwell in
the cliffes of the rocks, whose habitation is hie, that says in his heart,
who shall bring me down to the ground?
Pride, the first cause of the overthrow of the Idumeans.
THe first cause of this judgment of God against the Idumeans, is their pride,
the which they conceived of their vain confidence or bold trust, because of
the situation of their country, seated so strongly among the rocks and
cliffes, that as they supposed it could never be surprised or taken.

Verse. 4. Though thou exalt thy self as the Eagle, and make thy nest among the
stars, thence will I bring thee down says the Lord.
An objection of the Idumeans.
THe answering of an objection, which the Idumeans might make against these
threatenings of the Prophet and say, we are sure enough from danger, we dwell
safely, and most strongly, and as it were among the stars and high in the
air, far from al fear of hurt, (for thus much or the like in effect is
impl^ed in this objection) The Lord answers, The Lords answer.
Nothing shall let or hinder that God should not execute his judgments upon
them, albeit they dwell never so much in the rocks.

Verse. 5. Came thieves to thee, or robbers by night? how wast thou brought to
silence? would they not have stolen till they had enough? if the
grape-gatherers came to thee, would they not leave some grapes?
Sarcasmos, what this figure is, see Nahum cap. 3. ver. 14.
THe figure Sarcasmos, or a most sharp and bitter taunt, which might only or
at the last be understood by the issue or falling out of the matter, and
overthrow of this people, the which ensued afterward, the which for the better
understanding of the simple reader, I will make bold with the adding of a few
lines after this manner to make it some what more plain, thus, And is this that
gallant and dainty land (supposing that we now saw it miserably spoiled and
wasted by the enemy, as it fell out afterward for to be) nested in the stars,
and seated aloft out of reach in the air? So strong, so rich, so wealthy!
what? has she fallen into the hands of thieves and robbers, that she has bin
thus stripped and wasted? or have the grape-gatherers been with her, that she
is so rifled, and left thus naked and bare, and gathered or plucked so nearly,
that there is not one cluster left hanging on her?

Thus much imports this tart and biting frump or quip, whereby the Prophet
signifies that they shall be more pitifully and lamentably ransacked and
spoiled, then if they had been rifled by thieves, or plucked by
grape-gatherers, for that both the one and the other how hardly or narrowly
soever they had gone to work with them, yet would they have left them some
thing: but the greedines and cruelty of those enemies, into whose power they
shall be yielded up and come, shall be such that they will search al holes and
corners, stripping them as it were unto the very skin, and turning them away
naked, leaving them nothing, etc.

Verse. 6. How are the things of Esau sought up, and his treasures searched?
An amplification of the greedines of the enemies.
AN amplification. For there shall be nothing so secret hidden, and well laid
up, and dear unto them, the which shall not be taken away from the Idumeans by
the enemies, which God shall send in upon them.

Verse. 7. All the men of thy confederacy, have driven thee to the borders: the
men that were at peace with thee, have deceived thee, and prevailed against
thee: they that eat thy bread, have laid a wound under thee: there is none
understanding in him.
Hypotyposis, see what this figure is, Amos cap. 8. ver. 12.
THe figure Hypotyposis. For he describes or sets out very lively the
greatness of the misery to come. First, for that they shall then, or at that
time be betrayed by their own friends.

Verse. 8. Shall not I in that day, says the Lord, even destroy the wise men
out of Edom, and understanding from the mount of Esau? Verse. 9. And thy strong
men, O Teman, shall be afraid, because every one of the mount of Esau shall be
cut off by slaughter.
No remedy against their miseries.
ANd they shall not find any remedy among themselves against these so great
miseries, albeit they do use either counsel or strength.

Verse. 10. For thy cruelty against thy brother Iaacob, shame shall cover thee,
and thou shall be cut off for ever.
Cruelty, another cause of their destruction
AN other cause of this so great ruin or overthrow of the Idumeans, namely,
their cruelty against the Israelites their brethren now already declared and
uttered indeed.

Verse. 11. When thou stoodest on the other side, in the day that the strangers
carried away his substance, and strangers entered into his gates, and cast lots
upon Jerusalem, even thou wast as one of them.
A description of the cruelty of the Idumeans against the Israelites.
A Description or setting out and amplifiyng of this cruelty of the Idumeans,
taken from the circumstance of time.

Verse. 12. But thou should not have beholden the day of thy brother, in the
day that he was made a stranger, neither should thou have rejoiced over the
children of Judah, in the day of their destruction: thou should not have
spoken proudly in the day of affliction. Ver. 13. Thou should not have entered
into the gate of my people, in the day of their destruction, neither should
thou have once looked on their affliction in the day of their destruction, nor
have laid hands on their substance in the day of their destruction. Ver. 14.
Neither should thou have stand in the cross ways, to out off them that
should escape, neither should thou have shut up the remnant thereof in the
day of affliction.
Their cruelty amplified by setting down the duty of a brother toward his
brother afflicted.
HE describes and amplifieth their cruelty by way of matching together of
contraries, or by the description and setting out of the duty of a brother,
toward his brother afflicted or in misery, the which the Idumeans violated or
brake in every respect.

Ver. 15. For the day of the Lord is near upon all the heathen: as thou have
done, it shall be done to thee: thy reward shall return upon thine head.
The conclusion.
THe conclusion, that it is meet and just, that they which have afflicted or
troubled the Sons of God, should themselves also be afflicted or punished,
with the like punishment, and after the like manner. So writes Paul unto the
Thessalonians epist. 2. cap. 1. ver. 6. saying: It is a righteous thing with
God, to recompense tribulation to them that trouble you. And Deuteronomy. 32. ver.
41.42. God affirms that he will reward blood with blood upon those which had
murdered and slain his people, in these words: If I whet my glittering sword,
and mine hand take hold on judgment, I will execute vengeance on mine enemies,
and will reward them that hate me. I will make mine arrows drunk with blood,
(and my sword shall eat flesh) for the blood of the slain, and of the
captives, when I begin to take vengeance of the enemy. Ye nations praise his
people: for he will avenge the blood of his servants, and will execute
vengeance upon his adversaries, and will be merciful unto his land, and to his
people.

Ver. 16. For as ye have drunk upon mine holy mountain, so shall all the
heathen drink continually: yea they shall drink and swallow up, and they
shall be as though they had not bin.
HE amplifieth their wickedness by the figure Auxesis or increasing, Auxesis.
What this figure is see Oseas cap 7. ver 4.
casting into the teeth of the Idumeans their profaning or vnhalowinge and
defilinge of his sanctuary done by them unto shameful and filthy uses: whereby
he shows that his vengeance against the Idumeans is the more just,
notwithstanding that it be most sharp and grievous.

Ver. 17. But upon mount Zion shall be deliverance, and it shall be holy, and
the house of Iaacob shall possess their possessions, Ver. 18. And the house of
Iaacob shall be a fire, and the house of Joseph a flame, and the house of Esau
as stubble, and they shall kindle in them, and devour them: and there shall be
no remnant of the house of Esau: for the Lord has spoken it. Ver. 19. And they
shall possess the south side of the mount of Esau: and the plain of the
Philistims, and they shall possess the fields of Ephraim, and the fields of
Samaria, and Benjamin shall have Gilead.
A comparing of the estate of the church with the destruction of the Idumeans
their enemies.
ON the contrary side he compares with this destruction of the Idumeans the
condition and estate that shall be of the church, whom they had so hardly
afflicted. And this he shows shall be both most happy in regard of it self,
and also terrible or fearful unto the enemies themselves, whose borders and
countries it shall in the end through the preachinge of the Gospel invade and
possess.

Ver. 20. And the captivity of this host of the children of Israel, which were
among the Canaanites, shall possess unto Zarephath, and the captivity of
Jerusalem, which is in Shepharad, shall possess the caties of the South.
A confirmation of the godly.
A Repetition of that which went before, whereby the Prophet confirms or
strengthens the doubtful and wavering minds of the godly, by reason of so
great calamity or misery.

Ver. 21. And they that shall save, shall come up to mount Zion, to judge the
mount of Esau, and the kingdom shall be the Lords.
The happy estate of the Idumeans
IN this verse is promised and described or set forth, the happy condition and
estate of the Idumeans themselves, by reason of this their subjection unto God,
and the kingdom or rule of the Church over them.

FINIS.
The Commentary of Lambertus Danaeus, upon the Prophet Habacuck.
CAP. 1. The argument.
THe argument of this prophecy, albeit that it be like unto the rest, so far
forth as it contains the threatenings and promises of God: the threatenings
against wicked men, 2 Things proper unto this Prophet.
and his promises unto the godly and faithful, and such as fear God: yet has
it certain peculiar and proper things unto it self, and these two especially.
First, 1 A complaint against the providence of God.
a most bitter complaint of the Prophet himself, against the providence of
God, with the which also the Prophet begins. Secondly, an especial form of
prayer, serving as it were for a perpetual comfort, 2. A prayer for them in
captivity.
the which is set forth unto the godly captives, that they might cheer up and
comfort themselves in the midst of their miseries. This is the effect of this
whole prophecy. So then the end of this Prophecy is most unlike unto his
beginning. For the entrance or beginning shows a diste^perature, and
unquietness of mind in this Prophet: but the end declares the pacified and
quiet mind of the said Prophet, and resting in the judgments of God as most
just decrees: so diuerscertes are the affections even of godly men, and one
while to be praised, and another while to be dispraysed And it was behoofull
and requisite, that there should such an example be extant and remaining, both
that we might have at hand a ready and prepared answer unto the blasphemous
speeches of the ungodly against God, and their complaints of God, such as is
here set down, given by the spirit of God ver. 5. and also that these panges
and intemperate fits of the minds of the godly might by these examples be
bridled, the which do often come upon them: and not upon one man only. For with
such a rage of mind rather then sorrow, David.
is David himself also vexed and cumbred, as appears Psalm. 73, and Jeremy
cap 12. and likewise cap. 15. ver. 10. where he says: Woe is me my mother, that
thou have borne me, a contentious man, and a man that strives with the whole
earth: I have neither lent on usury, nor men have lent unto me on usury: yet
every one does curse me.

Furthermor concerning the time of the prophesying of this prophet, he seems
to have prophesied after that now all the godly and holy men had foreseen the
most grievous judgments of GOD likely to ensue upon the Jews, by reason of
their heinous offenses of all sorts, of the which Habacuc complains here in
the first place. The time of the prophesying of Habacuck.
So then Habacuc prophesies about the beginning of the reign of Sedechias, to
wit, the Jews then daring adventure the doing of any notorious wickedness: and
the Chaldeans or Babylonians being now known: and after that the self same
persons had carried away many of the Jews together with Ioacim their King
captives into Babylon, who waxed old in that captivity. Wherefore he lively
describes or sets out the power, and valor and experience, and warlike
courage and manhood of the Chaldeans, who were yet now further for to be, like
as they had already bin, the rod of God, least the Jews might suppose
themselves to be out of their danger: or able for to match them. In a word,
Habacuck prophesied before the taking of Jerusalem by Nabucadnezar.

Verse. 1. The burden, which Habacuck the Prophet did see.
Three parts of this verse.
THis verse contains three things, first the sum of the prophecy ensuing:
and that is, a burden, that is, a threatening of miseries and calamities. 1 The
sum of this prophecy.
But here is not expressed by name unto whom they are threatened: but by the
things which follow it easelie appears that this burden is carried and foretold
by the Prophet unto the Jews living wickedly: In the second place it shows
the person it self of the Prophet. 2 The person of the Prophet.
This is, Habacuc, not he of whom mention is made in the books of the
Apocrypha, namely in the story of Bell, 3 A confirmation of this prophecy.
and the Dragon, the which is set down Dan 14. ver. 32.33. and so forth: but
a Prophet of God, most known among the Jews at that time. In the third place
is expressed a confirmation of this prophecy: namely it is a vision showed or
sent unto this Prophet by God himself, like as Number 12. ver. 6. God shows
that if a Prophet of the Lord be among them, he will be known unto him by a
vision, and will speak unto him by a dream.

Verse. 2. O Lord how long shall I cry, and thou will not hear: even cry out
unto the, for violence, and thou will not help.
The Prophet begins with a complaint.
THe exordium, entrance or beginning of the prophecy, with a complaynt, the
which the Prophet conceiueth of the most defiled lyse of the Jews among whom
he lived, for that the same seemed by God to be left unrevenged and unpunished.
And this be calls (violence) that is to say, open force, Chamas.
whereby not only one took away from an other that which was his without
punishment, but also detained or withheld every part of righteousness in
unrighteousness, as Paul speaks, and denied both unto God and man their right,
against whom (as it is Romans 1. ver 18.) The wrath of God is reueiled from
heaven for all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men, the which withhold the
truth in unrighteousness, who (as Paul speaks ver. 31. of the same Chap.)
though they know the law or righteousness of God, how that they which commit such
things, are worthy of death, yet not only do the same, but also favor them
that do the^. Thus do I take this word here in this place, like as it is also
taken in many other places, as where the Prophet complayneth Psalm. 55. ver. 9.
Destroy, O Lord, and divide their tounges: for I have seen cruelty, (chamas)
and strife in the City. and Genesis 6 ver. 11. where it is said, The earth also
was corrupt before God: for the earth was filled with cruelty: (chamas)
Further the Prophet witnesses that he not only cried, but also cried out
against it, that is, for it, to have it punished by God, and yet for all this
that God was not wakened up, or took vengeance against so wicked a kind of
life. See Psalm. 94.

Verse. 3. Why do thou show me iniquity, and cause me to behold sorrow? for
spoiling and violence are before me: and there are that raise up strife and
contention.
A reason of the former complaint.
THe rendering of a reason of the former complaining and reasoning of the Prophet
with GOD, as the silence or forbearance of God were now out of season and too
long in so over much unbridled bold liberty and brasenfaced shamelesnes of
men, yea even of the Jews, that is, of the seed of Abraham, to commit all
evil and lewdnes. This verse has two parts. The one which repeteth again the
same former complaint: Two parts of this verse.
The other, which expresses the cause thereof, 1. A repeting of the former
complaint.
and shows what is understood before by the word (violence.) Touching the
complaint, the same is here again repeated, because that at the same time it
was known unto the most blind, and as it were unto every Cobbler and Tincker,
2 The cause of the same.
how wickedlie the Jews lived, among whom he and the other Prophets had their
conversation or abiding. shall J not visit them for these things says the
Lord? or shall not my soul be avenged on such a Nation as this? Yet were they,
as I have foresaid, the people of God, an holy Nation, the seed of Abraham.
Wherefore the matter was intolerable or not to be borne withal of any godly
man, much less of God, the which the Prophets and all the godly did see with
their own eyes. This open raunging and raging of vices and sin was forthwith
to be punished by God with sword and fire (whose name was for this cause
blasphemed or evil spoken of even among the infidels, as it is also in the
Prophet Isaias) and at no hand to be deferred or prolonged, and put off from
day to day. Wherefore this debating and reasoning of the matter with God is
repeated as a just complaint for so manifest or plain comtempt and despising
of God.

2. Iniquity Strife. Contention. Vexation. Violence. Spoiling.
Now the cause hereof, as I have said is the life of the Jews, outrageous and
horrible for all kind of lewdnes: for here are reckoned up sundry sorts of
wickedness, namely, iniquity, strife, contention, vexation, violence,
spoiling: of the which the three former I do refer unto those injuries, the
which private men privately did one unto another: and the three latter unto
those injuries, the which they publicly committed one against another: as for
example, either the officers and magistrates unto the subjects, or a people and
cities unto cities. And all these things argued or proved, that all charity
and love was extinct or quenched among them: and consequently that all fear of
God was done away. Strifes and contentions do show their unjust law quarrels,
the which notwithstanding never ceased among them. For there were always some
which raised and stirred them up. Which thing also appears in France even at
this day, where there are in number more suites and processes, then heads of
men. Iniquity, is deceit subtlety and craft, wherewith one beguiled another
in their traffike and bargainings. Vexation, is such grieuance, as the
toll-gatherers and custome-masters, and such like deceitful, way ward and
cruel persons did openly use unto the common people, demanding tribute of
them. Spoiling, is such losses and harms and vndoings, as these pillars and
pollers of the people did every where exercise and bring in. Violence, is the
force and open wrong the which one did unto another openly without punishment.
And these things do show that there was at that time a wonderful
disorderousnes of that state both public and also private. Compare with this
place the like complaints against this self same people by Isai cap. 1.
Jeremy cap. 2. and 5. Ezech. 16.

Verse. 4. Therefore the law is dissolved, and judgment does never go forth:
for the wicked do compass about the righteous: therefore wrong judgment
proceeds.
The cause of so great wickedness among the Jews, to wit, the contempt of the
law of God.
A Laying out of the matter more plainly. For the shows the causes of so
great, and such unpunished wickedness of the Jews. One is, and the same the
chief cause, namely, the contempt or despising of the law or doctrine of God,
the which had utterly lost her authority among them. And therefore in this
place it is said to be dissolved, or weakened. For it agrees with chap. 7. of
Jeremy. Doutles when as it alone prescribes the true way of living well,
Psalm. 19 Deuteronomy. 6. he which despises or sets naught by it, must needs live
ungodly and unjustly. Two evils follow of the despising of the law of God.
And so in the end two evils follow of the breaking, despising and throwning
down of the authority of the doctrine of God: One, that judgment never
mighty. 1. Judgment never goes forth
Therefore men never have their right given unto them, but in stead of justice,
oppression or wrong, and robbery is exercised even of the Magistrates in the
public judgments, much more by private persons, and in obscure and secret
places. Hereof complains the Prophet Isai cap. 5. ver. 7. saying: Surely the
vineyard of the Lord of hosts is the house of Israel, and the men of Judah are
his pleasant pla^ts: and he looked for judgment, but behold oppression: for
righteousness, but behold a crying. So the Prophet Hosea tells them cap. 10.
ver. 13. You have plowed wickedness: ye have reaped iniquity: you have eaten
the fruit of lies, 2. The wicked does compass about the righteous.
etc. The other evil is, That the wicked does compass about the righteous,
that is, watches him, lies in wait for him, wringeth, fears, and inuadeth
or sets upon him. Neither can or da^eth the righteous man defend himself,
or stir out of his place to escape the power and violence of that wicked man
Psalm. 12. Whereof in the winding up follows this third thing, that wrong and
crooked judgment proceeds or comes forth, Crooked judgment.
that is to say, appears, that the actions and doings of these men among
themselves are full of deceit, crankes, windings, turnings, and crooked? of
which kind of men and their crooked dealings, the Psalmist speaking Psalm. 125.
ver. 5. says, That those that turn aside by their crooked ways, them shall
the Lord lead with the workers of iniquity: but peace shall be upon Israel.
And the Lord by Jeremy cap. 6. ver. 28. complains of such manner of men, when
he says, They all are rebellious traitors, walking craftily: they are brass
and iron, The word (judgment) in this place how it is taken.
they all are destroyers. For here in this place I take the word judgment in
this sense, and not in such meaning and signification, as I have taken and
expounded it before: but for the duty of every man, the which was foreslowed,
nay, was turned awry with cunning shifts and subtilties. And therefore it is
called corrupt and crooked. For so that wicked men may have some show and
color in deceiving, it is enough for them: by and by do they be guile their
neighbors. See whither in the end the contempt or despising of the word of
God does carry us away, albeit that we diligently observe the laws of men,
and do very well know and follow the rules and ways of cases and
controversies, and of the Civil law.

Verse. 5. Behold among the heathen, and regard, and wonder, and marvel: for I
will work a work in your days: ye will not believe it, though it be told
you.
The answer of God unto the former complaint of the Prophet.
THe answer of God unto the former complaint of the Prophet the which contains
a threatening of most grievous punishments against such wickedness of the
Jews. And these punishments did God prepare for the Jews not in Judea, but
among the Gentiles or heathen. And therefore does God will both the Prophet and
also the Jews to look unto the Gentiles or heathen, among whom, and by whom
those scourges and rods were now in preparing. For God by them purposed to
punish this wickedness and ungodliness, whereof the Prophet complained. So
Ierem. 4. ver. 16. the Jews are commanded to behold, and diligently to mark
what God intended and went about against them among the heathen, Make ye
mention (says he) of the heathen, and publish in Jerusalem, Behold the scoutes
come from a far country, and cry out against the cities of Judah. So Isai
10. the self same wicked Jews are sent back unto the Assyrian.

Two parts of this verse.
But this verse has two points to be noted. The one is the phrase it self or
kind of speaking, the which is full of vehemency and pith, and moving of
affections, 1. The kind and manner of speaking.
to the end that these men albeit they were never so stubborn, and fast
asleep in their vices, might be the more moved and stirred up. For God uses a
speech that is ^^it and tied together with many copulative conjunctions, as,
and see, and behold, and marvel: also he strikes into them an attention or
heedfulnes and fear, whereas it is said, Maruailing marvel ye, or he
astonished: I work a work in your days, the which shall not be believed when
as it shall be told. These repetitions therefore do give a great force and
weight unto this sentence and threatening, to the awakening and stirring up of
all hypocrites, sleeping, and carelessly snorting in their sins and vices.
And so does Paul Act. 13. ver. 41. generally apply this saying of Habacuck
unto all the wicked.

2. The thing it self foretold by the Prophet.
The second point, which is here worthy the noting, contains the matter it
self, the which the Prophet foretells shall come to pass, namely, that same
work, the which the Lord was to do in their age and time. Whereby appears
that this prophecy went not long before those times, wherein those things
which are here threatened, came to pass, and we have said already. Further,
this work, is the rushing and breaking in of the Chaldeans into the land of
Iewrie, and the destruction of Jerusalem. For these even at that time did God
ordain and prepare to be the executioners of the people of the Jews, and the
reuengers of the contemning or despising of his name. Concerning this matter,
see Ierem. 5. Also Ierem. 13. ver. 20. and 21. the are willed to enter into the
consideration of these things in these words: Lift up your eyes, and behold
them that come from the North: where is the flock that was given thee, even
thy beautiful flock? what will thou say, when he shall visit thee? (for thou
have taught them to be captains and as chief over thee) shall not sorrow take
thee as a woman in travail? To this effect read also the 20. and 25. chapters
of his prophecy.

Furthermore, God did thus prepare the Chaldeans unto this Empire began to
arise up, and gathered strength and power: The Chaldeans growing in strength
and power, might the more easily execute God his judgments against the Jews.
for so by this means it did the more easily execute those judgments of God
against the Jews. Those increasings therefore of the Empire of the Chaldeans
(the which at that time began to wax very great among other nations near unto
them) were as a gathering together and making ready of rods, the which God
would use to whip his people withal. And the Jews are willed to mark this,
and that very diligently, because that within short time afterward they were to
be punished, and sharply corrected by those Chaldeans. So in the times of our
Elders, when as God raised up the Empire of the Turks, all the Christians
ought to set their eyes thereupon, as on whippes, The kingdom of Spain likely
to be a whip to correct the sins of the professors of the Gospel.
the which God ordained for them. So if any idolatrous kingdom (such as is
that of Spain) in God his will and purpose do afterward gather great increase,
let us Christians and the faithful take it, as if even now there were by God
ordained correctors of our sins, and of the naught setting by the doctrine of
the Gospel, and fearful reuengers of the despised name of God. Wherefore let
men that are Christians, at the least now at length begin to abstain from their
sins, and with speed and earnestly turn unto the true God, when as they see
these things to be done, and to be in preparing by God in the word.

Verse. 6. For lo, I raise up the Chaldeans, that bitter and furious nation,
which shall go upon the breadth of the land to possess the dwelling places
that are not theirs.
What that wonderful work is, the which God shall work against the Jews.
A Making more plain of that which went before. For he shows what that so
wonderful a work is, the which God shall shortly work against the wicked
Jews. And it is this: namely, God shall raise up, and send in the Chaldeans
most cruel and most mighty enemies, that the Jews may be punished by them.
And this agrees with the threatenings of God, the which are extant and to be
found Deuteronomy. 28. ver. 36.37. The Lord shall bring thee and thy king (which thou
shall set over thee) unto a nation, which neither thou, nor thy fathers have
known, and there thou shall serve others gods: even wood and stone, And thou
shall be a wonder; a proverb, and a common talk among all people, A lively de
scription of the power and cru^^ltie of the Chaldeans.
whither the Lord shall carry thee. Further, there is added a lively and
effectual description or setting out of the power and cruelty of the
Chaldeans, that hypocrites should not think, that they can escape the
judgments of God: or that they are impossible because of that strength of
their own, the which, such as it was, they had in some measure at that time in
the kingdom of Judah. Confer this place with that of Jeremy cap. 6. ver.
22.23. etc. Thus says the Lord, Behold, a people comes from the North
country, and a great nation shall arise from the sides of the earth. With bow
and shield shall they be weaponed: they are cruel, and will have no
compassion: their voice roreth like the sea, and they ride upon horses well
appointed, like men of war against thee, O daughter Zion.

Two things here to be noted.
This verse has two things especially to be noted. One, the name it self of
the Enemies, whom God shall bring and raise up against the Jews. And these are
the Chaldeans. 1. The name of the Enemies.
Now who these were it is known by other places of the holy Scriptures, and
also out of the profane histories themselves, or Chronicles of the heathen.
The second thing is, the description of this nation, 2. The description of that
nation.
whereby the same appears to be very terrible or much to be feared. And first
of all it is said to be a most bitter nation, namely, 1 A most bitter nation.
such a nation as is bitter over other nation, because of their hard rule and
gouemment over them. For the rule of the Chaldeans over the Jews which were
under their subjection, was a Manlian government, that is, most cruel and
tyrannical, as is the rule of masters over their slaves, or of the Spaniards
over the West Indians, and not as of a father over his children. It was a quick
and hasty nation, that is, 2. A quick and hasty nation.
diligent in the executing of matters. And such must all nations be, the which
of small beginnings and kingdoms do gather unto themselves great power, and
bear rule over others, to wit, diligent and speedy in the dispatching of
things. Such were the Romans at the first, as Salust teaches in his
Catilinarie wars in these words: But the Romans are diligent at home, and in
war speedy, ready, encouraging one another, going against their enemies. 3.
A nation ranging far abroad.
The same nation of the Chaldeans was ranging far abroad, and walking upon
the breadth of the land. For the Chaldeans made war upon sundry nations, and
waged battle far abroad, as appears Iere. cap. 25. Finally, they were
desirous of other men's goods, 4. Desirous of that is none of theirs.
or of that which was not theirs, as namely, being covetous, and ambitious or
proud, such as is the nation of the Spaniards, the which for praise and gains
sake is most desirous to enlarge their borders: the which thing also they have
effected or brought to pass. Now if the Babylonian Empire (the which
notwithstanding in Daniel is compared unto gold) were such a one and so cruel:
what manner of ones may we suppose the other Monarchies or Empires for to have
bin, and what may we think those great kingdoms, which worship not God, now
also for to be? To wit, they are so many plagues, and spoylers of mankind:
such as is the one Empire of the Turks at this day.

Verse. 7. They are terrible and fearful: their judgment and their dignity
shall proceed of themselves.
A Staying still in the same matter. For now he purseth the other parts of this
description: whereby appears, what manner of persons the Chaldeans were, that
is to say, how terrible, or greatly to be feared. 1. The cruel nature of the
Chaldeans.
First of all therefore is described their cruel nature: secondly, their might
and power. Their nature, for they are said to be terrible, or to be feared, as
namely, being such which did strike a fear of themselves into all others:
again, to be feared, as who^ other people and nations stood in awe and dread
of. 2. Their might and power.
A nation, which will be her own caruer, and minister law according unto her
own pleasure, and exercise and execute judgment,

Verse. 8. Their horses also are swifter then the Leopards, and are more fierce
then the woolues in the evening: and their horsemen are many: and their horsinen
shall come from far: they shall fly as the Eagle hasting to meat.
The description of the power of the Chaldeans.
THe description of the might and power of the Chaldeans follows: for it is
said, Their horsemen shall be most swift and strong, as the Leopard. The Chaldeans
therefore shall be most ravenous soldiers, the which for hope of pray and
booty, like unto woolues in the evening, shall cast themselves into any
dangers. Briefly, their horses, and their horsemen like unto Eagles, hasting
unto their pray, shall fly into all places, so that nothing can escape them.
Thus there is no help nor refuge against God punishing and chastising us.

Verse. 9. They come all to spoil: before their faces shall be an East wind,
and they shall gather the captivity, as the sand.
Why the Chaldeans are compared unto wild beasts.
THe applying or rather the explication or opening of the similitude, why the
Chaldeans are compared unto wild beast. Because that all this nation, to wit,
of the Chaldeans shall come with purpose to rob and steal, and so consquently
shall be most greedy and ravenous, and most swift, wherein also is or lies a
conformation of the power of the Chaldeans. For those soldiers are wont to be
most stout and valiant and eager, whom the hope of pray and booty pricketh
forward. For when as once they have filled their budget, as it is in the
proverb, then afterward they wax more fearful.

The purpose of our Author here by is to show, that like as this soldier having
lost al his victuals and goods gotten before with great toil becomes more
eager upon a new pray: so shall the Chaldeans in hope of the spoil and booty
most gree dilie and fiercely set upon the Jews.
Horatius lib. 2.Epistolar. Epistola secunda. Luculli miles collecta viatica
multis
Aerumnis, lassus dum noctu stertit, ad assem
Perdiderat: post hoc vehemens lupus and sibi, and hosti
Iratus pariter, ieiunis dentibus acer
Praesidium regale loco deiecit, vt aiunt,
Sum munito, and multarum diuitererum.
In homely meeter thus: The goods Lucullus soldier
Collected had with toil and pain,
While weary snorting he does lie
By night, he loses all again.
Thence forth becoming greedy woolfe,
All angry with himself, and foe,
with hungry teeth sharp set on meat
To get more pray he ginnes to go.
And eager bent with courage fell
A kindly forte he throws to ground,
In place most strong, as men do say,
Which with great riches did abound.


Such therefore shall the Chaldeans be. For they shall come unto the pray and
offering of force and violence for the same, that nothing shall be more bold,
The look of the Chaldeans like unto the East wind.
stout, and courageous then they. Wherefore they shall easily overcome the
Jews. Further, this also is a cause of the former comparison, for that their
faces or look shall be as the East wind, the which namely dries up all
things, and causes diseases and sickness, brings barrennes, and parcheth and
scorcheth the corn ready to be reaped Agg. 1. So shall the Chaldeans spoil
and consume all the goods of the Jews: they shall waste and spend their wealth
and riches the which long since they had gathered, and have lying by them in a
readiness: and for fear and trembling shall bring diseases upon the Jews, that
they shall not be able to stand against them.

They shall carry away as many captives as they can.
Another effect, They shall gather the captivity as the sand, that is to say,
they shall carry away as many Captives as they can. Neither shall they be
satisfied with the gain the which they shall make thereby. So the Sprniards,
when as they had taken the Island Hispaniola ie the Indies within a few months
they rid it clean of the citizens and inhabitants, The cruelty of the
Spaniards.
who first possessed it, whilst they gather unto themselves Captives and
slaves. The Turks.
So the Turks at this day do carry away from the Christian countries near
unto them, and others, innumerable booties and prays, insomuch that in this
our age out of one poor Hungary they have often carried away about a fifteen
thousand captives at a time, to wit, so cruel, covetous, and merciles are they,
and like unto these Chaldeans, whom God of his great mercy through Christ turn
from the necks of his Church. Amen.

Verse. 10. And they shall mock the Kings: and the Princes shall be as a
scorn unto them: they shall deride every strong hold: for they shall gather
dust, and take it.
The figure Hypophora, what it is, see Amos cap. 5. ver. 21.
THis is an Hypophora, or the answering of an objection, the which might be
made, least any force of men, or any munition and fortifying of places might
seem to be able to let, or keep back the assault of the Chaldeans. For they
shall mock all Kings, and make no account of them: they shall quickly take the
most strong places, making rampires and casting trenches about it. In the which
self same thing there lies a proof both of their easy executing of things:
and also of the hurly burly and trouble of the whole world, and likewise of
the victory which the Chaldeans should have. See Ierem. cap. 25. Ezech. 25.

Verse. 11. Then shall they take a courage, and transgress, and do wickedly,
imputing this their power unto their God.
An amplificatio^ of the great success of the Chaldeans.
AN amplification of the great happiness and success of the Chaldeans. For they
themselves shall be in such sort puffed up therewithal, that they will not now
take themselves for any mortal me^, but for gods, depend upon their own
selves, and with great unthankfulness toward God, and through the most shameful
sin of iodlatrie worship their own strength, so far doubtless shall they
beled with a spirit of so strong giddines, and in such sort shall they forget
their man's nature, as if they were gods, and not men.

Verse. 12. Art not thou of old, O Lord my God, mine holy one? we shall not
dye: O Lord, thou have ordained them for judgment, and O God, thou have
established them for correction.
A strong reason for the comfort of the godly.
A Most strong reason for their comfort. For the Prophet from the euerlastingnes
and constancy of God, the certainty of his adoption, the holiness of God, and
his care for those that are his, in such great trouble of all things, does
promise that the help and aid of God shall be present both with himself,
and also with all the godly, and therewithal does cheer and comfort
himself. Finally, in so great stir and barboyle of the world, he teaches
that there shall be one condition or estate of the godly, and another of the
ungodly, in as much as the Chaldeans are ordained of God only for the
chastising of the godly, and have appointed unto them by God a stinted measure
and rate of punishing them, the which in this place he calls judgment.

Verse. 13. Thou art of pure eyes, and can not see evil: thou can not
behold wickedness: wherefore do thou look upon the transgressors, and
hold thy tongue, when the wicked deuoureth the man that is more righteous
then he?
The asking of a question.
THe asking of a question, wherein according unto judgment darkened with the
clouds of the flesh, that same justice of God, whereby he hates all
wickedness, seems to be shuffled with his decree, A great combat of the
Prophet.
and falling out of the former vision. This was a great combat, the which the
Prophet felt in his mind, when as he held it for a most certain and assured
foundation and ground, That God did not favor the ungodly, and yet he saw
these Chaldeans, unto whom so great happiness or good success against all
nations of the world, and especially against the people of God, was promised by
God himself, The blasphemous disputations of some Philosophers. The complaints
of Pomperus. The answer of Cratippus.
to be most cruel, and worse then other men. From hence have sprung those
blasphemous disputations of the Philosophers, Whether the world were governed
by God his providence: from hence these complants of Pompeius overthrown by
Caesar in the Pharsalian battle, That God favored the unjust cause, as
Plutarch reports in his life. But the answer of Cratippus was true, That the
Common wealth of the Romans had need of these punishments, because of his
wickedness, and therefore that this alteration and change of things fell out
at Rome by God his providence. And that his decree of GOD, as a thing too high
for us to deal with, must be left unto God himself. And from hence also came
those opinions of the Platnonists, The Platonists.
That so strange alterations and changes of things did fall out by reason of
the matter, whereof humane things do consist, the which daily desires new
forms. From hence is the accusation of the gods Homer. lib. 1. Odyss.

Verse. 14. And make men as the fishers of the sea, and as the creeping
things, that have no ruler over them? Verse. 15. They take up all with the
angle: they catch it in their net, and gather it in their yarne, whereof they
rejoice and are glad.
A cause why the Prophet is thus troubled within himself.
THe rendering of a reason. For the Prophet shows the cause why he is so
greatly moved within himself. And this was first, for that so many and so
innumerable nations, 1. For that so many nations shall be subject unto the King
of Babylon.
were so easily laid open as a pray, and for a fishing unto the people and
King of the Chaldeans, in such sort as he described before, namely, as if the
mind and purpose of God were to glut him only, and to satisfy him alone, even
with the loss and destruction of so many nations. The cause hereof is alleged
Iere. 27. ver. 5.6. in these words, I have made the earth, the man, and the
beast that are upon the ground by my great power, and by my oustretched arm,
and have given it unto whom it pleased me. But now I have given all these lands
into the hand of Nebuchadnezzar the king of Babel my servant, and the beasts of
the field have I also given him to serve him.

Verse. 16. Therefore they sacrifice unto their net, and burn incense unto
their yarne, because by them their portion is fat, and their meat plenteous.
2. For his blasphemy and unthankfulness unto God.
SEcondly, for that this self same King of the Chaldeans, unto whom God gives
so great things, shall be both blasphermous against God himself, and also most
unthankful unto him. For he shall ascribe or give the praise of this his so
great felicity or happiness unto his own self, as one that no doubt despises
all soueraig^tie and majesty of God: and shall sacrifice unto his own net or
arm, as whereby alone he shall get unto himself so great a Monarchy or
Empire. This prophecy is more at large declared and laid open Dan. 4. ver.
26.27. where the proud King Nebuchadnezzar most blasphemously vaunteth himself
against God, and gives unto himself the whole praise of his strength and
power, and majesty, and glory, etc. The word be these: At the end of twelve
months, he walked in the royal palace of Babel. And the King spoke and said,
is not this great Babel, that I have built for the house of the kingdom by the
might of my power, and for the honor of my majesty?

Verse. 17. Shall they therefore stretch out their net, and not spare
continually to slay the nations?
An interro gation of the prophet comforting the godly, and mocking the
Chaldeans.
AN interrogation or asking of a question, as it were a conclusion, wherewith
the Prophet does both comfort the godly, and also mocketh the Chaldeans. He
comfort the godly, in that he shows that this barbarous cruelty of the
Chaldeans. He comfort the godly, in that he shows that this barbarous
cruelties of the Chaldeans shall not be perpetual, or last for ever. He
mocketh the Chaldeans, because he threatens that there shall at last be an
end of their cruelty and power. He does indeed ask a question of the thing,
the which notwithstanding he does not think shall be, but this kind of phrase
or speaking carries a greater emphasis, vehemency or force with it, then a
direct or plain and simple conclusion.

CAP. 2.
Verse. 1. I will stand upon my watch, and set me upon the tower, and will look
and see what he would say unto me, and what I shall answer to him that rebukes
me.
The second Sermon of Habacuck agreeing with the former in matter, but
differing in time.
THis Chapter contains another Sermon of Habacuck, in respect of argument or
matter agreeing, I confess, with the former, but the which notwithstanding
seems both to have been made, and also showed by God a long time after the
former, namely, after that the Prophet fastening both his mind and also his
eyes upon the misery described before, had prayed unto God, and required some
matter to comfort the godly with all. The which at the length was offered unto
him by God. For in regard of the great faithfulness of God his providence, and
care for those that are his, and for the state of this whole world, the Prophet
hoped that there was by God prepared some comfort for the godly, albeit that he
saw before nothing but confusion, or things in his judgment hudled up
together far out of square and order. And this Sermon has two parts, Two
parts of this Sermon.
namely, a reason of the vision showed unto the Prophet: and a reporting and
declaration of the same, 1. A reason of the vision showed the Prophet.
the which partly comfort the godly, and partly shows the destruction of
the Chaldeans, and the causes of the same.

2. A declaration of the same. The first part of this Sermon showing the
recovery of the Prophet from his former doubting, and his waiting for a more
loving vision.
As for this first verse, it is the first part of this Sermon, wherein the
Prophet teaches, by what means and when there was showed unto him by God a
more loving vision. And first of all he tells, that at the length he took
heart, and recovered himself from out of so great an encombrance, and dispute,
or complaining against God, the which condemning, he calls a reprehension or
reproof and rebuke made of himself, and with most assured confidence or trust
hoped for the peculiar and especial care of God concerning those that are his,
and that he waited a long time for another vision from God, whereby the former
might be mitigated or eased.

Verse. 2. And the Lord answered me, and said, write the vision, and make it
plain upon tables, that he may run that reads it.
Another vision showed the prophet, and commanded to be written so plainly,
that every one might read it.
AFterward, and in the second place he tells that at length there was another
vision showed unto him by God, wherein the Lord answers all the former
doubtings, and commanded expressly the same to be written, and drawn in great
letters, and to be set forth openly, that it might be read of every man, as
he passed by, to wit, for the comfort of the godly, and for the defense of his
justice.

Verse. 3. For the vision is yet for an appointed time, but at the last it shall
speak, and not lie: though it tarry, wait: for it shall surely come, and
shall not stay.
The second part of this Sermon, containing a general comfort for the godly.
THe second part of this Sermon, wherein first is promised a general comfort of
the godly, that they shall not want Prophets, whose prophesyings and comforts,
showing especially that the same Christ shall come, albeit they shall not
forthwith and by and by be fulfilled, yet shall they at the last have an end,
and wished accomplishment: and so he teaches that the godly are not to saint,
nor to quail, because of the delay or staying of the same. For as it is Hebr.
10. ver. 37. Yet a very little while, and he that shall come, will come, and
will not tarry.

Verse. 4. Behold, he that lifts up himfelfe, his mind is not upright in him;
but the just shall live by his faith.
An admonition for the godly.
AN answering of an objection, or an admonition or warning. For he warns us,
that we deceive not our selves because of the deferring of the fulfilling of
God his prophesies. For they, which by faith shall not lay hold of those
promises of God, will wax the more proud, and because of this delay will
carry minds both the more lifted up against God himself, and also the more
injurious or wrongful against men the servants of GOD. Through which pride and
vnstayednes and unruliness of mind, they shall not only displease God, but also
in the end shall run into destruction, because these is not in them that same
vprightnes and stayednes, whereupon men ought to rest and lean before God, to
wit, a mind and conscience. But those which fear GOD, who through a true and
sure faith shall wait for the promises of God, that especially of Christ to
come, the foundation and ground of the rest, and shall rely upon him as an
hold and fort that cannot be won, their life, estate, and salvation shall
always stand in a safe and sure place and shall be preserved, not only that
of the body, but much rather of the mind or soul: so that this (to live) in
this place must truly be understood of the perpetual and everlasting life of
the just according unto the meaning of the Prophet, and the holy Ghost himself
so expounding it, Romans 1. ver. 17. Hebr. 10. ver. 38.

A particular comfort for the godly.
Verse. 5. Yea, in deed proud man is as he that transgresses by wine: therefore
shall he not iudure, because he has enlarged his desire as the hell, and is as
death, and cannot be satisfied, but gathrereth unto him all nations, and
heapeth unto him all people.
NOw follows a special or particular comfort for the godly, the which
appertains unto the prophecy before going concerning the happiness and pride
of the Chaldeans. For he applies unto them the sentence immediately before, to
wit, as touching the overthrowing and destruction of those which are of a
lofty and proud mind, and that by way of comparison from the lesser unto the
greater, as thus: If those shall fall, which shall not believe the word of God,
how much more shall they be rooted out, and shall not remain, who being
drowned in all lewdnes, as if they were drunken with wine, do offend both
against God and men through outrageous pride, endless, cruelty against al men,
insatiable or vnfilable covetousness, and desire of ruling over all persons? All
which vices he showed in the Chapter before to be in the Chaldeans.

Verse. 6. Shall not all these take up a parable against him, and a taunting
proverb against him, and say, Ho, he that increases that, which is not his?
how long? and he that ladeth himself with thick clay?
An amplification of the judgment of God against the Chaldeans.
AN amplification of this judgment of God against the Chaldeans by the bitter
taunt of the nations in subjection unto them, and by their most tart and ^^arp
quip against them so afflicted or punished by God. For first of all, all men
shall acknowledge their punishment to be just, and in the very midst of their
afflictions or punishments shall reprochfullie cast into their teeth their
covetousness, and their vain carke and care in gathering together of gold that
is the clay of the earth. See what is written concerning this matter of
bringing down the pride of these Babylonians, and laying their honor in the
dust, Isai cap. 13. ver. 9, 10 11. Behold, the day of the Lord, comes,
cruel, with wrath, and fierce anger, to lay the land waste, and he shall
destroy the sinners out of it. For the Stars of Heaven and the Planets
thereof shall not give their light: the Sun shall be darkened in his going
forth, and the Moon shall not cause her light to shine. And I will visit the
wickedness upon the world, and their iniquity upon the wicked, and I will cause
the arrogancy of the proud to cease, and will cast down the pride of
tyrants. Again, cap. 14. ver. 9, 10, 11, 12. There is yet more lively
described the ignominious and foul reproachful fall of the King of Babylon,
and how he is derided and scorned in regard of the same, after this manner:
Hell beneath is moved for thee, to meet thee at thy coming, raising up the
dead for thee, even all the Princes of the earth, and has raised from their
thrones all the kings of the nations. All they shall cry, and say unto thee,
art thou become weak also, as we? Art thou become like unto us? Thy pomp is
brought down to the grave, and the sound of thy viols: the worm is spread under
thee, and the worms cover thee. How art thou fallen from Heaven, O Lucifer,
son of the morning? and cut down to the ground, which did cast lots upon
the nations? etc.

Verse. 7. Shall they not rise up suddenly, that shall bite thee? and awake,
that shall stir thee? and thou shall be their pray?
The Chaldeans that have robbed others, shall themselves be spoiled by the
Medes.
Again the enemies, which shall rise up against them, shall not but once, or
lightly vex them, but continually, and most willingly and desirouslie. Last
of all, these self same Chaldeans the thieves and robbers of the world, shall
become a pray and booty unto others. The which the very manner of speaking of
the Prophet by way of interrogation or asking of a question does show, shall
come to pass both out of hand, and also with an undoubted issue. Now these
enemies which he here speaks of, were the Medes, who destroyed and put down
the Empire of the Chaldeans, as Isai teaches in these words cap. 13. ver. 17,
18, 19. etc. Behold, I will stir up the Medes against them, which shall not
regard silver, nor be desirous of gold. With bows also they destroy the
children, and shall have no compassion on the fruit of the womb, and their
eyes shall not spare the children. And Babel the glory of the kingdoms, the
beauty and pride of the Chaldeans, shall be as the destruction of God in Sodom
and Gomorah, etc.

Verse. 8. Because thou have spoiled many nations, all the remnant of the people
shall spoil thee, because of men's blood, and for the wrong done in the land,
in the city, and unto all that dwell therein.
A reason why the Chaldeans should be so spoiled.
THe rendering of a reason for the robbing and spoiling of the Chaldeans by
others, wherein also is an answering of an objection, least God might seem too
bitter in punishing the Chaldeans so sharply. For it is meet, that they, which
have robbed others, should become also a pray themselves: who themselves had
been cruel, should also taste of the same violence. And those chiefelie, which
have used these sins against all mankind, and not against one or two nations
only, but against all nations: and especially against a city dedicated unto
God, which thing the Chaldeans have done.

Verse. 9. Ho, he that coueteth an evil covetousness unto his house, that he
may set his nest on hie, to escape from the power of evil.
An exhortation to be admonished by these judgments of God.
AN exhortation, whereby the Prophet ascends or goes up from the particular
unto the general by way of a certain digression or going aside from the
matter, that all men by these judgments of God may learn to be wise, and
take heed unto themselves. He therefore threatens destruction unto all those,
the which seek riches and power by evil and unjust means: the which two
things he shows to be most untrusty holds of security and carelesnes, and
a most deceitful harbor in calamities or troubles, as which namely are
accursed of God, howsoever the vain world think otherwise, and do trust in
them.

Verse. 10. Thou have consulted shame to thine own house, by destroying many
people, and have sinned against thine own soul.
A continuing of the former exhortation.
A Continuing of the said general most profitable exhortation, whereby he
partly amplifieth the wickedness of these both covetous, and also cruel
persons, partly takes away all vain hope in those their riches and trust in
their might and power. For contrary unto the opinion and judgment of them,
they get not unto themselves and their families honor and commendation by such
wealth and power, but shame and reproach. By destroying of others, they work not
security or saftie unto themselves for time to come, but they commit the
greater sin, the which in the end shall make against themselves, and turn
unto their own destruction.

Verse. 11. For the stone shall cry out of the wall, and the beam out of the
timber shall answer it.
A confirmation of the former threatening by the figure Hyperbole, which is a
speech exceeding the truth, not unto the maintenance of a lie, but to make that
to be believed, which seems almost incredible. An amplification teaching that
these threatenings concern in general all guilty persons in those crimes,
whosoever.
A Confirmation of the former threatening, by an Hyperbole, or excessive kind of
speech beyond and above the truth. For he says, howsoever those which have
sustained and received wrong, be still, and hold their peace, yet do the dum
rafters and timber beams, and the riches vninstlie horded and heaped up,
complain of so great injury or wrong done unto them, and do require and ask
vengeance at the hands of God against these sins.

Ver. 12. Woe unto him that builds a town with blood, and erecteth a city
by iniquity.
AN amplification, whereby he teaches, that the same judgment of God does
appertain and is threatened unto covetous and cruel men, not only such as are
private persons, but also unto whole common wealths, and Princes in like manner,
yea and moreover unto the Kings and Emperors themselves.

Verse. 13. Behold, is it not of the Lord of hosts, that the people shall
labor in the very fire? the people shall even weary themselves for very
vanity.
What the figure Hypophora is, see Amos cap. 5. ver. 21.
THis is an Hypophora, or answering of an objection, whereby he takes away from
them all hope of escaping, the which they conceived as appears verse. 9.
before. First for that this vengeance and punishment shall be from God, who is
the rule over all things, and whose will nothings can let nor hinder, yea, and
it shall be most assuredly, and speedily. And therefore he said, Behold
Furthermore, for that howsoever they do flee unto their idols, either forging
new, or furbishing up again the old, yet shall they weary themselves in
vain, and shall not for all this escape.

Verse. 14. For the earth shall be filled with the knowledge of the glory of
the Lord, as the waters cover the sea.
A reason of the former the former judgment.
THe rendering of a reason, taken from the decree of God himself. For God will
have himself, and his glory and power thus acknowledged of the world, in
stead of this that he was before in such sort contemned or despised of it. And
the Prophet looking especially into the destruction of the monarchy or Empire
of Babylon, the which he had foretold in this self same chapter, teaches
that then the judgments of God shall every where be scattered and spread so
far a broad, that they shall in such sort cover the whole earth, as the waters
do the channel of the sea. And so in this place he returns again unto the
Chaldeans, whom by means of the former digression or turning aside from the
matter, he had left.

Verse. 15. Woe unto him that gives his neighbor drink: thou ioynest thine
heat, and make him drunken also, that thou may see their priuities.
An other cause of the destruction of the Chaldeans.
REturning unto the Chaldeans, he alleges another cause of their destruction
besides their covetousness and cruelty, namely their exercrable or accursed
treachery, because that under a crafty counterfeiting of friendship, and a
pretense or color of help, learning out the weakness of their
conferderates, they inuadedor set upon their goods and kingdoms. The which
thing being then spoken of the nation of the Chaldeans, appertains unto all
men, yea private persons, which are trothles, and deceiving others with
counterfeiting of friendship. But this means did the Romans afterward
increase and enlarge their Empire.

Verse. 16. Thou art filled with shame for glory: drink thou also, and be
naked: the cup of the Lords right hand shall be turned unto thee, It is meet
the Chaldeans be served, as they have served others.
and shameful spuing shall be for thy glory.
BY the making of every member of this verse to fit and answer God against the
Chaldeans, to wit, that it is meet that they be handled by God after the same
manner, and that they drink roundly of the same cup, the which they themselves
had cruelly and treacherously mingled for others: that they be shamefullie
made naked, as they have made others naked. Finally, that they feel at the
last, ignominy or reproach greater, and more plentiful then that their cruel
glory, and that they drink of this cup of reproach and shame, even until they
spue again, or unto the very dregs.

Verse. 17. For the cruelty of Lebanon shall cover thee: so shall the spoil of
the beasts, which made them afraid, because of men's blood, and for the wrong
done in the land, in the city, and unto all that dwell therein.
THe fourth cause, The fourth cause of the destruction of the Chaldeans. What
the figure Synecdoche is, see Amos cap. 5 ver. 21.
and the same the chief cause of the destruction of the Chaldeans, namely
their cruelty against the people of God, and the spoiling of all Iewrie (the
which by the figure Synecdoche is signified under the name of Libanon) as which
namely was an earnest, or pledge of the promise of God: and finally, the
sacking and overthrowing of the holy city, done by them most cruelly, and
mercileslie Isai. 47.

Verse. 18. What profits the image? for the maker thereof has made it an
image, and a teacher of lies, though he that made it, trust therein, when he
makes dumme idols?
The Idols shall not be able to help the Chaldeans, for these causes.
THis is an answering of an objection, least the Chaldeans might think to escape
through the help of their idols and gods. For he teaches that the idols shall
neither be able to defend, nor help their worshippers, the which thing he
proves by the nature of the thing it self, that is, of the idols, the which
he describes by these four epithets or titles. First, because they are carved
wood, 1. Because they are carved wood.
and so consequently the work of men's hands. Secondly, because they remain
cast or molten images. And therefore have not by this workmanship of man
attained any divine nature, or new force. 2. Because they remain molten images.
Thirdly, for that they teach lies and false things. And therefore Idolators
are foulie deceived, when as they imagine them to be gods, and divine powers.
Fourthly, because such things are vain, and in themselves dumme and dead. 3
Because they teach lies.
And therefore they cannot do anything, nor answer unto the prayers of them
that pray unto them Isa. 40. and 44. ver. 10. Who has made a God, or molten an
image, that is profitable for nothing? And cap. 46.

Verse. 19. Woe unto him that says to the wood, awake, and to the dumb stone,
rise up, it shall teach thee: behold, it is laid over with gold and silver,
and there is no breath in it.
An amplification of the former refutation of the Chaldeans.
AN amplification of the former refutation or proouing of idols to be vain,
taken both from the curse pronounced against those which worship idols: and
also from the inability and vanity of the idols themselves, the which he
lively sets forth matching together by the way of contraries the vows and
prayers of idolators, with the event or issue and falling out of things it
self, and the nature of Idols. For they are deaf and dumb, and altogether
dead things, how so ever they be laid over with gold or silver. Therefore
they can hear no man, nor help any man.

Verse. 20. But the Lord is in his holy temple: let all the earth keep silence
before him.
A contrariety between the true God and Idols.
A Contrariety between the true God, and idols. First, least the godly which
rely and stay upon God, should think themselves to be no more secure, or
without danger, then the Idolators. Secondly, that the very profane or wicked
themselves, and the heathen might know assuredly that the former judgments
should be or come to pass, because God does denounce or threaten them, unto
whom the whole world obeys, and submits it self with reverence and
silence. Finally, whose majesty and power did manifestly shine forth in that
his Temple, people, and worship and service. For under a thing at that time
known very well unto al nations, namely that divine Temple, he does by the
figure Synecdoche comprehend and set forth the endless majesty of God, and the
true proof of his divinity. By which word he comprehends both the adoption
of the people of the Jews, and also the worship of God severed from the
idolatries of other nations: and moreover all those infinite benefits which
flowed from them both, whereby God manifestly showed himself unto the whole
world, that he was b^th the true God, and also almighty, and that the said
worship only, and temple were acceptable unto him.

CAP. 3.
An excellent prayer for the use of the Church, and every one of the faithful.
THis chapter has a notable and excellent prayer delivered and uttered by the
Prophet of God for the use of the whole church, and every one of the faithful,
wherewith they might both stay up and comfort themselves in the midst of those
afflictions or troubles, meditating or thinking upon the points contained in
this prayer: and also beg salvation or deliverance and help at the hands of
God for his Church, staying upon those foundations and grounds, which they
ought. Finally, that the godly even in the midst of the ruin and fall of the
whole world, might confirm, and exercise their faith touching the promises of
God, Three parts of this prayer.
the spirit of God helping their infirmities, as it is Romans 8. ver. 26.
Likewise the Spirit also helps our infirmities, etc. for he teaches them to
pray. 1. He prays for help.
The frame and disposition of this prayer has three points. For first the
Prophet prays for help at the hand of God. Secondly, he lays down the
foundations or grounds of this his request and hope. 2. The grounds of this
prayer.
Thirdly, he shows that he shall be heard of God. The style or indictment of
this prayer was in meeter or verse, and not in prose. 3. He hops to be heard.
Schiggionoth.


Verse. 1. A prayer of Habacuck for the ignorances.
The drift of the whole chapter contained in this verse.
IN this verse the whole scope and drift of this chapter is showed. For it
contains an humble prayer unto God, and proceeding from a true faith, and
uttered by Habacuck himself, and not by every one of the faithful, albeit
every faithful ought to know, after what manner God is to be prayed unto.
Finally, the musical instrument is added also, whereon this spiritual
meditation or prayer was to be sung: which was an order and manner appointed of
God himself unto the Church of that time, of which kind of instrument or tune,
and the like, to sing Psalms withal and upon, you may see Psalm. 7. ver. 1.
and hereafter in this chapter ver. 19. in the end.

Verse. 2. O Lord, I have heard thy voice, and was afraid: O Lord, revive thy
work in the midst of the people, in the midst of the years make it known: in
wrath remember mercy.
The first part of this prayer containing the sum of the request of the
Prophet, and also a cause of the same, for that,
THe first part of this prayer, the which contains both the sum of his
request, to wit, that God in that same foreshewed garboyle and trouble, and
fearful misery of the whole world, would have mercy and compassion on his
faithful: and he also sets down a reason, why this is meet to be done.
First, because they are his work. Secondly, because such is the nature of God,
that he can never forget his mercy toward those that are his, no not then,
when as he is angry with them. 1. They are his work.
For in him, as James says, cap. 2. ver. 13. Mercy rejoices against
judgment. And as the Psalmist witnesses Psalm. 30. ver. 5. God indureth but a
while in his anger: but in his favor is life: 2. He cannot forget his mercy
toward them.
weeping may abide at evening, but joy comes in the morning. And Psalm. 89.
ver. 31.32.33. If they break my statutes, and keep not my commandments: then
will I visit their transgression with the rod, and their iniquity with
strokes. Yet my loving kindness will I not take from him, neither will I
falsify my truth. Thirdly, for that the Church of God as yet is in her middle
age, 3. The Church is not yet come to her full age and growth.
and as it were in her youth: and is not yet come unto the end and term of her
life and continuance, of the which, and against the which the Church
complains and prays Psalm. 102. ver. 23.24. in these words: He abated my
strength in the way, and shortened my days. And I said, O my God, take me not
away in the midst of my days: thy years endure from generation to generation.
And the Prophet is moved now especially to pray for this, because that he is
very greatly troubled, trembles, and fears that there shall be a
destruction even of the Church it self, by reason of the former vision which
was showed him.

Verse. 3. God comes from Teman, and the holy one from mount Paran, Selah. His
glory covers the heavens, and the earth is full of his praise.
Two grounds of this prayer. The power of God, and his love to those that are
his.
THe second part of this prayer, wherein he declares two grounds of his prayer,
namely, the power of God, and his bounteousnes or good will toward those that
are his ver. 13. So Psalm. 61. ver. 7. where the Prophet prays for to be
settled firmly in his kingdom, upon trust in God his mercy and faithfulness in
his promises: He shall dwell before God for ever: prepare mercy and
faithfulness, th^^ they may preserve him. To this effect is a good part of the
89 Psalm spent in magnifying and extolling the bounteousnes, love (...) goodness
of God toward his elect in Christ, that is, his Ch^^^^ And as concerning the
power of God, and the same infi^^^^^ endle^, and far above the strength of
all things, he sets down^ the consideration and proofs thereof, for that
the godly could not otherwise be confirmed or strengthened against so great an
heap of calamities or troubles and miseries at hand, but by the same earnest
beholding and looking upon the endless power of God. Further, he alleges such
proofs, which are not fained after the manner of Poets, but even indeed have
already fallen out for the aid and use of his Church, and such as in the
Scripture are often rehear^ed, as for example, Psalm. 18. and 77. Such namely as
was his power ^npublishing or giving of the law, and when as he showed himself
in Mount Sinai, and when as he appeared in the wilderness of Pa^an, and in
Mount Theman of Arabia.

Verse. 4. And his brightness was as the light: he had horns coming out of his
hands, and there was the hiding of his power.
THe figure Hypotyposis, whereby not only the thing, that is, Hypotyposis,
what this figure is, see Amos cap. 8. ver. 12.
the majesty of God is lively laid open as it were to be seen with ^^e eyes,
but also his power is proved to be endless, and to be fea^ed of all things. And
this place is to be conferred or compared (...) that of Exodus cap. 19. ver.
16. and the verses following with the Psalm. 18.77. and Hebr. 12. ver. 18. and
certain other there following. First of all the majesty and power of God is
described by the brightness, The majesty and power of God described by his
brightness.
the which could not be beheld of the eyes of any man. And the beams shining
out of this brightness are called the ^^rn^s of his hands, because that they did
stretch out, and spread abroad themselves into sundry parts, as Moses also is
said to have had horns by reason of the brightness of his countenance, the
which was so great, that the children of Israel together with Aaron ^ere afraid
to come near him, as it is Exodus 34. ver. 30. The horns are said to come
forth out of his hands, not out of his face, that if the majesty and brightness
of the hands of God cannot be abidden of (...) we should understand that much
less could his face be of us be ^^holden. Finally, this self same so great
brightness is said to have ^^^n, not the very essence of God, but only a veil,
sacrament, and ^^^dow of his power, like as when he showed himself unto Moses
(...) 33. ver. 22. he does put a cover over him, and does not let him (...)
whole glory, but a certain dark show of the same. And Psalm. (...) 11. it is
said, that he made darkness his secret place, and his pa^^^ (...) about him eue^
(...) of ^aters (...) ^loudes of the air. (...) 104. ver. 2. ^pan^ likewise
said of God, that he covers himself with light, as with a garment, and
spreads the heavens like a curtain. Confer this place with that of 1.
King. cap. 19. ver. 11. and certain others there following, where is set forth
the manner of God his showing himself in some measure unto the Prophet Elijah,
by a strong wind, earthquake, fire, and a soft still voice, that thereby we
may easily conclude, that the thing it self, that is, the essence and power of
God, is a thing incomprehensible, or which cannot be comprehended and
conceived. For God dwells in the light that none can attain unto, as Paul
speaks 1. Tim. 6. ver. 16.

Verse. 5. Before him went the pestilence, and burning coals went forth before
his feet.
The majesty of God described by certain fearful effects.
HEre the Prophet shows the self same thing by certain effects, which are to
be feared of al mankind, the which notwithstanding are but as it were the only
prints of the feet of God, or as it were certain apparitors or purseuants
which stand before God. And these effects are works of God being angry, like
unto those which the Prophet described before. Two of them are reckoned up in
this place, namely, the pestilence, and sharp and burning diseases: also
blasting of corn. So Numb. 14. ver. 12. God threatens to smite them with the
pestilence. And Deuteronomy. 28. with other strange diseases. Wherefore he seems to
allude, or have resemblance unto those kinds of sicknesses, where with God
destroyed both his own people in the wilderness: and also the Chanaanites, by
little and little after the wars of Joshua.

Verse. 6. He stood and measured the earth: he beheld, and dissolved the
nations, and the everlasting mountains were broken, and the ancient hills did
bow: his ways were everlasting.
Another testimony of the power of God.
ANother most known testimony or witness of the endless power of GOD, yea, and
that favoring his Church, namely, the bringing of the people of God into the
promised land. In the which God shows, were melt and vanish away: and also
struck the mountains, the which from the beginning of the world had stood
immovable. Lastly, with that wisdom, whereby the issues and falling out of
al things are both very well known unto him, and also most easy, because they
are in his power.

Verse. 7. For his iniquity I saw the tents of Cushan, and the curtains of the
land of Midian did tremble.
The former testimony amplified by the adioynes.
HE amplifieth the former testimony by the adioynts, the which now makes very
much for the comforting of the godly. For he shows that both the Arabians
themselves, and also the Madianites (which people do live in tents, curtains,
and shelters, and are fearful unto their borderers) were then so afrighted,
that they durst no where to show their faces, and were not to be seen, as if
they had bin brought to nothing: but ran away, and trembled for fear in the
midst of their curtains and tents.

Verse. 8 Was the Lord angry against the rivers? or was thine anger against the
floods? or was thy wrath against the sea, that thou did ride upon thine
horses? thy chariots brought salvation.
An answering of the scoffs of the wicked, and also a comfort for the godly.
AN interrogation or asking of a question, whereby he partly meets with and
answers their scoffs, which denied that the former things were done for the
sake of the godly: and partly he does the more earnestly confirm or
strengthen the godly themselves in faith, and in looking for the help of God
in the midst of afflictions or troubles. They therefore which took away from
the godly this hope, did impute or lay it unto other causes, both that the sea
was dried up in the passage of the people: and also that the river Jordan was
dry in like manner: construing this to be done, because God was especially
angry against these waters. The Prophet denies this to be true, but answers
that so great majesty of God appeared for the salvation or deliverance of his
Church, for the preserving whereof he stood in the battle against the enemies,
riding as it were upon hooked or iron chariots, and not triumphant chariots,
and fighting from his chariot.

Verse. 9. Thy bow was manifestly revealed, and the oaths of the tribes were a
sure word, Selah. Thou did cleave the earth with rivers.
An amplification of God his deliverance of his people taken from the manner of
his helping of them, the which he also proves by certain adioynts.
AN amplification taken from the manner of the help showed them. For God most
manifestly did cast his weapons against the enemies of his Church, so that men
did nothing at all doubt, but that God did openly bear favor unto it. The
self same thing also he proves by the adioynts, of the which he reckons up
this first. That out of the earth and rock strooken by the power of God, there
did gush forth water for drink for the people. Read hereof Numb. 20. 1. Cor.
10. Of all which benefits he adds the foundation or ground, lest the Jews
might ascribe so great favor of God unto their own virtues, 1. The giving
the^ water out of the rock.
namely, the promise, or word of God confirmed unto the tribes, that is, the
whole seed of Abraham, by oath, he shows to have been the true cause of this
help of God.

Verse. 10. The mountains saw thee, and they trembled: the streamt of the
water passed by: the deep made a noise, and lift up his hand on hie.
2. A double miracle.
THE second adioynt unto this deliverance of the people, the which is a most
clear testimony or witness both of the infinite or endless power of God over
all things, and also of his mercy and favor toward his Church, to wit, a
double miracle, the which is described by an Anthropopatheia. What
Anthropopatheia is, see Mich. cap. 7 ver. 8.
The first miracle was the trembling of the earth, that is, of the mountains,
or a great earthquake there, the which was at the giving of the law, wherewith
the mountain Sinai himself was shaken. And this is reported Exodus 19.18. And
mount Sinai was all on a smoke, because the Lord came down upon it in sire,
and the smoke thereof ascended, as the smoke of a furnace, and all the mount
trembled exceedingly. Hereof also speaks David Psalm. 114. ver. 4.6. The
mountains leaped like rams, and the hills as lambs. Ye mountains, why
leaped ye like rams, and ye hills as lambs? The second miracle appeared in
the waters, whilst both the red sea went back, and was dried up at the
commandment of God: and also whilst the law being given in Mount Sinai, there
were thundrings and lightnings, and most thick clouds, and the noise of a
trumpet was heard in the air. Of the going back and drying up of the sea thus
it is written Exodus 14. ver. 21. And Moses stretched forth his hand upon the
sea, and the Lord caused the sea to run back by a strong East wind all the
night, and made the sea dry land: for the waters were divided. Hereof the
Psalmist speaks thus Psalm. 114. ver. 3. The sea saw it, and fled: Jorden was
turned back. And Psalm. 77. ver. 16.17. The waters saw thee, O God, the waters
saw thee, and were afraid: yea the depths trembled. The clouds powered out
water: the heavens gave a sound: yea, thine arrows went abroad. Of the thunder
and lightning, the thick cloud and sound of a trumpet thus we read Exodus 19.
ver. 16. And the third day, when it was morning, there was thunders, and
lightnings, and a thick cloud upon the mount, and the sound of the trumpet
exceeding loud, so that all the people, that was in the camp, was afraid.

Verse. 11. The Sun and the Moon stood still in their habitation: at the
light of thine arrows they went, and at the bright shining of thy spears.
THe third adioynt far more wonderful then the former miracles, as namely,
that which appeared in heaven it self, to wit, 3. The standing still of the
Sun and the Moon.
in the Sun and in the Moon, who at the commandment of God stayed their
course, as it is Iosue 10. verse. 12.13. Then spoke Joshua unto the Lord, in the
day, when the Lord gave the Ammorites before the children of Israel, and he
said in the sight of Israel, Sun, stay thou in Gibeon, and thou Moon in the
valley of Aialon. And the Sun abode, and the Moon stood still, until the
people avenged themselves upon their enemies (is not this written in the book
of Iasher?) so the Sun abode in the midst of the heaven, and hasted not to go
down for a whole day. Unto this miracle the Prophet Habacuck joins another
like thereunto, to wit, for that the people went safely through the desert both
by day and also by night, in the light and shining both of a fiery pillar
giving light unto them in the night time, and also of a cloud going before the
Israelites in the day time. This is recorded Exodus 13. ver. 21. after this
manner: And the Lord went before them by day in a pillar of a cloud to lead
them the way, and by night in a pillar of fire to give them light, that they
might go both by day and by night.

Verse. 12. Thou trodest down the land in anger, and did thresh the heathen
in displeasure.
The conclusion of the former discourse of the power of God for the good of his
Church.
THe conclusion of the whole former meditation and narration of the power of GOD
stretched out for the favor of his church, namely, that there is no country
or nation which the Lord cannot thresh and tread down in his anger. And
therefore that the church has a most excellent remedy and help of her
salvation and deliverance out of all evils in the same infinite or endless power
of God.

Verse. 13. Thou wentest forth for the salvation of thy people, even for
salvation with thine anointed: thou have wounded the head of the house of the
wicked, and discoueredst the foundations unto the neck, Selah.
Another ground of this prayer and hope of the Church.
A Light passing over unto another matter, by the which he declares another
foundation or ground of this prayer and hope of the church, namely the singular
good will of God toward it, whose foundation also, and sundry effects already
indeed tried and approved, he rehearses. First therefore he affirms that God
appeared to have had a love and a care of the salvation of his church, the
ground of which care is Christ, that is to say, the adoption or choosing of the
church in Christ. Wherefore in the word Anointed, or Christ, that same singular
and free election of God touching the Jews, and also the cause thereof, namely
Christ the mediator of his church, is contained. Finally, he rehearses the
effects witnessing that same singular good will of God toward the church, among
the which this is first reckoned up, that he has both wounded the head it
self, to with Pharao, and the first borne of the wicked, who afflicted or
troubled it, and also rased it up from the very foundation, that is, with his
whole army and family. Whereof see Exodus 11. and Psalm. 74. ver. 13.14. where
David speaks of this matter thus: Thou did divide the Sea by thy power:
thou brakest the heads of the dragons (that is, the servants of Pharao) in the
waters. Thou brakest the head of Leuiathan (that is, of Pharao) in pieces, and
gave him to be meat for the people in the wilderness. This self same, because
it is a singular benefit the Prophet would have to be sung and noted by the
musicians with a diverse tune and note, the which he signifies by this word
(Selah).

Verse. 14. Thou did strike through with his own staves the heads of his
villages: they came out as a whirle wind to scatter me: their rejoicing was as
to devour the poor secretly.
An amplification of the former benefit and work of God.
AN amplification of the former benefit and work of God, in that for the favor
of his church he destroyed not only the first borne of the Egyptian families in
the cities and towns, but also in the country: because that the country men
themselves also, as well as the rest in the cities, ranged and raged against
the people of God with deceit and violence, and did devour and eat them up
with great pleasure. Therefore look with what staff, and with what cruelty
they themselves went about to destroy the people of God, after the same manner
were they again justly punished by God.

Verse 15. Thou did walk in the Sea with thine horses upon the heap of
great waters.
The conclusion of this work of God and second part of this prayer.
THe conclusion of this work of God, and second part of this prayer, whereby
he teaches that God for the favor of his church even through the midst of
the waters of the sea (the which for this purpose he gathered into an heap
(Exodus 14. ver. 22.) made such a way, by the which both the horses, and all the
cariages of the people passed safely, and the Lord also himself as a most
valiant rider fought for those that were his, against their enemies.

Verse. 16. When I heard, my belly trembled: my lips shook at the voice:
rottennes entered into my bones, and I trembled in my self, that I might rest
in the day of trouble: for when he comes up unto the people he shall destroy
them.
The third part of this prayer, promising help and deliverance unto the Church.
THe third part of this prayer, wherein the Prophet promises unto himself, and
unto all other the true godly, that he shall be heard most assuredly, in so
much that he prophesies, that at what time the Lord shall come up to destroy
the Chaldeans, even then the whole church among the Chaldeans themselves, and
in such calamity or misery shall be sure and safe. Albeit that the same at
that time shall not be without great fear and trembling, both for that it
shall then see so wonderful judgments of God: and also for that she her self
shall be in the midst of so great danger at that time. The commandment of
Cyrus for the safety of the Jews.
This prophecy was fulfilled, when as Cyrus having taken Babylon, gave
commandment, that no Jews, or any that spoke the Syrian tongue, should be
hurt, as Xenophon teaches. And this fear, wherewith the church shall be then
shaken, and the which the Prophet had conceived of the revealing unto him of so
great misery, What the figure Hyperbole is, see Habac^c cap. 2. v. 11.
is hereby the way of an Hyperbole or excessive speech described or set out by
sundry effects, the which men being strooken into an unmeasurable or surpassing
fear do feel, and in very deed and truth have experience and trial of, to
wit the natural heat departing and leaving the members, that the godly may
thoroughly conceive the judgments of God, and when as the thing it self
should come to pass, might the more easily acknowledge it to have been
foretold long time before.

Verse. 17. For the fig tree shall not flourish, neither shall fruit be in the
vines: the labor of the olive shall fail, and the fields shall yield no
meat: the sheep shall be cut off from the fold, and there shall be no
bullock in the stalles.
The great misery of the Chaldeans.
BY coniuncts or things joined together he describes how great the calamity
or misery of the Chaldeans and enemies of the Church, shall be: for he shows
that they shall be destitute or void of all things necessary for man to live
withal, be they either the fruits of the earth, or cattle. By how much the
greater was the dulnes and blockishnes of Baltasar (Dan. 5.) who in so great
dearth and scarsitie of victuals, Baltasar.
does make those his feasts and banckets full of all riot and excess the very
self same night, in the which Babylon was taken.

Verse. 18. But I will rejoice in the Lord: I will joy in the God of my
salvation.
The great happiness of the Church.
BY the way of contraries he teaches how great on the contrary side shall be
the felicity or happiness of the church hoping and relying upon the true God,
the which being defended and preserved by him, shall at that time have nothing
else but matter of thanksgiving, gladness, and rejoicing. But in God, that is,
of his only bounty and goodness she confesses that she shall be saved, and
overwhelmed with that joy, wherewith the church shall rejoice, not in her
self, nor in so great slaughter and punishment of men properly, but for the
glory of the true God.

Verse. 19. The Lord is my strength: he will make my feet like hindes feet,
and he will make me to walk upon mine high places. To the chief singer on
Neginothai.
Epiphonema, what this figure is, see Jonas. cap. 2. v. 9.
THe figure Epiphonema, or acclamation, wherewith both this whole prayer is
concluded or shut up with the admiration or wondering at the goodness and
bounteousnes of God toward those that are his, and also that hope of preserving
the church trusting in God, is confirmed by sundry arguments or reasons, the
which are taken from the Epithets or titles here attributed unto God. And the
church vnaraying or spoiling her self of all trust in her own strength, of
all hope in the help of man, and of all other aid, does trust in the help of
God alone, whom by faith she knows to be hers, and most assuredly, and by
sundry similitudes persuade her self, that whatsoever shall be necessary
for the avoiding and escaping of so great danger, as has been described
before, and wherein she shall be at that time, shall be given unto her by God.
And therefore she sings of that help, as if it were now present, and
commands a public song to be sung unto God by the master of the music and
on such musical instruments, as according unto the course and order of that
time were in use in the church, by the appointment of God.

FJNIS.
The Commentary of Lambertus Danaeus upon the Prophet Aggaeus.
CAP. 1.
The argument of this prophesy.
WHen as the people of the Jews was returned out of the captivity of Babylon,
they began in the seventh month, in the year of that their first return by
the permission or sufferance of King Cyrus, to build or repair the altar of
God, in the self same place in the which it was before, as it is written Esdr.
cap. 3. verse. 1, 2, 3. And when the seventh month was come, The building of
the altar.
and the children of Israel were in their cities, the people assembled
themselves as one man to Jerusalem. Then stood up Ieshua the son of Iozadak,
and his brethren the Priests, and Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel, and his
brethren, and builded the altar of the God of Israel, to offer burnt offerings
thereon, as it is written in the law of Moses the man of God. And they set the
altar upon his bases, etc. And in the second year of the said return from
Babylon in the second month the people with great joy and gladness lays the
foundations of the Temple, The laying of the foundations of the second Temple.
which is called the second Temple, in the self same rubbish cleared, and on
the same foundations whereas it was builded before, as is likewise to be seen
in the said third chapter of Esdras ver. 8^* 9. and so forth. But when as
there were many lettes laid in their way, The building hindered and stayed.
(although king Cyrus expreslie gave them leave for this building) as it is
Esdr. 4. at the length they stayed and left off from that work by the edict or
commandment of Artaxerxes, and Assuerus, as is set down ver. 24. of the same
fourth chapter, and the building of the Temple was hindered until the second
year of King Darius. For this Darius being moved by the spir^^ of God, and
more favorable unto the Jews, Darius confirms the decree of King Cyrus for
the building of the Temple.
confirmed the edict or commandment of Cyrus for the building of the Temple,
and would have the same take place Esdr. 6. But when as the Jews supposed that
the self same thing would come to pass, as it did before under King Cyrus,
they did the more slowly settle and prepare themselves unto the work of the
Temple. And therefore the Lord stirred up Aggaeus the Prophet, who should
partly awaken them being so southfull with the threatenings, and partly with
promises, The second temple finished in the sixth year of Darius. The end of
this prophecy.
and the same most excellent concerning the glory of the second Temple, the
which should be greater then the glory of the first Temple Esdr. 5. With whose
Sermons they being moved at the last by the Spirit of God, did set their hand
earnestly to this work by the space of four whole years, and at the length
made an end of the temple in the sixth year of Darius. And the time from the
first beginning of that second Temple unto the full finishing of the same, was
46. years, as it is said 2. John ver. 20. For there the Jews say unto Christ,
Forty and six years was this Temple a building, and will thou rear it up in
three days? Threatenings. Promises of the second temple. Danaeus is wonderful
brief upon this Prophet. Wherefore for their further instructions I refer the
godly Readers unto the Commentaries of Grynaeus and Master Pilkingto^, which
are both in English.
although it were almost all of gold. For in Christ (as it is 2. Colos. ver.
3.) are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge. And he is greater then
Solomon, or Jonas, or any other the Prophets, as he witnesses of himself
Math. 12. ver. 41.42.

This prophecy does consist of sundry sermons or parts, of the which the
first do contain threatenings of God, and the latter, promises touching the
second temple, that is, Christ and his church.

Verse. 1. In the second year of King Darius, in the sixth month, the first day
of the month came the word of the Lord (by the ministry of the Prophet
Haggai) unto Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel, a prince of Judah, and to
Iehoshua the son of Iehozadak the high Priest, saying.
1 The calling of the prophet.
THe first Sermon. This whole first chapter is but one sermon, where the prophet
first confirms his calling: then shows the time, in the which he
prophesied: and thirdly, unto who^ the exhortations following do appertain
and are directed especially, 2 The time of his prophecy.
to wit, 3. Unto whom it appertains.
first unto the Princes, and secondly unto the rest of the people, whom God
would have to be the restorers of his worship.

Verse. 2. Thus speaks the Lord of hosts, saying, This people say, the time
is not yet come, that the Lords house should be builded.
The slacknes of the people reprehended in building the temple.
THe Prophet going about to reprehend or rebuke and find fault with the slacknes
of the people in building the Temple of God, does first of all rehearse their
vain excuses, and causes of their slacknes, and that by their own words.

Verse. 3. Then came the word of the Lord by the ministry of the Prophet
Haggai, saying,
HE refuteth or overthrows their vain excuses by an argument or reason taken
from things compared together, as follows:

Verse. 4. Is it time for your selves to dwell in your sieled houses, and this
house lie waste?
Their excuses confuted by a reason from things compared together.
FOr it is an unmeet thing that themselves, who are but fillie wretches should
dwell gaylie and gorgiously, every one in his own house: and that the Temple
of the Lord should lie and remain desolate or waste: and consequently that God
among them should be without his house.

Verse. 5. Now therefore thus says the Lord of hosts, Consider your own ways
in your hearts.
An exhortation.
AN exhortation, whereby he does stir them up unto the doing of their duty.

Verse. 6. Ye have sown much, and bring in little: ye eat, but ye have not
enough: ye drink, but ye are not filled: ye clothe you, but ye (...) not
warm: and he that earneth wages, puts the wages into (...) broken bag.
He spurreth them forward by the consideration of their losses and punishments
sustained for their slacknes in this work.
HE puts a spur unto them, or pricketh them forward unto the building of
the Temple by the consideration of the cal^^^^^^ or miseries and losses, which
went before, and were past, the which he shows to have fallen out unto them
for their so great negligence, in every part of their labors, and especially
in the kind of their corn.

Verse. 7. Thus says the Lord of hosts, Consider your own ways in your
hearts.
Another exhortation unto the building of the temple.
ANother exhortation unto the same work and building, taken from the blessing
which should ensue.

Verse. 8. Go up to the mountain and bring wood, and build this house, and I
will be favorable in it, and I will be glorified* says the Lord.
BOth upon the work it self, which is the Temple: and also upon them, if
laying aside and putting away all slouthfulnes, they will work diligently and
earnestly. And here and in the verse before is described two parts of
repentance. The first, Two parts of repentance.
that we be sorry for the sin committed. The second, that we do better
afterward.

1. Sorrow for sin
Verse. 9. Ye looked for much, and lo it came to little: and when ye brought it
home I did blow upon it. And why, 2. Newnes of life.
says the Lord of hosts? Because of mine house that is waste, and ye run every
man to his own house. Verse. 10. Therefore the heaven over you stayed it self
from dew, and the earth stayed her fruit. Verse. 11. And I called for a drought
upon the land, and upon the mountains, and upon the corn, and upon the wine,
and upon the oil, upon all that the ground brings forth: both upon men, and
upon cattle, and upon all the labor of the hands.
A repetition of the former plagues.
TO the end he may awaken and rouse up the most deaf and drousie, he does
again repeat the calamities or plagues past, and those also which were
present, in the which they were then exercised, or which then they presently
felt, that the Prophet may the more deeply move or touch them, as it were with
the view and beholding of the thing it self.

Verse. 12. When Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel, and Iehoshua the son of
Iehozadak the hie Priest with all the remnant of the people, heard the voice of
the Lord their God, and the words of the Prophet Haggai (as the Lord their God
had sent him:) then the people did fear before the Lord.
The fruit of the former exhortation.
HE shows what, and how great the fruit of the former exhortation was, and how
obedient unto God the Princes themselves together with the rest of the people
were. The which self same thing also he teaches to have proceeded from God,
that is, from the Spirit of GOD, and by the same Spirit to be wrought in them.

Verse. 13. Then spoke Haggai the Lords messenger in the Lords message unto the
people, saying, I am with you, says the Lord. Verse. 14. And the Lord stirred
up the spirit of Zerubbabel, the son of Shealtiel, a Prince of Judah, and the
spirit of Iehoshua the son of Iehozadak the hie Priest, and the spirit of all
the remnant of the people, and they came, and did the work in the house of the
Lord of hosts their God.
God promises his help unto the builders.
THe answering of an objection, that they should not quail and wax faint
hearted by reason of the sundry lets, the which should be brought against
this work by the adversaries: for the Lord does promise his help and aid
unto the builders, Esdr. 5. and 6. where the very beginning of the work
commanded to be done first by the decree of Cyrus, afterward of Darius, was the
most certain and assured work of God.

CAP. 2.
The second sermon of Haggaus.
THe second Sermon of the Prophet, the which gathers into one the things which
he had handled and dealt withal before the people at sundry times, namely, the
24. day of the 6. month, and the 21. day of the seventh month. So then it
has two parts. The first part remoueth and puts away all lets and
pul-backes, and cutteth off from the Jews all occasions of quenching their
forwardnes in the building of this second Temple.

Verse. 1. In the four and twentieth day of the sixth month, in the second
year of King Darius. Verse. 2. In the seventh month, in the one and twentieth
day of the month, came the word of the Lord by the ministry of the Prophet
H^ggai, saying, Verse. 3 Speak now to Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel Prince
of Judah, and to Iehoshua the son of Iehozadak the hie Priest, and to the
residue of the people, saying,
He confirms his calling afresh, etc.
HEre also because this doctrine is of great weight, and almost incredible or
not to be believed, he does confirm his calling: rehearses the time of his
prophecy, and those unto whom the exhortation following does especially
appertain.

Verse. 4. Who is left among you, that saw this house in her first glory, and
how do you see it now? Is it not in your eyes, in comparison of it as nothing?
The baseness of the second temple, one cause of their pretended slacknes in
building.
THe Prophet intending to exhort them unto the diligent building up of the
Temple, meets with the chief cause of the cooling or abating of their care
and forwardnes, the which did arise of the baseness of this Temple which was to
come, if it be compared with the former.

Verse 5. Yet now be of good courage, O Zerubbabel, says the Lord, and be of
good comfort, O Iehoshua, son of Iehozadak the hie Priest: and be strong, all
ye people of the land, says the Lord, and do it: for I am with you, says the
Lord of hosts,
The former cause refuted by the promise of greater glory unto it.
GOd refuteth or overthrows this cause, by the promise of greater glory,
which should be in the second Temple. But first of all he lovingly exhorts
them to build, for that they should not loose their labor in a vain matter.

Verse. 6. According to the word that I couenanted with you, when ye came out of
Egypt: so my spirit shall remain among you, fear ye not.
He promises his help unto them.
SEcondly, he promises help unto them because of that his perpetual or
continual favor toward them, the which he showed, and sufficiently witnessed
unto them long since by their miraculous deliverance out of Egypt: but this
help does he now again repeat unto them by an especial promise, and
express covenant. Finally, The passing dignity of the second temple,
witnessed by
he describes by an effect, which was by and by to ensue, what manner of
dignity and excellency there should be of this second Temple.

Verse. 7. For thus says the Lord of hosts, yet a little while, and I will
shake the heavens, and the earth, and the sea, and the dry land:
1. Both heaven and earth.
THe which both the heaven it self, and also the earth shall witness.

Verse. 8. And I will move all nations, and the desire of all nations shall
come, and I will fill this house with glory, says the Lord of hosts.
2. The acknowledgement of al nations.
ANd the which all nations shall acknowledge by offering of every their most
precious things. And this ought most truly to be referred unto the kingdom of
Christ, whereof this second Temple was a Sacrament or token.

Verse 9. The silver is mine, and the gold is mine, says the Lord of hosts.
A confirmation of the former promise.
GOd confirms the former promise by his authority and rule over all creatures.

Verse. 10. The glory of this last house shall be greater then the first, says
the Lord of hosts: and in this place will I give peace, says the Lord of
hosts.
The happy continuance of the glory of the second Temple.
THe conclusion, whereunto is joined the happy and perpetual enduring and
continuance of this glory of the second Temple, as a certain increase unto
the greater commendation of this Temple, that is, of the kingdom of Christ.
For in this respect, or thus far forth is this Temple commended, and pleased
God, as it was a figure and shadow of Christ to come.

Verse. 11. In the four and twentieth day of the ninth month, in the second
year of Darius, came the word of the Lord unto the Prophet Haggai, saying:
The second part of this sermon reproving certain gross errors of this people.
THE second part of this second Sermon, the which was made two months after,
wherein he reproves the gross errors of this people, which builded the
Temple, who supposed that themselves, and their works were acceptable unto God
for the very piles, frame, and building of the stones, for the very rites and
ceremonies, the which were used in the Temple: and not rather for the inward
godliness of mind, and holiness of the heart.

Verse. 12. Thus says the Lord of hosts, Ask now the Priests concerning the
law, and say,
Their error refuted by a similitude borrowed from holy things.
HE refuteth or overthrows them by a similitude, the which because it is taken
from holy things, and such as are expressed in the law of God, was especially
to be propounded, moved, or put unto the Priests.

Verse. 13. If one bear holy flesh in the skirt of his garment, and with his
skirt do touch the bread, or the pottage, or the wine, or oil, or any meat,
shall it be holy? And the Priests answered and said, no.
Nothing without life does sanctify a man.
NO dead thing, or without life (such as were the rites, ceremonies, and the
Temple) does sanctify or make holy a man, or any other thing else: but
contrariwise the polluted or defiled mind of a man polluteth or defiles all
things. For as Paul writes Tit. 1. ver. 15. Unto the pure are all things pure:
but unto them that are defiled, and unbelieving, is nothing pure, but even
their minds and consciences are defiled.

Verse. 14. Then said Haggai, If a polluted person touch any of these, shall it
be unclean? And the Priests answered and said, it shall be unclean.
An amplification of the similitude.

Verse. 15. Then answered Haggai, and said, so is this people, and so is this
nation before me, says the Lord: and so are all the works of their hands, and
that which they offer here, is unclean.
The answering of an objection.
THe answering of an objection, least that therefore they should leave off from
the work of the Temple, because they are not sanctified or made holy by that
same heap of stones, and outward frame and building of the Temple.

Verse. 16. And now, I pray you, consider in your minds: from this day, and
before, even before a stone was laid upon a stone in the temple of the Lord:
Verse. 17. Behold these things were, when one came to an heap of twenty
measures, there were but ten: when one came to the wine press for to draw out
fifty vessels out of the press, there were but twenty. Verse. 18. I smote you
with blasting, and with mildew, and with hail, in all the labors of your
hands: yet you turned not to me, says the Lord. Verse. 19 Consider, I pray you,
in your minds, from this day, and before from the four and twentieth day of the
ninth month, even from the day that the foundation of the Lords temple was
laid: consider it in your minds.
He exhorts them to go lustilie forward in the building of the temple.
HE exhorts them to go diligently and lustilie forward in the work of the
Temple, and not to leave of, or to be faint in heart, by an example, and
comparing or laying together of the former calamities, or punishments, the
which from God were sent upon the^, when they ceased from the work: and also
by the blessing hereafter to come, the which is promised unto them continuing
in the work.

Verse. 20. Is the seed yet in the barn? as yet the vine, and the fig tree,
and the pomegranate, and the olive tree has not brought forth: from this day
will I bless you.
HE sets before the Jews their seeds not yet cast or put out into the
ground, that they may the more easily understand, that this plenty of corn
and blessing of God is promised unto them because of the work of the temple
begu^, God promises henceforth to bless them in the fruits of the earth,
because of their forwardnes in building his temple.
the which could not yet be surmised or imagined, that it should be in any such
store, in regard of the time, or the seed, the which being as yet not
committed to the ground, there could be no proportion made of any such
plentiful yield of the same, as God here through his blessing henceforth
promises to increase them withal, both in respect of their corn, and also
all other fruits of the earth.

Verse. 21. And again the word of the Lord came unto Haggai in the four and
twentieth day of the month, saying,
The third Sermon of Aggaus containing the estate that should be of the Church
gathered of the Gentiles and Jews.
THE third Sermon, made the self same year and day, in the which the former
was made, wherein is contained a prophecy of the estate that should be of the
Gentiles and Jews, that by the comparing of them both together, the Jews,
that is to say, all the godly might understand, that the condition of the
Church should be always happy, and that God would have a perpetual care of
the same. And the Prophet by name speaks unto Zerubbabel their Prince, or
Captain, because that under his person the rest of the people of God is
comprehended, and because that he was a figure of Christ. And of Christ his
kingdom are these things especially and properly to be understood. For Christ
his sake are all these blessings both earthly and also heavenly, bestowed upon
the church. Further, hereby appears, that Princes ought to have an especial
care in restoring the worship and service of God.

Verse. 22. Speak to Zerubbabel the Prince of Judah, and say, I will shake the
heavens and the earth.
Christ at his death by diverse signs, and after diverse w^ies did shake both
heaven and earth.
CHrist dying that he might reign, with diverse signs and ways did shake
heaven and earth, as it is to be seen Mat. 27. ver. 45.51.52.53. in these
words: Now from the sixth hour was there darkness over all the land, unto the
ninth hour. And behold, the veil of the temple was rent in twain, from the
top to the bottom, and the earth did quake, and the stones were cloven. And
the graves did open themselves, and many bodies of the Saints, which slept,
arose, and came out of the graves after his resurrection, and went into the
holy city, and appeared unto many.

Verse. 23. And I will overthrow the throne of Kingdoms, and I will destroy the
strength of the kingdoms of the heathen, and I will overthrow the chariots,
and those that ride in them, and the horse, and the riders shall come down,
every one by the sword of his brother.
The world shaken with civil wars after the death of Christ.
AFter the death of Christ also, when as the Gospel begins to be preached,
the whole world in a manner is begun to be shaken with the civil wars of the
Romans. And Christ warns his Disciples of these matters Matthew. 24. ver. 6.
in these words, saying: Ye shall hear of wars, and rumors of wars: see
that ye be not troubled: for all these things must come to pass: but the end
is not yet. Albeit that this also may be referred unto those ouerthrowings and
destructions of kingdoms, yea and also of the Monarchies or Empires of the
world, the which fell out after the return of the people from Babylon, until
the receiving and allowing of the Gospel: such as were the Monarchies of the
Persians and Macedonians. That which the profane or heathen histories do
witness to have been done also.

Verse. 24. In that day, says the Lord of hosts, will I take thee, O Zerubbabel
my servant, the son of Shealtiel, says the Lord, and will make thee as a
signet: for I have chosen thee, says the Lord of hosts.
HOw dear the Church is unto God, could not better, nor more honorably be
expressed then by this similitude of a signet or ring that a man wears, to
seal withal. And the same similitude uses the Prophet Jeremy chap. 22.
verse. 24. against Ieconias the son of Iehoiakim, signifying, that if he were
never so dear unto him, but always in his sight, like unto a signet on a man's
finger, yet he should be destroyed. The words be these: As I live, says the
Lord, though Coniah (that is Ieconiah by taking away the first syllable) the
son of Iehoiakim King of Judah, were the signet of my right hand, yet would I
pluck thee thence.

FINIS.
The Commentary of Lambertus Danaeus, upon the Prophet Zacharias.
CAP. 1.
Two parts of this prophecy.
THere are two especial and principal parts of this prophecy. The first,
wherein the state of the people of the Jews, 1 A description of the state of
the Church from Zacharias his prophecy unto the reign of the Antiochi
and so consequently of the church of God, is described or set forth, from the
time of Zacharias unto the cruelty of the kings of Syria, and chiefelie unto
the reign of the Antiochi over the Jews. And this description lasts from
the first chapter of this book unto the eleventh. 2 What thence forth should
fall out to the Jews until the overthrow of Jerusalem.
The second part shows what should fall out unto the Jews from that time,
until the destruction of Jerusalem. And this narration con^inueth from the
beginning of the eleventh chapter unto the end of the book. Both these parts
in this prophet like as in the rest, does consist both of the threatenings, and
also of the promises of God. Also the Jews at that time were the true church
of God and the type or figure of the church under the gospel of Christ, that
is, of our church. And as some of those threatenings of God do appertain unto
the church it self, and some unto the enemies thereof: so some of the promises
of God do belong especially unto the Jews: some also unto the whole church
of God, out of what nation, and at what time soever it be gathered. The scope
and drift of this prophet.
So then the scope and drift of this prophet seems to be, first, to exhort
the people both unto the building of the temple (the which the Jews had then
in hand, and so these two Prophets Aggaeus and Zacharias do help the one the
other, 1 He exhorts unto the going forward with the building of the temple.
Aggaeus Zacharias, and Zacharias confirms the prophecy of Aggaeus) and also
unto the repairing of the city Jerusalem, the which he foretells shall
afterward be builded again, and maintained through the favor of God, and that
in the same place, of the same measure and bigness, which once it had, and of
the same spiritual dignity. Secondly, he foresheweth (so far as was
sufficient for the comfort of the good and godly) the fate, as I may so term
it, of this city when it should be builded, and of the people, as it was
determined by God, and such things as should fall out particularly. Zacharias
and Aggaeus prophecy both at ^ne time.
He was therefore of the same time with Aggaeus, and his fellow and companion,
in stirring up the people to the worshipping and serving of God holilie and
purelie, as appears Esdr. cap. 5. ver. 1. after this manner, Then Haggai a
Prophet, and Zachariah a Prophet, the son of Iddo, prophesied unto the Jews
that were in Judah and Jerusalem, in the name of the God of Israel, even unto
them. As for the city, of the reedifying or building up again whereof the
Prophet Zacharias prophesies, Nehemias afterward builded up the same, almost
forty years after the decree of Cyrus touching the sending home of the people
of the Jews, as appears Nehem. cap. 3. Furthermore this book consists of
many prophesies, and is full of types and figures, whereby things to come were
wont to be signified by the Prophets, to the end that men should give the more
diligent heed unto those foretellings and prophesies, and mark the more
perfectly and nearly the moments or course of times, and the events or issues
and fallings out of things.

Verse. 1. In the eight month of the second year of Darius, came the word of
the Lord unto Zechariah the son of Berechiah, the son of Iddo, the
Prophet, saying,
The office of Zacharias.
THe description of the office of Zacharias, and the ordeining of him unto the
same: also his stock or kindred: and his family or house: and the time wherein
he prophesied. His office is prophesying, and consequently an extraordinary
calling to declare the will of God, and also the law of God given unto men.
And when as he simply, calls himself a Prophet, without any further
addition, he understands and teaches that he is the prophet of God. His
calling from God.
The ordeining him unto this office is by a lawful calling, albeit
extraordinary. For he shows that he is called by Jehovah, that is by the
Lord himself, whose word or appointment and commandment went before unto
Zacharias, concerning the delivery and utterance of those things which follow.
For God alone calls Prophets, His stock or family honest.
and that also immediately. As for the original, or stock, and family of
Zacharias, the same was honest, and at that time very well known unto the
Jews. For he was the son of Barachias the Nephew of Iddo: who whether they
were priests, or only Levites, or rather of some other tribe, as of Judah for
example, it is not here expressed. Yet notwithstanding some do suppose him to
have been of the tribe of Leui, and of the race of the priests, Supposed to be
of the tribe of Leui, and family of Aaron. The time of his prophecy added,
and why?
that is of the family of the priests. The time wherein he began to execute
his office is added, both to procure credit unto his prophecy, and also to
declare the care of God toward his church, who at one and the same time raised
up many Prophets for the greater comfort of those that are his, that is to say,
this Prophet, and the Prophet Aggaeus. And this our prophet comes after
Aggaeus two months: at which very time also God framed and prepared the mind
of Darius in Persia, to grant and most willingly give the same leave that
Cyrus had done before, by a public decree, to build the Temple.

Verse. 2. The Lord has been sore displeased with your fathers.
The first Sermon containing the chief ground of the things at the
commandment of God to be delivered by the prophet.
THe first sermon, wherein is contained the proposition, or principal point and
ground of the things commanded by God, and which were to be denounced or
delivered by the Prophet, that being taught by the former examples of their
Elders, they might repent, and turn unto God with true and earnest repentance
of heart, least that they also at the last should taste of those plagues, the
which their Elders had felt before. First of all therefore the judgments of
God, and the same very fearful against their Elders (to wit, because of their
sins) are briefly rehearsed, when as the Prophet says, That God was not
only angry with them, but also thoroughly wroth and sore displeased against
them.

Verse. 3. Therefore say thou unto them, thus says the Lord of hosts, Turn ye
unto me, says the Lord of hosts, and I will turn unto you, says the Lord of
hosts.
The end, why God would have those former examples repeated unto the Jews.
THus then God will have these home examples laid down and repeated unto the
Jews, Thus shall thy ^ay unto them. And he shows the end, namely that they
their lselues should repent, and not that they should hear those fore passed
times only, as a story of things done, and take some delight of mind by the
rehersall of those old matters: but that they should apply and refe^re those
home examples unto their use, and make their benefit and profit of them unto
their salvation. And he describes or sets out repentance by the true
effect thereof, to wit, when as he calls it A turning unto GOD. Who they be,
that do truly repent.
For they only do truly repent, who do not alone hate the sins which
they have committed, and are sorry for the same: but who also do leave that
their wicked life, and do earnestly turn unto the obedience of God.
Finally, he adds both in this place, and also often hereafter, The saying of
the Lord of hosts, or thus says the Lord of hosts, both to win authority
unto his sermons, and unto this prophecy, from God the author thereof, and the
same also most mighty, who will fulfill and bring to pass those things which
he threatens: and also to oppose or set this true God against the vain idols
of the nations near unto them, to the end the Jews should not be moved with
their felicity or happiness. The figure Epimone, which is an often repeating
and rehersing of one and the same verse or sentence, as it were the holding of
the song, as they term it, whereof in the Psalms there are many examples, and
also Isai, 11. Where you shall find in that short chapter this one sentence
three times repeated: yet for all this his wrath is not turned away, but his
hand is stretched out still ver. 12.17.21.
For him he calls both Jehovah, and also the God of hosts.

Verse* 4. Be ye not as your fathers, unto whom the former Prophets have cried,
saying, Thus says the Lord of hosts, Turn you now from your evil ways, and
from your wicked works: but they would not he are, nor hearken unto me, says
the Lord.
THe figure Epimone, or returning to the repeating of the same thing which was
spoken already, whereby he does lively express by a certain Hypotyposis
that which he had briefly said before of their fathers in the second verse,
to the end they might be the more moved, with the representing, and laying as
it were before their eyes of the whole action it self with their fathers, and
the most lamentable issue or falling out of the same. And home examples do
very grea^lie move us, wherefore the prophets of God have used this kind of
argument in other places also, as Psalm 95. where David rehearses unto the
Jews the examples of their forefathers in tempting and proving god in the
wilderness and God his sore displeasure against them for the same, that thereby
they might learn to cast off all hard heart^dnes and disobedience for fear of
^^sting of the like punishments. So often in the Prophet Ieremi^ is th^^ the
Lord in like manner as in this place, call upon the Jews by his Prophet to
leave o^ their old^ wicked ways, and to return unto him, as Iere. 18. ver 11.
Speak thou now therefore unto the men of Judah, and to the inhabitants of
Jerusalem, saying. Thus says the Lord, be hold I prepare a plague for you, and
purpose a thing against you: return you therefore every one from his e^ill
way, and make our ways, and your works good. Again cap. 25. ver. 5. Turn
again now every one from his evil way, and from the wickedness of your
inventions, and ye shall dwell in the land, that the Lord has given unto you,
and to your fathers for ever and ever. And cap. 35. ver. 15. Return now every
man from his evil way, and amend your works, and go not after other gods to
serve them, and ye shall dwell in the land, which I have given unto you, and
to your fathers, but ye would not ene line your care, nor obey me.

The faithful especially are to mark those things that do fall out in the
people of God.
Moreover those things which fall out especially among the people of God, are
in deed diligently to be considered of all men, but yet chiefelie of the godly
and faithful, because that in them the nature, and as I may term it, the
disposition of GOD is the more perceived. Wherefore God would have this example
of the fathers to be again, and that in such sort, beaten into the heads of
the Jews, being returned from captivity, to the end he might show unto
them, both how he had dealt with them before, and also what things followed
afterward. And here in this place there is expressed and that very lively, and
unto the quick, an exhortation or admonition of GOD unto them touching earnest
repentance. The Prophets therefore by the commandment of God exhorted their
fathers (of whom they were wont very greatly to host) unto repentance before.
And the prophets of God exhorted them not slight lie, or lightly, but stoutly,
and daily. They spoke unto them (says he) crying, and that by the appointment
of God almighty commanding them: nay moreover they did pray and entreat them
that they would urne this so great patience of God unto their salvation. God
does after a sort pray and entreat us by his servants.
For so also does Paul witness that God after a sort does pray us by his
servants 2. Cor. 5. ve. 20. Now then ^r^ (...) ambassadors for Christ: as
though GOD did beseech you through us, we pray you in Christ his stead, that
ye be reconciled to God. So 2 Thessalonians 3. ver. 12. Therefore them that are
such, we command and exhort by our Lord Jesus Christ, that they work with
quietness, and eat their own bread. But what did the Jews for all this fair
speaking and intreatance? They did not obey God, no not dealing with them so
gently and fatherly. Nay some of them did not so much as with their outward
ears of their body hear the words of God, through the stubbornnes of their
hearts: others which indeed lent and yielded the ears of their body unto the
Prophets of God, yet did not set their minds unto those words, nor think that
the things which were threatened unto them should come to pass, because they
stoutly and lustily contemned or despised the threatenings of God.

Verse. 5. Your Fathers, where are they? and do the Prophets live for ever.
An interrogation.
THis is an interrogation, or the asking of a question, unto the which the
answer is set down in the verse following. And the Prophet asks a question,
to the end he may urge or press them the more, and in a manner lay the thing
it self before their eyes to be seen, that is, that he may teach that the
threatenings and judgments of God pronounced or delivered against their froward
fathers were not idle, nor vain: but had in the end their issue, fulfilling
and effect in them. So then both the men, which do show the commandments and
wrath of God, and those also against whom the same are showed, do themselves
indeed perish and dye: but the word of God indureth for ever, and always has
his efficacy or working and effect. And so does God testify by his Prophet
Isai cap. 55. where comparing his word unto the falling of the rain, he
infers ver. 1.1. So shall my word be, that goes out of my mouth: it shall
not return unto me void, but it shall accomplish that which I will, and it
shall prosper in the thing, whereto I sent it. God therefore will not have
those his threatenings always to sleep, or to be only foretold by his
Prophets: but in the end the Prophets cease, and yet does the word of God, as
it was showed or threatened, come to pass, and appears to be true by the
issue and falling out of the matter.

Verse. 6. But did not my words and my statutes, which I commanded by my
servants the Prophets, take hold of your fathers? And they returned and said,
As the Lord of hosts has determined to do unto us, according unto our own
ways, and according to our works, so has he dealt with us.
An answer unto the former ^nterrogation.
THis is an answer unto the former interrogation, the which contains two
things. One, the falling out of the matter. The other, the confession of the
fathers themselves in the end, and their giving testimony or witness both of
the truth of the word of God: and also of the justice of God in punishing of
them. And it was needful that both these points should be set down, as the
thing was, not only to move the Jews their sons, but also, that all men
should here have a most certain rule of the efficacy or power and force of
the word of God either fearing us, or else comforting of us. A certain rule of
the efficacy of the word of God.
This therefore was the issue or falling out of the matter, namely, that both
the words of God delivered by the Prophets, and also his judgment ordained and
appointed against the sins of men appeared in the end, even in those very
self same persons, against whom it was threatened. Therefore it (took hold
upon them.) And the confession of their Fathers and Elders was most notable and
excellent, both to admonish their posterity of the unremovable truth of the
word of God, and also to show, that God is just both in the threatening, and
also in the executing of his judgments. For they confessed, both that the
things which God had foretold should come to pass, and also the things the
which he had determined or thought, even the same in the end did justly fall
out and come to pass unto them. For they acknowledged that they were punished
for their sins: but then at length did they acknowledge it after that they
returned unto God with earnest repentance of mind. So in the Lamentations of
Jeremy cap 1. ver. 18. after that Jerusalem has entered into the consideration
of her sins, and been sorry for the same, she makes this confession: The
Lord is righteous: for I have rebelled against his commandment: hear, I pray
you, all people, and behold my sorrow. Again, cap. 2. ver. 17. The Lord has
done that which he had purposed: he has fulfilled his word that he had
determined of old time: he has thrown down, and not spared: he has caused
thine enemy to rejoice over thee, and set up the horn of thine adversaries.
So Psalm. 106. ver. 6. We have sinned with our fathers: we have committed
iniquity, and done wickedly. See to this purpose Dan. 9. And this is the end
of the first Sermon of the Prophet.

Verse. 7. Upon the four and twentieth day of the eleventh month, which is the
month Shebat, in the second year of Darius, came the word of the Lord unto
Zechariah the son of Berechiah, the son of Iddo the Prophet, saying,
The second Sermon.
THe second Sermon, the Author, Minister, and time whereof is described in this
verse, and in the verse following: the manner, in the 10. verse the end and
drift of this Sermon generally: lastly, vers^ the 12. and so following is
contained the peculiar application thereof unto the Church of God. The Author
of this Sermon. The Minister thereof. The time when it was made.
The Author therefore of this doctrine and Sermon is God properly, and the same
also Jehovah. The Minister is the same, which also was of the former, namely,
Zacharias himself. The time, two full and whole months after the first
Sermon, made of repentance. Therefore when as that first Sermon was received of
the people godly, and had brought forth his fruit, now does the Lord also
comfort them by his Prophet.

Verse. 8. I saw by night, and behold, a man riding upon a red horse, and he
stood among the myrrh trees, that were in a bottom, and behind him were there
red horses speckled and white.
The manner of revealing the things unto the Prophet is twofold.
THe manner, after which the Lord dealt, and revealed unto Zacharias the things
the which he should say unto the Jews, is now declared. And it is twofold,
namely a vision, and a talk or speech between the Prophet and the Angel. The
vision is here set down: the talk strait after in the verse following. Now
the vision, and the time of the vision is here expressed. 1. A vision.
The vision, were many horsemen sitting upon horses not of one color, but of
diverse colors, showed by God unto the Prophet, 2. A talk between the Prophet
and the Angel.
of the which one of more dignity then the rest did sit upon a red horse, and
stood in a shadie and dark place, to wit, among the myrrh trees The time of
the vision, The night, and not the day, because that the understanding of this
thing was as yet dark and hard. 1 Why the horses are of diverse colors.
This place is to be compared with that of the Revelation cap. 6. But in this
that the color of all the horses is diverse, and not all one, hereby is showed
that there are diverse ends, for the which those horses are prepared of God: and
when as the Riders on the^ do signify the Angels: thereby is declared, that
the Angels, which are sent of God, as messengers, and overseers, (whom the
Greeks call Epoptai) as from a great King, are sent, I say, as it were the
keepers of this world, partly for to execute his judgments, such as are they
which sit upon the bay or fiery colored horses: and partly for the bestowing
of his benefits, as are they which ride upon the white horses. He that sits
on the horse alone.
And that one, whom the other horse men do speak unto, and unto whom alone
they do render an account of their charge, ver. 11. hereafter, who sits
upon the horse among the mirre trees, who rules, instructs, and te^cheth the
Prophet, the same no doubt is our Lord Jesus Christ, unto whom, as both God,
and also the head of the Church, all creatures do obey. And he sits upon a
red horse, that is, a sad, dark, The color of his horse, and the place wherein
he stands.
and as yet no clear color. He keeps himself among the mirre trees, that
is, dark and shadie places, because that the state of the Church was as yet,
both because of many that were not yet now returned from the captivity of
Babylon, and also because of the troubles which were yet still hanging over
their heads, because I say that in these respects the state of the church was
yet sad, heavy, dark, not yet shining and merry, all clouds of calamities
or miseries being wiped away. Christ therefore that horseman and head of his
church, suffering and sorrowing with his Church (for as it is Hebr 4. ver. 15.
We have not an high priest, that cannot be touched with the feeling of our
infirmities, but was in all things tempted in like sort, yet without sin)
has taken upon him both a fit color and place for the said matter, the which
he would describe (...) set forth.

Verse. 9. Then said I, O my Lord, what are these? And the Angel that talked
with me, said unto me, I will show thee what these be. 2. The talk of the
prophet with the Angel, teaching three things.

THe talk of Zacharias, and the same most familiar with that Angel. Out of
the which these three things are gathered. First, that the prophets of God
spoke by the Spirit of Christ, for 1. Pet. 1. ver. 11. Peter teaches that the
prophets of God searched when or at what time the spirit which testified before
of Christ, 1. That Gods Prophets spoke by the Spirit of Christ.
which was in them, should declare the sufferings that should come unto Christ,
and the glory that should follow. Secondly, that Christ is he, who has
always showed unto us, that is, unto his Church, 2. Christ alone reuealeth the
counsel of his father.
the mind and counsel of his father, and that the same at the first was never
opened by any other, or by any other means. Lastly, how great mind, and how
great care Christ has for his spouse, that is, for his church, appears also
by this talk, 3. How great mind and care he has of his church.
look for this purpose Mat. 17. And Reuelat. cap. 1. and the. 2.

Verse. 10. And the man that stood among the mirre trees, answered, and said,
these are they, The general drift of this vision is to teach that God his
providence has a stroke in all things.
whom the Lord has sent to go through the world.
THe scope and drift of this vision is twofold, the one general, the other
particular, ver. 12. The general is here expressed, namely that it might be
declared, that whatsoever things fall out and are done in this world, come to
pass by the providence of God, and that all things, which any where are done,
are seen of God. Therefore he has his overseers, and messengers, the which
do search, view and go through, not only this or that part of the earth, but
the whole earth, that by and by like messengers, they may bring and report unto
him, what things soever are done in any place of the earth. Neither is there
any creature, which is not manifest in his sight (as it is Hebr. 4. ver. 13.)
but all things are naked and open unto his eyes, with whom we have to do. And
these things by an Anthropopatheia are spoken of God, Anthropopatheia what it
is, see Mich. cap. 7. ver. 8.
attributing unto him the properties and qualities of men, who of himself
needs no messengers, but (as it is Psalm. 113. ver. 6.) abaseth himself to
behold things in the heaven and in the earth.

Ver. 11. And they answered the Angel of the Lord, that stood among the mirre
trees, and said, we have gone through the world: and behold, all the world
sits still, and is at rest.
The quiet state of the whole earth, the church only excepted.
HEre is described or set forth what was the state of the whole world at that
time, to wit, calm and quiet, and at rest, excepting the church alone, the
which in the midst of the peace of all the whole earth, and of all nations, is
notwithstanding sundry ways tossed with storms and troubles. Wherefore this
place is a preparation unto the verse following, to the end that the complaint
of the Church, or of the Angel the head of the Church may appear to be the
more just.

Verse. 12. Then the Angel of the Lord answered and said, O Lord of hosts, The
complaint of the Angel having three things to be noted.
how long will thou be unmerciful unto Jerusalem, and to the cities of Judah,
with whom thou have been displeased now these threescore and ten years?
1. Who complains.
THe complaint of the Angel, that is, of Christ, by the which the things which
before were spoken of the general providence of God, and his care over this
world, are now peculiarly applied unto the Church. 2. For what he complains.
And in this complaint there are three things to be noted. First, who
complayneth. Secondly, for what he complains. 3. Of what he complains.
Thirdly* of what he complains. He complains which is the Angel, who is
peculiarly called The Angel of Jehovah, or of the Lord in this place, Jehovah
had no other Angels also, but because this Angel above the rest, and by a
certain excellency was such a one. For this is Christ, who is called the
Angel of the great counsel. This selfsame is he, which among the mirre trees
did sit upon the horse. And truly this agrees unto Christ very well, who is
our mediator unto God, and that alone to pray and entreat his father
especially for his Church afflicted, for as much as she is his body, and
filling up. 1. Cor. 12. For this is the proper office of the mediator, as we
are taught Heb. 9. ver. 24. That Christ is entered into heaven, to appear now
in the sight of God for us. Now he prays and that most earnestly for his
Church, that is, the Bridegroom for his bride, the Lord for his servant, the
father for his son, the owner for his inheritance, the which he worthily
soroweth to be so wasted, and to perish. For Christ has care for that company
of the world only, the which is his church. Last of all he complains of this
also, Thou will arise, and have mercy upon Zion: for the time to have mercy
thereon, for the appointed time is come. And this time that he here speaks
of was 70. years, as appears Ierem. 25. and yet the wasting both of the
city, and also of the whole land of the Jews did still continue in such sort,
that the church of God did not as yet inioye rest and peace, as other people
and nations of the world did. And so that great wrath of God against the cities
of the Jews seemed as yet not to be quenched, and appeased, when as
notwithstanding he appeared to be favorable unto other nations.

Josephus Scaliger.
Furthermore, whereas Josephus Scaliger libr. 6. Emendat. tempor. page 29.
reckons these years of the captivity from the first year of Xerxes with
his father Darius, unto the fourth year of Darius Nothus, this his account is
such that as yet I cannot agree unto him in the same. The which notwithstanding
be it spoken with the good leave or under the correction of that most
singularly learned, and godly man, unto whom all learning and learned men owe
much and are greatly beholding.

Verse. 13. And the Lord answered the Angel, that talked with me, with good
words, and comfortable words.
The applying of the former doctrine unto the church.
THe applying of the former doctrine of the providence of GOD unto the Church.
For this answer shows that God after a certain especial manner is careful,
and mindful of the same: the which thing appears as well by his benefits
ordained for the same his Church by God, as also by the punishment decreed
against the enemies thereof. Two things to be noted.
And here are two things to be noted. The one, that the prayers of the Angel,
that is, of the Mediator Jesus Christ making intercession and request for us,
1. The prayers of the Angel, are heard forthwith of the father.
are forthwith heard of the father. The second, what is the minding and
thinking of God upon us in Christ, namely, good, that is, full of happiness and
comforts, not only that we should enjoy the same peace and rest, the which
other nations do, but also far more excellent and better. Therefore the
things which God in Christ has showed unto us are called good words, 2. God
minds his Church all good in Christ.
and comfortable, because that through him, we have peace with God Psalm. 85.
And as Paul writes Romans 5. ver. 1.2. Being justified by faith, we have peace
toward God through our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom also we have access through
faith unto this grace, wherein we stand, and rejoice under the hope of the
glory of God.

Verse. 14. So the Angel that communed with me, said unto me, Cry thou, and
speak, Thus says the Lord of hosts, I am ielous over Jerusalem and Zion with
a great zeal,
What the good words spoken of before, are, toward the church her own self.
A Making more plain of that which went before. For he now shows what are
those good words of God. And first, they are the benefits of God prepared
toward the Church her self, to wit, that God embraces her, as he did before,
with great affection and love, and has not ceased to love her by reason of her
former calamities or miseries. 1. God will have his love made manifest to his
Church.
First of all then God will have that his exceeding affection or love, toward
those that are his, to be made manifest unto them, not privily, but openly:
not for fashion sake, but earnestly* not lightly, but with great crying and
diligence or earnestnes, that they may know it to be a weighty and great
matter. 2. God himself is the author of things at his commandment uttered by
men.
Secondly, that we should be assured that these things are spoken in the person
and at the commandment of God himself, albeit they be men that speak these
things, he adds, Thus says Jehovah, or, the Lord. Finally, that his
affection or love toward Jerusalem, that is to say, the Church, he describes
to be very great For hereunto it appertains that he calls it zeal, 3. God
his love toward his Church exceeding great.
or jealousy, yea and that great zeal or jealousy: and for that he repeateth
the same word again, t^^ which among the Hebrews or Hebricians is a
signification of (...) highest degree. Like as therefore the miseries of the
Church (...) great, so also does God comfort her with great protestation of his
love.

Verse. 15. And am greatly angry against the careless heathen: for I was angry
but a little, and they helped forward the affliction.
2. What the good words of God are toward his Church in regard of others.
IN the second place is showed what are those good words of God toward his
Church, namely, the overthrowing or destroying of the enemies of his Church.
This second benefit therefore is promised unto the godly and faithful, and
does contain a comfort for them, not that the godly are delighted with this
destruction of me^ simply in it self, and in that it is a destruction of men:
but in this consideration, namely, so far forth as they which are destroyed,
are the enemies of God. And this destruction is described and confirmed by the
cause going before, to wit, by the anger of God, and the same most exceeding
great and vehement or sore against them. For the Prophet says, that God is hot
in anger, yea, and that great and earnest anger against these heathen, which
have afflicted the Church of God. The anger of God is the cause of the
destruction and punishment of men.
Now the anger of God is both a most certain messenger and cause also of the
destruction and punishment that shall come upon men, against whom God is
angry. The Prophet ^ddeth and calls them quiet or careless heathen, both to
answer a secret objection of theirs, who complained that they alone were ve^ed
or grieved in the midst of the quiet of the whole world: and also to take away
from those self same heathen their vain confidence or trust, who, because
they were at that time quiet and at rest, did not at all fear that these
threatenings should come to pass, and did sleep and snort carelessly in this
their peace: nevertheless, says the Lord notwithstanding, they shall be
destroyed, and shall grievously be afflicted or punished, like as Isai 14. the
like is threatened both to the King of Babel, and also unto the Philistines,
notwithstanding their security, or fearing no dangers. Last of all, the Lord
sets down a reason of this his anger against those heathen, that it may
appear both to be just, and also that all the godly may the more certainly
believe and be persuaded, that they shall be punished. And this reason is,
because that all of them were very cruel against the people of God, The
reason why God is so angry with the heathen.
and afflicted or punished them (...) a mind not to chastise them, but to
destroy them. Therefore (...) heathen executed these judgments upon the Church
of God (...) unto the will of God. For God would have his people to be
corrected and punished but a little, and moderatly, or with reasonable
correction, as God himself witnesses of his chastising of his Church Jeremy
30. ver. 11. when he says: For I am with thee, to save thee: though I utterly
destroy all the nations where I have scattered thee, yet will I not utterly
destroy thee, but I will correct thee by judgment, and not utterly cut thee
off. But these heathen purposed and intended plainly and utterly to destroy and
root them out, as God himself bears record of the King of Assyria Isai 10.
ver. 7. saying: But he thinks not so, neither does his heart esteem it so:
but he imagines to destroy, and to cut off not a few nations. So likewise
does the King of Syria, and the King of Israel determine against the King of
Judah Isai 7. ver. 6. for there they say, Let us go up against Judah, and let
us waken them up, and make a breach therein for us, and set a King in the midst
thereof, even the son of Tabeal. And therefore Psalm. 83. ver. 4. the Church
complains unto God against such cruelty of her enemies, and says, They have
said, come and let us cut them off from being a nation: and let the name of
Israel be no were in remembrance. But howsoever the enemies lay their
platform, this promise of God toward those that are his remains
unremovable* My mercy will I not take from them for ever. Psalm. 89.

Verse. 16. Therefore thus says the Lord, I will return unto Jerusalem with
tender mercy: mine house shall be builded in it, says the Lord of hosts, and
a line shall be stretched upon Jerusalem.
THe third exposition and showing what is meant by those good words, The third
exposition, showing what is meant by good words.
the which contains two most large promises, the one of the building again
of the Temple of God, the other of the repayring of the city Jerusalem. And
God adds a reason of al these, to wit, his only mercy, and the same also
free, for the which he has had regard unto Sion, and will help his Church.
For God his returning, is to show himself favorable unto us.

Verse. 17. Cry yet, and speak, thus says the Lord of host, my cities shall
yet be broken with plenty: the Lord shall yet comfort Zion, and shall yet
choose Jerusalem.
The fourth exposition of the good words of God.
THe fourth exposition of the good words of God, cont^ini^^ (...) like manner two
promises. One, of the rest of the cities of (...) also not only to be builded,
but to be most full of people, (...) of the plenty and store of good things of
all sorts. The other, that these promises of God shall be ratified or
established, and perpetual. They shall be established, because he that same
God of hosts, and most mighty does command this self same thing openly to be
affirmed, and with great earnestnes and certainty. They shall be perpetual,
because God has yet chosen Sion, and does yet comfort her, least the election
and favor of God toward her, by reason of the former miseries might seem to
have ceased, and to be broken off, Nicham, Bachar, verbes of the present tense
signifying the continuance of God his favor.
as the feeling of the flesh wrongfully judges in affliction or trouble. For
God uses two words, the which do plain^e signify that the course of God his
favor and good will shall be continued, because of the present tense or time.
And the word (yet) sundry times repeated pertains also hereunto.

Verse. 18. Then lift I up mine eyes, and saw, and behold, four horns.
Tremelius refers these four verses unto the second chapter.
THe four verses following do belong unto the former sentence, therefore they
ought to be joined with it in this same chapter, and not to be severed from it,
as some do. For they contain the answering of an objection, whereby also the
confirmation of the former promises (namely of the destroying of the enemies of
the Church, ver. 15. and of the restoring of all the Church certainly, ver.
17.) is gathered. And they be the answering of an objection, because that both
the multitude, and also the strength of the enemies of the Church might seem
to be such, and so great, that the former promises might be supposed to be but
vain. Yet God confirms that it shall come to pass, because that how great
soever (...) these lets and hindrances may be judged of men for to be, the
Lord notwithstanding shall take them away. So then in the four verses
following one only vision, that is to say, The vision following has two parts,
containing
belonging unto one and the same end, is described, the which notwithstanding
has two parts. The first part thereof notes out the enemies that should (...)
unto the Church. And the latter part their destruction. 1. The enemies of the
Church.
Both these points in a vision, to the end that such as were the faithful
might give the more diligent heed unto them both (for these visible forms and
shows are wont more to draw us unto them, 2. Their destruction.
and (...) take us more heedfull) and also that they might the longer (...) and
muse upon them both, when as they did see them both (...) ^^uerally propounded
or set before them. As for this verse, the same contains a figurative vision
of the enemies of the Church, namely, there appear four horns unto the
Prophet. They are showed unto him by God, The afflictions of the Church come to
pass by the will and providence of God.
that all men may understand, that in this that his Church both before, and now
also is afflicted or troubled, the same comes to pass by the will and
providence of God. There are four showed, not that thereby should be declared,
that there are but four kingdoms only that are enemies unto the godly, but
rather that thereby might be noted the four parts of the world, to wit, East,
West, North, South, out of every of the which parts there have always sprung
up sundry enemies unto the Church, and shall at all times spring up, like as
Psalm. 107. ver. 2, 3 the people of God delivered from their enemies among whom
they were scattered in all those quarters, are by David exhorted to praise God
for their deliverance: Let them (says he) which have been redeemed of the
Lord, show how he has delivered them from the hand of the oppressor, and
gathered them out of the lands, from the East, and from the West, from the
North, and from the South. They are also called horns, Why the enemies of the
church are called horns.
because of their strength in comparison of that small company and strength of
the Church, if the matter be weighed, and esteemed in the judgment of men.

Verse. 19. And I said unto the Angel that talked with me, what be these? And he
answered me, These are the horns which have scattered Judah, Israel, and
Jerusalem.
The interpretation of the former vision describing
THe exposition or interpretation of the former vision. Wherein is first
described the carefulnes of the Prophet desirous to know the things laid before
him by God, but very obscure or dark, and humbly requesting to have them made
plain unto him, 1. The carefulnes of the prophet to understand the vision.
and not casting them away waywardly, and as being weary of them. And this
self same is to be imitated or followed of us, that we should by faith ask
of God the things which we are ignorant of in his word, as James in his
Epistle cap. 1. ver. 5. does teach us, saying, If any of you lack wisdom,
let him ask of God, which gives unto all men liberally, and reprocheth no
man, and it shall be given him. Secondly, the louingnes of God in teaching us
familiarlie or friendly, 2 The louingnes of God in friendly teaching us.
is to be noted, that we should not think such our prayers to be unacceptable,
or displeasing unto God. So Dan. 10. ver. 11. there is a man sent unto Daniel,
who does gently expound unto him the vision, and in friendly and courteous
speech says unto him, O D^^^iel, a man greatly beloved, understand the words,
that I speak unto thee, and stand in thy place: for unto thee am I now sent.
So again cap. 11. ver. 2.3. and so following. Last of all, the interpretation
of the vision is also to be marked. For he does not only show who^ whose horns
do signify, namely, the enemies of the Church, wheresoever the same be,
either at Jerusalem, or in France, or in Israel: but also how greatly they did
rage. For they win owed, that is, scattered into sundry parts of the world,
and tore in sunder the body of the Church gathered together before in a
certain place, cruelly renting it, so that as it is ver. 21, none durst lift
up his head.

Verse. 20. And the Lord showed me four Carpenters.
The second part of the vision, shows that God has those in a readiness, the
which shall beat down the enemies of his Church.
THe second part of the vision, which shows that the help of God is in a
readiness for his Church, that it should not think that (...) cannot be
defended. For God has remedies already prepared against so many, and so
strong enemies, the which are in this place signified by the name of
Carpenters. And this verse contains an other figurative vision. For the
Prophet sees four men showed unto him in the habit, form, and likelihood of
Carpenters, by God himself, that is to say, girded or furnished with beetles,
and being now prepared and ready to beat in those horns. In the show of
which vision there is a continuing still of the same Metaphor, What the figure
Metaphora is, see Amos cap. 4. ver. 12.
the which was in the former vision going next before. The ^ind of remedy
therefore now propounded or set forth, is answerable and agreeing unto that
same fear, the which was showed and described under the similitude of the
horns.

Verse. 21. Then said I, what come these to do? And he answered and said, These
are the horns which have scattered Judah, so that a man durst not lift up his
head: but these are come to fray them, and to cast out the horns of the
Gentiles, which lift up their horn over the land of Judah, to scatter it.
The interpretation of the vision of the Carpenters co^taining two things.
A Making plain of the vision which went next before concerning the Carpenters,
wherein appears both the desire of the Prophet in learning, and also the same
louingnes of God in teaching or instructing us. But this interpretation
contains two things. First, it shows that God has prepared and in a
readiness for his Church so many remedies, and out of the same places, 1. Look
how many enemies and in how many places the Church has, so many remedies,
and out of so many places, God has in readiness against them.
out of how many, and which places there arise enemies against it. Wherefore
the Prophet sees four Carpenters, although God by one Carpenter only be
able to throw down and break in pieces all those horns: how great soever
therefore the terror or dread of those enemies and horns be, and such as may
make the whole Church afraid, it is notwithstanding an easy thing unto God to
overthrow this their so great and so mighty strength also. Further, this
repetition, whereby their cruelty, and the trembling of the Church is again
described in this self same chapter, serves unto this end, least the godly
might suppose that God were too weak against such enemies, and least they
should measure his power and strength by their own fear, and so consequently
it serves, that the godly should cease to tremble at the power and might of
men, be they never so fierce, and terrifying or awhaping others. This is one
point that is to be noted in this interpretation.

2. After what manner these Carpenters shall help the Church.
Another point is, by what means, or after what manner those Carpenters shall
help the Church at the commandment of God. First of all they shall make
afraid the adversaries of the godly, then they shall cast them wholly down,
and overthrow their whole power and strength. So then God uses certain
degrees of punishments in punishing and destroying the enemies of his Church,
that is, his own enemies, both that they may learn to repent, if it be
possible, and also that the Church may the better wey and consider, and more
diligently meditate or think upon those judgments of God.

CAP. 2.
Verse. 1. I lift up mine eyes again, and looked, and behold, a man with a
measuring line in his hand.
The third Sermon under a wonderful manner or vision representing the building
of Jerusalem.
THe third Sermon, the which now shows and confirms especially and
peculiarly, that there shall be a building of the city Jerusalem it self.
And this also is showed unto the Prophet under a type or figure, and the same
wonderful, and full of comfort. Under a type or vision, that the Jews might
mark it the more diligently. Secondly, that the thing it self might in this
picture be the better laid open before their eyes. Lastly, that this so royal
and noble a promise might be set forth under a form altogether divine and to
be astonished at, that is, worthily, and agreeablie, as it becomes the
majesty of so high and weighty a matter. This vision full of comfort.
This vision also is full of comfort, both because of the multitude of Angels
ordained for the service of the Church, and also because of the singular care
of Christ for the Church, the which is here set forth under the person of the
Angel speaking unto the Prophet. In a word, this Sermon, which entreats of
the state and restoring of the Church, contains nothing but that which is
extraordinary, divine, and full of great majesty. The sum of this vision
and chapter is, The sum of this Sermon.
That the city Jerusalem it self (howsoever that then it were but rubbish, or
an heap of old stones) because it was a type or figure of the Church to come,
and the house or seat of the Church that the^ was, should, and that very
shortly, be restored, builded again, and set up, in the same glory, dignity,
safety, and favor of God, as it was before. Two parts of this narration.
This narration or discourse contains two parts. First, the vision it self
being figurative and dark. Secondly, the interpretation of the same, 1. A
vision.
the confirmation whereof is set down afterward. 2. The interpretation of the
same.
The vision was an Angel, under the shape of a man, that is, an excellent and
^eue^end man, offering himself unto the sight of the Prophet, to the end he
should not put him in fear, as Act. 16. ver. 9. there appears an Angel unto
Paul in the shape of a man of Macedonia, 1. The vision.
requesting his help there. This man holds in his hand a line, that is, an
instrument at that time most usual to measure the spaces of places, according
unto which custom David Psalm. 16. ver. 6. speaks, saying, The lines are
fallen unto me in pleasant places. And this line he holds in his hand to
show, wherefore he was sent. The Prophet lifted up his eyes, both because such
visions are sent from heaven, and so are spiritual: and also for that unless
we lift up our eyes unto them, they will quickly slip out of our minds, and
will be without profit.

Verse. 2. Then said I, whither go thou? And he said unto me, To measure
Jerusalem, that I may see what is the breadth thereof, and what is the length
thereof.
2. The interpretation of the vision.
THe interpretation of the vision, whereby is showed that Jerusalem, which at
that time was the house and seat of the Church of God, should be builded in
her just and old, both length and breadth: not in any less, or in some small
measure, but in that, wherein it was before. The which appears to have been
fulfilled Nehem. 3. for the Lord long since had promised by Daniel, that the
streets thereof should be builded, cap. 9. ver. 25. in these words: Know
therefore and understand, that from the going forth of the commandment to
bring again the people, and to build Jerusalem, unto Messiah the prince, shall
be seven weeks, and threescore and two weeks, and the street shall be built
again, and the wall, even in a troublous time. And the diligence of the
prophet in inquiring after the will of God is described in this verse, and
commended 1. Pet. 1. ver. 11. and is therefore of us to be imitated or followed.

Verse. 3. And behold, the Angel that talked with me, went forth: and another
Angel went forth to meet him.
A confirmation of the former interpretation.
A Confirmation of the former interpretation made by Christ himself, taking
another Angel also for witness, that in the mouth of two witnesses that decree
and promise of God might stand, and appear to be ratified, or established for
the former Angel, of whom was spoken before: and this latter Angel, who at
the commandment of Christ tells this same thing unto the Prophet, are two
very sufficient witnesses of his promise. Now it was a thing very needful,
that a matter so hard, and past all hope in the judgment of men, should be
confirmed by most sure reasons unto the Jews at that time, being yet in fear,
and feeling all things to be against them. God therefore takes two witnesses
of his promises. Angels appear before Christ to obey him, for the help and
defense of his Church.
And out of this place we do see that Angels do present themselves unto the
obedience of Christ, as who is true God, and do obey him, and that he uses
their service to help us, and to defend his Church, according as we read of
them Hebr. 1. ver. 14. where speaking of them, that Author says: Are they not
all ministering spirits, sent forth for their sakes which shall be heirs of
salvation?

Verse. 4. And said unto him, run, speak to this young man, and say,
Jerusalem shall be inhabited without walls, for the multitude of men and
cattle therein.
The promise made plain by parts. Two parts of this promise.
A Making plain of the promise by parts, with all speed, or out of hand unto
the prophet, and afterward Christ will have it by him to be declared unto the
church, that she should not faint with long waiting, Of the building.
the former of the building again: the latter of the conservation of the
church, 2. Of the preserving of the church.
in the verse following. So then God in this place promises that the city
shall be renewed, and that it shall be most full of all kind of living
creatures and things needful for the maintenance of cities, in so much that
from that same city a multitude both of men and cattle shall abound, and as
it were ouerflow into the villages and country. The which thing also may be
figuratively and mystical understood of the spreading abroad and enlarging of
the church of God, or of Christ by the preaching of the Gospel. And the
prophet calls himself a young man, or a child, both by the contempt of his
own person, and also in regard of the glorious form that the Angels did then
appear unto him in.

Verse. 5. For I, says the Lord, will be unto her a wall of fire round about,
and will be the glory in the midst of her.
The second part of the former promise, to wit of the preserving of the Church.
What the figure Sarcasmos is, see Nahum. cap. 3. ver. 14.
THe second part of the former promise of God, namely the preservation of the
city, albeit that at the first it were defended either with no fortresses or
bulwarks at al, or else with very weak ones. The which thing also is
understood by that Sarcasmos, or biting frump and taunt, wherewith the
Samaritans mocked and laughed to scorn the Jews building it again, as it is
Nehem 4. ver. 3. Where Tobiah the Ammonite comforting Sanballat being wroth
with the Jews for the building of the wall, answers and says in this
scoffing manner, Although they build, yet if a fox go up, he shall even break
down their stony wall. God therefore by the figure Noema promises that the
same city shall be most safe. Noema, or understanding, is a figure, where one
thing is said, and an other thing is meant or understood, as in this place, a
wall of fire, for a most strong wall, and such a one as none dare to assault.
For he shows that he will be a defense unto it, and a fiery wall, that is,
not only a most strong wall, but also such a one as all enemies shall
greatly be afraid of, and shall not dare to pass over, no nor once so much
as assay so to do, or to come nere unto it. So Isai 26. ver. 1. In the song of
the faithful they do praise God for that he is as a strong and well fensed
wall unto them, by whose aid and help they stand safe against all their
enemies. The words be these. In that day shall this song be sung in the land of
Judah, we have a strong city: salvation shall God set for walls, and strong
bulwarks. Again cap. 60. ver. 18. The prophet shows that they shall be
freed from all hurt and inconvenience because the Lord his salvation, help,
and deliverance, shall be as a strong and sure wall unto them, to enclose and
hedge them in round about, and on every side: Violence (faith he) shall be no
more heard of in thy land, neither desolation, nor destruction within thy
borders: but thou shall call salvation thy walls, and praise thy gates. And
here when as God promises that he will be as a fiery wall unto Jerusalem, and
that he will be the glory in the midst of her, he seems to allude and
have resemblance unto that aid, the which God some time gave unto the prophet
Elizaeus, as it is recorded 2. King. cap. 6. ver. 17. Where at his prayer, the
Lord opens the eyes of his fearful servant, and lets him see a multitude
of horses and fiery chariots round about the mountain, sufficient to encounter
the great army and host of the Syrians, who compassing about the city of
Samaria, had brought the servant of the man of God into such exceeding great
fear. Then Elisha prayed (says the text) and said, Lord, I beseech thee, open
his eyes that he may see. And the Lord opened the eyes of the servant, and he
looked, and behold, the mountain was full of horses, and chariots of fire
round about Elisha. Nay the Prophet teaches that the city shall not only be
sufficiently sensed without, but also that it shall be happy within, and
abounding in all things, even unto the wonder, fear and astonishment of the
enemies. Which thing in this place is added by the figure Auxesis or
increasing. What the figure Auxesis is, see Oseas cap. 7. ver. 4.
For the Lord himself promises that he will be the glory in the midst of
the city: that we should understand that nothing is more secure, or in more
saftie then the church, albeit that unto the unfaithful nothing seem more
weak, more dangerous, and forsaken then the refuge thereof.

Verse. 6. Ho, ho, come forth, and flee from the land of the North, says the
Lord: for I have scattered you into the four winds of the heaven, says the
Lord.
An exhortation unto the Jews, with a reason of the same.
AN exhortation with the rendering of a reason unto the Jews, and in their
person unto all men, to embrace so great felicity or happiness of the visible
church, and to gather themselves unto it, leaving all other things and
countries. And the circumstance of that time and men causes, that that this
exhortation was necessary and to be repeated again. The circumstance of time.
The circumstance of the time, because that then all things by reason of many
difficulties or incombrances did threaten unto the Jews destruction, rather
then give hope of building the city again. The circumstance of men.
The circumstance of men, because the Jews were slack and slow in laying hold
and conceiving of the promises of God. And therefore were they thrice called
out by God, to wit first by Zorobabel, Esd. 1. and 2. Secondly, by Esdras,
Esdr. 7. Thirdly, by Nehemias, Nehem. 2. And as often as some of these were
brought away out of Babylon by some of these Captains, it is said, That it
was the good hand of God, that is, that it was the great work of God in
persuading and turning or moving them unto this journey, so greatly doubtless
were they delited now with those outward seats and dwellings of Babylon, and
so fast did they cleave unto them. Wherefore God himself in displeasure does
here cry out Ho, ho. He therefore exhorts them to deliver and get
themselves out of those miserable and idolatrous countries, in which they were,
and that out of hand, and with all speed that may be. And therefore they are
commanded to flee and not to go. So Isai 48. ver. 20. is there the like
exhortation, Go ye out of Babel: flee ye from the Chaldeans, etc. And Reuelat.
18. ver. 4. And I heard another voice from heaven say, Go out of her my
people, that ye be not partakers in her sins, and that ye receive not of her
plagues.

The reason of the exhortation.
The reason of this exhortation is, because that all those north-countries (in
the which they were and seemed to have obtained some commodities) were so many
prisons, or most sorrowful banishments, into the which they were thrust by
God. Therefore so long as they remained in them, so long should they bear that
punishment and plague of God. Wherefore let them not interpret and take those
commodities and pleasures, if they had any there, for a testimony or witness of
the blessing of God, or prefer them before the toil and labor of this
journey, and finally before the holy land. Now the four winds, spoken of in
this place, The four winds, where they are to be understood to be placed.
are to be placed in that same North land, the which stretches very far. For
in that destruction of Jerusalem exploited by the Chaldeans, no Jews are red
to have comen over into Europa, or into our occident or western parts.

Verse. 7. Save thy self, O Zion, that dwell with the daughter of Babel.
A repetition of the exhortation with an amplification of the
THis is a repetition of the exhortation, with an amplification of the same, the
which is taken from a brief comparing together of the places, to wit of Sion
and Babylon, that is, of Paradise and hell. Moreover the miserable condition
also of those Jews which stayed in Babylon, is described most plainly, when
as they are willed to deliver themselves out of it, as out of a most miserable
thraldom and bondage. For the word (save or deliver) is opposed or matched
against the servitude or bondage, the which they then suffered.

Verse. 8. For thus says the Lord of hosts, after this glory has he sent me
unto the nations, which spoiled you: for he that touches you, touches the
apple of his eye.
A staying in the further laying open of the happiness of Jerusalem.
THis is a staying in the further laying open of the happiness of Jerusalem,
continued unto the end of the chapter, which consists or stands partly upon
promises, and partly upon exhortations. The promises concern both the happy
state of Jerusalem, that is, of the church of God, and also the most assured
destruction of the enemies thereof. The exhortations give encouragement unto
the godly to embrace by faith so notable promises of God. Therefore the things
which follow do appertain unto the same end, Why those things are so often
repeated.
unto the which the former part of this chapter did. But for this cause it was
needful for the godly, that these things should be often repeated, for that
the present state of things, and the condition of the Jews seemed to be
utterly against such promises, and to be a let unto them. And first of all the
Prophet here repeateth, that which ver. 5. of this chapter he had said of the
keeping and saftie of the church, but he does it in other words, and with an
other kind of benefit or aid. For there the Lord promises that he will be a
fiery wall unto those that are his: here, that those which are his, shall be as
dear unto him, as are his own eyes, which speech the Psalmist uses in his
prayer unto God Psalm. 17. ver. 8. signifying thereby that he craves God his
most sure and safe defense, when he says, keep me, as the apple of thine eye:
hide me under the shadow of thy wings.

Four things here to be noted.
And here are four things to be noted. First, who speaks here. And here, and
in the verses following the self same Angel speaks, Who speaks.
But because the place following contains exceeding great promises of God,
and such as at that time were almost incredible or not to be believed, toward
those that are his, therefore here also is again repeated the commandment of
God, yea and the same the true and most mighty God (which two things are
signified under these words (Jehovah, and the Lord of hosts) least any being
astonished at the present state of things, should despair, or be without all
hope of these benefits of the church, the which should be performed
afterward: and in the verse following the godly are called back unto the
event or issue it self and experience of things, as unto the most true witness
of this prophecy, howsoever there were no hope of the same. For the state of
this people in Babylon was as the lying of a dead man in a grave; or as the
condition of the same people in Egypt, to wit, past hope of recovery, and most
miserable in the judgment of man. The second thing to be noted is, 2. When
these things shall come to pass.
when these things shall come to pass. The answer is, After this glory. For
here the time is described, wherein the godly ought to mark the fulfilling of
this promise, not wholly I confess, but only to be begun, and afterward
by little and little to be finished. And after this glory it shall begin to be
done and come to pass, that is to say, after that God shall begin to exercise
that power and glory, when as he promised before ver. 5. that he would be
in the midst of his church. And because that the power and glory of God does
appear especially in the true and sincere or sound preaching of his word, and
chiefelie in the preaching of the gospel (which is the power of God, for Paul
says Romans 1. ver. 16. It is the power of God ^^^o salvation) these things also
ought chiefly to be referred unto that time, in the which the gospel of
Christ was preached, albeit notwithstanding this blessing of God began to have
some effect, and accomplishment before, as for example, when God destroyed the
kingdom of the Babylonians, Persians, the kings Antiochi, and Ptolomaei, the
enemies of his church. 3. To whom these threatenings appertain.
The third thing is, unto whom these threatenings do appertain. Answer, unto
those self same persons who were the enemies of the church, and which spoiled
and robbed the same Psalm. 79. and 83. The fourth, 4. What manner of promise this
is.
what manner of promise, the promise here made unto the church is. Answer, a
most large promise, nay such a one, that a greater affection or love, and care
of God cannot be showed. For God holds his church so dear, as his own eyes.

Verse. 9. For behold, I will lift up mine hand upon them: and they shall be a
spoil to those that served them, and ye shall know that the Lord of hosts
has sent me.
After what manner so many nations shall be destroyed.
A Making of the matter more plain, that they should understand by what means,
or after what manner so many nations, and so mighty, the which persecuted and
spoiled the Church of God, might be destroyed: namely, for that God himself
will execute and take vengeance upon them, and will lift up his hand upon them.
And God, whatsoever he will do, he can do. And therefore it is not without an
Emphasis, or vehemency and force, the which is said in this place (I) and
(mine hand). And by this word (lift up) God shows that they shall flee unto no
quarters and coasts of the world, unto the which he will not turn his hand
against them. For in all parts of the world the Church of God has been
afflicted by them. The punishment of the enemies of the Church amplified.
Finally, he amplifieth or increases their punishment by the lamentable
falling out of the matter, and by the circumstance of the persons. For they the
very self same proud enemies of God shall be a pray unto their own servants,
that is, unto those nation^ over whom they reigned tyrannically before, and
shall be spoiled by them: not by any other noble or famous nations, unto whom
it should not be so reproachful and hard to be in subjection, and to yield
unto. But at his hands, whom thou have used, and vexed like a slave, what
gentleness or courtesy can thou look for? And least that so great, and so
wonderful vengeance and threatening of God might seem to be vain, the
Prophet, or the Angel himself appealeth unto the issue and falling out of the
matter, that they may understand these things to be true, and that he may
confirm or strengthen the godly, and terrify or make afraid the ungodly.

Verse. 10. Rejoice, and be glad, O daughter Zion: for lo, I come, and will
dwell in the midst of thee, says the Lord.
THis is an exhortation, and also aco^firmation of the former promises, An
exhortation unto joy and gladness.
taken from a sign or token, namely, from the joy or gladness, and the same
great, public, and manifest, not secret, private, or obscure or unknown,
whereunto the Church is exhorted by God, because those promises shall most
certainly come to pass. He shows the manner also of fulfilling of them by
amplification and expressing of the cause, namely, for that God himself shall
come unto the Jews, and dwell in the midst of them. And it is no hard thing
for God to execute his decrees. For he is Jehovah, and as he is called in the
next verse, The Lord of hosts, that is, most mighty, and who has full and
absolute rule over all things generally and particularly. So then here are
three things to be noted. First, Three things to be noted.
who are exhorted? It is the Church of God which is exhorted, and she is
exhorted with most courteous and gentle words, to wit, 1. Who are exhorted.
by the name of the daughter Sion, the which is not without Emphasis or force
and vehemency: for this word has in it a moving of affection. 2. Whereunto
they are exhorted.
Secondly, whereunto they are exhorted, namely, unto joy and gladness of mind
both earnest and public, the which the Church ought to testify or show by
gesture, voice, and all other honest means. For so much signifies the word
Exulta, to leap and skip as it were for joy. Neither are the benefits of God,
especially so great benefits to be lightly tasted of, or received. The third
thing is, 3. Why they are exhorted unto so great joy.
why they are exhorted unto so great joy of mind, to wit, because the greatest
benefit of all benefits, the which by God may on earth be bestowed upon men,
yea even upon those which are his own, shall fall out unto the Jews, of his
mere or only good will, favor, and ^^rcie. For the Lord God Jehovah himself
shall come unto her, and ^well in the midst of her. The which fell out unto the
Church not only by effectual operation or working, and invisibly, but was
done in Christ visiblie, or in such sort as it might be seen, and bodily. For
Christ who is that true Jehovah (in whose name the Angel here speaks) is made
unto us God to be seen in the flesh, which he took upon him, and has dwelled
in us, as Paul speaks 1. Tim. 3 ver. 16. God is manifested in the flesh: and
his person, and glory has been seen, as John says cap. 1. ver. 14. The word
was made flesh, and dwelt among us (and we saw the glory thereof, as the
glory of the only begotten son of the Father) full of grace and truth.

Verse. 11. And many nations shall be joined to the Lord in that day, and shall
be my people: and I will dwell in the midst of thee, and thou shall know that
the Lord of hosts has sent me unto thee.
The second confirmation of the former promises.
THe second confirmation of the said promises of God from a double place. First,
from the even it self, or fulling out of the matter, the which the godly are
commanded to give heed unto. Secondly, from the repeating of this benefit
promised before, of the real and manifest dwelling which should be of the true
God, that is, of Christ being made man, in his Church, the which (because it is
the foundation or ground of all other promises of God, and a most singular
testimony or witness of the good will of God toward his Church) is here
repeated again, that we should think earnestly and always upon the same.
And of these two reasons does the Angel, and consequently the Prophet (unto
whom this Angel was sent) conclude, that these promises of God are true, and
that the Church should find and know indeed, (albeit that all things at that
time seemed for to bring despair, and to fight against those benefits of God)
that he spoke, and foretold all these things at the commandment of God.
Further, here is in this place described a wonderful event or falling out of
the matter, The conversion of the Gentiles.
and the which also is a part of the fulfilling of those graces of God, and a
cause of the gladness specified before, namely, the conversion or turning of
those nations which at that time were altogether Infidels, unto the true God,
and unto the fellowship of his Church, the which they persecuted so cruelly
before. For at that time, wherein God shall fulfill his promises, this
wonderful change and conversion of the world shall be made full indeed of
comfort and aid for the Church it self, Psalm. 87. Wherefore this word (Day)
in this place signifies a long and continual time. Moreover, the adjoining of
the nations is the work of God in the nations and peoples unbelieving before,
and shows that they of themselves, and of their own accord shall not come
unto God, but when as they shall be converted or turned by God himself.
Finally, all these things are the words of the Angel speaking unto the Prophet
at the commandment of God, and telling him what Christ (who is the same
Jehovah, whose dwelling is promised among us) shall do.

Verse. 12. And the Lord shall inherit Judah his portion in the holy land, and
shall choose Jerusalem again.
The conclusion of the former prophecy.
THe conclusion of the whole former prophecy, with the answering of an
objection that might be made, the which is set down in the next verse. The
conclusion has two parts. For it comprehends both the people, and also the
city it self, both which he teaches, that they shall not only be restored:
but also founded and grounded on the same favor of God, place, situation,
grace, and election, where with their fathers were loved before, and the first
^^tie inhabited, and that they shall be possessed also by the same title
(namely, of the peculiar people or inheritance of God) and that not only for a
day or twain: but for ever, and by right of inheritance, the which right has
a continuance and succession. Store of comforts ministered unto the Church.
So then here is a great heap and store of comforts set before the Church.
First, when as she hears that the persons, whereof she shall consist, shall be
so liked of God, and accepted after the same manner, that their Elders, namely,
the Patriarchs and Prophets, 1. Because the persons, of who^ she consists,
are so dear unto God.
and the rest of the people of the Jews were accepted of God. The reason is,
for that there is one and the same cause, why God holds both those, and
these, that is, all his elect dear and acceptable unto him, and this cause is
only Jesus Christ alone. Moreover, for that God has, and retains his Church
as his peculiar people, 2. Because she is his peculiar people.
or a portion peculiarly severed and chosen out by him, out of all the nations
of the world. Furthermore, because God will have the same testimonies of his
favor to be extant or remain among them, 3. Because God will have remaining
among them the same tokens of his favor, which were among their fathers.
the which were sometime remaining among their ancestors, to wit, the city it
self, and the manifest pledges of God his election, which were in it, as the
Temple, and the seat or government of the people. For this double preeminence
(both which Jerusalem had) was a token of the savor, and singular election or
choice of God made of this people, Psalm. 132. and 87. whereof he makes mention
in this place. But now all these outward and earthly tokens do cease under the
Gospel: and there are better then these placed in their stead, the which we
have for a pledge and most certain testimony or witness of ou^ election made
by God, namely, the pure preaching of the word of God, also the manifest
fulfilling of these figures, and the light of the Gospel, and other such like
truly and indeed spiritual pledges of the singular love of God toward us.

Verse. 13. Let all flesh be still before the Or the face of the Lord.
Lord: for he is raised up out of his holy place.
What these figure be, see Amos cap. 5. ver. 21. and Jonas cap. 2. ver. 9.
THis is an Hypophora, or answering of an objection that might be made, where
with as with an Epiphonema, or acclamation he seals up all the former
promises. Least therefore the Jews might think these things to be impossible,
when as they have so many enemies in their way, when as there are so many lets,
the which they meet withal: the Prophet shows that God will put silence upon
^ll these, that is, cause them to cease and be still, because he is Jehovah,
and almighty, before whose face or presence all things must tremble, An
excellent commendation of the majesty and power of God.
Psalm. 114. and all flesh be still. And here in this place is an excellent
praise and commendation of the majesty, and power of God over all, and every
singular thing, the which is set forth of the Prophet by the figure Epiphonema,
or acclamation, to stir and rouse up the minds of men withal. Further, it
carries an Emphasis or vehemency and force with it, that here also ( flesh,
and the face of the Lord) are opposed or matched one against another: for the
one has nothing but weakness, the other shows and carries before it nothing
but majesty. The cause of this silence of all things.
Last of all, that the minds of the Jews may be the more comforted and
strengthened, there is added or set down the cause of this silence imposed or
put upon all things, For that God is now raised up out of his Sanctuary or
holy place, in the which he seemed so long to have been asleep, how long he
suffered those that were his to be afflicted and oppressed of their enemies.
And therefore the godly often in the Psalms in such cases do call upon God,
as it were to awaken him being asleep, and as if he had forgotten them, as
Psalm. 44. ver. 23.24. Up, why sleep thou, O Lord? awake, be not far off
for ever. Wherefore hidest thou thy face, and forget test our misery, and our
affliction? Again, Psalm. 74. ver. 2. Think upon thy congregation, which thou
have possessed of old, and on the rod of thine inheritance, which thou have
redeemed, and on this mount Zion, wherein thou have dwelt. Now therefore he
will awake, and earnestly put to his hand, to deliver those that are his, and
will consider of the wrong that has been done unto them, and think upon the
revenging of it. So Psalm. 78. ver. 65.66. after many injuries suffered to be
done unto his people, and as it were winked at, it is said that at the length
The Lord awaked as one out of sleep, and as a strong man that after his wine
cries out, And smote his enemies in the hinder parts, and put them to a
perpetual shame. The word Sanctuary, or holy place, Sanctuary or holy
place.
I do refer unto the Temple, that the Jews might understand, that they had
the like testimonies or witnesses of the favor, presence, and defense of God,
as their fathers had of old. For they said that God did meet them out of his
Sanctuary, that is, his Temple, when as they signified that he was loving and
favorable unto them, Psalm. 20.1. King. 8.

CAP. 3.
Verse. 1. And he showed me Iehoshua the hie Priest, standing before the Angel
of the Lord, and Satan stood at his right hand to resist him.
Particular promises for the building of the Church.
AFter the general promises, the which do generally show that the Church shall
be renewed and restored, now God declares and opens unto the Jews other
particular promises, the which also do appertain unto the same end that the
general did. For they be not only a confirmation of the former, but also the
accomplishment, and fulfilling of the same, to wit, that the godly might
understand that God would fully restore his Church, and omit or let pass none
of those things, the which are necessary for the whole and full establishing
of so great a benefit. The restoring and renewing of the priesthood.
First therefore he promises the restoring of the Priesthood, or priests
office, both in the order, and also in the glory, and finally in the
succession and continuance of the same, and this he does in this whole chapter.
And after this method and order does God declare that his promise concerning
the Priesthood, that he shows both the cause of the same casting off of the
Priests ministry or office: and also does represent or lay open unto the
view, how great this casting off of it is. For by this means his grace and
power in restoring this Priesthood afterward is the more clearly known, and
appears, least that this so great a work of God might be thought to be but
a common benefit, and easy to be brought to pass and done. And all this is
showed by a vision unto the Prophet, and not opened unto him only in words,
that this promise may the more certainly be known to be of God, and that by
this means the auditors or hearers them selves together with the Prophet might
be the more moved, as namely, seeing and noting evidently in the same the
testimonies or witnesses of God his majesty. And first of all the cause is
rehearsed, The cause of the so long staying of the restoring of the priesthood.
the which was a let before unto so great a benefit of God, and the which did
so greatly depresse or keep down that holy office of the priestly order: and
that is Satan or the devil egging God on continually to take vengeance on
their sins. For it is he that accuses us before God, as it is witnessed
Reuelat. 12. ver. 10. in these words: Then I heard a loud voice, saying, Now
is salvation in heaven, and strength, and the kingdom of our God, and the
power of his Christ: for the accuser of our brethren is cast down, which
accused the^ before our God day and night. And he it is that will sift us, as
Christ tells Peter, and the rest of the Disciples Luke 22. ver. 30.31.
saying: And the Lord said, Simon, Simon, behold, Satan has desired you, to
winow you as wheat. But I have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not:
therefore when thou art conuerced, strengthen thy brethren. And he sets
himself both against the whole Church, and every particular member of the
same: for the defense whereof against Satan, and all other enemies by his
means procured against it, there is none (says the Angel talking with Daniel,
cap. 10. ver. 21.) which holds with me, but Michael your prince, that is,
Christ our Savior. How he sets himself against the particular members of
the Church, appears most clearly in the story of Job, cap. 1. And Paul
witnesses the same 1 Thessalonians. cap. 2. ver. 18. where he says, Therefore we
would have come unto you (I Paul, at the least once or twice) but Satan
hindered us. Wherefore by the signification of the word Satan, that is, our
adversary, his malicious and cruel endeavor against the Church is proved. For
he is called Satan, because he is an adversary, and enemy unto the Church.

The state of the priesthood described in Joshua.
Secondly, the state of the priestly order, in the person of Joshua, who then was
the hie priest, and head of that Leuiticall ministry, is here in part
described: and afterward more fully in the third verse. And Joshua is said to
have stood in the sight of the Angel, to wit, of that Angel, who is both
Jehovah, and unto whom the rest ministered or served (and this indeed is Christ,
that same great messenger of the counsel of God) that hereby the Prophet might
give us to understand, that the condition and case of that priestly order,
although it were then base, was known unto God, and not without the care of
God.

Verse. 2. And the Lord said unto Satan, The Lord reprove thee, O Satan: even
the Lord which has chosen Jerusalem, reprove thee. Is not this a brand taken
out of the fire?
The second part of this vision, being threefold.
THe second part of this vision, wherein is showed unto the Prophet, that he
afterward might declare it unto the Church, the foundation or ground of all the
promises of God which were to come toward the Pastors and Priests. 1. The will
of God.
First, the will and election of God. Secondly, 2. Christ his intercession.
Christ his intercession or request for the same priesthood. Thirdly, the
conservation and keeping of the same now opened and begun. 3. The conservation
of the priesthood already begun.
So then God will therefore restore that ministry or office, because that he
has now chosen Jerusalem, that is to say, his church of his mere or only
grace, and has ordained and keeps such things as are necessary for the
establishing, maintaining, and feeding of the same, as is especially the
ministry of the Church, the which in times past consisted in the order of the
Priests and Levites, and now in the Pastors and ministry of the church under
the Gospel. Secondly Christ, that is, the Lord (who before also was called the
Angel and our mediator unto Jehovah his father) prays for the same order or
priesthood daily, and with great affection unto his father, and taking upon
him the defense thereof. Christ therefore prays, that Satan, and all enemies
of this holy ministry may be reproved and repressed in deed, that is, may be
brideled, by the mighty hand of God that they may not be able to effect or
bring to pass that which they enterprise and go about. And the repeating of
his prayer against Satan (The Lord reprove thee, O Satan, the Lord reprove
thee) is a wit^es of the very great affection or love of Christ toward such his
ministers There is a like speech in the Epistle of Jude ver. 9. of Michaell
striving against the devil, and disputing about the body of Moses, whom (Jude
says) durst not blame ^im with cursed speaking, but said, the Lord rebuke
thee. Finally, the manifest will of God concerning the preserving of them is
also the foundation or ground of the promises following. For the Lord had taken
Joshua and others, as it were fire brands all ready on fire and burning, out of
the midst of the flames. He will therefore preserve them, how vile and base
soever their estate seem to be, and never to be lifted up again, because he
has already begun to do it. And so David by the former experience of God his
goodness toward him, assures himself of the like help in the time following,
when he says Psalm. 138. ver. 8. The Lord will perform his work toward me:
O Lord, thy mercy endures for ever: forsake not the works of thine hands.

Verse. 3. Now Iehoshua was clothed with filthy garments, and stood before the
Angel.
The laying open of the base estate of the priesthood at that time.
THe laying open of that base condition and estate, wherein the priests, that
is, the ministry of the church at that time were, because of the contemptible
or despised condition of that whole people as yet, so far as in the judgment
of man the affairs of the Jews might then be esteemed of. Wherefore the same
by an Hypotyposis or lively description is now represented or laid open to the
view, What the figure Hypotyposis is, see Amos cap. 8. ver. 12.
yea and that by God himself, to the end the Jews and the priests
themselves might understand that this their so base estate was known unto him,
when as notwithstanding he promises that the dignity of the priesthood shall
be so great: for it is an allegorical or figurative Hypotyposis. For under the
name and representation or show of filthy clothes, the contempt, and base
condition of the priesthood is signified, as contrariwise by the sight and
beholding of changed and glorious clothing in the fourth verse is noted the
happy and glorious estate of that order. For as it is Galat. 4. Thus did the
Lord teach that people touching spiritual things, being yet under figures and
shadows and weak, that he might signify and describe spiritual and heavenly
things under these earthly figures and signs Hebr. 9. The old apparel of the
priesthood, so glorious and golden, was a sign both of all those spiritual
riches and treasures, which should be in the man Christ, in whom all treasures
of wisdom and knowledge are hid, Coloss. 2. ver. 3. and also of that holiness,
which ought to be in the priests themselves, who in like manner were figures of
Christ. And whereas Iehoshua the high Priest is said to have stood so baselie
apparrelled before the Angel himself, who also before was called Jehovah,
this has an Emphasis or vehemency and force, and moving of affection, both
for the confirmation of the certainty of this whole prophecy, and also for
the proof and showing of the care of God, and knowledge of the state of his
Church, and of those that serve him. It is also a preparation unto the
narration ensuing in the verse following.

Verse. 4. And he answered, and spoke unto those that stood before him, The
first promise of the restoring of the priesthood. Three things to be noted in
this verse.
saying, Take away the filthy garments from him. And unto him he said,
behold, I have caused thine iniquity to depart from thee, and I will cloth
thee with charge of raiment.
THe first promise of God, to wit of the restoring unto those Jews and times,
the office of the Priests and Levites: and also of ^he ministry of the
church. 1. The person speaking.
Wherein there are three things to be noted. First, the person that speaks,
to wit the same Angel, before whom stood Iehoshua. And the same is no mean or
common Angel, but the head and prince of the Angels. And therefore before him
stood other Angels in a readiness to receive his commandment, and to execute
the same, as appears in the verse following. And he no doubt is Christ our
Lord, and the everlasting son of God, who is called both an Angel, in
respect that he is our mediator unto God the father, opening unto us his will
at the full: and also is called Jehovah, in respect that he is equal unto his
father. And this Angel answers, that is, of his own accord and willingly
promises this, which follows. For so do I expound the word (answers) in
this place. Secondly is to be noted, 2 What is promised.
what is promised, he promises the restoring of the Leuiticall priesthood,
that is, the ministry of the Church, and that figuratively by the changing of
filthy clothing into gay and gorgeous clothing. For such apparel shining
with gold and precious stones wore and had the high priest, whilst the order
of the priests and Levites enjoyed his beauty and glory. 3. For what cause it
is promised.
The third thing to be noted is, for what cause the Angel does now promise
that this shall come to pass, namely because that this Angel of his great and
only mercy and favor does now blot out and do away the iniquities of this
order committed against him. So then the forgi^enes of sins, and our
reconciliation or being made friends with God, which is done only by our
Lord Jesus Christ alone, is the principal and foreleading cause of all the
benefits of God toward us, as we are taught in this place.

Verse. 5. And I said, Let them set a fair diadem upon his head. So they set a
fair diadem upon his head, and clothed him with garments, and the Angel of
the Lord stood by.
The second promise of God of the restoring unto the ministry of the church
her former dignity.
THe second promise of God, to wit of the glory, and the same dignity to be
given again unto this ministry of the church once restored, the which it had
before, and in times past. The which in this place is set down under shadows
and figuratively, and by a Synecdoche. Under shadows or figuratiuelie, when as
by the name of a miter or diadem the priestlie dignity is signified. And by
the figure Synecdoche, when as the prophet by the part, What the figure
Synecdoche is, see Amos cap. 5. ver. 21.
that is, by the name of the Priests Miter or diadem does comprehend his
whole apparel and all the dignity of the priesthood, that is, of the
ministry of the church. For the Miter or this diadem was but one part only
of the Priests apparel, yet the chiefest and highest part, because it had
written upon it Holiness of holiness of Jehovah, and was worn upon the head, as
is showed in this place. And it has an Emphasis, or vehemency and force,
whereas it is commanded that a fair one be set upon his head, to wit, so
brave, large, and perfect one, as was in time past, least any thing of the
former dignity thereof might seem to be diminished. Finally, for the
confirming of the event or falling out and fulfilling of this promise, the
Angels which stood by as ministers unto Christ, are said now already to have
set this Miter or diadem upon the head of Iehoshua, yea and that Christ being
present, and standing by that is, seeing and marking, that all things should
be done, as he had appointed.

Verse. 6. And the Angel of the Lord testified unto Iehoshua, saying,
The third promise of the continuance of the priesthood, containing three
things.
THe third promise of God of the enduring and continuing of the priesthood, or
ministry of the church, under a certain condition, the which is contained in
the verse following. And in this place there is a preparation unto the
fulfilling of the promise following. Now this promise contains three things,
namely first, him which does utter and deliver the promise following. And he
also is the Angel, 1. Who utters this promise.
which by his name is called The Angel of Jehovah, that is, the same Christ,
so far forth as he is unto us the interpreter of the counsels of his Father,
and our mediator unto him. So much therefore the more certain is this promise,
by how much it is uttered by the son of God himself, Christ, yea and by
Jehovah, and in the name of the Lord of hosts, that is, of his father
almighty, 2. Whom the Angel speaks unto.
as it appears hereafter. The second thing here rehearsed is, whom this
Angel speaks unto. And he speaks unto Iehoshuah, not in respect that Joshua
was some private person, but in respect that he was at that time by God
ordained the head of the whole order of Priests among the Jews. Therefore
this one Iehoshuah did represent the whole order of priests, and ministry of
the Church: so that the promises which are made unto him, must be understood
not to appertain unto him alone, but also unto the whole Leuiticall
ministry. 3. After what manner he speaks unto him.
The third thing is, after what manner and form the Angel speaks, namely by
restifying, that is to say, by a solemn oath, or by making a protestation, and
not in a plain, simple, and ordinary manner of speaking, that this promise of
God may be understood to be most certain, how hard soever it were judged for
to be performed at that time, in regard of the state and judgment of that
people.

Verse. 7. Thus says the Lord of hosts, if thou will walk in my ways, and
keep my watch, thou shall also judge mine house, and shall also keep my
courts, and I will give thee place among these that stand by.
The promise with a condition joined thereunto.
THis is the promise with the condition joined with it. And the promise in a
word is, that it shall come to pass, that the same order of priesthood shall
be continued among the Jews, yea and that in such sort as it was first
ordained among them by God. The which thing is understood by a threefold kind
of speaking, the which is in this place, where so many parts of the priestlie
or Leuiticall ministry are expressed, as there were before. And of these the
first is, 1. Matters apperteining to the service of God, and unto the temple
and sacrifices, perteined to the priests.
that the judgment of the house of God shall be in their power, as it has
been in times past. For the judgment of those things, which appertained unto
the service and worship of God, and unto the ordering of the Temple and
sacrifices was in the power of the Priests and Levites Deuteronomy. 17. Secondly, the
Angel promises, that the keeping of the Courts of God shall belong unto
them. The which also was a most excellent part of the office of the Levites.
For they only might keep the Temple of God: 2. The keeping of the Courts of
God belonged unto the priests and Levites.
and more freely go into the same, then the rest of the people, as it was
ordained by the Law of God. Neither has this keeping any base thing in it:
nay it was a testimony, or witness, as if those priests did stand as Angels,
always in the presence of God. As David also does reckon the meanest of their
offices to be more honorable then the greatest dignity that otherwise in this
world may be obtained among men, when as he says Psalm. 84. ver. 10. A day in
thy courts (speaking of the house of God) is better then a thousand other
where. I had rather be a door keeper in the house of my God, then to dwell in
the tabernacles of wickedness. 3. He shall be over seer of the rest of the
Priests and Levites.
The third phrase, or kind of speaking and part is, Thou shall have authority
and privilege to go in among these, to wit priests, and thy fellows, which
stand by thee (for so I do expound it by the verse following, and do not
refer it unto the Angels) to wit, thou shall be as ouerseer of them, as
namely one which art ruler over them. God therefore understands and promises
that the peculiar preeminence shall be restored unto the high Priest above the
rest of the order of the Levites, and comes down from the general ordeining
of that whole order, unto this particular dignity of the high priesthood. And
thus much does this promise contain.

The condition twofold.
The condition joined to this promise is twofold. First, general, that he walk
in the ways and commandments of God, that is to say, 1. General.
that all the priests live holilie, as becomes godly men, and the sons of
God, and of the light. The second condition is particular, 2. Particular.
that every one, were they Levites, or were they Priests, should behave
themselves vprightlie, and faithfully in that his charge, standing, and watch,
over the which he was peculiarly set by God above the rest. Psalm. 134.

Verse 8. Hear now, O Iehoshua the high priest, thou and thy fellows that sit
before thee: for they are monstrous persons: but behold, I will bring forth the
Branch my servant.
A confirmation of all the former promises.
A Confirmation of all the former promises, which went before in this whole
chapter. And it is taken from the cause, and the same necessarily bringing
forth these promises, as his effects. This cause is Christ that was long
since promised unto the Jews, looked for of them, whose type or figure was
Iehoshua, and also the whole order of the Priests, and finally for the love
and sake of which Christ or Messiah, GOD does most entirely love his Church,
and cares for those things which appertain unto it. For she is the people or
inheritance of Christ, and the fulness of his mystical body. For as it is
Ephesians. 1. ver. 22, 23. GOD has made all things subject under his feet, and
has appointed him over all things to be the head to the Church, which is his
body, even the fulness of him that fills all in all things. And this body
cannot GOD forsake. Wherefore GOD confirms that all the former things shall
come to pass or be, because that afterward he gives, and shall give unto
his Church the cause of all these good things to wit, the very person of
Christ, whom he will send. We are therefore called back unto Christ, and it
behooves us to look unto him, as often as we do doubt of the promises of
God.

Two parts of this this verse.
But this verse has two points. The first, a preface. The second, a promise.
The preface teaches that here is entreated of a matter of very great weight,
1. A preface.
whereunto consequently we must give diligent heed. And therefore it is said
(Hear thou). 2. A promise.
And not only Iehoshua is commanded to hear, but also his fellows and
companions, that this promise and comfort may be understood to belong,
Diversity of degrees in the priesthood.
Wherein also there is a difference made in the order of the Church. For some
are showed to be in a greater place and degree, and some in a less, when as
some are said to stand before Iehoshua as before their Ruler and Captain, set
over them by God: and Iehoshua is called the great or hie priest, that this
distinction or difference may be understood to be true. For it was a part of
the ceremonial law, that the Church of God, which did wholly consist of the
Jewish people, had then also one visible head, the which was a type or figure
of Christ. The which notwithstanding the Church of God cannot now have, because
that according unto the prophesies of the Prophets it is scattered, and spread
abroad throughout the world. Why the Angel speaks unto the whole order of
priests, and comfort them.
Now why the Angel speaks also unto the whole order of priests, and
comfort them, the reason is, because that the Leuite Priests were despised
and mocked of the other Jews, nay, they were hated of them, as namely being
such, who did too much lay open, were too earnest upon, and accused the sins
of the people before God. Whereupon they are said to have been monstrous
persons, as David also complains of himself Psalm. 71. ver. 7. I am become as
it were a monster unto ^^ny: but thou art my sure trust. But the Lord on the
contrary part does comfort them.

2. The promise containing two things.
Now the promise is, that Christ or the cause of all the gifts of God toward his
Church, shall come, to be made manifest, and to be given unto the Church her
self. Therefore these things are done in the favor of Christ, to wit, that
his people, inheritance, and seat decreed, and ordained by God, might be
reserved unto him. And this promise contains two things. First, 1 The
exhibition or showing of Christ in the flesh.
the manifest giving of the person of Christ, which shall be done unto the
Church, understood by these words, Behold, I will bring forth, or cause to
come: the which is opposed or set against those promises, the which taught that
he was yet to be looked for. And therefore John says cap. 1. ver. 17. The law
was given by Moses, but grace and truth came by Jesus Christ. And the word of
exhortation (Behold) shows that the thing shall be, and that speedily, and
certainly, that they might by assured faith look as it were into the thing
present. 2 A description of Christ.
Secondly, this same promise contains a description of Christ, that we
should consider how great a benefit of God he is: and should not think this
to be as a simple gift, or some common and mean thing. And Christ is called
the servant of God, to wit, in respect that he was made man. And yet not a
servant after the manner of the rest of the faithful, the which in many things
obey not the Lord their God, Malach. 1. but he is so called by a certain
excellency. For he was in every respect to fulfill all the will of God his
father, and indeed in that he was man, he fulfilled the same Isai. 61.
Moreover, he is called a branch, as hereafter cap. 6. ver. 12. Behold the man,
whose name is the branch, and he shall grow up out of his place, and he shall
build the temple of the Lord. So Isai 11. ver. 1. But there shall come a rod
forth of the stock of Ishai, and a graffe shall grow out of his roots.
Likewise God says in Jeremy cap. 23. ver. 5. Behold, the days come, says
the Lord, that I will raise unto David a righteous branch, and a King shall
reign, and prosper, and shall execute judgment and justice in the earth. And
he is termed a branch, not so much for that his condition and state is base,
Why Christ is called a branch
and here described unto us mean and simple in the judgment of men, as for
that he should alone be understood of us to be the fountain, root, and
spring of the whole Church. And therefore that he alone is he, by whose power,
and Spirit, and word we are plants and trees in the Church of God: because he
is he, of whom alone, as of a spiritual branch we all are borne again, and
made heavenly plants. For as James witnesses cap. 1. ve. 18. Of his own will
begat he us with the word of truth, that we should be as the first fruits of
his creatures. And Peter Epist. 1. cap. 1. ver. 23. teaches us likewise, that
we are borne a new, not of mortal seed, but of immortal, by the word of God,
who lives and endures for ever. Which thing doubtless agrees unto Christ
alone, into whom we must be graffed, that we may be borne spirituallie, and be
heavenly branches, John 15.

Verse. 9. For lo, the stone that I have laid before Iehoshua: upon one stone
shall be seven eyes: Behold, I will cut out the grauing thereof, says the Lord
of hosts, and I will take away the iniquity of this land in one day.
THis is the rendering of a reason, whereby the Angel or the Prophet shows,
why, and how, when as Christ, or this branch is promised unto us, we ought to
hope for all those gifts from God, A reason, why and how we are to hope for all
the former gifts from God.
namely, because it is he alone, whom the father has laid the foundation,
ornament or beautifying, and appeasing of his Church. Therefore he confirms
the former consequence or reason by the Epithets or proper attributes or titles
of Christ, and of this branch, that we should without doubting look for all
things from God by and for Christ. And, that Christ is the foundation of the
Church, the word stone does declare, whereby Christ is here termed, not by
contempt, or in despite, but by his name, as Psalm. 118. ver. 22. The stone
which the builders refused, is the head of the corner. And I sai 28. ver. 16.
Behold, I will lay in Zion a stone, a tried stone, a precious corner stone, a
sure foundation. He that believes shall not make haste. And Peter Epist. 1.
cap. 2. ver. 7. having cited this former text of Isai infers, saying, Unto
you therefore, which believe, it is aprecious stone: but unto them which be
disobedient, the stone which the builders disallowed, the same is made the head
of the corner. So then this stone is said to be laid before Iehoshua, and that
same whole order of Levites, and finally before the universal Church, that all
should lie upon him, and look unto him, as their only foundation.

The use of this stone.
And the use of this stone is added, when as seven eyes are attributed or given
unto him, with all which he looks unto the calamities or miseries and matters
of his Church, least we might suppose him to be a blind and idle stone. The
same Christ is the ornament or beauty of his Church: What the figure Metaphora
is, see Amos cap 4. ver. 12.
the which is here Metaphorically described or set forth under the cutting or
grauing of a Ring, or Stone, the which is wont to be done in precious stones,
that albeit they be of themselves precious already, yet by this trimming they
may become more precious, beautiful, and to be had in the greater request. So
whilst Christ is present with his Church, there can be wanting no commendation
and setting of us forth unto God. Finally, the same Christ is the appeasing
of the Church unto God. For his obedience causes, that all the iniquity of
the Church is done away, yea, and that there is taken away in one day from her,
whatsoever iniquities she has gathered together in many years. Hereby
appears how great the benefit of Christ is, who in one moment blotteth out
all the spots and stains the which we have taken with long rusting,
obstinacy, and stubbornnes.

Verse. 10. In that day, says the Lord of hosts, shall ye call every man his
neighbor under the vine, and under the figgetre^
The conclusion promising unto the Church spiritual peace under a Metaphor of
earthly things.
THe conclusion, wherein peace is promised unto the Church, as the sealing up,
and fruit of all the former promises. And this peace albeit it be indeed
spiritual, and belonging unto our minds: yet is it in this place described or
set forth under a Metaphor of earthly things, to wit, under the description of
that time, wherein every man inioyeth his own goods quietly, and safely, and
without danger, being troubled by no man: and dares also, and may boldly
inuit or request others unto the inioying and partaking of the said goods. So
is the kingdom of Solomon commended 1. King. cap. 4. ver. 24. not only for
that he had a very wide and large dominion, even from the other side of the
river, from Tiphsa unto Azzah: but also for that he had plenty of peace round
about him on every side. And for that Judah, and Israel dwelt (under him)
without fear, every man under his vine, and under his fig tree, from Dan,
even unto Beer-sheba. So also Micah prophesying of the great peace of the
Church under the Gospel, cap. 4. ver. 4. says, That every man shall sit
under his vine, and under his fig tree, and none shall make them afraid: for
the mouth of the Lord of hosts has spoken it.

CAP. 4.
Verse. 1. And the Angel that talked with me, came again and waked me, as a
man that is raised out of his sleep.
This chapter is a confirmation of all the promises of God toward his Church at
all times.
THis chapter is warlike. For it answers and beats down together and at
once all the objections and doubts of all the godly, the which might then come
into their minds against the promises of God so past all hope, and impossible
in respect of men, and not only hard to be performed. Wherefore this is a
confirmation of the universal promises of God toward his Church at all times,
yea even in this our time, and for the time to come. The sum of the answer of
God unto all the doubts of men concerning his promises, is this, That the
Church of God is neither governed, nor vpholden and maintained by the ordinary
means or counsels of men, but by the extraordinary power, might, and spirit
of God. And therefore in desperate matters and cases, or such as are past hope,
that we must notwithstanding hope well, and in things past remedy in our
judgment, wayt still for the best touching the event or falling out and
fulfilling of the promises of God. The wonderful preservation of God his church
set forth here by a vision.
But this so wonderful counsel and purpose of God, not able to be uttered nor
conceived of the flesh, in the defending and saving of those that are his, is
notwithstanding here in this place, to the end that it may the better be
understood, set forth or showed by God himself, after a most easy manner by a
vision. And this vision is taken from things most known among the Jews in that
age, to wit, from that Candlestick, the which was lighted with candles in the
Temple of God, and was an ordinary instrument of the outward service of God,
and a part of the old ceremonies and such as were familiar unto the Jews, or
whereunto they were used, and with the which they were very well acquainted.
For albeit that this Candlestick which is here by vision showed unto the
Prophet, does in this point seem to differ from the Candlestick of the
Temple, such as is described Exodus 25. because that this had one only bowl,
and that of the Temple seven bowls: yet this is but a small difference. But
herein it was behouefull that the form of this should be diverse from that
Candlestick of the law, that it might the more easily be showed unto us,
that whatsoever falls out, is done or ordered in the Church, the same is done
by the one Spirit of God, and not by many: and needs not diverse authors, but
one God only. Why God sets forth this vision unto his Church.
And this first verse shows, why God by his Prophet propounds or sets
forth this vision unto his church, namely to confirm, or strengthen and
comfort the same, the which was rather astonished with the wondering at the
former promises, then did believe them: and was rather made astonished and
brought as it were into a trance, the^ comforted. Therefore this sleep, from
which the Prophet says he was raised, is the trance, and wondering of
amazednes, or an astonished mind, not the sleep of sleeping or slumbring, and
sleep of the body. So the same fell out unto Daniel cap. 8. ver. 17.18. where
he confesses that he was afraid at the vision, and fell upon his face, and
being asleep fell upon his face unto the ground. And ver. 27. he says that he
was not only astonished at the vision, but also was stricken and sick certain
days. And cap. 10. ver. 8.9.10. he affirms that at the vision, which was
there showed unto him alone, the men that were with him ran away for great
fear, and hid themselves, and that he for his part was so weakened, and
brought so low, that there remained no strength in him, for that his strength
was turned into corruption, and that he retained no power, yea that he was
thereby made so feeble, that he was not able to stand, until he was set up
upon his knees, and upon the palms of his hands, by the man that talked with
him, etc. And that which the Prophet in this place says to have fallen out
unto himself, we are to think the like also of other godly men, albeit they
fear God, and trust in him never so much, namely that they were rather
brought into a wonderment, then confirmed or strengthened: because that all
things, the which they then saw round about them, took from them all hope of
the fulfilling of these promises in time to come. God therefore having
compassion on his church (the state whereof is described or set forth in the
Prophet) does remit, that is, sends again the second time his Angel unto
the Prophet, This Angel here speaking unto the Prophet, is not Christ, as
before.
in whom he speaks unto his Church, and confirms or strengthens the
same. This Angel therefore is another then Christ, to wit, he which was sent
at the first, to instruct and teach the Prophet in the former chapters.

Verse. 2. And said unto me, what see thou? And I said I have looked, and
behold, a candlestick all of gold with a bowl upon the top of it, and his
seven lamps therein, and seven pipes to the lamps, which were upon the top
thereof.
The vision showed unto Prophet.
A Plain laying forth of the matter. For the Prophet shows what manner of
vision was showed unto him from God, the which that he should give the more
diligent heed unto, he in warned by the Angel, that he should not slenderly
or lightly over pass so great a confirmation of his faith set forth unto him
by God, or carelessie and lightly only look upon it, such as our both
negligence and dulnes is wont for to be. The things which appertain unto the
description of the candlestick, must be fet from the 25. chapter of Exodus.

Verse. 3. And two olive trees over it, one upon the right side of the bowl,
and the other upon the left side thereof.
The second part of the vision.
THe second part of the typical or figurative vision, namely, there are showed
unto him two Olive trees also, from which there was continual oil powered into
that burning candlestick^ that it should never dry up, or be put out. And yet
are not these olive in this place said to be pressed by any man, the which
notwithstanding among us must needs after an ordinary manner be done, that the
oil may flow or run from them. Neither is this oil said to fail, nor with
toil and labor to be carried from one part or place into another, that there
may be always oil for the candlestick, but there stand these olive trees, to
wit growing unto that candle and candlestick on both sides, and they are
continual, and of themselves without the service and help of any men or oil,
milles do drop and power in oil into the burning candle or candlestick.
Confer this place with that of the Revelation cap. 11. ver. 4. where he says:
These are two olive trees, and two candlestickes, standing before the God of
the earth.

Verse. 4. So I answered, and spoke unto the Angel that talked with me, saying,
what are these my Lord?
A preparation unto the interpretation of the former vision.
A Preparation unto the interpretation of the former vision by the way of a
dialogue or questioning, and answering, that the Prophet both then should give
the more heed unto it, and that ^e also now might be stirred up when as we
read these things. And therefore the prophet was warned by the Angel before,
that ^e should diligently behold the vision showed him by God. This when as he
had done, he is now astonished at the brightness or gloriousnes of these
things, because they were of gold: and with the newnes or strangenes, because
they differed from those which he knew: and with the multitude, he saw many
instruments. He therefore asks, and that of his own accord, what all these
things did mean? Gods benefits are to be accepted, when he offers them unto
us.
Doubtless we are to use the benefits of God, as when as he offers himself
to teach us, and help us (as in this place by the Angel) let us accept of that
hand and help of God, neither fearefullie, nor slowly, nor slightly: nay let
us most largely and plentifully use the whole benefit of God. The Angel
willed the Prophet, to behold, and mark what things were showed unto him: the
Prophet desires the interpretation of them also, not of a certain curiosity
of mind, but that the counsel of God, and this vision might turn unto the
comfort both of himself, and also of the Church. So Daniel cap. 8. ver. 15.
witnesses that ^e saw the vision, and sought also for the meaning. So cap. 9.
ver. 22. The Angel Gabriel speaks unto him, and tells him, that he is
^ome to show him the meaning of the vision, etc. The prophet calls the Angel
(Lord) for honor sake, and not to worship him according unto the manner of the
country. For the Jews called the more honorable persons (Raboni) and (Adoni)
as John 20. ver. 16. Jesus says unto her, Marie. She turned her self, and
said unto him, Rabboni, which is to say, Master. So Genesis 23. ver. 6. The
Hittites say unto Abraham, desiring to buy of them a place to bury his wife
Sarah in: Hear us my Lord: Thou art a prince of God among us: in the chief of
our sepulchers bury thy dead, etc.

Verse. 5. Then the Angel that talked with me, answered and said unto me,
know thou not what these be! And I said, No, my Lord.
The Angel wondreth at the ignorance of the prophet.
AN admiration, or wondering. For the Angel maruaileth that the Prophet being a
Jew and acquainted with the ceremonies of the Temple, is ignorant
notwithstanding what all these things (which in a manner were seen the same in
the Temple, and were ordinary) signified. What the godly believed touching
the ceremonies of the law.
For those that were godly in deed (as the prophet was) did not believe that
those ceremonies and rites of the law, and monuments and the whole furniture of
the Temple did of themselves please God, or that they were signs of nothing
that was more holy, as the Apostle teaches Hebr. 9. But they did acknowledge
all those things as figures, the verity or truth and signification whereof
was more reverend and holy, and to be sought else where, namely in Christ. Yet
does the prophet notwithstanding freely confess his ignorance, not in respect
of that candlestick, the which was ordinary in the Temple: but in respect of
that only which was extraordinarily showed him by God.

Verse. 6. Then he answered, and spoke unto me, saying, This is the word of the
Lord unto Zerubbabel, saying, Neither by an army, nor strength, but by my
spirit, says the Lord of hosts.
A brief interpretation of the drift of the former vision.
A Summarie or brief interpretation of the scope or drift of this vision, to
wit, that the church of God is vpholden, defended, governed by the
extraordinary counsels, and power of God, that when as we demand of the
fulfilling of the promises of God toward his church, we should not look unto
the means of man: but should consider the almighty power of God, surpassing
all the strength of men, the which will fulfill these his promises Psalm. 138.
But there are three things to be noted in this place. Three things to be noted.
First, that this speech is properly directed unto Zorobabel, that is the
prince of the people at that time, because it is requisite and necessary, that
he and other princes of the people, 1. The speech directed unto Zorobabel.
should be comforted in such dangers and troubles especially. For the rest of
the people for the most part, depends upon the disposition of their princes,
that is, upon their constancy or fearefulnes. 2. With what words God his
extraordinary manner of helping his church is described.
The second thing to be noted is, with what words this same extraordinary
manner of God in defending and helping of his church is described, to wit, By
the name and power of the only spirit of God. For the might and power of God
is called his spirit in the Scripture. So is it said 2. These. 2. ver. 8. of
Antichrist, That the Lord shall consume him with the spirit of his mouth. And
of Christ Isai. 11. ver. 4. That he shall smite the earth with the rod of his
mouth, and with the breath of his lips shall he slay the wicked. And of the
Egyptians cap. 31. ver. 3. That they are men, and not God, and their horses
flesh, and not spirit. Against this spirit is opposed or set whatsoever the
world or men do hold and judge strong, valiant, great in number, glorious.
Therefore under the name of (an army) the Prophet does comprehend a multitude,
wherein men are wont to trust: and under the word (strength) whatsoever is
mighty, valiant, and judged of force and powerful in the opinion of men. Then
all which this one spirit of God is far more mighty, that is to say, the
only power of God, even lacking or without all outward means, is stronger
then all the strength of men. 3. The warranting of this promise with the twice
affirming it to be the word of the Lord.
Thirdly, this double warranting is to be noted, wherewith all this so
excellent and grounded promise is confirmed, first, in the beginning of this
verse, when as this word is called The word of Jehovah. Secondly, in the end
of the same verse, when as it is set down again, that this self same is the
saying, and the most firm or assu^ed decree of the almighty God himself, to
wit, that the Church of God should not doubt, no never so little, of the help
of God, nor yet those which govern or rule the same. And therefore that they
should have and hold their eyes both of mind and body fixed or fastened upon
God alone, whether they be faithful Magistrates, or pastors and ministers of
the gospel.

Verse. 7. Who art thou. O great mountain, before Zerubbabel? thou shall be a
plain, and he shall bring forth the head stone thereof, with shoutings,
crying, grace, grace unto it.
The answering of an objection of the power of the enemies of the church.
THis is the answering of an objection that might be made, whereby God with
great vehemency and earnestnes of speech refuteth or overthrows all the
power of the enemies of his church, and the doubting and wavering, the which
hereupon might stick in the hearts of the godly. And to the end that this
speech might move us the more, What the figure Apostrophe is, see Amos cap. 1.
ver. 4.
by the figure Apostrophe, or turning of speech unto an other person or matter,
it is directed unto the enemies of the Church themselves. First, of all
therefore by way of granting or yielding unto them, he describes this power of
the enemies of the church according unto the judgment of carnal men, under
the name of mountains, yea and the same great mountains, the which carry a
show, and glorious appearance, and seem to be invincible, or such as cannot
be won and overcome. So Psalm. 68. ver. 16. the mountain of God is
described: The mountain of God is like the mountain of Bashan: it is an high
mountain, as mount Bashan: finally, he describes them to be such
mountains, the which might fear men with the very looking on them.
Furthermore, he propounds or sets forth unto the church, the throwing
down of those enemies, and the same full of exceeding comfort unto the godly:
The casting down of the mountains.
and their casting down lies herein: for that all the same huge high mass of
the mountains shall at the length shrink and fall down, so that the work
which was begun, shall be finished by the godly, that is, the Temple shall be
made an end of unto the building up of the same. The comfort of the godly.
The comfort is, first, for that Zorobabel himself (against whom these enemies
of God did set themselves Esdr. 3. and 4.) shall see this self same thing with
his eyes. For before him shall these mountains be brought into a plain, and
Zorobabel himself shall lay the last stone upon this Temple. Which thing was a
testimony or witness of the singular mercy of God toward Zorobabel, because
that it does not always so fall out, that those which begin the work of God,
do finish the same, albeit that the work of God, and restoring of his church
be finished at the length. Secondly, God does comfort the whole people of that
age and time: For they shall with a great shouting and gladness praise God for
the finishing of the Temple, and shall cry, The grace, the grace of God, that
is to say, it is the mere, or only and great benefit of God toward us, that
we see these things. So then the Jews at that time shall most readily and
earnestly give thanks unto God, and the same Jews, which shall see these
things to be done, and fulfilled, shall attribute this whole benefit unto his
only goodness, as the true cause thereof.

Verse. 8. Moreover, the word of the Lord came unto me saying,
A confirmation of the former comfort.
THis a confirmation of the former comfort, the which also is as it were a seal
and a sealing up of the former promise. And the Prophet confirms it by the
interpretation or exposition of that sentence, God shall bring forth a stone,
etc. The which least it might seem to be feined, or spoken by the Prophet
himself according to his own pleasure, and of his own good will and favor
toward Zorobabel, there is a warrantise, authority, and weight added unto this
interpretation. This warrantise is contained in this verse, whereas it is
expressly repeted, that this which the prophet will say, was the word of the Lord
himself, and not his own, as afterward in the verse following the same is
said again, namely, That the Lord of hosts sent this prophet unto them.
Therefore al these things are said of him not according unto the will and
judgment of his own mind, but by the commandment of God himself, and
consequently they are most true, and they in the end shall find them so to be,
because they are the word of God.

Verse. 9. The hands of Zerubbabel have laid the foundation of this house: his
hands shall also finish it, and thou shall know that the Lord of hosts has
sent me unto you.
The exposition of the peculiar promise touching Zorobabel.
THe exposition of the peculiar promise touching Zorobabel, namely, that this
self same Zorobabel, which had begun the Temple, should also finish the same.
The which things gave unto him a courage, and great constancy. Further, this
place shows that God has a care not only of the whole and universal
building of his church, but also of every one of them, which put to their hand
unto the furtherance of that building and work. For how much the more sincerely
and cheerefullie a man is occupied in the same, so much the more, the truth is,
that he pleases God, and that so much the more God has a care of him, or
that he is commended unto God so much the more for the same.

Verse. 10. For who has despised the day of the small things? but they shall
rejoice, and shall see the stone of tin in the hand of Zerubbabel: these
seven are the eyes of the Lord, which go through the whole world.
A confirmation of the promise of the finishing of the Temple by Zorobabel.
A Confirmation of the said promise of the finishing of the Temple by Zorobabel,
partly by way of matching together of contraries, and partly taken from the
cause, and the event or falling out of the matter. By the way of contraries,
namely, of those which despised those beginnings of the Temple, whose pride and
foolishnes the Prophet both describes, and also refuteth or overthrows. See
Esdr. 3. He describes it, when as he says, That they despised so small
beginnings of the Temple, and restoring of the Church. And to the end he may
the more stir them up, What the figure Apostrophe is, see Amos cap. 8. ver. 4.
he uses an Apostrophe or turning of speech, and an interrogation or asking of
a question unto them, that here they may understand that they them selves are
dealt withal, who either of pride do laugh to scorn, or of distrust do
despise and set naught by the small beginnings of the work of God. Baz.
For this word signifies both these contempts, to wit, The despisers refuted.
of pride and of arrogancy. And the Prophet refuteth or overthrows them by
an earnest affirmation and auouching of the most true falling out of the
things, and the fulfilling of this promise. Finally by the cause. 1 By the
earnest auouching of the fulfilling of the promise.
The earnest affirmation or auouching is contained in these words: Nay they
shall rejoice, nay they shall see (to wit, they which have despised these small
beginnings of things) a stone of tin, or a plumme line in the hand of
Zorobabel bringing this whole building unto the very last and utmost end.
Wherefore this affirmation of GOD, which is the truth, is to be set against
the scoffs of men, and the contempt or despising described before. Moreover,
2. By the cause of the same.
the cause of this event or falling out of the matter does also confirm the
same: and that is the providence of GOD, the which in this place is described
under the name of the seven eyes of God, as hereafter cap. 5. ver. 6. And Reave.
cap. 5. ver. 6. in these words, Then I beheld, and lo, in the midst of the
throne, and of the four beasts, and in the midst of the Elders stood a Lamb
as though he had been killed, which had seven horns, and seven eyes, which are
the seven spirits of God, sent into all the world. For this providence of God
resists all lets, foreseeth all things, which are necessary for the
performance of this thing. Eyes therefore are attributed unto God, both in this
place, and also before cap. 3. ver. 9. by an Anthropopatheia, Anthropopatheia,
what it is, see Mic. cap. 7. ver. 8.
or attributing unto God the parts and properties of a man: not idle eyes, but
such as have a care of the whole world: not only beholders of the issue and
falling out of things, but doers and workers. Last of al, seven eyes are
attributed unto him, because that this number in the holy Scriptures does
signify perfection, Seven eyes.
and is attributed unto holy things.

Verse. 11. Then answered I, and said unto him, What are these two olive trees
upon the right, and upon the left side thereof?
The third part of the interpretation of the former vision.
THe third part of the interpretation of the former vision, the which peculiarly
teaches the signification of the two olive trees, which stood on both sides of
the Candlestick, and did continually power oil into it. And therefore first
of all, that is, in this verse, the vision it self is repeated, whose
understanding and exposition the Prophet desires. For this was one thing in
this whole vision very especial and singular, that the Prophet saw the same
candle, wanting no snuffing, no help of man, no outward putting in of oil:
but having a fountain it self of oil growing unto it, so much as was
necessary for the maintaining of the light.

Verse. 12. And I spoke moreover, and said unto him, What be these two olive
branches, which through the two golden pipes empty themselves into the gold?
The Prophet is earnest to know the meaning of this vision.
AN earnest and careful asking of the signification of this vision, whereby is
showed how greatly the Prophet meruailed at this one continual supply, the
which without any art or service of man, and yet most easily was yielded unto
that candle, and maintaining of the light. And therefore the Prophet is said
again to have asked both of the olives, and also of the way, whereby oil did
continually run from them into the Candlestick. For here is a mean showed,
whereby oil of it own accord, and without the help of any man, was put into
the week of the candle from the two olive trees.

Verse. 13. And he answered me, and said, Know thou not what these be? And I
said, No, my Lord.
The answer of the Angel.
THe answer of the Angel, who shows that this thing is easy to be understood,
and that even by the very only beholding of the thing. For all things were so
ordered by God his providence, that the oil might easily beseene (God willing
and ordaining it so) to run and flow from the olive trees of it self, as
much as was sufficient for all the candles. The Prophet therefore does confess
his ignorance, because that except we be instructed and taught by the spirit of
God, in heavenly matters, be they never so plain and easy, yet are we
blind notwithstanding. For as Paul speaks 1. Cor. 2. ver. 11. What man
knows the things of a man, save the spirit of a man, which is in him? even so
the things of God knows no man, but the spirit of God. And yet this new form
of the thing was very wonderful to any man that did consider this matter
according unto the judgment, custom, and reason of man. Therefore he was to
give diligent heed unto it, as a singular work of God.

Verse. 14. Then said he, These are the two olive branches, that stand with the
ruler of the whole earth.
The exposition containing
THE exposition or interpretation, the which contains two things. First, the
signification of the thing or vision showed of the olive trees. The second, the
reason or cause of the same thing or deed. 1. The signification of the two
olive trees.
The signification of those two olive trees was this, namely, that they both
were a fountain set by God on both sides of the Candlestick, that oil and
light might never be failing unto it. And therefore these olive trees are
called the sons of fatnes, that is, oily olives, plentiful, most fat,
having a stream or fountain of oil, and supplying and ministering oil
without ceasing unto the Candlestick, which was a type or figure of the Church
of God. For the Church of God is the true light of the world, which shines
before all men, Matthew. 5. Psalm. 72. God therefore of his surpassing goodness,
and of his infinite wisdom, and wonderful providence toward his Church,
does so dispose and order all things, that she never wants those things which
are necessary for her, albeit men suppose her to lack these things, because
that they look only unto to the ordinary means. This is a singular comfort
for the Church. The Lord vpholdeth, maintains, rules, defends and
increases herby wonderful, and extraordinary means, the which do depend
upon his mere or only goodness, and are unknown, and unseen of men. 2. The
reason or cause of the same.
The reason of this extraordinary and continual supply is, because that God
the ruler of the whole earth, or the almighty Lord will so have it: and
therefore has so disposed all things, does so see unto his Church, finally,
because God has so ordained those things, wherewith he will help her even
extraordinarily, that he always has ready, and at hand the things, which
immediately, and without any labor he can use for the defense of his Church.
Now, whereas the Prophet makes mention only of two olive trees, the reason
is, because they were enough to minister oil unto that candle, when as they
did minister it on both sides, the one on the right hand, and the other on the
left hand. God therefore by a small number of things brings most great works
to pass in his Church.

CAP. 5.
Verse. 1. Then I turned me, and lift up mine eyes, and looked, and behold, a
flying book.
What God requires of his Church.
THe Church being ordained and established, God teaches what he requires at
her hand, namely, that she live holily, godly, and justly: otherwise he
threatens that he will be a sharp judge and revenger of her sins, as well as
of other men's. And albeit that God hereafter teach that wickedness and
ungodliness shall never be ^anting in the whole earth, no not in his own
Church, so long as she shall be in this world: yet he shows where, and when
this ungodliness shall be as it were double and twofold, that is to say, more
^boundant. The which thing is set down in the end of this chapter. Now
iniquity shall be more abundant among the enemies of his Church, the
Chaldeans in times past: now all other, which do hate the truth of God.
Whereof it comes to pass that God threatens that there among them his
judgments also shall therefore be the greater, nay doubled. This is the sum
of this chapter, the which shows the state of the world which the^ should be,
and the condition thereof after the times of Zacharias which were to come,
rather then the condition already past. And it does not alone contain those
judgments, which God will send upon the adversaries and enemies of his Church:
but those also the which he will lay upon the Church her self because of her
sins. This chapter contains three several visions.
And this chapter contains three distinct or several visions, of the which
this is the first, the which declares the judgments of God against the Church
already established, set up, and founded. And together with the vision the
interpretation thereof is also delivered by the Angel.

Two parts of this verse.
As for this first verse, the same does declare two things. First, that now
there is a new argument or matter showed or told unto the Prophet, 1. A new
matter showed unto the Prophet.
although it be joined with the former, to wit, what shall fall out unto the
Church now established. Whereof it comes to pass that the Prophet is said
afresh to have lifted up his eyes, and beheld, and yet standing still, and
abiding in the same place, and not turning his eyes into any other side from
the beholding of the Angel expounding unto him the former promises. So then
this vision, the which appertains unto the declaring of the state that should
be of the Church now restored, is showed unto the Prophet there in the same
place. The same commended by the cause.
for that it is heavenly, that is, from heaven, and showed him from thence,
from an high place, whereunto belongs this, that the Prophet is said to have
lifted up his eyes on hie, and there to have seen the things which he now
tells. Commended also by the greatness of the matter.
He also commends this vision by the greatness, or description of the thing it
self, the which has three things worthy to be noted. For he sees, first, a
volume or book written. Secondly, him flying, and not standing only in one
place. 1. Written.
Thirdly, in length twenty cubits, and in breadth ten cubits, 2. Flying.
that is, a book of a fearful, bigness, unusual, and of such a bigness as was
never heard of before, as is set down in the verse following. 3. Of a strange
length and breadth.
And these typical or figurative things agree very well with their
signification, to wit, with the curse, or judgments of God against men,
namely, both these, and all others because of their sins. Tribulation and
anguish shall be upon the soul of every man that does evil, of the Jew first,
and also of the Grecian. For God is not only the God of the Jews, but also of
the Gentiles, as Paul says Romans 3. ver. 29. and therefore will alike punish
the sinners in both nations, that is, in all nations whatsoever, that are
offenders. Therefore this punishment and curse pronounced by God against sin,
wandreth and rangeth into the whole world, and into all nations. Thirdly,

Verse. 2. And he said unto me, What see thou? And I answered, I see a flying
book: the length thereof is twenty cubits, and the breadth thereof ten
cubits.
The Prophet exhorted to take diligent heed to the vision.
AN exhortation, whereby the Angel warns the Prophet, and stirs him up to
behold and mark this vision diligently and thoroughly. For the counsels and
helps of God are not to be heard, (...) received carelessly, or without regard.

Verse. 3. Then said he unto me, This is the curse that goes forth over the
whole earth: for every one that steals, shall be cut off as well on this
side, as on that: and every one that swears, shall be cut off as well on this
side, as on that.
The interpretation of the vision containing.
A Plain and clear interpretation of the former vision, the which contains
two things. First, what that volume or book sig^ifieth. Secondly, why it
flies up and down in the air, and stands not in some certain place. 1.
The signification of that book.
As for the signification of this vol^me or book, it signifies, and
represents that punishment, anger, vengeance, and curse of God, the which God
by his law written enacted, and pronounced against sin and sinners, Deuteronomy. 28.
Exodus 20. Ephesians. 5. ver. 5.6. whose words are these: For this ye know, that no
whoremonger, neither unclean person, nor covetous person, which is an
idolater, has any inheritance in the kingdom of Christ, and of God. Let no
man deceive you with vain words: for, for such things comes the wrath of God
upon the children of disobedience. And Coloss. cap. 3. ver. 5.6. Mortify
therefore your members which are on the earth, fornication, uncleanness, the
inordinate affection, evil concupiscence and covetousness, which is idolatry.
For the which things sakes the wrath of God comes on the children of
disobedience.

2 Why it flies up and down in the air.
Now why this book flies, the reason is, that look wheresoever those sins
shall be and shall reign, there also the judgment of God must be looked for,
for to come, as well here, that is among the Jews, as in the rest of the
earth, or any other part of the world. So then whether on this side, that is in
Judea, or on that side, that is, in other parts of the world, any such men,
that is, sinners do appear, they shall be punished by God.

Verse. 4. I will bring it forth, says the Lord of hosts, and it shall enter
into the house of the thief, and into the house of him that swears falsely
by my name: and it shall remain in the midst of his house, and shall consume
it, with the timber thereof, and with the stones thereof.
The threatening of punishment containing.
THis is a most assured denuntiation of that punishment and vengeance against
sinners rehearsed before, the which contains three things. First, a very
earnest affirmation, or auouching of the punishment to come, 1. The certainty
of the same.
the which is not only ordained by that same almighty God, but also commanded
to be put in execution: for thus much signifies the word I will bring forth,
or I will send, 2. Who are threatened.
says the Lord Jehovah, this punishment upon them. Secondly, is to be noted,
against whom it is threatened, to wit against all those which have broken either
the first, or the second table of the law of God. For under the name of
thieves, the Prophet comprehends the whole second table by the figure
Synecdoche: What the figure Synecdoche is, see Amos cap. 5. ver. 21.
and by the name of those that swear by the name of God in vain, the first
table of the same law. But theftes and periuries are chiefeliest rehearsed,
because that those sins at that time did especially reign among men. 3. The
greatness of the punishment.
Thirdly, how great this punishment or vengeance of God shall be, that is to
say, both of long continuance, and consuming not only the sinner himself, but
also all that ever he has, as for example, his house, and his other goods: the
which the Lord shall touch and strike, not only with some small loss or
hurt, but also shall utterly destroy, so that, neither wood nor timber, nor the
stones of his house shall remain. For by these words an universal wasting,
rasing, and fearful destruction is described, and such a one as Christ
mentions unto his disciples should fall upon the temple of Jerusalem, whose
brave building they in a wonderment at the same show unto him, unto whom he
answers Mat. ^4. ver. 2. See ye not all these things? verelie I say unto you,
there shall not be here left a stone upon a stone, that shall not be cast
down. And out of this there are gathered two things. First, that God is the
punisher of the sins of every man, and that no man can escape the hands of
God. Secondly, that the punishments, miseries, and afflictions, which are felt
in the world, are sent by God for the sins of the world, and are the just
plagues of God for the contempt of men toward him.

Verse. 5. Then the Angel that talked with me, went forth, and said unto me,
lift up now thine eyes, and see what is this that goes forth.
Another vision depending on the former. The end of these visions.
AN other vision, the which is as it were an appendix, or a hangby, and addition
unto the former, as the third also is, the which follows hereafter. And the
end of these visions is, to show: first, that God sees all the sins of the
world, or of men, and their wickedness, lie it never so hidden: secondly, that
the same is restrained, The person showing thii vision.
The person showing this vision, is in deed the same Angel, who has all this
while before talked with the Prophet: but now he is said to have gone some what
further, as it were from the side of the Prophet by whom he stood, that by this
gesture, and going forward he might stir up the Prophet to the diligent
beholding of the vision, and might signify that a matter of great weight was
now in handling, to the beholding of the which also the Angel himself went
forth, that is, the which he desired to behold. Here then God does stir us
up unto the diligent both noting, and also learning of this so high a vision,
and so great a testimony or witness of his providence, wisdom, power, and
justice. And to this end also apperteineth the speech or talk of the Angel.
For the same is an earnest exhortation, 2. His talk unto the Prophet.
that both the Prophet, and we also should bend the eyes of our body, and also
of our mind unto this sight and vision. Hereby appears how great our
blockishnes or dulnes is, who except we be earnestly warned by God, or by his
servants, do with blind eyes, and as it were winking, ouerpasse the notable
works and witnesses of his providence and power, although they be cleerelie
before the eyes of all men.

Verse 6. And I said, what is it? And he said, this is an Ephah that goes
forth. He said moreover, this is the sight or eye of them, through all the
earth.
The Prophet has things showed him at the first a far off, and afterward
more neerelie.
THree things were showed unto the Prophet, the first a far off, so that he
did not forthwith, nor yet distinctly see all things which were showed him:
then more neerelie. For we do go forward by little and little, in the
beholding and perceiving of the works of God, and do by little and little
profit in the same: and do not out of hand, and at one instant conceive and
understand all things. That therefore which is here first showed unto the
Prophet, is diligently and earnestly to be beholden, It is an Epha, or a
bushel. For in this place this word is generally taken, the which
notwithstanding among the Hebrews has the signification, and is a kind of a
certain measure. For this Epha was to be so big, that it might receive and
hold a whole woman, or a woman upright, and standing in it: or else sitting and
leaning, or lying a side. The interpretation of this vision of the Epha.
The interpretation is set down afterward. And this Epha went forth, and
moved, and stood not in one place, but did fly through the whole earth. The
interpretation is this, that by this figure is showed, that the eye of the Lord
does see all wicked persons, or all wickedness and ungodliness, the which, as I
said before, flies and rangeth up and down in the whole world. God then
sees the same, as before cap. 4. ver. 10. For as David witnesses Psalm. 34.
ver. 16. The face of the Lord is against all them that do evil, to cut off
their remembrance from the earth. And this stinted figure and form of the
bushel or measure does represent and show, that God does in such sort see the
wickedness of men, that he does notwithstanding keep it in within certain
bounds, limits, and within a certain measure. For God will not, that
according unto the desire thereof, it shall rage, and break through, whether
soever it lists. For the rod of the wicked (as it is Psalm. 125. ver. 3.)
shall not rest on the lot of the righteous, least the righteous put forth their
hand unto wickedness. And this eye of God, or this Epha, or bushel is moved and
flies, as wickedness it self is moved, and flies: that we should know
assuredly, that nothing can escape that vnsleepie eye of God, or eye that never
sleeps. For as David says, Psalm 121. ver. 4. He that keeps Israel, will
neither slumber nor sleep. And as the writer to the Hebrews affirms cap. 4.
ver. 13. There is no creature, which is not manifest in his sight: but all
things are naked and open unto his eyes, with whom we have to do. Nothing
therefore is hid from his eyes or sight, but all the wicked wheresoever they
lie hidden, and in what place of the world soever they be, are found out,
taken, and seen of it. So then, God, so far forth as pleases him, and as he
sees to be meet, and expedient, does repress and keep back the wicked, not
only in his church, because he is not only the keeper and preserver of his
church: but also in all places of the earth, because that he also is the keeper
and preserver of all mankind, and of the society or fellowship of man. For as
Paul writes 1. Tim. cap. 4. ver. 10. God is the Savior of all men, specially
of those that ^^leeue.

Verse. 7. And be hold, there was lift up a talent of lead: and this is a woman
that sits in the midst of the Ephah.
Two other parts of the former vision.
OTher two things are now showed unto the Prophet, the which are parts of the
same vision, to wit, a great mass or lump all of lead, and broad, the which
afterward is made the cover of this Epha: secondly, a certain woman, the which
is cast into this bushel, 1. A lump of lead.
as it were by God being angry with her, and in this bushel is she enclosed
and shut in, as it were in a most strong prison. 2. A woman sitting in the
Ephah.
This Mass or cover was to be weighty, as which namely should bridle and
keep in the force, rage, and attempts of the wickedness of men, the which are
wont to be most vehement and hard to be kept under. And therefore is it said to
be of lead, things seem properly to appertain, albeit that the doctrine of
this place be also general.

Verse. 8. And he said, this is wickedness, and he cast it into the midst of
the Ephah, and he cast the weight of lead upon the mouth thereof.
THe interpretation of the two visions, and things lastly showed unto the
Prophet, 2. The woman in the Ephah. Ri^^hgnah.
to wit, of the Woman, and of the Mass or lump of lead. The woman was a type
or figure of the naughtines of men, or of most lewd wickedness. For the prophet
or God uses such a word, as does not signify every common corruption and
loosenes of manners: but open wickedness, shameless, and old, the which contains
both ungodliness toward God, and also injustice toward men. This lewdnes
therefore, albeit never so malapart and unbridled, does God notwithstanding
restrain, and does shut in within certain bounds and measure, that it may
not range at it own pleasure: or prevail, and corrupt or mar all things.
Yea and God does after this sort restrain it, being angry with it. And
therefore God is said to have cast this woman into the bushel, or Ephah, and
there to have bound her, and shut her up with a cover of lead, as it were in a
prison that is most strong, that she may not without punishment rome about,
fly abroad, over master, over run, and corrupt all things at her pleasure.
And so Reuelat. 9. ver. 4. The Locustes that came out of the smoke, and had
power like unto Scorpions, are commanded that they should not hurt the grass
of the earth, neither any green thing, neither any tree, but only those men,
which had not the seal of God in their foreheads. And so cap. 20: ver. 2. The
Angel is said to have taken the dragon that old serpent, which is the devil,
and satan, and to have bound him a thousand years, and cast him into the
bottomless pit, and shut him up, and sealed the door upon him, that he should
deceive the people no more, till the thousand years were fulfilled: for after
that he must be loosed for a little season.

Wickedness set forth under the figure of a woman.
Wickedness is in this place set forth under the type or figure of a woman,
because that like as the wit of a woman is subtle and crafty, and yet
notwithstanding she pleases and likes men: so sin and the wickedness of men
is always crafty, and yet it does please and allure us with the flatteries
thereof.

Verse. 9. Then lift I up mine eyes, and looked: and behold, there came out two
women, and the wind was in their wings (for they had wings like the wings of a
Storke) and they lift up the Ephal^ between the earth and the heaven.
The third vision.
THE third vision, or third part of this chapter, joined to the former, or
agreeing with the former. For it declares whither, that is, into what parts
of the world that bushel or Epha, which had wickedness, and consequently the
judgments of God, shut ^p was to be carried, namely into Babylon, and the
countries near unto it, that the Jews which remained in that country, should
speedily get them out of it, and withdraw themselves out of so great danger,
and vengeance of God, as it is in Isai cap. 48. ver. 20. Go ye out of Babel:
flee ye from the Chaldeans, with a voice of joy, etc. For a great many of the
Jews after liberty and leave granted unto them by Cyrus to go home, remained
notwithstanding among the Babylonians, being entangled, allured, and bound with
the entisements of the flesh, and little wealth, and some few ^^^hlie
commodities, Thus is that place expounded by Tremelius, albeit that others of
great learning do understand it otherwise, of such as served King David in
these trades.
as appears 1. Chron. cap. 4. ver. 22.23. Where making mention of certain of
the posterity of Judah, (...) is showed that they were rather moved to tarry
with the King, ^^d to follow their base occupations, then to return with the
rest of the people, preferring captivity before liberty, which thing (...)
the place before named is reported thus: These were potters, and dwelt among
plants and hedges (that is, followed their husbandry, and tillages:) there
(that is, in Babylon) they dwelt with the King ^o^ his work, that is, for the
gain which they had by serving him in these trades. So then this place also
shows, that the enemies of the Church, and such as do afflict the same (as
were the Babylonians) shall in the end be most severely or sharply and for
a ^^ng season punished by God.

Two parts of this verse.
But this verse contains two things. First, the manner of the showing of this
vision, the which the prophet reports briefly: Secondly, the vision it
self. 1. The manner of showing of this vision.
The manner of the showing of this vision, was altogether heavenly, like as were
the rest before. For this third vision was also showed from heaven, that it
should be ^o less certain unto us, then the former. 2. The vision i^ self.
For the Prophet is said to have seen it, when as he had lifted up his eyes
to heaven, upward. And here the Prophet is not said to have been admonished by
the Angel, to look, see, or behold: because that this vision was showed unto
him immediately after the former, the time not being interrupted or broken off,
that is, not some certain space after the former, but at the same very moment,
or minu^e, and instant of time. Wherefore the Prophet being raui^hed as yet
with the wondering at the former vision, of himself lifted up his eyes unto
heaven, and there diligently beheld what was showed unto him. And this is a new
vision, because that the Prophet is said again to have lifted up his
countenance. Now this vision was after this manner: in the hand of the Lord is a
cup, and the wine is red: it is full mixed, and he powers out of the same:
surely all the wicked of the earth shall wring out, Women carry this Ephah,
and why?
and drink the dr^gges thereof. And women carry this bushel, not men, for
that like as wickedness was represented under the type or figure of a woman: Two
women.
such as are women. There are two women, because that the anger and justice of
God do always follow and wait upon one another, and take punishment on the
wickedness of men. So Psalm. 85. verse. 10. the mercy and truth of God, and
righteousness and peace are joined together: Mercy and truth (says David)
shall meet: righteousness and peace shall kiss each other. Winged.
These women are winged, that they may be understood to be most swift,
nimble, and ready to execute the vengeance of God, and to obey him. Finally,
they are carried with the wind, Carried with the wind.
that the Prophet might teach that all things serve for the vengeance of God,
and that this judgment of God shall be forthwith against the Babylonians, and
therefore that the Jews should not stay and remain in those countries any
longer.

Verse. 10. Then said I to the Angel that talked with me, whether do these
bear the Ephah?
The prophet asks the interpretation of the Angel.
THE Prophet does ask the interpretation of the Angel, wherein he both
shows his desire to the prophet, and shines before us as an example to do
the like. And the women are said in such sort to bear the bushel, as if they
would by and by throw it down to the earth, to signify the wrath of God, the
which all creatures being the reuengers and instruments of God contemned or
despised, do declare, when as they revenge the contempt or despising of God
against the ungodly.

Verse. 11. And he said unto me, to build it an house in the Land of Shinar,
and it shall be established and set there upon her own place.
The interpretation containing.
THe interpretation of the vision, the which has two parts. For he describes
both the place, and also the time or stay and continuance of this judgment
there. The place, 1. The place.
where this bushel or Ephah most full of the anger and vengeance of GOD was to
be placed at the appointment of God, is the land of Sennaar or Shinar, that is,
Babylon, or Chaldaea, 2 The time.
and the countries nere unto it, in the hand of the Lord is a cup, and the wine
is red: it is full mixed, and he powers out of the same: surely all the wicked
of the earth shall wring out and drink the dregs thereof. And as it is in the
Psalm. 32. ver. 10. Many sorrows shall come to the wicked: but he that
trusts in the Lord, mercy shall compass him. It seems that these self
same things may be applied unto many nations of our time, which have most
hardly afflicted the Church of God.

CAP. 6.
Verse 1. Again, I turned and lift up mine eyes, and looked: and behold, there
came four chariots out from between two mountains, and the mountains were
mountains of brass.
Two visions containing the confirmation of two promises before.
THis chapter contains two visions, the which in a word are the confirmation
of two promises rehearsed before, that is; of the restoring and building again
of the church of God a fresh, and of the overthrowing and destroying of the
enemies of the same, the which at that time for the most part, and chiefelie
were the Chaldeans, 1. Of the sharp punishing of the Chaldeans.
and people of the North. The first vision of this chapter confirms that
which went lastly and immediately before of the most severe or sharp punishing
of those North people, or Chaldeans. 2. Of the restoring of the Church of God.
The second confirms those other promises of God, the which did signify, and
show the restoring of the Church. And albeit whatsoever God speaks and
promises, be most sure, because it is the word of God, and consequently
needs of it self no other confirmation Psalm. 10. yet notwithstanding both
in regard of our selves, who are too distrustful: and also for that time sake,
and state of the Jews, which at that time was most lamentable and contemptable
or despised in the judgment of men, these promises of God which were so hard,
and incomprehensible, or such as of flesh could not be conceived, were to be
confirmed, both by the sundry and often repetitions of them, and also by the
declaration and showing of the manner of the things which should afterward come
to pass, as the means, by the which God would execute that his counsel or
purpose. The which thing is evidently performed in this vision. For now God
teaches the Prophet, and consequently those Jews, and so us likewise which
are his Church, by what means so great and mighty nations, and people (as
those of the North without all question were) might be thus brought down. And
this self same thing is also particularly in Daniel showed and declared cap.
7. and 8. but here it is propounded or set forth only in general, namely, by
the description of the wonderful providence of God, Two parts of this vision,
showing
the which does both govern this universal world, and also every several
people and nation of the same, against the which he has always in a readiness
the ministers and executioners of his judgments and will. 1. The general rule
of God over all things.
Therefore there are two parts of this vision The one, which shows the
general care and rule of God over this whole world, and all things, and
kingdoms. The other, 2. What should fall out to the Chaldeans. Two parts of
this verse.
which declares what shall fall out and come to pass unto those Northren
people, and at that time enemies of the Jews, that is, of the Church of God,
ver. 8.

Now this first verse does first of all win authority and credit unto the
vision ensuing: and secondly in part contains the reporting and declaring of
the same. The authority of this prophecy is, 1. The authority of this
prophecy.
for that it is heavenly, and given by God, as the former. And therefore in
this place the Prophet uses the same kind of speaking the which he has done
before in the like cases, saying, Lifting up mine eyes I looked, Behold, etc.
And whereas he says that he was turned about, he declares that this vision
was showed unto him from an other part, and not from that part, whereas he saw
the former vision, to the end the Church of God should understand that on
every side there are propounded or set forth unto her evident and clear
testimonies or witnesses of the care of God toward her, so that she will give
heed unto them, and lift up her eyes. 2. The narration of the vision in part.
The narration or telling of this vision is, for that here are recited four
chariots to be seen, the which in the holy Scriptures do signify the
providence of God, Ezech. 1. They come out of the mountains, and the same of
brass, because that the judgments of God are both hidden and secret, and
unsearchable, and not to be avoided, and of iron or of brass, which cannot be
broken. So also in effect speaks David of the judgments of God, Psalm. 36.
ver. 6. saying, Thy righteousness is like the mighty mountains: thy judgments
are like a great deep: thou, O Lord, do save man and beast.

Verse. 2. In the first chariot were red horses, and in the second chariot
black horses, Verse. 3. And in the third chariot white horses, and in the
fourth chariot horses of diverse colors, and reddish.
The particular desc^iption of the chariots. Horses.
THe declaration and description of the four chariots. Also horses for the most
part and commonly are wont to be used by the holy Ghost for to note out the
providence of God, as before cap. 1 ver. 8. Reuelat. 6. for the eye of God, and
his providence do very swiftly pass through all things and places, as the
horse, of all the beasts that are familiar unto us, and tractable, or easy to
be handled, Their colors. Black. White. Red. Mixed.
is the most swift. Their diverse colors are to be expounded by the diverse
effects of God his providence in this world. The black color betokens
sorrowful events or issues and fallings out of matters. The white, joyful.
The red, bloody. The diverse and bay colors, sundry and mixed matters, partly
sad, and partly joyful. All which things are to be marked and noted in every
age, by the diverse effects both of the mercy, and also of the justice of God
toward men, and also in every singular people or nation, and not so in this
place to be understood, that we should restrain or tie the first chariot unto
one nation only, and the second to some one other certain nation, and so of
the rest. For here is a general description of the providence of God, justly
ordering and governing this whole world according unto his wisdom.

Verse. 4. Then I answered, and said unto the Angel that talked with me, What
are these, my Lord?
The interpretation of this vision.
THE interpretation of the vision, and first of all generally, afterward
particularly, that is, of the people of the North, to wit, the enemies of the
Church. The general interpretation of these four chariots does teach briefly,
1. Generally.
that God does dispose and order all things in every part of the world, and
rule them by his providence and decree, the which he does quickly, easily, and
without any let execute by his ministers by him thereunto appointed, in all
quarters of the world. Two parts of this verse.
And this verse with that which follows has two things worthy the nothing.
The first, the earnest desire of the Prophet in learning the will of God showed
unto him obscurely, 1. The desire of the Prophet to understand this vision.
or darkly, the which desire of his appears hereby, both for that he himself
does first demand the same of the Angel, and also does honorably call him, as
the scholar his master. So 1. Pet. cap. 1. ver. 11. often before cited to this
purpose, the Prophets are witnessed carefully to have searched after the will
of God. And so does David report of himself, Psalm. 119. For the word (Lord) in
this place, does signify such subjection and reverence only, as we do owe
unto those persons which are of some good account and estimation, and have rule
over us: and not such, as wherewith we do worship God. And after this
reverend manner does the woman of Tekoah, suborned or suttelly set on by Ioab to
sue for the making of Absalom friends with his father, speak unto King David
2. Sam. cap. 14. ver. 9. saying, My Lord, O King, this trespass be on me, and
on my fathers house, and the King and his throne be giltles. 2. The particular
noting of this general interpretation.
Secondly, this general interpretation is to be noted particularly, and
severally.

Verse. 5. And the Angel answered, and said unto me, These are the four spirits
of the heaven, which go forth from standing with the Lord of all the earth.
First, the Chariots, are said to be heavenly Spirits, that is to say, 1 The
Chariot^ said to be Angels.
Angels. So Psalm. 104. ver. 4. God is said to make the Spirits his messengers,
and a flaming fire his ministers. And Hebr. 1. ver. 14. it is said of the
Angels, Are they not all ministering spirits, sent forth to minister, for their
sakes which shall be heirs of salvation? They are therefore said to be
heavenly spirits, and not earthly, that is to say, men, that here we should
learn, how great the strength and power is of the executioners and ministers
of the providence and decree of God. For the angelical and spiritual nature is
infinite ways of more strength and power, then is the nature of men. Whereby
we understand that nothing is able to stand against the fulfilling of the will
of God, the which shall not be overcome of the same. Afterward under the form
of wagons and chariots, 2. Why the chariots are said to be Spirits.
are set forth the executioners of every the will of God, and they are called
Spirits, that we should note, how great their readiness and swiftnes is. For
both chariots, especially such as go with four wheels, and Spirits are
things most swift and speedy. Wherefore they are not slow, but forthwith do
perform, and bring to pass that thing, which God will have to be done by
them. So 2. King. cap. 19. ver. 35. The Angel with all speed, and setting al
delay aside, so soon as he is commanded, does execute the vengeance of God
upon the army of the Assyrians. For says the text, The same night the Angel
of the Lord went out, and smote in the camp of Asshur an hundredth four score
and five thousand. Thirdly, they are four Chariots, 3. Four chariots.
that they might answer unto so many quarters, and parts of the whole world,
to wit, that we should not think any thing to be done in any place without
the decree of God, and his providence. For God by that his heavenly providence
does rule all and every thing in every part of the world. For as it is Psalm.
105. ver. 7. He is the Lord our God: his judgments are through all the earth
Fourthly, 4. They stand always before God.
They are with the ruler of the whole earth, that is to say, they are always
prepared, and ready standing before God, waiting for his commandments, and
appointment, to execute the same. So then not Fortune, but God sends them,
and governs this universal world. And God is called the Ruler of the whole
earth, that his government in comparison of the government of men, may be
understood to be the highest, and most sovereign. For men how far soever
they do bear rule, as Monarchs or Kings and Emperors, yet have they rule and
dominion or Lordship, not over the whole earth: (much less over heaven, where
God notwithstanding bears rule also) but only over some one country of the
earth. Fifthly, These Chariots and Angels, 5. They go not until they be sent.
the executioners of the will of God, do stand in their place, until they be
sent of God. Which thing is true, whether you understand it either of the good,
or of the evil Angels. For 1. King. cap. 22. ver. 19. etc. the evil spirit
cannot seduce the Prophets of Achab, until God bid him go: and 1. Job. the
devil is limited in the plaguing of Job, and cannot go one hairs breadth
beioynd his commission.

Verse. 6. That with the black horse went forth into the land of the North,
and the white went out after them, and they of diverse colors went forth toward
the South country.
THe peculiar and particular interpretation of the chariots. And first of all
of the three chariots, 2. Particularly. Berudim.
the black, the white, the somewhat red (for so do I expound the word of
diverse colors, or spotted, and specked, the which is in this verse, least that
the same chariot might seem here to have been altogether ouerpassed). So then
these three chariots are specially sent forth by God, namely, the black first:
The North country.
afterward the white into the North country: the somewhat red into the South.
The North country without all doubt, in regard of the standing of the Prophet
and of the place, where this vision was showed (this was the land of Iewrie) I
say this North country is Babylon, The black horses sent into Chaldea.
and Chaldea, where the people of GOD was oppressed, the Church in captivity,
and the enemies of God himself bare sway and ruled. Into this the black
horses are sent first. By the black color of the horses are understood that
their effects also in those countries shall be black, and sad, and sorrowful.
There is therefore showed what shall fall out unto those peoples, and them that
shall dwell among them, by the decree of God, to wit, miserable destructions,
and a lamentable state. For the white horses, The white horses not sent
together with the black, but after them.
the which should signify more joyful matters, are sent indeed into the same
countries, but afterward, and not forthwith: least the Jews, which as yet were
among the Chaldeans, upon hope of that better falling out of matters, should
dwell or stay there any longer: when as the more joyful estate of the
Chaldeans and Babylonians was far off, and a long while to be waited for. And
in the mean season the present and yet to come condition of that whole
country is most lamentable, and miserable: such no doubt as it could not choose
but to be, the Empire and government being taken from the Babylonians by the
Persians: and the matter and truth it self by the change of governments does
teach it so to fall out usually. The third chariot of diverse colors.
The third chariot, to wit, that which was of diverse colors, or somewhat red,
is sent into the South, that is, into Egypt, and Arabia: for in respect of the
standing of the Prophet, and of this vision, or place where this vision was
showed, both Egypt and Arabia are South. The condition and state of which
countries is described unto the Jews, that they should not dream of an happy
estate for themselves in those countries. And therefore that they should rather
stay in Judea it self, and run unto it, to wit, those Jews, which were not
yet in it, when as they understood that both on the right ^and and also on the
left there was foreshewed nothing but greatest misery. These horses party or
diverse colored, and somewhat red, do betoken that the state of those countries
shall be uncertain, and also miserable and troubled: but yet such
notwithstanding, as has some little and small joy mixed with it, and that
also obscure or dark, like as the red color is mixed darkly of white and
black.

Verse. 7. And the reddish went out, and required to go, and pass through the
world, and he said: Go, pass through the world. So they went through the
world.
The red or reddish chariot.
THe fourth Chariot is expounded, to wit, the red, or reddish. He is sent forth
by God into the rest of the parts of the world, that the Jews should know,
not only what the state of the nations near unto them should be, but also of
the whole world, and of people that were farthest off. And such is it showed
that it should be, as namely, was the color of the horses, that is, afflicted,
troubled, doubtful and diverse, that all things being considered, and the whole
world being set before their eyes, the Jews might gather that they should
dwell safest of all in Judea, and in that same custody or keeping of the true
God: and that their estate in comparison of other people was happy. This
chariot desires to go through the world.
But whereas it is said, that this chariot desired of God that it might go
through the rest of the whole world, when as the three other chariots had now
their charge already appointed by God: it does not teach that the Angels are
more careful of this world, then God is: but first of all, that neither these
themselves, although they be Angels, nor yet any other creatures, can do, or
bring to pass any things, besides, or without the express commandment, will,
and bidding of God, albeit the creatures themselves oftentimes do not
understand so much Secondly, it teaches the readiness of all heavenly Angels to
perform obedience, when as all of them do offer their service unto GOD as it
were to strives, and willingly are at hand and ready to serve him.

Verse. 8. Then cried he unto me, and spoke unto me, saying: Behold, these that
go toward the North country have pacified my spirit in the North country.
An admonition unto the Prophet, co^taining
LAstly, this is a special admonition of God unto the Prophet, touching the
enemies of his Church, and consequently unto the Church, that God might comfort
her. Wherefore this verse has two parts. 1. A comfort for the Church.
First, a speech of Christ willingly and of his own accord unto the Prophet,
to show, what the comfort of the Church should be. 2. God will not rest until
he have punished the enemies of his Church.
Wherein is showed the care of God for his Church. Secondly, the thing it
self, which is showed, namely, that the mind of God was not quiet, or will
not be quiet, before that grievous and sore punishment be, or shall by him
be taken upon his enemies, the which have afflicted or trouble his Church.

Verse. 9. And the word of the Lord came unto me, saying,
The second part of this chapter being rather a sermon or history, then a
vision, the drift whereof is two fold.
THe second part of this chapter, in the which there appears not so much a
vision unto the Prophet (such as were the former) as there is declared a
certain ordinary admonition unto all Prophets, the which was made by God, as
often as God would have them to do their duty, and the people or any other to
be spoken unto in his name. Here therefore nothing is showed unto the eyes of
the Prophet to be seen, but only there is taught, what be ought both to do,
and also to say: so that this is rather a sermon and an history, then a
typical or figurative vision. But the scope or drift of this Sermon and
history is twofold. The first, 1 A confirmation of the former doctrine
touching the building, garnishing, and enlarging of the temple.
(...) confirmation of the former doctrine touching the Temple of God (by the
which the true church is signified) not only to be built, but also to be
garnished, and to be increased with the riches and gifts, and coming of all
nations thereunto. So then this place agrees with that of Aggaeus cap. 2.
verse. 8. and with the second chapter of this Prophet before, ve. 11. The second
drift, is a comfort of the Jews, who, to the end that they might now have and
see some taste, and as it were some proffer of the glory that should be of the
second temple to be built at the commandment of God, they do see Iehoshua the
priest first garnished with fair crowns: secondly, the Temple it self
bewtified with the said crowns hung up in it for ever, the which were made of
gold and silver, and other gifts sent even as far as from Babylon unto
Jerusalem. Now touching this verse, it has a confirmation of the whole
narration and fact following, because that the Prophet at the express bidding,
and commandment of GOD, ^oth whatsoever hereafter follows.

Verse. 10. Take of them of the captivity even of Heldai, and of Tobijah, and
Iedaiah, which are come from Babel, and come thou the same day, and go unto
the house of Ioshiah, the son of Zephaniah.
The commandment of God containing the fact, and the exposition and reason of
the same. In the fact are to be noted.
THe precept or commandment of God, the which contains both the fact, and the
exposition and interpretation of the f^ct, and reason of the same ver. 12.
hereafter, and so forth. In the f^ct these things are to be obseru^^. First,
the persons, of whom the Prophet received the silver and the gold, and the
other gifts (of the which afterward the crowns should be made) the persons
were four men that were Jews, which were newly come from Babylon, 1. The
persons,
bringing for the temple of God these gifts from themselves, and from other
Jews, which were yet at Babylon. The men are these, Cheldai, Tobia, Ieddaiah,
and Chen the son of Tzaphaniah. The zeal of these is commended afterward,
and is to be followed. 2. The place.
Secondly, the place is to be noted, into the which the prophet is commanded
to go, namely into the house of Josias the son also of Tzaphaniah, whereinto
these four men as they came from Babylon, were first and newly come. It is
likely that this Tzaphaniah was some great man, and such a one as gave
intertainement unto strangers. 3. The time.
Thirdly, the time, the self same day that the Lord spoke unto the Prophet, is
he commanded to go, not to make delay, or to put it off until another day.
For the people did need a speedy and hasty comfort. Moreover, by this means
God declares that he does show unto the Prophet, what should come to pass,
namely, that the self same day these three men should come unto the house of
Tzaphaniah out of the captivity of Babylon.

Verse. 11. Take even silver and gold, and make crowns, and se^ them upon the
head of Iehoshua, the son of Iehozadak the high priest.
The fact.
THe fact, that is to say, what the Priest is commanded to do, namely to
receive the gold, and the silver, the which they brought as a gift unto the
Temple: and to make of it received many crowns: and all those so made to set
them upon the head of the high priest (who was both a figure of Christ, and
also the visible head of this Temple upon this earth) for a testimony or
witness of the great garnishing, glory, beauty, and majesty, the which should
be in the Temple of God, and in the priests, and all others that served in the
Temple of God, howsoever they seemed then, and at that time to be base, and the
beginnings thereof to be vile and base. So then these things were a type, or
figure, both of the spiritual, and also of the earthly glory, the which was
afterward, first, in that Temple of Jerusalem, then in the Church of God
gathered out of all nations, by the preaching of the gospel. But how many
crowns there were, is not expressed: yet it is likely by the 14. verse, that
there were four, according unto the number of the persons, which brought those
gifts, to wit, of every one of their gifts one.

Verse. 12. And speak unto him, saying, Thus speaks the Lord of hosts, and
says, behold the man, whose name is the Branch, and he shall grow up out of
his place, and he shall build the Temple of the Lord.
THe interpretation of the former precept, and fact: in the which there are two
things to be noted. First, The interpretation of the former fact in the which
are to be noted.
what that crowning of Iehoshua meant: Secondly, what is the cause or foundation
of this honor bestowed upon the high priest. For the first, this setting of the
crowns upon the head of Iehoshua did foreshew that there should be restored
unto the priesthood or ministry of God his honor, and that in all points, or
wholly: 1 The meaning of this crowning of Iehoshua.
and not only in the half. And therefore Iehoshuah was garnished with many
crowns, and not with one only, to the end it might be understood by this
sacrament and sign of many crowns, 2. The cause of this honor bestowed upon
him.
that this ministry should afterward be glorious and bewtified most
plentifully, and so far forth as the reason of man his judgment does
suffer, most abundantly. Now the cause, or the foundat^^n and ground of this
so great honor of the ministry of God, day spring, that is to say, he by
whom, and through whose power and virtue, all those, which are plants in the
church of God, do bud, and spring, and afterward do flourish, live, and take
deep root. So Christ faith of himself John* 15. ver. 1.2. I am the true
vine, and my father is an husbandman. Every branch that bears not fruit in
me, he takes away: and every one that bears fruit he purges it, that it
may bring forth more fruit. Therefore Christ alone is the foundation and
fountain of so great glory, dignity and honor of the ministry of God, that
is, of the priesthood of the law, and of the ministry of the gospel. In him
therefore above all the rest, and first of all this glory was to appear, does
appear and has appeared: and in the ministers of the church, who do borrow
this honor from him, it does so far forth shine, and shall shine forth, as
there is or shall be between them both, to wit between Christ, and the
ministers themselves of the Church, the counsel of peace, that is, great
concord, conjunction, conformity, and agreement. So before cap. 3. ver. 8.
this same Prophet did draw comfort, and promised glory from Christ the branch
unto the priests.

Three parts of this verse.
But this verse contains three things. First, the truth and certainty of
this prophecy, by the earnest repetition of these words (Say unto him, saying)
and also by the rehearsing of the almighty power and majesty of God, 1. The
truth and certainty of this prophecy.
the which is contained in these words (The Lord of hosts). The second, the
name of this man Christ, which was to come, 2. The name of the man Christ.
and to take upon him the nature of man, is here expressed, whereupon the whole
glory of the ministry of God and of his Church is grounded, not his proper
name I grant, but a figurative name, or a name of dignity, by the which the
efficacy or power of Christ, and his degree of honor in the Church of God is
signified, to wit, for that he is the branch, that is, the ground faith, root,
foundation, and nourishment of all the faithful. And he shall come, both in
his place, and also in his time. The third thing is, what that same man, 3.
What he shall bring to pass.
the man Christ shall effect or bring to pass, that is, he shall build that
Temple of the Lord, whereof the Temple of Jerusalem was a figure. So then by
the name of the Temple in this place is signified the Church of God, the which
at all times has been gathered together by Christ through the preaching of the
word of God. The which promise albeit that it seemed hard, yet shall it have
his accomplishment and fulfilling: and therefore ^o the end the Jews might
be most assured of it, it is repeated again in the verse following.

Verse. 13. Even he shall build the Temple of the Lord, and he shall bear the
glory, and shall sit and rule upon his throne, and he shall be a Priest upon
his throne, and the counsel of peace shall be between them both.
THe figure Auxesis, Auxesis, what this figure is, see Oseas, cap. 7 ver. 4. A
three fold glory of Christ
or increasing. For he amplifieth that same glory of Christ, that the priests
and ministers of the Church may the more assuredly believe and perceive, how
great their glory shall be. And here in this place is described or set forth a
threefold glory of Christ, to wit, his honor, rule, priesthood, yea, and the
same firm, apparent, and glorious. 1. His honor.
His honor comprehends whatsoever outward beauty and excellency may be
noted and seen in the kingdom of Christ, as in times past under the law, was
the gold and silver of the Temple: the precious stones in the garment of the
high priest: his dignity among men, and such other like, the which
notwithstanding were in the ministry of the Temple, and also in the Temple it
self. Now also even under the Gospel Kings and Princes are brought unto
Christ, and there may be seen an outward glory of the true Church of God,
how great soever it be, Psalm. 72. The rule of Christ is described under the
name of sitting and dominion, and the self same is also glorious and manifest,
2. His rule.
because he has a throne: and moreover it is universal, because Christ is
said generally that he shall rule, and not over one or two nations only. For
whereas Luke 1. Christ is said, that he shall rule or reign in the house of
his father David, this does not restrain the rule of Christ unto one certain
nation, but does spread it over the whole world. Lastly, the Priesthood also of
Christ is rehearsed, 3. His priesthood.
and the same also manifest and glorious, because it also has his throne. So
then the Church also, and the Ecclesiastical or Church ministry has her
jurisdiction, and her throne, although distinct or severed from the civil, as
appears by this place. Hence also is gathered, that the same Christ is both
the King and also the Priest of his Church, and that for ever, because both are
by God showed to be in Christ without any limitation of time.

The application of the glory of Christ unto Iehoshua.
There follows the application of the glory of Christ unto Iehoshua the high
Priest, and consequently unto the whole ministry of the Church, whereof the
hie Priest at that time was as it were the head, or chief part. And it is
contained in these words: The ^^^nsell of peace was between these two.
Therefore the ministers of the Church shall feel and receive this glory, so
far forth as they shall consent and agree with Christ, that is, as they shall
not dissent or disagree from the doctrine of Christ: and as they and Christ
shall bold together. The Prophet therefore has propounded or set forth two men,
to wit, Iehoshua as the type or figure, and the Minister; and Christ, as the
truth and fountain, of whom he says, that the counsel of peace shall be
between them, that is, singular consent, and correspondence (as they term it)
or agreement, the one with the other, to wit, that the ministers of the Church,
in the execution of their office, have regard unto the glory of Christ alone.
Except some man had rather to refer these words (these two) unto the two
thrones, the which shall agree within themselves, * Kiss in the Hebrew is the
feminine gender, and the article (hem) in Schenehem (them two) is the masculine
gender.
or together to promote or set forward and advance the glory of God: but the
nature of the gender in the Hebrew word for (a throne) is against it.

Verse. 14. And the crowns shall be to Helem, and to Tobijah, and to Iedaiah,
and to Hen the son of Zephaniah, for a memorial in the Temple of the Lord.
A comfort for the Jews, and in their person, for all the godly.
A Double conclusion or rule, the which enlarges, and also sets out or
brings light unto the signification of the former fact, especially unto the
comfort and confirmation or strengthening of the Jews, which heard the former
promises, that they should not doubt of them. It enlarges it, for that the
Prophet teaches according unto the promise of God, and the interpretation of
this example or fact, that not only the Jews, but also all people, yea those
that did dwell far off should bestow gifts, and also their service for the
building of the Temple of God. It sets out, and enlighteneth the same,
because that all and every of them, which shall be so minded, shall win
praise and great glory, yea and the same immortal in the midst of the Church,
Psalm. 112. Dan. 12. For the righteous man shall be had in everlasting
remembrance, yea even with God, and God does honor those which have honored
him, 1. Sam. 2. ver. 30. So then indeed this first rule or conclusion teaches
how great honor, Th^se that in faith employ their service for the furtherance
of the Temple of God, shall be honored both of God and men.
yea and that true honor, and agreeable unto the will of God, remains for
all those which do service for the Temple of God either earthly, or
spiritual, of a true faith: and that both with God himself, and also with all
good or godly men. And therefore Esdr. 2. all those, which with a constant
mind returned unto the restoring of the worship and service of God, are
reckoned up, yea the mules themselves, and the mule keepers and mulitors, so
also Nehem. 7. By this sign therefore of hanging up of the Crowns in the
Temple of God, to the praise and remembrance of those four men (who brought
both their own gifts, and also the gifts of others) is showed the great
praise, and renowned name of the godly, which do build the Church of God, and
serve the same.

Verse. 15. And they that are far off, shall come and build in the temple of
the Lord, and ye shall know, that the Lord of hosts has sent me unto you. And
this shall come to pass, if ye will obey the voyc^ of the Lord your God.
THe second conclusion, or rule of the adjoining of other people, yea even of
such as dwell far off, that together with the Jews they may build the Temple
of God, but the spiritual Temple. The gentiles shall join with the Jews in
the building up of the Spiritual Temple.
The which thing was most truly brought to pass by the preaching of the
Gospel, and the conversion or turning of the Gentiles unto Christ. But to the
end the Prophet may take from them all distrust of a matter so hard and unhoped
for, he appealeth unto the issue or falling out of the matter, the which he
promises, that it shall be most assuredly. Lastly, cast the Jews, or any
other should abuse so great promises of God unto the wantonness and security,
or carelesnes of the flesh, he shows that these things shall fall out unto
them only, which shall obey God by faith. For infidelity or unbelief does
keep us back from the partaking of the graces and benefits of God.

CAP. 7.
Verse. 1. And in the fourth year of King Darius, the word of the Lord came unto
Zechariah in the fourth day of the ninth month, even in Chisleu.
The prophet answers a question moved by the Jews.
HItherto the Prophet at the commandment of God, has showed and set down
those things, the which did appertain evidently unto the confirmation of the
building, restoring, and preserving of the nation of the Jews, the City, and
Temple: now he answers unto a question moved unto him by the people and the
priests, to wit, the demanders of the same being Sareezer, Sareezer, and
Reguemmelech move the question at the appointment of the whol^ people.
and Reguemmelech, men of good place and countenance. For these were appointed
or chosen to ask this question, as it were the messengers and Ambassadors for
the whole people, who should show unto both the priests, and also the Prophets,
the des^res and requests of the whole people: these I say, were chosen hereunto
by the whole people, the which were returned from the captivity of Babylon,
and dwelt at Jerusalem, and in the whole land. And by occasion of this
question, God does again rehearse his promises toward the nation of the Jews,
and the city of Jerusalem, and confirms the former. And this question of the
people was a most true testimony or witness of the fulfilling of the former
promises now already begun. For the Jews that were returned from the
captivity propou^d or move this question: The question of the Jews.
Whether they ought to afflict or punish and humble themselves, as they did
before, and likewise to fast, when as they see with their own eyes, the Temple
for the most part now builded again, and do feel their condition and estate
changed, and of that which before was most miserable, to be made now more
joyful. All which things are the effects of God his promises, foretold by the
Prophet Zacharias. Now there is a time to mourn, and a time to rejoice,
Ecclesiast. 3. So then when as the occasion of that affliction and mourning was
ceased, they do demand of the Prophets of God, and of the Priests, Whether
they ^^ght to mourn still notwithstanding, and do the self same things, the
which they did in the chiefest state and time of their sorrow. The answer.
The answer is, ver. 20. of the eight chapter following, That they ought not.

Two parts of this verse.
But touching this verse, the same contains two things. First, a confirmation
of the doctrine, and answer following. It is the word of the Lord, 1. A
confirmation of the doctrine following.
and not the Prophet Zacharias his own word. Secondly, it notes the time, to
wit, the fourth year of the reign of Darius. The former promises were
delivered in the second year of the reign of the said King: 2. The time of
the delivery of the same.
and the Temple of God was finished in the sixth year of Darius, Esdr. 6. Thus
by the circumstance of the time we do understand that now already the work
of the Temple for the most part was in a good forwardnes, and that there shined
a joyful hope of better success of things in the Jews own country.

Verse. 2. For they had sent unto the house of God Sharezer, and Regem-melech
and their men, to pray before the Lord.
The reason, why the Prophet has a new inspiration and word from God.
THis is the rendering of a reason why God gave unto the Prophet a new instinct
or inspiration, and word, by occasion of the history, or thing done. For the
whole people enquired the will of God touching a new question. And God would
not deny the desires of those that were his, and therefore he answers by the
Prophet. For the people dealt well, and in very good order, who in their hard
case and doubt, do ask of God in his ministers. This their example therefore
is of us to be followed. So 2. King. cap. 1. ver. 6. Ahaziah King of Samaria is
greatly reproved of God by the ministry of the Prophet Elijah, because he
sent to Baal-zebub to know whether he should recover of his hurt which he had
taken by a fall through a window, and sought not by God his Prophets to
understand the will of the Lord in this matter. Wherefore Deuteronomy. 18. ver. 15.
Moses gives the people of Israel this comfort, that after his decease God will
not leave them staylesse, and helples, nor uncertain and doubtful whither to
go for to be resolved and taught in the will of the Lord, for (says he) the
Lord thy God will raise up unto thee a Prophet like unto me, from among you,
even of thy brethren: unto him ye shall hearken. And therefore in the Psalm 74.
ver. 9. when as the Church for a time, in the wrath of God is deprived of this
benefit, and the ordinary course of the Prophets and ministry ceased, by
whom they might be instructed, and enquire of the will of the Lord, they
complain of this want, and cry out unto God, and say, We see not our signs:
there is not one Prophet more, nor any with us that knows how long.

3 Parts of this verse.
But in this verse of our Prophet there are three things to be noted. First, the
good order of the Church for the people, yea and that all of them, asks and
desires to know some thing of the priests, yet do they not this
tumultuously, 1 The good order of the church.
nor by the confused or disordered multitude: but out of their whole body they
appoint certain, and send them in the name of the rest unto the Priests.
Secondly, 2 Who are to be demanded touching the will of the lord.
who are to be asked, and demanded concerning the will of God, namely, the
ministers of the Church, either ordinary, as the priests: or extraordinary, if
there be any, as in times past were the Prophets. And therefore it is said,
Malach. 2. ver. 7. The Priests lips should preserve knowledge, and they should
seek the law at his mouth: for he is the messenger of the Lord of hosts. So
then the people asks not Zorobabel, though he were a godly man, or other
politic Magistrates, of matters appertaining unto conscience: but the
ministers of the Church. The third thing is, how, 3 After what manner we must
come unto God.
or after what manner we must come unto God, to wit, by prayer, and
supplication. For after this sort ought both the ministers of the Church
themselves, and others also to come unto God, who seek after the will of God,
and the true interpretation of his word?

Verse. 3. And to speak unto the Priests, which were in the house of the Lord
of hosts, and to the Prophets, saying: Should I weep in the fifth month, and
separate my self, as I have done these so many years.
The question of the people.
THe declaring of the question, and request of the whole people returned from
the captivity, Whether now also they ought to fast, and to humble themselves
as they did before, when their estate was most afflicted, or troublous? And
that here they speak of such a certain fast, as at that time was usual, and
accustomable among the Jews, although it were extraordinary, appears both
by the answer of God, ver. 5. the which was agreeable unto the question of the
people, and also by the very words of the question it self, the which by the
adioynts, and things accompanying it, do describe a fast, namely, when as it
is said, Shall I weep, and separate my self? the which two things those do
which are in sorrow and heaviness. Now, a true fast is joined with sorrow and
heaviness of mind, as the same is notably set out Joel 2. ver. 15.16.17. in
these words: Blow the trumpet in Zion, sanctify a fast, call a solemn
assembly. Gather the people: sanctify the congregation, gather the Elders:
assemble the children, and those that suck the breasts: let the bridegroom go
forth of his chamber, and the bride out of her bride chamber. Let the priests,
the ministers of the Lord, weep between the porch and the altar, and let them
say, Spare thy people, O Lord, and give not thine heritage into reproach, that
the heathen should rule over them. Wherefore should they say among the people,
where is their God? See more hereof Isai 58.

Two things to be noted in this question.
Wherefore in this question two things are contained. First, a description of
the fast. Secondly, the kind of the fast. The fast is described or set forth
by the name of mourning and affliction, or humbling of themselves, 1. The
description of the fast.
that thereby may be understood that the cause of this question is just. For it
was unfit and unseemly, that in so joyful a time, wherein the temple was
peaceably and quietly builded, they should weep, 2. The kind or time of this
fast.
and be in sorrow. Moreover, the kind or time of the fast makes also for the
understanding of the cause of this question. For the people does not ask of
other fasts appointed in the law of God, and such as were set and ordinary
fasts: but of this only, to wit, an extraordinary fast, the which was yearly
kept in the fifth month, because that in the same month the Temple was
destroyed by the Chaldeans, as appears 2. King. cap. 25. ver. 8.9. in these
words: And in the fifth month, and 7. day of the month, which was the 19.
year of King Nebuchadnezzar King of Babel, came Nebuzar-adan chief steward and
servant of the King of Babel, to Jerusalem, and burnt the house of the Lord,
and the Kings house, and all the houses of Jerusalem, and all the great houses
burnt he with fire. So Ier. 52.12. the same thing is recorded almost in the
very self same words. Wherefore the Temple being now restored or builded again,
the cause of mourning ceased, and therefore the effect also, which was fasting
and mourning, ought to cease in like manner.

Verse. 4. Then came the word of the Lord of hosts unto me, saying,
A twofold answer unto the former question.
THe answer of the Prophet unto the former question, and the same twofold by
the mouth and commandment of God himself. The first generally, the which
shows in general what is to be judged and deemed of this whole kind of
things and actions. 1. Generally.
The second, specially or particularly, 2. Specially, and particularly.
the which shows what they ought to think of that same fast of the fifth
month, yea and of the seventh and tenth month also, the which fasts the Jews
had appointed extraordinarily, but yet yearly, to afflict or humble
themselves, as is to be seen hereafter, cap. 8. ver. 19. Why it was requisite
that the Jews should generally be taught what was to be judged of these
outward matters.
Now it was behouefull and requisite that the people of the Jews should be
answered generally, what was to be judged of this whole kind of things, not
only because all men generally do always attribute too much unto these
outward things, as if the most true worship of God stood in these things (such
is both the hypocrisy, and also the gross ignorance of men) but especially
the Jews were too much given always unto such things, ceremonies, and
actions, because that they had received them from God, and therefore they
placed in them the weight and sway of true religion, and of the worship and
service of God Isai. 1.12. etc. where in regard of the confidence and trust
which the Jews did put in these ceremonies, God says unto them by his
Prophet, When ye come to appear before me, who requires this of your hands,
to tread in my courts? And cap. 66. ver. 3. God tells them: He that kills a
bullock, is as if he slew a man: he that sacrifices a sheep, as if he cut
off a dogs neck: he that offreth an oblation, as if he offered swines blood: he
that remembers incense, as if he blessed an idol: yea they have chosen their
own ways, and their soul delights in their abominations. So Amos cap. 5.
ver. 22. the Lord says, Though ye offer me burnt offerings and meat offerings,
I will not accept them: neither will I regard the peace offerings of your fat
beasts. The Lord therefore by this answer would have this error pulled out of
their minds, the which did stick so fast, and cleave so hard in them, the which
moved this question of fasting. Wherefore God teaches that he is neither
delighted, nor appeased with these things in themselves: but with true godliness
and charity or love, such as he himself by his Prophets has prescribed or
appointed unto them in his word. Further, this verse and all other such like,
in the which it is said, that the word of God came, or was given, and that from
the God of hosts, that is, almighty, do confirm the doctrine which is to be
expounded, and do win and get authority unto the same, and audience, and
reverence from the author of it, namely, God himself.

Verse. 5. Speak unto all the people of the land, and to the Priests, and say,
When ye fasted and mourned in the fifth, and seven month, even these seventy
years, did ye fast unto me? do I approve it?
The answer of God co^taining two things.
THe sum of the answer of GOD, the which contains two things. First, that
God was not delighted with the fasts of themselves, either of the fifth month,
or of that other of the seventh month, 1. That God was not delighted in these
fasts of themselves.
ordained by them also for the death of Godolia, 2. King. 25. albeit they had
observed them a great space, and long season solemnly, and yearly. And this
answer is indeed made unto the whole people, but yet notwithstanding by the
Priests, unto whom especially God does direct the Prophet, because it is their
office to teach the people: and it is the office of the Priests to be taught of
God, either ordinarily, or extraordinarily, as it is here done by Zacharias.
And the Prophet expressly makes mention of the seventy years, those namely,
wherein the people was in banishment and captivity in Babylon, because that
all that whole time especially the Jews had kept those their extraordinary
fasts straightly, and hardly. Finally, the repeating of the word (me) has an
Emphasis or vehemency and force in it, the which shows that before God the
abasing of these outward things is the greater, yea, and a thing unpleasant
unto God, unless that true godliness or charity and love of mind do go
before.

Verse. 6. And when ye did eat, and when ye did drink, did ye not eat for
your selves, and drink for your selves?
2. Why these outward works of themselves please not God.
THe second thing to be noted in this answer of God, to wit, the cause, for the
which these outward works of themselves are not acceptable unto God, whether
they be extraordinary, that is, commanded by men, or ordinary, that is,
commanded by God himself. And first of all the extraordinary works the which
are done of men of their own accord, do not please God, because that men
themselves do them for their own commodity and pleasure, and not by the
commandment of God. And therefore in them regard and consideration of men is
rather had and sought, then of God. And therefore in them men do drink, and
eat, and fast unto themselves: and there comes thereby no profit unto God,
Psalm. 16. Wherefore whether they eat, or whether they drink, it is all one
unto God, neither have they thereby the more, or the less with God, that is,
neither are they therefore the more, or the less acceptable unto God, as Paul
teaches 1. Cor. 8. ver. 8. Meat makes not us acceptable unto God: for
neither if we eat have we the more, neither if we eat not, have we the
less. And therefore when as there was a jar in the Church of the Romans
between the Jews and the Gentiles about these matters, Paul, Romans 14 ver. 3.
for the appeasing of that strife, gives this counsel, Let not him that eats,
despise him that eats not: and let not him which eats not, judge him that
eats: for God has received him. And ver. 6. He that eats, eats to the
Lord: for he gives God thanks: and he that eats not, eats not to the
Lord, and gives God thanks.

Verse. 7. Should ye not hear the words, which the Lord has cried by the
ministry of the former Prophets, when Jerusalem was inhabited, and in
prosperity, and the cities thereof round about her, when the South and the
plain was inhabited?
Fasts and other outward works ordained by God, do not of themselves please
God.
AS touching fasts, and other such like outward works appointed by God
himself, neither are they also of themselves acceptable unto God, but those
things rather please him, the which by his Prophets he has always required at
the hands of men, yea, and even at that time, when as they had greatest
felicity or success of things. God indeed appointed unto the Jews fasts, and
other outward rites or customs and fashions, but yet such notwithstanding as
wherein he would not have the chiefest part of his worship and service to be
placed consist, nay he gave those ceremonies as tokens, and stirrings of us
forward unto his inward worship only, the which he always urged or earnestly
called upon by his Prophets. Wherefore God does not in this place call back the
Jews unto those ceremonies: but unto those sermons and words, the which by his
Prophets he had so often beaten into their heads, and set forth, and openly
delivered, and commanded that they should observe or keep, the which are
afterward declared verse 9. and in those that follow. So then the hypocrisy of
men, and of the Jews is showed, who ouerpassing, nay neglecting and setting
naught by the chief part of the worship and service of God, do stay in these
outward things, as the only means to appease God withal. For these
ceremonies are not properly those words, the which God propounded or set forth
by his prophets: but rather those things which follow hereafter, and in the
which there appears a true testimony or witness of godliness or love. Further
it has an Emphasis or force, whereas God says, that he cried and sounded
forth those things, the which he now also required of them, that both the
truth of God, and the conformity or agreeablenes of his worship and service
might be showed: and also the care of God with a loud voice to call them back
unto a better mind. And this also has a weight and force with it, where as
he says that he did the same, when as both the city did as yet still
flourish, and all the other cities near unto it, yea and moreover the whole
country it self, so far as it reaches, and is stretched out toward the
South both in the mountains, and in the plain. For this circumstance of time
shows the great and daily care of God for that people, that is, those that
are his, and also his continual course and constancy in exacting and
requiring still the same kind of his true and inward worship and service. For
like as the nature of God is one and the same always: so also his true and
inward worship, is, and has been always one, and the same.

Verse. 8. And the word of the Lord came unto Zechariah, saying,
He shows more plainly what these words are, which God required of their
fathers.
For God For God shows, what those words are, the which so carefully, and
daily, and earnestly (as namely for that they were his true worship) he did
by his Prophets require of their fathers and Elders, that they should not
perish, but that they might be acceptable unto him. And now God requires the
self same yet still of them their posterity, and desires that they may be
observed; that they also may please him. And this is showed by the way of
matching together of co^traries, the which does not only garnish this sentence,
but also does bring a great light unto it, and cleerelie teaches, that God is
truly worshipped, not with outward ceremonies, but with the earnest motion of
the heart: that he is not delited with the afflictings or exercises of the
body, but with the true duties and effects of faith and charity. Therefore
does Paul also always match these the one against the other, as 1. Tim. cap.
4. ver. 7.8. in these words Cast away profane, and old wives fables, Old
wives fables. Godliness. Bodily exercise. Godliness.
and exercise thy self unto godliness. For bodily exercise profits little,
but godliness is profitable unto all things, which has the promise of the life
present, and of that that is to come. And then verse the 12. he shows what be
these fruits of godliness, wherein he would have Timothy to be a pattern for
them to follow, saying, Let no man despise thy youth, but be unto them that
believe, an ensample in word, in conversation, in love, in spirit, in faith,
and in pureness. So again Tit. 1. and 2. where there is a matching together of
contraries between rites and ceremonies and the true works of godliness. What
the figure Noema^^, see Zach. cap. 2. ver. 5.
But here in this place by the figure Noema all the works both of faith, and
also of charity are commended. The works of faith, or of the first table by
the consequent, or that which follows. For if charity or love toward our
neighbor, and the works of the second table be acceptable or pleasing unto
GOD, much more is faith so, the which loves both God himself, and also is the
cause of our love toward our neighbor. So then of necessity by the works of
the second table, or of charity true faith or the first table is understood
and gathered especially to be commanded unto us. For (as it is Galat. 5. ver.
6.) In Jesus Christ neither circumcision avails any thing, neither
uncircumcision, but faith, which works by love. And all the works of
Charity are here contained by the figure Synecdoche, What Synecdoche is see
Amos cap. 3. v. 2^.
and by the reckoning up of part or a certain sort of them. But in this place
are exprestie recited three sorts of the works of Charity or of the second
table.

Verse. 9. Thus speaks the Lord of hosts, saying, Execute true judgment,
and show mercy and compassion, every man to his brother.
All duties the which men owe unto each other, in respect of any public office.
THe first contains all the works the which men do owe unto men in regard
of any public office, which they bear, as for example, Kings unto their
subjects, Judges unto those over whom they are set to rule. Of these it is
required that they should (judge) that is, execute that their office, and that
in (truth) the which is here set against all accepting of persons, and all
favor. Concerning this duty thus is it commanded Deuteronomy. 1. ver. 17. Ye shall
have no respect of person in judgment, but shall hear the small as well as the
great: ye shall not fear the face of man: for the judgment is Gods, Psalm.
82. The second sort here reckoned up describes the duties, the which
generally men owe unto men, so far forth as we are all of us brethren one
unto another, and made after the image of God. Now this do we owe one unto
another, first, that we be touched with mercy, and moved with a fellow
feeling of the miseries one of another: Secondly, that we do good unto them
that be in misery, and help them. To that inward affection apperteineth the
word Racham, Racham. Chesed.
compassion: and the word Chesed mercy, belongs to the effect of this
affection, or unto bounteousnes. And therefore Galat. 6. ver. 10. Paul
counsels us saying, While we have therefore time, let us do good unto all
men, but especially unto them, which are of the house hold of faith, Hebr. 13.

Verse. 10. And oppress not the widdowe, nor the fatherles, the stranger, nor
the poor, and let none of you imagine evil against his brother in your heart.
Particular duties toward some certain persons.
THe third sort has those duties, the which men do owe particularly unto
certain persons by the commandment and feeling of true charity it self,
that is, rather, and more readily then unto the rest of other men. And these
are such duties as both the law of GOD, and also the feeling of humanity it
self does command us to perform especially unto persons afflicted, or in
trouble and misery, as unto Widows, Fatherles children, strangers, the poor,
and such as are destitute or void of man his help Deuteronomy. 16. ver. 11.14. Psalm.
82. And this is that which we do owe unto them, namely, that because they
easelie lie open unto injuries and wrongs, and are not able to resist, and
stand against those that oppress them, we neither should our selves take from
them that which is their own, nor suffer it to be taken away from them.
Finally, by way of making it more plain, it is here further showed, what
manner of charity or love ours ought to be toward them, and also all other
men, namely, that we should not so much as in heart think, or wish, or devise
any evil against them, much less execute it in deed.

Verse. 11. Or And
But they refused to hearken, and pulled away the shoulder, and stopped their
ears, that they should not hear.
The former doctrine confirmed by an example familiar unto the Jews.
GOd confirms the former doctrine by an example familiar and known unto the
Jews, that they may be the more moved, and give heed unto it. Whereby they
are taught, that their forefathers selt punishments, and the same most
grievous, and the wrath of God, and that very great, because they worshipped
and served not God in such sort, that is, according unto the rule set down
before. For they gave heed only unto those rites, and outward ceremonies,
mocking God, touching which, the people as yet propounded the question, as the
chief part of God his worship and service, being in deed too much addicted or
given unto these outward things, and very wickedly, and through great error of
mind, placing the whole sway and weight of their salvation, and peace with
God, in these in a manner toys, and trifles. Two parts of this narration.
But this narration has two parts. The first shows the contempt of the
forefathers of this people (who asked this question of God) concerning the true
worship of God, and their rebellion. 1. The contempt of their forefathers.
The second, the judgment of God against them for the same. This their
contempt is described by an amplification, 2. The judgment of God for the same.
the which contains a proceeding as it were by degrees, and also a reckoting
up of those parts (wherein their stubborn despising of GOD does consist)
besides that the phrase also, 1. And And And And
and manner of speech of the Prophet, being knit together with many * copulative
conjunctions, does the better paynt out the greatness of the rebellion of those
former Jews, that the judgment and wrath of God against them may appear to
be the more just: and that their posterity or others should not follow them,
because that all ^en see that they are to be dispraised and discommended.

Three degrees of their contempt.
And furthermore, this verse has three degrees and parts of his manifest
contempt, or despising of God, the which was, and appeared in the Jews before
they were so miserably afflicted or punished in the captivity. The first
degree is, They refused to har^^. 1. They refuse to hear.
For by little and little men do fall into the manifest contempt of God: and
no man upon the sudden, and at a push becomes most lewd and filthy. First,
therefore men refuse to give ear unto those things, to considder and weigh
those things, the which are said unto them by the servants of God. They do not
at the first utterly refuse at all to hear, but they refuse to consider, and
to give heed unto the things, which they have heard. The second degree, The
pulled away the shoulder, or they set their stubborn shoulder against it. A
Metaphor taken from men that do not willingly take the burden, 2 They pulled
back the shoulder. What the figure Metaphora is, see Amos cap. 4. ver. 12.
which is laid upon them, nay which do refuse it, and cast it off, and
therefore withdraw the shoulder, wherewith they should carry the burden, and
strive against it. There is a like manner of speaking Nehem. 9. ver. 29. But
they behaved themselves proudely, and hearkened not unto thy commandments, but
sinned against thy judgments (which a man should do and live in them) and
pulled away the shoulder, and were stifnecked, and would not hear. For those
things which men do willingly take up, unto them they are said to yield a
willing shoulder. Sophon. 3. 3. They stopped their ears.
In the second place therefore men refuse to do, and take upon them those
things, the which having heard before, they foreslowed to meditate or think
upon. In the end they stop their ears, and harden them, that now they will not
so much as only hear and hearken unto those things, that is to say, they
refuse and disdain so much as with the ears of their body only, to receive
those things, the which before they only despised to give heed unto, and to
do.

Verse. 12. Yea, they made their hearts as an adamant stone, least they should
hear the law, and the words which the Lord of hosts sent in his spirit by the
ministry of the former Prophets: therefore came a great wrath from the Lord
of hosts.
4. They made their heart as hard as an adamant.
THe fourth and last degree of the manifest rebellion of men, to wit not only
the hardening of the ears of their body, but also the wilful stopping of the
ears of their heart. And this stubbornes is described or set forth, both
metaphorically, and also by way of matching together of contraries.
Metaphorically, in the word Adamant. For they did not lightly harden their
heart, but most stubbornly, so that now their heart and rebellious mind against
God, was not only a stone, but also most hard above all stones, such as is the
Adamant, so that it neither would, nor could by any means receive the words of
God, by means of that over much hardening. The matching together of contraries
lies in the description of that word which they despised. For it was the word
of almighty God revealed by his spirit, and so consequently making for their
salvation: and by the ministry of the prophets, not of any men whatsoever, but
of most choice and approved instruments of God was the same word showed and
delivered unto them. Now every one of these things severally, much more all of
them jointly do increase this rebellion of the Jews, or of men, and their
contempt or despising of God. The punishment of their rebellion.
The rebellion of men being set down, now follows their punishment, that is
to say, the judgment of God against them, and the same most just, and also
most greevous. And as against such kind of men, the anger of God goes before,
and then follows the punishment and pain: so is both of them in this place
orderly described. The wrath of God therefore was justly against so stifnecked
disobedience, yea and that great wrath, the which appeared by the effects, that
is the punishment, which followed. And by the proportion of the rebellion it
ought to be great, that the punishment might be equal and aunswerable unto the
fault.

Verse. 13. Therefore it is come to pass, that as he cried, and they would not
hear, so they cried, and I would not hear, says the Lord of hosts.
The description of their punishment.
THe description of the punishment, the which consists of three parts,
whereby the greatness thereof is showed, that other men, and the Jews
themselves might shun, and fear to initate or follow such stubbornes of
mind against God. 1. The first degree of their punishment.
The first degree of the punishment is that they were not heard of God, no not
when they cried unto God. The reason is from the rules of distributive justice,
as they call it, and such as punishes the sins of men, the which commands,
that men should be punished after the same manner, after the which they have
offended. They would not hear God crying unto them: so likewise were not they
heard of God, when as they cried unto him in their afflictions or troubles. So
God tells them of the like punishment in his Prophet Isai cap. 65. ver. 12.
in these words: Therefore I will number you to the sword, and all you shall
bow down to the slaughter, because I called, and ye did not answer: I spoke,
and ye heard not, but did evil in my sight, and did choose that thing, which I
would not. So Psalm. 18. ver. 25.26. David teaches, that God will deal with
men according to their behavior and deserving: with the godly (says he of
God) thou will show thy self godly: with the upright man, thou will show thy
self upright. With the pure thou will show thy self pure, and with the
froward thou will show thy self froward. Now this is a most grievous
punishment, not to be heard, or received of God.

Verse. 14. But I scattered them among all the nations, whom they knew not: thus
the land was desolate after them, that no man passed through, nor returned: for
they laid the pleasant land wast.
2. The second degree of their punishment.
THe second degree of this punishment, they were scattered as it were with a
strong whirle-winde, and cast out of their native soil among sundry nations,
and not all of them carried as banished persons, and captives into some one
certain land, and country, but one into this country and another into that,
with a great and fearful scattering, and renting in pieces of the same body,
and nation. Yea and moreover they were driven unto nations unknown unto the
Jews themselves, at whose hands they could look for no humanity or courteous
intertainement, as namely unto whom they were Barbarians: 3. The third degree
of their punishment.
and they unto them. The third degree of their punishment, for that their very
land it self did for their sake feel the most grievous judgments of God
also, as lacking inhabitants, and her blessing from God, that in stead of a
pleasant land, the which it was before, that same land of the Jews should be
laid wast; and become an huge and great wilderness. For as it is in the Psalm.
107. ver. 34. God turns a fruitful land into barrennes, for the wickedness
of them that dwell therein.

CAP. 8.
Verse. 1. Again the word of the Lord of hosts came unto me, saying, Two
parts of this chapter.

1. A confirmation of the former doctrine.
THis whole chapter contains two things. Frst, it has a confirmation of the
former doctrine touching the true worship and service of God to be defined and
restored by the true works of godliness and charity, 2. An answer unto the
question moved in the former chapter.
and not only by outward ceremonies, as appears hereafter ver. 16.17.
Secondly, an express answer unto the question propounded in the former chapter
verse. (...) and so forth. But touching the beginning of this chapter it is a
garnishing or a staying in the further laying out of the matter by the way of
matching together of the contraries, to wit of the punishment or judgment of
GOD against the forefathers of the Jews, and of the promise already made unto
their posterity by the free mercy of GOD, and not uttered, and beslowed upon
them for any righteousness or deserts of theirs, as appears hereafter verse
15. And it was requisite that these promises should be set after these
judgments and punishments of God against the Jews, least they might suppose
God to bestil angry with them, and consequently might lay aside al hope and
mind of building of the temple, and repairing of the City, and of their longer
stay in the land of Judea, as is showed ver. 9. For this rehearsing of the
promises of God, especially so notable and ^uident touching the restoring of
Sion, yea and of the City it self, and of the long continuance of them both,
did very greatly both ^omfort them, and also encourage them to go lustily
forward with the building. Moreover this verse, like a the beginning also of
the verse following has a confirmation of the doctrine, which ^^lloweth, namely
for that the Prophet was commanded by God, (...) and the almighty God, to
utter, and to promise these things (...) his name unto the Jews, that is,
unto his church. Why this preface of the Prophet is so often repeated (Thus
says the Lord of hosts.)
And this pre^^ce of the Prophet is often repeated, to wit because in so great
^^ly burly and trouble of things, in so lamentable destruction of that people,
and so great power and boldness of their enemies, (the which were against that
building of the Temple. Esdr. 4. ver. 1) this promise or doctrine, was so much
the more diligently to be confirmed.

Ver. 2. Thus says the Lord of hosts, I was ielous for Zion with great
ielousy, and I was ielous for her with great wrath.
The chief came of all the promises of God toward his church, is
THe manner and order of the Prophet, his staying still in the confirmation of
the former doctrine. For first of all he sets ^owne the very cause it self,
nay the ch^ese cause of all the promises of God to come, and which were to be
rehearsed, namely the only mercy and good will of God toward them: both that
these Jews the posterity of their forefathers, should not think that they had
deserved these things at the hand of G^d with their ceremonies or holiness of
life: and also that they might understand what was the most certain foundation
of these promises made unto them, to wit the purpose and will of God, which is
unchangeable. So then the most true and chief, and principal cause, nay the
only cause that moves God to bestow so great benefits upon them, His only
bounteousnes, and loving good will.
and us all, that is, upon his church, is the very bounteousnes and loving good
will of GOD toward those, whom he has wholly chosen. For as at the first he
chose and loved them for that cause only: so also for the same cause does he
cherish and defend them. And this free good will of God toward those that are
his is described and set forth by the adioyntes, to wit, his Jealousy. For as
Augustine says, He which loves, the self same also is jealous, and will have
the thing which is dear unto him, to be safe, without danger, and to do
well. But that the nature and greatness of this love of God toward us, whom he
has chosen, may be known, there is added or set down a difference, namely,
that this jealousy of God is great, and earnest. And the Prophet does describe
this jealousy by a word of like signification, to wit, of heat, or of burning
love. For that same sincere or unfeigned and pure love, both of GOD toward us,
and also ours toward GOD is an exceeding burning and heat of the heart,
wherewith we do burn and love.

Verse. 3. Thus says the Lord, I will return unto Zion, and will dwell in the
midst of Jerusalem, and Jerusalem shall be called a city of truth, and the
mountain of the Lord of hosts, the holy Mountain.
Effects of God his love.
FRom the cause he comes unto the effects and the same general, and in
consideration and respect of the other, first in regard of order. And in this
place there are reckoned up three, which are as it were the causes of them that
do follow, at leastwise, they go before in regard of order. 1. God his
reconcilement with those that are his.
The first is, God his reconcilement or being made friends with those that are
his, the which metaphorically is called the returning of God unto us, and those
that are his, from whom God seemed before (in respect of outward things, and of
the most miserable estate of that people) to be far distant, 2. His dwelling
among them.
and a great way off in the judgment of men Psalm. 74. and Psalm 85. The
second benefit or effect of the good will of God toward those that are his,
Schacan.
is his dwelling, yea, and that his sure dwelling among them (for this does
the Hebrew word signify, to have a sure and settled dwelling. Further it has
an Emphasis, or vehemency and force, whereas God is said to dwell in the
midst of those that are his, to wit, that he may the more easily be present
with the whole body of his Church, 3. His sanctifying of them.
and every one of the faithful, and help them. The third effect and benefit
is, The sanctifying of them. For like as God dwells among those that are his,
so also does he sanctify them by his presence and dwelling among them, John
17. By the which is understood that this presence of God is not a bodily
presence, but spiritual: for as much as it brings holiness unto our minds.
And doubtless the presence of God is the dwelling and efficacy or working of
his holy Spirit in us by the preaching of his word, the Sacraments, and
inward moving in us. Further hereby also is gathered, that this same presence
of God is not idle, and without effect in his Church. And by the name of the
city, and of Sion, 4 What the figure Metonymia is, see Oseas cap. 4. ve. 3
he does by the figure Metonymia, signify and betoken the inhabitants
themselves, both which were in the city, and also which in regard of their
office were, and dwelt in the temple. In the city, that is, in the men of the
city, he will have truth for to be, that they should not be hypocrites before
God, and liars, and league breakers one unto another: and in the mount Sion,
where the Temple was, he will have holiness to be, that in the same the true
worship, that is, which is appointed by God, may be done, and that reverently.

Verse. 4. Thus says the Lord of hosts, there shall yet old men, and old
women dwell in the streets of Jerusalem, and every man with his staff in his
hand for very age.
The security or saftie of the Church.
THe fourth benefit, the security, or saftie of the Church, or the continuance
and defense of the same even on this earth. So then the course and order of the
speech of the Prophet, and of the promises of God descends or comes down
from spiritual benefits unto earthly benefits. For as Paul writes, 1.
Timoth. cap. 4. ver. 8. Godliness is profitable unto all things, which has the
promise of the life present, and of that that is to come. Now this defense and
continuance of the Church is described or set forth by those adioyntes, the
which only come to pass and fall out in the time of great peace, and quiet
continuance, to wit long life of the citizens, saftie of the old men, and
finally great numbers of children, and public playing in the streets. God
therefore promises that the citizens of Jerusalem, which shall dwell in the
same, shall be long lived, and shall come unto great hoarenes of head, and old
age, yea of both sexes or kinds, that is to say, both men and women, the which
is a sign and adioynt both of a city of long continuance, and also inhabited
in peace.

Verse. 5 And the streets of the city shall be full of boys and girls,
playing in the streets thereof.
5. Store of children playing in the streets.
ALso the number of children of both sexes, that is, male and female, and their
freenes from danger and fear of enemies, and the same public (which then
appears, when as they freely and boldly play in the streets without fear)
is a most certain sign and token of the continuance and peace of the said
city. And it has a moving of affection, in that he makes mention both of old
men, and of children, and it adds a great Emphasis or force unto this
sentence.

Verse. 6. Thus says the Lord of hosts, Though it be Or Wonderful.
impossible in the eyes of the remnant of this people in these days, should it
therefore be Or Wonderful. Their doubting and distrustfulnes many ways
answered.
impossible in my sight, says the Lord of hosts?
THis is the answering of an objection that might be made, that they should
not distrust these so great and large promises of God, because of their smalnes
and fewnes. For the Prophet answers this their distrust and doubtfulnes of
mind many ways. 1. From the power of God compared with the strength of me^.
First of all here in this place from the nature and power of God himself, the
which is propounded or set forth by comparing of it with the strength of men.
For albeit the fulfilling of so hard and royal promises, seem, nay, is unto
men not only admirable or wonderful, but also impossible, shall the same
therefore be impossible unto God himself, who is both Jehovah, and also the
Lord of hosts, that is, almighty? Therefore the word (wonderful) in this
place is put for impossible, Iippalle.
as it is Luke cap. 1. ver. 13. For with God nothing shall be impossible. And
Ierem. 32. ver. 27. Behold, I am the Lord of all flesh, Is there any thing to
hard for me? 2. From experience it self.
The second solution, or answering of their doubt is taken from experience it
self, in these words (the remnant of this people). For that remnant had indeed
already proved the effects of these promises of God. Wherefore they ought to
hope well for the time to come afterward. Moreover in these words ( the remnant,
and, in these days) is contained the reason also of the distrustfulnes of the
people, namely, because they measured the fulfilling and performance of these
things, both by the present state of things, and also by that their fewnes or
smalnes.

Verse. 7. Thus says the Lord of hosts, Behold, I will deliver my people from
the East country, and from the West country.
3. From God his earnest auouching of the said former promise.
THe third solution, or answering of their doubtfulnes, from God his earnest
affirming, or auouching of the said former promise, whereby God does not only
repeat it, but because he is true of his word, and cannot lie, he does also
confirm it, as if he should say, I will do it, I will do it: I promise it,
yea indeed I promise it. This self same solution or answer therefore does
answer, and satisfy that doubting of the Jews, by reason of their remnant
only, that is, by reason of their fewnes. For God promises that he will both
save their whole nation wheresoever it shall be, and from thence will gather it
together into one body, as Psalm. 107. ver. 3. The Prophet acknowledges, or
rather indeed wills the people to acknowledge, that God gathered them out of
the lands, from the East, and from the West, from the North, and from the
South. And therefore Psalm. 126. ver. 4. the people pray unto God, saying: O
Lord, bring again our captivity, as the rivers in the South. And this promise
of gathering them together again from what places soever they shall be
scattered into, God makes unto them, because they should not faint, or be
dismayed because of their fewnes, after which manner also Christ comfort his
Disciples Luke 12. ver. 32. saying: Fear not, little l^cke, for it is your
fathers pleasure to give you the kingdom.

Three things to be noted.
But there are three things to be noted in this God his earnest avouching of
the former promise. First, the person promising, Behold, I, that is, the true
God, and Jehovah, 1 The person promising.
the which is matched against ^^n offering themselves, and promising something.
Secondly, the thing promised, to wit, salvation, that is, 2. The thing promised.
their preservation and keeping against violence or force, suttletie, and the
plots of me^ against the Church of GOD. Thirdly, the place, to wit, how far
and wide soever the faithful be scattered into the rising, 3. The place.
and going down of the Sun, that is, into the East and West, and into other
quart^^s of the whole world, God nevertheless does keep them, and also will
keep them most safely, and hereafter.

Verse. 8. And I will bring them, and they shall dwell in the midst of
Jerusalem, and they shall be my people, and I will be their God in truth, and
in righteousness.
An amplification of the benefit taking away al occasion of doubting from the
faithful.
AN amplification of the benefit, wherewith he does once for all shake off all
their doubtings and distrustfulnes. For God promises that he will not only
save them, and the scattered remnants of the people, but also that he will
gather them together into one body: and furthermore, that being thus gathered
together they shall dwell in Jerusalem, and consequently the city necessarily
to be restored and builded again. And finally, he promises that he will be
their God, yea and that for ever, and with most large effects. Therefore look
how many words there are, so many sentences, and most large promises are there,
the which both may, and also ought to take away all distrust from all the
godly. Thief words, They shall be my people etc. do show the renewing of the
covenant of God (the which seemed to be broken off because of their captivity,
and the destruction of the Temple and city) which is the fountain of all the
gifts of God. For upon that covenant depend all the benefits of God toward us.
Moreover, these words, In truth and righteousness, do declare that God will
cherish and preserve them not only in words and promises, but also for ever
and in very deed, that is, in the effect it self: for so in this place do I
expound the word (righteousness) for the effects.

Verse. 9. Thus says the Lord of hosts. Let your hands be strong, ye that
hear in these days these words by the mouth of the Prophets, which were in
the day, that the foundation of the house of the Lord of hosts was laid, that
the Temple might be builded.
An exhortation unto the building of the Temple.
AN exhortation, the which is joined unto the former doctrine, and confirms
the same by the causes thereof, the which are here alleged. And he exhorts
them unto the building of the Temple, the which was begun before, but yet was
afterward left off, because of the latter decree of Cyrus, and Assuerus: but
was taken in hand again under Darius, but yet faintly forwarded by the Jews,
because they preferred the private buildings of their own ho^ses, before the
Temple of God, as Aggeus shows cap. 1.

Three parts of this verse.
This verse contains three things. First of all, the thing it self, that is,
the sum of the exhortation. And it is, that they would strengthen their
hands unto that building of the Temple of God to be lustilie finished, 1. The
sum of the exhortation.
the which they went slowly and slacklie about. So Isai uses the like
exhortation, but in an unlike sense cap. 35. ver. 3. where he says,
strengthen the weak hands, and comfort the feeble knees. So Hebr 12. ver. 12.
Wherefore lift up your hands which hang down, and your weak knees. In this
exhortation their negligence in the former time is briefly, but yet sharply
noted and touched. The second thing is, 2. Who are stirred up unto this work.
who are in this sort stirred up unto this work, to wit those which lived at
the self same time, and had heard, and yet did hear with their ears the
promises of God touching the restoring of the Temple Esdr. 5. For they are
worthelie accused of great negligence, as who namely being stirred up, and
admonished by GOD, were not moved therewithal notwithstanding. Again God
would have these self same see the fulfilling of these promises, the which
they had heard, that they might learn to trust God, and might be confirmed or
strengthened against all doubtings. The third thing, 3. The time how long they
had left of this work.
he sets down the time, wherein they had ceased, and showed themselves to
be faint and careless, to wit, not for one year or twain only, or for some
short space: but from that space of time, wherein the temple began to be
builded. And this if it be gathered out of the 3. Esdr. 2. Ioh. and 7. of this
prophecy, it shall be found to have been the time of 44. years, in all the
which the Jews were negligent.

Verse. 10. For before these days there was no hire for man, nor any hire for
beast, neither was there any peace to him that went out, or came in, because of
the affliction: for I set all men, every one against his neighbor.
THis is a rendering of a reason of the former exhortation from the comparing
together of diverse times, A reason of the former exhortation. What the figure
Hypophora is see Amos cap. 5. ver. 21.
whereby they shall easily gather that they are exhorted by God unto that work.
And here is also contained a secret Hypophora, or answering of an objection
that might be made, that they should not think that their labor now also
should be unprofitable, as it was before, or that there should be any
disturbance or letting of the work, or that their state should be unquiet. For
the Prophet does answer, that God is now reconciled or made friends with them.
Wherefore the Jews did now already feel the effects of this covenant,
whereof Zacharias made mention before verse. 8. And in the describing or setting
forth of this comparison, is first of all set down the most lamentable
condition of the former time, wherein they ceased from the work, as appears
Agge. 1. ver. 6. in these words: Ye have sown much, and bring in little. ye
eat, but ye have not enough: ye drink, but ye are not filled: ye cloth you,
but you be not warm: and he that earneth wages, puts the wages into a
broken bag. This lamentable condition of the former time is described by the
reckoning up of three things, The misery of the former times described three
ways.
the which do declare the great misery of the men, and the curse of God
against them, to wit, The labor of the men, 1. The labor of men and beasts
was unprofitable.
and also of the cattle, was at that time unprofitable Deuteronomy. 28. But the
contrary falls out, where God favors our doings, as it is Psalm. 128.
ver. 2. When thou eatest the labors of thine hands, thou shall be blessed, and
it shall be well with thee. Secondly, 2. Wars and dangers on every side.
Wars and dangers are on every side. Such was the time that is spoken of 2.
Chr. 15. ver. 5. And in that time there was no peace to him, that did go out,
and go in: but great troubles were to all the inhabitants of the earth.
Lastly, there was no peace and agreement between the citizens themselves, 3.
Civil discord within themselves.
and those that were country men, but there were between them discourteous
discords and iarres.

Verse. 11. But now I will not entreat the residue of this people, as a fore
time, says the Lord of hosts.
The joyful estate of the Jews when they began to build the Temple again,
matched with their miseries, when they left off to build the same.
THe matching together of contraries, the which shows the joyful condition of
the latter time, namely wherein they began to build the Temple, contrary unto
that former estate of theirs, when as they left of the building of the same.
And here in this verse, time is matched with time, namely the time past with
the time present, that is, their leuing of, with their building, although it be
both the self same God which sent both those estates upon them: and also the
self same people, which feels and felt both estates, that they should
understand that God does now make them partakers of the effects of his
covenant, and therefore that they should hope well for the time to come: and
consider, how much the building of the Temple of God does differ from the
neglecting or letting alone of the same.

Verse. 12. For the seed shall be prosperous: the vine shall give her fruit,
the ground shall give her increase, and the heavens shall give their dew, and
I will cause the remnant of this people to possess all these things.
A threefold happiness of this time, set against a threefold misery of the
former.
HEre he sets thing against thing, to wit, a threefold happiness of this time,
against the threefold misery of the former time. For now there is peace both
for to sow, and also for to gather in that which is sowed: in the former time
nothing was in saftie unto any man. Now the fruit of the earth is most
plentiful, and the labor both of men and beasts most profitable: 1 Now
peace. Then wars.
then they lost all their labor and cost to. Agge. 2. ver. 19.20. Consider, I
pray you, in your minds, from this day, and before from the 24. day of the
ninth month, 2 Now plenty: Then scarsenes and loss.
even from the day that the foundation of the Lords Temple was laid: consider
it in your minds. Is the seed yet in the barn? As yet the vine, and the
Fig Tree, and the Pomegranate, and the Olive tree has not brought forth: from
this day will I bless you. 3. Now quiet possessing of their own. Then civil
discord and strife.
Now every one his possession in this people is and shall be safe and quiet
unto him: at that time every man strove and went together by the ears with his
own neighbor.

Verse. 13. And it shall come to pass, that as ye were a curse among the
heathen, O house of Judah, and house of Israel, so will J deliver you, and ye
shall be a blessing: fear not, but let your hands be strong.
An amplification of their joyful estate, by the happiness of the time to come
also.
AN amplification of their joyful estate, by the description, and happiness of
the time to come also. For this happiness shall be so great, that in time to
come it shall be a form of praying or wishing of the blessing of God unto
others, or unto themselves. So then this happiness of the Jews shall be both
manifest unto all men, and also great, and to be wished for by the consent and
agreement of all men. And moreover God both by the comparing together of the
former misery of the said Jews: and also by the showing of his mind and
purpose toward them, does make this promise toward them to be the more
welcome, and evident. By the comparing of their former estate, for that in
times past they were a former of cursing, and banning, whilst the judgments
of God against them being captives, were to be seen both manifest, and
bitter. And in this respect does David Psalm. 102. ver. 8. complain that he
sometimes was a reproach unto his enemies, saying: Mine enemies revile me
daily, and they that rage against me, have sworn against me. But now, and
hereafter they were a form and pattern of the great favor and blessing of
God. And by the showing of his mind toward them, he makes this promise the
more welcome and evident unto them, for that he will (save) them, that is,
deliver them out of all their miseries, and bless them, yea and that also for
the time which was to come, and to follow afterward Psalm. 37 in the end. Last
of all is added a conclusion necessarily gathered of all these things before,
to wit, the exhortation unto the work of the Temple lustilie, and without
fear either of disturbance or letting, or that their labor should be
unprofitable and unfruitful. For hereunto appertains the sum of these
promises, to wit, that they restore and set up again the temple, that is to
say, the worship and service of God.

Verse. 14. For thus says the Lord of hosts, As I thought to punish you, when
your fathers provoked me unto wrath, says the Lord of hosts, and repented
not.
A reason of the former amplification.
THis is the rendering of a reason of the former amplification, that is, of so
great a blessing of God which should fall upon the Jews, whereunto also there
is added the answering of an objection, that might be made. The reason is, for
that God being appeased toward them, does now think, and purpose to do good
unto them. The answering of an objection, for that albeit he did worthelie
afflict or punish them and their ancetours before, yet notwithstanding he has
now decreed with himself to bestow benefits upon them. The answering of the
objection is contained in this verse: and in the verse following the reason or
answer unto the same. For the calling to remembrance of their former estate,
and of the most grievous threatenings of God against them, might trouble their
minds Ierem. 25. God therefore preuenteth or meets as it were by the way
with this objection. He confesses therefore that they were before, and also
most just (he means his threatenings) because that he was provoked and
kindled by the most stubborn vices of them and their forefathers, how soever
he bare with them with a gentle, patient, and merciful mind. But as if the
patience of God had been overcome with their incurable wilfulnes, that which is
added (it repented me not) shows that the counsel and purpose of God was
both seasonable or in due time, and just, when as he chasteneth the Jews, and
his Church: and also that such punishments are healthful and profitable for
his Church, the which by God are inflicted or laid upon it: for they are
medicines.

Verse. 15. So again have I determined in these days to do well unto
Jerusalem, and to the house of Judah: fear ye not.
An answer unto the former objection.
THe answer unto the former objection, That God is now turned, that is, appeased
with the Jews, and therefore that his thoughts are otherwise touching them, to
wit, now good and joyful. Not that God does change his mind, but that men
being tamed and changed by afflictions or troubles, do find GOD otherwise
toward them, then when as they were stubborn and rebellious against him.
Albeit that even this very same, that men do repent from the stubborn
wickedness of their life, is not of themselves, but of the grace of God
preventing them. But here is showed only, that men, before they have God
appeased with them, can look and hope for no good at his hand. For the
fountain of all the gifts of GOD toward us, is his favor and reconciliation
or being made friends with us, the which when as it cannot be done but by
Christ the Mediator, doubtless it is only of free gift, and for to be
attributed unto his mercy, and not unto our works, or deserts. In the end of
this verse he repeateth again, Fear ye not, because that the remembrance of
that same former anger of God toward them, did stick deeply in their minds,
the prints whereof were even then yet still remaining. And therefore that same
fear and trembling could not so easily be shaken off, and put a way, neither
could this exceeding favor and love of God so soon be persuaded unto them, no
nor yet once be conceived in their mind: so distrustful doubtless are men by
nature of the promises of God.

Verse. 16. These are the things that ye shall do. Speak ye every man the
truth unto his neighbor: execute judgment truly and vprightlie in your
gates.
An admonition.
THis is an admonition, by the which he does both teach them the way, wherein,
if they walk, they shall continually feel that same favor of God: and also
confirms the doctrine delivered in the former chapter touching the true
worship and service of God, Wherein the true worship of God does consist.
namely, that it does not consist in outward ceremonies, but in the true works
of godliness and charity, the which are reckoned up in this place. The works
of charity both private and also public are contained in this verse by the
figure Synecdoche, What the figure Synecdoche is, see Amos cap. 5. v 21.
the duties of private persons by the word (truth) and the offices of public
persons, as of Judges, by these words (the judgment of peace) that is, upright
judgment, pronounced or delivered with a calm and quiet mind, not angry,
nor partial, not of any distempered or troubled affection: as for example,
through hatred, or envy, or favor.

Verse. 17. And let none of you imagine evil in your hearts against his
neighbor, and love no false oath: for all these are the things that I hate,
says the Lord.
The works of godliness contained under the word (oath) or swearing.
HEre also are contained the works of godliness by the figure Synecdoche, under
the name of an oath, or swearing. There is also showed how sincere and pure our
mind and heart ought to be in both kinds of these duties, that we should not
follow these works feinedly after the manner of hypocrites. For we must refrain
even from evil thoughts, much more from deeds: because that evil thoughts
themselves do displease God, and he does hate them, like as he does evil
works.

Verse. 18. And the word of the Lord of hosts came unto me, saying,
A passing unto the answering of the question of the Jews moved in the former
chapter touching their ordinary fasts.
A Passing unto another matter. For the Prophet comes now unto the question
moved in the 7. chapter of the ordinary fasts of the Jews, concerning the
which the Jews asked counsel of the Prophets and Priests, whether they were
now also of them to be observed and retained. The Prophet answered, that they
were not, both for that the true worship and service of God does not consist in
them: and also for that in stead of fastings and mourning, God will have them
keep feast days, in the which they should rejoice and be glad. But in this
verse the Prophet gets authority unto his answer, when as he shows that
it is not of himself, but from the almighty Jehovah. The which thing he also
repeateth again in the verse following, that it may the more be credited or be
believed.

Verse. 19. Thus says the Lord of hosts, The fast of the fourth month, and
the fast of the fifth, and the fast of the seventh, and the fast of the tenth,
shall be to the house of Judah joy and gladness, and prosperous hie feasts:
therefore love the truth and peace.
The answer unto the former question moved by the Jews concerning the
observing of their fasts.
THe answer unto the question moved, by the matching together of the contraries
of those things, the which not only they, that is, the Jews ought to observe,
but also we, and generally the Church of God at all times. Here therefore are
two things to be noted. First, the answer it self. Secondly, the matching
together of contraries. in the answer, this is of great moment or weight, for
that God not only makes answer concerning the fast of the fifth month (of the
which the question was moved) but also of al other extraordinary fasts, 1. The
answer it self.
the which the Jews had ordained in remembrance of their misery, and of the
judgments of God against them: 2. The matching together of contraries.
as of the fast of the fourth month, because then the walls of the city of
Jerusalem were cast down with the engines of war by Nabuchadnezzar. The fast
of the fifth month, in the which the temple it self was burned.

2. Into what works their fasts are now to be turned.
The Antithesis, or matching together of contraries shows, into what works
those fasts are now to be turned. First, into feast days both ordinary and
also extraordinary, in the which for the benefit received from God, and the
changing of their condition or estate the Jews were to rejoice holily, 1. Into
feast days
that is to say, inwardly, truly, and from their heart: and be glad, that is,
that they should testify or witness this inward joy of their mind in their
gesture it self, and also in countenance. But al these things they must do (in
God) and according unto his commandments, and not according unto the wantonness
of the flesh, and intemperance, and surfeiting. For God would have the feast
days to be joined with such holy gladness. And therefore Deuteronomy. 12. ver. 18. the
Lord by Moses instructing the Jews of their behavior in such kind of feasts,
says, And thou shall rejoice before the Lord thy God in all that thou put
thine hand to. And in this respect Christ answers for his Disciples against
the Scribes and Pharisees, chalenging him for their so seldom fasting, Matthew.
9. ver. 15. and saying, Can the children of the marriage chamber mourn as long
as the bridegroom is with them? But the days will come, when the bridegroom
shall be taken from them, and then shall they fast. 2. What things instead of
these fasts they ought to observe for ever.
Secondly, the matching together of contraries teaches, what they ought to
do, and ordain and observe in stead of these fasts, yea and that for ever
(for those feast days were part of the ceremonies, and therefore were not
ordained to continue for ever) namely, that they should love the truth and
peace. Under the name of truth he commends unto the godly, sincerity or
vprightnes without hypocrisy and dissembling, in all things. And under the
name of peace, mutual concord or agreement one with an other, the which two
are as it were the fountains of other virtues, at least wise especial effects
of true godliness and charity. Last of all, he will have that we should love
these self same virtues, that is, that we should reverence them, with a true,
and not feined heart and affection: secondly, that we be given with our whole
study and mind unto the retaining and performing of them.

Verse. 20. Thus says the Lord of hosts, That there shall yet come people, and
the inhabitants of great cities. A reason of the former answer wherein

1. He gets authority unto his prophecy.
THis is the rendering of a reason of the former answer, to wit, why those days
of mourning and fasting are to be turned into these joyful and feast days.
And first of all the Prophet gets authority unto his prophecy from the
authority of God, the which he does often here set down, because that an hard
matter, and almost incredible or not to be believed was set forth. Secondly, 2.
Delivers the cause of this joy.
he delivers the thing it self, that is, the cause of that joy, and the same
most just, namely, that the other nations of the whole world shall in the end
join themselves with the Jews to seek and worship God. Then the which what
could be told or fall out more joyful, and to be wished for of the Jews, and
men that are desirous and lovers of the glory of God? But the Prophet
propounds or sets forth this so joyful a promise, with the diligent
reckoning up of all the parts and circumstances thereof, to the end that the
greatness of so great a benefit might the more easily be considered both of
them then, and also of us now, and that our giving of thanks unto GOD
therefore should be the greater. Wherefore all this place unto the end of the
chapter is a staying still in the laying out of the same matter, What these
figures are, see Oseas cap. 6. ver. 1. and Amos cap. 8. ver. 12. Two
circumstances of this promise.
the which also does consist of most pleasant Prosopopoeiaes and Hypotyposis,
the which do offer the thing it self unto the view of the eyes more clearly,
so that in a manner it may seem to be seen, and not to be read.

Moreover, this verse contains two circumstances of this promise. The first,
of the time, in this word (yet). The second, of the thing, in the word (they
shall come). For so much the more joyful and certain is the promise, for that
the time to come hereafter is promised to be like unto the time past, to wit,
1. Of the time.
when as many people come from all places unto Jerusalem to seek the God of
Israel, 2. Of the thing it self.
as appears by the Acts of the Apostles cap. 8. and Psalm. 96. where the
Prophet exhorts both the Jews and the Gentiles to praise God for his
mercies, saying: Give unto the Lord the glory of his name: bring an offering,
and enter into his courts. Worship the Lord in the glorious Sanctuary: tremble
before him all the earth. Secondly, they shall come, that is, even for honor
sake taking their journey from out of their own cities, they shall go and
come as far as unto the land of Jury. So Psalm. 84. ver. 6.7. David praises
the courage of the people that pass through the wilderness to assemble
themselves in Zion, saying: They going through the vale of Baca, make wells
therein: the rain also covers the pooles. They go from strength to
strength, till every one appear before God in Zion.

Verse. 21. And they that dwell in one city, shall go to another, saying, Up,
let us go and pray before the Lord, and seek the Lord of host: I will go
also.
Two other circumstances.
TWo other circumstances, or parts and amplifications of the former promise* the
which are set forth by the figure Prosopopoeia, or Hypotyposis. 1. They shall
come not one by one, but by heaps.
One is, for that not every one by himself, or severally only, to wit, one
after another, but gathered together and by heaps in a great company they
shall come, the which thing has a greater testimony or witness of their
zeal, and honor unto the worship of God, as appeared immediately before out of
the testimony of the Psalm. 84. ver. 7. The other circumstance shows the end,
2. Why they shall come.
why they shall come thither, namely, to worship the true God. And here in this
place the true worship of God is described or set forth under the name of
(praying and seeking). The word praying comprehends invocation or calling up
upon God* and giving of thanks. And the word seeking, the knowledge of God set
from his word, out of the which appears and grows faith and obedience.

Verse. 22. Yea, great people and mighty nations shall come to seek the Lord
of hosts in Jerusalem, Or
and to The face of the Lord. Two other circumstances also.
pray before the Lord.
HEre also are two other circumstances expressed, namely, the quality or
dignity it self of the people which shall join themselves with the Jews to
seek the true God: and the place, 1. The dignity of the comers.
where they shall seek him. As for their dignity, the same is here set forth
twofold, namely, their multitude, and their excellency. For (many shall
come). 2. The place where they shall seek God.
The which is set against the small people, which then dwelled in Judea. And
the self same shall be mighty nations, the which shall excel among the rest
in same, power, and rule bearing. Whereby the Church of God shall be the more
joyful* and greater, Why they shall come to Jerusalem rather the^ unto any
other place.
and that they are indeed honored by God. A^^ the Prophet by the way sets
down a reason, why these people shall come unto that place especially, namely,
because the face or presence of the Lord shall be there. He calls the face of
God those visible signs of the presence of God, which were at Jerusalem,
namely, the Temple it self, and the sacrifices which were offered in the
Temple. So then the people did seek that place, not being moved with the
consideration of the soil or land it self, nor with the dignity of the
walls and stones, nor with the riches or excellency of the people of the
Jews: but for that there were there at that time the manifest tokens of the
presence of God, such as now are the pure preaching of his word or of the
Gospel, and the sincere or true administration of the Sacraments ordained by
himself.

Verse. 23. Thus says the Lord of hosts, In those days shall ten men take
hold out of all languages of the nations, even taken hold of the skirt of him
that is a Jew, and say, We will go with you: for we have heard that God is
with you.
Yet two other circumstances.
LAst of all, two other circumstances also or other parts of the former promise
are here set down and added by the figure Hypotyposis, and Prosopopoeia, to
wit, 1. The zeal of the comers.
the earnestnes or zeal of those that come, and their number. Their earnestnes
or zeal shall be most great. For ten men of the nations shall follow after
one Jew, as their Captain, yea and that willingly, and of their own accord,
2 Their number.
and with great affection: And many people shall go and say, Come, and let us
go up to the mountain of the Lord, to the house of the God of Iaacob, and he
will teach us his ways, and we will walk in his paths: for the law shall go
forth of Zion, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem. So David Psalm. 102.
ver. 15. Then the heathen shall fear the name of the Lord, and all the Kings
of the earth thy glory. And ver. 21 22. That they may declare the name of the
Lord in Zion, and his praise in Jerusalem, when the people shall be gathered
together, and the kingdoms to serve the Lord.

The number of them is declared in these words, (they shall come out of all
nations and languages) and not only out of one part of the world: as for
example, out of the East, or out of the West: but also out of the North, and
out of the South. This at the length was brought to pass after, and by the
preaching of the Gospel, Acts 2. And Christ says, Mat. 8. ver. 11. That many
shall come from the East and West, and shall sit down with Abraham, Isaac, and
Iaacob in the kingdom of heaven. There is also added or set down a reason to
pull down the pride of man, or of the Jews, least that whilst we do seek
the visible Church of God, men themselves might seem to be sought. A reason
why the Gentiles should seek unto the Jews, that is, unto the Church of God.
The reason is, (because God is with you). So then God himself is to be
sought, and not men, when as we do adioyne our selves unto the visible Church.
And that we ought thus to do, this place does plainly show, except we will be
made inexcusable before him. For when as we hear now, what things God does
give unto his in the visible Church, shall we despise and not care for i^* that
is, shall we not seek after it?

CAP. 9.
Verse. 1. The burden of the word of the Lord Or Against the land that is
near, or lies round about thee.
in the land of Hadrach: and Damascus shall be his rest: Or Because the eye of
the Lord is the beholder of men, as of all the tribes of Israel.
when the eyes of man, even of all the tribes of Israel shall be toward the
Lord.
WHether this prophecy were delivered at the same time that the former were,
or at some other time, it does altogether consent and agree with them, because
these two things do follow necessarily and mutually, or one the other, namely,
the building of the Church of God, the which has been declared before, and the
destruction of the enemies thereof, the which in this prophecy is threatened,
that it shall be. And he makes mention only of certain people and nations
near unto the Jews, and such as were always their enemies, and troublous
unto them, but yet such, as by the which it is easy to gather the like of the
rest of the enemies of the Church of God. And these are rather mentioned, both
because they were better known unto the Jews, and were more cruel* unto
them. Such were those that are spoken of Esdr. 4. ver. 9. Rehum the cha^^celour
and Shimshai the scribe, and their companions, Dinaie, and Apharsathcaie,
Tarpelaie, Apharsaie, Aroheuaie, Bablaie, Shusha^ca^* Dehane, Elmaie, and the
rest of the people. And such as he recit^^ cap. 5. ver. 6. Tatnai captain
beyond the river, and Shether-bo^^^ and his companions. And such as are
reckoned up, Nehem* 4.

1. The sum of this Sermon or prophecy.
But this verse has three things. First, the sum of the Sermon or prophecy
ensuing. For it contains a burden, or the bitter judgments of God, and not
any promises to be delivered: and the same from Jehovah, that is, from the most
true and most mighty God. Secondly, against whom, to wit, 2. Against whom it
is bent.
generally against all the countries near unto the Jews, but specially
against them of Damascus. For I agree unto those who expound the Syrian word
(Chadrach) for a country that is near or lying round about another country.
Wherefore Damascus is first rehearsed, in the which especially the judgments
of God shall be for a long season, and shall stay there as in their proper
home: and shall not fly presently away, and remain there but for some little
while, as has been showed generally before in the fifth chapter. 3. A reason
of the judgments of God against these nations.
Thirdly, the reason of these judgments of God against these strangers from
the covenant of the people of GOD, the which also is in stead of answering an
objection that might be made, to answer those, which should make some doubt of
these threatenings of God. And the reason is, Because the eye of God does behold
and mark these people and nations also, and does in the end judge them also,
as he does the tribes of Israel, and those which are his church. So the
Psalmist teaches us Psalm. 113. ver. 6. That God abaseth himself to behold
things in the heaven, and in the earth, neither is there any creature, which is
not manifest in his sight: but (as it is Hebr. 4. ver. 13.) all things are
naked and open unto his eyes, with whom we have to do. And he spares not to
punish his own people, when they displease him, as David does teach us Psalm.
103. ver. 7. He made his ways known unto Moses, and his works unto the
children of Israel.

Or He shall border (to wit the eye or providence of God.) Two parts of this
verse.
Verse. 2. And Hamath also shall border thereby: Tyrus also and Zidon, though
they be very wise.
ANother particular rehersall of those places, and nations, the which shall be
punished, and comprehended or caught with the self same judgment of God that
the country of Damascus was. Wherefore this verse has two things to be noted,
1 A rehearsal of other places to be punished.
the recital of the places, and secondly an especial objection touching the
Ty^ians. But by Damascus shall Camath or Hamath also the head ^^tie of Syria,
2. An objection, and answer for Tyrus.
which was called Coele (and the which also was af^^^ward named Antiochia) be
contained in this border, and also Tyrus, and Sidon. For thus much do these
words signify, and he shall bound or border, that is, bounds of the seat by
him limited. Now touching the especial objection for the Tyrians, this was it,
that this city was every way most strong, and so consequently free from these
judgments of God. But here in this place there is reckoned up but one kind of
these munitions, and the same the best, namely the Counsel, the which Tyrus
had at home. For the city was stored with most wise men, and governors, like
as at this day the city Venice is thought to be. For it has a most wise
politic Senate or Counsel.

Verse. 3. For Tyrus did build her self a strong hold, and heaped up silver as
the dust, and gold as the mire of the streets.
Two other kinds of munition in Tyrus.
Two other kinds of the munition of the said Tyrus, her holds, and treasures.
For albeit that in the word munition in the Hebrew there be an allusion or
resemblance unto the name of Tyrus (for Matsor is a munition, 1. Her holds.
and Tsor, is Tyrus) yet I notwithstanding do understand thereby the holds or
fortresses of the city, 2. Her treasures.
whether she had them by nature, and situation of the place, or by the
industry and diligence of men. By the word ( Charuts, Gold stamped or coined,
or golden money, and by silver) I understand her treasures laid up, and kept
for the use of war. Both which in how great abundance they were in this
city appears by similitudes of dust and mire, the which are not set down
here, as mere Hyperbolaes, as 1. King. cap. 10. ver. 27. where King Solomon is
said to have given silver in Jerusalem, What the figure Hyperbole is, see Hab.
cap. 2. ver. 11.
as stones, and Cedars as the wild figtrees that grow abundantly in the
plain.

Verse. 4. Behold, the Lord will spoil her, and he will smite her power in
the Sea, and she shall be devoured with fire.
An answer unto the former objection for the Tyrians.
AN answer unto the former objection, taken from the power of God, and the issue
or falling out of the matter, or destruction of the city, the which, after
what manner it shall be, is here lively painted forth, that all men may
understand that fables are not told in this place by the Prophet, but the
unchangeable truth of God. So then he which shall throw down Tyrus, is the
Lord, yea and he which has rule and power over her. The representation of the
thing it self, and of the destruction of Tyrus, as it were to be seen with
the eyes, does show that it is set forth as a matter decreed by God. Wherefore
God shall first of all make here poor,

Verse. 5. Ashkelon shall see it, and fear, and Azzah also shall be very
sorrowful, and Ekron: for her countenance shall be ashamed, and the King
shall perish from Azzah, and Ashkelon shall not be inhabited.
The punishment of the Philistims.
THis is a staying still in the laying out of the same matter. For the Prophet
of God recites other nations, which were enemies and troublous unto the Church
of God, and so consequently to be punished. Generally the Philistims: 1.
Generally.
and specially certain of their towns or cities, to wit the chiefest, are
rehearsed, 2. Particularly.
whom God does threaten most grieuouslie, least any enemies of GOD might
think that they shall escape due and just punishment. Here therefore in this
verse is first contained the judgment of God against three chief Lordships,
and head cities of the Philistims, to wit Ascalon, Aza, or Gaza, and Ekron,
Ascalon. Aza. Ekron, Ascalon.
the especial and peculiar punishment of every one of the which is described
or set forth. And first of all the fear and great trembling of Ascalon, upon
the sudden and fearful sight of the destruction of Tyrus. 1. Here fear.
For Tyrus was as it were the hold and the glory of other cities and countries
near ad^oyning, whither they always hoped that they might fly. Therefore it
being destroyed, great fear no doubt was stricken into all those that were
near unto it. 2. Her laying wast. Gaza.
Secondly, the desolation or laying of it wast is mentioned. For she shall not
afterward be inhabited. As for Aza, or Gaza, first, she shall be sorrowful
for the destruction of Tyrus, 1. Shall be sorrowful.
as namely with the which she had traffic, and by which she gained.
Furthermore she shall loose her King, yea and moreover her kingdom for ever, so
that afterward her authority and glory shall be nothing. 2. She shall loose
her king and kingdom. Ekron shall be confounded with shame.
Ekron shall be confounded with shame, because that same Tyrus is destroyed,
the which only she beheld, and had respect unto, as her aid, and fortress.
And these things then fell out, when as Alexander of Macedonia, and his
successors brought into their subjection, and wasted all those whole countries,
to wit, Palestina, and Edumea, and other countries near unto them, destroyed
their towns, and vexed them most hardly with continual wars.

Verse. 6. And the stranger shall dwell in Ashdod, and I will cut off the pride
of the Philistims.
The punishment of Azotus, or Ashdod.
ANother stay about the laying forth of the same matter, to wit of Azotus the
head city of the Philistimes. Whereupon the Prophet teaches that their whole
power shall perish, and be cut off, when as this city shall be destroyed. And
the punishment of Azotus or Ashdod is, that albeit in deed she shall be
inhabited (and shall not be laid wast, as Ascalon) yet shall she not be
inhabited by the Philistims themselves, and the own country people: but of
bastards, that is, a rabble and rascal company of unknown persons, and such,
as no man can tell or show the country of their parents. The which thing is
not only wont to be most grievous unto the own country people, when as they
see themselves to be driven out, and put by the possession and right of their
own native and mother city: but further it is a token also of the extreme
misery of their land and country. Hereby therefore does the Prophet testify
or witness, that the whole glory of the Philistims shall be destroyed.

Verse. 7. And I will take away his blood out of his mouth, and his abominations
from between his teeth: but he that remains, even he shall be for our God,
and he shall be as a prince in Judah, but Ekron shall be as a Iebusite.
An amplification of the former matter for the comfort of the church, and also
the stirring up of the Philistims unto the true worship of God. What the figure
Metaphora is, see Amos cap. 4. ver. 12.
AN amplification, the which secretly contains the cause of the former
punishments and plagues against the Philistims, whereunto notwithstanding God
sets down a promise, both for to comfort his church withal, and also for
to stir up the Philistims unto the true worship of God. The amplification is,
when as God adds that it shall come to pass, that he will then take away all
their bloody robberies and pillages, and pull away their abominations, the
which self same are the most true causes of the most sharp judgments of God
against men. And this self same does God describe or set forth
Metaphoricallie, to wit, comparing them unto Bears, Wolves, and Tigers, and
other cruel, and flesh-eating wild beasts, that the lewdnes of these men may
appear to have been the more barbarous and savage. So does David describe the
tyranny and cruelty of wicked oppressors Psalm. 10. ver. 9. when he says, He
lies in wait secretly, even as a lion in his den: he lies in wait to
spoil the poor, when he draws him into his net. So again he complains
of the ungodly Psalm. 57. ver. 4. saying, My soul is among Lions: I lie among
the children of men, that are set on fire: whose teeth are as spears and
arrows, and their tongue a sharp sword. So Plato in Politico, compares evil
magistrates unto wild beasts. Yet in the mean season there is a comfort set
down, A comfort for the Church.
that the church may understand that the same shall come to pass, the which
God promised in the former chapter verse 23. namely, that many of her enemies
should turn unto her. So then it is taught, that it shall come to pass, that
of the very Philistims themselves most worthy of punishment and destruction,
The wonderful conversion of the Philistims described by the effects. The
Ekronites shall have as honorable a place in the Church of God, as Araunah the
Iebusite sometime had in the midst of Jerusalem, who was honorably accounted
of by David himself, 2. Sam. 24. ve. 18, and so following.
some remnants notwithstanding shall remain, the which shall come unto God, but
yet of the only favor and endless mercy of God. And the comfort is so much
the greater unto them both, namely the Jews, that is, the Church of God, and
the Philistims, for that their most true, and wonderful, and most manifest
conversion is described by the effects. For the remnants of them shall not
only be consecrated unto God: but also among the Jews themselves and the
godly, the Philistines shall be leaders of the way, and guides unto others unto
godliness, in so much that the Ekronites, who of all the rest of the Philistims
in times past had lest traffic, or familiarity, and acquaintance with the
Jews, shall come to dwell afterward in the midst of Israel, and of the
church (as the Iebusites in the midst of Jerusalem 2. Sam. 24.) so that they
shall be the beginning to worship God godly and holilie in the Church of God
it self.

Verse. 8. And I will camp about mine house against the army, against him that
passes by, and against him that returns, and no oppressor shall come upon
them any more: for now have I seen with mine eyes.
Another comfort of the Church from the inward saftie and peace of the same.
THe former comfort of the church was taken from the increase of the same,
because of the coming of strangers unto it, yea and that of those, who before
were most deadly enemies unto it. But this comfort now, is from the inward
saftie, and quiet of the church, Two parts of this verse.
the which she should hereafter inioye. But this verse has two things, to wit,
first, a description of this security or safety of the church, 1. A
description of the saftie of the Church.
and secondly, the cause of the same. And first of all, the description shows
the defense, the which the church shall have at home, to wit, God himself
pitching his tents for his church, as appears Psalm. 34. For God promises
that he will watch for his temple against all sorts of enemies Psalm. 121.
and 124. that we should not think our saftie to come from our own strength.
Secondly, he shows the driving away of foreign enemies, so that there shall
be no host of enemies that shall set upon the church. Finally, that there
shall be no violence or oppression in the people themselves one against
another: or wringing and vexing by those that shall rule over them. But these
things are especially to be understood of the spiritual kingdom of Christ.
The cause of this so great a benefit, 2. The cause of the same.
is the only mercy of GOD toward his church, who both sees the afflictions
thereof with his eyes, Exodus 3. and also of his goodness and bounty takes
pity and compassion on her Psalm. 68. ver. 16. where the Psalmist faith that
God deliteth to dwell in mount Zion, (that is, in his church) yea and that the
Lord will dwell in it for ever. And ver. 21.22. he shows how that God will
both destroy her enemies, and also save and deliver her from all dangers in
these words: Surely God will wound the head of his enemies, and the hairie pate
of him that walks in his sins. The Lord has said, J will bring my people
again from Bashan. I will bring them again from the depthes of the Sea. And
therefore in consideration of this anger of God toward his enemies, and love
and mercy toward his church, he cries out by way of admiration in the end of
the Psalm, O God, thou art terrible out of thine holy places: the God of
Israel is he that gives strength and power unto the people: praised be God.

Verse. 9. Rejoice great lie, O daughter Zion, shout for joy, O daughter
Jerusalem: behold, thy King comes unto thee: he is just, and saved himself,
poor, and riding upon an ass, and upon a colt, the fool of an ass.
A confirmation of the former comfort of the church, containing
A Confirmation of the former comfort of the church taken from an encouragement
of her, or from an outward sign and token (for when God does encourage and
allure us, he does confirm his promises unto us) the reason whereof is
addded. As for the encouragement or exhorting of the Jews, An exhortation, or
stirring of her up to joy. and rejoicing.
it is unto exceeding great and notable joy: and the which also God will have
to be most manifest, or openly known, and not to be hidden and covered, the
which is signified by these words (rejoice greatly.) For the Church is
commanded to cry out or to shoute with the voice for a public testimony or
witness of her joy. But these words, (Daughter Zion, and daughter Jerusalem)
are put for the whole people, for to move and stir up affection, but the joy
of may dens is more acceptable and pleasant, and therefore they are rather
stirred up and exhorted to rejoice then men. Moreover, by the self same words
the whole city is allured unto the same joy of mind, of the which city
there are two parts, to wit, Sion, the which was the tower it self of the
city, and the place where the Temple was builded: and Jerusalem, that is, the
other part of the city. 2 The cause of this joy.
The cause of this so great joy and gladness is also most just, and evident, to
wit, the manifest coming of her King, that is to say, her defendor, and
protector. For the presence of Kings is a most safe defense unto their people,
and cause of joy, if so be they be the true fathers of their people, as the
King is, the which is described or set forth in this place Such a king was
David unto his people, and so great a care had he for their welfare and
defense against their enemies, and so great love did they bear to him again,
acknowledging their saftie to stand in his saftie, and therefore will they not
suffer him to go forth with them unto battle, ^ut make answer unto him,
offering so to do (as it is 2. Sam. 18. ver. 3.) Thou shall not go forth: for
if we flee away, they will not regard us, neither will they pass for us,
though half of us were slain: but thou art now worth ten thousand of us:
therefore now is it better that thou succor us out of the city. And therefore
Psalm. 118. they signify their exceeding great joy, the which they had
conceived, for that God had placed him King in the stead of Saul, ver. 26.
saying: This is the day, which the Lord has made: let us rejoice and be glad
in it.

Further in the description or setting forth of the coming of this king there
are three things to be noted, namely, 1. The quality of the King.
the quality of the king, the manner of his coming, 2. The manner of his
coming.
and the cause of the same. The quality is twofold. For this King (of whose
coming the Prophet says that they are to rejoice) is endued with justice,
whereby he shall every where set down lawful and good order, 3. The cause of
the same.
he shall take away things disordered, keep back violence, the good: and he is
also endued with salvation, whereby he will deliver those that are his out of
dangers. And for as much as this King was and is Christ the Messiah, the true
and everlasting King and keeper of his Church, he is said to be endued with
salvation and justice, in respect that he is a man: and not in respect that he
is God. For in respect that he is God, he has both these of himself, and not
of any other. But in respect that he is a man, he has received the same both
from himself, and also from his Father. Behold, thy King comes unto thee,
meek, and sitting upon an ass, and a colt, the fool of an ass used to the
yoke. And John says cap. 12. ver. 15. Fear not daughter of Sion, behold, thy
King comes, sitting on asses colt. These asses used to the yoke, Hesiodus
lib. 2. Ergoon Kai Hemeroon, calls Talaipoorous, that is, enduring great
toil and labor. And by these things is showed, that the power of this King
shall not be human, but divine, and that we are to esteem of it not after an
human, but after a divine manner. Last of all is expressed the cause of his
coming in these words, (He shall come unto thee) that is, for the profit of
the Church, and not for his own profit. For Christ coming into this world
profited not himself, but his church only, and was made man, not for his own
sake, but for our sake.

Verse. 10. And I will cut off the chariots from Ephraim, and the horse from
Jerusalem: the bow of the battle shall be broken, and he shall speak peace
unto the Heathen, and his dominion shall be from sea unto sea, and from the
river to the end of the land.
After what manner Christ shall be a King unto his church.
THis is a making of the former matter more plain, wherein is showed, after
what manner, and after what sort this Christ, or salvation shall be a King unto
his church, the which he had said in the verse before. And it is showed to
betwo fold, both a making of a general peace between all nations: 1. He shall
make peace among all nations.
and also a most large power and dominion or rule of this King. The making of
peace is declared by the effects, to wit, for that he shall cut off all armor
and instruments of war, and cause them for to cease, both from Ephraim and
Jerusalem, and sinally in every place, that is, among the heathen themselves.
For there shall be great peace in the whole world, when as this King shall
come, which is not precisely to be understood of that same former coming,
whereof he spoke in the verse going next immediately before this, but also of
that time wherein Christ was borne in the world, and of all that time, wherein
his Gospel is received, and he himself reigns among men. For then are men
of wild beasts made men, true peace is set between men, and braules cease,
and discords are taken away. So does Isai cap. 11. ver. 6. describe this time,
and this peace, when he says: The Woolfe also shall dwell with the lamb, and
the Leopard shall lie with the Kid, and the calfe, and the lion, and the fat
beast together, and a little child shall lead them. And thus does David set
forth the power of Christ, and his goodness toward his Church, Psalm. 46. ver.
9. in these words: He makes wars to cease unto the ends of the world: he
breaks the spear, and burns the chariots with fire. And not only weapons
shall be taken away, but peace, or the words of peace shall be between both
the Jews, and also other nations. The fruit of the receiving of the Gospel
is peace: of the refusing thereof, discords, and civil or homewarres within
our own selves.

2. The domion or rule of Christ.
The rule of Christ (and consequently of the spreading abroad of the Gospel)
shall stretch most far and wide, the which none shall be able to withstand.
For it shall be stretched from sea to sea. These things no doubt are to be
understood of the calling of the Gentiles unto the Gospel, and of the
spiritual peace of the Church, the which is in the consciences, by the consent
of the faith of the Gospel, the which makes all the godly in all places to be
friends within themselves. So does David under the person of Solomon express
this peace of the Church, and largenes of the borders of the kingdom of
Christ, Psalm. 72. ver. 7.8. saying, In his days shall the righteous flourish:
and abundance of peace shall be so long as the Moon indureth. His dominion
also shall be from sea to sea, and from the river unto the ends of the land.

Verse. 11. Thou also shall be saved through the blood of thy covenant. I have
loosed thy prisoners out of the pit, wherein is no water.
A comfort for the Church.
A Comfort. For the Messiah or Christ shows, that he will communicate or
impart that his kingdom unto the Church herself, and does rehearse an effect
thereof showed now already by himself. And this communication or imparting is
set forth by the figure Aposiopesis, What the figure Aposiopesis is, see Oseas
cap. 8. ver. 10.
or keeping back something unspoken, because of the earnest affection or love
of Christ toward his Church, to wit, in these words, Yea even thou in the blood
of thy covenant. For there must be supplied (shall reign; or have rule from
sea unto sea, etc.) For the good things or benefits which Christ our King
has, the same he does impart unto us (for in himself, as it is Reu. 1. ver.
6. he made us Kings and Priests unto God his father) because that our society
or fellowship with him is inseperable, and he does acknowledge his Church to be
the filling up, or the fulness of his body, Ephesians. 4. And as Paul writes 1.
Coloss. ver. 18.19. He is the head of the body of the Church: he is the
beginning, and first borne of the dead, that in all things he might have the
preeminence. For it pleased the father that in him should all fulness dwell.

The cause of the imparting of the benefits of Christ with us. Bedam Berithick,
for the blood of thy covenant.
Now the cause of this communicating or imparting of his benefits with us is
added, to wit, the covenant of the Church with God, or Christ, that is, the
favor of God, and his adoption of her. And therefore in this place I do
expound the letter (Beth) for thy covenant. And the Prophet in this place
rehearsing the covenant, according unto the fashion and manner of that time,
that is, of the ceremonies of the law, adds (blood) because that the
covenant of God with the Church, and contrariwise of the Church with God, was
not made and established but by blood and bloody sacrifices. So the writer
unto the Hebrews witnesses cap. 9. ver. 20. that when Moses sprinkled the
book and the people with blood, he said, This is the blood of the Testament,
which God has appointed unto you. So is it also in Exodus cap. 24. ver. 8. Then
Moses took the blood and sprinkled it on the people, and said, Behold, the
blood of the covenant, which the Lord has made with you concerning all these
things. Further, the effect of this rule of Christ, and kingdom of the church,
was now evidently showed and declared already, namely, the deliverance of them
was made already indeed, who did before lie miserably in Babylon as in a most
dry pit, and in a grave (for here is an allusion or resemblance unto the
story of Joseph, who by his brethren was put into a dry pit Genesis 37. ver.
24.) and languished and were held their captives, whom Christ by that might,
and according unto that power, which he has over al nations, loosed out of
those bands, and bad them, and made them to be free. So does he daily loose us
from the bands of finne, and of Satan.

Verse. 12. Turn ye to the strong hold, ye prisoners of hope: even to day do I
declare that I will render the double unto thee.
An exhortation unto the Jews, and in their person, unto the Church of God.
AN exhortation, that the Jews might understand, how certain things are
promised unto them. So then God commands that now henceforth withal their
mind they wait for, and hearken after those promises of God made unto
Jerusalem, that is, unto his Church, and that they have their eyes turned and
fastened thereupon, and consequently that they come unto the same city. The
word hope which is here added in the word (Turn ye) shows that in this place
is not spoken of the returning and drawing back of the feet only: but also of
the hope and expectation or looking for of the fulfilling of the promises of
God, and consequently of our conversion, hope and heedfulnes of mind unto them,
that we should not faint, or quail, being overwhelmed with the evils, the
which fall out unto us in the mean season. But here are three things to be
considered. First, who are exhorted. Secondly, 1 Who are exhorted.
whereunto they are exhorted. Thirdly, what is here promised by God, or by the
prophet unto those that are exhorted. 2. Whereunto they are exhorted.
They that are exhorted are prisoners of hope, that is, the godly, which were
afflicted or punished most miserably and most hardly, as namely, who are most
like unto those which are bound, and shut up in a most filthy prison, but yet
hoping nevertheless in the promises of GOD, 3. What is promised unto those
that are exhorted.
and giving heed or hearkening after them, according unto that saying of Job,
Albeit that he kill me, yet will I notwithstanding trust in him, cap. 13. ver.
15. They are exhorted unto the city Jerusalem it self, that they should flee
thither as unto a most strong tower or hold. (an hold) the reason is, for that
as it is in the Psalm. 49. says, As the moutaines are about Jerusalem: so is
the Lord about his people from henceforth and for ever. So far forth
therefore both the Church now, and also Jerusalem in times past, is a most sure
and safe place unto us, as it has the promises of God, and as we have regard
unto the same. Therefore they are exhorted, not only to go into this tower,
but also that they turn their minds unto the promises of God made unto it.

Verse. 13. For Judah have I bent as a bow for me: Ephraims hand have I filled:
and I have raised up thy sons, O Zion, against thy sons, O Grecia, and have
made thee as a Giants sword.
Why the Jews should flee unto Jerusalem.
A Garnishing or staying in the further laying out of the former matter, the
which also contains the rendering of a reason, namely, why the Jews should
flee unto Jerusalem, to wit, because there should be most grievous wars
between them and the Grecian Kings, the which ruled in those countries, and in
the countries near thereunto, that is, between the Jews, and the successors
of Alexander the great in the East Empire: yet shall the Jews have the upper
hand in those wars, God fighting for them. This is the sum and substance,
the which is laid forth by an amplification in this place, Two parts of this
verse.
to lay open unto us the more clearly the glory and grace or favor of God.
And first of all this verse contains a cause of the seeking unto that hold of
Jerusalem: 1. A cause of seeking to Jerusalem.
and then secondly a promise of victory. The cause therefore, were those hard
and long wars between the whole nation of the Jews, and the successors of
Alexander in the East, 2. A promise of victory.
or the Kings of Syria. The which thing to be true the issue or falling out of
the matter, and the history of the Machabees does witness: and also Daniel
cap. 11. Wherefore by these words Judah, Ephraim, Sion, the whole nation of the
Jews is signified: as under the name of the sons of Grecia, the successors
of the Macedonian and Grecian Empire, first established by Alexander the great.

that God himself will strengthen them, and raise them up in those wars: and
direct their bow and their weapons in the battle, Psalm. 144. will minister or
give them strength to fight withal, and will furnish them with courage and
stoutnes of mind. Finally, because they shall be unto God against those his
enemies, as it were swords in the hands of Giants, and most valiant men, by
whom their enemies are forthwith destroyed, and overcome. Which thing the
wars of Judas Macchabeus against the Captains of Antiochus, do prove to
have been most true.

Verse. 14. And the Lord shall be seen over them: and his arrow shall go forth
as the lightning: and the Lord God shall blow the trumpet, and shall come forth
with the whirlewinds of the South.
What the figure Hypotyposis is, see Amos cap. 8. ver. 12.
THe figure Hypotyposis, the which both confirms the former promise of
victory, and also shows that the whole praise and glory of the said
victory is due and to be given unto God only, because that he properly shall
overcome, and not the army of the Jews that fight. So then in this place
there is represented as it were unto the view or sight, God shall do all the
parts of a warrior in this fight for the Jews.
the state or behavior of God in the army of the Jews, and the fight set
forth by diverse most notable similitudes, where also all the parts of the fight
are briefly rehearsed, and attributed unto God. First of all of a Captain,
because he shall be seen in that set battle of the fighting Jews, 1 A
Captain.
as a Captain is wont for to be. He shall do the part of a Soldier, because
that he shall fight with his arrows against the enemies of the Jews. 2. A
Soldier.
And those his arrows shall be so swift and fearful, as is the lightning
from heaven, at the which men do fear and tremble. Further, he shall also
execute the office of a Trumpeter and watch man, 3. A Trumpeter.
for he shall blow the Trumpet, that the Jews be not overtaken as it were at
unawares by their enemies. Last of all, he shall do the office of a Centurion,
or Leader of the band: 4. A Centurion or leader of the band.
for he shall march before them in the battle, but accompanied, not with men,
but with wirlewindes of the South, (such as are wont to arise from Theman, that
is, from the South quarter Abacuc. The meaning is, that Theodosius in his
wars was every way prosperous, in so much that both wind and wether did as
it were conspire and agree to s^rue him, as well as his Souldiars.
3.) and the same very strong and boisterous, with the which he shall forthwith
throw down his enemies. Like unto this is that which is written of the
victory of Theodosius the Great. O nimium dilecte deo, tibi militat ether,
Et coniurati veniunt ad classica venti.
Which may thus be englished: O high and dear beloved of God,
For thee the sky does fight;
And coniur'd winds do beck and bow
Unto thy warlike might.


These things fell out oftentimes in the wars of the Machabees, as appears
by their history.

Verse. 15. The Lord of hosts shall defend them, and they shall devour them,
and subdue them with sling stones, and they shall drink, and make a noise as
through wine, and they shall be filled like bowls, and as the horns of the
altar.
A confirmation of the former narration two ways.
A Confirmation of the former narration or discourse, both from the cause, and
also from the effect. From the cause, because God will defend those that are
his, and therefore he will fight for them. And thus does David describe God
fighting for his people Psalm. 68. ver. 22.23, 24. in these words: 1. From the
cause
The Lord has said, I will bring my people again from Bashan: J will bring
them again from the depthes of the sea: that thy foot may be dipped in blood,
and the tongue of thy dogs in the blood of the enemies, even in it. They have
seen, O God, thy goings, the goings of my God, and my King, which art in the
Sanctuary. 2. From the effect
The effect is, the great joy and gladness, the which the conquerours
themselves shall enjoy, as David also shows the like in the Church of God,
for the which Psalm. 68. ver. 4. he wills them to sing and rejoice, when he
says, Sing unto God, and sing praises unto his name: exalt him, that rides
upon the heavens, in his name Iah, and rejoice before him. And this effect of
their joy and gladness is described, or set forth partly by things following
it, and partly by the similitude of things, the which then were done in the
Temple of God, and in their sacrifices. The things that follow it, are public
feasts, the which then the conquerours themselves shall make and keep, and
that with a great noise and stir, as usually is done both in a great
assemblies of people, and also of them that in battle get the upper hand, who
have over thrown and subdued their enemies which were fearful unto them
before, such as then in the camp of the Grecians was the first band of those
that did cast stones with slings and of the Darters, and those which are called
Agrarij, as Arianus in libr. de expeditione Alexandri Magni speaks and
teaches. These therefore after that the Jews have overcome, and consequently
have vanquished the whole host of their enemies, they shall make feasts. The
similitudes taken from the sacrifices are thus: They shall be filled with
gladness most largely, as with wine. Wherefore like as in the sacrifices the
holy cups abound with wine, and the corner of the altar (where the blood of
the sacrifices is wont to be powered out) flows with blood: so shall the
people of God abound with joy and gladness, when they have overcome their
enemies. And therefore God shall fight for them.

Verse. 16. And the Lord their God shall deliver them in that day, as the flock
of his people: for they shall be as the stones of the crown lifted up upon
his land.
The conclusion, containing the cause and effect of their deliverance.
THe conclusion, whose both cause, and also notable of effect or consequent is
here described or set forth. The conclusion is, and Jehovah, or the Lord shall
save the^, that is, therefore that same almighty and everlasting God (who is
called Jehovah) shall deliver them, and save them out of all the way-layings,
threatenings, strength, and dangers of their enemies. The which has evidently
appeared in those altogether miraculous victories of the Machabees. For I had
rather refer these things unto that time, then unto that deliverance, whereby
the Jews through the great miracle of God were delivered from the threatenings,
rage, and cruelty of Alexander the Great being angry with the Jews,
Alexander being by and by changed at the sight of Iaddi the high Priest. Again
I do expound the word (Those) generally of all the Jews, both Elect and also
hypocrites, albeit the fruit of that benefit of God were healthsome and
profitable in the Elect only. For the Hypocrites abused it. And this is the
conclusion of the former promise of the victory that the Jews should have
against the Grecians, 1. The cause of their deliverance.
that is, the Grecian Kings of Syria, the successors of Alexander.

But the cause of this deliverance and decree of God is, for that Jehovah is
peculiarly the God, keeper, and shepherd of them, that is, of the Jews: and
the Jews are his people, and flock Psalm. 105. and Psalm. 78.71. Where the
people committed unto the government of David, are called god his people, and
God his inheritance, when he says, He chose David also his servant, and took
him from the sheep foldes; Even from behind the ewes with young brought he him
to feed his people in Jacob, and his inheritance in Israel. Now God saves or
delivers his sheep, whom he both will keep, and also according unto the
duty of a Shepherd ought to keep. Lastly, the effect of this deliverance is
described or set forth, namely the tokens, 2. The effect of this victory.
and those same notable monuments of their victory, set up in every place, the
which marks and monuments are in this place called stones of the crown, or
excellent, and notable stones (and not Jewels or precious stones) set up by the
Jews upon the ground, or land, after the manner of an ensign, or mark of
victories, as Genesis 28. ver. 18. The stone that lay under the head of Jacob
while he slept, and saw the ladder reaching from the earth up unto heaven, the
which stone he set up as a pillar, and powered oil upon the top of it, in
remembrance of that which there had fallen out. So Genesis 35. ver. 20. Jacob
sets up a pillar upon the grave of Rachel, who died in travail by the way
homeward. And in many other places of the Scriptures you shall read of the
like, as for example the stones set up in Jordan by Ioshuah, and Exodus 17. ver.
16. Moses built an altar, and called the name thereof, Iehouah-nissi, for a
memorial of the great overthrow given unto the Amalekites. These Trophies also
or monuments of victory do appertain unto the sundry victories of the
Machabees against Antiochus, and his successor.

Verse. 17. For how great is his goodness! and how great is his beauty? corn
shall make the young men cheerful, and new wine the maids.
An amplification of the former promise by the figure Epiphonema which what it
is, see Jonas cap. 2. ver. 9.
AN amplification of the former promise by the figure Epiphonema, or
acclamation, that men might be stirred up unto the earnest consideration and
weighing of the benefits of God, the which for the most part they make but
small accounte of, or pass them over blind folded. The Prophet therefore
wondering cries out and pronounces, that neither the number of the benefits
of God toward his church, nor their profit, and excellency, can sufficiently
of any man be rehearsed, no nor of himself neither. Afterward by an argument
from things compared he shows, that at the length and in the end they shall
be publicly acknowledged, and set forth by all sorts of men. For if this
goodness and bounteousnes of God be praised of boys and girls that are not
endued with any great judgment, by reason of the exceeding great and evident
store of all things powered out by God upon his church, how much more shall it
so be by men grown, and such as have a settled and stayed judgment in the
considering of the liberality of God? So then this blessing of God shall make
then young men, and maidens eloquent and full mouthed in the publishing and
setting forth of the praise of God Psalm. 8.

CAP. 10.
Verse. 1. Ask you of the Lord rain in the time of the latter rain: so shall
the Lord make white clouds, and give you showers of rain, and to every one
grass in the field.
The scope and drift of this chapter.
THe scope and drift of this chapter is to teach the Jews, and consequently the
church of God, how she ought to behave her self, in whom alone she is to
trust, unto whom she must hearken, ^^till the full accomplishment and
performance of all the former promises does appear, which is Jesus Christ the
Messiah which was for to come. And the sum of the doctrine here delivered is,
that they rely upon God alone, and that they detest, and shun all idols, and
worshippers and seruers of idols, because that God will grieuouslie punish such
pastors or shepheardes of the people, and will gloriously defend and advance
his people that serves him, and cleaves unto him. So then this chapter is
both an wholesome admonition, and also as it were a certain answer of an
objection that might be made, and a forewarning against the idolatries that
should fall out among this people (such as were diverse brought in among the
Jews in the time of the Antiochi, and others Kings of Syria) that being
betimes warned to avoid them, they might learn to be wise, and contrariwise
know what they were to hope for, and to follow. Two parts of this verse.


1. A commandment to seek unto God in all our necessities.
But this verse contains two things. First of all a precept or commandment
for the relying upon God alone, the calling on him, 2. A promise that our
prayers shall be heard
and seeking unto him in all things, that shall be needful for them. The
second, an excellent promise of God concerning the hearing of their prayers,
that is, the prayers of the church. The commandment is delivered by the
figure Synechdoche, 1. What the figure Synecdoche is, see Amos cap. 5. ver 21.
setting down the part for the whole, for albeit it speak only of the latter
rain to be asked of God, yet does it generally show, that we are wholly and
altogether to depend upon that same Jehovah alone (that is, the true God) and
whatsoever we desire, to ask the same of him. But by the name (of the latter
rain) the Prophet by a Metaphor taken from fruit and seasonable rain, What
the figure Metaphora is, see Amos cap 4. ver. 12.
does signify, that whatsoever wholesome and profitable thing for us in regard
either of the soul or body is to be wished for, that all the same is to be
asked of God alone. Of the profitablenes of the latter rain, consider what is
written Deuteronomy. 11.14. in these words, where God says: I also will give rain
unto your land in due time, the first rain and the latter, that thou may
gather in thy wheat, and thy wine, and thine oil. And James cap. 5 ver. 7.
borrows a similitude from thence to move the godly with patience to wait
until it please the Lord to hear them, saying: Be patient therefore,
brethren, unto the coming of the Lord: Behold, the husband man waits for
the precious fruit of the earth, and has long patience for it, until he
receive the former, and the latter rain. And this is set against that drought
and barrennes, the which the Jews felt of late in their ground, as appears
Agg. 1. v. 11. where the Lord faith, And J called for a drought upon the land,
and upon the mountains, and upon the wine, and upon the oil, and upon all
that the ground brings forth: both upon men, and upon cattle, and upon all the labor of the hands: the which drought the more grievous it was unto them,
so much the more welcome unto them should this promise of fruitefulnes, and
seasonable rain, be. For by earthly benefits they, yea, and also we, in such
kind of promises are put in mind of heavenly benefits. Therefore after this
commandment there is set down a promise of God, and the same also most
notable and excellent, concerning the hearing of the prayers of those that do
call upon him. For God in great abundance will give that same rain asked of
him, yea with lightning and thunder. And these indeed for the most part are the
adioyntes, or things that come or follow after great raines, and with great
raines. So Virgill lib. 4. Aeneid. describes or sets forth a great tempest.
Interea magno misceri murmr coelum
Incipit, insequitur commista grandine nimbus.
Thus englished by Phaer. By this time heaven with rumbling noise and clouds
is over cast, And thunders break the skies, and rain outragrous powers fast,
and showers of hail and sleet so sharp, --

Moreover, the Lord shall give plentious rain, that is, rain of showers. For
that is most plentiful, much, and grea^ly moystening the earth. So David
painteth forth God his blessing and increasing of the fruits of the earth by
these means, Psalm. 65. ver. 9.10. after this manner: Thou visitest the earth
and waterest it: thou make it very rich: the river of God is full of water:
thou preparest them corn: for so thou appoyntest it. Thou waterest abundantly
the furrows thereof: thou causest the rain to descend into the valleys
thereof* thou make it soft with showers and blessest the bud thereof. I hese
words therefore of Zacharias (white clouds, and showers of rain) declare the
kind of this rain. Lastly, by the effects is this rain described, the which
shall in such sort make the earth fruitful, that every man in his own field
and ground shall have both grass, and hay and corn (for I take the word
grass generally in this place): and shall seele no barrennes of the earth.

Verse. 2. Surely the Idols have spoken vanity, and the South sayers have seen
a lie, and the dreamers have told a vain thing: they comfort in vain:
therefore they went away as sheep: they were troubled, because there was no
shepherd.
The figure Hypophora, or the answering of an objection. What this figure is,
see Amos cap. 5. v 21.
THis is the figure Hypophora, or the answering of an objection, whereby he
fears the Jews from praying unto Idols in any necessity whatsoever, and
from regarding of them, that they may the more assuredly understand, that they
must rely upon God alone only. Ask ye (says he) of the Lord, because the
Idols can do nothing, if they be called upon by you. Wherefore the Prophet
answers those, who peradventure would call the people back again unto Idols,
as it was done both before the captivity of Babylon, 2. Chron. 36. and also
after the captivity, Iere. 44. ver. 22. where God shows that for their
idolatries their land was laid waste, Ezech. 9. and finally, 1. Match. after
their bringing back again or deliverance from that captivity, under the
Antiochi. And he sets down a reason why they should not seek unto Idols, A
reason why they should not seek unto idols
namely, because they shall be disappoynted of their hope, if they call upon
Idols, or seek help at their hands: for they are vain, and lies, and
consequently Idols do deceive their worshippers. And not only they are so: but
also their ministers, yea the chiefest of them, to wit, their Divines, or
Southsayers. For they speak nothing but lies, nor dream or prophecy any
thing else. He therefore makes mention of their Southsayers, because among the
Idol ministers or seruers they were the chief. And here also he has
expressed the name of those Idols, the which were wont to be asked concerning
things to come, and are called Theraphim. Theraphim.


A confirmation of his answer of the vanity of idols.
Further, he alleges a confirmation of this his answer concerning the vanity
of Idols, to wit, the testimony or witness of the idolators themselves, which
were in that people, who albeit they have worshipped, and did worship Idols
never so much, yet were they as a straying and wandering flock without help,
without a shepherd, and running every where up and down. For all this they
neither had, nor found any to govern and to help them, Ezech. 34. Ierem. 23.
Isai. 29.

Verse. 3. My wrath was kindled against the shepherds, and I did visit the
goats: but the Lord of hosts will visit his flock the house of Judah, and
will make them as his beautiful horse in the bat^el.
Another confirmation of the former dehorting of the^ from the worship of idols.
ANother confirmation of his said dehorting or discounsailing of them from the
worship of Idols, namely, for that God himself is most grievously angry
against these shepherds, the which do set forth Idols to be worshipped, and
will visit upon them, that is, will punish them, as most filthy goats, and
the plagues and destructions of his people. For they do most filthilie infect
them with their smell, of what degree or estate soever they be, whether they be
rulers of the Common wealth, or of the Church, who do teach this. And this
appears to be true both at all times: and also when as the Jews were
carried away into captivity, because of their idolatry, and when as under the
Antiochi he did so afflict or punish the heads of his people for their
idolatry, that there was in a manner at that time no form or Common wealth of
that people. Further, where as the Shepherds or guides of idolatry are
expressly said that they shall be punished, the rest of the people which
follows such guides, is nothing at all excused. For if the blind lead the
blind, both shall fall into the dike, Matthew. 15. ver. 14. Again, They shall
all be confounded, who do trust in idols, and serve them. Psalm. 115. and Psalm.
97. ver. 7. Nay, this is rather a reason from the greater unto the lesser,
thus: If the Lord neither has spared, nor will spare the Shepherds, and
Rulers which were idolators, how much less will he spare others? Moreover,
against this wrath of God toward idolators does the Prophet on the contrary
part set and match the favor of God toward those which are godly indeed, and
those, which shall call upon the true God, to the end the godly might be the
more confirmed and strengthened in the invocation or calling upon of God alone:
and that Idols might be detested and abhorred. And therefore in this place I
do expound the Hebrew word (Ki, but) to show this contrariety. God promises
two things unto the godly Jews.
For God promises two things unto the Jews which are indeed godly, and do
call upon him. First, that it shall come to pass, that he himself, who is God
almighty, and the Lord of hosts, will cherish them, that those which are the
house of Judah, (for he expressly names them, 1 All manner of help.
that they may be the more assured that these promises do appertain unto
them) that God I say will help them, be present with them, comfort them,
which things the Idols do not. For the word (visit) does comprehend all kind
of the help of God, when as it has not the word (gnal) joined with it, as on
the other side being joined with the same particle gnal, it threatens all kind
of the judgments of God. In this latter signification does God use this word
(visit) in this place against the idolators, and in the former toward the
godly. Secondly, God promises that it shall come to pass, 2. That they shall
be famous and valiant.
that the self same godly shall be strong, notable, and beautiful, and famous
above other people, like unto a war horse, to wit, such a one as is
courageous, and armed, that is, dressed, trimmed, and furnished up for the
battle, of the which his master is wont to have an especial care, and to have
him in request and account above the rest. Finally, the Lord of purpose took
this similitude of a war horse, to signify unto the^ darkly by the way that
there should afterward be wars, but in the which they should not need to
fear any thing, because that they should be like unto most strong horses, the
which in the wars ouerrunne and throw down all things, and therefore are
they diligently nourished, and bravely or comely garnished and set forth.

Verse. 4. Out of him shall the corner come forth: out of him the nail, out of
him the bow of battle, and out of him every appoynter of tribute also.
An amplification of the former promise by the reckoning up of the sundry
gifts of God toward his Church.
AN amplification of the former promise, taken from the reckoning up of the
sundry gifts of God toward the Jews, and consequently his Church, the which
gifts also do show the manner how the Jews shall be both strong, and also
beautiful, to wit, because they shall have in abundance al things, which are
wont to be needful both at home, and also abroad: yea and moreover both in the
time of peace, and also in war. Finally, every appoynter of tribute shall in
the end once be driven out of their borders, that they may be oppressed by no
man. Wherefore I expound this word (out of him) of the Lord, who shall give unto
the Jews these things, which are afterward reckoned up in this verse. And that
which is in the last place (out of him the appoynter of tribute shall come
forth) signifies, that every tribute gatherer, which did vex them before,
shall depart and go away from that people, God driving him forth. Further,
these words, Corner, Nail, Bow, Itake as spoken prouerbially, for any thing,
whereof there is both great use, and great force, and briefly, the which men
cannot lack in building, in the disposing and ordering of matters belonging to
the house, and in fight and wars. All these benefits are given us of God by,
and for Christ his sake. And these similitudes are elsewhere used to like
purpose, as Isai cap. 22. ver. 23. where God will signify that Eliakim, who
was to succeed Shebne in his office, shall stand sure in his place, he says,
And I will fasten him as a nail in a sure place, and he shall be for the
throne of glory to his fathers house.

Verse. 5. And they shall be as the mighty men, which tread down their enemies
in the mire of the streets in the battle: and they shall fight, because the
Lord is with them, and the riders on horses shall be confounded.
The applification.
THe application. For that which he had said generally before, he now applies
unto one kind, namely, unto the use of wars, the which afterward in this
nation should be very rise and great: like as now adays also the Church of
God is daily vexed or grieved and troubled. Wherefore God promises two things
unto the^, Two things promised to the people of God.
the which are very necessary for victory. First, that they shall be
valiant, stoure, and strong in these wars, and even like unto Giants, and
that they shall tread down their enemies, 1. They shall be strong and
victorious.
as they tread down the mire and dirt of the streets or high ways. The
second, that they shall not only be so valiant against the footmen of their
enemies, but also against their horsemen, 2. They shall prevail not only
against the footmen, but also the horsemen of their enemies.
whom they shall easily slay, overthrow, put to flight, and consequently make
ashamed, that they should understand that every way the victory should be
theirs, and sure on their side. And this has appeared in the wars of the
Machabees, and in other battles also: and now also appears in sundry
wars of our men, as among the rest of Zisca with the Emperor Sigismundus.
The reason is added, because that God shall be with the Jews, that they should
not attribute unto themselves the praise of this victory, but give the same
wholly unto God.

Verse. 6. And I will strengthen the house of Judah, and I will preserve the
house of Joseph, and I will bring them again, for I pity them: and they shall
be as though I had not cast them off: for I am the Lord their God, and will
hear them.
The same promise again repeated for the further assurance of the Jews, and
Church of God.
A Garnishing of the former matter. For he does again promise the same thing,
repeating his earnest assurance made unto them before, that the Jews should be
assured (and consequently we our selves) of the help of God both in public,
and also in private afflictions or troubles. But now he adds thus much more,
that not only the Jews, but also the house of Joseph shall feel the said
help of God. By which name some do understand the rest of the Tribes, the
which were carried away by the Assyrians before the destruction of the kingdom
of Judah. But if this name be taken according unto the letter, it is to be
referred unto those few, the which returned both with Zorobabel, and also with
Esdras afterward, Esdr. 2. and 8. and moreover unto those which dwelled in the
other Tribes afterward. But if it be taken in a mystical, or spiritual sense
and understanding, the Prophet comprehends the whole Church, unto all the
which, and not unto some one part thereof only, God promises that he will be
favorable, and present with it. But the chief part of this verse does consist
in the showing forth of the cause of these so great promises of God, that men
should not attribute them unto their own merits or deseruings. And here is a
double cause alleged, Two causes of these promises.
and both of them excludes or shuts out all works of men, and calls us
back unto the only grace and mercy of God, as the true and alone cause of
those promises. So David acknowledges, Psalm. 44 ver. 3. that the people of
Israel did not inherit the promised land for any worthiness in themselves, but
only through God his love and favor unto them, saying: They inherited not the
land by their own sword, neither did their own arm save them: but thy right
hand, and thine arm, and the light of thy countenance, because thou did
favor them. So Psalm. 68. ver. 22. he teaches us, that the Lord would have us
know the deliverance of his Church to be his own work, when he says, The
Lord has said, I will bring my people again from Bashan: I will bring the^
again from the depths of the sea. 1. The mercy of God.
The first cause of these promises is, The mercy of GOD, whereby he has
compassion on us, that is, on his Church, freely pardoning her sins. The
second, because he is their God, that is, 2. His election.
has chosen them of his mere or only grace. This latter is the cause of the
former, that is to say, the election of God is the cause of his taking pity
and compassion on us. The effects hereof, That he hears us when we pray unto
him: and does in such sort renew and restore us again, as if he had never
abhorred us, to wit, because through Christ he is fully and perfectly
reconciled, or made friends with us.

Verse. 7. And they of Ephraim shall be as a giant, and their heart shall
rejoice as through wine: yea their children shall see it, and be glad: and
their heart shall rejoice in the Lord.
That which was promised of the strength of the Jews, confirmed by a double
comparison.
BY a double comparison he does both confirm, and also make plain that which
he had said before of the strength, which the Jews should have in their
battles. The first is taken from the strength of the tribe of Ephraim, the
which among the rest of the tribes of Israel was counted most populous, or full
of people, and in wars most strong. And therefore in the Psalm. 60. ver. 7.
it is said of that tribe, Ephraim also shall be the head of my strength. This
also may appear by the 78. Psalm. ver. 9. that in it self this tribe of
Ephraim was of great force and power, either to defend it self, or to hurt his
enemies, albeit that God being angry with them for their idolatries, and other
sins, they had the overthrow in that battle, and fled before their enemies.
The children of Ephraim (says the Psalmist) being armed and shooting with the
bow, turned back in the day of battle. So strong then shall the Jews be in
their battles against their enemies, as the Ephraimites in times past were wont
to be strong against their enemies.

Verse. 8. I will hiss for them, and gather them, for I have redeemed them: and
they shall increase, as they have increased.
The answering of an objection touching those that were still in Babylon, and
their fewnes.
THis is the answering of an objection, least because of the rest which yet
abode still in Babylon, and by reason of the small number of the^ they should
distrust of the former promises of God. First therefore he answers unto that
their debating concerning those that were absent, that it shall come to pass,
that these also together with themselves shall most eas^^, I will multiply thy
seed, as the dust of the earth, etc. shall also be of force in these. No one
nation of the world so great in number as the Jews at this day.
The which promise doubtless appears even at this day yet now in the Jews,
albeit miserably dispersed or scattered. For there is not any one nation yet at
this day in the world so great in number as that is, if the dispersed Jews
might be all gathered together into one place.

Verse. 9. And I will sow them among the people, and they shall remember me in
far countries: and they shall live with their children, and turn again.
An amplification and confirmation of the former promise of God.
AN amplification of the promise of God immediately going before, touching the
multiplying or increasing of the nation of the Jews, and a confirmation of the
same, by a most excellent and manifest effect thereof, to wit, the Jews shall
be so many in number, that they shall be scattered among other nations as
pearls, and sowed among them for the spreading abroad of the knowledge of the
true God. Wherefore there is promised an exceeding multiplying or increasing of
this nation, and the same described by the sign or token spoken of before.
Three benefits of God toward the Jews.
So that this verse contains these three benefits of God. First, that the
Jews are in such sort to be scattered, and carried among other nations, as the
seed is sown in the fields for hope of harvest, 1. They shall be scattered
among the heathen to be preachers of the grace and glory of God.
and not that they shall be cast out into most lamentable bondage and
banishment, as they were before among the heathen. Wherefore this thing shows
the multiplying or increasing of this people: and that which otherwise might
seem most woeful, namely, to live without the borders of their country, that
the same shall be both profitable and glorious for the Jews, who by this
means are sent forth to be as it were preachers of the glory of God among the
heathen, that they might sow the first seeds of the grace of God, which was
to be showed toward them. This scattering abroad of the Jews, as it were an
heavenly sowing, fell out after their return f^^m the captivity of Babylon.
Whereupon both Acts. 2. and also 1. Pet. 1. and 1. Iam. ver. 1. they are called
Diaspora, 2. They shall have free liberty to serve God among other nations.
that is, a scattering or sowing abroad. The second benefit of God is, That it
shall come to pass, that in those countries, howbeit never so far off, they
shall notwithstanding serve God: they shall be suffered, and also may freely
retain and godly use the remembrance and calling upon of God: The which does
not always appear to have been done and granted unto them in the captivity
of Babylon. So the Jews every where had their Synagogues by the permission or
sufferance of the Magistrates, when as before the time of Christ they were thus
scattered among the heathen, as may be gathered both by the Acts of the
Apostles: and also by the history of Josephus. The third benefit, That the
same Jews shall with their whole families both have their being and dwelling
among those nations in safety, and shall return to Jerusalem, 3. They and
theirs shall dwell in saftie among the heathen, and may return to Jerusalem,
when they will.
when they will, both to sacrifice, and also to dwell. The which was not
lawful for them to do in the time of their captivity. So then here by the way
of matching together of contraries is a comparison made between the estate of
the same Jews, when as they were in exile or banishment among the Babylonians,
and when as the Lord shall scatter them among the Gentiles, as the preachers of
his glory, and forerunners of his Gospel. Others do refer this unto a
mystical or spiritual sense of the calling of the Jews, and Gentiles, the
which I confess also to be true, but first these things ought thus to be
understood according unto the letter, as they also in very deed fell out, and
came to pass. And the event or falling out of the matter is the best
interpretation of Prophesies.

Verse. 10. I will bring them again also out of the land of Egypt, and gather
them out of Asshur: and I will bring them into the land of Gilead, and Lebanon,
and place shall not be found for them.
A confirmation of the second promise made before touching the bringing back
of the Jews from captivity.
A Confirmation of the second promise, the which also is contained before ver.
8. For when as both natural affection toward their brethren moved the Jews
which were returned, to think of the Jews their brethren being yet still
exiles, or in captivity among the Babylonians: so also was that multiplying or
increasing of the nation promised before, after that God had gathered together
and brought back again those self same exiles and captives. God therefore
promises that it shall come to pass, that he will bring them back out of all
nations whatsoever, where they yet remain in banishment or captivity, either
among the Egyptians, whither they had fled after that the Temple was destroyed
Ierem. 44. or among the Assyrians, as the ten Tribes 2. King. 17. And that it
shall come to pass, that they shall dwell again also in those places, in the
which they were once placed by God, to wit, in Galaad, and Lebanon, which two
places by the figure Synecdoche, What the figure Synecdoche is, see Amos, cap.
^. ver. 21.
are reckoned up for the rest of the parts of the promised land Finally, that
it shall come to pass, that the same nation shall be so populous or full of
people, that there will not any more be room enough for them in the promised
land: and that therefore the Jews, as he said before ver. 9. must be feign to
go to dwell among other nations. Accordingly hereunto does Isai. cap. 49. ver.
20. prophecy of the great increase of the Church of God, saying, The children
of thy barrennes shall say again in thine ears: The place is strait for me:
give place to me, that I may dwell. And again cap. 54. ver. 1. Rejoice, O
barren that did not bear: break forth into joy, and rejoice, thou that
did not travail with child: for the desolate has more children then the
married wife, says the Lord.

Verse. 11. And he shall go into the sea with affliction, and shall smite the
waves in the sea, and all the depthes of the river shall dry up: and the pride
of Asshur shall be cast down, and the Scepter of Egypt shall depart away.
The answering of an objection against their return.
THis is the answering of an objection, that they should not despair, or be
without hope of the return of their brethren, either for the hardness of the
ways, and iourneyes, or for the power of the kingdoms, 1. The hardness of the
ways, might seem to be a let unto them.
in the which they are exiles or captives, the which peradventure would
withstand or let them being willing to go away. All this shall be no let,
answers the Lord. For as concerning the iourneyes and ways be they never so
hard and combersome, they shall not let, neither the sea, nor the rivers, nor
the waves, or floodes. For the rivers shall dry up, be they never so deep,
when they shall return unto Jerusalem: this people returning shall pass the
sea, being so strait and gathered in, as they did of old in Egypt, so that it
may be gone through on foot. Finally, the waves and floods shall fall, and
being strooken, as they were some times with the rod of Moses, shall sink
down. So then in this place there is an allusion or resemblance unto those
miracles, the which were wrought by God in the first deliverance of the people,
that nothing should be any let unto the people, going unto the place that was
promised unto them. He therefore promises that the same help of God shall be
ready for them, when as they shall return unto Jerusalem from the captivity
of Babylon: the which thing came to pass, Esdras and Nehemias being their
Captains, See Isai. cap. 40. ver. 12. And cap. 43. ver. 1.2. in these words,
But now thus says the Lord, that created thee, O Iaakob: and he that formed
thee, O Israel, Fear not: For I have redeemed thee: I have called thee by thy
name, thou art mine. When thou passest through the waters, I will be with thee,
and through the floods, that they do not ouerflowe thee. Where thou walk
through the very fire, thou shall not be burnt, neither shall the flame kindle
upon thee. But these things in a prouerbiall kind of speaking do declare,
that it shall come to pass, that all ways shall be easy unto them, and such
as they may pass through. So it appears to have come to pass Esdr. 8. ver.
21.22. where he says, And there at the River Ahaua, I proclaimed a fast, that
we might humble our selves before our God, and seek of him a right way for
us, and for our children, and for all our substance. For J was ashamed to
require of the King an army, and horsemen, to help us against the enemy in
the way, because we had spoken unto the King, saying, The hand of our God is
upon all them that seek him in goodness, but his power, and his wrath is
against all them that forsake him. So we fasted, and besought our God for this:
and he was entreated of us.

2. The power of the kings in whose lands the Jews shall be, might also seem
to be a stay unto their return.
Further, as touching the kings, in whose dominions and countries the Jews
were, and who as yet at that time seemed to be enemies unto the Jews, and not
to favor them, as the Persians were (albeit that they had before given the
Jews leave to depart) neither shall they also be able to stay or let them,
that God should not bring his people out of their kingdoms, as of old Pharao
withstood the Israelites. The reason is, because the power both of the
Assyrians the which the banished Jews do fear: and also the kingdom and
scepter of the Egyptians, shall be cast down, and shall perish, so that then
it cannot be any let or stay unto them. In a word, nothing can let the work of
God, and the decree of the deliverance and redeeming of his Church Isai. 40.

Verse. 12. And I will strengthen them in the Lord, and they shall walk in his
name, says the Lord.
The conclusion of this chapter, and of the former promises.
THe conclusion of the whole chapter, and of the former promises, the which
shows, both that, they shall have their fulfilling, and accomplishment, and
that also of the mere or only grace of God. And therefore the prophet says,
that the people or Church of GOD shall be strengthened, but in Jehovah, or the
Lord: that the people shall walk, but in the name of God. Both these do
signify, that they shall have this strength, both to fight against their
enemies, and to return from the places of their banishment or captivity, from
the Lord, and not of themselves: in the name of God, and not in their own
strength. Albeit the word (walk) may also be referred unto their life, the
which he promises shall be agreeable unto the will of God: that we should
understand, that then at the length we are made partakers of the promises of
God, when as we obey him, and walk in his fear. There is added an earnest
confirmation of this whole prophecy, in these words, The saying of the Lord,
or, thus says the Lord, of the which I have spoken often before.

CAP. 11.
Verse. 1. Open thy doors, O Lebanon, and the fire shall denoure thy Cedars.
The dirft of this chapter,
THe drift and purpose of this Chapter is twofold. First, to foretell that there
shall be wars in Judea, and in the countries near unto it, 1. To forewarne
them of wars to come.
both unto the terrifying or fearing of the wicked, and the fore arming of the
godly and faithful: and also for the yielding of a reason, and making more
plain of the promise made before touching the victory which the Jews should
have against their enemies. For to what end should he speak of victory, but
because that there should be wars? So then in this place are briefly
foretold both the warrrs which were before the Machabees, and also those which
were in their government, yea and also in those countries afterward, even
until the coming of Christ: for I do not think that here are rehearsed
those wars, the which fell out after the coming of Christ. Albeit that the
things, which here are spoken, may be applied also unto all the afflictions of
the church at any time, that the godly may be fore armed, and that the wicked,
and such as are hypocrites in the Church, may be called back unto repentance,
if it may be, for fear of the calamities or punishments, hanging over their
heads. This is the first drift of this chapter. 2. To show the causes of so
great afflictions of the church.
The second is that the causes of so great afflictions of the Church of God may
be declared, and that by this means all men may be put in mind of their
duty, both the rulers of the common wealth, and the rulers of the Church, and
also the Subjects. The causes of these evils and punishments here recited, the
which afterward fell out, and do also now a days fall out unto the church of
God, are the negligences of the pastors or rulers as well of the common wealth,
as of the civil Magistrates: as of the Church, as the Priests and Levites
then, and the Ministers of the word of God now. By which recital the rulers of
that nation were betimes put in mind of the performance of their duty: and
yet notwithstanding did that negligence endure, nay became always worse and
worse, until that God did utterly break off the old covenant of that people,
and sent hi^ Christ, who gave new pastors unto his Church, Matthew. 25. And the
self same causes do also make the pastors of the Church guilty even at this
day, if so be they shall be careless, and negligent.

This verse contains the destruction of Coelosyria.
Now this first verse foretells the desolation, or laying wast of a country,
the which among many other near unto the Jews, was more further off from
Judea, to wit, of Coelosyria, the which is contained between the two
mountains Libanon. The which fell out not under Alexander the Great, winning
Asia, and Syria: but under his successors, to wit, the Kings of Syria, such as
were the Antiochi, the Seleuci, and others, the which made and had continual
wars in those countries with the Ptolomees of Egypt, and often with the
Syrian Kings, as appears most manifestly by Justinius the hystorian, and by
Appianus in Syriacis, and by the continual history of that time. But in this
place, and in those that follow, for the moving and stirring up of affections,
God uses the figure Prosopopoeia, What the figure Prosopopoeia is, see Oseas
cap. 6. ver. 1.
and the same is directed not unto men, but unto mountains, and things without
life, as in Micheas often, and in the Prophet Isai, cap. 1. ver. 2. Hear, O
Heavens, and hearken, O earth, etc. For the Lord, or the Prophet speaks unto
Libanum, a mountain of Phoenicia, or rather of Syria, to open his doors and
gates. And why I pray you does he this? To wit, that the Cedars, and most
excellent trees, the which this mountain Libanus does bear, as his riches,
wealth, and ornaments, might be burnt, and consumed. For that there do grow
the good^y Cedars the Psalm. 29. ver. 5. does witness, where it is said, The
voice of the Lord breaks the Cedars, yea, the Lord breaks the Cedars of
Lebanon. By this kind of speaking the Prophets also do show that things
without life do notwithstanding hear the voice of God: and therefore that men
ought so much the more to hear the same. Further, doors or gates, are
attributed unto Libanus, because as Plinius says, lib. 5. Not. hist. cap. 20.
Against the mountain Libanus, the mountain Antilibanus is set or lies out in
leng^h, joined unto it as it were with a certain wall: so that these were, and
are narrow passages, and gates, kept also some times of the kings of Persia by
a wood ward or a woodreeue, that is, a special officer for that turn, as
appears Nehem* 2. ver. 8. where mention is made of Asaph the kings keeper
thereof, that he should deliver from thence timber for the building at
Jerusalem. By the name of Cedars some will have all the most notable men of
that country to be signified, whose destruction is signified, that the Church
should not be troubled by means thereof.

Verse. 2. Houle, fur trees: for the cedar is fallen, because all the mighty
are destroyed: houle ye O Oaks of Bashan, for the defensed forest is cut
down.
Two parts of this verse.
TWo things are to be noted in this verse. The first is, an amplification of the
former prophecy. For not only the Cedars, but also the Fur trees are
stirred up unto mourning, 1. An amplification of the former prophecy.
nay unto howling, that is, exceeding wailing and crying to be heard every
where. The reason, because every the most excellent, and most glorious things
(whether ye have regard unto men, 2. The destruction of the land of Basan. What
the figure Synecdoche is see Amos, cap. ^. ver. 21.
or unto any other things) in those countries are cut down, wasted, consumed,
and destroyed, or to be cut down and destroyed. By which effect the greatness
of the destruction is signified. The latter part of the verse foretells the
destruction of another country, the which also is near unto Judea, to wit,
the province of Basan, the which was nearer unto Judea, and yet beyond Jordan.
For Basan was the land of king Og, An Allegory is a figure, whereby one thing
is said in words, and another thing signified in sense, and meaning, as in the
former verse by Cedars, great men, and here by oaks the poorer sort.
Numb. 12. Afterward the historians, as Stephanus, have given all that land
unto Arabia. For it was won by the Arabians. So then this land also is called
unto mourning, because that the wooddes of that country, yea, the defensed
forest, is destroyed. By the figure Synecdoche, by the most notable part of
that country, that is, the Oken wood destroyed, God shows the destruction of
the whole people. For that country was both full of mountains, and also full
of woods, abounding, not with Cedars, as Libanus, but with Oaks, by which word
some do Allegoricallie understand the common people, and poorer sort, unto
whom also destruction is threatened. But all sorts of men of that place of what
degree soever they be, are thereby understood.

Verse. 3. There is the voice of the houling of the Shepherds: for their glory
is destroyed: the voice of the roaring of Lions whelps: for the pride of Jorden
is destroyed.
The foretelling of the judgment of God against the Jews themselves.
THe third foretelling of the Judgment of God now against the Jews themselves,
whose shepherds (whom afterward he calls Lions) are first of all said to
houle, because that God will first of all punish them for their negligence, or
slouthfulnes in feeding of the flock committed unto them. And he calls Judea,
the Pride, or Excellency of Jorden, that is to say, that country, which of al
those which adioyne unto the river Jorden, is and was without all doubt the
most excellent, and most brave and dainty. This also does God foreshew shall
be destroyed.

Verse. 4. Thus says the Lord my God, Feed the sheep of the slaughter.
The care of God his church committed to the Prophet.
THe moving and stirring up of affections, for God by way of taking pity and
compassion, does commend and commit the care and charge of his Church and
people unto the Prophet, because it shall be very ill governed by those, which
hereafter will call themselves the Shepheardes thereof. Therefore both to
condemn, The things here spoken unto Zacharias, are chiefly fulfilled in
Christ.
and correct that same negligence of the Shepheardes (the which should be, and
waxed every day worse and worse, even until the destruction of that nation)
and also to show how great miseries there should be by this means in that
people, God will have the government of his people to be given unto other
Shepheardes. But the things which are here spoken and commanded by God unto the
Prophet Zacharias, because that Christ is the head both of the prophets, and
also of all Shepherds, they are chiefelie to be understood of Christ, 1. Who
is commanded?
who at the length does take upon himself the charge of his church, those,
whom he has appointed Shepheardes, either sleeping, 2. What is commanded.
or treacherously neglecting or foreslowing of their duty.

3. Whereof there is commandments?
And this verse has three things to be noted. First, whom God commands:
Secondly, what he commands: and thirdly, whereof God gives commandment.
For the first: God commands the Prophet, that is, another, then the ordinary
Shepherds, but extraordinary, such as were the Prophets. 1. The Prophet.
For thus does God teach, how careful he is for his Church, namely as who,
when as the ordinary Shepheardes cease to do their duties, rayseth up
extraordinary. And thus much does Christ seem to win out of the mouths of
the pharisees themselves by the parable of those undutiful husbandmen, which
foreslowed the vineyard committed unto their charge, and also slew those that
were sent to receive the fruits thereof, when as unto Christ demanding what
they think that the Lord of the vineyard will do unto those lewd
husbandmen, they make this answer Matthew. 21. verse. 41. He will cruelly
destroy those wicked men, and will let out his vineyard unto other husband men,
which shall deliver him the fruits in their seasons. Now this extraordinary
government, the which is given unto the Prophet, seems to be to be
understood of the Ecclesiastical, or spiritual government only: and not of
the government of the common wealth, as if both government were committed
unto the Prophet, albeit that afterward both the government of the common
wealth, and also the government of the Church became most corrupt. But the
Prophet in this place does represent the person of Christ, who coming into
this world, himself by himself took upon him this charge of the church,
being spiritual, and not an earthly kingdom, the which he left unto Caesar
Matthew. 21. ver. 12. When he went into the Temple of God, and cast out all them
that sold and bought in the Temple, and overthrew the tables of the money
changers, and the seats of them that sold doves. And Matthew. 22. ver. 21. when
he wills them To give to Caesar, the things, which are Cesars, and unto God,
the things, which are Gods. 2. The spiritual government of the Church.
In the second place is to be considered, what God commands, and commits
unto the Prophet, namely the spiritual government of his church, whereof I
have spoken, so far forth as he represents the image of Christ. 3. Of God
his Sheep.
The third thing is, whereof God gives commandment, to wit, he gives
commandment touching his Sheep, whom to move affection, and compassion
withal, he calls Sheep of the slaughter, that is to say, the which are
handled, and used of their Shepheardes both of the common wealth, and also of
the Church, even in such sort, as if they were mere or only beasts delivered
and appointed unto them for a pray, and unto the slaughter, and to be devoured.
Against which kind of rulers it is said Psalm. 14.4. Do not all the workers
of iniquity know, that they eat up my people, as they eat bread? And
against such the Lord by his Prophet Ezechiel cap. 34. ver. 2. cries out, and
says, Woe be unto the Shepheardes of Israel, that feed themselves: should
not the Shepherds feed the flocks? Who are to be understood by the name of
Sheep.
And by the name Sheep, the Prophet signifies, not the whole people, or
every one that is a Jew, but him only who is a sheep, and godly, and not
filthy, and a goat in the Church of GOD. Whereby we are taught, that God has
not this especial care of every one in the Church, but of those only which
are his Elect, or Chosen.

Verse. 5. They that possess them, slay them, and sin not: and they that sell
them, say, Blessed be the Lord: for I am rich, and their own shepherds spare
them not.
The first reason, why the sheep are to be given unto other Shepherds.
THe first reason, why therefore these Sheep of God were to be committed unto
others, then the ordinary governors, namely, because the ordinary governors
did not feed them, but vnmercifullie slew them. Therefore here is now
described, what manner of Shepheardes the ordinary Shepherds were. First, they
were outragiously cruel, as namely who do slay and kill, yea, The Shepherds of
that time.
and that scotfree, or without any punishment, the very self same their own
and Gods sheep, the which they ought to save, 1. Cruel.
as their most precious goods. For even then, when as they do this, they are
not counted guilty, or esteemed so by others. So great doubtless was the
tyranny of those Shepheardes toward their sheep, and such was their
authority over the people of God, and so grounded, and settled, that their
greatest injuries, and tyrannical against the Church of God, was judged to be
their right, and their lawful power, such as the right and power of the King,
in profane or wicked Kings is described or set forth for to be, 1. Sam. 8.
from the eleventh verse unto the 18. wherein is showed that he shall make
their sons his horse men, and chariot driuers, his souldiars, his plow men,
his haruesters, his smithes, and such like: their daughters, his apothecaries,
and cooks, and bakers: that he will take away their goods, and give them
unto his nobles, and finally use them every way most seruilelie and
slauishlie. 2. Covetous.
Secondly, they shall be covetous vnsatiablie, that is, in such sort, as they
can never be filled. For they sell those sheep, which they ought to redeem
even with their own blood: and grow rich by them with great blasphemy
against God, whom they make the author of such riches sacrilegiouslie, and most
theeuishlie gotten. For they say, blessed be the Lord, who has given us these
things. So does Christ accuse the Pharisees of his time, and Shepheardes of the
Jews, who retained these manners brought in, and accustomed of long time,
Matthew. 23. ver 14. where he cries woe unto them for the same, saying, Woe be
unto you Scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites: for ye devour widows houses, even
under a color of long prayers: wherefore ye shall receive the greater
damnation. This that is here said of their covetousness to have been true,
appears by the history of the Jews in Aristobulus, Antipater, Herod, and in
all the rest, also in the Priests, which until the time of the destruction of
Jerusalem were their Kings and Shepherds, Joseph. 3. Hypocrites.
in Antiquitat. lib. 13. and de Bello Iudaico lib. 2. Thirdly, they were
Hypocrites. For they go about to hide and cover their sacrileges or notorious
robberies, their making merchandise of the people, and their prays and
booties, with the holy name of God, as with a veil. So speaks Christ of the
ordinary Shepherds of the Church of his time Matthew. 23. ver. 15.16.23. Woe be
unto you, Scribes and Pharisees, Hypocrites: for ye compass sea, and land to
make one of your profession: and when he is made, ye make him twofold more
the child of hell then your selves. Woe be unto you blind guides, which say,
whosoever swears by the Temple, it is nothing: but whosoever swears by the
gold of the Temple, he offends. Woe be to you, Scribes and Pharisees,
Hypocrites: for ye tit he mynth and anyse, and commin, and leave the weighty
matters of the law, as judgment, and mercy, and fidelity. These ought ye to
have done, and not to have left the other. So also does Peter describe or set
forth the Popish Clergy, in his second epistle, cap. 2. ver. 3.10.14. after
this manner: Through covetousness shall they with fained words make merchandise
of you, whose judgment long agone is not far off, and their damnation
sleeps not, chiefly them that walk after the flesh, in the lust of
uncleanness, and despise the government, which are presumptuous, and stand in
their own conceit^, and fear not to speak evil of them that are in
dignity, having eyes full of adultery, and that cannot cease to sin,
beguiling unstable souls: they have hearts exercised with covetousness, cursed
children. Against these are the true Shepherds matched, being described by the
same Peter in his first epistle, cap. 5. ver. 2. where he says: Feed the
flock of God, They are unworthy of their charge and office.
which depends upon you, caring for it not by constraint, but willingly: not
for filt hie lucre, but of a ready mind. Fourthly, they are altogether
unworthy of their charge and office. For these shepherds are not touched with
any affection or love at all toward the sheep of GOD committed unto them. So
does Paul warn the Bishops, Acts. 20. ver. 29. saying: For I know this, that
after my departing shall grievous wolves enter in among you, not sparing the
flooke. For this does the word (feed) signify in this place, to wit, with a
loving affection to be careful for the good and benefit of the sheep.

Verse. 6. Surely I will no more spare those that dwell in the land, says the
Lord: but lo, I will deliver the men every one into his neighbors hand, and
into the hand of his King: and they shall smite the land, and out of their
hands I will not deliver them.
The second reason, why the sheep are to be committed unto good sheapheards.
THe second reason, why God worthily commits the charge of his sheep unto
good shepherds, because great miseries hang over the world, and the land of
the Jews, among whom notwithstanding God will have those that are his to be
governed by his word, and to be preserved. Wherefore there was need of a
shepherd. And he properly both was, and also now is, Christ: and not men. For
he does truly, and indeed govern his Church, and save it in hard and
troublous times. So then a great calamity or misery of that country, which
was to ensue, is described in this place, and threatened, the sum whereof is
first of all set forth. 1. The sum of the misery, which was to come upon the
land.
And that is this, namely, God will no longer spare the inhabitants of the
land: both by reason of those sins of the shepherds reckoned up before (for
the people also is worthily punished for the sins of the shepherds, as who
namely agrees and consents unto them:) and also because of the sins of the
people themselves, the which are afterward described ver. 12. Secondly, the
same misery is laid open more plainly, and at large, namely, that God will
deliver every one into the hand of his neighbor, and of his ruler, as it were
his hangman, both that they may mutually vex one another, yea and that their
rulers especially might slay them. The which thing came to pass unto them in
the times of the Alexanders, of the Aristobuli, of the Caiaphasses, and
Annasses. And then also will not God deliver them, that is, he will not save the
rest besides his sheep, whilst the whole land of Judah shall be thus trodden
under foot, wasted, and defiled with the blood of her own people by her
shepherds.

Verse 17. For I fed the sheep of slaughter, even the poor of the flock, and
I took unto me two staves: the one I called Beauty, and the other I called
Bands, and I fed the sheep.
How the Prophet behaved himself in the execution of the former commandment
of God touching the feeding of his sheep.
A Consequence, or showing how the matter fell out. For it follows in order,
that having declared the commandment of God unto the Prophet touching the
feeding of his sheep, and his people, we should understand, what was the
obedience of this Prophet, and the execution of this commandment. And this is
here now set forth even unto the end of the chapter in order. And first of all
in this verse the Prophet shows, how great was his diligence and care (and
consequently of Christ, whereof this was a figure) in feeding this people. 1.
The diligence of the Prophet in feeding the flock.
Secondly, whom he especially fed, that is to say, who were indeed partakers of
this care of Christ for his church. And they truly were these only, who are
here called the sheep, and poor of the flock, 2. Who were partakers of this
diligence.
that is, which were teachable, and humble, and obedient unto God, as hereafter
ver. 11. the Prophet himself does expressly expound the same. The will and care
of the Prophet in deed, and consequently of Christ, was to feed all: but all
other besides the sheep, and these poor ones of the flock would not, and
refused to be fed, and heard not this shepherd, and therefore they perished.
For as Christ says, Ioh. 10. ver. 27. His sheep hear his voice, and he
knows them, and they follow him, and he gives unto them eternal life, The
great care of Christ in feeding the flock, declared,
and they shall never perish, neither shall any pluck them out of his hand.

But how great affection and diligence there was in God, or in Christ to feed
this whole flock, 1. By the repeating of these words, I have fed the sheep.
appears here by a double sign or token. First, by the earnest repeating of
these words, I have fed the sheep, I have fed the flock. For this kind of
speaking is an earnest protestation and declaration of the heart and mind of
the Prophet, (and consequently of Christ) touching the governing of this
people, 2. By executing of both parts of well governing.
of whom because he took compassion, he also in this place to move affection,
calls the sheep of slaughter. Secondly, by the executing of both parts, 1.
In restoring good order.
the which are required in the well governing of a people. The first, in
restoring again of good order gone to ruin and decay. 2. In putting down
evil shepherds.
The second, in putting down of evil shepherds. The first, the Prophet
describes or sets forth in this verse, by a figure or sign, the which the
Prophet, that is Christ, took unto him. So then the true and wholesome
governing of that people consisted first in bringing again of true order, to
wit, in purging the pure doctrine of the word of God delivered unto them, from
all superstition, and in the restoring of other things (whereby the excellency
of this people above others, and their order in religion, and in policy
appeared) and also in the preserving of the most strait union and agreement of
that whole people within themselves, and that form and rule appointed by God.
Wherefore the Prophet representing the person of Christ, shows that he also
was desirous, and took upon him the care of restoring of this government, and
delivering it unto them. And this does he declare by two signs most fit to
signify the same. For he says that he took unto him two rods, or
shepherds hooks: the one, which he called Beauty, or Comlines, Beauty.
to wit, of the signification of the thing which it signified: the other, he
named Cords, or Bands, and fellowship, namely, of the end, Bands.
and signification of the thing, whereof it was a sign and figure. Wherefore,
as appears hereafter, ver. 15. God by the consideration of the sheephooke and
sign (the which the Prophet as a shepherd took unto him) would have it showed
unto his people as it were by a figure, what manner of shepherds he then would
give, and also what manner of shepherd he himself would be unto that people.
Wherefore that rod, which is called Beauty and Comelines, What was signified by
the rod Beauty.
was a sign of that same whole order, truth, and form or beauty, the which
God went about to restore unto them both in true religion, and also in true
policy, whereby the fairenes, comlines, and beauty of that state did shine
forth. This excellency and beauty of the state of the Jews above al other
nations, Moses does lively express Deuteronomy. 4. ver. 6.7.8. in these words: Keep
them therefore, and do them: (he speaks of the laws and ordinances, which
God had given unto them) for that is your wisdom, and your understanding in
the sight of the people, which shall hear all these ordinances, and say, only
this people is wise, and of understanding, and a great nation. For what nation
is so great, unto whom the gods come so near unto them, as the Lord our God is
near unto us, in all that we call unto him for? And what nation is so great,
that has ordinances, and laws so righteous, as all this law, which I set
before you this day? The second rod, which is called Bands, was a sign of that
union or agreement, What is meant by the rod Bands.
both in true faith, and also in the politic order ordained by God, the which
God procured also to be done in this whole nation, Psalm. 133. but in vain.
And in these two points is contained that same first part of wholesome
government, the which is called due and lawful, and right order. And for this
cause are these things said so diligently to be procured by God, that we
should understand that the cause of the destruction, and ruin of this people
does not lie, nor is in God, but in both the shepherds, and also the people.

Verse. 8. Three shepherds also I cut off in one month, and my soul lothed
them, and their soul abhorred me.
The second part to be observed in good government, is the present deposing of
bad shepherds.
THe second part, and caution or prouiso to be observed in the establishing of
true government, namely, that all evil shepherds be deposed, and put away,
and that forthwith, and out of hand, so that they be not tolerated or suffered,
no not so much as for the space of one month, that is, for a very short and
little space. For as the good are to be set up and retained, so are the evil
even the very first day, and out of hand to be removed. The which also God, or
Christ shows in this place to have been done by him, in the person of the
Prophet, that is, in his own type or figure. But these things both have place
daily in the Church of God: When this deposing of bad shepherds was fulfilled
among the Jews
and also especially were fulfilled among the Jews, when (as it appears by
the history of the Machabees, and by Josephus) God would have so many
ambitious and proud hie Priests, Kings, and Judges to be removed, and
displaced, even by the heathen princes: as for example, Menelaus, Jason, the
Aristobuli, the Hircani, etc. the Annasses, and others. And thus far has God
showed, what manner of care he had for the feeding of this people.

The rebellion, unthankfulness, and disobedience of the Jews toward God for
all his benefits toward them.
Now is set down, and follows on the other side, what, and how great the
rebellion, unthankfulness, and stubbornnes or disobedience of this people was
against God. Therefore I translate these words, And my soul lothed them, etc.
by the aduersatiue particle or conjunction (but) But my soul was wearied in
them, or, lothed them, etc. that the Lord might show, that he labored in
vain among them so long, and so greatly. The reason is added, the which
proves the whole fault and blame to be in them, to wit, because they lothed
God himself, and abhorred his admonitions, and not only cared not for them or
despised him and them. Whereby it came to pass that God, after long patience
and tarrying for them, began to be weary of them, or to loathe them. For in
this place the Prophet has briefly comprised those things, the which
notwithstanding came to pass a long while after, but he was contented in few
words to have comprehended, or set down the falling out of the matter, as it
was. So then the Jews were in the end rejected or cast off, because of their
disobedience and rebellion against God, and God was weary of his care and
carking for them.

Verse. 9. Then said I, I will not feed you: that that dies, let it dye: and
that that perishes, let it perish: and let the remnant eat, every one the
flesh of his neighbor.
What is men^ by God his lothing, or being weary of the Jews.
THe making of the former matter more plain. For he shows what this means,
where it is said, that God was weary because of the obstinacy or stubbornnes
of the Jews, to wit, that he left of the care of them, as of his flock, and
would have every one of them to suffer the due punishments for their lewdnes
and wilful rebellion. A threefold punishment.
Wherefore here is described or set forth a three fold punishment. First, their
casting off, wrought by God himself, in these words, I will not feed you, to
wit, any more, or any longer. 1. God will cast them off.
The which, what it signifies, is declared afterward in the verse following in
these words, I will disanull, or, make void my covenant, etc. 2. He will not
give them a mind to repent.
The second punishment, That he will deliver over every one unto his own
destruction, and that God will not give them any more a mind to be sorry for
their fault, or to repent. The which is a most grievous punishment, and
vengeance of God against men, Revel. cap. 22. ver. 11. pronounced against such
as are past all hope, and hardened in their sins, where it is said: He that is
unjust, let him be unjust still: and he which is filthy, let him be filthy
still. And of such speaks God, Iere. 15. ver. 1.2. saying, Though Moses, and
Samuel stood before me, yet mine affection could not be toward this people:
cast them out of my sight, and let them depart. And if they say unto thee,
whither shall we depart? Then tell them, Thus says the Lord, Such as are
appointed unto death, unto death: and such as are for the sword, to the sword:
and such as are for the famine, to the famine: and such as are for the
captivity, to the captivity. This punishment even yet now appears at this
day in the Jews most stubbornly resisting the Gospel. The third punishment
is, 3. Those that shall be left alive shall eat one another.
That the remnants of those that shall be left alive, shall eat up one
another. The which thing fell justly so out among the Jews, when as they
destroy and kill one another with mutual and civil, or home wars, within
themselves. And to conclude, they did in the end overthrow themselves, in the
besieging of the city Jerusalem.

Verse. 10. And I took my staff, even Beauty, and brake it, that I might
disanul my covenant, which I had made with all people.
A confirmation of the former threatenings by a visible sign.
A Confirmation of the former threatenings, taken from a visible sign set before
the Jews, the signification whereof is added. The visible sign is used, that
the very hypocrites themselves, and rebels, might be the more moved. There is
also a clear and plain interpretation thereof set down: that they should not
afterward have any excuse of ignorance, but should plainly understand the
meaning of God. The sign.
As for the sign, it was this, namely, that the Prophet before their faces
brake that same his rod, the which he had called Beauty and Comlines. The
interpretation.
The interpretation, that this breaking of the rod did signify, that God had
broken that covenant, the which of old he had made with all those tribes (the
which were so many nations, and so many people in most great numbers, as there
were tribes therein) in Abraham, and the Patriarchs. And therefore that they
should not now any more have the pure and true doctrine of God: nor any
politic state or order. In the which two points consisted the beauty and
praise of that nation, as it does in like manner of any other people whatsoever.
But by this place appears now (in which time there has been an
accomplishment of these threatenings of God) that the Jews are strangers from
the covenant of God. The which thing also this confirms, to wit, that this
whole nation of the Jews is without Baptism, that is, a most certain sign
of the covenant of God with men, instituted or ordained by God himself.

Verse. 11. And it was broken in that day: and so the poor of the sheep that
waited upon me, knew that it was the word of the Lord.
THe figure Auxesis, Auxesis: what this figure is, see Oseas cap. 7. ver. 4.
or increasing. For he amplifieth, and confirms the matter from two places.
First, from the very falling out of the matter, the which followed immediately:
The same day, says the Prophet: not wherein the Prophet spoke these things,
but at what time they desperately cast off, and refused God. Now this fell out
especially at the time of Christ crucified, and in all the time that followed
after the same. Secondly, he confirms this thing by the very confession of
the godly, who did manifestly acknowledge that thing to have been fulfilled,
the which God had foretold: and therefore that this was the word of God, and
true. For the falling out of the matter accordingly, is a most true witness of
the prophesies of God. This place agrees with that saying of Christ, Matthew.
11. ver. 19. The wisdom of God is justified of her children. And this
chiefly came then to pass, when as all the godly Jews after the death and
ascension of Christ, when wars began to grow, departed all from Jerusalem
and went to Pella, as Eusebius witnesses, lib 3. Hist. cap. 5. Further, the
Prophet calls the children of God, the poor of the flock, as before ver. 7.
because they are afflicted, and humble above the rest, and willing to be taught.

Verse. 12. And I said unto them, if ye think it good, give me my wages: and
if no, leave of: so they weighed for my wages thirty pieces of silver.
A reason why God left of the care of his people.
THis is the yielding of a reason, which shows the causes, why God has left
of the care of his people, and cast them away, to wit, the great unthankfulness
of the people most manifestly declared by a visible sign, and testimony or
witness. For they did not esteem a pin, or a rush all this labor and pains
of God, the which he had taken in teaching, governing, and keeping or
preserving of them, both by himself, and also by his Prophets. Wherefore this
verse contains two things. First, Two parts of this verse.
a request of the Prophet speaking in the name and person of God, touching the
valewing, and giving unto him due wages for his pains. Secondly, 1. The
Prophets requesting his wages.
the peoples unequal and lewd valewing of the same. The Prophet therefore
requesteth, that they would value Gods, and his care and pains taken with them
and for them, 2. The peoples unequal valewing of the same.
as it was worth, that is, at a reasonable and due value, or else that they
would put him away, as one whose labor and service they do think
unprofitable for them. Whereby appears that it is lawful for the true
Ministers of GOD in the end to leave those flocks, Give ye not that which is
holy to dogs, neither cast ye your pearls before swine, least they tread
them under their feet, and turning again, all to rent you.

Now the people value this so long, and continual, so diligent, and so
profitable pains, and care of God, and of all his Prophets toward them, These
coins I confess my self to be ignorant in, neither is it greatly material to
stand long about the^. He that will further be herein satisfied, let him talk
with some learned french man. The Prophet by 30. pieces of silver, means a
very little and small price, and a matter almost of nothing.
at nothing, to wit, at thirty pieces of silver only, that is, at thirty
common sicles, every one of which was two drachmas, or groates, that is seven
Solidos, or shillings, or souces, Turnois. Albeit some had rather have the
common sicle to have made only four French Carolins. But the holy sicle was
of a greater value, namely twice as much as the common sicle. So then thirty
common sicles do make ten pound French, and ten shillings, or souces Turnois.
After the same manner, and of the same sicle I do think that is to be
understood, the which is Matthew. 26. ver. 15. and 27. ver. 3. of the thirty
pieces of silver, for the which Judas betrayed his master Christ. For these
things were a type or figure of those things which afterward fell out in
Christ, and do teach at how vile or base and small a price our Lord Jesus
Christ the Savior of the world was esteemed, or valewed by the Jews. Doubtless
no cow, nor the very vilest slave or bond man that ever was, has been rated
at so small a value.

Verse. 13. And the Lord said unto me, cast it unto the potter: a goodly price,
that I was valewed at of them. And I took the thirty pieces of silver, and
cast them to the potter in the House of the Lord.
God cannot abide to have him, and his, to be so baselie accounted of.
A Commandment of God, whereby is understood, that God can no longer abide
himself, and all his to be so smallie accounted of. Therefore he wills
this price of his valewed labor to be cast away, as a thing unto him
altogether reproachful, and a most assured testimony or witness of the great
contempt or despising both of him, and his. But some do mystically or
spirituallie expound these 30. sicles of silver of vain and toyish ceremonies,
with the which these me^ would worship God, contemning or setting at naught
true godliness, which things God rejects Isai, cap. 1. ver. 13. saying, Bring
no more oblations, in vain, incense is an abomination unto me: I cannot suffer
your new moons, nor Sabbaothes, nor solemn days (it is iniquity) nor
solemn assemblies. And cap. 66. ver. 3. God says of these things, He that
kills a bullock, is as if he slow a man: he that sacrifices a sheep, as if
he cut off a dogs neck: he that offers an oblation, as if he offered
swines blood: he that remembers incense, as if he blessed an idol: yea they
have chosen their own ways, and their soul deliteth in their abominations:
This interpretation I confess to be true. But yet notwithstanding these
things are to be taken according unto the letter, and were fulfilled in Christ,
as appears Mat. 27. verse 9.10 where it is said, Then was fulfilled that
which was spoken by Ieremias the Prophet, saying, And they took thirty pieces
of silver, the price of him that was valewed, whom they of the children of
Israel valewed, and they gave them for the potters field, as the Lord appointed
me.

Three things here commanded.
Further, the Lord does here command three things. First, that this money should
be cast away by the Prophet, in token of contempt. The reason is added, to wit,
in mockage, for that forsooth it is a goodly, that is, a trifling price and
reward, 1. That the money be cast away.
and appointed by the Jews for a most manifest contempt or despising of so
great, and so long, and so profitable care, and pains both of God himself,
and also of all his Prophets for them. Secondly, he commands that it be cast
away unto the potter, that is, 2 That it be cast away unto a potter.
unto a most base, and most contemptible crafts man. For hereby is showed,
that not any the most basest artificers would be content with so mean and
small a price for their so long work and service, be it never so base and
simple. And therefore much less was God, or the Prophets of God to be valewed
at such a matter of nothing. Yet out of this place ought not to be gathered,
that we can either value the due and just price and worth of the benefits of
God, or pay the same unto him for his pains: but only that the gifts and
graces of God, and service of his Ministers, ought always of us to be had in
greatest account and regard. Thirdly, 3. That it be cast unto a potter in the
Temple.
God commands that it be cast away in the Temple it self unto some potter,
both that in a manifest and public place the Prophet may witness, that God does
condemn this his contempt, and also that by this means he might the more
sharply prick the Sacrificers, and Priests themselves, unto whom this care
appertained, that God should not be thus contemned, or despised: but that the
worship and service of God might flo^^sh, and be observed accordingly: both
these things was observed in that same low and small price, which Math. 27.
the Priests paid unto Judas Iscariot for the buying of Christ at his hands,
as if he had been a most vile bondslaue, and Judas afterward cast it down in
the temple, wherewithal was bought the potters field, the which is wont to be
bought for a very small price.

Verse. 14. Then break I mine other staff, even the Bands, that I might
dissolve the brotherhoode between Judah and Israel.
An other sign showing the division of the tribes, and disagreement between
them.
ANother sign and outward token, wherewith by an amplification, the utter
casting away of this people from God, which was afterward to ensue, is
declared, to wit, it is foretold that it shall come to pass, that there shall
no more be any peace and agreement between them, but that Judah shall be
separated from the other tribes, and contrariewise, that is, the other tribes
shall be separated from Judah: who notwithstanding before lived both joined
together and agreeing within themselves, and also were brethren.

Two parts of this verse.
This verse contains two things: The sign it self, and the declaration of
the same. Both parts are easy, by that which has been said upon the
seventh verse. 1. The sign.
But the accomplishing, and fulfilling of this disjunction and separation of
this people appeared, both after the death of Christ, 2. The interpretation of
the sa^e.
unto the destruction of Jerusalem, and also is to be seen at this day, at
which time we do see that nation to be most miserably scattered, and that
they do not know one another, nor yet agree within themselves.

Verse. 15. And the Lord said unto me, Take to thee yet the instruments of a
foolish Shepherd.
The third sign, contrary unto the two former.
THe third sign contrary unto the two former, whereby is showed the destruction
that shall be of the whole nation, because of their most wicked government,
which shall be by their Shepherds as well political, or of the Common wealth, as
Ecclesiastical, or of the Church. The which was most especially fulfilled in
all that time, the which passed before the times of the Machabees, under the
Antiochi, and afterward also (when as the same parties of the house of the
Machabees were both Kings and also Priests) until the coming of Christ: but
most chiefelie of all it was fulfilled from the time of Christ his Passion,
until the destruction of Jerusalem, to wit, by the space of forty years
continually, as may sufficiently be understood by the second and third book
of Josephus of the wars of the Jews, and also at the besieging of the city
it self. The two former signs did show the care of God for them: this shows
the casting of them off in such sort, that God will deliver them over unto such
Shepheardes, as are fit to punish their sins.

A commandment unto the Prophet for the taking of a new sign upon him.
But this verse has and contains a commandment of God concerning the Prophet
his taking, and other figure and sign upon him. And this figure was a sign of
the most unjust and most cruel grouernement of these Shepheardes, which should
be afterward, whom this people, refusing Christ, should have over them. For
they were notable vesseles, or instruments of a foolish Shepherd. Keli.
For the Hebrews do use the word (vessel) generally for the signifying of
any instrument and thing.

Verse. 16. For lo, I will raise up a shepherd in the land, which shall not
look for the thing that is lost, nor seek the tender lambs, nor heal that
that is hurt, nor feed that that stands up: but he shall eat the flesh of
the fat, and tear their claws in pieces.
The interpretation of this sign. Three things to be noted.
THe declaration, and interpretation of the former sign, the which does lively
describe or set forth all the parts and points of a bad Shepherd either
politic, or Ecclesiastical. And here are three things to be noted. First of
all, that these bad Shepheardes, are in deed called Shepherds, but
improperlie, 1. That those bad Shepherds are called Shepheardes.
as fained faith, is called faith, 2. Iam. and a painted man, is called a man:
that these visardes of Popish Shepherds should not beguile us with their fair
and glorious title. For Idols also are called Gods, Psalm. 115. and 1. Cor. 8.
ver. 5.6. For though there be that are called Gods, whether in heaven, or in
earth (as there be many Gods, and many Lords) yet unto us there is but one
GOD, which is the Father, of whom are all things, and we in him: and one Lord
Jesus Christ, by whom are all things, and we by him. But the right and true
name of these Shepherds is, to be called dumme Dogs, Isai, 56. ver. 10.
Their watch men are all blind: they have no knowledge: they are all dumme
dogs: they cannot bark: they lie and sleep, and delight in sleeping. The
second thing to be noted is, 2. That they are appointed by God.
that such Shepheardes also are appointed by God, namely to punish the sins
of rebellious and disobedient persons, and God in his anger gives such
Shepheardes. So God speaks Hosea. cap. 13. ver. 11. I gave thee a King in
mine anger, and J took him away in my wrath. And in Isai, cap. 3. ver. 4. I
will appoint children to be their princes, 3. The description of a bad
Shepherd.
and babes shall rule over them. Thirdly, the description of a bad shepherd is
to be noted, against the which that is to be opposed or set, the which is made
by Christ of a good Shepherd, John 10. ver. 11. I am the good shepherd: the
good shepherd gives his life for his sheep, etc. And this description
shows two perpetual, or continual notes of bad shepheardes, in this verse,
to wit, their negligence, and cruelcie. In the verse following is added the
third note, namely, the flying away of the shepherd, by the which he forsakes
and leaves his flock, as John witnesses cap 10. ver. 12. An hireling and he
that is not the shepherd, neither the sheep are his own, sees the wolf
coming, and he leaves the sheep, and flies, and the wolf catches them,
and scatters the sheep. The negligence of these shepherds is in feeding:
their cruelty in devouring, and also in killing their flock. And the
negligence of shepheardes is not of one sort, Four points of a negligent
shepherd.
but manifold. For here are reckoned up four sorts of it. For the whole
flock, or every particular member thereof, or more members, do either stand,
or else have fallen already, or are likely to fall by and by: and moreover
they are either hole and sound, or else hurt and broken. Wherefore God shows
in all these points what is the duty of good shepherds, that on the
contrary part, they may be understood, who are bad, and negligent
shepheardes. As for that flock, 1. The flock that stands.
and the members thereof which do stand, they are to be fed, both with
heavenly doctrine, and to be governed with good laws. 2. The flock that is
fallen.
But that flock and the members thereof, which have already fallen, and have
gone a stray, like wanton Lambs, they are to be sought up again. 3. The
flock ready to fall.
When they have not already fallen, and gone clean out of the way, but are
likely by and by for to fall, they are to be visited. When as they are hurt or
broken, they are to be cured, and healed. 4. The flock that is hurt, and
broken. Who is a negligent shepherd.
Whereof it comes to pass that he is a negligent shepherd, whosoever
either feeds not the flock standing: or seeks it not up, going now a stray:
or does not visit it, being likely to fall: or when it is hurt and wounded,
does not, so far as in him lies, cure and heal it, as Pet. 1. cap. 5.2.
they are willed so far as in them lies, to feed the flock. As for the
cruelty of bad shepherds, The cruelty of bad shepherds two fold.
the same is two fold, namely, either in devouring the flock, or else in
slaying, and in breaking or hurting of the same. Of these kind of Shepherds
both political, and also Ecclesiastical, this our age has infinite examples.
The bad Shepherd his leaving and forsaking of his flock, and fleeing from the
same, is contained in the verse following, being the third note of them.

Verse. 17. O idol shepherd that leaves the flock: the sword shall be upon
his arm, and upon his right eye. His arm shall be clean dried up, and his
right eye shall be utterly darkened.
A threatening against the bad shepherds
A Threatening of God against the Shepherds themselves with most grievous
indignation, or reproving of them. God therefore threatens also these foolish
and bad Shepherds, that they likewise shall in the end be destroyed, and
utterly rased out by him. And this punishment by the figure Synecdoche, What
the figure Synecdoche is, see Amos cap. 5. ver. 21.
is described or set forth by making mention of two of the chief and
principal members of the body, to wit, the Arm, and the Eye. These two
members in a Shepherd ought especially to be whole, sound, and lively. The
Eyes, that the Shepherds may see and perceive those things which are
profitable for their flock, or hurtful. The Arm, that they may defend and
keep their flock. For these two members being taken away, men are utterly
unprofitable and unfit especially for the charge of defending, governing, and
feeding others. But in these words and members there is a Metaphor. What a
Metaphor is, see Amos cap. 4. ver. 12.
For by the word (Eye) he signifies wisdom, and by the word (Arm) might,
power, and strength, both which the Lord threatens shall be wanting, and that
he will take them away from these covetous, and cruel, and negligent, that is,
bad shepherds of his people, Isai. 3. ver. 1.2.3 in these words: For lo, the
Lord God of hosts will take away from Jerusalem, and from Judah the stay, and
the strength: even all the stay of bread, and all the stay of water, the strong
man, and the man of war, the Judge and the Prophet, the prudent, and the
aged, the captain of fifty, and the honorable, and the counselor, and the
cunning artificer, and the eloquent man. This is now especially fulfilled among
the Jews, and has been fulfilled, both before the times of the Machabees, and
afterward all those forty years from the death of Christ unto the destruction
of Jerusalem, and now also. But there is a most hard and sharp reproof
contained in these words (O unprofitable, or idol shepherd, etc.) added for
this cause, that they being so often admonished by God, may be made
vnexcuseable, and be showed altogether contemners or despisers of their charge
and duty.

CAP. 12.
Verse. 1. The burden of the word of the Lord upon Israel, says the Lord, which
spread the heavens, and laid the foundation of the earth, and formed the spirit
of man within him.
The drift of this chapter.
THe drift of this chapter is, to comfort the godly and elect of God, that they
be not discouraged, being feared with the former threatenings. And God does
comfort them, with the rehearsal of the notable, and indeed miraculous
victories, the which he gave unto his people of the Jews, by the ministry
and service of the Machabees, of whom this whole chapter seems peculiarly to
be understood, albeit that by the same may be gathered that God will never
forsake those that are his. For he has said (as it is Hebr. 13. ver. 5.6.) I
will not fail thee, neither forsake thee: so that we may boldly say, The Lord
is mine helper, neither will I fear what man can do unto me. In what sense
God his victories for his people are called burdens.
Therefore those sundry, happy, easy, and manifold victories of God for his
people against their enemies are described or set forth, the which are named or
called burdens in this place, not in regard of the people of God, whom he
favored, and whom by these victories he delivered: but in respect of their
enemies ouercommen by God. Wherefore this place is to be translated thus: The
burden by the word of the Lord denounced or threatened unto other nations,
namely, because of Israel. For the word (gnal) in this place does not signify
against, but (for) or (because of) that is, for Israel his sake. Unless some man
had rather take the word ( Massa, a burden) generally in this place for any
manner of denouncing or declaring of a thing, as well joyful, as sorrowful: and
not only burdenous, as if he should say, a declaration made by the word of God
unto Israel, that is, which Israel should now hear for his comfort, like as he
has understood the former threatenings unto his fear and repentance. And
herein also God seems to have followed the respect of the time, because that
these victories follow that same overthrow of the whole state both
Ecclesiastical, and also political, made by those evil governors, whereof
has been spoken in the chapter before going. But the thing it self, that is,
that burden, the which the Jews should be unto other nations near unto them,
does the Prophet first of all briefly set forth by three similitudes, that
those nations might so much the sooner abstain or leave off from their
confederacies and wars against the Jews, being admonished of their exile or
banishment and * overthrow, I put in the word (overthrow) because it may
happily be the fault of the Printer to make exilio for excidio in the latin.
which they should have for the same, and so by this means that they might be
made inexcusable. Then does he describe the victories that should be against
the nations fighting against the Jews.

But this verse has an entrance or preface unto this whole prophecy, wherein
both the said prophecy is briefly propounded or laid down, and also commended
and confirmed. The sum of the things which are to be spoken afterward, This
verse contains an entrance or preface unto this prophecy, propounding and
confirming the same.
is propounded in this word, The burden of the word, that is, a burden, which
must be declared, and which was reueiled. For this term (word) is taken for a
revelation made by God unto the Prophet, whether it were made by word, or by
vision. Further, the self same is showed by these words (for Israel). For
these words teach unto whom these things shall be a burden, not unto the
Israelites, but unto their enemies. Moreover, this self same prophecy is here
commended two ways. First, This prophecy commended.
from the person of the author thereof, or of him that does command and declare
these things. For it is Jehovah, the Lord or true God, 1. From the person of
the author thereof.
which shows that these things shall be. Secondly, from his power, the which
for the greater Emphasis, vehemency, or force sake, and for the terrifying or
fearing of the ungodly, 2. From his power. What the figure Synecdoche is see
Amos cap. 5 ver. 21.
and for the comfort of the godly is here expressed over three sorts of most
excellent things (by the which the whole world is contained by the figure
Synecdoche). For God rules over these things, and has power over them, to
wit, over Heaven, Earth, and Men themselves. Over Heaven, because he does
stretch or spread it forth, Genesis 1. Over the Earth, because he has founded, or
laid the foundation of it, Psalm. Against the old revived or renewed error of
those that hold the soul to be begotten.
24. Over Men, because he does create, and form, or frame their souls in
them, yea, and that alone without any help of their parents. For the fathers
beget the bodies only. So are we taught to believe of God in this point, Hebr.
12. ver. 9. in these words, Moreover we have had the fathers of our bodies,
which corrected us, and we gave them reverence: should we not much rather be in
subjection unto the Father of spirits, that we might live? So Eccle. cap. 12.
ver. 7. And dust return to earth as it was, and the spirit return to God that
gave it.

Verse. 2. Behold, I will make Jerusalem a cup of poison unto all the people
round about: and also with Judah will he be, in the siege against Jerusalem.
The first similitude, showing how great a burden the Church has always been
unto her enemies.
THe first similitude, whereby is showed how great a burden Jerusalem, and
consequently the Church, shall be unto her enemies inuading or setting upon
her, as it has appeared in the time of the Machabees, and always at all other
times. He therefore compares her unto a cup of confusion, or poison, that is,
the which being drunk of, great distemperature or trouble is bred in the mind
of the drinker. Such is the river Gallus said to be, whereof who so drinks,
The river Gallus.
as Ovid affirms, runs mad by and by. The people therefore which shall
assault Jerusalem shall do nothing with good and advised counsel, but like
unto mad men they shall destroy themselves, and theirs, and deal in all
things disorderously, as if they were drunken with the wine of giddines or
brainsicknes, as they in the Psalm 60. ver. 3. do complain, saying, Thou
have showed thy people heavy things: thou have made us to drink the wine of
giddi es. And under a much like similitude does he express the greatness of the
plagues that shall in the end fall upon the wicked, when they shall have taken
their full draught of the wine of God his vengeance, Psalm 75. ver. 8 in this
manner: In the hand of the Lord is a cup, and the wine is red: it is full mixed,
and he powers out of the same: surely all the wicked of the earth shall wring
out, and drink the dregs thereof. Some translate it, a cup causing sleep,
that is, making drunk, the which is all one. For drunken men do nothing
rightly, and with advise, but confound all things, or do all things out of
order.

Three things to be noted.
But here are three things to be noted. First, who shall thus make Jerusalem?
Secondly, unto whom he shall so make it? Thirdly, when he shall so make it. 1
Who shall make Jerusalem so?
I, says he. So then he which is almighty, shall do it, albeit this seemed a
matter not to be believed, because of the fearful and lamentable estate of
that city under the Kings of Syria, and because that the Church is always a
small flock, yea, and moreover almost also of no strength. So Christ affirms
that number to be small, Matthew. 7. ver. 13.14. when he says, Enter in at the
straight gate: for it is the wide gate, and broad way that leads to
destruction: and many there be which go in thereat, because the gate is
strait, and the way narrow that leads unto life, and few there be that
find it. And Luke 12. ver. 32. Fear not, little flock, for it is your
fathers pleasure, to give you the kingdom. Secondly, 2. Unto whom he shall so
make it?
he shall make Jerusalem a cup against all people near unto it, because that
they above the rest were most deadly enemies unto the Jews, that is, the
Church. Lastly, he shall make it such a cup against the enemies, especially in
the time of the besieging of it, that is, 3. When he shall so make it.
when as it shall be besieged, and pressed, or hardly used by those people, and
this shall God do for Iehudah, that is, that in that city the remnants of the
true Church may be preserved and saved.

Verse. 3. And in that day will I make Jerusalem an heavy stone for all people:
all that lift it up shall be torn, though all the people of the earth be
gathered together against it.
The second similitude.
THE second similitude, wherein the same burden, whereof he had spoken, is
declared. In the second place, Jerusalem, or the Church of God shall be an
heavy, and a weighty stone unto her enemies, whom whosoever shall go about
to bear, and to remove out of his place, he shall be torn and broken in pieces
with the stone it self, the weight and very edge or sharpnes of the stone, in
how great number soever they shall be gathered together: In a word, they shall
be pressed down with it. See the exposition and interpretation of this verse
Luke 20. ver. 18. where Christ comparing himself unto a stone, says, Who
soever shall fall upon that stone, shall be broken: and on whom soever it shall
fall, it will grind him to powder. Therefore albeit all nations near unto it,
do conspire and be gathered together against Jerusalem, yet shall they by it be
crushed in pieces as of a most hard and weighty stone.

Verse. 4. In that day, says the Lord, I will smite every horse with
stonishment, and his rider with madness, and I will open mine eyes upon the
house of Judah, and will smite every horse of the people with blindness.
The former sentence explained, or made more plain.
A Making plain of the former sentence. For he shows by what means it shall
come to pass, that they that be gathered together against the Jews, and
consequently those that be the godly indeed, albeit they be a mighty army,
shall nevertheless by them be overthrown, namely, because that God being moved
with mercy toward those that are his, shall strike all the strength of their
enemies, both with stonishment, and also with blindness. Wherefore in this place
there are three things to be noted. Three things to be noted.
First of all, that the praise and work of this victory of the Jews, and
overthrowing and daunting of their enemies is not attributed unto the godly
them selves, 1. The praise of the victory given unto God.
but unto God. For he shall strike, that is, he shall do it, and scatter so
mighty armies: and that, by sending both an astonishment upon the enemies of
his Church, that they shall be able to bring nothing to pass with their
strength, be it never so great (for they shall remain astonished, as it were
dead with sleep, and immovable:) and also by sending blindness upon the samd
enemies, as he did upon the Sodomites, seeking the door of Lot, that they
shall not be able to put that in execution, the which they attempt, and go
about never so rashly and foolishly. So in the Psalm. 76. ver. 5.6. the godly
acknowledge God to have brought a fear and astonishment upon the strong men of
Saneherib, and to have cast them as it were into a deadly slumber, when they
say: The stout hearted are spoiled: they have slept their sleep, and all the
men of strength have not found their hands. At thy rebuke, O God of Iaacob,
both the chariot and the horse are asleep. 2. God shall strike the strength it
self of their enemies.
The second thing is, He shall strike the strength it self of their enemies,
the which is signified by the name of ( the horse, and the rider) in the which
the chief strength of wars and armies does consist. The third, the cause why
God does this, 3. Why God shall do this?
namely, of his only mercy toward his elect or chosen, for he shall open his
eyes upon the house of Judah, that is, he shall behold their calamities or
miseries, and shall take pity upon them.

Verse. 5. And the Princes of Judah shall say in their hearts, The inhabitants
of Jerusalem shall be my strength in the Lord of hosts their God.
What the figure Auxesis is, see Oseas cap. 7. ver. 4.
THe first Auxesis, or increasing of the former matter. For God does amplify or
increase this self same benefit and his help, from the manner of the same. It
shall be so manifest and evident, or plain to be seen, that the Captains
themselves of the people of the Jews shall freely and openly both acknowledge
and also witness the same: when as notwithstanding men for the most part, and
especially Captains, are wont to challenge unto themselves the praise of the
victory, that is, of the army which they have ouercommen, as it is said
hereafter, Two parts of this verse.
ver. 7. But this verse contains two things. First, an acknowledging of the
power of God in delivering those that are his out of the hands of their enemies
by a wonderful victory, and after a wonderful manner. 1. The acknowledging of
the power of God in this victory.
For all the Jews shall confess, that their power, and the power of the
Inhabitants of Jerusalem, and the strength of their whole army to have been
from that same God of hosts, who is their God. Therefore the power of God in
saving those that are his shall be so manifest, that neither the Captains of
the war themselves, nor the dwellers at Jerusalem (who were thought to be
the strength of the whole nation) shall dissemble, hide, or deny the same. For
Mathathias, and Judah, of the city Modin did signify so much in the writing
and title or inscription of their Ensign. For it was written upon their
Ensigns, Machab. 1. Who is like unto Jehovah, glorious and strong? Whereupon
they were afterward called Machabei of those notes or letters in their
Ensigns. The Machabes did carry in their ensigns these four letters M, C,
B, I, alluding unto these four Hebrew words beginning with these letters,
Exodus 1^. ver. 11. Mi Camocah Beelim Jehovah? Who is like unto thee among the
gods, I^houah? of which four letters they were called Macbi, both by their
country men, and also by strangers, and afterward corruptly Machabaei, or
Machabes.
There is a like place Psalm. 18 ver. 31. Who is God besides the Lord? and who
is mighty, save our God? And Psalm. 89. ver. 6. Who is equal to the Lord in
the heaven? and who is like the Lord* among the sons of the gods? O Lord God
of hosts, who is like unto thee, which art a mighty Lord? But where as it is
said (They shall say in their hearts) the Prophet does not hereby exclude or
shut out open confession, and confession with the mouth of that their
acknowledging of the extraordinary power of GOD in these wars: but only
teaches, that they shall confess and acknowledge these things earnestly, not
hypocritically: truly, or from their heart, and not dissemblingly, or feinedly.
And that these things may the better be understood to belong, according unto
the letter, unto the times of these Machabees, which first delivered the people
from that miserable tyranny of the Antiochi, the which then shall be the
Captains of the people, are in this place called Elaphim, or Aluphim, that is,
such Captains as did not wear any kingly Crown: but rather which were only
Magistrates, Governors, or Rulers of the people, such as also the Levites
were. For the Machabees were Levites. So 1 Machab. 2. and Joseph. lib. 2. cap.
8. de Antiquit. Iudaeor. these Machabees are said to have borne offices only,
and are called Captains of victory. This therefore is here first to be noted.
The second thing is, Unto whom God was a strength, namely, both unto the
Captains of the people, and also unto the whole people, and finally unto them
of Jerusalem themselves, who then did lie miserably oppressed under that
tyranny. So then no part, or city of that people could attribute unto
themselves the praise of so great and mighty deliverance. So God even now
adays also does save and deliver his Church by extraordinary means.

Verse. 6. In that day will I make the Princes of Judah like coals of fire
among the wood, and like a firebrand in the sheafe, and they shall devour all
the people round about on the right hand, and on the left: and Jerusalem shall
be inhabited again in her own place, even in Jerusalem.
The third similitude.
THe second amplification of the said benefit of God in the deliverance of
those that are his, the which contains the third similitude, by the which the
word (burden) whereof has been spoken before, is expounded. But this verse or
amplification has three things. For first it contains the manner of this
strength, the which the Lord will extraordinarily give unto those that are his.
Secondly, the number of those which shall be destroyed. Three parts of this
verse.
Thirdly, the effect of that city preserved, the which the enemies
notwithstanding were most desirous to have to be destroyed. 1. The manner of the
extraordinary strength, which God will give unto his Church.
First, the manner of this strength is set out or made plain by a similitude.
For the Captains of Iehudah shall be like unto an hearth, whereon afterward
much wood is burnt. And James, cap. 3. ver. 5. uses the like similitude of
fire, the which although it be but small at the first, yet it consumes a great
deal of matter. Behold (says he) how great a thing a little fire kindles. 2.
The number of those that shall be destroyed.
And so do the people use the like comparison, when they pray unto God to make
a great consuming of the enemies of the Church, Psalm. 83. ver. 14.15. saying,
As the fire burns the forest. and as the flame sets the mountains on
fire: 3. The effect of the city preserved.
so persecute them with thy tempest, and make them afraid with thy storm. And
these Captains shall also be like unto a firebrand, or burning wood in the
midst of sheaues or heaps of straw, 1. What the figure Metaphora is, see
Amos cap. 4. ver. 12.
or stubble, Isai. 30. ver. 30. With the which double Metaphor of an hearth of
fire consuming wood, and a burning firebrand among heaps of straw is showed,
that albeit the remnants of the people of God were then but small, as some
little earthen hearth, or pan to keep fire in, yet shall they notwithstanding
easily be conquerours of their enemies, and as soon as fire consumes dry
wood. These things thus fell out in those first wars of the Machabees, as
appears lib. 1. Machab. and Joseph. lib. 12. de Antiquit. Iudaic. Secondly,
that are to be destroyed and slain. All the people near unto them shall be
slain, the which shall come together from all places to hurt the Jews, from
what country or coast soever they shall assault the Church of God, either at
the right hand, or at the left hand. A very notable and continual promise of
God for the saving of those that are his. 3. Lastly,

Verse. 7. The Lord also shall preserve the tents of Judah, * as before time:
therefore the glory of the house of David shall not boast, Or First of all.
nor the glory of the inhabitants of Jerusalem against Judah.
The third amplification of the benefit of God.
THe third amplification, taken from the state of the people, the which, before
these things come to pass, shall be most miserable, and consequently the
saving and restoring thereof shall be past all hope, at that time. But God does
in such sort amplify his benefit, both because men are unthankful, and do
ouerpasse his grace and favor, either with blinded eyes, or else do not
esteem it as is meet: and also because that this deliverance of the people
was the wonderful work of God, the which ought to profit, and to be set forth
to contain or keep them and their posterity in the fear of God: but it was
forgotten of them by and by. Now this desolation and destruction the which was
among that people, at that time (at the which God did deliver them) is
briefly described or set forth under the word (Tent.) For Tents are the
uncertain and for a very short time, dwellings of men scattered, and wandering
up and down. For the whole land of Iewrie, otherwise being a country most
flourishing, was after this miserable sort wasted and spoiled by the Antiochi.
Two parts of this verse.
And this verse contains two things. The one, the order of the thing done.
For God shall deal after this manner: first, 1. The manner of the doing of the
thing.
he shall deliver those Jews, the which shall dwell in the fields, and
without the cities, or at least wise without Jerusalem. Then afterward he
shall deliver the city it self. thing is a conclusion arising from this
falling out of the matter, 2. These victories ascribed unto God, and not unto
men.
by the which appears that these victories are attributed unto God, and not
unto men. Furthermore, a certain wonderful, and strange thing shall fall out,
to wit, that the deliverance of the people shall not be brought to pass, by
them of Jerusalem, for those that dwell in the fields and villages (as it was
wont to be done before, as namely, when as the chief help of the country is
from the cities, and this city was the head of the whole nation) but
contrariwise, the country, and scattered people shall deliver the city. So
then at that time, that is, in those victories neither shall the house of
David, and the Princes of the Jews (the which were then yet remaining of that
family) nor the city Jerusalem it self, (the which was the head city, and
the beauty, and ornament of the whole land) glory or boast against or above
that Judah dwelling in tents, and miserably torn in sunder, and scattered
before.

Verse. 8. In that day shall the Lord defend the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and
he that is feeble among them, in that day shall be as David: and the house of
David shall be as Gods house, and as the Angel of the Lord before them.
After the people of the country, the Citizens of Jerusalem it self also
shall be delivered.
IN the second place the Lord also shall deliver the citizens of Jerusalem
themselves, (in the which was his Temple) and he shall defend them, and take
them out of the hands of their enemies. The which doubtless came so to pass.
But God does here promise two things. First, that he will defend the Jews, as
if he should set himself as it were a shield against the enemies of his
Church, 1. The Lord will defend them.
and against their darts. Secondly, he promises unto them wonderful
strength, and the same also most evident by degrees. 2. Their strength shall be
wonderful.
He that shall then be feeble in that city, shall notwithstanding be stout
and strong, as some times was David, that most valiant and warlike man, who
confesses God his power in induing his with extraordinary strength and
knowledge in fight Psalm. 18. ver. 34, 35, saying, 1. The feeble shall be strong
like David.
He teaches mine hands to fight, so that a bow of brass is broken with
mine arms. Thou have also given me the shield of thy salvation, and thy right
hand has stayed me, and thy loving kindness has caused me to increase. So 2.
Sam. ver. 8. Husha^ exceedingly commends the strength of David, and his skill,
and policy in war, unto his rebellious son Absalom, to dissuade him from
his purpose. Thou know (said Hushai) thy father and his men, that they be
strong men, and are chafed in mind, as a bear robbed of her whelps in the
field: also thy father is a valiant warrier, and will not lodge with the
people. So cap. 18. ver. 3. do the people also set forth his valor and
prowess in these words: Thou shall not go forth: for if we flee away they
will not regard us, neither will they pass for us, though half of us were
slain: but thou art now worth ten thousand of us: therefore now it is better,
that thou succor us out of the city. Moreover, 2. He that is of the kings
blood, shall be as an Angel.
he that of David shall be of the blood royal, as namely who ought to be the
guide and captain of the rest, he shall be as an Angel, yea and as that
Angel, which went before them in the desert, and led them, that is, a most
strong Angel of God. Exodus 32. ver. 34.

Verse. 9. And in that day will I seek, to destroy all the nations that come
against Jerusalem.
A confirmation of the former promise.
A Confirmation of the former promise by way of matching together of contraries.
For like as before God promised that he would defend Jerusalem, that is, his
Church: so in this place on the contrary he threatens, and that most
plainly, that he will destroy the enemies thereof. Three things to be noted.
And here are three things to be noted. First, the most earnest diligence of
God, in searching out, and overthrowing the enemies of his Church. For he
says, 1. The diligence of God in searching out the enemies of his Church.
I will seek them out from every where round about: and that diligently. For
this is the force and signification of the word Bakasch. The second, whom he
will seek out, namely (all) which shall come against Jerusalem, that is to
say, all the enemies of his Church, such as were they, 2. Whom he shall seek
out.
who in the time of the Machabees besieged Jerusalem, as Antiochus Illustris,
or Epiphanes, Antiochus Eupator, Triphon, and the rest, Machab. 6. Joseph. lib.
Antiquit. Iudaic. 12. cap. 14. and others afterward. 3. They shall utterly be
destroyed, and none left.
So then whosoever shall set upon the Church, shall be destroyed by God. The
third, God shall in such sort destroy them, that he shall utterly raze them
out, and not scatter them only, but that nothing shall remain of them.

Verse. 10. And I will power upon the house of David, and upon the inhabitants
of Jerusalem the spirit of grace, and of compassion, and they shall look upon
me, whom they have pierced, and they shall lament for him, as one mourns for
his only son, and be sorry for him, as one is sorry for his first borne.
An amplification of the former promise by a threefold gift which shall follow
their deliverance.
AN amplification of the former promise and benefit toward those that are his,
first the Jews, and afterward all those that are Christ's out of what nation
soever. And he does amplify it, by the reckoning of a threefolde gift, the
which shall follow that deliverance of the people. First, for that God shall
power out spiritual gifts, both upon the princes themselves, and also upon
the common people. 1. God shall power out spiritual gifts both upon the
princes, and also upon the people.
For under the name of the house of David, I do comprehend the Princes and the
Captains, and under the name of the Citizens of Jerusalem, the rest of the
Jews, among whom were the chief and more better sort of them of Jerusalem,
which did dwell in that same head city, and holy place. And therefore are they
recited by name, but by the figure Synecdoche, they do signify the rest of
the Jews also. The second gift of God adjoined unto the former benefit of
his, Amos, cap. 5. ver. 21.
is the spirit both of grace, or of mercy and compassion: 2. The spirit of
mercy, and prayer shall be powered out upon them.
and also of prayer, the which spirit God will power out largely upon them. By
the word (grace) therefore God promises his mercies toward the Jews. For he
favors them, being moved thereunto with these alone. This mercy of God did
seem to be broken off, or ceased because of the so long afflictions of the
people, but yet the same people shall feel it to be restored again. And by
the word prayer, he understands a godly mind, and acknowledging God, and
grounded in faith, and the which in afflictions has recourse unto God, not
unto idols, or men, and gives thanks unto him for benefits received. Lastly,
such a mind as the godly indeed have, which pray unto God through faith
Psalm. 77. ver. 3, 4, 5, 6. and so forth. But these gifts does God call
(Spirit) both because they are the effects of the Spirit of God in us, and his
gifts, 1. Cor. 12. and also because they are inward motions, and altogether
spiritual feelings of the mind. Now the inward force and power of God in us,
is called Spirit, according unto the propriety of the Hebrew tongue. He says
also, I will power out, that is to say, I will give these healthsome and
profitable gifts in great abundance. And these spiritual gifts are more of
us to be accounted of, then is the deliverance of the body, because this bodily
deliverance, unless these spiritual gifts were added, would turn unto our
destruction, because we should not acknowledge the same as a benefit of God,
nor praise God for it, except he himself gave us this feeling, that he
bestowed this deliverance upon us of his grace and mercy. The third gift, 3.
Their repentance and turning unto God.
is their repentance and conversion or turning unto God. For they shall look
diligently upon God, whom before they did pearce with their sins and
idolatries, and strike through, provoke, and wound even unto the very bottom
and innermost parts of his heart and breast. For so it appears that the word
(pearce) is taken in this place, and is confirmed Psalm. 22. ver. 16. where it
is said: Dogs have compassed me, and the assembly of the wicked have
enclosed me: they pierced mine hands, and my feet. In these words therefore
of our Prophet (they shall look upon me, whom they have pierced, etc.) earnest
repentance of mind is described or set forth.

Now that which is here Metaphoricallie spoken of the divine nature of Christ
(who is that same God, What the figure Metaphora is, see Amos cap. 4. ver. 12.
That which is here spoken of the divine nature of Christ, was also upon earth
fulfilled in his humane nature.
who was provoked by the Jews, as Paul teaches, both in the desert, and also
as often as this people did fall unto the worshipping of idols, 1. Cor. 10.
ver. 9. where Paul wills the Corinthians, that they tempt not Christ, as some
of the Jews in the wilderness did, and were destroyed of serpents) the self
same according to the letter was fulfilled in his humane or man's nature, as
John teaches cap. 19.37. alleging this place for proof of the same. And
Reuelat. 1. ver. 7. in these words, Behold, he comes with clouds, and
every eye shall see him, yea even they, which pierced him through, in so much
that it cannot be doubted (except we make the Spirit of God the best expounder
of himself, a liar) but that he which here says he was pierced through, is
Christ, which afterward was incarnate, or took flesh: and that he is the same
true God, the keeper of Israel, which speaks in this place.

What shall fall out unto the Jews after these promises, and after this
deliverance.
And they shall lament for him.) A continuance of this Prophecy, by the which
God shows, what shall afterward come to pass unto the Jews, after that they
have received these gifts, and this deliverance, namely, that the Church shall
not be without her afflictions, and exercises notwithstanding. And therefore
he rehearses the sorrow and lamenting, which they shall make for him, whom at
that time God shall use for the captain, and instrument of his grace toward
them. And therefore I refer the relative voice (him) in this sentence ( and
they shall lament or mourn over him, The Relative (Him.) Antonomasia is a
figure, whereby we do change one name for another, as the Apostle, for Paul,
Job, for a poor man, and full of miseaie: the savior, for Christ. And bear,
the relative (him) for whosoever should be their deliverer.
or for him) neither unto God, nor yet unto Christ, but by the figure
Antonomasia, unto him or them, by whom God at that time wrought this miraculous
deliverance, and saving of the people, I mean the first Machabees. But their
name is not added or set down, but suppressed, or kept in by concealing the
same, as in mourning is wont to be done. For then commonly we do not name
those, whom we do bewail, but conceal them being known as it were unto
every one. So Ieremias cap. 4. Lament. bewailing Josias, does not any where
name him notwithstanding. Yet if any man will apply these things which follow,
unto the mourning and lamenting of the Church (the which bewailed Christ
treacherously and cruelly condemned and put to death Luc. 23. ver. 27. where
he reports that there followed him a great multitude of people, and of
women, which women bewailed and lamented him,) it may very well fit, and
agree thereunto. For all the deliuerers of Israel were a type or figure of
Christ the true Captain and redeemer of his Church. But first of all, these
things do belong according unto the letter, unto that mourning the which the
Jews made partly for Mathathias, and partly for Judas the Machabees 1. Mich.
9. ver. 20.21. Iosep. lib. 12. Antiquit. in the last chapter, being most like
unto that mourning, the which they had made before for Josias 2. Chr. 35. ver.
24.25. This mourning therefore he describes or sets forth, both by the
outward pomp, and also by the inward sorrow. For the Prophet has comprehended
them both. By the word (Saphad) is declared the outward pomp and funeral
rites: and by the word (Hamer) the sorrow of the mind, or true heaviness.
Furthermore he describes the said mourning by a similitude, or comparison of
most lamentable sorrowing. For (says he) the Jews shall in such sort
bewail him as pitiful and tender hearted parents, are wont to lament their
only son taken away from them by death.

Verse. 11. In that day shall there be a great mourning in Jerusalem, as the
mourning of Hadradrimmon in the valley of Megiddon.
The first amplification of this mourning, compared unto that for Josias, the
which was exceeding great, and made an ordinance unto the children of Israel.
THe first amplification of the mourning described before And it is taken from
things compared together, or from a comparison, to wit, this mourning shall be
in the very midst of Jerusalem, a most strong city, the head of the land,
and an holy city, and not only in the country, and villages: yea, and it
shall be such a mourning, as was some time for King Josias in Hadradrinmon the
valley of Magiddon, concerning whose death and most sorrowful mourning for the
same, thus it is written 2. Chro. 35. ver. 24.25. So his servants took him out
of that chariot (namely wherein he was shot at by the shooters of Necho King of
Egypt in the valley of Megiddo, verse 22.23.) and put him in the second
chariot, which he had, and when they had brought him to Jerusalem, he died, and
was buried in the sepulchers of his fathers: and all Judah, and Jerusalem
mourned for Josiah. And Jeremiah lamented Josiah, and all singing men, and
singing women mourned for Josiah in their lamentations to this day, and made
the same, for an ordinance unto Jsrael: and behold they be written in the
Lamentations. Some think also that there is an allusion and resemblance unto
this place, Reuelat. 16. ver. 16. in these words: And they gathered them
together into a place called in Hebrew Armagedon.

Verse, 12. And the land shall bewail every family a part, the family of the
house of David apart, and their wives apart, the family of the house of Nathan
apart, and their wiuer apart. Verse. 13. The family of the house of Leui apart,
and their wives apart: the family of Shemei apart, and their wives apart.
Verse. 14. All the families that remain, every family apart, and their wives
apart.
The second amplification taken from the manner of the mourning, and number of
the manners.
THe second amplification from the manner of the mourning, and the number of the
mourners. And it is amplified, to show, both how great that deliverance shall
be, the minister and Captain whereof shall be had in so great regard and
estimation of the whole people: and also to teach that the remembrance and
death of the good Captains of Israel (especially so far forth as they were
a type or figure of Christ) ought to be dear and precious in the Church of
God. But of old in the time of the law, this funeral pomp and manner of
mourning was more tolerable, or to be borne withal, then now it is, because
that the godly and faithful were yet under ceremonies, Moderate mourning for
the dead permitted unto Christians.
but are not now so: and yet is it not forbidden Christians after a moderate
sort to mourn for theirs that are dead, 1 Thessalonians. 4. Act. 8. ver. 2. where the
godly and faithful mourned for the death of Steven. The manner of the mourning
in this place is, that not every one alone by himself, but gathered together
shall mourn. 1. The manner of their mourning. Men by themselves, and women by
themselves.
And this is a public testimony or witness of mourning, and public sorrow,
and not only a sign of the private heaviness, and sadness of some few. Again,
for that the men or males by themselves shall mourn, and likewise the women by
themselves and apart, as well for civil honesty and comelines, the which the
Jews also do at this day observe in their public assemblies (for they are not
wont to mix both sexes together in those public meetings, as it may also
appear Exodus 15. ver. 20. that this order in their meetings was observed, by
this that Miriam and her women do apart by themselves praise God for their
deliverance) as also that every sex may the more freely lament, and that one
sex for shame of another should not be withholden and kept from pouring
forth their tears. 2. The number of the mourners.
The number also of the mourners is here described or set forth, to wit, first
and generally, the whole land of the Israelites, and all the families. For that
whole people shall bewail those Captains of their deliverance, and figures of
Christ: and then afterward the Princes also of this people, and every the most
honorable among all that people of God, shall bewail those Captains: as for
example, the house of David: the house of Nathan, which succeeded in dignity,
when the house of Solomon decayed, Luke 3. the house of Leui, in the which also
the Priests are contained. Lastly, the house of Semei, who among the other
Levites was at that time most famous, and well known, 1. Chron. 6. ver. 17.

CAP. 13.
Verse. 1. In that day there shall be a fountain opened to the house of David,
and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem, for sin, Or
For separation for uncleanness.
and for uncleanness.
The sum of this chapter.
THe sum of this chapter is a brief narration or discourse both of the chief
gifts of God, and also of the events or fallings out of matters, the which
should come to pass, and did indeed come to pass among the people of the
Jews, that is, the Church of God, after the restoring of the estate both of
the people and also of the Church by the Machabees, unto the last besieging and
destruction of the city of Jerusalem, the which is contained in the chapter
following. Therefore this prophecy contains the order of time, and is fitly
joined unto the former. And it rehearses two especial benefits of God toward
the Church or the Jews, to wit, a way of clea^sing of sins, and purging of
idolatry from his Church and Temple. And it does in like manner recite two
strange events, or fallings out of things, to wit, the massacring or murdering
of the true Shepherds, and the cutting off of the people, and their great
punishments by reason of the same. Now all these things (whether ye respect the
benefits, or the fallings out of the things) have been in such sort fulfilled,
that in other matters they have attained their accomplishment but in part, and
figuratively, but in Christ most chiefly and most truly they have had their
whole, and their full performance and accomplishment.

Three parts of this verse.
This verse contains three things. First, the rehearsing of the time in the
which this prophecy should come to pass. In those days, that is to say,
after those things shall come to pass, the which have been described in the
former chapter, 1. The time of the fulfilling of this prophecy.
then shall these things which follow fall out. And not in one day, but in
process of time. For in this signification is the word (day) to be taken, to
wit, for a long time, and for the whole space of time, wherein these things
were, or began to be. The second, the thing it self, that is, 2. The first
benefit of God. What the figure Metaphora is, see Amos cap. 4. ver. 12.
the first benefit of God, which shall come to pass, does the Prophet declare
and set down, and that after a Metaphorical kind of speaking, and such as is
taken from the rites and ceremonies of the law. This afterward also was
fulfilled according to the letter, and has now likewise place in the Church of
God. He promises therefore that there shall be in the Church and people
forgiveness of sins ready at hand, and a cleansing of all sins, as before:
but yet after a diverse manner, in respect of the outward sign, to wit, for that
this cleansing was to be made before either by sacrifices, or else by water
kept for that purpose. Whereupon there were waterpots every where in the
houses of every one of the Jews, wherein water was kept, wherewith they might
purge and cleanse themselves, John. 2. ver. 6. Mark. 7. ver. 3.4. In that day
therefore, that is, afterward, there shall be a fountain flowing of it self,
and open and ready unto every one for the cleansing of sins, both those,
which do separate us from God, and also those which for a time, or else for
ever, do sever us from the common conuersing, or being, and companying with
other men, by the commandment of God, of which sort are those sins, which
are reckoned up Leuit. 12. and 15. And these are contained under the word
(separation) as those former under the name of (sin.)

When these things were fulfilled.
Now these things were fulfilled typically or figuratively, when as the worship
of God, the sacrifices, the washings ordained by God (which had ceased under
the Antiochi, or were very seldom used for fear) were restored again by the
Machabees, the Temple being purged, and the whole outward worship of God being
restored in the Temple, as it was before. And it was then indeed truly
fulfilled, when as John the Baptist baptized in the rivers all those that
repented, which came unto him, and did first of all use in the Church, by the
commandment of God, and according unto this prophecy, the Baptism of the
Church, the which is a testimony or witness of the washing away of all our
sins made by GOD through the blood of Christ. So then this place contains a
prophecy, and a promise of instituting or ordaining that Baptism, the which
we have at this day in the Church, and the which is said by John the Baptist to
have been commanded from God out of heaven, as may appear Matthew. 21. verse. 25.
by Christ his demand unto the Scribes and Pharisees touching this matter, when
he asks them of the Baptism of John, whether it were from heaven, or from
men, thereby indeed without all doubt giving to understand, that it was from
God. Lastly, the said Baptism was allowed and established by Christ himself
in his own person, 3. Unto whom this fountain shall be opened.
Matthew. 3. Thirdly, it is here to be noted, unto whom this fountain shall be
opened, namely, unto the house of David, and unto the inhabitants of Jerusalem.
Under which words by the figure Synecdoche, What the figure Synecdoche is, see
Amos cap. 5 ver. 21.
he does contain the rest of the families of Israel also, yea and moreover all
the godly out of any nation whatsoever: but first of all this Baptism the
sign and Sacrament of the cleansing of sins, was offered, and declared, and
communicated or imparted unto the Jews: and then afterward unto other nations
by the Apostles, unto whom also the Church and doctrine of God was spread by
the same Apostles.

Verse. 2. And in that day says the Lord of hosts, I will cut off the names of
the Idols out of the land: and they shall no more be remembered: and I will
cause the Prophets and the unclean spirit to depart out of the land.
The second benefit.
THe second benefit of God, the which shall then be also, namely, the
overthrowing of idolatry used before even in Jerusalem it self, and the
casting down of the authority of all false teachers. This verse therefore
has two things, that is, Two parts of this verse.
two parts of this second benefit. And first of all, a promise of the utter
destroying of Idols among the Jews, the like whereof is made also in Isai, 1.
A promise of the utter destroying of Idols.
cap 1. ver. 18. where he says in these words: And the Idols will he utterly
destroy. Wherein the person of him that promises is expressed, (and the same
is God almighty) least any man might doubt that this could not be brought to
pass because of the power of Idolators, and the reverence of the Idols
themselves among these Idolators. This overthrowing of the Idols also is
expressed, to wit, they shall be cast down in such sort, that not only they
shall be cut off, but also the very remembrance of them shall perish from the
mouths of men, Psalm. 16 and the worship and reverence of them, which is in the
hearts and minds of men, shall also be taken out of their hearts and minds.
Lastly, these Idols are in contempt called the fearebugs of men, Gnatsabbim.
as they likewise are termed by the same name 1. Sam. 31. ver. 9.1. Chron. 10.
ver. 9.

When these things were fulfilled.
Now these things had their accomplishment and fulfilling, first after the
Temple was purged by the Machabees until the destruction of Jerusalem. In all
the which time the Jews were so constant or steadfast in removing of Idols from
themselves, and from the Temple of God, that they often skirmished with the
Romans about that matter, Joseph. lib. 1.2. and 3. de Bello Iudaico: neither
are they said, or read since that time, especially in Judea to have been
Idolators, as they were before under the Antiochi, and before also under the
Kings of Judah and Israel. Secondly, this self same thing has much more been
fulfilled after the preaching of the Gospel, and is now at this day also
fulfilled in the true Church of God, out of the which Idols were afterward cast
by the Christian Emperors themselves, and now also are removed, and always
have been refused by the Christians. This therefore is one part of the second
benefit in this place comprehended and contained.

2. The false teachers loosing their authority in the Church.
The second part is, the false teachers loosing of their authority in the
Church, nay moreover their correction and chastising, as is showed in the
verses following. Here therefore God promises that he will remove the false
Teachers, whom he calls Prophets, to wit, in a general signification taking
this word, and not for those which truly do foretell things to come, but for
those which profess or take upon themselves to be the interpreters and
expounders of the law and word of God, but falsely. Further, God also promises
that he will remove their Father, and Spirit, to wit, the unclean Spirit. And
by the name of the unclean Spirit is the devil signified, as where it is
said, Matthew. 12. ver. 43. Now when the unclean spirit is gone out of a man, he
walks throughout dry places, seeking rest, and finds none. Likewise Mark.
1. ver. 26. And the unclean spirit tare him, and cried with a loud voice, and
came out of him. For the devil is the author of all error and lying, as
Christ, John 8. ver. 44. witnesses, that he is a liar, and the father thereof,
as he is also the author of that corruption which is brought into the true and
heavenly doctrine, the which is signified Reuelat. 16. ver. 13. by the unclean
spirits like frogs coming out of the mouth of the dragon, and out of the
mouth of the beast, and out of the mouth of the false Prophet. Now God shows
that he will earnestly and diligently overthrow all that same false
interpretation, and doctrine of the false Prophets, when as he promises that
the author thereof also shall be removed out of the Church of God. And this was
fulfilled especially by Christ himself, who confuted or overthrew the false
doctrine of the Scribes and Pharisees, Matthew. 5. Secondly, by his Apostles
through the preaching of the Gospel: and now by the true Pastors of the Church
of God, out of the word of God.

Verse. 3. And when any shall yet prophecy, his father and his mother that
begat him, shall say unto him, Thou shall not live: for thou speak lies in
the name of the Lord: and his father and his mother that begat him shall thrust
him through, when he prophesies.
A Confirmation of the former promise of the rooting out of false doctrine, the
which is taken from the event, issue, A confirmation of the former promise of
the rooting cut of false doctrine.
or falling out of the matter. For the false teachers shall be in such hatred,
that they shall not so much as be privately borne with of their friends, or at
their hands remain unpunished, much less publicly, or openly. And here are
three things taught. First, who shall punish false Prophets yea even privately,
to wit, their very parents which begat them, the which is in this sentence
twice repeated very effectually, and not only their father, but also their
mother, 1. Who shall privately punish the false Prophets.
whose affection toward her children is wont to be most tender, but at that
time the love of godliness, and the desire and liking of true faith shall
overcome, and get the upper hand in them. And so was it commanded concerning
such as should entice unto idolatry, were they never so near of kin. Deuteronomy.
13. ver. 9. Thou shall even kill him (says God in that place) thine hand shall
be first upon him to put him to death, and then the hands of all the people.
And that which here is set down in precept, seems by Moses to be testified
of the children of Leui, that it was performed in action, when they drew their
swords at the commandment of God, and slew every man his brother in the
revenge of the great idolatry which was committed, in worshipping of the
golden Calfe, whereunto he alludeth Deuteronomy. 33. ver. 9. saying: Who said unto his
father, and unto his mother, I have not seen him, neither knew he his
brethren, nor knew his own children: (meaning that he slew all, without
partiality) for they observed thy word, and kept thy covenant. For we ought
to love GOD more then our own children. For Christ says, Matthew. 10. ver. 37.
He that loves father or mother more then me, is not worthy of me. And he that
loves son or daughter more then me, is not worthy of me. And out of this
place is easily gathered, if he ought to do this, who is as it were a
Magistrate but only in his own family or household, how much more ought he to
punish the said false Shepherds, who is a Magistrate in the Common wealth,
that is, unto whom a greater care and charge of revenging the glory and
doctrine of God, is committed by God himself? The second thing is, what
punishment shall be appointed for them, 2. What punishment they shall have.
namely, death and destruction. For so I think these words to be expounded,
Thou shall not live, Shall thrust him through. Not that all false doctrine and
the teacher thereof is to be put to death notwithstanding (for one does more
hurt and is obstinate or stiff necked in his opinions then another in the
Church of God) but, for that, if the case so stand, or fault be such, that the
son be to be punished with death by his father, or by his mother for his
stiff standing in his error, the parents will not spare that their son
themselves, there shall be in them so great a zeal of maintaining of the
truth. The third thing is, for what cause the Prophets both are to be judged
false, 3. For what cause the Prophets are to be judged false Prophets, and also
to be punished.
and also to be punished, to wit, for that they have taught a lie, and that in
the name of the Lord, as if they were true Prophets. So then their fault and
sacrilege or robbery appears to be twofold, and both of them committed
against God, to wit, for that they corrupt or falsify his truth (for this is
a lie) and do falsely boast that they are sent of God, that is, that they are
lawfully called. Yet nevertheless does not this excuse those from punishment,
who when as they do not take upon them the name of a Shepherd in the Church,
yet do they notwithstanding sow and spread abroad lies and errors. For it is
all one, when as a man does teach falsehood and heresy, whether he give
himself out to be called, or do not give himself out so to be. For even in
this that he teaches, he does profess himself to be a shepherd, or a
Prophet, and will have himself to be believed to be sent of God.

Verse. 4. And in that day shall the Prophets be ashamed every one of his
vision, when he has prophesied: neither shall they wear a rough garment to
deceive.
The false teachers shall acknowledge their faults.
A Staying in the further laying open of the former matter, where there is
declared another event or issue and effect of the said promise, to wit, that
those self same parties, who in times past and before did take upon them to be
Shepherds, but falsely, shall freely acknowledge their fault, and leave off
from the charge of teaching which they have taken upon them. So then first of
all the false Prophets themselves shall be ashamed of those their lies, when as
they have told them, so great doubtless shall the light of the truth be, and
so great in the Church of God shall be the hatred of all men against heresies
and lies. These things were fulfilled, When these things were fulfilled.
like as were those also which are contained in the former verse, first among
the Jews themselves, the light of the word of God, or of the law being
restored unto them, together with public liberty to teach and profess the
same under the Machabees. Secondly, they were also fulfilled, when as Christ so
many times made the Scribes and Pharisees ashamed teaching false things: and
lastly, by the Apostles through the preaching of the Gospel. For many which
before were Pharisees, became Christ his Disciples, and ceased, and left off to
be false teachers. This prophecy fulfilled in our time.
But in our time this notably has had his accomplishment, when as the Gospel
has been restored unto the world, because that infinite numbers have both
called back and condemned their false doctrine, and also have given over that
their office of teaching. So the^ the false teachers themselves shall be
ashamed of their errors. Secondly, they shall abstain from teaching, and
condemn the estate of their former life. The which thing is described or set
forth by the Metaphor taken from a special kind of apparel, What the figure
Metaphora is, see Amos cap. 4. ver. 12.
but common notwithstanding, the which they did wear, which would seem to be
the Prophets of God, and professed this kind of life. And this kind of
apparel is called rough or hairie, because it was made of hair, or such like
course matter, such as was the garment or mantell of Elias, 2. King. cap. 1.
ver. 8. and the apparel of John the Baptist, Matthew. 3. ver. 4. who is there
said to have had his garment of Camels hair.

Verse. 5. But he shall say, I am no Prophet: I am an husbandman: for man taught
me to be an heardman from my youth up.
The abiuring of their error, and change of their state of life.
THe abiuring or forswearing of their error is described, and the change of
their life, the which is an effect of their former repentance, and detesting of
their error. Their abiuring is contained in these words, I am no Prophet: the
change of their life, I am an husbandman, and was so trained up from my youth.
So then they shall rather take pains with their own hands for their living,
then be fed as before like idle and fat bellies by lying, so great shall their
love be of the truth, and hatred of lying.

Verse. 6. And one shall say unto him, What are these wounds in thine hands?
Then he shall answer, Thus was I wounded in the house of my friends.
They shall acknowledge that they have been punished for their false doctrine.
AN amplification. For he amplifieth this love of the truth, the which then
shall be in the very same men, who were false Prophets before, namely, for that
they shall not be ashamed freely to confess and acknowledge, that they have
justly been punished, and received wounds at the hands of their friends for
those their lies. Further, they shall call them friends by whom they have bin
strooken and corrected for their corrupting or falsifying of the word of God,
that thereby we may understand how great, and how earnest love there is of
preserving the truth in the true Church of GOD. Hereby appears how great a
work of God it is to call back a false teacher unto the acknowledging of the
truth, and how excellent a gift of God it is toward him, whom God does so
change, that of a wolf he makes him a sheep. The which notwithstanding Isai
cap. 11. has foretold should come to pass in the preaching of the Gospel.
These things are daily seen to fall out among us, through the grace of God.

Verse. 7. Arise, O sword, upon my shepherd, and upon the man, that is my
fellow, says the Lord of hosts: smite the shepherd, and the sheep shall
be scattered: and I will turn mine hand upon the little ones.
The murdering of the true teachers, and their punishment which so use them.
THE second part of this chapter, in the which are declared the mere or only
fallings out of things, and yet such as are ordinary in the world. And the same
are two, to wit, the murdering of the good Shepherds of the Church, the which
is done of the world, and the great affliction or punishment of the world for
the same, in the which nevertheless God does always preserve some Church.
Concerning the first, Christ teaches his Disciples, Matthew. 10. ver. 17. that
for the truths sake they shall deliver the^ up to the Councels, and shall
scourge them in their Synagogues. And John 16. ver. 2. shows, that the time
shall come, that whosoever kills them, will think that he does God service.
And touching the second, he likewise affirms that in the world that thus
deals with the servants of God, nation shall rise against nation, and realm
against realm, and there shall be pestilence, famine, and earthquakes in
diverse places, Matthew. 24. ver. 7 It is therefore a wonder that these things
fall out in all ages, and that the world repents not, and in the times
following becomes not more wise through the examples of the former age. It is
a wonder also that these things could come to pass among the Jews, which did
boast that they were the people of God, especially being in this place by God
so fatherly and diligently warned before of the destruction and affliction or
punishment of their nation for the same cause. Now touching the first event or
falling out of things concerning the killing of the good Shepherds, the same
is here described or set foorthby the figure Prosopopoeia, What the figure
Prosopopoeia is, see Osas cap. 6. ver. 1.
that this whole speech may have the more emphasis, vehemency, or force, and
may the more sharply strike and pearce the minds of the readers: and also it
is set forth as it were upon the sudden, and breaking off from the former
matter in hand, because that it is a wonder and a strange thing, after so great
light of the truth opened by God, and in so great an earnestnes of the godly
and good men to defend and maintain the same, there should yet be some, who
notwithstanding should persecute the same. The Prosopopoeia is unto the sword
himself, that the persecution may be noted that it shall be exceeding great
and most cruel, as if all bands being broken, this persecuting sword should
raunge and rage against the godly and good Shepheardes of the church.

1. The persecution.
But this verse contains two things. First, a description or setting forth of
the persecution. Secondly, the preservation of the Church of God in the same
notwithstanding. This most cruel persecution is described by a most cruel
instrument, 2. The preserving of the church in the same.
to wit a sword, by the which in this place is comprehended all deadly
punishment, the which forthwith shall be showed and laid upon the good
shepheardes. So Christ, as Tacitus speaks, 1. The persecution described.
was puninished with a deadly or heinous punishment. So was James by Herod,
Act. 12. ver. 2. So finally were many good men handled before the coming of
Christ, 1. By the instrument.
as it appears Hebr. 11. v. 36.37. and certain otherverses there following.
Again, this persecution is described by the persons, which shall be
afflicted. 2. By the persons persecuted.
For they shall be Shepheardes, and the same not of the common sort, but every
the best, and most faithful (who in this place are called the fellows of God,
and said to stand over against him, or by his side, as who namely in that their
charge depart not from the mouth, eyes, and doctrine of God, nor will never so
little turn a side, but always have their eyes bent upon God. This therefore
is a general thing, as afterward appeared by the falling out and fulfilling of
the matter, and appears now a days also. For the world hates the best
servants of God, and especially the Jewish Church of God, that is, the
visarded Church, and which is but the Church only in name, and also murthereth
the^ Ioh. 16. but most principally this was fulfilled in Christ, being slain
of the Jews, who Matthew. 26. ver. 31. cites this place of the Prophet, to
prove the foretelling of his passion, and the scattering of his Disciples, when
as he their master should be taken. Last of all, this most cruel persecution
is described by a most lamentable, but yet ordinary event, 3. By the most
lamentable scattering of the flock.
or falling out of the matter, to wit, that then the poor sheep of God, and
the body of the Church shall be scattered, as appears Act. 8. ver. 1. and
now also. And thus in this place is the persecution of the church described.
But the preservation of the same is here also promised, the manner whereof is
afterward declared ver. 9. but in this place the Lord promises two things by
way of answering an objection, God promises two things for the preservation of
his church.
that the minds of the faithful should not quail, because of the mention
made of so hard and sore afflictions. For this does God meet withal in these
words, 1. His hand shall not be heavy upon it.
but I will bring back, or turn mine hand upon the little ones. First,
therefore he promises that he will not make his hand heavy upon his church,
but that he will immediately draw it back for the love and favor of those
that are his. So Isai. 65. ver. 8. God promises that he will not utterly
destroy his people, but spare some of them in these words: As the wine is
found in the cluster, and one says, destroy it not, for a blessing is in it:
so will I do for my servants sake, that I may not destroy them whole. So cap.
47. ver. 6, he is angry with the Babylonians, because they showed no mercy
unto his people, but laid their heavy yoke upon the ancient. Secondly, 2. The
godly only shall be partakers of this promise.
he shows unto whom he promises this, namely not unto all, but only unto
those which are the true godly, and humble in heart, whom in this place the
Prophet calls little one, as Christ also does Matthew. 11. ver. 25. where he
says, I give thee thanks, O Father, Lord of Heaven and Earth, because thou
have hid these things from the wise and men of understanding, and have opened
them unto babes.

Verse 8. And in all the land, says the Lord, two parts therein shall be cut
off, and dye: but the third shall be left therein.
The land of the Jews shall be most miserably punished for persecuting the
Church of God.
THe second event or falling out of the matter, namely the most lamentable and
miserable affliction of the whole land and nation of the Jews, the which fell
out unto the Jews for the afflicting of the church of God, as Christ himself
shows, Matthew. 24. ver. 9. and so forth, where the great persecutions of the
godly are foretold, the fulfilling whereof Paul also confirms 1 Thessalonians. 2.
ver. 14. when he commends them for their suffering of grievous persecution,
like as the churches of the Jews had done before them. And 2 Thessalonians. cap. 1.
ver. 6. he teaches that God for this cause will recompense tribulation unto
those, which troubled them: and this did the falling out of things unto the
Jews prove to be most true. For that nation after the death of Christ was
wonderfully, by little and little wasted and consumed by the Romans, until at
the last it was by them destroyed and overthrown: although not utterly, as it
appears also at this day. And look what Judgments of GOD are threatened unto
the Jews, afflicting the Church of God, the same also are set forth unto
other people, and do remain for the^, as is to be seen Reu. 8. and 9.
chapters. Two parts of the world are said, that for this cause they shall be
destroyed, and that the third only shall be preserved, which shall be the
Church.

Verse 9. And I will bring that third part through the fire, and will fine them
as the silver is fined, and will try them as gold is tried: they shall call
on my name, and I will hear them: I will say, It is my people, and they shall
say, The Lord is my God.
How the remnant of the Church shall be saved.
A Making more plain of that, which went before. For he shows how the Lord
will cause that third part to be left, and will preserve the same, namely,
through the midst of afflictions or troubles. In the which self same thing
is contained a prophecy of the persecutions that should be in the Church, and
a fore strengthening and confirming of the said Church, that she do not faint
in them, Three parts of this verse.
or be troubled and disquieted with the so sorrowful falling out of things.
But this verse has three things. First, 1. A prophecy of the persecutions of
the church.
a prophecy, as I said, of the afflictions, which were to come, which are
signified by the name of fire. Secondly, the manner, measure, and order of the
same: namely, they shall not consume the Church, but shall purge it, like as
the fire purges gold and silver from the dross, 2. What they shall work in
the same.
and tries it. Afflictions do swallow up the ungodly, and do devour them:
but they only try the good, and make the elect of God more pure. So Peter 1.
Epist cap. 1. ver. 7. Teaches that many tentations fell out unto the godly,
That the trial of their faith being much more precious then gold, which
perishes (though it be tried with fire) might be found unto their praise, and
honor, and glory, at the coming of Christ. And GOD says of his Church Isai
48. ver. 10. Behold, I have fined thee, but not as silver, I have chosen thee
in the furnace of affliction. Whereby appears how profitable affliction is
unto the Church. It is good that thou have humbled me, and brought me down,
says David, Psalm. 119. ver. 71. The third thing is, what confirmation of
faith shall grow by this affliction, 3. What confirmation of faith shall grow
by these afflictions.
namely, that then the Church shall come near unto God, and shall call upon
him: and again God himself shall more clearelie show himself unto her, and
shall hear her prayers and requests. Finally, he shall then give more
assured testimonies or witnesses unto the Church her self of his covenant with
his Church, the which she shall acknowledge, and follow, and therefore shall
answer GOD, when he calls her. Wherefore the calling upon God, and the
acknowledging of him as a father, is greater, and more certain in the godly in
the time of affliction, then in the time of prosperity, because that in the
happy success of things we are wont to be secure or careless: but in trouble
we show our selves more obedient unto the holy Ghost, drawing this fruit out
of afflictions, as it were light out of darkness. For albeit (as it is Hebrews
12. verse 11.) no affliction be pleasant for the present time, but grievous,
yet afterward it brings the quiet fruit of righteousness unto them, which are
thereby exercised.

CAP. 14.
Verse. 1. Behold the day of the Lord comes, and thy spoil shall be divided
in the midst of thee.
The drift of this chapter.
THe drift of this chapter in a word is to show, what shall fall out unto the
Jews, and also unto the city Jerusalem it self after the times described in
the former chapter. And it is a double prophecy: one of the destruction of the
city, and not of the whole nation of the Jews. The which event or issue as in
order of time it was first fulfilled, so also is it in this place first
described, or reported. The second prophecy is of the enlarging and spreading
abroad of the Church of God, notwithstanding by that doctrine, the which
proceeded or came forth of Sion, or Jerusalem throughout the whole world,
toward the East and West. And finally unto this last prophecy there are
threatenings adjoined against those of what nation or country soever they be,
the which shall despise this same doctrine of God, and the assembly of the
church, the which by the same is to be gathered. But it might seem a thing
out of season, that God should threaten the destruction of that city, which
was not yet builded. But the Lord would betimes admonish those that are his,
both of this self same thing, and of those things, which should come to pass
unto this people, that the wicked might look unto themselves, and repent: and
the good should not afterward be dismayed with the beholding of so great evils
or miseries, or should be quailed or out of hope by means of the same.

Three parts of this verse.
Now this verse contains three things. First, a rehearsal of the time, and
the same certain, the which is signified by the word (day) and also by this
word (behold) for these words do show some certain thing, 1. The time of this
prophecy.
albeit the very moment and instant of time be not in this place added and
expressed. And unto the same purpose pertains this word (comes.) Secondly,
2. By whose decree this time shall come.
the prophet describes him, by whose decree and commandment this day or time
shall come. And he is Jehovah, that is, the true God, the which is added, that
the godly should not think so great afflictions or troubles to fall out unto
themselves, and unto the church of God, without the knowledge, decree, and will
of God. Nay that day is from the Lord, it is the Lords day, and comes unto
him, because that it is the day of the just vengeance of God against the
contemners or despisers of his name. So every where in other places is it
called the day of the Lord. 3. What shall fall out unto the Jews, and unto the
city Jerusalem.
Thirdly, he briefly lays down the thing it self, the which shall fall out
unto the Jews and unto the city her self, namely, that it shall be taken by
the enemies, and in such sort, be brought under their power, and that (...)
^^^mies should freely and boldly roue and range in it being vanquished and
ouercomne, that they should divide the spoil thereof in the midst of it, as
they do, which do not fear the power of them, over whom they have gotten the
upper hand. And this most brief prediction, or foretelling does very
manifestly contain the winning of Jerusalem (the which the verses following
also do confirm or approve,) and the same not after a common manner, but such
as should be most lamentable: nay the destruction it self of it. For before
this time, the estate of the Jews was very short and bare, so that now, if
they would never so fame, they should not be able to help that their head
city. Now this destruction was exploited or achieved by the Romans, Titus
the son of Vespasian being their Captain, as appears by Josephus, and by
the Roman History. For it was in deed taken before by Pompeius, but yet
sustained no cruelty: but it was utterly overthrown by Titus, and the spoils
thereof were most frankelie then divided in the midst of it.

Verse. 2. For I will gather all nations against Jerusalem to battle, and the
city shall be taken, and the houses spoiled, and the women defiled, and half
of the city shall go into captivity, and the residue of the people shall not
be cut off from the city.
The last destruction of Jerusalem here described. Four things here to be noted
A More plain laying open of the taking of the city mentioned before, whereby
we are taught, that in this place the last destruction of Jerusalem is
described: and not any such calamity or misery as fell out unto it before
under the Antiochi, or Herod, or Pompeius. And this verse contains four
things, the which do fully iumpe and agree with the very falling out of the
matter in the last taking of Jerusalem by Titus. 1. The number of the enemies.
The first is the number of the enemies. Out of every nation there shall come
an army gathered against that city, God, willing so to have it, the Romans
being their Captains. For God at that time was determined to execute against
her his just judgments: both because of other sins of the Jews: and most
especially for the slaying therein of that same chief Shepherd and Author of
life, Christ his son, Act. 2. ver. 21.22.23. Act. 3. ver. 15. In this first
point therefore thus it came to pass: For the army and host of Vespasian, was
both exceeding great in number, and also gathered together out of al nations of
the world, to wit, both of people near, and also dwelling far off, Joseph.
lib. 3. Belli Iudaic. cap. 1. and 3. Secondly, the calamity or misery of the
City is here described, 2. The misery of the City.
It shall be taken, the houses shall be spoiled, the women shall be defiled. It
shall therefore suffer all most sharp and cruel things, the which cities that
are taken and won, are wont to feel and suffer. See Josephus, 3. Their
captivity.
li. 7. de Bell. Iudaic. from the 13. cap. unto the 20. cap. The third, the
banishment, or captivity of them, that is, both of those of Jerusalem, and
also of other Jews, and captivity is added, Joseph. Ibid. cap. 17. Fourthly,
4. The Jews that are left, though they dwell not at Jerusalem, yet shall they
dwell else where.
that for all this notwithstanding, the Jews shall not be so utterly
destroyed, that those which were left alive, should afterward dwell in no
cities. Nay they shall dwell in cities, not at Jerusalem I grant: but every
where in other places of the earth. That which the falling out of the matter
proves to be true even at this day.

Verse 3. Then shall the Lord go forth, and fight Or In the midst of those
nations.
against those nations, as when he fought in the day of battle.
A confirmation of the former prophecy taken.
A Confirmation of the former prophecy, taken both from the cause and also from
the effects, the which in this place are so plainly reported, that the matter
it self may seem not only to be written, but to be set before the view of the
eyes, and to be painted forth unto us. And first of all the cause and the
reason, 1. From the cause
why so great calamity or misery can be brought upon a city so well sensed
and full of people, (as Jerusalem some time was) is, 2. From the effects. verse.
5.1.
for that God himself will fight against it, and will be in the midst of the
camp of the enemies. For so do I interpret these words He shall fight,
bagojim, that is, among, or in the midst of those nations gathered together
against Jerusalem, and he shall fight among them, not as an enemy, and
adversary unto those nations, but as an helper. God at that time shall forsake
Jerusalem.
Wherefore I expound the hebrew letter (Beth) not for Gnal, that is (against)
but for (for or, between.) But here are two things contained. First, that it
shall come to pass, that then God, who until that day had been the keeper of
this nation, and city, shall go forth of the city, that is, shall leave his
holy places, temple, and city, and hold it as given over, and forsaken. In
fine shall get him unto another place, namely, unto the enemies besieging the
city. See Joseph. He shall fight against it, as a fellow soldier with their
enemies.
lib. 7, Iudaic. bol. cap. 12. The second is, that it shall also come to pass,
that God being in the Camp of the enemies shall fight against the Jews, and
Jerusalem, as a fellow soldier, and companion of their enemies: yea and God
himself shall fight against the Jews, not lightly, but most earnestly, and
stoutely, in such sort as he uses for to do, when as he fights most eagerly
in the hardest and forest battles, where it appears most manifestly that he
is present, and warreth, as he did for Gedeon, for David, for Ezechias, and
oftentimes for others.

Verse. 4. And his feet shall stand in that day upon the mount of Olives, which
is before Jerusalem on the East side, and the mount of Olives shall cleave in
the midst thereof: toward the East, and toward the West there shall be a very
great valley, and half of the mountain shall remove toward the North, and
half of the mountain toward the South.
The figure Hypotyposis, what this is, see Amos, cap. 8. ver. 12.
THe figure Hypotyposis, or a most lively setting out of the matter, as it were
in his colors, whereby the place (in the which God shall stand to fight
against the Jews) is described, and there is further showed, that such
fortification as the city has planted about her by nature, as it were strong
holds and fortes to defend her withal, the same shall either be destroyed, or
serve for the munitions of their enemies, that it may the more easily be
understood, that the same thing, which the prophet has threatened shall be
brought to pass, and that nothing shall stand against it, or let it, be it
never so well framed, either by nature or art for the defense and munition or
strengthening of that city. But in this place also there are two things to be
noted. Two things to be noted.
First the place, where the Lord shall stand on the other side, or over
against the city. And it is the Mount Oliuet, 1. Where God shall stand to
fight against the Jews.
which in the histories is commonly called Elaeon, or Elaion. This mountain
being severed from the city by a valley, and the brook Cedron, and being
only six furlongs from it, the Romans did first of all take, and did
fortify or strengthen it with most strong garrisons, to restrain the out
roades, and issuings or breakings forth of the Jews. And doubtless, as Josephus
teaches, who is a most notable interpreter of all this prophecy, lib. 6. de
Bello Iudaico. cap. 3. the city was greatly pressed, and much annoyed from
this mountain and garrison. Therefore look in what place their Ancetours some
forty years before took Christ, and brought him unto most cruel torments,
in the self same place God himself stood to punish them most sharply, and as
they had deserved, most hardly, John 18. Matthew. 26. ver. 30. where it is
expressed how Christ went with his Disciples after the eating of the Paschal
Lamb, unto Mount Oliuet, where he was taken. Secondly, the casting down, The
fitting of this mount Oliuet for the use and turn of the enemies.
or the breaking and digging of this mountain of Olives, and the making of it
fit for the use and turn of the enemies, is to be noted. For the souldiars
that besieged the city shall dig it through, that there may be left a great
valley in the midst between both parts of the mountain so dug, that the
tents and garrisons of the enemies planted in that place, might be the safer
against the assaults, and breakings forth of the besieged Jews. Finally,
this mountain shall be so broken off in the end, to cast down the fortes of
the Jews, and to annoy the city, that one part of the mountain shall fall
toward the South, and the other toward the North. The which thing I judge then
to have been done, when as the Romans with most great labor raised up that
same wall in three days (wherewith they compassed about the whole city) and
brought it through the midst of Mount Oliuet, Joseph. lib. 6. cap. 13. These
things therefore does God severally recite, that afterward it might be
understood by the very falling out of the matter that this prophecy was true:
and that, when as these things should come to pass, the Jews might know that
their utter destruction was near at hand: and so that they might even then at
the leastwise repent. So GOD showed unto the Ninevites, on what side their
city should be taken, and what at that time should be the power, and
attemptes of the enemies against them, Nahum. 2. verse 6. and cap. 3. and yet
neither of these repented for all this

Verse. 5. And ye shall flee unto the valley of the Mountains: for the valley
of the Mountains shall reach unto Azal: yea, ye shall flee like as ye fled
from the earthquake in the days of Vzziah King of Judah: and the Lord my God
shall come, and all the Saints with thee.
NOw he rehearses the effects of this cause, 2 The effects of the cause
specified before v. 3. Three parts of this verse.
that is, of God fighting against the city. The first is in this place
recited, to wit, the fleeing of the Jews, yea and the same most shameful, and
full of great despair and trouble. But this verse contains three things.
First the fleeing of the Jews, as I said, being now unable, 1. The flying of
the Jews.
and wanting strength to withstand their enemies, Secondly, the place by the
which, and unto the which they shall flee. They shall flee by the valley of the
Mountains. For Jerusalem was on every side compassed about with Mountains, 2.
The place whither the Jews should flee.
Psalm. 125. Joseph. lib. 6. de Bello Iudaic. cap. 6. Without the city (says
he) two mountains were compassed with deep valleys, and the rocks letting on
both sides they could no way be comen unto. Out of which place of Josephus it
appears that the valleys of the mountains near unto the city were most
fit to flee unto: and thereby there is light brought unto this place. Lastly,
they shall flee unto Azal, because that the same valley of the Mountains near
unto Jerusalem shall reach unto Azal, and therefore shall seem most fit for
their secret fleeing. If there be any place left for conjectures or gesses, I
do think Azal to be that same part of the city, and hold, the which both
was most safe against the enemies, and also most fit for to flee unto, the
which by Josephus is called Bezeta, concerning the which, Josephus himself
must be read, 3. The great fear of them that shall flee away.
lib. 6. Belli. Iudaic. cap. 6. Thirdly, the fear and trembling of the people
in this flying is described, the which shall not be after the common and
usual manner, but an extreme sudden fear, and full of despair, as namely
who shall then acknowledge the hand of God to be armed against them. And the
greatness of this trembling is set forth by a similitude. For it shall be like
unto the same, wherewith the Jews were strooken of old by reason of the
earthquake, the which fell out in the days of Vzzias the King as we have seen
before, Amos cap. 1. ver. 1. This history at that time was very well known
unto the Jews. Further, by way of an Epiphonema, or acclamatio^, the cause of
this so great trembling in this people, is added by the Prophet, to wit, the
coming of God being angry against the Jews, with those his holy Angels, with
the which he shows himself full of majesty and fear unto men, not in any
visible form: but by extraordinary effects, and maruailous, so that men must
then needs tremble, when as God appears in such sort, and so terrible or
fearful. For as the Psalmist reports Psalm. 89. ver. 7. God is very
terrible in the assembly of the Saints, and to be reverenced above all that
are about him. Psalm. 93. And Jude, ver. 14.15. Behold, the Lord comes with
thousands of his Saints, to give judgment against all men, and to rebuke all
the ungodly among them, of all their wicked deeds, which they have ungodly
committed, and of all their cruel speakings, which wicked sinners have spoken
against him.

Verse. 6. And in that day shall there be no clear light, but dark.
The second effect.
THe second effect, is the most lamentable state of the people then, so that at
that time, neither the light shall be welcome and dear unto them, neither yet
shall it be sweet and pleasant unto them to live. And this does Christ
confirm Luc. 23. ver. 3 saying, Then shall they begin to say unto the
mountains, Fall on us, and to the hills, Cover us. And the falling out of the
matter afterward has likewise taught the same. Further, this so heavy a
punishment of the Jews, justly laid upon them by God for the slaying of
Christ shows, both that the sin and wickedness of the Jews in murdering of
Christ the son of GOD, was so great, as none can be greater, and also how
grievous punishments are threatened and prepared by GOD against the obstinate or
stifnecked persecutors of the Church, and of his Christ, even at this day.

Verse. 7. And there shall be a day (it is known unto the Lord) neither day,
nor night, but about the evening time it shall be light.
A promise containing three things.
NOw is there added a promise unto the former threatenings, for the comforting of
the godly Jews. For this verse pertains especially unto the Jews. A joyful
day or time for the^, but not at the feast.
And this promise contains three things. First a Day, or some time more
joyful, then that which was mentioned in the former verse. For before such was
the condition of the Jews, that then neither life it self, nor this light was
welcome unto them because of the exceeding afflictions, wherewith they were
pressed both in the besieging of the city, and also after that it was taken,
in sundry quarters of the world (by the just judgment of God) the which
Josephus recites, lib. 7. Bell^ Iudaic. cap. 21. and 25. and so forth.
Wherefore that same first time and day was nothing precious nor dear unto
them. But there shall succeed this so heavy a day or state of theirs in the
mercy of God, another day, not altogether clear and bright unto them at the
first: but yet more joyful then the former, in the evening or latter end of
the which second time and day, a true and full light shall shine unto the
Jews, because (as Paul says) the Jews then, and about the end of the world
shall be converted unto Christ Romans 11. ver. 25. For (says the Apostle) I
would not, brethren, that ye should be ignorant of this secret (least ye
should be arrogant in your selves) that partly obstinacy is come to Israel,
until the fullness of the Gentiles be come in, and so all Israel shall be
saved. So then by the word (one day) a certain and a set time is signified by
God: but a long, and not a short time, comprehending many years continually,
and not the space of 24. hours. And by the adding of these words (neither day
nor night) the Prophet betokens, a certain middle state, case, and
condition, the which is neither in all points to be wished for, and happy
(as is the day) neither yet in all points (as is the night) is most heavy and
lamentable and full of murders and slaughters of the Jews, as it was before,
but such as shall be somewhat dim or dark, as the day uses for to be in the
boblight or twilight, either in the morning or in the evening, when as it is
neither fully day, nor fully darkness. So then this middle state is promised
unto the Jews, after those most sharp and bitter miseries. And such is now
doubtless the nation of the Jews in all places of the world, where they are,
neither yet utterly rooted out, nor yet gathered together, but likevnto the
twie light. For it is in a doubt, whether it be a people or no: dark because
of their burdens, and yet not clean put out, through the great mercy,
faithfulness, and providence of God. This is the first point that this verse
contains.

2. A most joyful day in the end.
Secondly it promises, that afterward, and in the end of this second time there
shall shine out unto the Jews a most joyful estate of the said people. For he
says, At the evening time of that day there shall be light unto them.
Wherefore this also properly belonggeth unto the Jews, albeit universally and
generally God always be present with those that be his after their long
afflictions. By the word (light) it is certain that a most happy state is
signified, as where it is said, Psalm 97. ver. 11. Light is sown for the
righteous, and joy for the upright in heart. Such a state therefore is here
promised unto the Jews. And this light is the conversion or turning of the
Jews unto the Gospel and faith of Christ, the which Ezechiel cap. 37. ver.
16.17. and so forth, has foretold that it should come to pass: and Paul
confirms the same, Romans 11. ver. 25. cited but a little before in the
expounding of this verse, and the which the very state of this world does seem
plainly to promise, least God in the end should be utterly without a Church,
the which now for the most part has perished among us of the heathen, nay even
in those places among us of the Gentiles where the Church yet remains, even
in those same very places through our own great fault, is by little and little
extinguished or put out. 3. The answering of an objection.
The third thing contains the answering of an objection, because the Prophet
does not directly set down this day. For it might be objected or alleged,
This day shall never be, because thou the Prophet of God do not declare the
same unto us. Zacharias answers: This day or time shall be, but the moment or
present instant thereof is known only unto God, and as yet reuelled or opened
unto no man. And truly there are many things, the which God has foretold that
they shall come to pass, but the moment or time whereof he has not signified,
as the time of every man his death: also of the last judgment, Acts. 1. of the
conversion of the Jews, Romans 11. of the overthrowing of the kingdom of
Antichrist, 2 Thessalonians. 2. and also this prophecy and promise peculiarly unto
the Jews. But that which follows pertains generally unto all the Gentiles,
among whom in the mean season, and until that time these things shall come to
pass. God shall gather together his Church out of the very ruins, and as it
were the rubbish of the Jews, as he is a wonderful, that is, a most mighty
and most wise workmaster, who can bring forth light out of darkness, 2. Corin.
4. ver. 6.

Verse. 8. And in that day shall there waters of life go out from Jerusalem,
half of them toward the East sea, and half of them toward the uttermost sea,
and shall be, both in summer and winter.
A promise of the gathering together of the Church.
A Promise of the gathering together of the Church even after the utter
overthrowing of Jerusalem, yea and out of the remnants thereof, the which no
doubt was brought to pass by the miraculous work of God. But that this whole
place with that which follows may be understood, there are two certain
things to be noted from the continual use of the holy Scripture. The things
here following concern not all, but only the godly Jews.
First, that the things, which follow touching the building of the Church of
God, are spoken not in respect of all the Jews, whom Zacharias speaks unto,
but in regard of the godly only, whom alone God his purpose was to comfort
with this promise. The second, That by the name of Jerusalem is understood not
only that same earthly city, By Jerusalem is meant not only that same earthly
city, but also the true Church of God.
but also the true Church of God, in what place of the world soever it shall
be, of the which that same earthly Jerusalem was a figure, Heb. 11. Whereupon
the things that follow are properly to be understood of the Church of God,
the which Jerusalem being destroyed, was gathered together among the Gentiles
by faith in Christ, and by the preaching of the Gospel. Although peradventure
the things which are here spoken, shall have place in the city it self which
is to be restored (and not in the temple, or sacrifices, or ceremonies) when as
God shall call the Jews unto the Gospel, like as in the former verse they are
foretold that they shall be called.

Four things to be noted in this verse.
But this verse contains four things. First, the time, in the which this
prophecy shall have his accomplishment, and fulfilling. In that day (says he)
that is, after the destroying of the city by the Romans. 1. The time of the
fulfilling of this prophecy.
For this word (day) betokens a long time. The second adds a promise,
Living waters or waters of life shall go forth. By the name of waters are
signified the spiritual graces of God, as has been expounded before, 2. A
promise of the waters of life.
Joel. 3.18. So is it also taken, Ezech. 36. ver. 25. where God says, Then
will I power clean water upon you, and ye shall be clean: yea, from all your
filthiness, and from all your idols will I cleanse you. So also is it taken,
Ioh. 7. ver. 38. He that believes in me, as says the Scripture, out of his
belly shall flow rivers of the water of life. And of these waters without all
doubt our Baptism ordained of God is a figure and a Sacrament. Thirdly, 3.
From whence, and whither they shall flow.
this verse contains the place, both from whence those waters shall come
forth, and also into what place they shall flow. The place from whence they
shall come, is Jerusalem and Sion, as it is agreeablie hereunto, Isai. 2. ver.
3. The law shall go forth of Zion, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem.
For from thence the Gospel came into the whole world. The place wither they
shall come is the East, and the whole West, the which in this place is
described under the name of two Seas well known unto the Jews. For the
preaching of the Gospel was carried through the whole world both by the
Apostles, and also by their true successors. 4. The continuance of these waters.
Fourthly, this place shows, how continual, enduring and lasting these graces
of God shall be in the Church. For they shall be perpetual, both day and
night, and winter, and summer (at which times of the year brooks and other
waters that are not living or springing are wont for to fail, and be dried up)
that in this self same point may be contained an amplification of so great
graces of GOD, through the which godly men shall live, yea and that for ever,
but spiritually, Ioh. 6. and day and night, and always, or continually.

Verse. 9. And the Lord shall be King over all the earth: in that day shall
there be one Lord, and his name shall be one.
The first amplification of this benefit, containing
THe first exposition or amplification of this benefit of God, the which
contains two things, to wit, a description of true godliness or religion, and
the most far spreading abroad of the same throughout the whole world. 1. A
description of true religion
When as God therefore shall gather together his Church, then also true and
pure religion shall be restored, yea and that unto the whole world: and it shall
not be corrupt in one part and sound in another point, as it often falls out:
2. The far spredding abroad of the same.
but it shall be altogether and in every point thoroughly pure and perfectly
sound. And this true religion does the Prophet describe or set forth three
ways. First, when as the Jehovah, that is, the true God is acknowledged to the
King, to wit, of us, over who^ he ought to rule. Secondly, when as Jehovah or
the Lord is acknowledged to be but one, that is, when as the one true God and
not many are worshipped. Thirdly, when as his name, that is, his majesty and
power alone is acknowledged, and is not divided among many, as among some other
lesser and petty gods, as both the heathen did in times past, and the Papists
also do at this day.

Verse. 10. All the land shall be turned as a plain from Geba to Rimmon, toward
the South of Jerusalem, and it shall be lifted up, and inhabited in her place:
from Beniamins gate unto the place of the first gate, unto the corner gate, and
from the tower of Hananiel, unto the Kings wine presses.
The second amplification of the former benefit.
THe second amplification taken from the full and manifest restoring of the
Church, the which is contained under the type or figure of Jerusalem, the which
was yet then to be builded again at that time, wherein Zacharias lived.
Wherefore the true worship of God, and the true Church of God shall manifestly
be restored. And therefore it is said that it shall be such, as a city
builded in some high place above the midst of the plain lying round about
it, the which is plainly seen on every side. For as Christ speaks, Matthew. 5.
ver. 14. a city that is set on an hill, cannot be hid. And the place and space
from whence it is seen, is here described to be very broad or wide, to wit,
from the borders of Benjamin (in the which was Rama, 1. King. 15.) unto the
borders of the tribe of Simeon (where was Rimmon, Iosue. 19.) that by this
means we should understand, that the sight of the Church of God should be
evident, and in the view of all nations and people, and not hidden, or
unknown. Further, as the Church shall be restored manifestly, so shall it be
restored thoroughly, and having no want in any part thereof: not in the preaching
of the word, not in the Sacraments, not in the discipline of the Church must
there be any thing wanting. This perfection is set forth under the figure of
the city having all her parts, of the which read Nehem. cap. 3. There is a
like place Reuelat. cap. 21. ver. 18.19. and so forth, of the spiritual or
heavenly Jerusalem.

Verse. 11. And men shall dwell in it, and there shall be no more destruction,
but Jerusalem shall be safely inhabited.
The third amplification of the former benefit, taken
THe third exposition or amplification of the former promise and benefit of God,
taken from the number and safety of the Church. The number is signified in
these words, They shall dwell in it, not one or two only, 1. From the number
of the Church.
but very many: and she shall be inhabited, that is to say, Jerusalem, or that
same Church of God, which shall be gathered by the preaching of the Gospel,
shall indeed be dwelt in in great numbers and multitude of people. 2. From
the safety of the same.
The security or safety of the same is declared in these words: She shall be
inhabited safely, that is, without any danger, either inward or outward:
neither shall she suffer destruction any more. For the word (Cherem) in this
place signifies destruction, the which oftentimes did fall out unto that
city. For it was destroyed both by Nabuchadnezzar, and also by the Emperor
Titus. And it was likewise oftentimes taken, as Josephus teaches, lib. 7. Bell.
Iudaic. cap. 18. So then henceforth, or hereafter, it shall neither be
destroyed, as before: and when as it shall be inhabited, it shall not be dwelt
in with fear, Psalm. 121. Psalm. 144. because God shall defend it under the
shadow of his wings. But this boldness and safety is rather to be understood
spiritually, then carnally, as Paul teaches Romans 8. in the end of the chapter.
For as concerning men, it has been said unto the godly, Ye shall always
suffer trouble in this world.

Verse. 12. And this shall be the plague, wherewith the Lord will smite all
people that have fought against Jerusalem: their flesh shall consume away,
though they stand upon their feet, and their eyes shall consume in their holes,
and their tongue shall consume in their mouth.
Why the Church shall dwell in safety.
THe rendering of a reason of the former exposition. For this cause shall the
Church be inhabited in safety, because God shall strike the enemies thereof,
yea, and that all of them, with a very great and fearful plague. And not only
the men themselves, but also the beasts that served those men, to a^^^^^ and
trouble the Church of God, ver. 15. Here therefore is threatened destruction
unto the enemies of the Church, and the same most grievous, but yet upon
causes, and natural diseases. And this verse contains three things. Three
parts of this verse.
First, the author of the plague, and he is the true God. Jehovah (says the
Prophet) shall smite them. Secondly, who shall be smitten, namely, 1. Who shall
plague the enemies of the Church.
al people which have fought against the church of God. Lastly, with what
plague or punishment they shall be smitten, to wit, with a fearful plague,
but yet such a one, the which shall not be done, and be altogether after an
extraordinary, or miraculous manner, 2. Who shall be smitten.
but such, as with the which many are wont to dye: They shall therefore pine
away in their body: yea, and in their whole body, 3. With what plague they
shall be smitten
the which these words, flesh eyes, and tongue do signify: also very quickly,
to wit, standing on their feet, and with most bitter pains. For a consumption
is a most lamentable and most hard kind of death, and which other men do most
greatly abhor and loathe. There are examples in Antiochus the Noble, 1.
Machah. 6. Joseph. lib 12. Antiquit. cap. 11. In King Herod* Act. 12. In the
Emperor Maximinus, Eus^b. lib. 8. hist. Ecclesiast. cap. 5. and 16. In the
Heretic Nestorius, Theodor. lib. 2. Euagrius lib. 1. hist. cap. 17.

Verse. 13. But in that day agreat tumult of the Lord shall be among them, and
every one shall take the hand of his neighbor, and his hand shall ris^ up
against the hand of his neighbor.
An extraordinary judgment of God upon the enemies of his Church.
A Threatening of the said judgment of God against the enemies of the Church,
but extraordinarily, and altogether miraculouslie, to wit, for that the self
same enemies of the Church shall both be taken with a panical or distraughtfull
kind of sudden fear, as they call it: and also shall murder one another, so
that God shall destroy them by themselves. Hereof we have examples in the
Scriptures, as Judge. 7. ver. 22. in the Madianites murdering one an other,
coming to fight against the Israelites: and likewise 1. Sam. 14. ver. 15.20.
of a sudden fear sent by God upon the army of the Philistims, by means
whereof they fell one upon another, and slew each other: and Christ has
foretold the like, Matthew. 24. ver. 7. the which things also have been since
Christ, yea, and in our time, to wit, when as people, which have persecuted the
Church of God, have afterward with mutual wars and battles within themselves
slain one another, and have been most pitiful spectacles of this prophecy
unto the whole wo^^^* The which examples if the world, our history ^riters
have not marked, their c^reles^es doubtless is very, great, yet nevertheless do
the examples hereof appear in the Kings of Syria, and of Egypt, who after they
have afflicted the Church, have in like manner destroyed themselves. Or


Verse. 14. And Judah shall fight also For Jerusalem. A confirmation of the
help of God against the enemies of the Church, taken
against Jerusalem, and the arm of all the heathen shall be gathered round
about, with gold and silver, and great abundance of apparel.
AN amplification or confirmation of the former help of God in the destroying
of the enemies of his Church, taken from the manner of the same, and from the
effects. 1. From the manner of this help.
The manner is, for that Judah himself shall fight for Jerusalem, and not
against Jerusalem, as some do expound it. And this does signify, that the
godly, and such as are truly faithful, shall with great courage and
chee^efulnes of mind fight for the defense of the glory of God against the
armed enemies of the same. So the godly are said; Heb. 11. ver. 34. by arms
to have conquered hosts of men, and not only by prayers, that by this place we
may understand the foolish Anabaptists to be soundly refuted or overthrown,
who hold it unlawful to take arms, or to make wars. The effect of this
help of God is declared in these words, 2. From the effect of the same.
The riches of the nations near at hand ^ound about shall be gathered in
Jerusalem, namely gold, and silver, and their apparel for a spoil taken from
those enemies, the which the godly shall have unto themselves, God giving it
them. Therefore the church shall plentifully and abundantly be enriched with
the spoils of their enemies, God in such sort defending it, as of old in
times past he made them wealthy with the spoils of the Egyptians.

Verse. 15. Yet this shall be the plague of the horse, of the Mule, of the
Camel, and of the Ass, God his iudement against the brute beasts, which
served against the church. What the figure Synecdoche is, see Amo^ cap. 5. ver
21. Three things to be noted.
and of all the beasts that be in these tents, as this plague.
ANother part of Gods judgment, namely, against the brute beasts themselves,
and by the figure Syneedoche against all the instruments and furniture of the
enemies of the Church, which have served them, whilst they afflicted the
Church* For they also shall be punished by the hand of GOD, and with the same
plague that the men themselves were punished, and not only one kind of
beasts, as Horses, or Mules, but all, which served their turn; Horses, Mules,
Camels, Asses; 1. All things fighting against the glory of God, displease him.
and finally of what sort soever they be (whether they served the enemies of
the Church ordinarily, or extraordinarily) they shall be punished, and
smitten by the hand of God. Wherefore this place teaches three things, first
that not only men endued with reason, which do fight against the glory of
God, and his people, 2. That they shall all be punished.
do displease God, but also all instruments, which men use in that behalf.
Secondly, that none of those instruments shall be spared. 3. The cause why
these things without reason displease God.
Thirdly, that the cause of this judgment of God against those things without
reason is, not that God hates the things* which he has creat^d, bu^ because
they have been in the ten^s of his enemies, that is, have been weapons and
instruments of the fighting against his glory. So God curses and abhors
all instruments of idolatry, Isai. 30. ver. 22. where God speaks thus: Ye
shall pollute the covering of the images of silver, and the rich ornament of
thine images of gold, and cast them away as a menstruous cloth, and thou shall
say unto it, Get thee hence. And contrariwise he blesses both men, that do
bless him, and also all those things, which men do use to bless God with all,
Deuteronomy. 28.

Verse. 16. But it shall come to pass, that every one that is left of all the
nations, which came against erusalem, shall go up from year to year to
worship the King the Lord of hosts, and to keep the feast of Tabernacles.
The calling of the Gentiles, here described after the manner of the worship of
God usual at that time, and the reason why it is thus described.
THe last place of this prophecy, to wit, the calling or conversion of the
Gentiles, yea even of those who before persecuted the Church of God, unto the
true God, the which like as it is described, and that notably, so also it had
his accomplishment by the preaching of the Gospel. But this conversion, and
the effects thereof, in deed wonderful, are here described or set forth,
according unto the manner of the worship of GOD, and ceremonies used at that
time, partly that the Jews might understand the more easily, that the godliness
of the Gentiles should be true godliness, the which then consisted in those
rites and ordinances: and partly that they should rather consider the inward
signification of those ceremonies, then the outward rites and manners of them.
And not that the Gentiles, which were converted unto God after the passion or
suffering of Christ, should still retain or keep the use of these ceremonies
and shadows, as the Apostles teach, Coloss. 2. Acts. 15. the which in Christ
had their fulfilling, and body, and so consequently their end. For as Paul
speaks, 2. Coloss. ver 17. These are but shadows of things to come, but the
body is in Christ. And so are we taught, Heb. 10. ver. 1. That the law having
the shadow of good things to come, and not the very image of the things, 1. Who
of the Gentiles shall be converted.
can never with those sacrifices, which they offer year by year continually,
sanctify the comers thereunto.

Now this verse has a promise, or a prophecy of the conversion of the
Gentiles, 2 After what manner they shall be converted.
which was to come* the which contains two things. First, who of the Gentiles
shall be converted. Secondly, after what manner, that is, how truly and
sincerely or unfeignedly they shall be converted. shall come to pass, the
Gentiles which shall be left, shall be converted, and not one or two of them,
but whosoever shall remain among them, that is to say, men out of every nation
shall come by heaps and throngs unto Christ: not that every several or
particular man notwithstanding out of every nation shall be converted unto
God, but those only out of every nation, which shall be elected, or chosen by
God. To this effect, Luke Act. 13 ver. 48. speaks, saying, And when the
Gentiles heard it, they were glad, and glorified the word of the Lord: and as
many as were ordained unto eternal life, believed. And not only those Gentiles
shall be converted unto the true God, and Christ by the preaching of the
Gospel, which did favor the Jews before: but those also, which did persecute
them before, and had besieged Jerusalem it self.

Verse. 17. And who so will not come up of all the famil^es of the earth unto
Jerusalem to worship the King the Lord of hosts, even upon them shall come no
rain.
A confirmation of the former promise.
A Confirmation of the former promise by a penalty or punishment, the which by
God is added against the rebellious Gentiles, and such as will not obey him.
For this punishment shows that God altogether would, that the Gentiles should
be converted. Therefore he sets down a punishment for the disobedient,
first generally: afterward particularly. For those Gentiles, the which are more
strange and turned away from true religion, such, as every where in the holy
Scripture the Egyptians are taken for to be. This verse therefore has a
threatening of a punishment against the Gentiles, Two parts of this verse.
the which then did not join themselves unto GOD, and a showing what that
punishment should be. 1. A threatening of punishment against the disobedient
Gentiles.
The threatening of the punishment is from God, that it may be most assuredly
believed that it shall come to pass, and that it cannot be shifted off by the
rebellious Gentiles. The showing what the punishment is, follows, and the
same forsooth shall be a withholding from them of showers and rain, 2. What
that punishment is.
wherewith the fields and sown ground, and the earth uses to be made
fruitful. So David witnesses of God his making the earth fruitful with the
rain from heaven, Psalm. 65. ver. 9. saying, Thou visitest the earth, and
waterest it: thou make it very rich: the river of God is full of water: thou
preparest them corn: for so thou appoyntest it. Likewise, Isai. cap. 30. ver.
23. Then shall he give rain unto thy seed, when thou shall sow the ground,
and bread of the increase of the earth, and it shall be fat, and as oil: in
that day shall thy cattle be fed in large pastures. So then God will not rain
upon them: but the heaven shall be brass, and the earth iron, the which by
this means shall yield nothing unto them to live withal.

Verse. 18. And if the family of Egypt go not up, and come not, it shall not
rain upon them. This shall be the plague, wherewith the Lord will smite all
the heathen, that come not up to keep the feast of Tabernacles.
A particular threatening against the Egyptians.
A Particular and peculiar threatening of punishment against the Gentiles, which
are more enstranged from the true worship of God. Therefore that they should
not flatter themselves, because of their continual hatred against the Jews,
and think that they should be free from this punishment, they are also
comprehended in this place. For they shall be punished by God with the same
punishment, wherewith the other Gentiles shall be punished, the which did
always more favor the Jews, and their religion, that is, the true religion.
Further, all those wilfully stubborn Gentiles, and enemies unto true godliness,
What the figure Synecdoche is see Amos cap. ^. ver. 21.
are here by the figure Synecdoche contained under the name of the Egyptians.
For these always professed themselves to be open enemies of the Jews, that
is, of the people of God. Wherefore they also shall be punished with the same
plague that other people are, unless that they be converted or do turn unto
the true God, namely, that they shall lack rain, the which was so much the
more welcome, and profitable unto that nation of the Egyptians, for that it is
parched with the heat of the sun, and although it be made fruitful with the
ouerflowings of the river Nilus, yet notwithstanding it has needed rain, and
does need. So Psalm. 105. ver. 32. David affirms, that in stead of rain, he
gave them hail, and flames of fire in their land. So then the Egyptians
themselves, mortal enemies otherwise of true religion, shall at that time be
converted unto God. Thus also does Isai prophecy of them, cap. 19. ver. 21.
saying, And the Lord shall be known of the Egyptians, and the Egyptians shall
know the Lord in that day, and do sacrifice and oblation, and shall vow vows
unto the Lord, and perform them. And truly so it came to pass: for Egypt
after the passion of Christ seems first to have publicly or openly professed
religion, to have had Christian Schools, and Doctors, and Monks: like as it
first also generally and openly fell away from true religion afterward.

Verse. 19. Or
This shall be the Sin. Or
punishment of Egypt, and the Sin.
punishment of all the nations that come not up to keep the feast of
Tabernacles.
The conclusion of the former place containing 3. things.
THe conclusion of the whole former threatening and showing of punishment, the
which has three things to be noted. First of all, that he calls this
ceasing or staying from the exercise of the outward worship of Cod, and from
the keeping of the ceremonies ordained by God, Sin. And doubtless it is
sin, 1. The abstaining from the exercise of true religion, called Sin.
not to do those things, which God for his worshipping requires to be done:
whereof it comes to pass, that punishment appears worthily to be
threatened unto those, which shall neglect or forslowe those ceremonies of God
in the Church of God. So then out of this place the Libertines of this our age
are soundly refuted or overthrown, who do bring in, and allow the contempt or
despising of the Sacraments ordained by Christ. The second thing is, 2. All are
commanded to worship God with one outward worship.
that he commands all, whether Egyptians, or other nations to worship God
with the same and all one ceremonies and all one outward worship. For in as
much as even the lawful outward worship of God is also ordained by God, it is
not to be changed, and omitted or ouerpassed by any man. Furthermore, when as
God cannot be worshipped either outwardly or inwardly, but according unto his
word, surely it is not lawful for any man to ordeine an outward worship of
his own head, and consequently according unto the pleasure of his own mind.
But this is spoken of the outward worship it self, and not of the comelines,
and ceremonies, and ordinances necessary for the mainteining and keeping of
this outward comelines, the which among diverse nations may be diverse in the
Church of God. 3. The feast of Tabernacles only mentioned.
The third is, for that here is especially mention made of the feast of
Tabernacles, because this feast both was more solemnlie kept among the Jews,
then the feast of first fruits, of Whitsontide, and certain others, Nehem. 8.
and also was a most evident testimony or witness of the first gathering
together of the people of Israel, that is, of a free ordained church. Therefore
it was better liked of the people, and a more evident sign of their uniting or
knitting together within themselves, as is unto us the holy Supper of our Lord
Jesus Christ.

Verse 20. In that day shall there be written upon the bridles of the horses,
The holiness unto the Lord, and the pots in the Lords house shall be like the
bowls before the altar.
An amplification of the former. promise from two effects.
AN amplification of the former promise of the conversion of the Gentiles unto
the true God, taken from the effects, manifestly witnessing the great godliness
of their minds, and the effectual working of the Spirit of God among them.
And in this place there are reckoned up two effects, the same outward, I
grant, but yet showing the inward godliness of the mind of these men unto
Godward. 1. The inscription of the bridles of their Horses.
The first, the bridles or the belles of their horses (for the hebrew word
Metsilloth may be translated both ways) shall have the self same thing
written upon them, the which some times was written upon the Miter of the high
priest, to wit, Holiness unto the Lord. This shall be an especial outward
witness of this thing wholly consecrated, and acceptable and dedicated unto God.
Thus then shall all the godly, even among the gentiles dispose and order all
things, What the figure Synecdoche is, see Amos cap. 5. ver. 21.
and especially the things pertaining unto household (as are horses, the
furniture belonging unto horses, and by the figure Synecdoche, all other things
the which they shall use both at home and abroad) that they may show that they
have consecrated them unto GOD, may use them holilie, and apply them unto the
glory of God, and the witnessing of their worship and reverence to Godward.
And hereunto serves the exhortation of Paul 1. Cor. 10. ver. 31. Whether ye
eat, or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all to the glory of God. And that
which he has 1. Tim 4. ver. 4. That every creature of God is good, and
nothing ought to be refused, if it be received with thanks giving. And
finally hereunto appertains that which Jude says in his epistle, ver. 23.
Hating even the garment, which is defiled with the touching of the flesh, so
great holiness and godliness doubtless shall there then be of the Church, both
outward and inward. I omit or let pass in this place to speak of the fond
interpretation of Theod. upon this place, lib 1. Hist. cap. 18. Namely, that
this prophecy was then fulfilled, when as Constantinus Magnus caused the
bittes of his horse, and an helmet to be made for himself of the nails of the
Cross of Christ, Ruff. lib. 1. Histor. cap. 8. Socrat. 1. cap. 1. affirms
the same. And this shall be the effect of the Gentiles in things private, and
such as otherwise are profane, or serve for common uses. But in public
matters, and also in matters Ecclesiastical or appertaining unto the Church,
that is, in things dedicated unto GOD, there shall be no less testimony or
witness of their godliness, and of the effectual working of the Spirit of God.
2. The things of smallest holiness among the Gentiles converted, shall be as
holy as the holiest things in the Temple of Solomon.
He therefore in this place shows also the second effect, to wit, what shall
be the holiness in things dedicated peculiarly unto GOD, namely, that the
things, which among the Gentiles converted shall have the least degree of
holiness, shall notwithstanding be as holy, as those things which in the Temple
of Solomon had the highest degree of holiness, or the next unto the highest. And
this does the Prophet declare by a similitude taken from the ceremonies, and
things well known of that time. For the pottes, wherein the flesh of the
sacrifices was sodden in the house and Temple of God (and these have the least
degree of holiness in the Temple, and are for the most part always foul) shall
be as holy among the Gentiles, as the basins or bowls, which are before the
Altar, to wit of Incense, covering the Shewbread. In a word, this is the
meaning of God, the efficacy, force, and working of the holy Ghost shall be
far more plentiful through Christ in the Church of the Gospel gathered out
of the Gentiles, then it was of old, and in times past under the law. Whereof
it comes to pass, that Christ is called the mediator of a better or more
excellent Testament Hebr. 8. ver. 6. and Paul Ephe. 3. ver. 5 shows, first,
That the mystery of God was not opened unto the sons of men, as it is now
reueiled unto his holy Apostles, and Prophets by the Spirit. And hereof it
comes also to pass, that the graces of God are said to be by him more
largely poured out, and more liberally given unto men, then under the old
Testament. Acts. 2. Joel. 2. And hereof also speaks God by his Prophet Isai,
cap 44. ver. 3. 4. saying: I will power water upon the thirsty, and floodes
upon the dry ground: I will power my Spirit upon thy seed, and my blessing upon
thy buddes, and they shall grow as among the grass, and as the willowes by
the rivers of waters.

Verse. 21. Yea, every Pot in Jerusalem and Judah shall be holy unto the Lord of
hosts, and all they that sacrifice, shall come and take of them, and seethe
therein: and in that day there shall be no more the Canaanite in the house of
the Lord of hosts.
Two other effects ofh this grace of God.
TWo other effects of the said grace of God toward his Church gathered together
by the Gospel (for this both promise, and also the effects of this promise do
without all question appertain unto Christ, 1. All the Pots in Judah and
Jerusalem shall be holy unto God.
and unto his kingdom.) The first (the which in like manner is declared by a
comparison of ceremonies and things at that time used) to wit, that all the
Pottes the which shall be in Judah and in Jerusalem, shall be holy unto God:
yea and that so holy, that the flesh of the Sacrifices may as well be sod in
them, as in the Pots dedicated unto the Temple. For the Pots of all the godly
shall be holy unto God: this therefore is the meaning, the holiness, The
meaning hereof.
the which is now seen, and is peculiar in things dedicated unto the Temple of
God, the same shall then be in all the houses of the godly, and in their
furniture, and vessel: for all things which are in the family of the holy, are
themselves also holy. Wherefore God shall then every where be worshipped so
holily, as he is now in his Temple. John, 4. And so Paul wills 1. Tim. 2.
ver. 8, That men pray every where, lifting up pure hands unto God. He shall as
godly be worshipped of every faithful person in his own house; as he was of
old, and in times past in his house and Temple by the Jews. And this is one
effect of that same grace of God, the which by Christ shall be bestowed upon his
Church, the which also does show her full deliverance that shall be from the
ceremonies of the Law, when as the same holiness of the Temple shall be spread
over all places: this freedom from the ceremonies of the Law, Paul witnesses
that the Galathians were called unto, Galat. 5. ver. 13. and bids them take
heed, That they use not this liberty as an occasion unto the flesh, but that
they serve one an other by love. The second effect is, 2. There shall be no
Canaanite in the house of the Lord.
There shall no Canaanite be any more, or any ungodly person in the House of
the Lord, that is, in the church. This promise pertains to the state of the
Church, which shall be in heaven only, for so long as here upon earth there
shall be a Church of God: it shall always have the evil mixed among the good,
that we should not in vain after the manner of the Donatistes, Circumcellians,
and Anabaptists, Heretics, seek a Church altogether pure and free from spots
and faults in this earth. For Christ, Mat. 13. ver. 28, and so forth, by the
parable of the tares sown among the good corn teaches, that in this life the
bad shall always be mingled among the good. Wherefore the word Canaanite in
this place is not used for a Merchant, but for an ungodly man, What the sigure
Metalepsis is, see Oseas cap. 4. ver. 18.
by the figure Metalepsis ( the person for the quality of the person) such as
the Canaanites are every where in the holy Scripture said to have been. So
then these things do show, what manner of Church both in this earth, and also in
the heavens, the Church of God shall be, always blessed of God, by and through
his only begotten son our Lord Jesus Christ, Amen.

FINIS.
The Commentary of Lambertus Danaeus, upon the Prophet Malachias.
The Argument.
Malachias the last of all the Prophets.
THe last of the Prophets, whose wrytings, and prophesies are extant or
remaining among us, was Malachias: albeit some Psalms seem to have been
written after the times, wherein he lived, namely when as the Church of God was
miserably afflicted or troubled by Antiochus Epiphanes, and his Successors, as
is the Psalm 79, and many others. Now this Prophet seems to have lived under
Nehemias, In what time this Prophet lived, and Prophesied.
being now an old man, when as the priests neglected or for slowed their
duty, the people gave them no maintenance, and finally when as all things were
wonderfully out of order in the observation of the worship of God, The shortness
of this Author upon this Prophet, may be supplied by the larger comme^taries of
master Gilbee, upon the same Prophet.
the ceremonies of the law, and the executing of the Priests office, as is
gathered out of Nehemias, cap. 10. and 13. Wherefore if the second chapter of
this Prophet, ver. 13. be compared with Esd. 10. and Nehem. 10. and cap 13.
that which I have said will appear, namely that Malachias began to prophecy
about the latter end of Nehemias

CAP. 1.
Verse. 1. The burden of the word of the Lord to Israel, by the ministry of
Malachi.
The confirmation of the calling of the Prophet.
THis whole chapter is one Sermon, wherein the contemning or neglecting and
forslowing of the worship of God, and the great covetousness and
niggardliness of the people, in giving and paying things necessary for that
worship is most sharply reprehended, or reproved, and found fault withal. He
shows that the sum of his doctrine is threatenings of God, confirming
briefly, and first of all his calling.

Verse. 2. I have loved you, says the Lord: Yet ye say, wherein have thou loved
us? was not Esau Iaacobs brother, says the Lord? yet I loved Iaacob.
The principal point of this prophecy.
THe general proposition, or principal point, wherein is contemed the sum of
all the benefits of God toward the Jews, the which consists herein, for that
God of his mere or only goodness has loved them before other nations, yea
before the nation of the Idumaeans, the which notwithstanding was not only of
the lawful seed of Abraham, but came also of the same family of Isaac, and
moreover by the right and privilege of nature seemed to be the better, and to
be to be preferred before the Jews. And the Prophet brings in the people as
it were murmuring and answering again against God, that the stubbornnes of
that age may seem to have been most peevish and dogged against God, whereunto
notwithstanding ours is very like.

Verse. 3. And I hated Esau, and made his mountains wast, and his heritage a
wilderness for dragons.
A confirmation of the preferring of the Jews before the Idumeans, taken from
the inequality of their estates under the Babylonians.
HE confirms the selfsame which he said before of the preferring of the Jews
before the Idumeans. First from the dislike and unequal falling out of the
calamity or misery and captivity, the which fell out unto them both under
their common enemies the Babylonians. The inequality appeared herein, for that
the Country of the Idumeans; and nation was by the Babylonians brought unto
exceeding great wastnes, and desolation or destruction: but the Jews at that
time lived and dwelled in safety in their own homes, and in a most fruitful
country.

Verse. 4. Though Edom say, we are impouerished, but we will return, and build
the desolate places: yet says the Lord of hosts, they shall build, but I will
destroy it, and they shall call them, the border of wickedness, and the people,
with whom the Lord is angry for ever.
An amplification of this benefit bestowed upon the Jews.
HE amplifieth, or increases the benefit by God bestowed upon the Jews, by the
state of the miserable condition of the Idumeans, the which he shows shall be
continual or lasting and enduring, whatsoever they attempt or assay to the
contrary. The which no doubt was a great testimony or witness of the hatred of
God against the Idumeans.

Verse. 5. And your eyes shall see it, and ye shall say, The Lord will be
magnified upon the border of Israel.
The second token of the love of God toward the Jews.
THe second argument or token of his goodness or love toward the Jews does God
here allege: in the which self same there is also a great comfort of them,
namely, that they in the end and at the last should see the glory of their
own God, that is, of the true God spread abroad even upon all foreign nations
also. And this was fulfilled by the preaching of the Gospel, and the
conversion of the Gentiles unto Christ.

Verse. 6. A son honoreth his father, and a servant his master. If then I be a
father, where is mine honor? And if I be a master, where is my fear, says the
Lord of hosts unto you, O Priests that despise my name? and ye say, Wherein
have we despised thy name?
The unthankfulness of the Jews matched against the kindness of God.
A Matching together of contraries. For against those his benefits toward the
Jews, he sets and matcheth their great ingratitude or unthankfulness, as who
namely did neither acknowledge nor worship God for Father, nor Master. And
first of all he sets upon the Priests themselves, who ought to shine before
the rest of the people as an example of godliness, and who also when as they
were admonished, or put in mind of their duty, yet they stubbornly chummered
and answered again.

Verse. 7. Ye offer unclean bread upon mine altar, and you say, wherein have we
polluted thee? In that ye say, The table of the Lord is not to be regarded.
The Jews found faulty in the contemning of God his worship.
GOd does convince or prove the Jews in fault by one kind of his worship or
service most manifestly contemned or despised, and of their open blasphemy
also against his very altar. For when as the Jews beheld that same altar of
the second temple to be less outwardly garnished then the altar of the first
Temple, they also supposed the same altar to be less holy then the former:
and judged the things that were offered thereupon unto God, to be in like manner
less holy and acceptable unto God, the which is a blasphemous cogitation or
surmise of God, as if God did measure holiness by these outward things.

Verse. 8. And if ye offer the blind for sacrifice, it is not evil: and if ye
offer the lame, and sick, it is not evil: offer it now unto thy prince: will
he be content with thee, or accept thy person, says the Lord of hosts?
The Jews proved guilty and unthankful by an example of offering of things
forbidden, and also by a reason from the lesser unto the greater.
GOd proves the said Jews to be guilty, and shows them to be unthankful by
an example and rehearsal of things offered against the law, as it is to be
seen, Deuteronomy. 15. ver. 21. where speaking of sacrifices to be offered, he says,
If there be any blemish therein, as if it be lame, or blind, or have any evil
fault, thou shall not offer it unto the Lord thy God. Also Leuit. 22. ver. 22.
Blind, or broken, or maimed, or having a wenne, or skiruie, or scabbed: these
shall ye not offer unto the Lord, nor make an offering by fire of these upon the
altar of the Lord. Again, the Lord here reproves them by an argument or
reason taken from the less unto the greater, as for example thus: An earthly
Prince will not take these things well in worth, much less therefore will God
accept or like them at your hand.

Verse. 9. And now, I pray you, pray before God, that he may have mercy upon
us: this has bin by your means: will he regard your persons, says the Lord
of hosts?
A remedy for this their so great fault.
YEt he shows that there is a remedy remaining and left for this their so
great a fault. And this forsooth is their humble prayer unto God. For albeit
these faults be committed by them, yet is the mercy of God ready for all
them that earnestly pray unto God. And this kind of speaking being as it were
unjointed, and not knit together with copulative conjunctions, and sharpened
with often interrogations or asking of questions, as it were with woundings and
many pricks of conscience to rouse up and waken such as are dull and sluggish,
carries a very great weight and force with it.

Verse. 10. Who is there even among you, that would shut the doors, and kindle
not fire on mine altar in vain? I have no pleasure in you, says the Lord of
hosts, neither will I accept an offering at your hands.
An amplificatio^ of the fault of the Priests by the reward promised for their
service.
AN amplification of the said fault of the Priests, by a reward promised unto
the Priests. For the Prophet shows, that the anger of God is so much the more
just against them, for that none of them would do service in the Temple and
worship of God for nothing, no not those which were but the bare keepers of the
doors of the Temple, as it is also Psalm. 84. much less the Priests
themselves, the which were by God placed in an higher place in the Temple, and
ordained to offer and to make sacrifices unto GOD himself: the which was the
most honorable degree in the whole ministry of the Levites, and next unto
God. For the rest of the orders of the Levites did services unto the Priests,
and sacrifices.

Verse. 11. For from the rising of the Sun unto the going down of the same,
my name is great among the Gentiles, and in every place incense shall be
offered unto my name, and a pure offering: for my name is great among the
heathen, says the Lord of hosts.
The second amplification of the fault of the Priests.
THe second amplification of the said fault of the Priests, taken from the
majesty of the name of God, the which, God by the repeating of the promise
does more earnestly confirm, that it shall be reverenced among all the
Gentiles, that is, holilie worshipped. And this thing pertains unto the
kingdom of Christ, and was at the last fulfilled by the preaching of the
Gospel.

Verse. 12. But ye have polluted it, in that ye say, The table of the Lord is
polluted, and the fruit thereof, even his meat, is not to be regarded. Verse.
13. Ye said also, Behold, it is a wearines, and ye have snuffed at it, says
the Lord of hosts: and ye offered that which was torn, and the lame, and the
sick: thus ye offered an offering: should I accept this at your hand, says
the Lord?
BY the way of granting and yielding so much unto them the Lord confesses,
That the labor and pains indeed of the priests doing sacrifice, and slaying
offerings, The Priests rather sought their own gain then the glory of God in
offering of sacrifices unto him.
is great (in so much that they sweat and toil, and weary themselves
thereabout:) but he teaches the same to be about a matter of nothing, and
wherein they displease God: nay whereby they rather manifestly show forth the
contempt or despising of his worship, then his true service and worship indeed:
because that these Priests and offerers of sacrifice in as much as they were
covetous, served themselves, and not God.

Verse. 14. But cursed be the deceiuer, that has in his flock a male, and
voweth, and sacrifices unto the Lord a corrupt thing: for I am a great king,
says the Lord of hosts, and my name is terrible among the heathen.
God his judgment threatened unto all those that deal deceitfully in his
worship and service.
A General conclusion, the which threatens the judgment of God against all
those which mock God, either openly, or by some subtlety, or which by any
means deal falsely, deceitfully, and corruptly in the service and worship of
God. For God (who also is terrible or fearful even among the heathen
themselves) will not suffer them to escape unpunished, when as they make a
mocking stock of him, and yet in the mean season notwithstanding with full
mouths give out and boast, that they are his people.

CAP. 2.
This chapter has two Sermons, one against the Priests, and the other against
the people.
THis chapter has two Sermons, of the which the first is directed peculiarly
against the Priests, as the lights and examples of the whole people, and it
lasts unto the tenth verse. The second is against the rest of the whole
people, who themselves also were most grievously infected with other their both
general and also peculiar vices.

Verse. 1. And now, O ye Priests, this commandment is for you. Verse. 2. If ye
will not hear it, nor consider it in your heart, to give glory unto my name,
says the Lord of hosts, I will even send a curse upon you, and will curse
your blessings: yea I have cursed them already, because you do not consider
it in your heart.
IN the chapter before going he particularly and specially reprehended or
reproved the Priests for the neglecting of the sacrifices. Now in this chapter
he generally exhorts them unto the diligent doing and performing of the other
parts of their office and duty, The Pristes exhorted unto the doing of the
other parts of their duty.
setting down the menacing and threatening of most grievous punishments.

Verse. 3. Behold, I will corrupt your seed, and cast dung upon your faces,
even the dung of your solemn feasts, and you shall be like unto it.
Punishments concerning the contempt of their public office, and also the
private overthrow of their families.
THese punishments partly respect or concern the despising and contemning of
their public office, and partly the private overthrowing of their families, the
which in the end shall overtake them continuing and going on in the neglecting
or forslowing of the worship and service of God.

Verse. 4. And ye shall know, that I have sent this commandment unto you, that
my covenant, which I made with Leui, might stand, says the Lord of hosts.
An amplification of the equity of God his threatenings against them.
GOd shows and amplifieth the equity of his threatenings against them, both by
the equity and profitablenes of his league and covenant with them, and also by
his peculiar benefit toward that one tribe of Leui, the which he chose out of
all the tribes of Israel to do his sacrifices, 1. Sam. 2.

Verse. 5. My covenant was with him of life and peace, and I gave him fear, and
he feared me, and was afraid before my name.
He reproves them by the example of the godliness of their father Leui.
AN earnest reproving of them by the example of the godliness of their fathers,
the which they had at home and in their own families of whence they came, to
follow, and the which also obtained great rewards of God for the keeping of his
covenant. See Leuit. 8. and 1. Sam. 2. and the which godliness of their
fathers, and faithfulness in the doing of the service and worship of God these
had no care nor keep to imitate or follow.

Verse. 6. The law of truth was in his mouth, and there was no iniquity found
in his lips: he walked with me in peace and equity, and did turn many away
from iniquity.
A declaration of the covenant made with the house of Aaron.
A Declaration of the covenant made with the house of Aaron, nay with the whole
tribe of Leui, and of the observation or the keeping of the same, the which he
teaches to have consisted herein, that the purity and soundnes of the
heavenly doctrine might purely be taught by them, and also by the said Levites
might be applied particularly unto every one of the godly for the use and
correction of manners. The duty of the Pastors or ministers of the gospel is
the same at this day, as Paul teaches 2. Tim. 3. ver. 16. where he shows,
that the whole scripture given of God by inspiration, is profitable to teach,
to improve, to correct, and to instruct in righteousness, that the man of God
may be absolute, being made perfect unto all good works.

Verse. 7. For the priests lips should preserve knowledge, and they should
seek the law at his mouth: for he is the messenger of the Lord of hosts.
Wherein the office of the Priests and Levites did especially consist.
AN ascending or going upward, in the which the prophet going up from the
particular unto the general, shows generally that the office both of the
Priests, and also of the Levites, did chiefly consist in this one point, that
they should teach unto others the true understanding of the law of God, the
which they themselves had truly learned before, because that they were
peculiarly ordained unto this office by God. The self same is to be applied
unto the ministers of the Gospel. For among other the parts of a true
minister Paul writing unto Titus, cap 1. ver. 9. says, that he should hold
fast the faithful word according to doctrine, that he also may be able to
exhort with wholesome doctrine, and improve them that say against it.

Verse. 8. But ye are gone out of the way: ye have caused many to fall by the
law: ye have broken the covenant of Leui, says the Lord of hosts.
The diligence of their forefathers in doing of their duty, matched with the
negligence of these men.
BY the way of matching together of contraries he compares the negligence of
the Levites of his time, both with the diligence and godliness of their
forefathers, and also with the former description of their office, that they
might the more be convinced or proved faulty of negligence, and of their
manifest contemning of the worship and service of God, by both these
comparisons.

Verse 9. Therefore have I also made you to be despised, and vile before all the
people, because ye kept not my ways, but have been partial in the law.
The conclusion of this first sermon, showing that they are worthily to be
punished by God.
THe conclusion, wherein he teaches that they are worthily to be plagued with
great punishments by God. And chiefly for that they bowed and bent that law of
God, whereof they were ordained keepers by God, unto the pleasure and favor of
men, in so much that they applied the word of God unto that which liked men.
And thus they became, and were the servants of men, and not the servants of
God. And such times, 2. Tim. 4. ver. 3. Paul teaches should come, When they
should not suffer wholesome doctrine, but having their ears itching, shall
after their own lusts get them an heap of teachers. But such as apply their
doctrine unto the humors of men, cannot please God, accordingly whereunto Paul
speaks, Galath. 1. ver. 10. For now preach I man's doctrine, or Gods? or go I
about to please men? for if I should yet please men, I were not the servant of
Christ. And this is the first Sermon of this chapter.

Verse. 10. Have we not alone father? has not one God made us? why do we
transgress every one against his brother, and break the covenant of our
fathers?
The second sermon, proving the whole people guilty of many grievous crimes.
THe second Sermon, in the which the whole people themselves are proved guilty
of many crimes, but especially of these four, that is, of Covetousness, of
defiling themselves with the Heathen, of Polygamy, or having of more wives the^
one at one time, and of manifest or open and heathnish ungodliness against God.
And when as the Prophet reproves their covetousness and deceit, 1. Covetousness.
he shows the same utterly to fight and be against both that same common
band (the which is between all men) and also against that more near
friendship and strait familiarity the which was among themselves, because of
the one or common original or first beginning of this whole nation, springing
and coming from their father Israel or Jacob.

Verse. 11. Judah has transgressed, and an abomination is committed in Israel,
and in Jerusalem: for Judah has defiled the holiness of the Lord, which he
loved, and has married the daughters of a strange god.
2. Their defiling themselves with other wicked nations
THe second very detestable and abominable crime of theirs, to wit, their mixing
and defiling of themselves with others and profane or wicked nations. For God
his chief desire was to have this people holy unto himself, and to be
separated or severed from other nations: but they notwithstanding defiled
themselves with the vices and idolatry of infidels, made marriages with them,
the which by the law of God were forbidden. For among other dealings the which
it was unlawful for them to have with these nations, God says unto them,
Deuteronomy. 7. ver. 3. Neither shall thou make marriages with them, neither give thy
daughter unto his son, nor take his daughter unto thy son. This place
therefore fully agrees and iumpeth with that of Nehe. cap. 13. and of Esd.
cap. 10. Whereby appears, at what time this Prophet lived, and prophesied.

Verse. 12. The Lord will cut off the man that does this: both the master and
the servant out of the Tabernacle of Iaacob, and him that offers an offering
unto the Lord of hosts.
Al sorts of men guilty of this defilement.
HEre he shows that all sorts of men, namely, Magistrates, Subjects, yea and
moreover the Priests themselves were guilty of this pollution or defilement,
and reproves them all: and so consequently God denounces and threatens utter
destruction against them all, without any regard of their persons, or dignity.
See Esdr. cap. 10. as I have said, and Nehem. cap. 13.

Verse. 13. And this have ye done again, and covered the altar of the Lord with
tears, with weeping, and with mourning: because the offering is no more
regarded, neither received acceptablie at your hands.
Their continuance in this sin.
HE increases their disobedience, for that they continued in this wickedness,
when as notwithstanding they themselves had now twice openly in the Temple
acknowledged this their lewdnes and sin, and confessed that themselves and
their sacrifices were not accepted or regard of God. The first acknowledgement
of this sin is extant or to be seen, Esdr. cap. 10. The second, Nehem. cap.
10. ver. 30. where among other points of the covenant, that they sealed unto,
this was one, That they would not give their daughters to the people of the
land, neither take their daughters for their sons. And cap. 13. ver. 25.
where Nehemias takes an oath of them for the performance hereof. Out of this
place appears, as I have said, at what time this Prophet prophesied, to wit,
in the last age of Nehemias.

Verse. 14. Yet ye say, Wherein? Because the Lord has been witness between thee
and the wife of thy youth, against whom thou have transgressed: yet is she thy
companion, and the wife of thy covenant.
3. Their Polygamie, or having more wives the^ one at one time
WIth a gentle transition or passing from one kind of marriage forbidden, he
falls into another, namely, into Polygamie, or their having of more wives
then one at one time, the which third crime of theirs God reproves in this
people. But against this accusation this people answered again, pretending or
alleging the example of Iaacob, of David, and of others, who had many wives at
one time. But al these examples does God confute or overthrow, by the first
institution or ordaining of marriage. Further, he shows the treachery and
cruelty of these men having many wives, against their said wives, the which
was not in Iaacob, and David, and by which their cruelty even against their
wives, they prove that nothing can make them more courteous and gentle. Their
treachery God improueth, for that these do violate or break that same holy
covenant and band of marriage, and the which he himself had ordained at the
first: their cruelty, for that, forgetting their now accustomed and first and
tender love with their first wife, they took a new wife over and above, the
which is a very great unkind, and unnatural part.

Verse. 15. And did not he make one? yet had he abundance of Spirit: and
wherefore one? because he sought a godly seed. Therefore keep your selves in
your spirit, and let none trespass against the wife of his youth.
The true nature of marriage.
WIth a necessary interpretation he makes plain the true nature of marriage
by the true end thereof, the which he describes or sets forth, by the first
ordaining thereof, which was made by God. For God the first author of marriage,
being most wise and most mighty joined one only unto one, and not many, that
by this means both a lawful issue, and such as is acceptable unto GOD, might
be sought for by men. In the which institution or ordinance the Prophet
teaches that we ought to tarry and continue. See Paul 1. Cor 7. ver. 2. and
7. who runs unto the first institution of marriage, to show the nature and
force thereof.

Verse. 16. If thou hate her, put her away, says the Lord God of Israel, yet
he covers the injury under his garment, says the Lord of hosts: therefore
keep your selves in your spirit, and transgress not.
The answering of an objection, the which was but a toleratio^ for that time
and people for the hardness of their hearts, as Christ expounds it, Mat. 19
THe answering of an objection, by the which al refuge and help of excuse is
taken away from them, and their fault is increased, both for that there was a
remedy given unto them against the griefs and wearines of the former
marriage, namely, Diuorceme^t, the which they refused to use, and neglected or
cared not for the same. Deuteronomy. 24. and also for that they nourished in the
midst of their bosom this shamefulnes and multitude and number of many
wives, and increased the same, without any punishment for it: nay, tolerated or
bare with the same, with the manifest contempt or despising of true and lawful
marriage.

Verse. 17. Ye have wearied the Lord with your words: yet ye say, Wherein have we
wearied him? When ye say, Every one that does evil is good in the sight of the
Lord, and he deliteth in them. Or, where is the God of judgment?
4. Their malapertnes or saucines against God himself.
THe fourth crime, to wit, a general, and profane or heathenish ungodliness and
malapertnes of these men against God, whereunto they fell at the last by little
and little from and by the accustoming themselves unto the former vices. And
this their wickedness is described or set forth to be so great, as there
cannot be greater. For with manifest or open scoffs and reproachful taunting
words and speeches very profane or heathen like and lewd, they did spoil and
rob God both of his holiness, and also of his justice and truth, the which is
more then heathenish, and most notorious and vile wickedness, and ungodliness.

CAP. 3.
Verse. 1. Behold, I will send my messenger, and he shall prepare the way before
me: and the Lord, whom ye seek, shall speedily come to his Temple: even the
messenger of the covenant, whom ye desire: behold, he shall come, says the
Lord of hosts.
Two parts of this chapter.
THis whole chapter contains but one only Sermon, the which has two parts.
The first part opposes, or sets and matcheth the infinite goodness of God,
1. Sets the goodness of God against the wickedness of the Jews.
against the former vices and sins against him, through which his goodness
he promises that the Christ, and Messiah looked for shall come, and that
shortly, which Christ shall restore, renew and purge the whole state of his
Church. Whereby the mercy and truth of GOD appears toward his Church. For
as Paul speaks, 2. Tim. cap. 2. ver. 13. If we believe not, yet he abides
faithful: he cannot deny himself. This part continues unto the 6. verse.
The second part, the better to show this self same infinite or endless mercy
of God, 2. The long patience of God toward them.
describes or sets forth his long patience and sufferance, in bearing with
the rebelliousnes of this people, and moving and stirring the^ unto repentance.

A promise of the Messiah to come, containing the history of things to come,
and a commendation of the said Messiah.
This first verse is a repeated promise, and therefore most assured and
certain, of the coming of the Messiah, being even now present and hard at
hand, wherein is contained both the history of things to come, and also a
diligent commendation of the Messiah himself. The history, for that there is
showed whom the Lord would send next before the coming of his Messiah, to wit,
John the Baptist: and that indeed was done, both that the coming of so great a
Prince might be the better noted and marked, and also that he might be the
more honorably received.

Verse. 2. But who may abide the day of his coming? and who shall endure, when
he appears? for he is like a purging fire, and like fullers soap.
An amplification of the ministry of the Messiah.
HE amplifieth the ministry or office of the Messiah to come, by the hardness
of the work, the which he shall perform. And this hardness of the work shall
arise hereupon, namely, of the most corrupt manners of all sorts of men at that
time, whom he comes to amend, and to denounce or show the judgments of God.
And therefore he shall be to be feared. For, as it is Matthew. 3. ver. 12. He
shall come with his fan in his hand, and will make clean his floor, and
gather his wheat into his garner, but will burn up the chafe with
unquenchable fire.

Verse. 3. And he shall sit down to try and fine the silver: he shall even
fine the sons of Leui, and purify them, as gold and silver, that they may
bring offerings unto the Lord in righteousness.
A several setting down the parts of the office of the Messiah.
HE severally sets down the parts and benefits of the office of the
Messiah. First, that he shall purge both the Levites themselves from their
sins, and the worship of God from the blemishes that were added unto it, and
restore it unto the former beauty and brightness, and that with authority
above the other Prophets. So Mark. 1. ver. 22. it is reported of him, that they
were astonished at his doctrine: for he taught them as one that had authority,
and not as the Scribes. And Ioh. 2. ver. 15. John bears record of him, that
he was more excellent then he. And Matthew. 21. ver. 12. it is said of Christ,
that he went into the Temple of God, and cast out all them that sold and
bought in the Temple, and overthrew the tables of the money changers, and the
seats of them that sold doves.

Verse. 4. Then shall the offerings of Judah and Jerusalem be acceptable unto
the Lord, as in old time, and in the years before.
An amplification of the former benefit.
HE amplifieth this benefit by a singular effect thereof, that is, by another
benefit, which shall follow thereof, namely, that then the sacrifices and
offerings of the whole people shall be as acceptable and sweet, as they were at
any time before.

Verse. 5. And I will come near unto you to judgment, and I will be a swift
witness against the Soothsayers, and against the adulterers, and against false
swearers, and against those that wrongfully keep back the hirelings wages,
and vex the widow, and the fatherles, and oppress the stranger, and fear
not me, says the Lord of hosts.
The second part of the office of Christ.
THe second part of the ministry or office of Christ, appertains to the
reproving and condemning of the evil manners of men, and all vices, although
here be made a reckoning up but of a few only for example sake. And he
teaches that the Messiah will do this in a few years. For Christ executed
that his office in the midst of a week of years only, that is, in three
years and an half, Dan. 9. Further, the Prophet shows, that the Messiah,
when as he shall correct the wicked manners and vices of men, shall do the same
by the force and power of heavenly doctrine (the which he shall teach:) and the
testimony or witness of the conscience of those whom he shall reprove, rather
condemning them, then by any real vengeance or punishment, or penalty of
money, which he should lay upon them. So it appears, John 9.

Verse. 6. For I am the Lord: I change not, and ye sons of Iaacob are not
consumed.
The second part of this sermon commending the mercy of God toward the Jews.
THe second part of this Sermon, wherein Malachias commends the great mercy
of God toward the Jews by his long sufferance and patience, for as much as
they long sithence had deserved utter destruction for their sins, and yet God
saved and preserved them. And of this his benefit toward them, God teaches
that there was but one only cause, to wit, his truth and faithfulness in his
promises.

Verse. 7. From the days of your fathers, ye are gone away from mine
ordinances, and have not kept them: return unto me, and I will return unto
you, says the Lord of hosts: but ye said, Wherein shall we return?
God commends his own mercy, and condemns the rebelliousnes of the Jews.
BY the matching by the way of contraries, of the long and continual
stubbornnes and disobedience of this people, with his good will even now
prepared and offered unto them, God commends both his mercy, and also
increases the rebelliousnes of the Jews, whose peeuishnes also he lively
painteth forth by their impudent or shameless chummering and muttering again.

Verse. 8. Will a man spoil his Or God.
gods? yet have ye spoiled me: but ye say: Wherein have we spoiled thee? In
tithes and offerings.
God proves the wickedness of the Jews to be inexcusable
GOd pleading with the Jews as it were with equal law, proves their wickedness
and lewdnes to be inexcusable, because that they did sacrilegiously or
theeuishly retain and keep back unto themselves through notorious
covetousness and despising of the majesty of God, the very self same things,
the which he had ordained, and commanded to be paid unto his worship and
service. The which thing how wicked it is, he shows by a reason of a God, and
Lord, also by the duty of a man that is a servant, and by the comparing of
them both together.

Verse. 9. Ye are cursed with a curse: for ye have spoiled me, even this whole
nation.
The wrath of God most just against this people.
HE shows the wrath and anger of God to be most just against them for this
wickedness. For not only one or two of them did this, but the whole nation
making a certain conspiracy within themselves against God, that they might
utterly cast him down from his dignity and right.

Verse. 10. Bring ye all the tithes into the store house, that there may be
meat in mine house, and prove me now herewith, says the Lord of hosts, if I
will not open the windows of heaven unto you, and power you out a blessing
without measure.
A remedy against the former threatenings.
HE sets down a remedy against the former threatenings, namely, their
repentance, and the manner of this repentance, to wit, that they offer willingly
and readily those things, which God has commanded to be offered for his
service and ministry. The which thing that they may do the more cheerfully,
he promises a great blessing from heaven it self, and an endless pouring out
of all good things upon them.

Verse. 11. And I will rebuke the deuourer for your sakes, and he shall not
destroy the fruit of your ground, neither shall your vine be barren in the
field, says the Lord of hosts.
An amplification of their happiness.
HE amplifieth this their happiness to come, for that it shall not only be
exceeding great, but also most safe against all hurts and damages likely to
ensue: namely, God himself with holding and driving them away, that they may
obey God with a more willing and ready mind, and think the better upon the
greatness of this promise.

Verse. 12. And all nations shall call you blessed: for ye shall be a pleasant
land, says the Lord of hosts.
An other amplification of the said benefit.
THe said benefit of God is again amplified, both by the public testimony of
all nations concerning the same felicity or happiness of the Jews, and their
desire to enjoy the like: and also by the comparing and changing of their
former most miserable estate, with this second manifestly most happy estate
that shall be by this means.

Verse. 13. Your words have been stout against me, says the Lord: yet ye say,
What have we spoken against thee? Verse. 14. Ye have said, It is in vain to
serve God: and what profit is it that we have kept his commandment, and that
we walked humbly before the Lord of hosts.
Their second crime and notorious blasphemy.
THeir second crime and fault defended and denied by them with the same
impudency or shamelesnes of mind, and public stubbornnes, that the former
was. And this is their notorious ungodliness and blasphemy, wherewith they did
reprove God of a most shameful lie, to wit, as if oftentimes he had not
performed his promises made unto those that are his, of the which number with
full mouths they boasted themselves to be.

Verse. 15. Therefore we count the proud blessed: even they that work
wickedness, are set up, and they that tempt God, you, they are delivered.
An amplification of the former wickedness.
THe first amplification of this last former wickedness and stubbornnes, for that
the Jews said that they had proved indeed that God was a liar. For that he
was more gentle and liberal unto those that did despise him, then unto those
that did serve and worship him.

Verse. 16. Then spoke they that feared the Lord every one unto his neighbor,
and the Lord hearkened and heard it: and a book of remembrance was written
before him for them that feared the Lord, and that thought upon his name.
A second amplification of the former ungodliness.
SEcondly he amplifieth the former wickedness, for that this ungodliness was so
great, and so public, that it was not lawful for godly men in a manner once
to whisper or mutter against it, the which in the mean season notwithstanding
GOD himself did hear. This false accusation therefore against himself does
God confute or overthrow, first threatening that it shall not be unpunished,
for that he avouches that it is in such sort written before him, that neither
he, nor any of his Saints can ever forget it, but that they must punish it, or
desire to have it punished.

Verse. 17. And they shall be to me says the Lord of hosts, in that day that I
shall do this, for a flock, and I will spare them as a man spares his own
son that serves him.
The blaspemie of the ungodly refuted by the difference that shall be between
them and the godly.
Again God refuteth or overthrows the said blaspemie against himself by that
difference, the which shall most manifestly appear then between the godly,
and the ungodly: also between them that worship God, and them that despise
him, when as God shall execute his Judgments. For those godly ones shall be
free from the punishments of the others, that is, of the ungodly, for that God
shall then acknowledge them for his own, as namely who have served God, as
their father. Wherefore it is most meet that they should be severed from the
ungodly, as it shall also come to pass at the same time.

Verse. 18. Then shall you return, and discern between the righteous and the
wicked, between him that serves God, and him that serves him not.
The Jews refuted by their own testimony or witness.
FInally (wherein is both the fruit and also the conclusion of the former
reprehension) he overthrows the same Jews by the very testimony or witness of
themselves: if so be that they will themselves also feel and receive the
blessings by God prepared for the godly. And they shall taste of them, if they
turn themselves unto God by true repentance of mind, and do now begin to
worship him. Therefore in this end of this sermon there is an exhortation unto
earnest repentance of mind.

CAP. 4.
Verse. 1. For behold, the day comes that shall burn as an oven, and all the
proud, yea, and all that do wickedly, shall be stubble, and the day that
comes, shall burn them up, says the Lord of hosts: and shall leave them
neither root, nor branch.
The restoring of the Church, the Author and time of the same, is contained in
this Sermon.
THis chapter contains one sermon, wherein the Lord promises the amending of
so miserable and corrupt an estate of his Church, as he had described or set
forth before, and the restoring of it unto better: and recites both the
Author thereof, to wit the Messiah, long promised before: and appoints also
the time, namely when as God shall send John the Baptist, that second Elias.

Now this first verse is a promise of this new state of the church which should
be renewed and restored, The renewing of the Church, and the destruction of the
wicked.
the which because it could not be those wicked and ungodly ones remaining in
the Church, whom he had described before, he teaches that their most grievous
and last destruction and overthrow should by and by be, taking a similitude
from a most hot burning fire, and such as should most easily devour them as
light stubble. The which thing although some do expound of the last
destruction of Jerusalem, the which fell out in the end after Christ, his
ascension or going up into heaven: I rather expound it of those miseries, the
which the Jews suffered after the days of Malachias until the coming of
Christ under the Grecian Kings of Syria and Egypt.

Verse. 2. But unto you that fear my name, shall the Sun of righteousness
arise, and health shall be under his wings, and ye shall go forth, and grow up
as fat calves.
The happiness of the godly.
HE shows by the contrary how happy and full shall be the good success and
estate of the godly and the faithful (whom in this place he calls those that
fear God) that it might be the more joyful unto them. That it shall be full,
he teaches by the cause, for that the Church shall then have and see the
Messiah (in whom there is full and perfect righteousness, and the remedy and
medicine for all our sins and miseries) and that with the clear and evident,
and hence forth no more darkened and light of knowledge. And the Church shall
see it in the Gospel, in heart embrace it.

Verse. 3. And ye shall tread down the wicked: for they shall be dust under the
soles of your feet, in that day that I shall do this, says the Lord of
hosts.
An amplification of the former benefit.
AN amplification of the former benefit of God, taken from the most full
victory, which the godly in the end shall have over the wicked, because that
the godly in the end shall at the full have rule over the wicked, neither shall
the godly be any more afraid of them. And this do I understand of the full and
last happiness, and resurrection, or rising again of the godly: Psalm. 149.

Verse. 4. Remember the law of Moses my servant, which I commanded unto him in
Horeb for all Israel, with the Statutes, and Judgments.
A double admonition.
A Profitable admonition consisting of two parts, the first contained in this
verse, the second expressed in the verse following. The first, wherein the godly
are taught, namely that until such time as these things come to pass, 1. That
they must continue in the law of God given by Moses.
they must persevere or continue and serve God both in the moral, and also the
ceremonial, and political, or Judicial law of God, given unto them by Moses:
and that the must not by any means turn from the same unto the inventions and
heathenish ordinances of men.

Verse. 5. Behold, I will send you Elijah the Prophet before the coming of the
great and fearful day of the Lord.
2. Of the time and notes that the former benefit is given them of God.
THe second admonition concerning the time, and the notes and marks, by the
which the godly shall understand and know the former benefit to be given by
God. And this shall then be when as John the Baptist shall be sent, the which
shall begin that same wonderful restoring and renewing of the Church. So does
Christ himself expound this place of John the Baptist Mat. 11. ver. 13.14. in
these words, saying: All the Prophets, and the Law Prophesied unto John. And
if ye will receive it, this is Elias, which was to come. The like is, Mark. 1.

Verse. 6. And he shall turn the heart of the fathers to the children, and the
heart of the children to their fathers, least I come and smite the earth with
cursing.
A commendation and approbation of the office of John the Baptist.
A Commendation and an approbation or allowance both of the person, and also of
the office of John the Baptist, together with a description or setting forth
of his office. And here withal also does the Evangelist Mark begin his
history of the Gospel, cap. 1. ver. 1.2. after this manner: The beginning of
the Gospel of Jesus Christ, the Son of God: As it is written in the
Prophets, Behold, I send my messenger before thy face, which shall prepare thy
way before thee. And with this place of Malachias fully agrees the place of
Luke, cap. 1. ver. 17. where the Angel Gabriel says unto Zacharias concerning
John the Baptist, He shall go before him (to wit, before Christ) in the spirit
and power of Elias, to turn the hearts of the fathers to the children, and the
disobedient to the wisdom of the just men, to make ready a people prepared
for the Lord.

Praise be unto God.
FJNIS.
The table.
A
Declaration of the covenant with the house of Aaron. 1123 Abakuk his life. 79
Abdias. 60 Abstaining from evil the first part of Repentance. 256 Afflictions
are wont to put us in mind of God. 449 a difference between the Afflictions of
the godly and the ungodly. 700 Aggeus 63. his life and death. 80 Aegyptia^s
become Christians. 1111 Amasias his counsel to Amos. 305 his subtlety. 304
Ammon his destruction. 833 the Ammonites cruelty. 215 Amos accused of
conspiracy. 302 might not prophecy in Bethel. 304. the second of the
Canonical prophets. 203. more ancient then Oseas and Isaias. 54. succeeded
Jonas. ibid. Amos his calling described. 306. his preaching. 204. his life and
death. 75. to whom he is sent and at what time he prophesied. 205 Anarchy is
the cause of all wickedness. 490 the difference between an Angel and a
Prophet. 3 Angels attend upon Christ. 928 Anger pursues the authors thereof.
583 Anna 63 Antichrist and his prophets false prophets. 11 Apollo the devil of
Delphos. 11 Aeromancie. 10 Astrology. 10 Azarias. 51 the punishment of Azotus.
1020
B
BAlaam. 36. a notable soothsayer. 658 Balthazar. 738 Baptism what it is. 1082
the destruction of Basan. 1048 what is meant by the oaks of Basan. ibid.
Benefits entice men to wickedness. 435 Gods Benefits are to be accepted when
they are offered unto us. 953 Beasts punished for men. 785. 1107 why Bethel is
called Bethaven. 397 Broccard a peevish prophet living in Holland. 394.
conferred withal about his writings. 31. refuted. 30
C
Captivity is a hard thing. 730 the destruction of Caelosyria. 1047 the vision
of the Candlestick and meaning thereof. 951 the Chaldeans power and cruelty.
2872 Chasas signifies a lie. 590 Christ the foundation of all the promises of
god toward his church. 641. the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets. 12. a
Prophet of the new Testament. 42. the redeemer of the Church. 90 Christ his
dominion and rule. 1025 his description. 1054. his glory threefold. 982. his
care in feeding his flock. 1054 how Christ shall be a king unto his Church.
1024 the true Church of God what it is. 793 the true Church of God never
utterly destroyed. 218. not cast away, though it be punished 832 what manner of
company the Church of God shall be. 850 the authority of the Church is from
Christ. 646. the happiness thereof. 996. the comfort thereof. 834 836. the
benefits of God toward it. 813. what he requires of his Church. 961. from
whom he will gather it. 349. he rendereth like for like to the enemies
thereof. 80 the afflictions of the Church come to pass by the providence and
will of God. 924. a lesson for the Church of God at all times. 650. a
description of the restoring of the Church. 332. why the enemies of the Church
are called horns. 924 all Church matters belonged to the Priests. 945 Contempt
of Gods law the cause of diverse sins. 867 Contempt of God and the manner of
the same. 431 Counselors of Belial. 698 Covetousnes is unsatiable. 595 the
corruption of the Court a great mischief unto kingdoms. 443 (...) bad
practice of Courtiers. 442 the time of the Creation of the world until Christ,
divided iuto seven ages. 46 Cruelty displeases God. 216. 117 sundry kinds of
Cruelty. 314
D
A Daller what kind of coin it is. 374 Damascus the chief city of Syria.
207. punished. 209 the nearer a Danger is, the more circumspect we ought to be
to eschew it. 762 what is meant by one Day. 1100 Devil the author of lies.
1084 Diadem what it is. 737 Divinours. 2
E
ELias. 52. compared with Moses. ibid. the Earth punished for the sins of the
people. 317 Elizeus prophesied four and fifty years. 53 Enemies of Gods
Church destroyed 1106. a vision of the Epha and meaning thereof 966 Evil what
it signifies 233 what it is to put a far of the Evil day 282 Ecstasy contained
under vision. 28
F
FAith has the promises of this life and of the life to come. 965. confirmed
by afflictions. 1092. the nature thereof. 625. the force thereof. 808. Faith
going before knowledge and how. 370 Famine. 249. described. 293 The description
of a Fast. 988. many kinds thereof. 774. all sorts must come thereunto. 775
Fatherless children find help of God. 564 tokens and effects of Fear. 716
Flattery gets friends. 618 Forgiveness of sin a benefit of God. 848
Fruitfulness in bearing of children was in old time reckened for an especial
blessing of God. 390
G
GEntiles called and converted. 1109. 1108. Geomancie. 10 the Gibeonites
villainy and the punishment of the same. 477. 478 Glory is used for issue or
children. 480 Gluttony. 390 God described. 260. is unchangeable. 517. hates
them which work wickedness. 484. co^pareth himself to a leopard. 547. Judges
according unto the truth. 664. can never be deceived or hindered. 856 has rule
over death it self. 539. is the fountain of goodness in Christ. 426. is
^ever the author of death to any. 530. is not subject to passions or
affections. 654. is always true and never fails. 629. is careful to punish
sin, though men be careless in committing it 439. 96^ continues his benefits
toward his children. 532* spares the world for a small company of the godly.
828. is strong and holy. 517. declared his will by his prophets. 10. teaches
us by none other way but by his word. 502. is to be served both with soul and
body. 488. fights for the Jews. 1029. is Lord over all, but not father of
all in Christ. 88. loves who^ he punishes. 233. is always near to his
Church. 357. delights not in injustice or cruelty. 620. the true God
compared with false gods. 628. he only is to be trusted unto. 494. in himself
he can not be hurt, but in his members. 698. he only calls prophets. 911* how
he is said to repent. 290. Natural reason does teach that there is a God. 97.
nothing can hinder him in his purposes. 571. when he is said to do evil. 234
Gods power laid forth by effects. 690. his omnipotency described. 327. three
effects of Gods favor toward his Church. 787. his four sore judgments. 367.
his love toward his children. 684. his anger the cause of the destruction of
man. 921. his kingdom first to be sought for. 453. his benefits toward the
Israelites. 225. they are then to be received when they are offered. 502. five
effects of his majesty. 252. his titles heaped up, and what we are thereby to
learn. 239. his gifts toward the godly. 565. 566. his anger like a flame.
693. his anger the fountain of all misery and calamity. 481. his passage
joyful. 268. his favor toward his is perpetual. 811. his love toward his
Church. 920. his power described. 259. how he is said to remember or forget.
315. in what sense he is said to swear by his holiness. 243. what his riding
and sitting upon us is. 501. why he imparteth his benefits with us. 1020 we
must swear by the name of God alone. 398. it is better to fall into Gods hands,
then into the hands of men. 482. 483. all good gifts proceed from God alone.
291. the end of the use of the gifts of God. 786. the happy estate of those
whom he favors. 631. no help against his punishment. 873. whom he chideth,
he saves, unless they hurt themselves. 826. to worship God after a strange
manner is to contemn him. 456 Gods revelation after 3. manners. 28 examples of
his anger. 515. a co^trarietie between the true God and Idols. 886. Gods help
to be preferred before man's. 463 an admonition for the godly. 353. to continue
in well doing. 428
H
HAbacuk. 61. his time of prophesying. 899 Hydromancie. 10 Hypocrites worship
God in show only, not in sincerity of heart. 659. how they repent. 357
I
Jacob his base estate. 536. his virtues. 524 what I dolatry is. 355. a
description of the Idolatry of the Jews and punishment of the same. 460 to
attribute the administration of the word unto the course of planets is
Idolatry. 652 Idolatry hated of God. 365 Idolatry the cause of the
judgments of God 817 what good follows the banishment of Idolatry. 273
Idolatry increases by degrees. 522 Idolatry defaceth the true worship of God.
534 Idolatry infectious 453 the nature of Idolaters. 542 Idolatours are not
the Church of God. 355 Idolatours under the show of religion do mock God. 521
The vanity of Idols and falsehood. 433 why Idols can not help us. 885 why we
should not seek unto Idols. 1036 How great a sin it is to enquire of things
to come at Idols. 393 Idol places in what sense called sanctuaries. 299
Iehoshua the type of Christ. 946 Iehu. 52. his punishment and why it was
inflicted. 344 Jeremy accused of treason. 301 Jeremy wears a wooden chain.
71 the situation of Jerusalem. 1^^8 what is meant by Ierusale^^ 1102 why God is
said to dwell in Jerusalem. 577 the stubbornnes of the Jews against God. 845.
their punishment. 219 the desire of God to have the Jews repent. 845.
destruction threatened unto them. 819 the Jews are put in fear by other men's
example. 829. their affliction and deliverance. 642 the Jews punished for
afflicting Gods Church. 1091 the commendations of John Baptist. 2136 all
Infants guilty. 488 Insecta what they are. 745 Joel. 60. his stock. 744. the
time wherein he prophesied. 743. his life and death. 78 Jonas the first
canonical Prophet. 205. he succeeded Elizeus. 53 Jonas the true Arion of the
Poets. 107 Jonas threatens destruction unto Ninivie. 688. utters his own
sin. 99 what Jonas did in the whales belly. 182 Jonas his prayer. 183. his
rebellion. 91. his stock. 88. his miraculous deliverance. 110 Josephus. 687
three kinds of Joy. 703 Isaias barefooted. 71 Israel is called an empty vine.
487 the Israelites were sinners of old. 520. rebelled against God a long time.
497. served Idols above 2. hundred years. 362 God calls dumb creatures to be
witness against the Israelites. 656 what caused the Israelites to sin against
God so grievously. 504 the Israelites ascribe the cause of their benefit to
other, and not to God. 358 the Israelites punishment for conte^ning God. 454
the Israelites in their captivity retained no seal of Gods covenant. 348 the
Israelites riotous life described. 238. their falling away from their kingdom,
from the worship of God, and from the Priesthood. 457. their superstition.
244. their unthankfulness. 435. their stubbornnes past recovery. 381. their
incest, cruelty, and covetousness. 222 the duty of Judges. 621 the kingdom of
Judah never restored to its former glory. 597 the greatness and certentie of
Gods Judgments. 830 the Judgments of God upon his Church ought especially to
be regarded. 588 we are Justified through Christ before God. 854
K
HOw far Kings may help or not help us. 552
L
HE Labors in vain that despises God. 40 the doctrine of the Law twofold.
501 the end of the first and second table of the Law. 430 destruction
follows the love of Lying. 608 Losses stir up men to call on God. 96
casting of Lots in what cases used. 98. Gods providence appears in them.
ibid. the Love of God toward wicked men. 823 effects of Gods Love. 1000
M
CEremonies restored by the Machabees. 1082. whence the Machabees had their
name. 107 Magistrates called watchmen. 672 the life and death of Malachy. 81
Man is but a bubble. 495. the cause of his own destruction. 549. by nature
easily drawn to Idolatry. 435 Marks and bounds not to be remooved. 416. a
curse against them which do so. ibid. how the Marriage between God and us is
contracted. 369, 368 a promise of Messiah to come. 1128 his office. 1129
Micheas later then Isaias, and the time of his prophecy. 576. his life and
death. 75 the highest degree of Misery. 741 Music in it self very lawful.
284
N
NAhum prophesied of the ruin of Assyria 59. 688. the time wherein he lived.
687. his life and death. 79 It is a great commodity to have a good Neighbor.
584. we ought to perform judgment and mercy unto our neighbors. 529. the
manners of Noble men once forlorn become most wanto^. 445
O
OBadiah his calling is from God. 858 when Oseas began to prophecy. 340 why he
is placed first among the small prophets. 338. his life and death. 75. he is
commanded to marry a common harlot. 341
P
THE comfort of the Penitent. 778 the People sin after the manner of the
princes. 434 436 Philanthropeia what it is. 510 the Philistines cruelty. 211.
there punishment. 212 the office of the Priests and Levites. 1123 why the
Priests wete called Camarim or Chemerims. 493 the state of the Priesthood
described in Iosuah. 940 The covetousness of Priests. 112 Gods judgments upon
deceitful Priests. 1121 Princes should be examples of well doing 611 Princes
reprehended. 259 spiritual Promises 787 what Prophecy is generally. 5
Prophecy of two sorts. 10 Prophecy defined by Paul. 19 Prophecy of greater
use then the gift of tongues. 20. has two ends. 12. the instrume^tal cause of
Prophecy. 9 Prophecy uses only the mother tongue. 20 diverse names given to
Prophets. 3 God always raised up Prophets to put the Israelites in mind of
their duty. 338 the excellency of the books of the Prophets. 13 the
signification of the Prophets names out of Isidorus. 83 how the writings of the
godly Prophets have been gathered. 63 Rules to be observed in expounding the
Prophets. 69 the signification of the Prophets names. 82 the order of the
Prophets in the Hebrew. 82 in what age each Prophet lived. 45 48 when the
Prophets of the old Testament ceased. 41. when the new ceased. 43. when the
true prophets of God began and ended. 38. notes of true and godly Prophets 34
Gods Prophets shall prophecy whether they will or no that forbid them. 600
Prophets of the Gentiles. 9 false Prophets are called Prophets. 3 a description
of false Prophets. 605 false Prophets in three respects. 35 titles given to
false Prophets by the holy ghost. 475 tokens of false Prophets. 1086 why God
suffers the heathen Prophets to foretell some things of Christ. 23 Poligamie
of the Jews. 11^0 the Popish confessors. 388 what is meant by the holy Pots of
Judah. 1114 Postellus the canker of Christianity. 475 after what manner we
sin after the same God punishes us. 464 the end of the Punishments of God
759 Pyromancie. 10
R
REformation of life must begin at the true worship of God. 274 Regeneration a
benefit of God. 849 a description of true Religion. 1103 what true Repentance
is. 256. 266. it only can stand against the threatenings of God. 240. 264. the
fruit thereof. 564. it is the gif of God. 1067 what manner of Repentance ours
ought to be. 100 who they be that truly repent. 912 the prayer of the Repentant
contains two things 561 when God is angry Riches avail nothing. 828. they
are not always tokens of Gods favor. 531
S
What Sacrifice is acceptable to God. 472 Samaria why so called. 242. the
destruction thereof with the cause of the same. 558 the Sardians in reproach are
called dog-cheape slaves. 798 the hardness of Saving the godly. 828 Scriptures
are to be understood literally and spiritually. 831 bad Shepherds appointed by
God. 1063. a description thereof. 1064 who are signified by the name of Sheep.
1050 what Silence is commanded. 263 who should be Simple as doves. 449 Sin
condemned by the light of nature. 101. a cause of divorce between God and us.
523 when Sins are said to cry up into heaven. 91. no help from God until our
sins be pardoned. 553 Sophonias. ^0. his life and his death. 80 Spain like
to be a whip to correct the sins of the professors of the Gospel. 870 the
Spainyards cruelty. 874 the Soul is not begotten. 1067 the Standing still of
the sun and Moon and the meaning thereof. 893 good Success in affairs
persuades the wicked that their dealings are good. 530
T
THe feast of Tabernacles. 1112 true Teachers murdered. 1088 false Teachers
loose their authority. 1084 the punishment of loytring Teachers. 386 why the
godly must come to the Temple of God. 625 the second Temple finished in the 6.
year of Darius. 899 Tentation, which God uses to his children brings forth
patience. 326 Theodosius his good success. 1030 Truth gets hatred. 618 the
Turks cruelty. 874 Tyrants break the law of consanguinitie. 213. punished.
212 Titus Vespasian destroyed Jerusalem. 1092
V
Victory is to be attributed to God and not to men. 1074 Vision threefold. 29
Visitation what it is. 672 Vagodly hate the godly. 476 the Unthankful first
exalt themselves: secondly forget God. 546
W
Whoredom. 390 goes together with surfeiting. 442 Wickedness is set down
under the figure of a woman. 968 the diverse practices of the Wicked and of the
godly. 594 the note of a Wise man in the midst of troubles. 264 Woe what it does
signify. 278 the Word of God ought to be the rule of our life. 402 what a
misery it is to Want the word of God. 319 Works of themselves please not God.
990, 991
Z
ZAcharias. 63. talks with an Angel. 917. his office and calling from God.
910. his life and death. 81 the time of the prophecy of Zophonias. 16
FINIS.

