Maroccus Extaticus. Or, BANKS BAY HORSE IN a Trance.

A Discourse set down in a merry Dialogue, between Banks and his beast:
Anatomizing some abuses and bad tricks of this age.

Written and entitled to mine Host of the Belsauage, and all his honest Guests.

By John Dando the wierdrawer of Hadley, and Harrie Runt, head Ostler of
Bosoms Inn.

Printed for Cuthbert Burby. 1595.

To the Reader.
GEntle Readers, or Gentlemen Readers, which you will, though it past manners
in us to stand like a couple of eaues-dropping knaves, and steal away a
discourse betwixt Banks and his bay horse from Belsauage without Ludgate, which
in our conscience we must confess is a kind of coosning, and in a manner such
a matter as if we should have gone into a Cooks shop in Fleet lane, and with
the smell of roast meat filled our bellies, not emptying our purses, a flat
robbery, and by a figure such a piece of filching as is punishable with
ribroast among the turn spits at pie corner, where a man of an ill mind may
break his fast with the sent of a piece of beef pulled piping hot out of the
furnace. Yet considering the case as it concerns the commonwealth, and the
nature of the subject handled betwixt this horse and his master, which not any
in the world, I promise ye, heard or understood but our selves that came
hither upon other business, we could not choose but do as we huve done: very
pure love to our country leading us to lay our wits together, and present the
world with this pamphlet, which if it be not mistaken, may as well serve to
drive away pastime and good company, as the finest philosophical discourse you
can light upon. If it hang not well together, think the fault is ours that
carried it not well away, for truly there was never horse in this world
answered man with more reason, nor never man in this world reasond more
sensibly with a horse than this man and this horse in this matter, as for
example. And so committing you (not to prison) no, but to the reading of this
Dialogue, we end our Epistle to the Reader.

depiction of horse doing tricks

BANKS BAY HORSE IN a Trance.
INTERLOCVTORES, Banks and his Horse.
Banks HOlla Marocco, whose mare is dead, that you are thus melancoly, up I
say, and let you and me confer a little upon the cause, whereby matters and
dealings may seem to be so, you know my meaning.


Horse. Whereby matters and dealinges may seem for to be. Very good sir,
spoke like a wholesome haberdasher, and as wisely by Lady master, as he that
was sworn to his wives friends, not to credit out his wares to any man for
the first fifteen years he was married.


Banks. And therewith me thinks I see him hang the hat upon the pin again.
Wast not so Marocco? I am glad sir to hear you so pleasant in the threshold of
my discourse, for I am come in purpose to debate a while and dialogue with you,
and therefore have at you after your watering. Lay out your lips and sweep
your manger clean, and summon your wits together, for I mean (by mine host
leave) to recreate my self awhile with your horsemanship.


Horse. And I am as like master to show you some horse play as ere a nag in
this parish, for it is a jade can neither whihie nor wag his tail, and you have
brought me up to both I thank you, and made me an understanding horse, and a
horse of service, master, and that you know.


Banks. I Marocco I know it and acknowledge it, and so must thou if thou have
so much ingenuitie, confess my kindness, thou art not only but also bound to
honest Banks, for teaching thee so many odd prankes. I have brought thee up
right te^derly, as a Bakers daughter would bring up a Cosset by hand, and allow
it bread and milk by the eye.


Horse. Maius peccatum habes, master you have the more to answer, God help
you. For I warrant you, (though I say it that should not say it) I eat more
prouender in four and twenty hours, than two of the best geldings that Robin
Snibor keeps, that a hires for two shillings a day a piece.


Bank. Two shillings Marocco, nay what say thou by half a crown, and ten
groats.


Horse. Marie I say, three days hire is worth four such horses, saddles, and
all. For a buys them for ten pence a saddle at S. Giles one with another, and
those accoutrements are suitable to his steeds.


Banks. Me thinks such steedes should stand a man in small stead, by that he
had rid some five miles out of town.


Horse: Yea be sure, or half five miles either. And commonly the saddle falls
asunder and splits in two pieces at the towns end, and one side takes his
journey toward Vxbridge, and the other toward Stanes, to stop mine Hosts
cushions of the George.


Banks. Why that's Suum cuique boy, for the waine-men of the West country,
and the Carryers of Gloucestershire commonly barter away their broken ware
with the hostlers for pease and horsebread, and they return them a horseback
to Peter Pympe the patchpannell. Marocco thou know where I am now.


Horse. Not I truly master, unless you mean that shrewde Sadler that served
you so ill the last Term, and as I trow his name was not Peter, his name was
John Indifferent, for a wrought me thought as if a had not cared whether a had
earned your money or no.


Banks. Beshrew him Marocco, a deceived my hope, in a good part of purple
velvet hose, that I purposde should have made me a seemly saddle.


Horse. O Master you are to purpose, and he (...) dispose, of those hose* then
were your breeches in his hands, and sweetly he handled them as you know: here
me thinks had you supde up but a quarter of sack, a quart of ^^ck^, I should
have said. See how my mind was Master Patinis upon the bag of Otes etc. Or
had you come in but reasonably loded from the Tavern, or taken some of the
excellent Muscadine at the Horn: why, what an occupation might you apprehend
to rail horribly against these mechanical fellows of the Town, that so they
have it, care not how they come by it. It Was but a veneriall sin in this
Sadler, to nycoll you, or nicke you rather of an old piece of Velvet hose. But
what think you by him that had the conscience to ask fourteen yeardes of
Satin for a suit of Apparel, and not to put in nine of them.


Bancks. Yea Marocco, as well as of him that sold it for eighteen shillings a
yearde, being not worth ten.


Horse. O he gave time Master: And then take heed of that while you live, In
space, grows grace And in prosperity of the Satin, will swell wonderfully.


Banckes. I am fall as fast in a cunning stealers hand.


Horse. A hard heart has he that has such a hand to cut such large thonges
of another man's lether, and lap him self in a gentle man's livery.


Banckes. Tush, this is but a pettye matter to stand upon: And yet Marocco I
dare say it and swear it to thee, because thou art no talker: this petty
matter has pyncht nearer than every man weenes for. I am undone, now young
genleman. Well, Motos praestat componere fluctus.


Horse. Why master of whom should you be afraid, I am able to iustifye as
much as you say. Indeed those be the young men that never saw the Lions. Young
masters and gentlemen of the careless cut, such as care not how they be
cut, or of what cut they be like, so they may have, to follow al fashions, and
then they are cut indeed, noforce, so they fall into a fashion, and walk but
twenty four turns in Paul's, let it pack the next day for the third penny.
Master M. Nemo ceditur nisi a seipso. Byrch and green holly, and thou be
beaten boy, thank thine own, folly: He that will thrust his neck into the
yoke, is worthy to be used like a jade. He that has been a gentleman of fair
demeanes, and will so demean him self to let lands and lordeshippes fly for
a little bravery Luat paenas and in pistrino, let him cry and let him lie, yea
and dye to, for any pity he is like to have at my hands.


Ba. Why how now Marocco. O ye are too sour. Dare you tell me of my spleen
against the Sadler, and be so bitter against the young gallantes of our age.
What man, nay horse rather, nay ass as thou art, to become odious to the
flower of England with thy foul manners. It is as natural for young men to
be brave and amorous, as for old men to be grave and serious. Why colte then,
you will take upon you I see? Do you not hear what they say that scarce
vouchsafe you an answer? Patres aequum esse censent nos iam iam a pueris
illico nasci senes, neque illarum assines essse rerum, quas fert adolescentia.


Horse. Master you mistake me, I am no such severe horse nor sullen ass, but
I can allow a young Gentleman his mad tricks, yea, and his merry tricks
too for a need. But master, this Latin I learned when I gambolde at Oxforde,
Est modus in rebus sunt, certi denique fines. This is it vrgesth me thus far,
and I speak it in passion too, and with the action of my head and heels, that
a Mercadore, nay, a mechanical fellow shall go so far into a Gentleman,
and a Gentleman so far out of himself and all a has, that for one or two
terms arraie, a shall for his lives term, and term of life become
beggeries bondsman, and vsuries vassal, O tempora, O mores, O Poetarum flores.
You shall find in an old Tracte printed by Winkin de Word, this old said
saw, What Is a Gentleman but his pleasure, O pleasure, what a treasure is it to
take pleasure with measure.


Banks. Measure Marocco, nay, nay, they that take up commodities make no
differnce for measure between a Flemishe ell and an English yard.


Horse. I know an ell Flemish cost English Anthony half a yard of the best
ware he had.


Banks. That ware will never see ware again, in so good sort as it has
done, nor sit in a shower of rain on the top of Amwell hill.


Horse. Go to master, hum drum is sauce for a cunnie, you and I should do
very ill to speak in private, we are so plain.


Banks. Plain Marocco, nay and I were as plain as I will be, I should cry
outright, for in this I agree with thee, and with thee the world agrees, and
besides tears and commiseration on the state of Gentlemen that have
vngentlefied, why I might say, dishonored themselves by buying and selling.


Horse. Have they so master? Why would he be a buyer then? Why would he
be a seller?

This buying and selling,
By all men's telling,
Is gain without swelling,
To him that sels his dwelling,
For his bonds cancelling.

Banks. Ho, ho, good Marocco, I see now a dozen of bread dooes as much with
you, as three pipes of Tobacco taken in an odd alehouse, to a weak brain.


Horse. I am not drunk master, after my watering, that you need to challenge
me thus: I know what I say, and I say what I know:

To buy this measure,
And this momentanie pleasure,
With so much treasure,
To sell seat and seizure,
And repent at leisure.
Go to master, he is a bad waster, that consumes his days and hours, and
reapes Pour un plaisure, mill. Cambridge and Oxford can record: and the foul
dolorous fortune of many a fair boorde, What it is?

What it is to come into the clouches,
For Aglets or brouches,
Of these pure appearing asses,
That like simple glasses
Seem that they are not,
Let them storm I care not:
Vnpittied might he be,
That imbases his degree,
With this indignity.
I tell you master, for a truth I tell you too, I know a man that in this
town, had a Bible lying on his shop boorde, and sold but three yardes of
satin unto a Gentleman, and forswore himself at least three times in the
coping, and yet the book lay open before him, and he came new from reading
of Salomons Proverbs.


Banks. That had been somewhat gross in him if he had been reading the
twentieth of Exodus.


Horse. No, no, his mind was on the twentieth day of the month following,
when his money was due.


Banks. It Is good to have an eye to the maine: house keeping is chargeable, and
rent must be paid, the Landlord will have his due, Caveat emptor, let the
Tenant look to it.


Horse. The Landlord will lead to the devil, and the Tenant will follow after.


Bancks. What else? they be relatiues: Landlord and Tenant are as Pater and
Filius.


Horse. O master, I could relate to you of these relatiues, if it became me to
speak like a commonwealths man, what an abuse is ingendered twixte the
Landlord and Tenant.


Banks. Occasion of what Marocco.


Horse. Of more amiss by gis, than easily amended is, of bauderie, and
beggerie, and such like matters, master. Ambubaiarum collegia, pharmacapolae,
mendici mimi balatrones, hoc genus omne. Cry out and complain for the loss
of this good landlordes worship, God rest his soul, says T. B. we could have
had no wrong while he lived: so he had had his rent at the day, the devil
and John of Comber should not have fetched Kate L. to Bridewell, no nor all the
Court whipped C. F. at the cart, I Will tell you master, come what complaint could
have come against Peticoate lane, Smock Alley, Shordich, or Rotten row, there
were champions and spokes men for this crew, other manner of fellows Iwis, than
you think for, such as sit in their sattens and rich furs, and with a dash
of a pen in a counting house, could do more than the proudest plaintiefe
that commenceth any matter or suit against this sisterhoode, yea, and seal up
his letter and their lyps both at once, that murmur^ any thing against the
inhabitants of this holy corner. Master I could have showed you the coppie of
a Letter that was lost in this yard by chance, written by a man of some
account, so favorably to the Treasurer of Bridewell, in the behalf of an
honest Tenant of his, such a Tenant, master, as had her name a Tenendo, and
would hold so fast between the thighs, that shame it was for him that had
any shame, to be so shameless to use any means to keep her from open shame.


Banks. Thou speak of malice against some or other Marocco, and perhaps
thou meanest that drabbe that the last day when she saw thee here do thy
tricks, said thou were a devil and I a coniurer.


Horse. Against her Master, no of mine honesty, she is but a poor whore, to
her I mean. Tush, she that I talk of can entertain you with a duzen of
tiffite taffetie girls in a morning, I, and the worst of them, when she is at
the worst, shall have a wrought wastcoate on her back, and a lockram smock
worth three pence, as well rent behind as before, I warrant you.


Ban. Those rents by your leave Marocco, help to pay the Landlords rent at
the quarters end.


Horse. I master, and the Landlorde by your leave helps to rent some of them
between the quarters.


Banks. That's but a trick of youth lad^ Omnis homo mendax, Every man may
amend.


Horse. True master, Et vt hora sic vita, A loves a whore as his life. For he
will forbear as long as she will bear, and that's ka me, and ka thee, knave
he, and queen she.


Banks. Had need be of exceeding patience Marocco, to forbear as long as
she will bear, for a better bearing beast is not in all Shordich, nor Hounds
dich neither, than this beastly beast that I think thou meanest. But speak
not so loud, for and if her landlord heard you, he would answer for her.


Horse. I think so, has answered so long for her, that a can scarce answer
for himself, and I speak not so loud that I fear him, Male audit vbique,
master, a hears very badlye every where: and worse a will hear, and a hold
on, yea master, and loose hearing and seeing to, and a vi^ it and see it, as a
has done these duzen years.


Banks. Well, what is that to the purpose, these wrongs are private, and touch
himself, and wrack not the common wealth, as thou exclaymest.


Horse. O master, then you know nothing: For understand you as of Nownes, some
be substantives, some be adjectives: so of Landlords, some of them be
covetous, and some be lecherous, and he is both.


Banckes. Say me so. Well then Marocco, whether does more harm in the
commonwelth, the covetous or the lecherous Landlord.


Horse. Tush master, that question is no question. For though it be a question
between the covetous and the prodigal, yet is it no question betwixt the
covetous and the lecherous. The lecherous Landlord has his wench at his
commandment, and is content to take ware for his money, his private scutcherie
wounds not the commonwealth farther than that his whore shall have a house
rent free, when his honest neighbors wife and children shall neither have a
piece of a house or householde loaf for him. Let him pass for a farting
churl, and wear his mistres favors, viz. rubies and precious stones on his
nose, etc. And this Et caetera shall, if you will, be the perfectest pox that
ever grew in Shordich or Southwarke.


Banks. And there have been big inflammations, and more unquenchable than
the great fire that burnt so much blew thread on the top of Fishstreet hill.


Horse. But the covetous Landlord is the caterpiller of the commonwealth, he
neither fears God nor the devil, nor so he may rack it out, cares not what
Tenant he receives: he is no wencher (pray God he be no bencher) he fits
warm at home, and sets down his accounts, and says to himself, my houses
go now but for twenty pounds by the year, I Will make them all baudie houses,
and they will yield me twice as much. Upon the Exchange comes to him one or
two honest men to take the^ at his hands, the poor artificer or his like, of
what trade so ever, offers him the rent it has gone for, and sureties perhaps.
Yea, say so, good security, and four pounds a year for a house, comes Pierce
Pandor, and baudie Bettrice his wife, two that I warrant you were known well
enough what they were, I two that had been as well carted and whipped, and
couerd with dirt over head and ears, and they forsooth will begin the world
anue again, having a fresh wench or two that came but from the carryers that
morning, though she had tapt many a can in long lane at Barthelmew tide.
With this stock of wenches will this Trusty Roger and his Bettrice set up
forsooth with their pamphlet pots, and stewed prunes, nine for a tester, in a
sinful saucer, and they will offer this covetous and wretched landlorde five
pounds by the year, yea six pounds to have his house and his countenance
wythall. But he that will go to the devil for money, will admit them with
favor, and so let them have his house, with promise of any thing whatsoever
in his power, yea, and if occasion serve, will write, and speak, and take
pains and play the suitor, and bear with them in any thing, so there be
any mean to do it, and he to be sure of his rent. God is his judge he
does it for no fleshly respect, but even of a mere worldly motion, to bear
sin out with sin, and lechery with covetousness. Let the Parish
complain, why (says he) what should I do, I have my rent paid me at my
day. I must make money of my land, and so let them do their hearts out,
thinks he, I shall have my rent the readier. This cormorant is he that cares
not how he get it so he have it. This Stymphalist is he that with five or six
Tenements, and the retinue thereunto belonging, infectes the air with stench,
and poisons that parish, yea and twenty parishes off with the contagion of
such carrion as lies there in their bumble baths, and stink at both ends like
filthy green elder pipes. For him and them master, such Landlordes and such
Tenants. Good master wish as I wish.


Banks What Is thy wish Marocco?


Horse. That at the quarter day the parish would of their own devotion to the
common wealth, bestow a banquet upon them of ale and cakes in the cage, and a
hundred or two of good faggots, to consume the bodies and bones of them all and
every mothers child, such Landlords and such Tenants as so much against
conscience, receive and deceive, and day by day, and hour by hour cheat,
coosen, catch, and dcuour in pillage from gentlemen, prentises, and good
fellows, abvno vsque ad mill, even from the outside to the inside, from the
cloak to the shirt, leaving Nicol Neuerthriue never a wench in the chamber or
penie in the purse.


Ban. Marocco, Pray thy wish take effect, I wish for every parish so pestered
with such tenants and tenements, God put into their minds to be but at cost
and charges for the faggots, for ale and cakes I were mearst, if it cost five
marks. But how does this landlord fall into this Praemunire? Why is thy
malice so great against them, when it is the baude and the whore that make all
this stir?


Hor. O master, miserable landlords are cause of all this mischief. It Is he
that because he will have an unreasonable rent, will uphold any villainy in
his tenant: a slave to money, a pandor to the baud, a pillar, nay a pillow and
a bolster to all the roguerie committed in his houses. And yet will this
filthy fellow sit at his door on a sunday in the high street and my mistres
his wife by him, and there forsooth talk so saint-like of the sermon that day,
and what a good piece of work the young man made, and what a goodly gift of
utterance he had, but not the value of a pound of beef will a give him, were
his gift of utterance comparable to S. Augustines, or Chrisostomes eloquence.
Swear a will and forfweare upon the work day, as well as any. And if percase
a sit in place of authority, O how severe will he be in all his proceedings
against a youg or good fellow in any trifling matter. Then a takes upon him
not a little: Sir (says he) what did you in such an house? Wherefore came you
thither? And lay the law and the Prophets too, and so rate a Gentleman well
descended, merely privileged with a furd gown and a nightcap: when in deed
his bringing up has been in beggerie and slavery illiberally, having spent
his time in conference with the water tankard at the Conduit, lying miserably,
and for sparing of wood, loding his gown sleeue with fuel from the
haberdashers, and wearing his hands in a frostie morning by the fugitive
flames of a few wast papers, a natural enemy to all learning and liberality.
O master, such a churl as you and I saw here last day talk with two
soldiers in the yard, and put his hand in his pouch, and gave them nere a
penny.


Ban. Did thou see that Marocco? Well, there be too many such as he, yet
there is a choice number of sober citizens that have golden minds, and golden
purses withal.


Hor: That I know well master, and to them that have such golden minds, I wish
golden mines: master, I protest to you I speak it not to flatter, but in
reproach of those money-mongers, those lease-mongers, those caniballs, that
dishonor the city wherein they dwell, but uprightly I speak it, that you may
not think I rail upon malice against any private man for any private
quarrel: There are many that beautify London for their good parts, who being
ciuily and well brought up, are affable to strangers, charitable to the poor,
liberal to scholars, and such as Citizens should be, dutiful to their
prince, and devout to their city.

But as cockle is ever among corn, and dross among gold, so will those soul
churles cumber the best corners, and march cheek by ioul among the better many,
with as great show of devotion and charity as the best. From such dissembling
holiness, such double wickedness, good Lord deliver us.


Banks. It Is almost supper time Marocco, I hear mine host call, you have done
pretily well for two points, refer the rest till another time.


Horse. As you please master, and let this be our first lecture of the Anatomy
of the world. If the Trance hold me but till the next Term, where now I have
but with a dry foot ouerleapt these matters, I may chance of these and more
leave a deeper print, and having handled a case of commodities, will say
somewhat further of their discommodities and differences, even as the bit of
reason shall lead me. And so I commit you to your supper, and my self to my
litter, for I promise you I am not a little weary with gambolling this after
noone.


Finis.
THE AVTHORS to the Reader.
SO Marocco did lie him down, and Laurence Holden called in his guest unto a
shoulder of mutton of the best in the market, piping hot from the spit. We like
two lazy fellows lay tumbling in the hayloft, and heard this that we have
set down verbatim, as well as we could: and will watch narrowly but we will seize
the rest to our use* gentle Reader, whenever it comes upon them. For by
Maroccos conclusion, this Dialog should seem but an Induction to another
discourse, which how unpleasant so ever it prove, to a great many, we know,
that have been wrong on the withers, and stong with the merchants book, it
will be reasonably friendly and welcome.

Finis
quoth John Dando and Harry Runt.


