THE HISTORY, LIFE, AND MIRACLES, ECSTASIES AND REVELATIONS of the blessed
virgin, sister IOANE, OF THE CROSS, OF THE THIRD ORDER OF OUR HOLY FATHER S.
Francis.

Composed by the Reverend Father, brother ANTHONY OF ACA, Diffinitor of the
Province of the Conception, and Chroinckler of the Order aforsaid. And
translated out of Spanish into English, by a Father of the same Order.

AT S. OMERS, For John Heigham, with Approbation. Anno 1625.

THE EPISTLE DEDICATORIE.
TO THE RIGHT VIRTVOVS and venerable Sisters, both in Blood and Religion,
Sister Margaret, and Sister Elizabeth Radcliffe, professed of the second order
of S. Francis, called the poor Dames of S. Clare; the peace of our Lord Jesus
Christ etc.
RIght virtuous and venerable Sisters; Sisters, I say, first in our Lord and
Savior Christ, because both beleeuinge and embracinge, one and the same most
ancient, holy and Christian faith. Sisters in Blood, because both descended of
one and the same Father and Mother. Sisters also in Religion, because both
professinge under one and the same Father S. Francis, and Mother S. Clare (full
fifteen years) the second Rule or Order of that Seraphicall Saint.

For as much as in virtu of the Obedience given me my by Superiors, your
selves, with all that are under you, are committed to my charge, I find my
self bound to promote you in the way of Piety, all that possibly lies in my
power. Wherein, the better to discharge my duty, I have thought good to
present you with the life of a Saint of our own Order, who lived and dyed in
the profession of the third Rule of holy S* Francis. For this Seraphicall
Father, as all do know, instituted his Order so, as he might draw all people
to God, by three Rules. The first whereof is, the Apostolical Rule of the Friar
Minors, which I (although far unworthy) do profess. The second, the Rule of
S. Clare, which with great perfection your selves do practice. The third, the
Rule of Penance, in which this blessed Saint lived and dyed. The first, for
Religious men. The second, for Religious virgins. The third, for all virtuous
people of either sex: in which this holy Virgin profited so well, that
although she were of the lowest rank for the number of Rules, yet was she
not the lowest in holy observance, but singular for sanctity here in earth,
as she is now for glory above in heaven.

This premised, the Dedication of this book seems in particular to be due to
you, by reason of a certain Simpathie betwixt you and this B* Saint. Who as
she was extraordinarily obtained of God, by the intercession of his B. Mother,
for the reparation of a Religious house of the third order, which thorough the
indeuotion, of the Religious, was quite fallen to decay: so are you the very
first, who are elected for Superiors of an English Monastery of the third
order, newly errected in a foreign contrie, with hope hereafter to
transplant the same in to your own, where Religious discipline is so decayed.

For this effect, you (Renowned Sisters) being by Obedience, first called from
your former Celles of quiet repose, and severed by the holy Ghost unto the
work whereto he had chosen you, were next by lot and common suffrage of your
whole community, elected to undergo so great labors, as must needs be
granted to be in so great an enterprise. For those whom you were to govern,
not being in all particulars of your own observance, nor of so strait and
strict a Rule, hence it follows, that clothing others with linen, your
selves go vvollevvard: lodging others on beds of vvolle, your selves do lie
upon the straw: providing others hose and shoes, your selves go barefoote:
finally, sitting at the self same Table, and feeding all your Religious with
flesh, your daintiest dishe is but only fish* What Monk or Heremit, was ever
yet (by his profession of fasting) obliged to the like Auste^itie?

To conclude therefore (Right venerable Sisters) besides the particular
obligation, love, and zeal which I bear to your souls, your rare virtu,
worthily draws this little book to your defense. Wherein if this my Epistle
Dedicatorie, may seem to affect too much plainness, I freely confess, to
affect plain dealing, open sincerity and simplicity. If any shall censure
the Translation, as sauouring of too rude a language, in this I humbly pray
you, both to pardon me your selves, and to excuse me also unto others, who so
well know me to be so far alienated from all sort of affectation, and from
seeking to please the itching vain of any, with vvorldly eloquence, which I
willingly profess to want; my principal care having been employed,
faithfully to translate the book in a plain and homely language, the talent
which (most aggreeable to my nature) God has given me. Far ye well, my very
dear and beloved Sisters, and forget not him in your holy prayers, who ever
remains your faithful servant and poor brother,

Brother Francis Bell.

THE PROLOGVE,
An^ aduertisements to the Reader, wherein is declared what is Vision, Ecstasies,
Raptes and other things most important for the understanding of this history.
WIth tongues of Seraphins and spirit from heaven I would manifest to the world
the things so sovereign, which for his honor and glory God wrought in his
faithful and loving espouse sister Ioane of the cross, with who^ he so
enlarged the hand of his mercy, as being so singular as they are, they require
singular attention to read them, and particular devotion to write them. And
that I might obtain the same, and the end of my desire, having visited her
holy body, and the places where she was borne, lived, and dyed, and seeking
with particular care the truest papers that could be had, for to write her
life, I follow fourteen authenticke informations, and a very ancient
manuscript (which she her self dictating, by commandment of her Angel
keeper) sister Marie Evangelist a disciple of hers did write, to whom
miraculously to this effect, and to write, the book of sermons which the
servant of God preached, our Lord gave the grace to read and write, for before
she did not know it, according as by many witnesses has been proved: and that
after the death of this blessed woman, she appeared to another religious in the
quire vested with splendour, with a book of gold open in her hands,
representinge that which she had written of the things of the glorious Ioane.
And to all this authority, as great as it is, another is added no less, which
is, the miracle of the incorruptibilitie of her body, seen with my eyes, and
handled with my hands, when I wrote this, she being incorrupte, entire, and of
excellent savor, according as to the honor and glory of God we will speak
hereafter more at large.

So admirable are the things of this servant of God, as they oblige me, that
they may better be understood, to do not only the office of an historian, but
also of a paraphraste, with particular annotations and scholia in the margent,
wherewith are explained many difficulties: in such sort as whosom-euer may read
them, and draw most sauorie fruit out of them. And because to some it seemed
not convenient that they should go in a vulgar tongue, they have been
reformed in this last impression: and let this be the first advertisement of
this Prologue.

The second, that writing the life of a servant of God, so full of visions,
revelations, ecstasies, and apparitions of Angels, and devils, I am bound to
give some notice of these things, at least as much as a brief Prologue
permits. For the which it shall be of much importance, somewhat to
understand by root the force and propriety of the word vision, with which
generally are comprehended and declared all these things; as with particular
energie the holy tongue declares deriuing it from the verba Raa, which
signifies to see with the eyes of the body the things which God reuealeth,
and to understand them with the spiritual eyes of the soul. And hence it is,
that to the Prophets to whom God showed so many visions and merueils, the
sacred scripture calls them videntes with the participle of the same verb
Haroe; and vision, the revelation communicated to them, which is a kind of
supernatural knowledge. And because in man there are three principles of
knowledge, the exterior sense, the imagination, and the understanding: so also
the Doctors and Saints do reduce to three kinds of visions, all kind of
revelations which God makes to his servants: conform to one of these
principles with which a man knows them. S. Banauentur. de profectu
religiosor. lib. 2. cap. 75. S. Tho. 2. 2. q. 174. a. 1. ad. 3.

The first of these visio^s, which is called, se^sitiue is when with the eyes
of the body are seen some things by mean of sensitive or corporal figures,
representing to the exterior senses, which are as it were signs or likenesses
of that which God signifies by them, the which can not be seen without
supernatural light, as when God showed to Abraham the mystery of the passion
of his only begotten son, in the lamb entangled in the thorns. ( Glossa
ordinaria in the Prothe. Apocal. ad princip. and upon the 2. epist. ad Cor.
cap. 12. Gilbert. Pictaue en Glossa ord. in the preface upon the Apoc. Nicolas
de Lyra as upon the Prologue of Gilbert. and cap. 1. Apoc.) The second is
called, Imaginary, when the soul without help of the corporal eyes, sees
the things which God reuealeth her, by mean of some imaginary figure. Of this
kind of visions were those which S. John saw in his Apocalipse, being in that
unjust banishment in the i will of Patmos. The third and last of these visions,
is, when the soul sees and knows cleerlie that which God reuealeth to her.
And it is called Intellectual, because the understanding, without having for
mean any figure of sensible things, or imaginary, does know all that which
God reuealeth to her. And this last is held for the highest and most principal
of all, because it is most like to the vision which the blessed enjoy in glory.

The raptes which the Hebrews call Tardemach, which is to say, a profound
sleep, and the Greeks Ecstasy, which signifies a going out or flight of the
soul (not because the soul goes out of the body, and returns to it, which
would be to grant a great error, and every foot death and resurrection of the
bodies) but because in raptes he which suffers them, is as if he were dead,
or a sleep, an effect proper to love, which according to S. Denis is that
which causes ecstasies in the soul, and draws a man out of himself,
transforming him into that he loves. ( S. Dionis. de diuinis nominibus cap.
4.) And this elevation the divines call ecstasies. ( S. Thomas 2. 2. q. 28.
articulo. 3.) Unto the which rapte adds, a certain kind of violence on the
part of the object, which moves the power of the soul which rauisheth it and
strongly draws it to it self (although with mighty sweetness) drawing her
from her senses; the which when she is rapte in God with the force of love, in
such sort transformeth herself into him, that suspe^ding her powers, she
repaireth for aid to the superior portion of the soul: and not having forces
to resist the supernatural violence, nor able withal to repair to the
corporal senses, she is wanting to them and does not give them strength, nor
sends the animal faculty to the parts of the body; without the which,
neither the ears can hear, nor the eyes see, nor the nose smell, nor the
taste, nor the feeling touch. ( Medina. 1. 2. q. 8. a. 3. S. Thomas 2. 2. 175.
artic. 1.) for the which those which are rapte, neither ^eele cold, nor heat,
hunger, thirste, nor weariness.

And therefore some think, that when the soul enjoys these ecstasies and
raptes she does not merit in the same, nor demerite, thinking that her
liberty remains not entire, freely to use reason, as a body that were a
sleep. But the same judgment is not to be made of them as is of ordinary and
common sleeps: for if in these the use of reason be hindered and the
understanding, in raptes it is not so, but more free and disburdened to
understand and contemplate the things which God communicates in them to the
soul, as is easily understood in looking to the end which God has in these
ecstasies and raptes, which he gives not to the end his friends lose time in
them and remain for that space without judgment, but that the soul gathered
together, disburdened and free of the disquiet of the senses, more feruorously
and freely may work. And so the works which they do in the ecstasies and
raptes, are of virtue, and done with more light and claritie then those which
are done out of it, according as is gathered out of the doctrine of the Saints,
and we are taught by persons, to whom God has done so singular favors. ( S.
Thom. 1. 2. q. 113. a. 3. ad 2. solutio 2. And thus we might ^ay that Ecstasy,
is a profound sleep of the soul, in which the vnderstandi^g and will are
watching, and occupying themselves in a work so high, the corporal senses do
fail, and remain as it were asleep to exterior things.

To conclude with this matter, because I would neither enlarge my self in it,
nor leave it fasting of so sauorie bittes, let it be considered, that when God
speaks to men, most commonly it is wont to be by ministry of the Angels,
representing the divine person, and in his name they receive messages, and
dispatch them, speaking not in a third person as messingers do, who in another
name give their errand, and carry back the answer; but as legates, and
viceroyes, who hold the turn and place of himself that sends them. This was
more used in the old law, then in the law of grace; in which, for the dignity
of it, and for the love which Christ bears to souls, sometimes himself
appears to them, visits them and comfort them, as is manifest by
express places of the new testament, and the Saints do relate in many
histories. ( S. Thomas 3. p. q. 57. a. 6. ad 3. and Caiet. Suarez. 3 p. Tom.
2.) The history of the wounds of our holy Fa. S. Francis is well known,
whom our Lord Jesus Christ visited, not by ministry of Angels, but in his
proper person when he imprinted his most sacred wounds in his feet, hands,
and side, as speak the Popes of glorious memory, Gregory the 9. Alexander
the 4. Nicolas the 3. and Sixtus the 4. in diverse Bulls: and is the doctrine
of many Saints, and authors. ( Disp. 15. sect. 4. Belarm. de Sacrament.
Euchar. lib. 3. cap. 3. Actor. cap. 9. 22. and 26. ad Corinth. cap. 9. and 19.
Dionis. epist. 8. ad Demophil. 8. Antonin. in vita S. Antonij. S. Gregor. lib.
4. Dialog. 16.) And the seraphicall Father himself, after his death appearinge
to a holy religious, told it him, in these words: Ille qui mihi apparuit, non
fuit Angelus, sed fuit Dominus meus Jesus Christus, in specie seraph. qui sicut
vulnera ipsa sacra in cruce suscepit, ita manibus suis benedictis in corpore
meo impressit: primo manibus, deinde pedibus, postea lateri. Monumenta ordinis
tract. 1. and 2. S. Bonauent. in Apologia pauperum Tom. 7. p. 4. and de sex
alijs Seraphim. Tom. 7. p. 3* S. Anto. 3. p. hist. tit. 24. c. 1.. 8. S.
Bernardin. de Sena. de euangel. aetern. sermon. 60. a. 1. cap. 1. and sermon. de
stigmatib. S. Francis. a 1. cap. 1. Tom. 2. Angel del Pus in expositione
symboli Apostolor. lib. 8. cap. 19. Chroni. antiq. 1. p. lib. 2. cap. 55.
Rodulph. historia seraphica lib. 1. cap. 12. and lib. 2. fol. 264. Bartholome.
de Pisa. in conform. lib. 2. and 3. Boragines sermon. 1. de stigmatibus S.
Francisci. Robertus de Licio Bishop of Aquitania sermon. de S. Catharina de Sena.
cap. 3. and sermon. S. Francisci Gonzaga Bishop of Mantua. 2. p. fol. 327. and
241. speculum B. Francisci. fol. 98. Gerardus Odon. in offici^ stigmatum B.
Francisci. Leonardus de Vtino. sermon. de B. Francis. Biga salutis. sermon. de
sacris stigmatibus. S. Franc. Bernardinus de Bustis in rosario sermon. 72. Matthew
Palmerius in additionibus ad Chronicon Eusebij. Mairones sermon. de S. Francis.
Truxille in thesau. sermon. de S. Francisco. Bartholo. de Pisa. confort. 31. lib.
3.

And our Lord is wont to make these apparitions descending to the earth, and
together remaining in heaven; which although to our appearance difficult, is not
to God impossible, yea rather among learned men, it is an opinion very
probable and secure, as also it is in good physic, and theology, which
Scotus teaches with many others which follow him, that one and the same
body, by the power divine, may be at once quantitatiuely in two places
distinct and different. The Angels when they appear and speak to the Saints,
and the devils when they torment and scourge, take (for to exercise these
actions) bodies apparent and phantastike of air imperfectly mixte, applying
active things to passive, as teaceth the subtilitie of Scotus, and the glorious
Father. S. Augustine. And although it be true, that these bodies in which they
show themselves and appear, are not true bodies of flesh and blood as ours
are, (for according to S. Thomas, to work properly these things, which are
vital actions, they ought to be the soul of the same body in which they
appear, and as the form thereof to animate it:) yet for all this, so great is
the force which the spirits have above all things corporal and visible, as
they do with them what they will, moving the tongue of the body feinedly, to
speak, the feet to go, the eyes to see, and with the same facility, that the
soul does serve her self of her members, the spirit serves it self of
these which it makes. For to as much as this comes the power of the Angel
good or evil. And let this serve the curious reader, for the understanding of
many things which shall occur unto him in the discourse of the life of this
servant of God. Ioannes May. 4. sent. d. 10. q. 4. Suar. 3. p. Tom. 2. q. 58.
disp. 51. sect. 4. Scotus lib. 4. did. 10. per multas qq. and in 2. Alex. de
Hales, 4. p. q. 11. a. l.. vlt. Gab. lib. 4. q. 1. a. 1. and lect. 46. in
Canon. Belar. lib. 3. de Euchar. cap. 3. and 4. and tract. 4. physicor. q. ^.
Scot. 2. senten. did. 18. q. 1. S. August. lib. de Genesis ad literam cap. 10. S.
Tho. 1. p. q. 51. a. 3.

THE HISTORY, LIFE, AND MIRACLES, ECSTASIES, AND REVELATIONS, OF THE blessed
virgin, sister IOANE, of the third order of our holy Father S. Francis.
THE FIRST CHAPTER.
Of the foundation of the Monastery of saint Marie of the Cross, and of nine
times which our B. Lady appeared to a little keeper of swine, native of Cubas.
Five leagues from Madrid (the famous court of the Catholic Kings of Spain)
stands the town of Cubas; although little and poor, yet most happi^ and
fortunate, for that near unto it, the virgin our B. Lady, had chosen her
habitation and dwelling place, and so near, unto it, that only fifty paces
from it, she would have her house, as Lady and neighbor of the people, in
whose jurisdiction and bounds, the sovereign virgin appeared nine times, on
the first nine days of March, in the year one th^wsand fouer hundred forty
and nine, to a little gy^le which kept swine, of thirteen years, called Agnes,
keeping a littleheard of h^gges: so de^ote to our B. Lady, that every day she
reci^ed her Rosarie, fasted her feasts, and the hal^e of the lent, from seven
yeare^ of her age: and when she came to more years, she comm^n ca^ed often,
and frequented much the Church. And although upon the informations which were
taken upon this occasion, we have no assurance but only of five or six
apparitions of the B. virgin, yet it is certain that they were nine in number,
as God revealed to the blessed saint Ioanne, by her good Angel, and is holden
for a common tradition in that country, and in the convent, where are
celebrated every year since that time, the feast of those nine apparitions,
with great solemnity and concourse of people.

2. The truth of this history of the apparitions of the B. virgin, has been
gathered from an information made by the commandment of the most excellent Lord
Alfonsus Carillo Archbishopp of Toledo, committed to John Nunes archpriest of
the town of Madrid, and to John Gonzales Morejon, archpriest of the town of
Illesias, by particular order of the said Archbishopp, dated in the town of
Benauente, the seventh of April in the year 1449. signed by Gomez of Cordoua
his secretary, and authorized by Ruy Dias of Madrid, scriuener of the chamber
of ou^ Lo^d the King, and public no^a^ie in his court, and in all his
kingdom. And to write so grave a h^storie as this of the apparitions of our
Lady, I do not find any words more to the purpose, not more grave, or true,
then the self same words where with the said Agnes recounted them, being
examined upon this article; which because they are hers, and for the
plainness, and the antiquity of the language, will the rather give
co^tenteme^t to whosoever shall read the^: which are these following.

3. Agnes affi^me^h, that this monday now past, which was the th^^d day of the
month of March she being a broad, keeping hogs, in the field which is called
Fount Cecilie, at the hour of midd day, little more, or less, there came to
her a woman, very fair, vested in cloth of gold, and said to her: What do
thou here little Chi^k? and that she answered her: I keep these hoggs: Then
the Lady said unto her: Why do thou fast the days of saint Marie on
fridayes? who answered: that her parents commanded so so to do. And by and by
the Lady said: that ^hee did well, and that few fridayes remained her to
fast this year: but that from thence forward, she should fast the feasts of
the Lady saint Marie, on the same days which they should fall: for why, those
that fasted so, did gain eighti^ thousand years of pardon. And that also she
commanded her to will all the people, that they should confess themselves, and
put their souls in good estate, for that there would fall upon them a great
pestilence, and pain of the side, and many red stones embrued in blood, of
the which many people should die: which having said, forth with she
disappeared. And the said Agnes said, that these things she durst not spe^ke
of to her Father, nor to her mother, nor to any person. And that by and by the
Tuesday following, going with the said hoggs by the side of the river Torrejon,
about the hour of midday, the forsaid Lady appeared to her as before saying.

4. Daughter tell me wherefore did thou not relate that which I comanded
thee yesterday? And that she answered: that she durst not tell it, it seeming
to her that she should not be believed: and that then the Lady said to her:
Take heed that what I command thee thou tell it, and if they shall not believe
thee, I will give thee a sign whereby they shall believe thee. And then the
said Agnes asked her who she was, and she answered her: that she would not tell
her now, and with this disappeared. Upon the friday, the seventh day of the
same month, the said Agnes said, that going to keep the hoggs in the new
pasture near the said town of Cubas, the said Lady came to her the third
time, at the foresaid hour, clothed as she had already related, and spoke to
her: asking if she had told that which she had commanded her: and she
answered: that she had told it to her Father, and to her mother, and to other
persons of the town. And then the Lady said: that she should publish it, and
should tell it to the priest, and to the people without any fear or trembling.

5. And after this the said Agnes said, that the sunday now passed, which was
the ninth day of the said month, keeping the said hoggs in the pasture which
they call of the Cirolera, kneeling upon her knees and kissing the earth,
offering up her prayers, and craving that the said Lady might appear unto
her, that she came unto her in the form that other times she had appeared,
and said to her: Rise up daughter. And that then she was afraid, and raised
her self up. And that the said Lady said to her: Be not afraid: And asking her
who she was, she answered: I am the virgin saint Marie, and she came to the
said Agnes, and took her by the right hand, and griped it with her thumb, and
left her the fingers of it joined and sticking toge her, and made in manner of
a cross according as she showed it, and we all saw^ it who stood there
present: And that when she joined her aforsaid fingers, the said Agnes
complained, and the said Lady said to her: w^^h this sign which I give thee
they shall believe thee, and this thou shall suffer for their sakes* go thy
way to the Church, and thou sh^l^ come when they go out from mass, and show
it to all the people, that they may believe that which th^w shall say. And so
she went by and by to the Church, and came at the time which the ^aide Lady
had told, and entering into the Church, she bowed her knees before the altar of
the B. virgin Marie, and told publicly to the priest, and to all the people,
all what has been above said. And by and by the Priest, the Church wardens,
the cunstables, and all the chiefest men of the town, bearing much devotion to
our B. blessed Lady the virgin saint Marie, who had showed such a miracle on
the said Agnes, began with great devotion, with Crosses, candles, and torches
lighted in their hands, and all barefooted, to go in procession with all the
children which they could find in the said place, and (with the said Agnes)
carried a Cross of wood, for to place it where our B. Lady had taken her by
the hand, and made upon her the said sign.

6. Going beyond the place where they dress their corn, thinking to enter
into the vineyards, the said Agnes who went before the children, turned her
head, and said to Lopes of Lorbes, and Andrew Ferrandes the cunstable, who went
ordering the procession of the said children, that they should stand still,
that she had heard a voice, that the said Lady saint Marie the virgin, called
her, that she had twice said: Come hither, and that therefore she would go to
see that which the said Lady commanded her. And that by and by the said Andrew
Ferrandes, who carried the Cross of wood, gave it to the said Agnes: who went
with the Cross and said: that as soon as she severed herself from the
procession, the virgin our B. Lady came, and they went together, at the right
side of the said Agnes, and that she never spoke a word unto her, until they
came to the place where she had given her the said sign, and that then the
virgin S. Marie took the Cross in her hands, and bowing her Body, pitched it
fast in the ground, and commanded her to kneel on her knees, with her face
toward the procession, and that she should wish the people, there to errect a
Church unto her, which they should call S. Mary's: and commanded her that she
should return with the processio^ to the Church of the town, and that she
should stand in the same before the altar of S. Marie with some pure and
innocent people, all that day, and that night until the next day: that they
should say two masses of S. Marie on her altar, and that at the end of each
mass, they should say the gospel upon the head of the said Agnes, and they
should carry her to saint Mary's of Guadalupe, where she should be two days,
and that they should carry with her four pounds of wax, and by and by she
should be sound, and her hand should be dissolved, and the marck be taken from
her. This is that which Agnes affirmed under oath.

7. And the people seeing these maruaills, adored the place, where the virgin
set her most blessed feet, and with the grains of the sand, in which remained
the signs of her plants, they healed many sick. They adored also the holy
Cross, and setting men to keept it, the procession returned to Cubas with the
child: and all being done with her which the B. virgin commanded, her parents
brought her to Guadalupe: in the way she did some miracles in the cure of the
sick, and at her return she healed of the pain of the side, one of the men
which came with her: she was in Guadalupe three days, and the second day her
hand was unloosed, and she remained perfectly whole: the miracle being public
and evident, being seen by the Prior and Monckes of that house, with many
other people, who took it for a testimony of the truth of the fact. When
Agnes returned from Guadalupe, before she went home, she went to the place,
where our B. Lady had placed the Cross, and as she stood adoring it, the most
holy virgin appeared unto her the second time, and spoke unto her, and from
thence she returned with her parents home. Those of Cubas found themselves so
favored, for that the mother of God had visited them nine times, that within
one year they builded her a Church, bearing the title of S. Mary's of the
Cross, wherein the most holy virgin wrought above the number of three score
and six miracles, all which by scriueners and public nota^ies have been found
forth and approved. Amongst others twelve criples were healed, eight freed from
manifest peril of death, and eleven dead raised to life. At the fame of these
meruaills and apparitions of our B. Lady, some deuote women (which dwelt in
the neighboring places of Cubas) came unto them, and of their poverty,
builded a house joined to the Church, the which after was given them, with the
Cross which our B. Lady had taken in her hands, who yielded their obedience to
the order of our holy Father S. Francis, and taking his habitt, professed the
third rule: the little hogardesse Agnes also, took the same habit, and after
some years, the other religious chose her for their head and superior for the
holiness and virtues which shined in her. But as the Devil where he finds
most perfection, procures the greatest fall, so he solicited the perfection
of these poor women, giving them occasions of treaty and frendshipp with
seculars, which in short time forsook that good odor of sanctity and virtue,
in which they had been brought up, in so much that some of them went out of
the monastery. And the sorrowful Agnes, which in foremer time was the first in
virtue, overcome by the devil, went apostata out of the convent. But favored
by the Queen of Angels, did penance for her sin, and lead so good a life,
as it is holden by tradition, that at the hour of her death, the belles rang
miraculously.

THE SECOND CHAPTER.
How to restore the monastery, God sent unto the world, the glorious sister
Ioane of the Cross, at the intercession of his most holy Mother.
1 THe sovereign Queen of heaven, seeing the fall of her house, where, with
so many miracles she had appeared, besought her most blessed son, that he
would send such a person as was meet to restore such a breach; and our Savior
granted her petition, promising he would send a person of singular perfection;
For accomplishme^t whereof, in the year 1481. was borne this servant of our
Lord, on the day of the holy Cross in May, in the holy ground of Toledo, in
Hazanna, a town of the same archbishopricke, and of the holy Church of
Toledo, called S. Mary's: because she that was to live and die in the house of
the most holy virgin, should be borne in a town of her jurisdiction and
lordshipp, and that the same should be called Hazanna, being God was to worck in
her, by the intercession of his most holy mother, so admirable a fact, and so
worthy an exploit in matter of sanctity and virtue. Her parents, being of the
same nation, were called John Vasquez, and Catharine Gutierzes, both of them
Catholics, and very virtuous, and honorably endued with the goods of
fortune, God gave them this daughter, and in baptism they called her Ioane:
she was scarcely borne (as they say) when the greatness of the merueils of
God, began to be declared in her, which in her so tender age he began to
manifest by her with notable admiration of the people: for being but newly
borne, she fasted the fridayes, sucking only once in the day, for so soon
would our Lord manifest in his servant, the great abstinences, and fastes, in
which for the time to come he was to make her so notable and famous. And
although of S. Nicolas and other saints, the like maruaills be read, it does
not therefore follow, that they had use of reason, but that God wrought them in
sign of other greater which by them he would work when they should attain to
the use of reason, and in sign of their future holiness and excellency.

2. The holiness of this happy child was such, as from so tender age, not only
she fasted the fridayes (as has been said) but also one time she was 3.
days without sucking, or returning to herself: wherefore, the afflicted mother
believing that her daughter was dead, besought our Lord he would raise her to
life, promising to carry her with her weight of wax, to the convent of S.
Marie of the Cross, and to watch with her there, a whole night. The child
returned to her senses, wherewith her mother was much conforted, confesing she
had recovered the health and life which she desired. These and many other
tokens she gave in her childhood, and increased every day in spiritual
graces and gifts of God, although at that time they were not known of her
parents. The child being two years old, grew so pale and sick, that she
could not make her take the breaste, nor swallow down any other thing; for the
which they carried her to a very denote pilgrimage of S. Bartholomew, in the
town^ of Annouer: and being in the Church, looking upon the image of the
glorious Apostle, which stood on the altar, the child laughed, and by and by
demanded to eat. From that instant she was well, and related afterward, when
she could speak, that she had seen the Apostle S. Bartholomew, who touching
her with his hand, healed her and took away the ill color of her face, which
before she had. They never saw her play with children of her age, for although
she was a child, yet she did not seem so, but only in years.

3. When she was four years old, it happened, that her mother sending her to
the yard where the corn was dressed, to play, because it was summer time, as
she passed by a street, she remembered, how a little before they had carried
that way the most holy Sacrament to a sick person, and in such manner was she
rapt with this consideration, that she fell from the ass on which she sat.
The Curate of the town saw her, and taking her up from the ground, found her
without any kind of sense, and carried her in his arms to her fathers house,
where she was a great while without coming to her self; and as she recounted,
when after she came to her senses, she was carried in spirit to a most fair
place, where she saw many Ladies maruailously composed, and among them one,
who to her seeming, was the Queen of them all, according to her beauty and
splendour: she saw also many children of great beauty, which said to her: what
do thou here? come with us and adore that Lady, which is the mother of
almighty God: the blessed child answered, I do not know what I must do, but I
will say the Aue Maria, and kneeling on her knees, she presently rehearced it.
Having saluted the Queen of heaven with that Angelical Salutation, she saw
at her side, her good angel which taught her many things, and at the end of a
large conference which she had with him, she prayed him that he would carry
her to her fathers house; and when she returned from that rapt, she recounted
in order all the things which she had seen, until her Father bad her hold her
peace, and so she did.

4. This same year the blessed child standing at the door of her fathers
house, the most holy Sacrament passing that way, which was carried to a sick
body, she adored it, and saw over the chalice, our Savior Jesus Christ in
form of a child, very fair and bright. Another time upon the day of the
purification of our B. Lady, hearing mass, at the time that the priest made
an end of consecrating the host, she saw it most clear and bright, and within
it our Lord Jesus Christ, and round above him many Angels: of the which the
innocent creature made no great account at that time, thincking that all had
seen those sovereign meruails, and that they were common to all as well as to
her: for being her self so humble, so innocent, and sincere, she never thought,
that such things were wrought in favor of her, until our Lord declared it to
her in manner following.

THE III. CHAPTER.
Of the penances which the servant of God did being a child, and of the fervent
desires thee had to be religious.
1 AT this time, the blessed child being but seven years old, it fell out
that her mother died, who seeing the end of her days to approach, and not having
accomplished the promise she had made, to bring her daughter with her weight in
wax to the convent of S. Mary's of the Cross, besought her husband that he
would accomplish it for her, and bidding her daughter farewell, giving her her
benediction, she yielded up her soul to her Creator, in the year of ou^ Lord
1488. But the blessed child considering these things, said with in herself: It
shall be better that I go my self (to fulfill the promise of my mother) to the
house of our B. Lady S. Marie of the Cross, and that I remain religious
there. She communicated her desires with an aunt she had, which at the same
time took the habit of S. Dominicke in the co^uent of Toledo, and would have
been a nun with her, and asked it of her Father, and kinsfolk, who hindered
her, putting her in mind of her tender years and the austeritie of religion.
Her aunt was professed, and increased so much in sanctity and virtue, that she
had many revelations from almighty God.

2. Being one time in prayer, it was revealed unto her, that her niece was to
be a great saint, and that she was endued with great graces of God. For the
which her aunt desiring to have her a nun in that house, treated thereof with
the prioresse, and the nuns of the co^uent, who desired it so earnestly, that
they offered to receive her without dowry: but the Father and kindred of the
child, yealded not then unto it, because they loved her very much. And being
this took no effect, nor other diligences, which on the behalf of the convent
were made, the aunt took^ order with her own mother (which was the grandmother
of the child) in whose house she was brought up, to steal her away, and to
bring her to that monastery. But God having designed her for that of S. Marie
of the Cross, altered all those purposes in his servant, which she had before
to be religious with her aunt. It seeming to her that to be with her, were a
point of little perfection, and carried with it something of flesh and blood,
purposed firmly not to take the habitt in that monastery, but in an other,
without respect of parents, kindred, or any other thing of the world: so much
enamored was her soul of God, and so desirous to serve him and to please him.

3. In the same town of Hazanna, the blessed child had some principal uncles,
and very rich, who desired to have her in their house, it seeming to them that
she would be better kept and more secure then in the house of her grandmother:
with much entreatie, they obtained it of her Father, and most contented with
the jewel, they carried her to their house, and committed to her the
government of all the family, for although she were young, yet was she most
prudent, and obedient to all. Here began our Lord to bring to light her
virtues, and wonderful penances, to be admired in men of great strength, how
much more in so dedicate a child as she was. All the days of obligation, she
fasted in bread and water, and sometimes she was two or three days without
eating, and like another Cecilie, she ware a hair cloth next unto her flesh:
she whipped herself with chains of iron, until she drew blood, and there was
never heard from her a vain or idle word. When she went about the house or did
any labor, she pinched her arms: and if she were at the oven, or in other
place where she was not seen, she vnstripped them, and undressed her head,
to scorche herself with the flames of the oven, and to suffer pain for the
love of God, and with this she was so humble, that she held her self for
unworthy of the bread that she eat, and of the earth she troad upon.

4. Besides the hairie and pricking shirt that wounded her body in a thousand
places, she ware chains next unto her flesh, and although it were in winter
time when the nights are cold and long, yet after the servants were gone to
bed, she rose up, and all naked, she remained only with the at shirt of hair
upon her, and in this manner passed all the night in prayer, until about the
break of day, when with much silence and quiet she returned to her bed,
without any one perceiving of it. But one time, the servants seeing that she
was missing out of her bed, and that she returned late unto it, they told it
to her aunt: who being vexed about it, commanded a servant that she should
follow her in secret, and epsy whether she went at such hours. And so the
night following* the maid seeing that she was not in her bed, waited for her
at the chamber door, thinking that she was gone out: but within a little
while she heard her weep before a certain image: and coming to her, she
perceived her to be covered as she thought, with hair or hard mattes, and upon
her knees; for being by night, she could not see her perfectly. The maid
dissembled the matter for that time, and the next morning she told her
mistress of the sanctity of her niece, and of the steps of virtu wherein she
walked: for which the servant of God was full of great grief; and began with
new care, to seek another place where with more quiet and peace (without
being seen or perceived of the people) she might alone enjoy God.

5. The virgin being new come to this house of her uncles, entering into a
chamber, she saw by an image of our B. Lady, a most fair fountain, and two
Seraphines with diverse pots in their hands, which did nothing else but take
water out of the fountain, and often to fill and ouerturne the pots, who as
often as she entered into that chamber (the which she did oftentimes) looked
upon her, laughed and made very merry with her: and she said she received so
much comfort always when she saw them, that she would not willingly go out
of that chamber: and although the comfort which the peaceable sight of the
Seraphines caused her were great, the admiration was no less which she had,
in not knowing what was done with so much water as was drawn out of that
fountain, for she never saw where they put it, nor did she know, until
some years afterward her good Angel told her, that, that fountain was
miraculous, and the water which the Seraphines powered out, to represent the
grace of the holy Ghost, which copiously and abundantly they powered forth into
her soul.

6. On good friday in the morning, having spent a good part thereof and of the
night, like another Magdalen, in tears and tender feelings, cast at the feet
of Christ contemplanting that which his majesty had suffered that day, he
appeared unto her crucified, with all the ensigns of his holy Passion, and the
three Mary's much grieved and sadd: The holy Damsel was so sadd with the
feeling and grief which this sovereign vision caused her (the which she
enjoyed not being rapt, but in her proper senses) that of the great feeling
she had, and the much that she wept, she left the place where she was all
watered, and her face remained so pale and disfigured, that when her uncles
came from Church, amazed at the soddaine change which they saw in their niece,
they procured that she should eat something. But the disease of the blessed
Damsel not being that which her uncles thought, she herself comforted them,
willing them not to take care, nor to oblige her to break the fast of good
friday, for she should be very soon well.

7. Another night, there arriving certain gentlemen at her uncles house, after
she had given them their supper and conuersed with them, and with all those of
the house, she went out into the court alone, seeking some solitude for her
exercices. Then set on her knees, and being in very profound prayer, she saw
heaven open it self, and from thence descended the Queen of Angels, with her
most sacred Son in her arms, who coming near unto her, looked upon her
with eyes very amorous and mild: and considering how near her she had God,
and his most holy Mother, with most deuote words she besought her, that she
would favor her, and help her with her most Noble Son, in that which she so
much desired, which was, to be religious: and this she uttered with such feruor
of spirit, that at the cries she gave, they went out into the court to see
what it was, and they found her set with her hands and knees, upon the ground,
speaking to our B. Lady. And after being well certified thereof, and the
vision ended, they came all unto her and spoke to her dissemblingly, of which
the virgin received great trouble, fearing least hence that should be
discovered, which she so much sought to cover.

8. Being thus busied in the exercises aforsaid, and daily increasing in
virtue, as well as in years, she came to be 14. years old, at which time her
father and kinsfolks began to treat of her remedy (for that name the world
gives to the marriages of women, as if there were no other remedy left by God
for them.) And at the fame of her great retiredness, honesty and beauty
(which in that age so greatly pleases) she was sought of many in marriage:
among which he that was most of note, was a noble young man, borne in Illescas;
but whereas the intents of the blessed Damsel were to have for espouse Jesus
Christ our Lord, and to consecrate to him her virginity perpetually, of this
only she treated, and with such tears demanded it, as she deserved to be
heard of God, and her petition also dispatched, as we shall see in the ensuing
chapter.

THE IV. CHAPTER.
How the servant of God went out of her hows^ in man's apparel, to be
religious; and of the great favors which our Lady did her in the way.
1 Whereas the solicitous virgin sought always to please and truly to serve
that Lord, who from her mothers womb chose her for himself, and separated her
from the number of the children of perdition, she ceased not even from her
tender years, to beseech him that he would grant her to be religious, to the
end she might yet more truly serve him: and being that at home they watched
her, and went ever espying after her, that it might not be discovered what she
desired to keep so close, she retired her self into an old and for-lorne
Pigeon house, which stood a good way of from the noize of the house (although
within the enclosure thereof) and making of it her oratorie, she there spent
long time with God in prayer. And one day of the holy week, after she had
whipped her self with chains of iron, as her custom was, lying prostrate on
the earth before a picture of S. Veronica, she said: O my sweet Jesus Christ,
I beseech thee Lord, for the merits of thy sacred passion, that I may deserve
to be thy espouse, and to enter into religion, that freed from the affairs of
the world, I may the better resign my self up to thee, the sweet rede^mer of
my soul. And saying this, the picture was changed, and transformed, into the
most fair countenance of our Lord Jesus Christ, so lively, as it ^eemed to
her, as if he had be in very mortal and passible flesh, and then spoke she
those words unto him; Seeing now her Lord and her redeemer in this sort, such
were her tears, such her vexation and grief springing from so great love, that
our Lord himself comforted her, promising to receive her for his espouse, and
to bring her to religion, if with all she would help her self in what she
could, and would do what lay in her.

2. These words said, the holy picture turned to the former likeness, and the
blessed maid remained with this favor so comforted and cheered, that from
that instant she began to invent means, how to go to the monastery of S.
Marie of the Cross, where to she had most great devotion, and many
inspirations from heaven, to take in it the habit of the third order of our
holy Father S. Francis. She further considered, that if in these occasions a
firm and resolute determination do not strongly posesse a person with courage
and valor, cold and weak^ purposes do little profit. But being these of this
solicitous virgin were no such, but strong and feruorous, she resolved that as
soon as easter should be passed, to go to the happy monastery, two leagues
from her town (and as she imagined it, so she did it, not as a weak woman,
but as a strong and forcible man, putting herself into the garments of one of
her cozins, and making a pack of her own) in the habit of a man; and so with a
sword under her arm, alone, and on foot she took her way one morning before
the rising of the sun, with contradiction enough of the devil, who desiring
to hinder her, represented unto her many fears and astonishme^ts, together
with the displeasure of her Father and kindred, who would conceive amiss of her
going in that habit, so indecent for her person and age. This made such an
impression in the holy Damsel, that beginning the way, she began to tremble,
until combated by weakness and fear, all her body tre^bling, she fell on
the ground much dismayed, where she heard thrice a voice, which said unto her:
Take courage, be not dismayed, make an end of the good worck begun, for God
will favor thee. She did not then see who spoke to her, until going on, she
knew that it was her Angel Guardian.

3. With this favor, the holy virgin was much cheered, and prosecuted her way:
and having gone a good part of it, she perceived that there came after her
(although a far off) a person on horsback: who coming more near, she knew it
was the gentleman that pretended to have her for his wife. She was much
troubled when she saw him, considering herself to be alone, and in that place,
but our Lord who would keep her, permitted him not to know her, and she seeing
her self free from that peril, kneeling upon the ground, gave many thancks to
God, and to his most holy mother, who appeared to her, and said: My daughter
take courage, for I pray for thee, and I have asked thee of my dear Son, to
the end thou restore my house of the Cross. With these and other words of much
love, which our B. Lady spoke unto her, she rested much conforted, and
prosecuting her way, she came to the holy monastery, where having made her
prayer in the habit of a man, as she went and adored the holy image of the
mother of God, she turned aside to a corner of the church, and putting off
that apparel, put on the woman's apparel which she brought with her, and
lifting up her eyes to an image of our B. Lady of much devotion, which stood
over the regular door of the co^uent (which as is said was the same which is
there now) and kneeling before it, gave thanks to her anew for having delivered
her from so many dangers, and brought her to her holy house. The image spoke
unto her, and said: my daughter in good time be thou come to my house, enter
merrily, for well thou may, when for the same God created thee, and I again
give thee the superiority and care over it, with authority that thou edify
and plant virtues, and root out and destroy vices and sins. To this the
innocent Damsel replied saying: Ah Lady, being I come alone and in this sort,
I fear they will not receive me your servant. Fear nothing, said the holy
image, for my dear Son who has brought thee hither, will cause that they
receive thee.

3. With this the virgin comforted in our Lord, spoke unto the Abbess, and
giving her accoumpt who she was, and what she would, demanded that they would
receive her into their company, which for to enjoy, she had left her Father
and kindred, and to take that holy habitt, had come in the habitt of a man, so
not to be known. The Abbess reprehe^ded her for having put herself in so
manifest peril, although interiorly she gave many thancks to God, who had
infused such spirit and fortitude in to so tender a Damsel: and she was so
affected to her, seeing her so fair, of so comely a grace, so well spoken, and
so composed, that she called other religious, and giving them notice of the
success, said that the maiden was an Angel in face, in her discretion, and
spirit, and that without doubt God had brought her to the house, for some
great good, and for the reparation of the convent. The nuns asked her a
thousand things, and with bashfulnesse enough unto herself, she must again
and again relate all her former histories.

4. As she was recounting these things, her Father arrived with her kinsfolks,
who came to seek her? What have thou done daughter? said he? what madness is
this? what desparate parts are these of thine? such like words he spoke unto
her, so grievous and so foul, as they could not be worse, had he found her in
some fault of a loose woman. To all which she made herself deaf, to injuries
dumb, and to the fierceness of her Father, a sheep. But when she heard that
he would force her to return unto his house, with much humility (her eyes
becoming fontaines of tears) and setting upon her knees before his feet, she
besought him, and her uncles, that they would molest her no more, nor weary
themselves in persuading her any other thing: for more easy it should be, to
move the mountains, and soften the rocks, then to go against the firmness
of her purpose, for that now she was under the aid and protection of our B.
Lady, with great confidence not to go out of her house in all her life: and
therefore she besought them they would not assay to draw her from thence,
because our Lord himself, for whom she had come, would defend her.

5. By this time also was the young man come who had met her in the way, and
pretended marriage with her: he was driven to great extremities, when he knew
of her absence, seeking her in many places, and with license of her Father and
kinsfolk, he offered to carry her to Illescas, and keep her with his mother
daintilie and well attended on, until such time as all things should be well
composed. The servant of our Lord with great humility and integrity,
satisfied these speeches, and obtained of her kinsfolk, that they should leave
her in that monastery of our B. Lady, whither interiorly the holy spirit had
called her. The religious seeing these things, and the great devotion and
perseverance of the most humble and devout Damsel, had compassion of her in
such sort, as althoug they were very poor, they said they would have no more
riches, then to have such a pledge from heaven in their house, and that they
would receive her either with little, or without any dowry at all, as her Father
was best able: who something appeased, and touched with the powerful hand of
God said: God forbid my daughter, that we should go against the will of him,
from whom I know very well thy determinations do proceed, as the great
perseverance and patience which thou have had well declares, and this new
deed does now confirm, I give thee my benediction, give many thancks to God,
and he guide thee, for I am resolved to conform my self to his holy will.

THE V. CHAPTER.
How the servant of God received the h^bitt; And of some things which happened to
her, being a nouice.
1 IN the estate which we have spoken, stood the affairs of the blessed
Damsel, she with the nuns, and with her Father, treating of her reception,
at the same time the provincial came to the monastery: which doutles was the
providence of God, for but eight days before he departed thence, with intent
not to return for many months, and without his license they could not receive
her. The Abbess asked his license, recounting to him what had passed, and gave
many thancks to God for having brought to her con^ent a person of such spirit.
The prouincial saw her, and satisfied with her devotion, and the tears where
with she demanded the habit, commanded it should be given her, and went his way.
And so she was admitted into the convent and received the habit on the third
of May, the day of the invention of the holy Cross, when she had accomplished
15. years, the year of our Lord 1496. her Father and kinsfolk being present.

2. As soon as the holy virgin saw herself religious, considering the
obligation of the new estate she had chosen, she began from that time
presently to shine amongst all the other religious, as the sun among the
stars. The mistress of the nouices commanded her by and by, that in all the
year of her nouitiate she should not speak, but with her, or the Abbess, or
Vicaresse, or with her Confessor: of which the nouice was very glad, for
naturally she was inclined to speak little: and so she kept it so punctually
all the year of her nouice ship, and all the things which she was taught,
with such exactnes, that she would sooner yield to be killed, then to break only
one, how little soever the same were. And so much she desired to please God,
that not only she observed all things which they taught her, but whatsoever
virtue she heard, of an other body, she procured to imitat^ it. Concerning
which there happened to her some cases of great edification, supposing her
sincerity, which are not related, because they are not so imitable.

3. The first time that the blessed nouice communicated with the other nuns,
a thing happened to her of great novelty, and discomfort: for our Lord so
permitting it, she did not then see in the consecrated host, that which
always she was wont to see which was, Christ our Savior, as has been
said. Whereat she remained so afflicted and disconforted, that her eyes casting
forth fountains of tears, she went to give account to the confessor, of her
new disco^fort; and so extreme, as it drove her into great straites, and no
little care of seeking reasons thereof to comfort herself with all. What Father
(quoth she) Does not this deserve hell? Is it not enough (said this innocent
soul) to condemn me? this offense of God must needs be great: why, it is
denied me for my sins, what is granted to all Christians? The prudent
co^fessor comforted her, saying, that although she had not seen Christ our
Lord in the consecrated host, she should not thinck that she had communicated
in mortal sin, nor that the favors which God had done her at other times,
were communicated to all: for although the change of the bread into the flesh
of Christ, is real and true, yet it is not always seen with corporal eyes,
but with those of the soul: whereby the faith is very meritorious of those who
come to this most holy Sacrament, believing truly that Christ our redeemer,
whom they see not, is under those accidents. With these and other reasons which
he spoke unto her, the sincere nouice remained much comforted, and gave great
thancks to God for so singular favors, as he had done her until then, with the
presence of her most sweet redeemer, whom so often she had seen in the
Sacrament of the Altar, and for that which then he did unto her, in exercizing
of her faith.

4. The blessed Nouice, accomplished the year of her probation, and with the
voices of all the convent, she was admitted to be professed, which she made
with much seruour and tears, on the day of the holy Cross, the third of May:
for the which, and for having taken the habitt on the same day, she took her
surname of the Cross: so truly to follow Christ crucified, as her life from
that time forward was a Cross, so terrible to the devil, that not being able
to endure it, he who with hellishe fury, threw down the first man from the
height in which God had created him, that a woman young and weak, should now
overcome him and escape free out of his hands (God permitting it, to exercise
his servant, as another Job or S. Antonie, in patience) he persecuted her
visiblie and invisible, and the devil tempted her in a thousand manners, many
times whipping her so rigorously and so cruelly, that the stripes and marks of
the strokes and blows which he gave her, dured on her for many days, and new
wounds added, before the old were wholly healed.

5. One time it chanced to her, that asking humbly of God for a soul, the
devils whipped her so cruelly, and shed so much blood forth of her body, that
they left her for dead. At that time came her Angel keeper, and cheering
herself with his presence, she said unto him with great love: O blessed
Angel what have you done? how have you left me in so great necessity and
weariness, look how the ministers of the divine justice have handled me. To
which the Angel answered very joyful: nether have I left thee, nor does my
Lord Jesus Christ leave thee: but I tell thee in his behalf, that with this
evil entreatie, these blows, and stripes which they have given thee, thou
have gained a crown very grateful to the divine majesty: and I come in
virtue of his name to cure thee of these wounds. And making upon her the sign
of the Cross, he healed her, and our Lord granted her that which she asked,
for that soul for which she was praying. Who is able to recount all the evil
intreatings, that the infernal ministers inflicted upon her? whom it seemed
they were so resolved and set to persecute, as if they had neglected all the
world besides her. Who can explicate the mortification and penance of this
virgin, and the depth, and height of her humility, where with she thought so
highly of God, and so lowly of herself? maruelling always with her self,
that God should enclose so great treasures in a vessel so frail and miserable
as she was, who thought not herself worthy of the earth which she troad upon.

THE VI. CHAPTER.
Of the pennances of the servant of God, and of the frequencie of her raptes.
1 THe new Professed, found herself so obliged to God, for having brought her
to holy religion, and so desirous to do him great service, that from the day
she was professed, she determined to suffer for his love whatsoever kind of
torment was compatible with her condition, desiring to give her life for that
Lord, who with so much love gave his life for her. And many times thinking on
this love of her God, with desire to be a martyr, she said with great grief: O
that God would do me this favor, that I might die for him, for I desire no
other blessedness on the earth, then to see my self beheaded, for his love,
burned, beaten to poulder, or scalded to death. Thincking on this, and on her
most sweet espouse crucified for her, burning in his love, she said: Lord
give me pains, torments, labors, and griefs: command the Angels of heaven,
the devils of hell, and all the creatures of the earth, to execute upon me all
their power, for be it as great as it can be, it shall be all limited and
little, in comparison of the much which for thy divine majesty I desire to
suffer, my only love, and my good, through thy divine grace.

2. Accompanying with worckes these so feruorous desires, she began to lead
a new life, and to do very sharp penances, adding to the old ones some new,
and to her great rigours, others very terrible. And her fastes were such, as
she brake them not in three days together, and often times she passed eight
whole days without eating one bitt. Her watching was very long, and her sleep
so little, that she slept not until the day break, and then only that which
served to comfort the head. Her clothing was always more humble, poor, and
patched, then of any other of the nuns, but without any extremity of
singularity, although inwardly she used shirts of hair and chains next unto
her skin. And for the greater pen^nce and the more to mortify her taste and
mouth, many times she carried in it bitter wor^wood, in memory of the gall and
vinegre which our Savior ta^ted upon the Cross. In prayer she spent the most
of the night, and she would say, that when it was, not very feruorous, and
accompanied with many tears, it seemed to her unworthy that God should receive
it. Her times of leis^re in the day, she spent in humble offices, and in the
service of the convent. When she washed the po^tes and platters of the kitchen,
and other like vessels, she considered that they were for the servants of God
to eat in. And so in these humble and base offices she received many favors
and particular comforts of God, and of his most holy and blessed Mother.

3. And whereas she knew, how much humility pleases God, she procured
^lwayes to occupy herself in humble offices, and with notable charity to
serve the sick religious, wholly carring for their service and comfort: in
which there happened to her things of great mortification, much like to those
which have happened to diverse other saints, who licked the wounds of the sick,
and exercised themselves in offices which of their oune nature were very
loathsome, but to God very pleasing, as with his divine favor she his douote
servant did many times, who being Cook, and drawing water out of the well,
brake a great pan of clay which she carried in her hands, for the which she
was much confounded: and attributing it to her sloth and carelessness, she
threw herself down upon the earth, and making prayer to our Lord, the pieces
were joined together, and the pan remaining whole, served afterward two or
three years in the kitchen. One religious who was present at all this, and
saw with her eyes the miracle, said: what is this sister? was not this pan
all to pieces? how is it now whole? to this the blessed cook answered with
much humility: yes sister, but our Lord has remedied by his goodness, that
which I have abused by my sins.

4. In such exercises as this, and the like, the servant of God spent her time,
and the first years of her religion, which being so admirable, and the great
talent and valor of the new professed, and her prudence, and sanctity being
known (although her years were but few) obedience employed her in the office
of sacristian, after having been well proved in that of the kitchen; of the
which she gave so good account, that without taking her from it, they gave her
also care of the Torner, and she proved so well in these offices, that in
short time they made her Portresse. All which in that she did them with so
much humility and patience (as most zealous of the service of God, of
sanctity, and of the service of the convent) she did undergo great labors:
for because she was young, all opposed themselves against her, and the most
mild lamb humbled herself to whom soever, and to those that chi^d her, confessed
her fault, praying our Lord for those that persecuted her. And she was so well
contented in serving of the other religious, in offices of humility and
obedience, as if therein had been her glory, her bliss, and her heaven. And
intruth so it was, for in these offices she found God, who is the bliss and
true heaven of the just, as this virgin found him in the porterie, and in the
torner: for doing these offices she went so enamored of her most sweet Jesus,
that always she had him present, in so much that if she turned the torner to
give or receive any thing, thorough the same, she contemplated the cradell in
which she rocked the sweet child Jesus. And once indeed it happened her so to
turn it w^^h this thought, as she found God a child therein, who wi^h a
countenance very peaceable and smiling, spoke unto her, making merry with her.

5. Another time being Portresse, the most holy child Jesus appeared to her,
and as soon as she saw him, she stretched out her arms for to embrace him:
but at the same instant appeared his most holy mother, and taking him in her
arms, lifted her self upon high with him, accompanied with infinite Angels,
who with most sweet harmony made him music. But as soon as blessed Ioane
saw that the mother and the Son departed, and left her so alone, iudgeing
her self unworthy of so sovereign company, she remained very sadd, and
without comfort: but she that is mother of comfort, comforting her, said: Do
not afflict thy self daughter, but come toward the figtrees in the garden, for
there thou shall find us.

6. Most contented with this favor, accomplishing her office of obedience,
she went to the garden looking on every side, to see that which her soul
desired: and approaching to the bakehowse near unto the figtrees, she saw our
Lord Jesus Christ, and his blessed mother, and many Angels which awayted her.
And falling prostrate upon the earth, she adored God, and the B. virgin, and
stood long time enjoying of that sovereign vision, so absorpt, as although
they called her with a bell, she heard not, until the mother of God said to
her: Go daughter, perform thy obedience, for they have called thee three
several times, and thou have never heard them. Then leaving God, and his
mother, for obedience sake, she went to see who it was that sought her: and
having done the business, she returned by and by to the bake-howse aforesaid,
where she had left her heart and her rest. But some of the nonnes meeting her,
noted much the speed and have with which she went, and that her face was very
bright, and that a sweet savor proceeded from it: for the which some of them
followed her, desirous to know, what the matter was, suspecting some great
thing. And seeing her enter into the bake house, they heard her say: O
sovereign mother of God, great is thy mercy toward me unworthy sinner, that
I having gone, and left thee and my most sweet espouse in this humble and poor
place, I find that you ar still here attending for me. The nonnes also heard the
B. virgin answer, saying. My daughter, thou have therefore found me, because
for obedience sake thou have left me, which much pleases my Son and me.

7. The blessed Ioane was so favored of our B. Lady the virgin, as the
favors and comforts which she received from her powerful hand, cannot as they
worthily deserve, be esteemed. For not only being a child, but when she was of
greater age, and in all times, she had great revelations and visites of our
Lord, and of his most holy mother, both in r^ptes and out of them, which dured
her more or less time, as pleased God. At the beginning, three, or four
hours: after they were greater, for they came to fourteen, and to twenty, and
forty hours every one, and sometimes she was elevated, three days without
returning to herself; Once it happened her to return from a very great rapt,
and scarcely to have come to her self, when only hearing named the most sweet
name of Jesus, or of seeing some image of his most sacred passion, she was
again elevated as before, without any manner of sense or feeling. She was most
beautiful and shining in these rapts, and when she returned from them, the
nonnes besought, her, that she would tell where she was, and what she had
seen in those rapt^s and revelations, which although she refused to do
(excusing her self for humility sake) yet when it was the will of God that
she should manifest it, she said, that her good Angel carried her in
spirit, and set her in a throne very bright and glorious, where she ^awe our
Lord, and his most holy mother, and the Angels, the Apostles, and
Evangelists, the Patriarchs, and Prophets, our holy Father saint Francis, and
infinite other saints, men, and women of the new and old testament, giving
such evident signs of them, as if she had been borne and brought up with
them. She said that they went adorned with their particular insignes. The
saints of the old testament with the figures thereof which they represented,
conform to their prophecies, Abraham with the sacrifice of the lamb, Moses
with his serpent, and the bush: Aaron with his rodd: others with the Arck of
the testament. And that the saints of the new testament, carried also their
ensigns. The Apostles and Martyrs those of their martyrdom, our holy Father,
S. Francis, the five wounds more bright then stars: others carried the
chalice with the most holy Sacrament, others the font of baptism, and others
the keys of the Church: Every one of them more fair and bright, and more
shining then the sun: in so much that it is a meruellous thing and very
pleasing, to see and contemplate these things, full of so much beauty and
comeliness, as no tongue is able to explicate the same, answerable to that
which our Lord of his mercy does show them unto me (said the Saint) and will
that I see them from that holy place, where as it seems to me, I stand tied
with a certain beam of that place, which denotes, that my soul is not yet
wholly untied and free, from the prison of this body.

8. The blessed Ioane was four and twenty years old, at which age, the
no^nes saw her fall into a rapt, such, as neither before, nor after, she never
was seen to have the like: For other times when she was rapt, she remained
with much beauty and luster of her face: but this time it was not so, for all
that, wanted in her, and she remained as one dead, her eyes broken and sunck,
her lips blue, her teeth gnashing, her nose drawn up, and all the members of
her body disioynted and stiff, and her face so pale and wanne, as if she were
altogether dead. The nonnes admired at the novelty of the chance, and desiring
to know the cause thereof, prayed the holy virgin, that she would reveal the
same unto them. But she as one prudent and silent, would never tell it, until
some days being passed, her good Angel commanded her to tell it, and then
she said: the cause (mothers) that you saw in me such novelty in that rapt,
was, for that being in it, I saw my good Angel with sad countenance. And I
asking him the cause, he said, that our Lord had showed him the great
persecutious, wearinesses and infirmities, which were to come upon me: and that
he having prayed for me, The Angels to show sad countenance and to weep, is a
speech which the holy scripture uses, as in the 33. chapter of Isaias more by
similitude, then by propriet^e: for an Angel, although he appear in corporal
form and visible to men, does neither weep, nor eat, nor speak, nor exercise
any vital operation, according to S. Thom. 1. p. q. 51. a. 3. for to Worck
properly these things, which are vital actions, he should be the soul of the
same body in which he appears, and as the form thereof, animate it.
the divine majesty answered him, that it was convenient to lead me by that
way, and to see what courage I had in me. Then he again beseeched him, that
for his clemency he would do me that grace to relieve me, and that I might not
endure that pain which then I had: and the most powerful Lord did grant it
him. And so from that day all her rapts were very sweet, being so great and so
long, that the most of the day and of the night, she was so elevated, that she
could not now do any office, nor follow the burden of the community as she
was wont: wherefore they gave her a cell aparte, and one of the Religious that
should take care of her, whereof she was very glad, having better commodity for
the secret penances which she performed, of the which some were known.

9. Oftentimes it happened unto her, that desiring to please her beloved
espouse, and remembering with how great cruelty he was whippt at a pillar,
desiring to imitate him in that point, asking first leave for it of his divine
majesty, she shut her self up in a chamber, very close and secret, where she
was wont to do her mortifications and penances, and naked, she tied her self
to a pillar, which she had there for these mortifications: then fastening
herself with cords, first her feet, and after her body, leaving her arms
free, she whipped her self all over with a chain of iron; and that the
chain might the better discharge its office, she hu^g at the end of it a ball
of iron round and massiue, and taking it in her hand, she struck her self with
the ends of the chain over all the body, until she shed blood. Being in this
holy exercise, contemplating the stripes of our Savior, and brusing her flesh
with those she gave her self, her good Angel appeared to her, and commanded
her to cease, saying: enough, for hitherto extends the will of my Lord Jesus
Christ; and the same Angel, untied her sometimes from the pillar at which she
stood.

10. Other times with the desire she had to please God, kneeling on her knees
in that little chamber, she took a flint, which weighed seaue^ pounds, and
with so great fervor she struck her self upon the breast there with, that
at the very first blow, the blood sprang out so far, that it spotted the
walls. She continued in this holy exercise as long, as she was wont to be in
going on her knees fifteen times about the chamber, in memory of the fifteen
principal wounds of our Lord Jesus Christ.

11. One night the saint finding her self much afflicted, and euilly treated
of the devils, which with filthy and unseemly figures, pretended to induce
her to sensual desires, she went out into the garden, and gathering together
many bushes, in imitation of our holy Father saint Francis, stripping herself
naked, she laid herself down upon that thornie bed, and leaving it all
bespotted with her blood, she entered into a lake, saying; That thou may
know that thou art clay, in this mudd thou shall wash thy self, and yet thou
do not deserve this. There she stood a great while, and before she put on
her clothes again, she whipped herself with a chain, which she had made to
this effect: after which time she remained so favored of almighty God, that
never after did the enemy set upon her with such like temptations.

12. With the great spirit and devotion which this blessed one had, she made a
thousand inventions for mortification and penance, sometimes she girded her
arms, and her body with ropes of brissels and of hard rushes, in memory of
the ropes where with our Savior was fastened to the pillar. Other times she
girded herself with the chains, with which before she had whipped herself.
And for the most part she went always vested with iron, as the hard shirtes,
do well prove, which she used during her whole life, as of brissels, of
cards, of iron, and one of maile with half sleeves, made in manner of a
iacket, so long that it reached to her knees: another of plates of iron in
form of a heart, which girded her body on every side, and for her more devotion
she carried it set with crosses, and the instruments of the passion, made of
very sharp nails: although she used this shirt very seldom, because without
great difficulty she could not stoop: and so it happened unto her on a time,
that bowing herself with it, the points of the nails entered into her body,
she offering all to our Savior in memory of his sacred passion. And for her
greater mortification, she was wont to draw herself along upon the ground,
holding by a rope which she put about her neck, and whipping herself with a
chain she said: who so does, so let him pay: whereof do thou complain
noughtie miserable body, when thou have so much offended thy God?

13. Othertimes, set in form of a Cross, she walked with her bare knees upon
the earth, until the blood burst forth of them. Other times for more grief,
she tied upon her knees little stones, or tile shardes, which did greatly
wound her. Other times she set herself crossewise against a wall, where she
had driven some nails, and thrust her hands so fast upon them, as she hung
there in Cross wise an hour together, without her feet touching the ground.

14. On a certain occasion, making an end of taking a great discipline, upon
^he wounds which she had made with the chains, she put on that shirt of
maile, which was the more ordinary, and scarcely had she put on her habitt,
when she remained elevated for six hours, until the nonnes coming unto her,
found her in that manner, to whom she recounted marvelous things, concerning
the manner which they were to take to serve and please our Lord, who thereupon
became so full of devotion, as they enkindled and enflamed, all that ever heard
them in the love of God.

THE VII. CHAPTER.
How the child Jesus espoused himself with the blessed Ioane of the Cross, and
of the devotion she had to the most holy Sacrament.
1 THis chapter requires singular attention, and therefore I do humbly ask
of God, his grace, to asist me to write for his honor and glory, two most
singular favors and very royal benefits, which with great show of love, he
granted to this most tender virgin. For when our Lord would give more rich
pledges of his love toward her, his divine majesty determined to visit her,
not by the ministry of Angels (as at other times) but in his own person,
and to wedd himself unto her; his most holy mother assisting at this
spiritual wedding, with many Angels, and virgins, which came accompanying
their King and Lord: on whom the blessed Ioane set her eyes, and calling to
mind the promise which he had given her to espouse him self unto her, with
much humility and love, she demanded of the Queen of heaven, she would
obtain of her Son, that he would fulfill what he had promised, and with much
faith and humility, she ceased not from her holy prayer, until our most
clement Lord, moved by the petitions of his most holy mother, and of the
Angels, and virgins which on their knees in his divine presence did ask it of
him, his majesty cast on the blessed Ioane, the eyes of his divine mercy, and
looking upon her with a countenance very pleasant and amorouse, said; It
pleases me daughter, to espous^^ my self unto thee, and then extending his
powerful hand, he gave it unto her, in sign of espousall, with many shows of
love.

2. The devotion she had to the most holy Sacrament, surpasses all that can be
said: Before communion, she set all things in order to dispose her self for
communion: after communion, all which followed, she wholly spent in giving of
thancks; And such gust and comfort she received in this celestial meat, that
the more she tasted of it, the more increased her hunger of it: and so she
procured to come to this divine Sacrament as often as she could: which when it
was not granted her, she communicated spiritually, and that so frequently and
without intermission, as her life was a continual spiritual communion. In so
much that being one time ravished, in those maruailous raptes which hereafter
we shall declare, our Lord said, that those spiritual communions did please
him much, wherewith the servant of God was much comforted. And acknowledging
this so sovereign benefitt, Spiritual communion is, when as one cannot
receive the body of Christ our Lord sacramentally, he receives it interiorly
and spirituallie in his soul, with faith and charity, as the Counsel of
Trent defines in the 13. session, and 8. ca. S. Thomas in the 3. p. q. 80 a.
1. and 2. and 4. book d. 9. a. 2. Suarez tom. 3. p. 3. d. 62 sect. 1. and to
those that so communicate spiritually, is given the effect and virtue of the
sacrament, according to their devotion: and after this manner a soul may
communicate spiritually many times in the day.
she was wo^t to say many times: O my Lord, how excellent is this manner of
communicating? without being seen or perceived, and without any other troubling
the ghostly Father, or giving account thereof to any creature, but only to thee
my Creator and my Lord, who heapest on me such delights, and susteynest with
the sweet and sauorie bittes of thy most holy presence me poor sinner,
unworthy of this most high gift, the most vile and outcast of the world, and
do me such singular favor, that every hour and moment, my soul may
receive such gust, sweetness and delight, and that always I may be sweetened
of thee my sweet Jesus, my espouse and Lord, if I by the bitterness of my
sins, do not make my self unworthy of thy divine sweetness. O marvelous
meat! O bread of Angels! what banquet is this? what piety is this, my sweet
Jesus? and what mercy, and liberality is that which thy divine majesty
bestows upon an unworthy and miserable slave? This said the holy Ioane,
giving thancks to God for communicating so often spirituallie: and touching
Sacramental Communion, such marvelous things happened unto her, as these
following do declare.

3. This most deuote virgin on a time confessing her self while the
conuentuall mass was said, the confessor bidd her go and adore the most holy
Sacrament, and coming to a portall hard by the Church, hearing it ring to the
elevation, she kneeled on her knees to adore from thence with the eyes of her
soul, him whom she could not see with the eyes of her body. Being so on her
knees, the wall of the portall which divided the convent from the Church, was
opened a wide, and she saw the most holy Sacrament on the altar, as also the
priest who said mass, and all the Church, and persons which were therein. And
having adored the sacred Host and Chalice, the wall joined it self again
together, she remaining on her knees in the same place: but when the priest
elevated the Host the latter time, the wall opened again. And for a
perpetual memory of this miracle, our Lord God would, that the last stone in
which the joint of the wall shut it self, should remain more white then the
others, and cloven in three parts in manner of a Cross, as is to be seen to
this very day, and from that time has been held in great veneratio^. And when
that wall was taken down, for to make the Church in the form that now it is,
the most part of this stone, (as a precious relic) was put in the high
cloister as now it stands, covered with a grate of iron gilded, whither the
nonnes repair to pray and to touch their beads.

4. The like to this happened to the humble servant of God, as she went about
the work of the kitchen, for hearing it ring to the elevation, amongst the
firebrands and the pots where as she was, she kneeled upon her knees, and there
adored: and it seemed to her that she saw the most holy Sacrament, although
there were four or five several walls, and as many chambers between it and
her. And one time Christ our Lord spoke to her in the consecrated host,
promising her the salvation of a nonne of her co^uent, which was in the very
agony of death, for whom she prayed. Being one Easter eve in her cell, she
heard it ring to the Gloria, and being not able to go to mass, because she
was sick, kneeling on her knees in the bed to give thancks to God, she saw
from thence, and heard all that which the priest said at the Altar, and that
which the nonnes did say in the quire; And which is more, she saw Christ
risen, bright, and glorious as he came out of the sepulcher, with many Angels
which made him music and song many hymns. Other times it happened to this
virgin (so tendered of God) that being far from the quire, she heard the
divine office which the nonnes said, and by the signs which she gave so
punctually of all things done, the miracle was appare^t, and the truth thereof.

5. One of the Religious seeking another thing in the cell of this holy virgin,
saw within a little coffer, a consecrated host, our Lord permitting it, who
by this means would publish so sovereign a miracle. At the same instant the
servant of God returned from a rapt in which she was, and with great anxietie
went straight to the little coffer wherein the religious went to look, to whom
she said: sister do not touch this holy relic, for it is the most holy
Sacrament, which the Angels have brought hither. The religious astonished to
hear her say so, prayed her she would tell the^ how it came thither; to whom she
said: A certain man (who for his sins went to hell) dyed with the most holy
Sacrament in his mouth, from whence the Angels took it with great reverence,
and brought it hither, commanding me that being I had seen it, I should
communicate that holy Hoaste, and receive it for one of the souls in
purgatory: and being in prayer they said unto me, that a certain person came
to the coffer where the holy Host was, and so I will forth with perform my
obedience, and that which the Angels command me, and receive my Lord: and so
kneeling on her knees, with many tears and much devotion, she received the
most holy Sacrament, her Angel administering it unto her.

THE VIII. CHAPTER.
Of the familiarity wherewith the B. Ioane treated with the Angels, especially
with her Angel keeper, and of the devotion she ^ad to the glorious S. Antonie
of Padua.
1 WHo shall hear tell in the holy scripture, that the Angel Raphaell served
the young Tobias in a long journey, and that another carried the Prophet Habacuc,
by the hair from Judea to Babylon, to give D^niell to eat who was shut up in
the lake of lions, and will not admire when he shall hear that which passed
betwixt blessed Ioane with the Angels? and in especial with her good Angel,
with whom she treated so familiarly and friendly, as one friend does with
another, wherewith she got that Angelical condition which she had: whence she
communicated such a savor to the things which she touched, and to the habitt
and clothes she ware, as no odor upon the earth could be compared to it, for
it was a heavenly smell (from whence intruth she was herself more then from
earth) and so it was no marvel, that she should smell all of heaven, and have
the savors thereof, she who so much communicated with the Angels; not only
with her Angel keeper, but also with many others, especially with those which
kept particular provinces and kingdoms, who often times visited her, and
prayed her she would obtain of our Lord that he would moderate such or such a
tempest of thunder, hayle, or lightening, which he was to send upon the earth.
They told her their names and offices, and sometimes the things which fell out
in the kingdoms or provinces which they kept, as well things present, as that
were to come.

2. Being one time with the other nonnes ready to communicate, the Angels
snatched her away from before their eyes, and they ^awe her no more, until
after they had communicated, she appeared in the midst of them with no small
admiration to them all, who as much admiring the fact, as desirous to know it,
prayed her to recount it to them, and she for their edification said unto
them. Because you busied your selves in thinking on me, when you should have
treated only with God, his divine majesty would that his Angels should carry me
on high, from whence they and I adored the most holy Sacrament, and I saw you
all communicate, and how much your Angels keepers reioysed themselves with
those who communicated holily and purely: and how they turned their faces and
departed a little way from those, who did not communicate with entire devotion.
Wherefore she persuaded the nonnes they should be very deuote to their good
Angels, because they not only keep us always, and acompanie us, but also
when we fall, they take us up: and if we be cold in devotion, they inflame us.
They are those that teach us in our doutes, defend us in our dangers, and
sustain us in our labors, and at the hour of our death with particular
vigilancie, do assist, and acompanie our souls, and present them to God, they
visit them and comfort them in purgatory. Finally in our labors and perils,
they aid, and defend us. And that you may know how certain this is (said the
holy Ioane to her nonnes) this other day I saw the mother vicaresse ringing
the bell of the community that the religious might come together, being they
did not all forthwith repair thither, the Angel keepers of those which were
wanting, came to do the obedience for them.

3. Another time this holy virgin being Abbess, reprehending two young
religious in presence of the others, she said unto them. A little while since,
I being in prayer, our Lord showed me your disobedience, and that you would not
sweep that which the mother vicaresse, had commanded you: for the which you
lost two crowns which your good Angels brought for you, and God comma^ding
them, they gave them to the good Angels of two other sisters, that they might
put them on them, because they had obeyed for you. This God showed to me,
children, and I speak it for your confusion and amendment, and to teach you
that the bell, and whatsoever sign of obedience, is the voice of God, to whom
we must obey if we will please and serve him.

4. With these examples and others which she recounted to her nonnes, she
made them very deuote to their Angel keepers: Of her own she told many great
things, that his beauty and comeliness exceeded all that men can imagine,
that he was more bright then the sun, and his garments more white then the
snow: that he had wings of excellent fairness, and on his sacred head a
crown and most precious diadem set with rich stones, and on his forehead
the sign of the Cross, with this motto: Let all Angels confess, that Christ
is the King of Angels. And on his breast this. The grace of the holy Ghost
lighten our senses and our hearts. And on the sleeue of his right arm (of
precious stones) ^he sign of the holy Cross, with this saying. Behold the
Cross of our Lord, fly you adverse parties. And on the left arm the same
devise of the Cross, with the nails and other ensigns of the sacred passion,
and this saying. Sweet wood, sweet nails. And on his feet (of precious stones)
this motto: How beautiful are thy paces. And on his knees another, which
said: In the name of Jesus, let every knee bow. And a little above these words.
Of celestialls of terrestrialls, and of infernalls. And in his h^nd he is wont
to bear a fair banner with all the ensigns of the passion.

5. After this manner she recounted of her Angel so many and so great things,
The Angels are painted with wings, as S. Dennis, says in his book of the
celestial hierarchy and the 15. chap. for their swiftness and speed with
which they repair to the succoure of men. And for this, and that which the B.
Ioane says of the beauty and habit of the Angels, we must not thinck that
they are corporal, for they are not so, nor have they any body bu^ they take
it, that they may be seen of men, as the Counsels do say, and the saints.
Council. Lateran. 2. cap. 1. 5 Dionis de coelest. Hierarch. cap. 1. 2. 7. and S.
Augustine. lib. de spiritu and anima, cap 13. and 15. Thomas 1. p q 50. a. 1.
and 2 sent. D. 8. 5. Bonauenture lib. 2. sent. D 8. and Scotus in the same
place.
as she stirred up in the no^nes such devotion and desire to know his name,
that thy might commend themselves unto him, and they besought her that she would
ask his name of himself; And understanding that he was called saint Laruel
Aureo, she told it to the religious, who not only from that time forward took
him for their patron and advocate, but leaving the names of their Image and
kindred, took for surname the name of the Angel Laruel: and this devotion to
this day, still endures in the convent. She said moreover that this blessed
Angel was of the most private with God, and that he had in his charge the
souls of the most special saints, and that he comfort and visits the
souls of Purgatory, and that the devils do so much fear him, that sometime
with only lifting up his right arm, whereon he bears the sign of the Cross,
with the motto that says. Ecce crucem Domini, fugite parts aduersae, behold
the Cross of our Lord, fly ye adverse parties, the cursed spirits do fly, and
like enraged dogs, biting one another, run a way with terrible howling. He
succoureth also those that are in danger of death, and much favors my friends,
and all those that wish me well.

6. She demanded on a time of her holy Angel, why it was that the Angels were
so fair, and so blessed, and the devils, so deformed, and so obstinate in
their sin. Thou have demanded many things, said her good Angel: to all which
I will make thee answer, because God will have it so. Then he declared to the
Saint, such high and profound mysteries, and the resolution of almost all
questions and subtilities which scholasticall divines do move in the matter of
Angels, so copiously and so distinctly, as with only this revelation, might be
known much of that which is written of them, as well of the manner of their
creation, confirmation in grace, and the disposition they had to merit the
same, and in what time they obtained their beatitude: as of the fall of the
devils, their sin and obstinacy, and after what manner they were cast from
heaven: with other difficulties of the like nature, which are more to exercise
wits in the schools, then to inflame the wills of those who shall read them
(the principal thing that this history pretends) and is the cause I do not
dilate my self in recounting of them. He further added, that the devils fell
more thick then flakes of snow, or the drops of water when it raineth
fastest. Also he expounded unto her those words of the Gospel of saint John:
In principio erat verbum: and and those of Genesis: In principio creauit Deus
caelum and terram, because this servant of God had prayed him to do it, whom he
then commanded to write these things, and many other which our Lord did reveal
unto her, as we read them in the books of her speeches, which are full of
maruailous things. The B. Ioane besought her Angel, to tell her the just
number of times our Lady had appeared in that place. Who told her, that nine
times arewe the virgin our B. Lady had appeared in that holy house, on the
first nine days of the month of March, and that at the last of these
apparitions, our Lady set the Cross, signing therewith the place where she
would have them build the Church, which is in the midst of the chancell, in
the same place where now stands a Cross, in memory of that which the
sovereign Queen of heaven set there with her own hands.

7. The B. S. Ioane had such terrible persecutions and infirmities, as
hereafter we shall show, and so little humane comfort in them, that she knew
not to whom she might turn her self, but to her good Angel, to whom with
much familiarity and plains, she recounted her travails, and laid open the
scruples of her conscience. One day when the fury of her persecutions and
affrontes were at the height, she told him it would be a great comfort to her,
if he would hear her confession. I have not so much authority, said the
Angel, nor is it my office, but the office of the priest, to whom only as to
his proper minister, God has granted this great power on the earth, that he
can absolve and pardon sins. I have now confessed my sins with the vicar
of the convent, No one which is not priest although he be an Angel or a
Scraphin, ca^ absolve or administer the sacrament of penance, the Counsel of
Trent. sess. 14. cap. 6. and can. 9. and 10. wherefore this confession was not
sacramental, but as when one friend under confession co^forting himself with
another, or demanmanding council, discovers to him the secret of his soul.
And so although the confession she made to her Angel, was not sacramental, it
would be meritorious for that which Scotus says in the 4. book of sentences D.
17. q 1. ad 2. and 3 because there may cases be given when mentoriously one may
confess his sins to a lay man as these Doctors of the Church do clearly
teach, S. Augustine de vera and falsa poenitentiae, cap. 10. S. Thomas lib. 4.
sententia, D 17. q. 3. and in adoitionibus, 1. 8. a 2. ad 1. S. Bonauenture 4.
sent. D. 17. q. 2. and super literam magistri, and Gabriell, Mayor Marsil. And
the master in the same distinc. in litera ad finem: but this must not be done
without great warienesse and not with the ceremonies of sacramental
confession, so to avoid all manner of scandal
said the afflicted virgin: and so with your holy license I would accuse me of
the self same things unto you. And beginning her confession, sheding many
tears, she said: what shall I do a sinner, and miserable woman, who have
committed against my God and Lord most grievous sins, and of no one of them
can I remember my self, do you put me in mind of them blessed Angel. Thou
do well said he in weeping so bitterly for thy sins, and to bring the^
to thy memory, for it is more meritorious, then if I should bring them to thy
mind: to this the virgin replied.

8. Sir one scruple of conscience does afflict me much, and to get out of it, I
would know if tentations be sins? yea said the Angel when they be consented
unto, but those which are not consented unto, and are resisted, are rather
meritorious. To this she replied: sir, among those tentations which most do
afflict me, I hold it for a great tentation, that it seems to me I do feel
to much the false testimonies that are raised against me, and it gives me
great trouble, because I know not if there be in it any vain glory or pride.
There is none in this, said the Angel, but rather it is just that thou feel
the loss of thy fame, and of thy honor at least for that of God, whom they
offend who do infame thee. Ah sir, said she, I thinck now this is extreme
which I have in feeling my affronts, and dishonours, for why? seeing how they
have handled me reprehe^ded and chastized me, I am so as although I do not
speak it but only to your comlynesse (for so she styled her Angel for the
singular beauty which he had) I cannot put away the grief it causes me, and
to think if therefore I shall be abhorred of the venerable prelates of the order
of our Father S. Francis, and if this shall be cause that I may lose the masses
and suffrages which after my death I did hope for of them. And when I thinck
upon my sins, chiefly after they have judged me to be evil, I do so beyond
reason afflict my self, as I know not how to express it. And saying this,
she shed many tears, for the which her Angel desiring to comfort her, said.

9. Be quiet blessed soul, let not the memory of thy sins so much torment
thee, nor let thy tribulations weary thee, when for them thou shall be
blessed, and they purify thee as the furnace does the gold. Neither do thou
thinck, that because thou art reprehe^ded by thy prelates, that they do abhor
thee, but that by this way thy crown shall be made, and thy soul shall be
purified: for as the holy scripture says, thou have it always in the palm of
thy hands. I would not sir that my soul should be in such wicked hands as mine
are (replied she) but only in the hands of God, for so I should have it most
secure, for I being so evil, and a sinner, do fear much to lose it: and sir
it seems to me, that according to the great mercies which God uses toward
such a sinner, our Lord would be pleased with me, if I did not so much feel
how greatly they do afflict and persecute me, and where I should persuade my
self, that with great reason they do it, yet I cannot at all times, for the
little virtue which I have: and I would rather not to have been borne, the^ to
have offended my God so many times. Ah holy Angel, how great are my sins?
What shall be come of me, if God according to his mercy do not deal with me
like himself? demand it thou of him (my holy keeper) let not this soul be
lost which is committed to thy charge, give good accoumpt of this thy little
sheep, suffer not the wolf, holy S. Laruell, to carry her away. Blessed
comforter of souls, comfort mine, for I am altogether without comfort and
persecuted: although the greatest of my persecutions is, to think that God
permits them because I am so great a sinner, and for this cause it is that
the devil, does so much torment me.

10. Be not ungrateful to our Lord (said the Angel) for the persecutions
which are inflicted on thee, are so many favors which God does give thee: and
thou know well, that it is long time since I told thee, that satan had asked
license to persecute thee, and to tempt thee as he did holy Job. But trust in
Jesus Christ our redeemer, and in the virtue of his Cross, for although the
body suffer, yet the soul shall be saved. Cast therefore away this fear and
vexation, and consider that if thy persecutions be great, so also are the
helps and succors which our Lord sends thee to support them, as are the
many visitations which his divine majesty, and his holy mother do so often
afforde thee: the spiritual goods which thou do enjoy in this life, when
being on earth thou participatest so oftentimes of the delights of that
celestial Jerusalem: the great familiarity wherewith thou conuersest with me,
and the particular care wherewith I defend and keep thee. I give infinite
thancks to my God, said she, and to thee my good Angel, who so have
comforted me with thy holy discourses, yet I desire that thou tell me, how I
being so great a sinner, We read of some saints, who had much familiarity
with their Angel keeper of S. Lyd win a virgin. Surias tom. 7. April. 14. of
S. Francisca Romana. Julius Vrsinus in her life lib. 1. cap. 1^. and saint
Elizabeth sister of King Eckerbert, Abbasse of the monastery of Esconaagia,
Marcus Marulus lib. 2. cap. 4.
thou art seen of me so oftentimes and I enjoy so often the most sweet presence
of my redeemer Jesus Christ, and of his most holy mother? It is his grace
(answered the Angel) and he co^municateth it to whom he will, whereof thou
art to render him a strict accou^pt. His divine majesty knows well (answered
she) that I never demanded of him, neither visions, not apparitions: for being
so miserable and a sinner, I do not deserve it: and so I know, that only
because he is who he is, he does me these favors. Give him many thancks for
them (said the Angel) and confess that other persons, without enjoying of
these favors, ar better then thou; And this hold always in thy memory, that
for thy greater good, and to keep thee from vain glory, God has permitted
thee to be persecuted and troaden under foot of every one, and by the tongues
of many, to be detracted and torn in pieces.

11. At the fame of these things, and many others which befell her with her
Angel, there repaired unto her so many people that stood in need of
consolation, that many times there were seen all at once at the door of the
convent, a hundred persons, al which she received, heard, and spoke unto most
curreously, without being ever tired or distasteful to any of them. Wherein she
had in truth the condition of her good Angel; to whom after their departures
she represe^ted the necessities of them all, requesting him to comfort them:
and so well she retained the answer of her Angel as, although they were of
things very different, yet she forgot none. To a certain spiritual person who
prayed her to know of her Angel, what he should do to please our Lord, she
answered: Peace, prayer, and silence are three things which much please God.
And to another who desired to know the same, she said. Weep with those that
weep, rejoice with those that rejoice, and hold thy peace with those that
speak. Another person in necessity of health and comfort, knowing that each
one found it by her means, sent to pray her that she would obtain of her
Angel some holesom council, to bear with patience the dolours of her
infirmity, which were great. And the holy Virgin having co^sulted with him
about it, the Angel gave her this answer. Tell this afflicted person that she
put for the tester of her bed, Christ crucified; and for corteines, the ensign
of his passion, and so offer to God all his dolours. Many were the answers
which the Angel gave to the servant of God in diverse business, which every
moment she consulted with him; all full of mysteries, and like celestial
oracles, most important for the health of the soul: of which I leave some, not
to make this volume to large, and because they are like to these already
related.

12. This servant of our Lord, did not only treat with her good Angel, and
with other Angels, with the familiarity which we have seen, but she had the
same in very great degree with many saints, in especial with the most
glorious S. Annie of Padua, of whom from her infancy she was so tendered and
favored in all her labors, that in each occasion he was her singular
patron, and advocate. Being one time in prayer, asking of our Lord mercy for
her own, and for other souls, the glorious Saint appeared to her, and said:
Daughter, who pleases her sweetest espouse so much as thou do please him,
may demand much of him. And the saint contemplating the beauty of that most
sweet child which S. Antonie brought in his hand, began to speak to him
such loving speeches, and so sweet, that she stood so a great while, until the
same saint said to her: Turn away, my daughter, thy face, and be sorrowefull
for thy sisters, and for their necessities. And turning her face a little
aside, she saw two souls in great necessity: and with the great love she
bore to the child Jesus, she begged for them, saying with great humility, and
confidence: Lord I will not arise from these thy most holy feet, until I
obtain this favor. The which our most pious Lord, moved by her clamoures and
begging, did forthwith bestow upon her; And giving thancks to his divine
majesty for the pardon which he had given to those souls, saint Antonie
stretching out over her his hand, and giving her his benediction, said: Here
rests in his espouse, divine Jesus, the true espouse of souls. This rapt
endured long time, and the saint returned out of it, with so great mirth and
splendour in her face, that she caused great admiration to all the religious
which saw the same.

13. Another time the B. virgin making an end of doing a certain worck of
charity, to the benefit of one of the religious of the house, she remained
with some discomfort seeing her want of other necessities for her soul: and
this grief increasing in her, because the spiritual necessity of her sister
increased, fetching a great sigh, she called upon S. Antonie, saying: o my
Father S. Antonie, help me now, and be my intercessor to the divine majesty,
that he will deliver this my sister. This she said with so much charity and
love of God, that at the same instant, the saint appeared, and said to her:
beloved espouse of my Lord Jesus Christ, what do thou ask me? what is that
thou would have? for thou shall obtain it of his divine majesty. To the
which with most profound humility the blessed woman answered: my Father S.
Antonie, I find my self so unworthy, that I dare not appear before my most
sweet Jesus, but only by thy intercession. Then the glorious Father strerching
out his blessed hand, gave her his benediction, and the child Jesus which he
held in the other hand, said to her with many shows of love: I will help thee
in thy necessities; and that which now thou demandest for thy sister, is
already granted thee: who within one month, shall pass out of this temporal
life to the eternal, pardoning her many years of Purgatory by thy
intercession, and prayers. And giving many thancks to God for this mercy, with
great alacrity of spirit, she went to the religious, and bad her prepare her
self, for in very short time God would receive her to his rest. The sister
asked her how soon her departure should be; and she was answered, that within
one month. And it pleased our Lord, to give her at that instant, great
contrition, and sorrow for her sins, and within the month, took her from
hence to himself.

THE IX. CHAPTER.
How the servant of God was chosen Abbess, and of one dead which she raised to
life, and of other miracles which she did.
1 ALthough the B. Ioane was very young to undertake the office of a Prelate,
the No^nes not relying so much on her little age, as on her great virtue,
demanded her sometimes for Abbess of their convent. But the superiors
considering that she was not but five or six and twenty years of age, the
first time that they would have made her Abbess hindered it: And when in
another occasion the office was void, they besought the divine majesty, that
he would be pleased to put his servant into the same, who now was full 27. or
28. years of age. Our Lord heard them, and the provincial coming to the
convent to make the election, began to conceive some scruple for having
contradicted it before, when the religious would have chosen her. Although yet
it seemed doutfull to him, to place one for Abbess, who for the most part of
the time was rapt in prayer, he thinking it a great adventure so to do: for
offices, and business, be they never so holy, are wont oftentimes to distract
the persons. The provincial being doubtful, and combated with diverse
thoughts, and with the instances the religious made unto him, the hand of our
Lord came upon his servant, and she began to speak, elevated as she was wont
to be: and addressing her speech to the provincial (who was a Biscaner) she
spoke to him in the Biscay tongue, commanding him that he should make her
Abbess, for he might securely. All the Nonnes gave their voices, without
wanting one, and the Provincial confirming her, said: Sisters, I give you not
this Abbess but the holy Ghost who commands it: and recounted that which
has been said.

2. The Nonnes could not contain the joy they conceived, to see themselves
subjects to so blessed a Superior: who for the space of seauenteene years
that she was so, performed things of very great importance in the service of
God, and augmentation of the monastery; which was so poor and needy when she
began to govern, that it had only a few little lands whereon they sowed a
little miserable quantity of wheat, and nine reales of rent every year. But
God would forthwith by the merits of the holy Abbess, that the convent should
increase and be augmented, not only in great perfection of sanctity, and
virtue, but also in the edifices and other things necessary for humane life.
For Lords and Grandes of the kingdom, gave unto it certain great alms. The
Lord Cardinal freer Francis Simenes much devoted to her, was very notable
herein, and the great captain Gonsalo Fernandes of Corduba, ga^e unto it five
hundred thousand Marauadis at one time (a great alms for that time) with which
the servant of Go^ built one quarter, and the best dormi^orie that the convent
has. And for the divine service, she made many ornaments, vessels of gold
and silver, and she increased the house in rents, fifty bushell^ of wheat, and
fifty thousand marauadis every year, above all being markable in sanctity,
and in good government of the house.

3. She ordained that the Nonnes should be encloased, for until then (because
they were very poor) they did neither keep it, nor yet promise it, but went
abroad like to the freers, to demand alms of the neighbor places. She was so
much beloved of them, that they held themselves for blessed, in taking her
benediction, kissing her hand, or touching her habit. Besides this, the tender
love the nonnes carried her, and the fear and reverence they bare unto her,
was so much, that oftentimes it happened, that sending to call a religious to
her, she would come trembling, in such sort as it was necessary the blessed
superior should take from her that fear, to the end she might be able to make
her answer. Before all her chapters, went raptes, and very great eleuations,
in which she knew all the necessities of the convent and of the nonnes, as
well public as secret, spiritual as temporal, all which she remedied, and
provided for: her Angel keeper, often telling her, what she was to do, and to
ordain. Finally she exhorted them all, to what was good, and reprehended that
which was not so, chastizing with much charity and prudence, without
dissembling any fault, were it never so little. And for to animate the nonnes
in the service of God, and better observing of their profession and rule, she
related in the Chapter, many things of those which our Lord of his mercy showed
unto her.

4. One of the Religious being very ^icke, in the article of death, full of
great anxietie and vexation, which the memory of the pains of Purgatory
caused in her, and of the pains of hell, she gave most terrible groans, and
was in no^able extremity. The blessed Abbess seeing her fear, full of
charity and confidence, said: Daughter do not fear, trust in our Lord Jesus
Christ, who has created thee and redeemed thee, for thou shall not go to hell,
nor yet to Purgatory caused in her, and of the pains of hell, she gave most
terrible groans, and was in notable extremity. The blessed Abbess seeing her
fear, full of charity and confidence, said: Daughter do not fear, trust in
our Lord Jesus Christ, who has created thee and read ned thee, for thou shall
not go to hell, nor yet to Purgatory: and I, although miserable, beseech his
divine majesty, to bestow it, and grant it thee, with plenarie remission of
all thy sins. This said, the blessed Abbess went to communicate, and being
rapte, the sick party died, and she saw that they carried her soul to
judgment, taking of her a most strict account of all her words, worckes, and
thoughts; The holy virgin seeing this, cried out to the Angels, which were
present at that judgment, and said: Sirres, carry not that soul to
Purgatory, I pray you, for I trust in the mercy of God he will grant me this
favor, which I his unworthy servant have demanded of him. And so our Lord
granted it to her, and the liberty of that soul. Whence is seen, how much
the prayers of the just can do with God.

5. So much virtue this holy woman had, and so much love of God, and ze^le of
his honor, as our Lord was pleased to authorize the same with miracles, which
is wont to be the sealeof ^uch like favors. And as those of this servant of
God recounted from the beginning, were so miraculous and divine, it was
necessary that the testimonies to believe them, should also be supernatural
and divine. Among the which the raising of a child deserves the first place,
who died when her parents had carried her in pilgrimage to the convent of the
Cross the servant of God being Abbess at the same time, of whose sanctity
the world, had such opinion and credit, that the parents of the dead child,
persuading themselves that if she should give her benediction, she should give
her also life, entreated the same of her. But the humble Abbess refu^ed it,
excusing herself with words of humility: yet in the end being overcome by
natural pity, and by the tears, and great instance wherewith the afflicted
parents entreated her, she commanded to bring the dead child, and taking it
into her arms, she said on it a crucifix which she had about her, and making
upon her the sign of the Cross, raised her to life, and returned her to her
parents whole and sound, in the presence of more then eighty persons, all
witnesses of this miracle.

6. There was in Madrid a great Lady, called the Lady Anne Manrique, afflicted
with the pain of her side, and in great dout of the danger of her life. The B.
Ioane appeared unto her, as was known by that the sick Lady related
afterward, and by a letter of hers, with a clause which ru^eth in this manner.
I am much better, as you mother do know, since you have been with me. I well
saw you, when you visited me on the seventh day of my infirmity. I being
despiced of all, and full of pain and great g^^^e, law you come upon my bed,
and touching my shoulders, and that side where the grief held me it was by and
by taken from me: and with the great pleasure that I had (for your sigh^ ^^ue
me great alacrity) I did speak to you. Do not deny me, mother, this truth,
for your self knows that it is so. The nonnes understanding this, went to
know the truth of the humble Abbess; and she desiring to hide the ca^e, rather
then to manifest it, said: Do you not believe all that is said, sisters? But
they seeing that it was public in the court, and that the sick woman did
^iuulge it, besought her that she would not conceal it, but that for the
honor and glory of God, she would recount how it was. Then she said: Do not
thin^k, sisters, that this charity of having gone and visited our sister, came
(...) me, but from my holy Angel; for I requesting him that he would demand of
God to give her health, he said unto me: It shall be better that we go and
visit her, she being thy friend; for friends are known in necessities: and
entering into her chamber, he commanded me to touch her on the sholders, and to
make upon her the sign of the Cross, and the Angel gave her also his
benediction: and if she be healed, it was because he blessed her. Nether do I
marvel much, that God should permit her to see me, and not the Angel.

7 Another case very like to this, happened with another religious of her own
convent: for having carried her many league^ from thence to found a new
convent, after some years, our Lord sent her an infirmity, of which she died.
And being at the poin^ of death, and with great desire to see this servant of
God, she said wi^h much anxietie: O that I might see my mother Ioane of the
Cross? and drawing nerer to her end, she said with much alacrity: Do you not
see her? it is my mother Ioane of the Cross. And the other nonnes saying that
she was deceived; she answered, no surely for I know her well, it is she
indeed, as may be well perceived, by the much that she has comforted me. And
afterward this apparition was known to have been certain.

8. Two sick Religious, of which the one had two cankers, and the other one
upon her breast as bigg as ones fist, were healed by commending themselves to
their holy Abbess. And one Religious very sick of an ague, asked for a little
of the bread which the mother Abbess had left, uneaten, and as soon as she
had put it into her mouth, the ague left her, and she remained whole and
sound. Another Religious had one arm very dangerous soar with a great wound,
and asking of her good Angel that he would obtain of our Savior Jesus Christ
true health for that her sick sister, he answered her: This nonne has a
greater evil then you thinck, for it is Saint Martiales fire, and such as will
not heal unless it be by miracle. The fire began to manifest it self in her
arm, and she in such earnest prosecuted her prayer, that she obtained of God
health for the sick. To a little child sick of the evil of the heart, she gave
health, making upon it the sign of the Cross. And to the confessor of the
convent, being sick of a phrenesie, she gave health by blessing his meat. And
like unto these she did other miracles in the cure of the sick, and in
bringing to light many things lost, which were commended unto her prayers.

THE X. CHAPTER.
Of the beads which our Lord blessed at the instance of the B. Ioane of the
Cross.
1 BEfore I treat of the graces and virtues granted to the beads so
celebrated through the world, by the name of the beads of S. Ioane, it has
seemed to me convenient to advertise first, that being this miracle is so
singular, and which has so much excited the devotion of the faithful, not
only in Spain, but also in other parts very remote, the devil has procured
by means of his ministers, to mingle with the truth of the miracles (which
could not be denied, because they were so apparent) many superstitions, of
which some little summaries were full which went in print into the hands of
the ignorant people, which it was necessary to prohibit, as a thing many ways
pernicious.

2. The second, that there is great difference between the virtues which we
experience in things blessed, or things of devotion, as are Agnus Deies,
Relics, Images, etc. and those which we call indulgences; for this second
presupposes jurisdiction in him that grants them, and for to publish them,
certitude in the concession. In consequence whereof, although it be holden for a
tradition very ancient, that some Popes, and in especial Gregory the 13. of
happy memory, granted many indulgences to these beads, and this might be
without bulle, by only oracle of lively voice, at the iustance of the
generals, and of others devoted to Religion, as has been done in many other
cases of which the compendiums of the indulgences granted to the religious at
full; yet because this was not known with that claritie which was convenient,
I did not treat of these indulgences in particular in the first impression of
this book; nor yet did I hold it for inco^uenient to use the name of
indulgences; considering, that some of the said summaries which went abroad,
were fall and without ground: And yet because that sufficed not, I have
determined in this impression not to use the name of indulgences, or any other
which may presuppose jurisdiction, until it be made apparent by the
Apostolical grant: And so I use only the name of virtues and graces, which our
Lord granted to these beads, as has been manifested by many miracles,
without denying or affirming that the divine majesty, or any of the Popes,
have granted many indulgences to the said beads. For in matter of indulgences,
that cannot be published which is not proved by the indulte, neither dare I
deny that which tradition (so commonly received) ^oldeth, and which we read in
the originalls of the life of this servant of God.

3. The third, that th^se graces and virtues may not be contemned, for that
they are not always exp^^ienced; because they are favors of God, which he
grants to the faithful according to the good ^aith and devotion of every
one, or according to the necessity of the occasion, or according as his
majesty of his clemency, is pleased to impart: yea i^ is clear, that it
should be a great impiety to ^ffirme, that the Agnus Deies and other things
which are blessed, have not the virtues which are granted them in the
benedictions of the Church, because they are not always experienced.

4. This being supposed, the history ensues of the said beads, approved, not
only by tradition so ancient, but by many informations iuridically made, some
by the commission of the most grave prelates, others in their own persons, and
others by testimony of persons very worthy of credit, of all which mention is
made in relating the said miracles. And being the favors, which our Lord did
to his blessed servant sister Ioane, were so manifest, the Religious of the
said convent, desiring to help themselves by the intercession of their B.
Mother, prayed her that she would obtain of our Lord, by means of her good
Angel, that he would bless their Rosaries, and grant them some graces for
them, and for the souls of Purgatory, because in those times there were very
few hallowed beads. The servant of God out of her charity (who never knew
how to deny any thing they asked her for Gods sak^) did promise to treat thereof
with her Angel keeper: and having communicated it with him, and obtained of
God what she desired, she willed the nonnes, that against a certain day, they
should get together all the Rosaries and bea^^es they had, for our Lord of his
goodness would bless them, and had comanded that the Angel should bring the^
up to heaven, from whence he should bring the^ back again blessed. She spoke
not this to dea^ people, for the nonnes hearing her, sought in the house and in
all places of the country about, all the Rosaries, decades, and beads they
could: all which they brought her against, the day appointed: and being they
were so many and so different, hence it comes that there is so much
difference, of them: some of amber, and iett, others of wood, others of coral,
and of glass etc. the B. sister Ioane, when she saw amas^ed together so many
beads, she wild them to be put in a little chest, (which I have seen
sometimes and is kept in the convent wi^h great veneration, even from that time
unto this day) and one of the nonnes to lock it, and to keep the key to
herself.

5. This done she ^e^her self to prayer, and the religious seeing her rapt,
held for certain that that was the happy hour and instant when the holy
Angel should carry the Rosaries up to heaven, there to bless them. And so
carried away with a kind of curiosity, they came to the religious that kept
the key of the coffer, and opening it, they saw that it was empty, and that
there were no beads at all therein; whence they held for certain, that which
they had imagined; and so locking it again as it was before, they retired from
thence, that she returning from her rapt, might not see them, awaiting with
great comfort, the graces from heaven, which the Angel was to bring them, when
the servant of God should return from that rapte. From which when she returned,
there was felt over all the convent, so great fragrancie and sweetness of
savor, that drawn thereby, they came to ask the servant of God the cause of
such novelty. Presently, said she, sisters you shall know it, and the favor
which God has done us. Come to me, all of you, and especially she that has
the key of the little coffre.

6. It was a maruailous thing to see, it being but a little while since they
had opened it, and seen it empty, opening it now again, they found it with
the same Rosaries, and Beads, which they had put into it, without wanting any
one, because the Angel which had carried them to heaven, had now brought them
back again blessed, and put them in the same chest: and when the nonne opened
it who had the key, the smell which issued thence increased so much, as the
nonnes admired. But the B. Ioane told them, that that sweetness and good savor,
came from their Rosaries, the which had cleaued to them, as having been in the
most sacred hands of our Lord Jesus Christ, who not only had given them his
benediction, but granted them many graces and virtues: which she related to
them, and with all giving to every religions her beads, and of these, some the
called Agnus Deies, because our Lord had granted them the graces which the
Popes do grant to the Agnus Deies. Others against deuilles, for the virtue
which they had to cast them out of the bodies of the possessed. Others against
temptations and infirmities: and others against other perils, according to the
virtues which God had given them. And this great maruaill happened in the year
of our Lord, one thousand five hundred twenty three.

7. With ^his treasure of heaven, which our Lord Jesus Christ granted to his
servant, the religious remained much comforted* and much obliged to their
blessed mother, for the mercy which by her intercess^o^ they had received. And
with much devotion they began to en^oye the graces of those holy beads and
Rosaries: yet every one desiring to enjoy more copiously of that good, and to
participate of the virtues which the others had by their beads, they besought
the blessed Abbess, she would obtain of our Lord, that the graces and virtues
which his divine majesty had divided among all ^he Rosaries, he would
generally grant them all to every one of their beads, that they might better
participate of his mercies: The servant of our Lord did ask it of him, and his
divine majesty accorded it, with condition that for the graces of those beads,
they should not despise those which the Popes should grant upon the earth.

8. This is the history of these misteriou^ beads, of which the like so
rarely has been seen. And it is much to be noted, that our Lord did this
most notable favor to his Church, in a time when it was very necessary: for
it was at the same time when Luther impudently and sacrilegiously, opened his
excommunicated mouth against the indulgences and Reads of pardon, which the
Popes did grant, and against Agnus Deies, and all kind of holy things. The
virtues of these beads are many, and by experience it is known, that they
have virtue against the devils, for they drive them out of humane bodies,
confessing that they go out of them, through the virtue of these beads, and
fly from those that carry them about them. They have virtue also against fire,
against thunder, lightening, tempests, and troubles of the raging seaes, and
against many infirmities, both of body and soul. They heal agues, the
pestilence, and other infirmities. They are also of force against scruples,
temptations, and frightes of the devils. These and other virtues, our Savior
granted them, as is gathered by the miracles which are approved; for of those
which are not approved which are many, I do not speak, because all that I
shall speak in this history, I pretend (to the honor and glory of God) that
it be so authenticke and certain, as with reason, none may doubt thereof.

9. That which has been hitherto said, has been gathered from the
informations aforementioned, and especially of that which under oath certain
of the ancient religious did affirm, who knew and treated with the companions
of the same servant of God, and being deposed do swear, that they have heard
it told many t^mes, and it is a public tradition from those times, unto
these, that these beads were in heaven, and our Lord Jesus Christ blessed
them, granting them many virtues and graces, without any person of accoumpt
having spoken against them; but rather many Lords of this kingdom, and great
prelates thereof, have procured of them, and much esteemed them. King Philip the
second of glorious memory had one of the^, and our Catholic King Philipp the
third, and Margarite, have two of them, which they hold in very great
estimation: And Pope Clement the eight of glorious memory, who before he was
Pope came to Spain, with a brother of his, Auditor of the Rota, about the
businesses of the earldome of Punnonrostro, went from Torreion of Velasco to
the co^uent of the Cross where the body of B. Ioane is, in company of Don
John Arrias Portocarrero, and the Lady Ioane of Castro, his wife: and being
informed of the life and miracles of this virgin, and of the truth of these
beads, after he had said mass in the Chapel where her body lies, demanded
of sister Ioane Evangelist then Abbess, some of the beads, and with much
devotion, carried with him that which they gave him. And the blessed freers,
freer Francis of Torres, and freer Julian of Saint Augustine, men of singular
virtue, and sanctity, by whom in their life, and after their death God did
many miracles, do affirm, that these beads had been carried up to heaven, and
that Christ our redeemer had blessed them, and granted them many virtues and
pardons.

10. And to the end that the faithful might enjoy them, they persuaded the
people, that they* should touch their Rosaries and Beads, at those which they
brought with them. And if there were no other testimony of the truth of these
beads, but only the sanctity of this servant of God, and that only she had
affirmed it, it were most sufficient to persuade us, that she would not
deceive the Church, publishing false virtues and graces. And less can it be
thought, that she was deluded by the devil, who was so much enlightened of
God, and of her Angel keeper. But that which fully proves and confirms the
virtu and truth of these beads, are the many miracles which God has wrought
of his goodness, and in confirmation of them, and of those that have touched
them, which have the same virtue, as shall be seen in the ensuing chapters.

THE XI. CHAPTER.
Of the many miracles where with our Lord has confirmed the virtue of the
Beads aforsaid, and of those also that have touched them.
1 THe sovereign and divine maruaills which our Lord has wrought by the
intercession of this B. virgin, are so excellent and so seldom times seen in
the world, as they seem to the people incredible, if the testimonies from
whence they are drawn, were not so free from all suspect, as in her history
is already said. And because there is nothing of more force to confirm the
truth of an extraordinary thing, and surpassing the common course of nature,
the^ the truth of miracles, I will here recite to the honor and glory of God,
some of the many miracles, wherewith the divine majesty has confirmed them,
because they a^ the touchstone wherewith the supernatural things and truths of
God are known and approved: For God never does miracles in confirmation of
false things: and those which he does in confirmation of whatsoever truth, they
make it evidently credible, as is manifest in those wrought for the
confirmation of the faith, and the many which the divine majesty works,
every day, approving the sanctity of some saints. The same is to be judged of
the miracles which God has wrought in confirmation of these beads, which make
the truth of them so evidently credible, as there is no place left for humane
malice to discredit them. And because the miracles done in our days, do move
us more then the ancient miracles, all those which I will here speak of shall
be so new, as I will speak of none, of which the witnesses, judges, and
scriueners (before whom the informations out of which they are drawn passed)
are not at this present alive; and the informations themselves, their
originalls, or their authentical translations, in the archiue of the convent
of the Cross.

2. Dame Marie Perez, a neighbor of Madrid, lent a bead which she had, to
Emanuell Vasquez a priest of the same place, that the^with he might dispossess
a certain person: and as soon as they had put it upon the party, the devil
said, that Ioanes bea^ should not cast him out of that body: but the priest
hearing it said: by the virtue which God has put in this bead of the B.
Ioane, I command thee, devil, that thou by and by depart out of this woman:
and at that instant he went out of her, and she remained wholly melted in giving
thancks to our Lord, and the asistants with new devotion, redoubling their
feruor toward the beads.

3. Dame Agnes of Luxan, religious of the convent of saint Marie of the Cross,
does declare upon her oath, that bringing to the said convent a woman
possessed, she gave her a bead that she had, and putting it about her neck,
the devil went out of her that was possessed.

4. Father freer Francis Castannosa, of the order of our holy Father S.
Francis, diffinitor of the holy province of Castile, declared also under oath,
that having some of the said beads, and hearing say in P^nto where he was
guardian, that a priest was dispossessing a woman, went to the Church where he
was: and as soon as she espied him, she gave a leap of more then thirty
foot, flying from him: which seeing, he asked the possessed, wherefore she
started? who answered, because thou bring with thee certain beads; and the
said guardian, willing to dissemble it, showed his empty hands and said:
do thou not see that I bring nothing? but the devil crying out said: thou
bring beads, thou bring beads of that same Ioane of the Cross. What
virtue have they that thou flyest from them, said the guardian? And the devil
answered: I will not tell thee. And in such extremities was the possessed
woman, as she would never consent that they should put upon her those beads.
Whereby was experienced, how much the devils do fear them.

5. Isabell of Cerro, neighbor of the town of Torreion de Velasco, had three
of these Beads, and going out to hear the Mass of the children of the
doctrine in Madrid, she met with a possessed woman, who had her face all
scratched and full of marks: and putting upon her the said Beads, she
began forthwith to sweat, crying out and bleating like a goat, whereupon the
devil went out of her: but as soon as they were taken from her, she was
possessed again. Another time, putting upon her another Bead of one of the
religious of our holy Father S. Francis, the devil went out of her again: and
that he might no more return to torment her, the Religious bestowed that Bid
upon her.

6. The said Isabell of Cerro, being in Torreion, she heard tell, that a
certain young man which came to her house was possessed, whom they carried to
exorcise, to S. Toribio of Lieuana; She moved with compassion, put her Beads
upon him, and the devil making a greeuos stir said: if thou knew the
torment thou put me to, thou would let me alone. O what do I see! O what
do I see! and saying this and crying out, he p^ssed through the press of
people, and with such admirable swiftne fled aw^y, that they could not catch
him, although many people ran after him.

7. Another possessed woman, came to the house of the sai^ I^^be^^ of Cerro, so
cruelly tormented by those ^ell^she furies, as it was pi^^ie to see her. But
touching her on the mouth with the Beads, she fell down as one dead, and
remained blue, and all covered with a great sweat: but a little after she
arose, greatly comforted to see herself delivered, thorough Gods asistance,
from that cruel tyrant.

8. Father freer Peeter of Salazar, consultor of the supreme council of the
holy inquisition, who had been Provincial in the province of Castile, declared
upon his oath being examined thereon, that he knew that the Beads of B. Ioane,
have not only virtue against the devils, but also against fire, tempests,
lightenings, thunderboltes, and all torments of the se^, and that this is a
thing well known in these kingdoms, and confirmed by much experience and by
many miracles; Especially he declared that the year past, which was a
thousand six hundred and nine, the twentieth day of May, there was a great
tempest of thunder and lightening, from which to be defended, a woman of little
Torreioncillo, called Marie Buena, blessed her self with a Bead of the B. Ioane,
and the tempest increasing, a thunderbolt fell, which killed a little dog she
had on her lap, and she remained without hurt: afterward, this very miracle
was approved, and the said woman swear that it was true, as has been told.
So many extraordinary things have happened in matter of thu^derbolts, as this
might chance without miracle; but for such it was judged, and lastly the thing
is recounted as it happened.

9. Moreover, the aforsaid Father affirmed, that going to Rome to the General
chapter, which was celebrated in the time of Sixtus Quintus, being at sea about
the Port of Niza, there arose so great a tempest, that all of them were at the
point to perish: and being much troubled and calling for help from heaven, he
remembered himself, that he carried with him a bead of B. Ioane, and casting it
into the sea, fastened to a long cord, that he might get it again, in that
instant the heaven cleared, and the tempest ceased, and the sea was assuaged
in such sort, that they gained the haven, and all of them gave many thanckes to
God, for having delivered them from so manifest peril, by the virtue of that
bead, to the which all of them attributed it, because the fair wether came so
instantly, and so unhoped for by the mariners.

10. Christofer of Cerro neighbor of Torreion, affirmed, that a great tempest
of thunder, hayle, and lightening fallinge, he remembered himself of one of
these beads which he had with him, and desiring that all that stood there,
should know the virtue of these beads, he threw that which he had toward that
quarter whence the tempest came, and at the same instant it ceased, and the
sky waxed clear, to the great admiration of them all.

11. Luissa Roman, neighbor of Torreion, fell into a great infirmity, for
which she was wholly despaired of by the physicians: and being almost dead,
they put about her neck the beads of the B. Ioane, and she saw in a dream,
that a nonne of her habit put on her the said beads, and bad her take courage,
for with those she should be healed; And when she awaked, she was found
covered with a great sweat, and wholly healed, not without great admiration of
all those who had seen her in so great peril, and all praised our Lord for so
great a meruaill.

12. Anne of Lero, widow, neighbor of Torreion, was much oppressed with a
palsy, in such sort that she could not stir her arm, nor her left leg; and
commending herself to the B. Ioane of the Cross, she promised, that if it
pleased her to heal her, she would visit her holy body for nine days
together. And putting upon her one of those beads, she found herself suddenly
whole. The same woman also in the time of ^he plague, had upon her, two deadly
impostumes; was quitte despaired of the physicians, and forsaken of the people
of her own house, who to fly from the plague, utterly left her. But remembering
her of a bead, she hoped that by the merits of the Saint, our Lord would
restore her to her health. She was not frustrated of her ho^e, for the divine
majesty caused, that the self ^ame hour in which the physician affirmed she
would dye, she was all covered with a sweat, which being past, she was well,
and called the people of her house unto her, asking them to give her to eat:
the Physician demanding on the morrow, it she were dead, they told him that
she was amended, and entering to see her, he found her without any manner of
sickness, and when she was well recovered, she came to watch at the body of B.
Ioane, as she had promised.

13. Dame Isabell of Valleio, was in Alcada of Henares much oppressed with the
evil of the heart, and with other infirmities, so perilous, as that she was
despayred of; But laying one of these Beads upon her heart, it stuck so fast
unto her flesh, as if they had nailed it, and she began presently to be
better, and in short time obtained entire health of all her infirmities, by the
virtue which God had put into that beade.

14. Hieronyma Evangelist, a Religious of the convent of the Cross, declared,
that as she eat a little fish, a sharp bone went cross her throat; and
fearing to choke herself, she commended it to the glorious S. Blase: but
seeing her self still oppressed of her grief, and calling to mind the beads
of B. Ioane, inuoked her help, and putting to her throat one of the beads, at
that very instant, the thorn came out all bloody at that end which had stuck
fast in her throat, and she remained whole and well.

15. A Lady of Madrid (whom for just respects I do not name) being much
perplexed with scruples, and doutes of faith, wherewith the devil did disquiet
her, procured a beade of the B. Ioane, and only with carrying it about her, she
remained free from the temptations of the devil. And the same bead put upon a
grandchild of the justice Villaroell in Madrid, who then was sick of a strong
ague, she remained forthwith well: discovering herein the virtue which our Lord
put in these beads, against the perils both of soul and body.

16. Marie Nuns, a neighbor of Torreion, on a time said to Isabell of
Cerro, her neighbor, that there was no salvation for her, for she was
condemned, and that her Angel keeper had now forsaken her. The said Isabell of
Cerro hearing this, put in her hand the beads of B. Ioane, with which she
slept for the space of an hour, and awaking she said: Ah neighbor what is
this you have put betwixt my hands, for by it I have found both health, and
remedy: and presently remained free from that desperation and madness, in to
which she formerly was fallen.

17. Anne Lopez, a neighbor of the foresaid place; prayed the said Isabell of
Cerro, to give her one of those beads, for to put it upon a son of hers,
which saw many evil visions, and after she had put it on him, he never saw
them more, but remained very quiet and well at ease. A little while after,
Isabell prayed her to restore her the bead back again, being her son was now
well: but she covetous thereof, would not render it, whereupon the said Isabell
of Cerro, said: I pray God thou may never enjoy it: and so it happened, for
Anne, saying her prayers upon it, it vanished from out of her fingers, leaving
her full of confusion, and fear, and never after could she see it.

18. Agnes Baptist a religious in the monastery of Saint Marie of the Cross,
gave one of these beads to Francis of Royas her cousin germane, and he losing
it upon the way, missed it, and returning back some leagues so seek it,
praying the glorious Ioane of the Cross that he might find it, because he
esteemed it very much, he found it in a cobwebb, in the air, elevated a yard
from above the ground; and with much reverence he took it, and caused it to
be set in gold, and full of tears and devotion, he recounted this history to
his before named cousin, which she relates upon her oath.

19. It is also manifest by information, and by the testimony of Isidore
Garcia, public scri^ener of the town of Cubas, that in the year 1607. the
11. day of July, Anne de Montoya a neighbor of Valdemoro, being in the Church
of the monastery of the Cross, fulfilling a nouen, or nine days prayer,
which she had promised to the blessed Ioane of the Cross (for having
delivered her husband from a very perilous infirmity) and desiring much to
have some of her beads, prayed that she might find one, and being in this
prayer, one came in the air, which fell from on high, and struck her on the
fore head, in the sight of Angela of Auila, wife to John Giron, and Catharine
of Tolosa, wife to John Martinez, neighbors of Cienposuelos, who were present,
and declared it before the said scriuener. And considering the place where the
woman ^ate when the bead fell, it was a miraculous chance, for it could not be
by humane industry, because there was not near about it any door, window,
hole, not chin^k, whereby they might cast it, which therefore is holden for a
miracle of the blessed Ioane of the Cross.

THE XII. CHAPTER.
Of other miracles, which our Lord has wrought with the Beads, touched at the
original Beads.
1 NOt only the beads which the Angel carried up to heaven, and there were
blessed by our Lord, have the virtues which we have seen. But also those have
the same which are touched at them, as the B. Ioane had said to her religious.
And the virtue of these beads, do much more prove the miracles done at those
that have been touched of them, which have been done by means of those which
our Lord blessed in heaven. For if only for having to^ched these beads* they
have such property and virtue as to cast out ^iuells, and do other miracles,
it is clear that the beads which gave them this virtue, do not want it
themselves; when in good Philosophy they must have it eminently. And because
miracles are so good a proof and so sufficient, for supernatural things (for
no proof is equal unto it, because a miracle being done in confirmation of
the doctrine which is preached, God is found to be the witness thereof) I willl
here recount some, gathered of the above named informations, and of another
made by authority of his excellency of Toledo, for the auouching of certain
miracles of the blessed freer Julian of S. Augustine, by whom our Lord has
wrought so many, that those which are iuridically proved in nintie and two
authentical informatio^s, a^erred by a thousand and four hundred witness,
taken first by authority of the ordinary, and after by especial commission
of his holiness pass the number of six hundred. This servant of God, had one
of the original Beads, and so much devotion bare he to it, as he exhorted the
people, to touch their Rosaries at the same, and in this wor^k of charity
there fell out strange cases wi^h the devils, who procured to deprive him of
it, as these miracles which follow do approve.

2. The blessed Father being in the yard where they of the town of Villanueua
dress their corn, there came to him Marie Sanz, wife to Bartholomew de
Onchell the elder, and requesting him that she might touch her Rosarie, at the
beade that he had hanging at this Rosarie, he said: lift up first this stone
which is hard by us: the woman tried twice and could not, for it burnt like
fire, and she burnt herself: B. freer Julian seeing this, said: Do not labor
about it daughter, for this is no stone, although it seems so to be, but it
is a devil, which pretendet to hinder, that thy beads be not touched at the
bead of B. Ioane, that thou may not enjoy of the virtues which God has put
therein; like cases to these happened him many times in the said town of
Villanueua, and in Camarma, as appears by the said information, and that the
stones disappeared, when the saint discovered what they were.

3. In the town of Meiorada, the servant of God being a touching other
Rosaries, at the bead which he had, there came to him Julian Dias, daughter of
Albertus de Cobeia, that he might touch her ten beads, and the saint said:
They have been touched at an other time, and they have the virtue of the
beads of the B. Ioane: which was approved to be so, and that it was more then
two years, since Francis Moreno a neighbor of Zelafe, had touched them in
Madrid at another beade.

4. Magdalen Es^riuano, a neighbor of Torreion of Velasco, was much tempted by
the devil, who appeared to her oftentimes, and offering her a rope, willed
her, to hang herself; But our Lord was pleased, that he laying upon her a
touched bead, the devil never more appeared unto her, and she remained free
from him, and from the fears, and amazements which he suggested unto her.

5. A certain Doctor was much troubled with scruples and doutes, in matters of
faith, wherewith the devil vexed him: and having heard speak of the virtue of
the beads of the blessed Ioane, he procured one of the^ that were touched, and
with only carrying it about him, he remained free, and with the same bead, cast
the devil out of a man.

6. Carrillo, priest and singing man of the holy Church of Toledo, had one of
the touched beads: and thinking that it was of the originalls (because for
such it was given him) coming where there was a possessed person, the devil
wild him that he should get him from him, because he brought with him a bead of
S. Ioane, which although it were of those that were touched, had the same
virtue that the others had, and that he much tormented him with it: and with
this the priest was freed of his error, and knew that the bead was no
original, but of the touched; yet that it had the self same virtue, which
those had which Christ himself blessed. And although the devil be the Father
of lies, yet in such like cases, God is not wont to let him lie, nor yet permit
him to deceive us.

7. M^rie Magdalen a Religious of the convent of the Cross, declared on her
word, that a woman of Mad^id, came to watch at the said convent, and said that
she seeing a poss^ssed person carried to be exorcised, and remembering herself
of the beads of B. Ioane, said: oh that we had one! another woman that went
with her heard it, and answered: I have one of those that are touched, but I
will not part with it, least it be lost: and the foresaid woman said: why then
let me touch another with that, for although those that that are touched, are
not of the original Beads, yet faith will suffice. And touching a bea^ at
that which had been touched, went with it to the Church where they exo^cised
the possessed person: and as soon as she entered at the door, the devil
began to cry out, saying, that they should put out that woman from thence, for
with a bead that she brought, she tormented him more then all hell together.

8. Dame Katharine of Salazar declared, that a woman slave of her mothers, had
one of the touched beads, and that going one day to the market, she saw many
people about a possessed person, and coming also to look on, the possessed
began to cry out, saying: Take away from thence that slave, for she
torme^teth me with a be^d which she brings of that same Iugg. Which the
people hearing, gave place that the slave might come near, and put the bead
upon the possessed person, and at that instant the devil went out of him,
leaving him free: all that were present, admiring the virtue which God had put
in the said beads.

9. John of Arriaga, a neighbor of Cubas, had a broken bead of those that were
touched, and going to the town of Pinto, he found that they were exorcising in
the Church, a woman possessed by the devil: who so soon as he saw him,
began to cry out, that they should put from thence that man, for he bringes a
bead of Iugg of the Cross, which tormented him more then hell it self: and
the said Arriaga, gave it to the priest which exorcised, and putting it upon
the possessed, the devil went forthwith out of her, and left her free.

10. Catharine of S. Anne, an old religious of the convent of the Cross, gave
to a certain man, one of these beads, and he thinking that it was of the
originalls, expected the hour to make experience of it, and of the virtue it
had against the devils: and meeting with one possessed, and putting it upon
him, the devil fell into great extremities, saying most furiously: it is not a
beade of S. Ioane that casts me out, but a bead of S. Anne; for so was the
religious called that gave it him, because it was not an original, but of
those that were touched thereat.

11. Many other miracles I leave to set down; for it seems to me that these
do sufficiently prove the virtue of these beads, and that which they have that
are touched at them, and such are the most of those that are extant: for of
those original Beads which our Lord blessed in heaven, there are very few,
being that with the time they have been lost and consumed. In the conue^t of
the Cross there are two, since the time of the glorious Ioane: and among the
nonnes thereof some are found, and other particular persons also have of them.
In the town of Cubas, so nere to the convent of the Cross, are found some of
them, so much esteemed of those who have them, that they are hereditarie from
one to another, and they leave them by will of testament when they dye, for the
great devotion they have to the said beads, and great experience of the
virtues which God has put in them.

THE XIII. CHAPTER.
Of many other miracles, which our Lord has done by means of the said Beads.
1 Our most clement Lord who has done so many favors to his servant, sister
Ioane of the Cross, at the same time when the contempt was made of the Beads
which his divine majesty had blessed at her insta^ce, was pleased to worck
many others in defense of the truth, and in public places, where the
ecclesiastical and secular judges, could make iuridicall processes. Of the
which I will here recite some, to the greater glory of almighty God.

2. Francis Rodrigues, the Son of Antonie Rodriguez, and of Helena Rodriguez
neighbors of Monforte de Lemos, and resident in the city of Valladolid, of
24. years of age, being on thursdays at night well and sound of his eyes, was
found so blind on the morrow, that although he opened them, yet he could not
see the light of the day, nor the shininge of the sun, no^ any other thing:
and so he went blind, leaning upon a staff, and asking alms almost three
months, until coming to ask at the monastery of S. Francis of Valladolid,
after the porter had given him his alme^, having great pity of him, he put
upon his eyes an o^^ginall bead of the B. Ioane of the Cross, which is in the
same convent, and touched therewith his Rosarie which he carried, bidding him to
have much devotion and faith toward the glorious saint: and that when he went
to bed, he should put that Rosarie many times upon his eyes, and so he did with
the greatest devotion that he could all that night, calling many times upon the
Saint, until he fell a sleep: and waking in the morning being Palm sunday,
in the year 1611. he found his eyes very clear and well, and with the self
same sight as before: for the which not containing himself for joy, he arose
from his bed crying out, and without remembering his staff on which he leaned
(for now he had no need of it) he went strait to give thancks to the saint, to
the foresaid convent of S. Francis where her image is painted, as also that
both the freers and the porter, might see the favor God had done him. Whereupon
Doctor Don Fernande de Valdes, Prouisor general of the Bishopric of
Valladolid, examined him iuridically: and the information being made, with many
other sworn witnesses, and with the interue^tion of the fiscall of the
episcopal audience, this above said was found to be true, by the same
original information which is in the office of John de Vaga in the city of
Valladolid, Notarie, and the authentical coppie thereof in the convent of the
Cross. Also Doctor Ortega de Salazar teniente of the corrigidor of Valladolid,
gave another information upon this case, before Peter of Auila, a public
scriuener of his majesty, and of the number of that city, approved by
Antonie Vasquez of Barreda, and John de Gamarra, the Kings public scriueners
of Valladolid. It is also manifest by a testimony, sealed and signed by seven
scriueners of the King, and of the number of the forenamed city: the which is
originally kept in the convent of the Cross.

3. The same year it happened in Valladolid, that a child of thirteen
months, the son of one John of Velasco, a Gold smith, being sick of the
squincie, and of the evil of the throat, together with an aposteme in the
throat, and besides all these infirmities it did not suck, and had n^we the
breast swollen, which caused the phisi^ia^s ^o despair of it who had it in
cure: The parents seeing that their child would dye, and that there was, no
remedy for it on the earth, commended it to the B. Ioane of the Cross, and
put upon the throat of it, th^ee of her touched beads, wherewith the aposteme
brake, and the child cast out at the nose and mouth, great quantity of matter
and blood, and witho^t any other benefit by and by took the breast, and
remained sound, all holding it for a miracle of the ^aint* according as under
oa^h Doctor Hernan Sanches, Professor of Physic in the University of
Valladolid declared, who was the physician that had it in cure, being
iuridicallie examined by Doctor Fernando de Valdes, Provost general of the
Diocese of Valladolid, who gave the information of this miracle: which
declaration is in the office of John Vega, Notarie of Valladolid, and the
authentical copy of it, in the convent of the Cross.

4. It fell out also the same year, that Manuela de Toro, daughter of Antonie
de Toro, and of Anne de la Fuente, neighbors of the forenamed city of
Valladolid, having a great running in her eyes, and two clodds or skins that
covered them, although they applied many remedies, none pro^ited until they
put upon her eyes, an original bead of the B. Ioane, which is in the convent
of S. Francis o^ V^lladoli^, wherewith she remained sound of her sight.

5. Marie of Tordesillas, daughter to Gabriell of Tordesillas, a Broker in
Valladolid, being a child of only ^wo months old, fell into certain
quartanes and very strong ag^es, which dured her for four ^eares, and it
pleased God, that touching her with the beade of B. Ioane which is in the
convent of saint Francis, and putting about her neck another of the touched at
it, she remained forthwith, found and perfectly whole.

6. Marie Mexia, wife to John of Mexia scriuener in Valladolid, became blind of
both her eyes by certain wennes, and putting upon them the Rosarie of her
husband, which had been touched at a beade of the Saint, and commending
herself to her, recovered sight at the second time that they applied the said
Rosarie to her eyes.

7. Ga^par de Arriaga, who resideth in the court, and Anne Perez his Lady
declared, how the said Ga^par de Arriaga, being sick with a pain of the side
and of very great agues, forsake of the Physicians, his wife commending him to
the B. Ioane of the Cross, and making on that side where the pain was, many
Crosses with one of the touched beads, it pleased God, that at that instant he
was ridd of the pain and of the ague, and was presently well: and so they
promised to go and visit her body: and in accomplishing the aforsaid
promise, they swear that this above said was truth, whereof information was
made, and is originally kept in the convent of the Cross, and in the same is
related another case much like unto this.

8. In Villaseca of Sagra was a woman much persecuted of the devil, which many
times appeared to her in diverse forms, giving her many blows and punches; but
it pleased our Lord, that putting upon her one of the touched beads, the
devil tormented her no more, nor came unto her from that time forward,
although once he appeared to her, and told her, that if she would not take away
that beade, which was not of the true originalls of Ioane of the Cross, he
would choke her. And the woman noted, that this time the devil did not come
nere her as he was wont, not yet within five paces of her: whereof John
Fernandez de Plaza scriuener of his majesty, and notarie of the holy office in
the town of Cubas, the yea^ 1611. gave his testimony.

9. Dame Luissa de P^rres Montaluo, neighbor of Valladolid, being deaf of
both her ears, and no remedy profitting her, of many which were sough^e, was
healed by touching a beade of the B. Ioane of the Cross, and putting upon her
ears others o^ those (...) had been touched at it, remained ^er^ectly whole:
whereof the original information, is in the con^ent of the Cross.

10. In the city of Palencia, was a man possess^^ (...) ^he devil, who seeing
a surgeane of the same citt^^, ^ed and bad him get him from him for he came to
kill him; and the surgeane bidding him ^ooke for he had no weapons wherwithall
^o offend hi^: he answered, that it was with the beads he brought with him,
of Ioane of the Cross. This possessed person being to be exorcised, infinite
people came together, and the foresaid surgeane; whom as soon as he saw, he
said, calling him by his name: what w^t thou with me Peter Doblanza, that thou
so do persecute and burn me? the surgen replied, with what do I thee so much
harm, when I have no weapons to offend thee? then the possessed person lifting
up his voice, said: With those which thou sleep with a nights, which are
three beads touched at that of Ioane of the Cross, the which thou wearest on
thy wristes and throat: Wherein was manifest, that it was the devil who spoke
in that man, because this was so secret, that none at all knew thereof. And it
was more known, because at the first exorcismes, the curate commanded him to
tell who he was, and he said satan. Then the curate demanding some bead of B.
Ioane, they gave him a Rosarie which he put about his neck, although the
possessed refused it much, and began to make many faces and gestures, making
show of many most grievous pinchinges, and griefs: whereupon the curate asking
of him, what he felt? he answered, that he felt greater pains and torment with
that Rosarie, then if for three thousand years he had been in hell, suffering
all the pains and torments, which there are suffered: and this he said with a
voice so terrible and so sorrowful, as he feared all that heard it. Being
asked by the curate whose those beads were which so much did torment him? he
answered, that they were Ioanes of the Cross: and again asking him if they
were of the originalls: he answered no, but of those that were touched, at
them; addinge that he would go out of that body, if they would take them away,
for they much burned him. The curate took them away, and in the sight of all,
the devil went out of the body, and never returned again, but rather from
that time forward they have seen him do many things of devotion, and ask
beads of the Saint, which he carries about him. The original information of
this case as it has been recounted, is in the convent of the Cross.

11. In the town of Madrid it happened in the year 1611. that Marie of
Aluarado being very sick of a strong evil of the heart, that took her very
often, during when it was least, an hour and a half, having actually this
sickness upon her, they put upon the pulse of her hand, a bead of the B.
Ioane: and at the same instant she returned to her self, and was well, with
great admiration to all those that saw her, who remained praising our Lord in
his servant: whereat were found present many witnesses, and seven public
scriueners of his majesty, residing in the court and province, and one
Apostolical Notarie, who gave his testimony and signed it with their seals,
and confirmed it with their names, as appears by the original testimony,
which is yet in the convent of the Cross.

12. All the miracles which hitherto have been related in this chapter, are of
the year 1611. and those that our Lord does every day, by means of the beads
of this his servant are so many, as if all of them were to be written, they
whold contain a great volume. Wherefore leaving many, I will recount one
public, and notorius meruaill, seen and examined by many people, which at
this day, and every day God works in the town of Grinnon, six leagues from
the court of our Lord the King, upon a woman taken with so great soundinges,
as coming upon her very often, they are wont to dure her two days and nights
together: proceeding of a strong evil of a running gout, which because she
has had it many years, and is an aged person, it is incurable in her, as the
physicians affirm which have had her in cure. Being as it were dead with this
evil, and with these so great soundinges, deprived of all kind of sense, if
they put on her a bead of the B. Ioane, she comes to her self, saying Jesus:
and if they take it of, presently she falls into her sound again, the same
effect being known to be as often as they take it of and put it on; in such sort
as the sound taking her, her remedy consists in that they put on her the
bead. And this is a thing so known there about, that whosoever has any of
these beads, to be out of doubt, and to know if they be true, they go and
make experience upon this sick woman: as is manifest by diverse testimonies,
which concerning this point, diverse scriueners have given that have seen it,
and by a declaration of Doctor, Roias, physician, made before Francis Ortiz de
Herrera, public scriuener of our Lord the King, from whom is also taken this
testimony following.

13. I Francis Ortiz of Herrera, public scriuener of his majesty, neighbor
and native of this town of Grizonno, do testify and faithfully declare, that
Marie de la Vieia, daughter of Bartholomew de la Vieia, neighbor of the same
town, has been sick these three years last past, and is so now at this
present, of an evil which the physicians call a running gout, which is wont
to take her so furio^sly, as she gives herself great strokes on her body,
enduring on her, two days and two nights: for about five or six months, the
said Marie de la Vieia has had this evil, who when she is deprived of her
senses, putting upon her a bead of the B. Ioane of the Cross, e^her to her
neck, or throat, or what part soever of her body, in such sort that it touch
her flesh, she ret^rneth forthwith in that instant out of her sounding, saying
many times Jesus: and in taking it from her, in the same instant she is bereued
of all her senses, and the said evil returns to her; but putting the said
bead to her, she returns to herself until she be altogether well. And this
miracle being seen so patent, and the sounding taking her so ordinarily, many
persons which have the said beads and relics, put them upon the forenamed
Marie de la Vieia; when she is in her sounding and without sense, and by and by
she returns to herself: which has been done in my presence infinite times,
especially one night when Father Did^cus Ordonnes, Commissarie general of the
order of our Seraphicall Father S. Francis, being come to the monastery of
this town of Grinnon, the Lord Don Pedro de Mendoza, son and heir of the
Lord Don Ynigo Lopes of Me^doza, Lord of this town, and also of Cubas, called
in my presence his reverend Paternitie, that he might see the miracles which
our Lord wrought by mean of the beads of the B. Ioane: who went to see it,
and saw how the said Lord Don Pedro, touched the said Marie de la Vieia with a
beade, and making with the same the sign of the Cross, saying in the name of
the most holy Trinity, and of the B. Ioane, although she were were in a sound,
yet by and by she came to herself and said, Jesus: and if they took, from her
the said bead, the former evil took her again, and as before, she remained
deprived of her senses.

14. His reverend Paternitie seeing so great a miracle, and so patent, drew out
two beads which he had with him of the B. Ioane, and made the same proof, and
she came to herself with whichsoeuer of them: and taking them from her, she
fell into the same. And this passed in presence of me the said scri^ener, and
the said Father commissarie general, and his secretary, and of the Guardian
of Pinto, and of many others who all admired it, and gave many thancks to God
that they had seen with their eyes so great a miracle done by mean of the
beads of the B. Ioane of the Cross. And the same I testify, succedeth every
time that the evil takes her putting upon her whichsoeuer of the said
beads. Which that it might be manifest, I have given this testimony, and have
signed and sealed it: and the said Lord Don Pedro de Mendoza, confirmed it
also, in Madrid the eight day of April in the year 1611. Don Pedro Gonzales
de Mendoza, and Bo^mediano in testimony of the truth.

Francisco Ortiz de Herrera.
15. Our Lord would not shut up the virtue of these beads within the limits
of Spain, but that extending it beyond them, other nations also might enjoy
it, for now they have experience^, and known it. In the city of Ays, in the
kingdom of France, on Easter ^ay the 2. of April in the year 16. 2. passing
by the same city Father Antonie de Treio commissarie general of Indies, and
other Fathers Prouincialls, and Gardians of the order of our holy Father S.
Francis, of the provinces of Spain, which went to the general chapter, to be
celebrated in Rome, being in the connent of our holy Father S. Francis in the
said city, they understood how there was in the same, a monastery of
religious much reformed of the order of S. Clare, in the which of forty nuns
which were therein, twenty four of them were possessed by the devil; a case
which grieved all the city and kingdom. For the which the Bishopp of the
city, moved with compassion, carried them to his palace, where he kept them
with all the care and tenderness possible, that so with more commodity he
might come to remedy so great an evil, and to the spiritual comfort of their
souls, which was done by the asistance, of the said Lord Bishopp, and of the
religious of our order, to whom this care was committed. Some of the Fathers
which were there especially Father Hierom of Cauanillas, reader Iubilate in
divinity, and custos of the province of Valencia, Father Peter Iouer, reader
of divinity, and custos of the province of Catalunna, now Provincial of the
same: Father John Grao, reader of divinity of the same province: Father
Echauarri, preacher, of the province of S. James: and Father John Ninno,
Vice-commissarie general of the Indies, and reader of divinity in S. Francis
of Salamanca, hearing of so pittyfull a case, and desiring to put some remedy
thereto, together with the two religious, who had charge to repair to the
spiritual comforth of the religious, went the first day of Easter to the
palace of the Lord Bishopp, where the religious lived with their Abbess: and
those which were sound, received them in a high hall after the manner of a
chapel, where they saw an altar whereon stood the B. Sacrament with lights,
and some of the^ upon their knees.

16. After they had made their prayer, they brought forth those that were
possessed: who so much refused it, that they came with an evil will and by
force, crying out, and foming at the mouth, scratching their faces, and
sweating through great affliction and vexation. For remedy thereof, the said
Father John, having a bead of the B. Ioane of the Cross, put it upon the head
of one of those which was possessed, without telling her whose it was; but
forthwith she began to manifest it, crying with aloude voice and making most
fearful and terrible faces, and much hurting her own self, said: take it
away, take it away: the Father would not do it, but asked her what she felt
with that bead which so pained her. To which she answered in french, that they
should take away the bead, for although they ^^ld tear her to pieces she would
not tell: seeing this he commanded her in virtue of the holy Ghost, and the
priestly dignity which he had, that he should tell him what she felt with that
beade, and whose it was? The possessed party stood a good while without
answering any thing, until forcing her by exorcisme she said, that that beade
was of Ioane the Spaniard, and that with it she felt so much fire, after they
had put it upon her head, as if they had put her into a burning oven. He also
asked her what virtue that bead had: and although at the beginning she ref^sed,
yet still constraining her, she said it had many virtues: and commanding her in
virtue of the holy Ghost, that for the glory of God, and of his servant the B.
Ioane of the Cross, she should tell which was the greatest it had, she said:
It has virtue against us. And asking her from whence the beade had that
virtue; she answered, that from the benediction of God above. And that an
Angel had carried it up, (pointing toward heaven) to the end it should be
blessed of God.

17. Whilst this passed thus with this religious possessed, many of the others
fled away: but bringing them to the presence of all and putting upon them the
beads, the same succeeded with them, which had succeeded with the other, every
one severally confessing that the bead was of Ioane, and that the Angel
carrying it up. God had blessed it, from whence it had the virtue which it had.
And because at the beginning, the Fathers did not well understand some worde^
which the possessed parties spoke, for that it was in French, they were
explicated unto them by the two religious men, who had them in charge, and by a
Doctor of Physic which had them in cure. It was also seen, that touching
their Rosaries at the said bead, the devil did the same, confessing that they
had the same virtue, and putting in the mouth of one of the^ a Rosarie touched
at the said bead, she made strange faces, and cried out, saying: that if they
took it not from her, she would tear them in pieces: and the said Father made
her answer, that she could not do it, for that the beads of that Rosarie had
virtue from God: and she answered: it is true, I cannot, and so she did them
no manner of damage.

18. It was also seen, that with another of the said beads which Father
Cauanillas one of the forenamed carried, the same succeeded: and that Father
Peter Iouer, carried with him two beads, which had been given him in Castile,
although of the one he were doubtful, if it were a right one yea or no,
because the person which had given him them, told him, that for the one it was
most certain, but for the other he held it not for so certain. And the said
Father asking of one of the possessed, that for the honor and glory of God and
of his Saint, she would tell him if those beads were of Saint Ioane, she
answered that the one was most certain, pointing to that which for such had
been given him, and that the other was not of the true beads. It was also
seen, how in presence of those which were there (as to all it appeared) the
devil went out of the bodies of the religious which were possessed, in putting
on the^ the aforesaid bead, for the same instant that the devil left them,
they remained weary and sweating exceedingly, they made the sign of the
Cross, and blessed themselves, and those which before fled from the bead,
ki^^ed it, making show of denotion, and that they were free from the devil:
and she which was first free of him, help the others, that they might put upon
them the bead. Whereat, and at all the above said, were found prelent the said
Fathers, who gave testimony of it, and swear it to be true, in verbo
sacerdotis, in the word of a Priest.

19. Likewise there are witnesses yet living, and above all exception, who have
read a letter newly written of the most excellent Lord Cardinal Dietrichastain
Archbishop of Nichilspurg^ in Almania, to the Lady Marquess of Mondeiar his
Sister, wherein is a clause of the tenor following. Your excellency shall do me
a singular favor, in sending me the other bead of saint Ioane of the Cross,
for certainly I have taken infinite devotion to them seeing the great miracles of
that which I have here, for by the means thereof, the wife of the Lord of
Mechaw, great chamberlin of the King of Hungary, holding as at the last gasp
the holy Candle in her hand, and he shutting her eyes, thinking she had given
up the ghost, for that she had brought forth a dead son, having forty times
a day a pain of the heart accompained with soundinges, I sent it thither, and
it being applied to her neck, she presently reposed, and at this day is
perfectly well, besides other particular benefits which I have experienced.

20. The Lady Marquess aforsaid, having read this clause of the letter to the
nuns of the mother of God, of the convent called Constantinople, in Madrid,
where she is lodged, she sent it to the Lord Bishopp of Canaria, the Lord
freer Francis of Sosa, who read it, copied it out, and gave his testimony
signed with his name, and sealed with his seal, and approved of John Alonso de
Medina his Secretary, which is to be found in the archiue of the monastery of
the Cross, were he testifies he knows the letter, the hand, and the seal
of the said Lord Cardinal, and that the letter is all of his own hand:
besides it being so evident, none durst write to the Lady Marquessa a faulse
letter: whence the truth thereof remains much authorized.

21. Many other miracles, persons worthy of credit, do relate which I
silence, for that I find not iuridicall informations concerning the^, and
because these related, are sufficient for our purpose; which is, to prove that
great are the merits of the B. Sister Ioane of the Cross, and the virtues of
her beads most certain, seeing they are then most manifested, and in places
remote, at such time when most contradiction is made against them; which is the
ordinary mean our Lord is wont to defend his cause withal.

THE XIV. CHAPTER.
Of certain revelations and things very profitable, which our Lord
communicated to his servant, and how devout she was to the virgin our B. Lady.
1 SO much shines the sweetness and greatness of the spirit of our Lord in all
the reuelatio^s which he communicated to this virgin, as although her life be
so full of them as it might be called a continual revelation, yet would I write
this chapter of revelations, in regard that God communicating them, did it for
the profit of many, as the Angel told, commanding her to write them. And this
was the end that the extaticall virgin had in manifesting them: and the end
which now we have in bringing them to light, that the sinner reading them, may
be comforted, considering the mercies of God, which do so much shine in them;
as shall be seen in one which she related to her religious in these words
following.

2. My holy Angel carrying me on Saint Marie Magdalens day, to visit the
Church where her holy body is, for to gain the pardons which there are granted,
and passing by a certain city of Castile, I saw in a field many people round
about a bonfire: from the which, between the flames, and the smoke, went out
a soul more bright then the sun, with two Angels which carried it in the
midst of them, and another which went before with a Cross in his hand, all
going a great pace toward heaven, and my holy Angel said to me; That thou
may see what the mercy of God can do, and how great the force is of true
co^trition. This example is more for to trust in the mercy of God* then for to
imitate, by reason of the danger which penance differred to the hour of death
brings with it. De hoc videatur D. August. lib. de vera and fals^ poenitentia
S. Greg. cap. 27. in Job S. Ambros. lib. de poenitentia S. Hierom. tom. 4. in
epist. Eusebij ad Damasum Episcopum.
That soul which thou have seen go from the flames up to heaven accompanied
with the Angels, is of an old man, a most grievous sinner, who dwelt in
mortal sin all his life, and that so abominable, and so filthy, as not only
he merited the flames of that temporal fire, but to be burned in hell. The
justice apprehended him, and he confessed plainly his sin, demanding of God
mercy for it, protesting that he willingly desired to suffer for his fault in
this life, the most cruel death that could be devised: and although he might
have saved his life, if he would, yet he chose to dye, and to suffer that pain
in satisfaction of his fault: and so after they had strangled him, they burned
him in that fire, out of which and o^ the body, in this instant the soul
departs and goe^h straight to heaven, accompanied with th^se Angels as thou
see. Which I am glad that thou have seen, that thou may know, that
whilst the soul is in the body, place is to be found for the mercy of God,
even between the rope and the neck.

3. Being one day in prayer, our Lord showed her how to an Eremite of holy
life, who did penance living solitary in the desert, the devil appeared in
figure of Christ crucified, and said unto him; Adore me, for I am thy God, who
for thy sake suffered my self to be nailed on this Cross, and am here come to
assure thee, that thy prayer and penance much pleases me. The Heremite did so,
and being in adoration on his knees at the foot of that false crucifix, many
other devils came, saying: Prince of darcknesse, return to thine infernal
kingdom, for the Angels destroy us, the Angels of him that was crucified:
what will this profit us, since thou know that their God does hold him self
well appayed with the good will, and that he accepts that of this Hermit as
if he truly adored the God of heaven; leave therefore these vain adorations
which so little profit thee, and return by and by to thy miserable kingdom,
which much more imports thee. Our Lord would have the Eremite to hear these
things, In such cases God accepts the will for the work S. T. 1. p. q. 64.
a. 2. ad 3. and 1. 2. q. 20. a. 4. and 5. and 3 p. q. 68. a. 2. ad 3. S. Bonau.
de prefect. religiosor. lib. 2. cap. 23.
to enlighten him in this this way (said the servant of God) and that I should
tell them to you, that you may know the crafts of the enemy, and may keep
your selves from his deceptes, which are greater then men think of.

4. Another time it happened, that this servant of God, upon the day of S. Lucie,
being elevated in prayer, and her spirit in that celestial place where God was
wont to put it, she saw, (as another Prophet Esaias) the Lord of Host seated
in a throne, of most great majesty and glory, compassed with infinite Angels,
and Saints, who gave rewards, and commanded that that Feast should be made to
the glorious Saint Lucie, for having suffered on that day, and shed her blood
for the honor of his name. She confidering these things, and how well God
rewarded the labors suffered for his love, our Lord himself seemed to say to
her with so shrill and strong a voice, as it were the noise of a great water.
Will thou not my daughter have as much as I now give to this my servant? The
humble and deuote virgin with great confidence and love, after she had adored
him said: I render immense tha^cks to thy majesty for so sovereign a favor,
and I hope to receive no less of thy most powerful and liberal hand; for
these gifts Lord, do not fill me, nor do these Jewels, and feasts satisfy
me, because the hunger of my soul can not be satisfied with less, the^
drinking of this fountain of life: and until I get and obtain it, I will not
cease to make supplication to thy divine majesty for it.

5. Another time being in a most profound rapte, there came to visit her the
glorious Saint Barbara, to whom she was particularly devoted: and reasoning
with her, said: You well know, Lady, how much this your unworthy servant
desires to serve you. Yea I know, it well sister (answered S. Barbara) and I
would also that you should know I love you in our Lord, and hold you for my
singular, and devoted friend. With this the B. virgins ended their talk, which
scarcely was ended, when the soul of a child which had newely expired, did
appear unto her, praying her to speak to her mother to chastise her children,
for she should give a strict account to God our Lord for their evil breeding:
and I give his majesty many thancks, for having brought me to his holy kingdom
in so tender age, for if I had come to be great, I had been damned by the ill
education of my mother. Bid her look to my brothers, and chastize them before
they be greater, and come to be lost. My mother is called such an one, and
lives in such a place, and is the wife of such an one. With this the servant
of God sent to call her, and recounted all that had passed, with such assured
signs, as she could not doubt there of: and she from that time forward was so
much affected to the servant of God, that she visited her very often, making
profit of the holy counsels which she gave her.

6. Every year upon the fundation of the convent of the Cross, is celebrated
therein the apparition of the Queen of Angels, the first nine days of March;
on the which the B. virgin appeared (as has been said) and every year on
these 9. days at the hour of matines, the servant of God saw a most solemn
procession, in which the mother of God came with many Angels and Saints, and
the souls of many religious of that house, and of other persons departed which
were in bliss, and had been devout to that holy apparition: and also those
which were in Purgatory, for the virgin took them out on this holy Feast. And
before they entered into the convent, they went in procession round about it,
giving her blessing to the fieldes^lying round about the monastery, in the
which she entered by and by, and went straight to the dormitorie of the
religious where they were retired, some at prayers, and others sleeping. To all
of them she gave her blessing with words of most great charity, and love, and
spoke with their Angels keepers: who presented to her the prayers, and good
desires, wherewith they had prepared themselves to celebrate the feast of her
holy apparition. And our B. Lady said; Be constant in your labors, for so are
the crowns of heaven gained.

7. Other times she commanded their Angels kepers, they should put them
Garlandes of Roses on their heads, although they did not see them, nor know
of them. And sometimes she reprehended them with most sweet words. From hence
she went to the quire with all that celestial company, and assisted at the
martines, the blessed Ioane in spirit being present at all, went with the
procession. On the morrow at high Mass, coming to her self, she went to
the quire, where she heard the divine office and sermon, and saw the
procession. And at that instant she was wont to be elevated, and when she came
to her self, the religious entreated her, to tell what she had seen: and she
with much humility, recounting that which has been said, could them, that
she had seen the Queen of heaven in that procession, and that she blessed
those which had come to celebrate the feast of her holy apparition: that they
should be very deuote to the same, and to the most holy virgin, for at her
instance God bestowed on this Church many graces and favors.

8. There was in this monastery an image of miracles very ancient, to which
the nonnes had much devotion, and carried it in procession the day of the
apparition: but because it was now very old and without luster, they made the
head and face anewe: and that the servant of God might see it (who lay sick,
in bed) they carried it to her cell, where for her comfort they left it her
upon an altar: and that same night the Saint being at prayer, saw in an
imaginary vision, the Queen of Angels, who stood by the image: whom the
servant of God prayed to grant some favor to her image: and the night
following at the hour of matines, she saw how Christ our Lord appeared unto
her, and blessed the image, which from that time is much reverenced for the
tradition of this miracle. And of these is God wont to do many according to the
necessity of the times: But at this time the heretics doing so many injuries
to holy images, they will censure amiss of this maruaill; which our Lord did
for their confusion, and for the confirmation of the ancient custom of the
Church.

9. In this servant of our Lord, that was experienced, which the Saints say,
that it is a singular means, for to attain to the top of Christian
perfection, to have devotion to our B. Lady the virgin, to whom this her humble
servant was so deuote, that from a very child she used to recite her Rosarie,
and not having one of beads, she made one of a cord, with knottes in place of
the Pater nosters, and Aue marias. And being waxen bigger, as she increased in
age, so she increased in this holy devotion; in such sort, as when the feasts
of our B. Lady came, to her great penances, fastes and ordinary exercises, she
added others extraordinary, with which she disposed herself to celebrate them
worthily. For which the favors were very great which God did her on these
days, and greater and more frequent were her raptes, in the which our Lord
took her tongue, for instrument to publish the praises of his most holy
mother: And so this servant of our Lord being in prayer, and abstract from her
senses in the great eleuations and raptes which we shall sue in the ensuing
chapter, one day of the Annuntiation of our B. Lady, in the year 1508.
contemplating that so marvelous work of the Incarnation of the word, which
that day the Church represents, and the profound humility wherewith the most
sacred virgin gave her consent to be mother of God, she said. That when the
divine word took flesh in her virginal womb, she saw in that instant the
divine essence, and many other mysteries, which were revealed to her (as grave
authors have affirmed) and that she did merit more in that hour, obeying to
the will of God, and giving credit to the words of the Angel, then all the
Angels had merited when they yielded their obedience to God, more then all the
martyrs in their martyrdomes, more then all the confessoures in as many
penances as they did, and more then all the virgins in the virginity, and
purity which they kept. ( Our B. Lady saw the divine essence in the
incarnation of the word S. Antonin. 4. part titulo. 15. c. 17.. 1.)

10. So also upon a certain day of the Presentation of our B. Lady, in the
year 1509. this B. Saint being in a rapte, which endured her for many hours,
she said, that from that instant in which the most excellent Queen of Angels
was conceived in the womb of her mother S. Anne, she had the use of reason, as
if she had been of perfect age, together with great love and knowledge of
almighty God, wherein she always increased, and in all other virtues until
she came to be (among the pure creatures) the most perfect and holy of as many
as have been, or ever shall be in heaven or in earth. ( Our B. Lady had use of
reason in the womb of her mother from the first instant of her conception, S.
Bernardinus de Sena, sermon. 51. de B. virg. cap. 2. Caiet. 3. p. q 27.)

11. Another time, on the day of the Resurrection of our Lord, in the year
1508. being elevated, she said, that when our Lord Jesus Christ went out of
the sepulcher glorious, and risen again, he appeared first (before to any
other person) to his most sacred mother, for that she had most of all others
felt his death, and sacred passion, and in whom was most lively the hope of the
holy Resurrection. ( S. Bonauent. in medit. vitae Christi cap. 87. S. Ambros.
lib. 3. de vir. c. 6. S. Anion. de Padua sermon. in die sancto Paschatis, and S.
Brigit lib. 6. of her revelations.) These favors, and many others did God to
his servant on the feasts of his most sacred mother, but especially on that of
the most pure conception, because to this feast she was most deuote: which she
celebrated with particular joy and devotion: and that her religious also might
have the same, she made them on these days most devout speeches.

12. One day of the most pure Conception in the year 1509. being in prayer,
she was elevated in a most profound rapte, which endured her for some hours:
and so remaining for an hour together, she never left speaking, recounting
worthy things and praises of our B. Lady: as, calling her, the most pure, the
rose among thorns, she which only among the children of Adam, was conceived
without original sin. And explicated the Gospel. Beatus venture qui te
portauit, which is that, that on that day the Church does recite in the proper
office: and many other authorities of the sacred scripture and the Psalms, all
uttered in praise of the Queen of Angels. These and many other things of much
edification the blessed Abbess uttered to her religious in the spiritual
speeches she made them, beside the sermons which being elevated she preached
unto them, which caused so great admiration in those that heard them, whereof
mention is made in the chapter following.

13. There was brought to the servant of God, a sucking child very sick, that
she mighe give it her benediction, and as soon as she saw it, our Lord
revealing to her that it was possessessed, she said to the religious with
great affliction of her spirit. Great is the height of the secrets of God,
when his divine majesty permits, that the devil has power to torment this
innocent child, which is but seven months old: I pray you sisters, let us
commend it to God. And making upon it the sign of the Cross, it remained free
from that evil spirit, which did before so much torment it. We may say of
this child, that which Christ said of the blind man, that he was not blind
for his own sins, nor for the sins of his Fathers, but for the glory of
God, which in the healing of it, was to be manifested. It happened many times
to this servant of our Lord, that being in prayer in her cell, praying to God
for such persons as were commended to her prayers, she saw them all, and their
necessities and trauaills, and that so clearly, and so distinctly, as if she
had had the^ there present: which recounting once to her Angel keeper, he
answered: that God had showed them unto her, to the end she should the more
charitablie, and the more fervently, be mindful of them in her prayer.

14. The Angels visiting the B. Ioane upon a certain day, they said unto her,
that with so great affect of love one might feel and deplore the passion of
Christ Jesus our Lord, that it might be so acceptable a sacrifice to his divine
majesty, as if he should have shed his blood, and should have suffered great
trauaills for his sake, so much does the memory of his sacred passion please
him. These things and many others (quoth she to her religious) does my holy
Angel show unto me, by the will of God; and both for mine profit, and for
yours, I relate them to you, and assure you that our Lord has done me so much
favor, and that he has given me so much light and charity in them, that most
certainly I know them to be his, and for so true and certain I hold them, as
I would swear they are his, if I were put unto to it upon my oath, although
because my soul had not so much charity at the beginning, I did not receive
so much comfort in the revelations which our Lord did show me, as now I do.
For the which I miserable sinner, give infinite thancks to his divine majesty.

THE XV. CHAPTER.
How thorough divine virtue, the servant of God spoke for the space of
thirteen years marvelous things (being elevated) and of the gift of tongues
which our Lord granted her.
1 ONe of the greatest labors which the B. Ioane had in this life, was, that
many persons desiring to know the favors which God had done her, and the
secrets which in those ecstasies and raptes he revealed to her, begged it of her
many times. And whereas the B. virgin was so humble, she took this in such
manner, as she affirmed, that she had much rather relate her faults, then the
mercies and favors which God had done her. And if she told of some of those
which are written in this history, it was for that God had so commanded her,
some times by himself, other times by the Angel of her guard. And whereas by
this occasion she was much discomforted, our Lord willing to deliver her from
the tediousness (and also to comfort his servants, who desired to know these
things, for whose good his majesty had wrought many of them) he used this
means, as to strike her dumb, and to make him self speak by the mouth of
his espouse: and so our Lord appearing to her and comforting her, she remained
speechles for some months: and after again appearing to her in another rapte,
touching her with his divine hand, she remained sound; but in the time of her
dumbness, and for some years after, the servant of God being elevated, did
preach, uttering by the divine virtue marvelous sentences, explicating
propheties and difficult places of sacred scripture, to the great admiration of
all those that heard her, seeing so manifestly the virtue of our Lord in his
servant. This most singular grace lasted her thirteen years, speaking some
times every eight days, or fifteen days, other times every four days,
other times every third day, other times one day after another, and some days
twice, more or less, as it pleased our Lord.

2. This great maruaill being diuulged through the kingdom, much people came
to see her, although not all with equal intention; for some had a very evil
opinion of her: but for greater confusion of these, and of others incredulous,
being rapte she spoke unto them, showing that God revealed her what they had in
their hearts, and reprehending them, she said: who art thou who wilt limite
the power of God? has not the now the same he had always? can he not infuse
his grace into who^ he please? can he not make a vessel which may contain it?
To this purpose it fell out, that a certain inquisitor, very zealous about
things of faith, not being able to suffer, that it should be said, that the
holy Ghost did speak by the mouth of this B. woman, came to hear her, with
intent to examine her words; but those she spoke that very day were such, as
in the midst of the sermon, the inquisitor fell upon his knees, and satte so
shedding tears, until the servant of God had ended her preaching: and coming
to her senses, he prayed her to let him see her at the grate: and giving
himself great strokes upon the breast, he said: I came to examine the words of
God, but now I know, that they are his, whatsoever I have heard from this holy
woman. And after having spoken with her alone, commending himself to her
prayers, ^he returned, no little edified at the humility which he acknowledged
in her, remaining much affected to her doctrine.

3. For greater testimony that this business was from heaven, often times
they heard her speak in diverse languagues, of which she never had any former
knowledge, especially in Latin, Arabic, and others. The Lord Bishopp of Auila,
freer Francis Ruiz, was most deuote to this holy virgin, and out of his
charity, gave to the convent two slaves, Mores which he had brought from the
conquest of Oran, where he had been to accompany the Lord Cardinal, freer
Francis Ximenes. These two Mores, were so obstinate in the law of Mahomet,
that in only proposing them the law of Christ, and asking them if they would
be Christians, they would weep bitterly, and tear their faces even till the
blood came out of them. They carried the^ on a time to B. Ioane, because she
preached in the former manner: and turning her speech to the Mores, she spoke
unto them in Algauaria, and they also answered in the same language: and such
things she recounted to them, as she converted them to the faith, and they were
baptized. And after being rapte, she spoke to them other times in Arabicke, and
many times in Latin, as also with some learned men which came to hear her,
putting them in mind of particular cases, and of defects of theirs.

4. Notwithsta^nding all these experiences and many others which were seen,
because it was so unaccustomed and marvelous a thing, the Prelates of the
order, to stop the censures of some evil tongues, commanded the Abbess that
when she spoke in that manner, they should shut her up into her cell, that none
should hear her, although they were of the religious themselves. But on a time
our Lord permitting it, being left alone, and shut up, she stayed so long
before she returned from her rapte, that the Abbess careful of the success,
sent a nonne to know what was done; and coming to the cell where the virgin
was, she saw many birds of diverse colors, stretching out their necks, as
if they did harken what she said (whom God had sent to hearke^ to her) which
she recounting to the Abbess, she went with some religious to her celle, and
they found all true which the nonne had tole; Wherein it was known to be the
will of our Lord that they should hear his servant, and what he spoke by her
mouth. So long as there were some doubts hereof, and of the truth of these
things, it was good to hide them from the world, so to temper the variety of
judgments there upon. But when the things themselves give a certainty, that God
is their author, which the miracle of the birds made most manifest, it should
have been iniust in men to have suppressed it. And so the Provincial being
informed of this marvel, granted, that speaking in those raptes, some
principal persons might hear her, and whom he gave license to (for the
co^uent at that time was nor enclosed) With this new license, drawn by the
fame of these great maruells, there came infinite people ecclesiastical, and
secular, Preachers, Lawiers, religious of all orders, Canons, Inquisitors,
Bishopps, the great Captain Consalo Fernandes de Cordoua, the Cardinal of
Toledo, freer Francis Ximenes, many Earls, Dukes, Marquesses, Lords and
Ladies of all estates, witnesses of this mystery, who have seen it oftentimes
for the space of 13. years. And among them one that would see this marvel
with his own eyes was our Lord the Emperor Charles the V. who remained much
affectioned to the servant of God.

5. Our Lord gave this grace to this servant at four and twenty years of
age, which she never enjoyed but being in rapte: and many times it appeared,
they heard her speak with the Angels, with the Apostles, and Saints, as who
had our Lord present, before whom she made her petitions, praying for all the
persons of the world in general, for some in particular, and for the souls in
Purgatory. This done she joined her hands (all seeing her) and making many
very profound, and humble inclinations with her head she prayed so in secret,
as no word was heard, but only saw her move her lips as a person that
prayed, or spoke. And after with her hands joined, she remained in most great
silence. The^ came the religious, and lifting her from the ground, she not
feeling it, they carried her to her cell, and laid her on her bed, and
forthwith with loud voice and ordered, in very peacible and sweet tone (that
all that stood there understood it) she spoke maruaillous things. Finally the
said sermons, and spiritual speeches, were of much edification and profit,
declaring the sacred scripture and Gospells of the year, conform to the
feasts thereof, every sermon, during, the space of four, five, six, and seven
hours, without resting, nor moving more then the tongue, for in the rest she
was as one dead; in so much that a certain Lady, on a time hearing the sermon
and being very near her, stuck a pin into her head, in such manner as she
drew blood: and although at that time she felt it not, yet being returned from
her rapt, she complained much thereof.

6. Another time as she was preaching, there came to her an ecclesiastical
person and very noble, and taking her by the arm, which she held fast to her
breast, threw it from him very strongly, to see if she made any motion, or
complained of the grief: but she insensible to all this, went forward with
that she was saying, and the arm remained so fallen, until a religious came,
and put it upon her breast as before she held it. She spoke with such grace,
mildnes, and sweetness as the sermons being so long as they were, yet none was
ever weary of them. When the holy virgin had ended and was returned to herself,
she rentained most beautiful, her face, her vesture, and person all shining,
and all things which belonged to her, savoring of a celestial smell. And out
of the great vehemency wherewith she had spoken, she remained with such
abundance of sweat, as ordinarily they changed her habit, and dressings: and
when she returned to her senses, they caused her to eat, because she was very
fainte and feeble: and it was an admirable thing that she felt nothing of what
foeuer passed about her exteriorly, if afterward it were not told her. And
because the times which are to come, might have knowledge of so great
maruailles, our Lord gave wisdom and grace to a religious which could not read
nor write, called Sister Marie Evangelist, to write a great book, entitled,
of the Mariners card, which contains the sermons the glorious Ioane preached
in one year: two other religious helping her, called sister Catharine of S.
Francis, and sister Catharine of the martyrs: whereof there is tradition,
public voice and fame in the monastery of the Cross, and some ancient
religious, which live at this day, knew the said sister Marie Evangelist, and
swear that they know her hand, and heard her speak it many times.

7. This book of the Card, contains seauentie and two sermons, divided into
as many chapters, written in seuenhundred and three leaves in folio; and is kept
in the convent as a relic of great esteem, and with great reason, all what
soever is in it, being miraculous: as is also it, that a woman should have
written it, without knowing how to read, or write: and should bear in memory
all whatsoever the blessed preacher had said; in such sort that making an end
to hear the sermon, she wrote the same, some of them containing twelve, and
some twenty sheets of paper, full of Theology, and authorities of sacred
scripture. And only in one year, taking part of that of 1508. and part of
1509. this blessed woman wrote, three hundred sixty and five sheets, the
number that this book contains, of a very legible and plain letter,
although now the time, and the worms have much endamaged it. The sermons
which this servant of God preached in this year, as they are found originally
in the book of the Card, are these that follow.

8. Of the Incarnation, of the Nativity, of the Circumcision, of the
Epiphanie, of the flight into Egypt. Excellencies of the holy Baptism.
Reprehensions, and counsels, of the Purification of our B. Lady, of the
creation of Adam, of Septuagesima, of holy and true doctrines. Of the Chair of
Saint Peter, of the parable of the Gospel, of the sower, of our Redeemer lost
in Jerusalem, of his fast, and tentation in the desert. How sinners ask of
God favors, of Palm sunday, of tenebre Wednesday, of Mandy thursday, of Good
friday, of the mysteries of the most holy Resurrection, of the good Pastor, of
the Cross, of the Gospel which is song on the sunday before the Ascension, of
the holy Ascension of our Lord, of the coming of the holy Ghost, of the most
holy Trinity, of Corpus Christi, of the holy Catholic faith, of the
excellency of the friday, of the days of the week, of the Visitation of our
B. Lady, of saint John Baptist, of saint Laurence, of saint Peter, and S.
Paul, of S. Marie Magdalen, of the holy Cross, of S. Anne, of the evil
steward, of the Transfiguration, of saint Laurence martyr, of our Saviors
weeping over Jerusalem, of S. Clare, of the Assumption of our B. Lady, of S.
Bartholomew, of the Decollation of S. John Baptist, of the Feasts which
Nathaniel made to our Lord, of the Nativity of our B. Lady, of the Exaltation
of the Cross. How our Redemer raised the son of the widdowe, of the
Conversion of S. Matthew, of celestial figures, and doctrines, of
reprehensions for our sins, of S. Michaell, and of all the Angels, of our
glorious Father S. Francis, of the Feasts which they make to our redemer on
the fridayes, of celestial Feasts. A declaration of the Gospel of the
virgins, of saint Luke, of S. Simon and Jude, of all Saints, of the pains of
hell, of the coming of Antichrist, of the Dedication of the Church, of the
Presentation of our B. Lady, of the most pure Conceptio^ of our B. Lady, of
Reprehensions, and of Aduent: all with great mysteries. And the book of these
sermons is not of little authority, for the continual tradition with which it
has been conserved, since the life time of the servant of our Lord, with
admiration, and approbation of so many learned Prelates, Generals and
Prouincialls, who have visited that holy convent, for the space of eighty
years and above. And when the tradition of any thing goes continued, from the
day in which it happened, by a whole community, it has, and is of much
authority.

THE XVI. CHAPTER.
How our Lord gave to the Blessed Ioane the feeling of his sacred wounds, and
how the blessed Apostle S. Peter, healed her of her deafenes.
1 IN thirteen years which our Lord so much favored his holy espouse, he
wrought in her, things very misterious and divine. And because some times God
is jealous of the souls which he much loves, and will have them all for
himself; he made his loving espouse deaf, for that she much diuerted herself
in the consideration of creatures, and received some consolation, and delight
in hearing the little birds to sing and chirp. Wherefore not willing she
should employ her love on any other thing, but on himself, and in token of the
love his majesty bore her, he wrought in her a sovereign maruaill, seen and
experiented of very many, and especially of all the religious of the convent,
which freer Alonso de Mena, her confessor, freer Alonso de Tarracena his
companion, and other religious and grave Fathers of the order, all saw it, and
made experience of it: the case was this. Our Lord willing to enrich and honor
his beloved espouse, gave her for precious Jewels, the pains and signs of
his most sacred wounds, the history and miraculous success whereof, passed in
this manner.

2. In the year of our Lord one thousand five hundred twenty and four, the
virgin being forty and three years of age, one year after the concession of
the beads, it happened, that on Good friday in the morning, being in prayer,
set in Cross wise, she was rapte, her arms so stretched out and stiff, as
also all the members of her body, as if it had been a Crucifix of stone, in
such sort that no humane force could stir her from that holy composture*
although it was sometimes attempted. The no^nes seeing her rapte, and in so
different a posture to that which at other times she was wont to be, and that
the rapte continued long, they carried her unto her cell, and went all to the
quire, because it was time to begin the divine office. Being in the office,
while the passion was read, the virgin entered into the quire, shedding many
tears. The nonnes seeing her come and leaning to the walls* who for that she
could not go nor keep herself upon her feet, she went barefooted (as she
was accustomed:) and because she could not set them to the ground, she went
only upon her heels and toes, with so much difficulty as if she had set her
eyes where she set her feet. The nonnes seeing this, asked her the reason of it
by signs they made her (for being deaf, she understood not otherwise) how she
came in that manner? who made the^ answer, that she could not go, because her
feet grieved her so much. Let us see them (said the nonne that wrote this
history) and then they saw that she had in her feet and hands, the signs of
our B. Savior crucified, being round, of the bigness of a sixpence, of the
color of roses very flesh, and redd, and of which figure and color they were
equally, both on the tops and soles of her feet, and on her hands above and
below: and out of them iussed such fragrancie of savor, as nothing created
could be comparable unto it: she complaining of the great pain and grief that
these signs did cause her.

3. The religious seeing her in this plight, wept for devotion and gave thancks
to God, for what they had seen with their eyes and felt with their own hands.
And taking her in their arms (for she could not go nor sustain herself upon
her feet) they carried her into her cell: and making her a thousand
chrerishings, with tenderness and devotion, they asked her by signs: (because
it was in the time that she was deaf) what marks those were? who had given
her them? or how they had been there made? To the which she answered, that
being in that most precious place, where by commandme^t of God the Angel of
her guard had carried her, she saw our Lord Jesus Christ crucified, who
touching her with his most sacred wounds, left her with most grievous doloures
in her hands and feet. And this sovereign vision ended, she found herself in
her cell, and in her senses, with those marks, which endured her from this
good Friday, until the day of the Ascension, although she had the^ not every
day, but only fridaies and saturdaies: Upon the sunday, at the hour that our
Lord arose, both the pains and the marks quite departed, without any more
appearance remaining of them, then if she never had the^. And being so humble as
she was, with much humility, and tears of devotion, she prayed her most holy
espouse, he would not permit that so precious and rich Jewels, should be
employed upon a creature so vile as she; beseeching his divine majesty, he
would take them away, for it seemed to her a thing of little security, to
expose to the sight of others eyes, those singular favors which God had done
her. This she demanded with such tears, with such gronings and anxietie, as
she obtained what she desired, in such manner, that the very day of the
Ascension of our Lord to heaven, our Lord took from her these sacred signs;
having first said to her: Thou importunest me that I take away that precious
gift which I gave unto thee, and I will do it: but being thou will not suffer
my roses, I will give thee my thorns, and a thing that shall grieve thee more.
And our Lord fulfilling his word, took from her these signs, and gave her to
feel the doloures of his passion in all the parts of her body, much more
painful then before; For although from the seven, or eight years of her age,
our Lord had given her to feel them, yet they had not been so painful to her
as they were from this day forward, as the revelations following do declare.

4. Being elevated in spirit by her good Angel, in that place where he was
wont to place her, on friday the twenty two of June before the day break, our
Lord represented unto her all the mysteries of his sacred passion, so lively,
to her seeming, as if she had seen them on the mount of Caluarie at the foot
of the Cross, when Christ did suffer them. His majesty also showed her in a
great field, the martyrdom of Saint Acatius, and his ten thousand companions,
how they were crucified, and how our Lord from his own Cross did animate
the^, saying: Courageous my friends, behold me crucified, and dead for you. She
seeing all this, asked of her Angel keeper, what it meant that Christ stood
crucified, and so many other crucified with him; After that God made himself
man (answered the Angel) he has many companions, and thou also must be one,
and partaker of the doloures of his passion, and of his Cross, for so his
majesty will have it. And that thou might see his sacred passion, and the
passions of so many of his servants crucified with him, I brought thee to this
place. And our Lord looking upon her, said: will thou daughter taste of this
fruit? Lord (answered she) I will whatsoever thy majesty will; and his
majesty embracing her, left her the doloures of his sacred passion, and so
lively a feeling of them all, as the virgin said, that it seemed to her that
they had driven burning nails, through all the parts of her body, and that
she heard a great noise, as if with iron hammers they did drive and enforce
them into her flesh.

5. Another time being very sick a bed, there appeared to her our holy Father
S. Francis (upon his own feast) glorious and bright, accompanied with many
Saints, who^ she both saw, and spoke unto. The Seraphicall Father gave her
his benediction, and the blessed virgin with much humility and love (having
received it) asked it for all the freers and nonnes of his order, and in
especial for those of that holy convent, beseeching he would give them all his
blessing: The holy Father did so, and taking his leave of her, because she was
prostrate at his sacred feet, she kissed them, and he again kissed her head,
saying^ my daughter I will kiss the doloures of my Lord Jesus Christ, which by
his mercy the divine majesty has placed in thee.

6. At the beginning of her great infirmities, her doloures being most
grievous, it happened her with the force of them to be two or three days
without rapte (a thing which was very new unto her) and attributing it to her
sins, she thought that God for them handled her as his enemy. Thinking upon
this, her good Angel appeared to her, and said: harken and hear for our Lord
will speak to thee, and remember what he shall say unto thee. Forthwith our
Lord Jesus Christ, appeared in a throne of Majesty, accompanied with many
Angels, and speaking to her with most sweet and amorous words, he said: what
do thou, daughter, on this bed? she answered (delighting her self with
him having first adored him) o my Lord, how do I suffer so many doloures, and
yet thy majesty does not help me, neither does my soul enjoy thy sovereign
cherishings, as it was wont? our pious Lord answered; It is not much that thou
suffer doloures and infirmities seeing thou art my espouse, and have also
chosen me for thine, for I, in the time of my passion, was a man of doloures.
It is but just, that who loves truly, do partake of the doloures of the
beloved. A great favor and grace is this for me, replied the virgin: but how o
Lord do I find my self so lukewarm as I am in thy love, and why command
thou not my Angel keeper, to comfort me so often as he was wont? sweet heart,
said our Lord, where I am, there is comfort and beatitude, and so, although
thou be in this bed, this is thy heaven, for I am with thee here. This said,
our Lord disappeared, leaving her much comforted, although something
confounded, not knowing whether she had seen this vision with the eyes of her
soul, or of her body: but always she knew most certainly, that it was her
redeemer who had appeared, and spoken to her, and to take from her this doubt
he appeared to her the second time, as she herself told it. Then she remained
not only satisfied, but much strengthened, and with new courage to suffer the
travails and pains of all the world for his love.

7. Although our Lord so much cherished his espouse, and had adorned her with
the signs of his sacred passion, yet he still kept her deaf, which was in
part the cause that she lived in so great sincerity as she had been a child
of a year old, the which was a great discommoditie, not only for the religious
of the house, but also for other persons abroad, which came to communicate with
her, and to confort them selves, who heartily prayed our Lord he would restore
her her hearing, for the want they had thereof. The divine majesty heard their
prayers, appearing to his espouse on the day of S. Clare (it being six months
that he had kept her deaf) whereupon she made a marvelous sermon in presence of
many people, and declaring most great mysteries, she said, that he had made
her deaf for that she should have her senses and thoughts more recollected
upon the divine majesty, and on no other thing of the earth, and that now it
had pleased him to heal her. And ending the sermon before she came unto her
senses, the glorious S. Peter appeared to her, and putting his fingers into her
ears, and making upon her the sign of the Cross, he restored her her
hearing, and she remained sound, the religious giving much thancks to God for
so remarkable a faruour.

THE XVII. CHAPTER.
Of the great devotion, and compassion, which the blessed Ioane had of the
souls in purgatory, and of the efficacy of her prayers to our Lord for to
deliver them from the pains which they sufferred.
1 THis holy virgin being Abbess, with the desire she had to exercise her
religious in the fear of God, she told them many things of those which his
majesty revealed to her, concerning his rigorous judgment, the pains of
Purgatory, and of hell. But it has seemed convenient to leave to relate many
of them, for although they be very conform to the doctrine of the Saints, and
to a great multitude of examples which are found in their books, yet are they
not written in the vulgar tongue, nor may go in all men's hands without
special declaration. That which in rigor is delivered in such like cases, is
better explicated in terms proper to the schools, then to be used in such a
book as this, which is written that it may go in the hands of all, of which
many will find a rock of scandal, in that which well and piously understood,
is of much edification; as the glorious Saint Gregory, and other holy doctors
rightly judged, who of these matters and apparitions of the souls, and
special places where they purged their faults, and of that which had passed
with them in divine judgment, set down so many revelations, made, not only to
them, but to persons so unequal in sanctity and credit to the blessed Ioane,
that they were holden for grievous sinners, and God our Lord did them this
great favor to reveal them these like things; that taking heed by others men's
harms, they might fear the rigor of his justice, and have confidence in his
divine mercy.

2. With the same desire this blessed Abbess in the chapters and speeches
which she made to her religious, did exhort them, recounting them many
revelations which she had had of God, and with notable spirit, said as
follows when she related them: Think not sisters, that the pains of hell,
and Purgatory are but little, for by only thinking on that which our Lord does
show me sometimes my flesh tre^bleth, and I am driven even to the very straites
of death. She further recounted what passed with a soul, when it was taken out
of the body, as well with the supreme judge as with, the Angel keeper of the
same: and in especial when it heard the terrible sentence of everlasting glory
or pain. And although of these things the books of the Saints be full, and of
these apparitions of Christ our Lord in the particular judgment of every one
(which are to be understood, not according to his real presence, but according
to his efficacy and virtue) they are not written here, not to give occasion of
erring. For the greater declaration therefore of some things here related, of
many which are found in the book of the life of this servant of God, it seemed
convenient to note some of them, not because that which I shall note, is not
most evidently known to the learned, and to many of those which have not
studied, for as much as they are found in every manual, but because none may
have occasion of error.

3. I say then first, that in the hour of death, every one hears his
sentence of condemnation or liberty, according as is gathered out of many
places of the sacred scripture, and out of the holy Fathers, as appears in
Ecclesiasticus, in S. Matthew, and in S. Luce: S. Augustine also affirms as
much, together with Saint Hierom, and Saint Bonauenture: although concerning
the manner, and how it ought to be understood, there be diverse opinions;
whereupon Pope Innocent the third wrote at large in his second book: and
Landulphus the Carthusian in the forty six chapter of the third tome. Who all
relate some cases very like to those which befell to the B. Ioane. But where it
is said, that every one hears this sentence of Christ our Lord, it ought to
be understood as is already said, not according to his real presence, but
according to his efficacy. ( Eccl. 11. Matthew. 10. and 22. Luc. 16. D. Aug. de
ciuit. Dei lib. 20. cap. 1. and de anima and eius origin lib. 2. cap. 4. S.
Hierom. in Joel. cap. 2. S. Bonauent. lib. 4. sent. did. 20. 1. p. q. 5.)

4. The second, that as little improprietie it has to say with the same
declaration, that the glorious Archangell S. Michaell does judge in particular
the souls after they are gone out of the bodies, as the Church sings, when
in his office she says to God, that he constituteth him prince over all
souls: and the same she repreateth in the prose of the Mass of the dead. (
Constitui te principem super omnes animas suscipiendas. Signifer sanctus
Michael, representes eas in Lucem Sanctam.)

5. The third and most principal which we have in this matter, is, that the
Saints speak therein after two manners: the one according to the Common Law,
which is that ordinarily is executed: and the other according to particular
cases which God reuealeth to them. In consequence whereof, it is so, that there
is a common place which is called Purgatory, where regularly the souls are
purged with pain correspondent to the faults which they committed, and
satisfied not in their life time: and there are also particular places, where
God ordeyneth that they satisfy, as teaches S. Thomas with all the Doctors,
in especial S. Gregory. ( S. Tho. in 4. D. 21. q. 1. a. 1. ad 3. S. Bonau. in
4. D. 20. 1. p. q. 6. S. Antonin 3. p. hist. tit. 33.. 3. S. Greg. lib. 4.
Dialog. cap. 40. and 55.)

6. Likewise the common opinion is, that in Purgatory neither the Angels, nor
the devils do torment the souls, but only the divine justice by means of the
fire of Purgatory, as teach S. Thomas, and Scotus, with all school divines.
Yet for all this it is no less manifest and certain, that sometimes the
devils do torment the souls in Purgatory, as appears by a reu^lation made
to saint Bernard, and is related in the 23. chapter of the first book of his
life: and of other revelations venerable Bead, and Dionysius Carthufianus, and
the master of sentences with many others do make mention. ( S. Thom. lib. 2.
sent. D. 6. a. 6. ad. 3. and lib. 4. D. 20. a. 5. Scotus 4. sent. D. 44. q. 3.
Beda lib. 3. hist. Angliae cap. 19.)

7. The fourth thing, that concerns the terriblenesse and duration, of the
pains of Purgatory, and the great valor of the suffrages of the Church, and
intercession of the just, we find in many of the Saints books some things very
great and of greater note, then that which has been revealed to this B.
virgin. Saint Thomas pondereth the greatness of the pains, and saint Vincent
Ferer affirms, that a soul was suffering these most grievous pains a year
for one venial sin: and to the same it was revealed, that his Sister Francis
Ferrer, was in Purgatory condemned to the pains thereof until the end of the
world; from which within few days she was free, by the prayers and masses of
her holy Brother. ( Dionysius Carthus. de iudicio particulari. Magist. senten.
lib. 4. D. 44. S. Thom. 3. p. q. 46. a. 6, and 3. sent. D. 15 q. 2. a. 3. S.
Vincent. sermon. de aqua benedicta and in vita eius).

8. Cesarius in his Dialogues recounteth of an other soul which was condemned
to purgatory for two thousand years, John Heralt in his forty first sermon
of the deceased souls, does say, that some souls have been condemned for one
thousand years. And in his examples he recounteth of a religious, which was
condemned to the pains of Purgatory, until the day of judgment, because he
accomplished his penances coldly and slackly. And Saint Bede, Richard de S.
Victore, and Belarmine affirm the same of others. ( Beda hist. Angliae lib. 5.
cap. 3. Belarm. tom. 1. de Purgatorio libro 2.) And although other authors do
limit this very much, judging that at most a soul may be in Purgatory for the
space of ten years, yet they deserve not so rigorous ce^sure as those who
impugn it, affirming it contrary to the doctrine of the Saints, for the one
part speaks, according to the just condemnation, in respect of the faults,
and the other of that which seems to them, in respect of the many suffrages
of the Church, which continually are made for the souls in Purgatory.

9. This supposed, the holy Abbess persuaded her nonnes much to fear the
pains of Purgatory, and to be very deuote to the Archangell Saint Michaell,
whom in spirit she had seen i^dge the souls: and that when he condemned any
soul to hell, We paint the Archangell Saint Michaell with a waieght and a
sword in his hand, declaring by this painting the power wherewith he judges
po^dereth and measures the merits and demerites of the souls. Johannes
Molanus in historia sanctar, imaginum lib. 2. cap. 28. Viegas in Apocalypsim
cap. 12. tom. 1. sect. 17. number. 5. and sect. 18. number. 7. Johan. Eckius homil.
8. de sancto Michaele.
other Angels did singe. O Lord of majesty, how full of mercy is thy justice,
we bless and adore thee for it: and that they cursed the souls condemned to
hell, and that others were the executors of the divine justice upon those which
went to Purgatory, as S. Hierom, and S. Augustine do affirm ( S. Hier. in
Dani. cap. 7. S. Aug. de ciuit. Dei lib. 9. cap. 5.) She said also that the
Angels keepers carry the souls to Purgatory, and comfort them, as the Saints
do say, to many of whom our Lord has permitted, that souls which were in
pain should appear, ( S. Bonauen. lib. 4. sent. did. 2. in 1. p. q. 5.) that
in their prayers they might be commended, and that others in spirit might see
Purgatory, and the rigorous pains which in so many manners the souls did
there suffer; ( S. Thom. ibi. did. 21. q. 1. a. 1. that they might recount
them to the living: and taking pity upon them, they might beware by others
harms. The same happened to the B. Ioane many times: and among others being
sacristian, and ringing one night to martines, she heard very sorrowful groans
as of some person that bewailed: and asking of her Angel keeper, what voices
those were, he said; They are of a soul, in great necessity, which by the
license of God, comes to commend it self by thy prayers. This was the soul
of a great Lady of Castile (who died a little before) which said to B. Ioane,
that in as much as her pains were most grievous, she entreated her she would
commend her to God, and also to pray her mother, to help her with certain
alms and masses: of these cases many happened to her, and she said, that she
saw in purgatory certain places dark, most fearful and filthy, and the
devils which very cruelly tormented some souls, to the which for every fault
they gave different pains, and that the souls gave many groans, saying: woe
to us, which had time to serve God, and did not do it; now we are tormented,
and contrition avails us not, nor repentance.

10. I saw by the will of God (said she on a time to her religious) the soul
of a certain Prelate in purgatory, which suffered much pain: and I demanding
the cause thereof of my holy Angel, he said to me, that that soul was of a
prelate, which for having been careless of the souls of his subjects,
suffered great pains for the faults he did in the service of God, and for
those which his subjects did by his occasion and evil example.

11. This blessed woman knew that a certain Ecclesiastical person (of whom
herself had received particular aggrieuances) of much authority, was dead.
And as she was a friend of doing good for evil, she did not cease to pray to
God to have mercy of his soul: making therefore her prayer for him, he
appeared to her one night in a figure very fearful and filthy. He bare in his
mouth a gagge, and his clothing was very miserable and poor: he went upon his
hand^ and feet like a beast, and being he could not make his complaint, he
roared like a Bull, and he carried about him all the sins which he had
committed against God, and some souls which by his evil example, had been
condemned, were put to pains upon his back: he carried also upon him, a great
troop of devils on horsbacke, which cast in his teeth his sins, and gave
him many blows and buffets: and taking the gagge out of his mouth, they put in
it a hallow tru^ck, by the which issued a voice so terrible, that at the only
hearing of it, the B. Ioane was exceeding sorrowful, although much more for
that she knew not if his pains were of Purgatory or of hell: which desirous
to know, she asked it of her Angel keeper: who answered her; God in time
will reveal it to thee. And so perseuering in her prayer, she prayed our Lord
he would take pity, of the pains of that soul, and remember some good
worckes which it had done in this life; But not knowing any other which in
particular she might allege in his favor, she said: Lord I know that this
man was so devout to a Saint, that being in this life he caused his image to
be painted, and had much devotion to it, for the which I beseech thy majesty,
that taking pity upon his soul, thou will deliver it from the pains which it
suffers.

12. So long she perseuered in prayer to God for this soul, that some days
being passed over, she saw enter in at the door of her cell, a most fierce
bull which bare between his horns the image of the Saint, which that man had
caused to be painted, and he came along by it, as it were helping him self by
the image: and looking toward the servant of our Lord, said: I am such an one,
for whom thou so much have prayed, and for thy merits, God has done me great
mercy and gave me this image for my comfort and defense, which is the same
that I caused to be painted of the Saint to which I was devout, the which does
much help me in this labor: our Lord lighten thy pains, christian soul, said
the servant of God, for thou have comforted me sufficiently, by reason I
desired so much to know, if thou were in the way of salvation, for the other
time when I saw thee, thou came in such torme^^s as I could not discern it.
Be not amazed (answered the soul) for my pains have been very great: and if
I had none other but those of this ox on which I go, they were most grievous,
for on him I have the pain of thirst, hunger, fire, and cold. And this said
he asked her pardon of many aggreuances which in this life he had done her, and
said: that the devotion which some time he had had to her, help him much: and
with this he vanished. Whom she never left to pray to God for, visiting him,
and comforting him in purgatory, until our Lord by her prayers took him from
those pains.

13. The pains of purgatory are such, as they surpass and exceed all the
torments which can be suffered in this life S. Tho. 3. p. q. 46. a. 6. and lib.
3. sent. d. 15. q. 1. a. 3. and our Lord reuealeth it to his servants, that
they may know the great rigor of his justice, when one idle word, and
whatsoever negligence in his service, how little soever, he chastises so
rigorously. And that people may learn to walk with a thousand eyes in the
service of God, not so much to fly these pains, as to see how much his
majesty is offended with the faults which so rigorously he chastises. For
according to S. Vincent Ferrer, a soul was a whole year in purgatory,
suffering these most rigorous pains, for one only venial sin. In sermon de
aqua benedicta littera. G. and certainly this example alone might suffice with
people, that every one procure to conform his life as he may live with the
faith which he professes.
The B. Ioane returned one time from a rapte very sadd, and shedding so many
tears, that the nonnes taking compassion of her, prayed her she would tell
them the cause of her sadness. The holy virgin, to the end they might commend
to God that soul (giving a pitiful scrich) said: Alas if people knew what
the souls suffer in the other life, they would not offend God, nor would they
commit so many sins as they do: for those pains are fare greater, then all
that in this world can be suffered, and then she recounted what she had seen,
and never forsook that soul, nor ceased to pray to God for it, until he
took it out of the pains of Purgatory.

14. One day in Lent, this servant of our Lord feeling great griefs and
infirmities, other of the sick religious women went to comfort themselves with
her, such I mean as were a recovering, and speaking with them, she was rapte,
and returned from this rapte so merry that the nonnes which saw her, asked her
the cause of her extraordinary mirth, and she to pleasure the sick said: I
saw the Queen of heaven, who with much glory and majesty accompanied with
many Angels, and with the glorious Saint John Evangelist, and Lazarus, and his
holy Sisters Martha and Marie came down to Purgatory: and passing by the
place where I stood, the most Clement Lady looking upon me, said: sweet heart
come thou with us, and it pleased our Lord, through his great mercy, that at
the same time our blessed Lady took a great number of souls out of
Purgatory, with the which she returned to heaven, and I remained so comforted
heerwith, that all my doloures are turned into particular joy and rest, when I
see any soul go out of Purgatory: and for this my joy is so great, as
neither do I know how to speak it, nor is it in my power to dissemble it.

THE XVIII. CHAPTER.
Of the labors and infirmities with which God proved his servant with all,
and of her great patience.
1 BY a revelation made to this servant of our Lord, it was known, that God
had chosen her to make her very like to his only begotten Son in labors,
persecutions, and disgraces. And she desiring to have in her soul all such
Jewels which so much please God, asked of his majesty in all her prayers,
with much humility and tears, that he would give her pains, labors,
weariness and doloures to suffer for his love. Our Lord heard her prayer, and
gave her them in so great plenty as she could desire, which manifested well
the powerful hand of him who gave them, by the multitude which came upon her,
being tormented with very excessive doloures, which she had in her head, so
great as there was no physitia^ found, that could understand what they were:
and those days that she had them, it was with such rigor, that she could
nether eat, nor sleep, nor get down a draft of water, nor yet open her mouth
to complain. They endured her fourteen years, not continually, but at
certain times, sometimes every fourteen^ days; other times every twenty
days, more or lesie, as our Lord was pleased: which evil used to take her
suddenly, and suddenly to leave her again.

2. To these so great doloures, were added also others of her stomache and
liver, with most grievous vexations, and with so great sweate^, that they
changed her habit, her tunicke, and the clothes of her bed, five or six times
a day. These sweates were as cold as ye, and endured her twenty, and thirty
days, without ceasing, and with so many doloures and evils, our Lord sent her
others very great and more continual; for her arms and hands, knees, legs,
and feet were drawn together in such sort, as she could never more open them
nor stretch them out, and with the great force of the pains, all her members
were out of iointe: so that many of them remained, not only cripled, and lame,
but also wrested, turned aside, and thrust out of their places: and in this
sort and manner her body, is at this day, according as hereafter we shall
declare.

3. The blessed Abbess, finding herself one day much tired with the troop of
labors which attended her, and with much weakness of her infirmities, her
corporal forces now failing, and her griefs abou^ding, lifted up her eyes to
an image of the prayer of our Lord in the garden, which she had by her at her
beds head: and sheding some tears, she prayed our Lord to help her in the
vexations, and labors which she awayted. And being in this prayer, she heard
a voice which said to her: our Lord is with thee, and will that thou suffer
great doloures and anguishes, and that the members of thy body be cripled, and
broken as the corn is threshed and broken on the floor, when they thresh it
out of the ear. And so was this servant of our Lord made a see of grief, and
an abyss of revelations.

4. The divine majesty willing, to manifest to the world the patience and
sanctity of his servant, permitted to come upon her a persecution which the
devil plotted, taking for instrument some of her own religious: in the which
the servant of God showed how exercised she was in patience, for one had no^
need of no small portion to suffer such like tribulations, which although light
and not of so great substance in themselves, yet are much felt, because of the
offense of God in those that procure them: and in this was also joined very
great ingratitude for so many benefits as the co^ue^t had always received of
so inculpable a Prelate. The occasion was, that the Lord Cardinal freer
Francis Simenes having done a grace to the convent, of bestowing on it the
benefice of Cubas, a certain person which pretended thereto, procured to
obtain the same from Rome, at the death of him that had it in possession, and
they counseled the servant of God she should procure of his holiness a
perpetual confirmation of that which the Cardinal had granted temporally.
This was done by means of one devout to the said monastery, and the Bull was
obtained, in virtue whereof at this day the nonnes possess the aforsaid
benefice: in getting of which Bull, was spent some quantity of money. The fact
was this, and the circumstances which therein might be considered of so little
consideration, as would hardly be thought, for they would have done it without
consulting with the Prelate, and to spend that money without her license, or
any religious contradicting it. And howsoever it be, I found not in the books
of the life of this servant of God, more then this spoken of.

5. And yet on the other side, the success was terrible. For first of all the
Superior suspended her, and after corrected her and deprived her of her office,
and placed in it the vicaresse which had accused her: and being the servant of
God had such credit before, hereby occasion was given, that many spoke diversely
of her, calling in doubt the great maruailes which before were related of her,
holding it morally impossible, that the religious which had great experience of
her, could doubt of her sancti^ie, and not doubting of her, could invent such
like persecution against her: And above all, it made the case hard, that the
superior should take such a resolution against a person of such credit, for
it was as much as to set a seal to a blancke, to the end that each one might
put therein what pleased him. That which I believe of the case is, that the
superior did it in policy, for to prove this servant of God in all manners
For whereas the things published of her, were so strange and admirable, and the
devil so subtle, it was not contrary to prudence to refine her in all
manners. But howsoever it was, God ^rewe out of it much profit in favor and
praise of his servant. For first of all was seen not only her patience, but
the great quietude of her conscience, in the equality and alacrity wherewith
she bare this travail, judging her self not only worthy of this, but also of
many others greater. She showed also her fervent charity, in praying to God
for her that persecuted her: for whom she obtained pardon of her fault by the
earnest prayer she made: for our Lord chastising her with temporal pain, she
died in the same office within short time of a great pain of the side. And
acknowledging her fault, she demanded publickely pardon of the servant of God
with great tears, and having received the Sacraments, with great shows of
contrition, she gave up the Ghost, of which the nonnes admiring, were confirmed
a new in the great good opinion which they had of their blessed Abbess.

6. A little before this succeeded, on friday before the day break, this
servant of our Lord saw, (his majesty showing it her) hell open, and out of
it ran to her convent infinite devils in figures of diverse savage beasts.
Whereupon with many tears she demanded aid of our Lord, that he would cast out
of her monastery that infernal rabble. And the divine majesty hearing her,
sent his Angels to expel the devils, of which the servant of God remaining
much comforted on the one side, and timorous on the other, called the nuns
together to chapter, and with many tears said unto the^: O Sisters: how much
change do I see this palace of our B. Lady the virgin, for I was wont to see
it full of Angels and now I see it full of devils: my sins must needs be
the cause of it, and not yours; let us amend our lives and procure to exercise
us in true virtues, and in especial in charity, and humility, which are
those which the devils do most of all fear.

7. At this same time, the seru^nt of God (compassed about with infirmities and
travails) set her self in prayer before an image of our Lords prayer in the
garden, beseeching our Lord to help, her seeing her weakness and the tumult
of labors which threatened her on every side. Our Lord heard her prayer, and
for the greater comfort of his servant, spoke to her in the same image, with
sadd and dolorous voice, saying: My celestial Father, who would not revoke the
sentence of my death, although I prayed, and wept, will not that it be revoked
which has been given against thee, but that it be rigorously executed, that
wearied every way, thou may enjoy the fruit of patience. And the servant of
God confident that our Lord who with one hand gives labors, with the other
co^municateth aid for to draw fruit out of them, as often as she felt
special favors of the holy spirit, prayed to have pains and trauaills to
be mixed with them, as who so well understood this to be the most secure way.

THE XIX. CHAPTER.
How the Angel keeper of the servant of God, commanded her to write the things
which our Lord did reveal unto her, and of her glorious death.
1 SO great is the charity of God, and such his mercy, that seeldom times ho
does so special favors (as those which have been seen in this history) to
any one for himself alone, but by means thereof to profit many others. And
hence it is, that her Angel keeper so oftentimes commanded the servant of God
B. Ioane, to write the mercies and favors which God did to her. For she with
womanly modesty, and through her great humility, was ashamed for to write
them. Which not to do, nor prosecute, what was begun, she proposed a thousand
infirmities every day, alleging those of her little health, and her being so
stiff in the hands, as she could hardly write her name, as appears by some
papers and writings found which she wrote while she was Abbess. Whereupon the
Angel commanded her she should write no more with her own hand, but that she
should cause them to be written by the hand of another of the religious, which
was to her another labor, greater then the former was; and therefore refusing
it as much as she could, she said: Sir the favors which God has done me
(and the things which your beauty has told me) have been all in secret, and
writing them by another hand, they cannot choose but be published. And fearing
it, and the judgments of men, being so persecuted as she was, and as other
religious of the convent were also for her sake, she said to the Angel: sir
if hereupo^ there should befall some great evil to my sisters and to me, what
should we do? God has care of them and of thee (said the An^ell) fear not,
but do that which I command thee, for our Lord who works these ma^uailes in
thee, does them for the good of many others, and will that they be written, and
that there be made a memory of them: and if not, the favors which he does
thee shall cease, and thy doloures and persecutions shall be augmented more
then thou artable to think.

2. She hearing this with humility and fear obeying the Angel, began to
write by the hand of another religious, called sister Marie Evangelist, who
according to the tradition of the convent, and as is manifest by an information
made with sworn witnesses, which knew her and many times heard her say it:
neither knew how to read, nor write, until our Lord miraculously granted her
this grace to write the book of the Card (as aforsaide) and so she wrote with
much certainty, the life and miracles of this B. virgin. Those two books have
been holden and are holden in the convent as relics of much esteem, giving
help against tempests, and thunders, and many infirmities. They are both very
old, and at this day live three religious, which knew her that wrote them,
and heard her tell it many times, and they affirm that she was a nun of good
life very penitent and of much prayer, and contemplation, and that after her
death she appeared to another religious, in the Church, with much splendour, and
with a book of Gold in her hands open which was that she wrote of the things
of the glorious Ioane. The servant of our Lord grieved much to see that the
writing was never made an end of, and how fair and softly the nun proceeded
in her writing: wherefore a little before the last infirmity took her, of
which she died, she prayed her Angel keeper, he would be content with that was
written, and not oblige her to more, he granted it her with good will, and
said: bid thy sister that her pen cease, and she write no more. With this
license of the Angel, the servant of God having what she desired, was bold to
say: sir if it should please the sisters, it would be to me much comfort, that
what is written should be torn. God forgive thy presumption (answered the
Angel) and do by and by penance thereof, for thou have offended him with this
evil thought: With this she took her leave of her Angel, and bid the sister
she should leave wrighting.

3. To the many infirmities which she had, our Lord sent her the last, which
was a stto^g evil of her urine, whereby she was driven to great straites, with
most grievous pains, and was fifteen days together without paying to nature
her accustomed tribute. And although in all her infirmities she had marvelous
patience, in this which was the last, she had a thousand times more and
exceeded even her self: she had in the same exceeding raptes, and most
familiar colloquies with her Angel keeper. And as the Swanne toward her
death, sings most sweetly and melodiously: so this sovereign Swanne by how
much more her desired and happy end approached, with so much more sweetness,
she song, discovering with acce^ts from above, the fire of the divine love,
which did burn within her breast. And although in her infirmities she never
consented that the ph^si^ians should cure her, in this last she did admit them,
at the instance and devotion of some Ladies which entreated her she would be
cured, and sent to her their own physicians: who seeing that the infirmity so
much increased, and her weakness with all, despaired of her at the first time
of their visit. But she as a most prudent virgin, and well experimented in the
things of her soul, before she came to this point, received her viaticum and
extreme unction.

4. Three days before her death, being in a ra^te* which dured her two hours,
she ^^we the Apostles S. Philipp and Jacob, and her Angel keeper, who bid her
conform herself to the will of God, and pray him to confirm his sentence,
for that he had given it three times and as many times had revoked it at the
instance of other persons which had prayed for her. There is no change in God,
for as the first being infinite, and most simple, that which once he wills,
and can never leave to will it. S. Th. 1. p. q. 9. a. 1. and so all that God
wills efficaciously is done, but not that which he wills with the will
which divines do call, in sign, which is not absolute, but condition ally: and
this is that which is not always fulfilled. S. Tho. 1. p. q. 19. a. 11. and
12. and q. 23. a. 5. and lib. 4. D. 45. a. 4. and D. 47. a. 2. and, de veritate
q. 6. and q. 23,
Then the blessed maid prayed the holy Apostles (whom she had present) with
much instance, that they would ask of our Lord, not to revoke his sentence:
and they promised her so to do. And the next day when the physician came to
visit her, she entreated him to take no more pains about her, for the will of
our Lord was, that she should die of that infirmity. This was by and by known
in Madrid, and Toledo: and some Ladies, with license which they had for to
enter in to the convent, desirous to be at the death of the servant of our
Lord, came from diverse parts and in especial the Lady Isabell de Mendoza,
wife to Don Gonzalo Chacon, Lord of the town of Casarrubios: who was one of
the first, and deserved to be present at the maruailles which our Lord wrought
at the passage of his blessed espouse, so full of favors, and cherinshings
from heaven, as it seems the divine majesty would seal up in her death, the
great favors which he had done in the course of her life.

5. First of all, on friday the first of May, the day of the Apostles Saint
Philipp, and Jacob, the servant of God being in her senses, saw with her
bodily eyes certain visions, of the which she would tell none, although the
religious did entreat it of her. The night of the same day, she gave a great
cry, saying. Woe is me! how careless have I been! And that night she was many
times rapte, and entering into the agony of death she entered into the last
battle with the enemy of mankind, as another S. Hilarion (according as they
saw and understood who were present, and as was manifest by those things which
she said) for sometimes she held her peace, other times she answered; and as
if she had spoken with another person, she said: O what a cruel sword! hold
him, hold him, let him not kill me with it. And a little while after, she
said: Call her to me, call her to me, she goes away. And asking her whom she
would they should call. She answered, the blessed Saint Magdalen. Then she
rested a little, and after with much affection said. Let us go mother of God,
mother of God let us go, for it is late. After all this she said with notable
heart and courage, cast him hence, cast him hence.

6. It happened that in this battle and conflict, the Saints left her (our Lord
permitting it) that alone she might overcome in death, him whom so often she
had overcome in life. All the time that this co^bate dured (which was a great
while) she lamented much, saying: Oh in what an ill time have thou left me! and
after she said? Lord have thou left me alone? go to, cast hence this devil,
for he has no part in me, evil go with him. And turning to the religious,
she said: Sisters l^fte me from hence, I will give my soul to my Creator: and
a little after as speaking with other persons she began to say: seek me him
out, seek me my Lord Jesus Christ. Let him find me and I will find him.
Wherefore have you carried him from me? let me alone, I will go to see him,
although I am all disioynted. The religious asked her whom she would they
should seek? and she said* my Lord; Why where shall we find him, mother? In
the garden answered the blessed maid, and as it were complaining for grief,
with a great sighe she said: Ah mother of God? Jesus, what cruelty, what
cruelty my Lord, let thy mercy exceed thy justice. Jesus, what anguish, and
turning her face to the religious, much afflicted she said: help me to pray.
And stopped with the word in her mouth, the nonnes much afflicted said: what
will you mother that we help you to pray for? she answered: that mercy may
exceed justice. After this very merry, she began to say: let us go: O at
what a point! O at what a point! and this she repeated many times.

7. The physician who assisted at her beds head, seeing these things, said:
happy monastery, which sendest such a soul to heaven, where she will do thee
more favors, the^ having her upon the earth. And the Saint answered; it may
be, and with all this she had been four hours without pulse, and three
days without eating. Then lifting up her voice, again she said: my friends
carry me away, carry me by and by. They asked her with whom she spoke, and
she answered: with the Saints and virgins. They said to her* why with whom
will you go mother? wi^^ Jesus Christ my true spouse (answered she) wherefore do
you hide (said she) my Lord from me, and my Lady? the religious hearing this,
showed her an image of our B. Lady, and adoring it she said: it is not this,
bring me again, bring me again my Queen and Lady. And asking her if the
mother of God were there, she said: yea and my Angels, and my Saints; and she
said: let us go my Lady, let us go. And by and by she said again with most
great alacrity: make him place here at my side just by me. And a little after
she said with great reverence: O my Father! And the religious thought she
spoke to her Father Saint Francis. And although they had been wearied with the
sick party all the saturday night, yet it seemed not a moment to them: and the
holy morning of the sunday coming, she said: why then sweet Jesus, let us go
hence my Lord, let us go quickly, let us go my redemer. Then the religious
seeing their comfort was going away, and their sun setting, made processions
prayers, and disciplines, praying God he would not deprive them of so great a
good, but give health to their B. Mother. All of them kissed her hand, and she
blessed the present and absent, and all that were devoted to her. And again
she said: let us go Lord, my Redemer, let us go from hence: they asked her
if our Lord were there, she said, yea, and also his most holy mother.

8. On the saturday morning came the physician, and said to the sick party:
it seems to me mother, that you are going from us to heaven; tell us who
accompanies you in the way. My Lady the virgin Marie, and my Angel keeper,
and my Angels and my Saints, answered she: and her face by and by became so
fair and so resplendent, as when she was wont to be in raptes, and having had
till that time a very unsavory breath, caused by her infirmity, from that
time so much sweetness and fragrancie came out of her mouth, as it seemed some
heavenly thing. And a little while after, with new fervor and spirit, as if
she spoke with other persons she said; happy tidings, salute me with happy
tidings. And this she said with such alacrity, that those which stood there,
judged that her celestial spouse adorned now that holy soul, with the Jewels
of her espousall. The blessed maid remained full of that sweet smell, and her
face most resplendent, and her lips, carnatio^ redd as coral, with such
quiet, and alacrity as was admirable. And so she remained not speaking a word
from saturday until sunday after euensong, the day of the Invention of the
Cross, on which she was borne, took the habit, and was professed. On this
happy day at six of clock in the evening, reading the passion, with
extraordinary joy, she gave up her soul to her celestial spouse, in the
year of our Lord one thousand five hundred thirty four, at fifty and three
years of her age, and at forty of her conversion to the order.

9. Those that stood about her remained with much marvel at the peace,
quietude and alacrity with which she rendered up her soul to her Creator; the
rather for having understood by her words, the great force of her doloures,
which at that time her many infirmities caused her, and the strong conflict
which she had with the devil (a thing which our Lord permitted to happen, to
other Saints, as to Saint Martin, Saint Hilarion, etc.) that they should see so
great novelty for many hours before her blessed passage; when she that before
so much complained, stood so quiet, and the afflicted so merry, and joyful:
and that which more is, the evil smell of her breath changed into most sweet
savor. And although they attribute this to the divine revelations and the
presence of the Saints, which she said came to help her, nevertheless
afterward, another cause of these maruailes was known, by testimony of
another gr^^t servant of God, called Marie of Saint John, who at the same time
was religious in the convent of the Conception in the City of Almeria, very
like in virtue and sanctity to our glorious Ioane, and both of them so great
friends, that being so far a sunder they communed together many times in
spirit. And the proof which for some of these cases was had, does add more
credit to that which this servant of God testified of the glory, of the blessed
Ioane, the which was this; Four days after her death, she appeared to her,
compassed about with certain Saints, and Angels: and all admiring, she asked
of her Angel keeper, how it came that the mother Sister Ioane of the Cross,
appeared to her so much altered, and in so different figure to that which at
other times she has done, and placed in so high degrees of glory? The Angel
answered her, that now the was losed from the bonds of the flesh: and the
blessed soul bowing down, they embraced one another, and this servant of God
said to her: how now sister, thus without me? yea sister answered she, for
the will of the powerful God was accomplished, and it is now four days since
I departed this mortal life, where I had my Purgatory, and two days before I
expired, my soul began to feel the joy of the eternal bliss; although to
the eyes of the people, it seemed that I was touched with the pains of the
passage of death. When notice was had of this revelation, the cause was better
understood of the said change in the servant of God, so many hours before her
passage.

THE XX. CHAPTER.
Of some miracles which our Lord wrought by the merits of the glorious Ioane by
and by after her departure: and of the incorruptibilitie and translation of her
body.
1 SO soon as the B. Ioane was departed out of this life, they treated of
giving sepulture to her B. body, yet because the concourse and devotion of the
people was so great, and the instance so much which they made to see her, the
religious of the order, who assisted at her burial ordained, to give
satisfaction to all, that her body should be brought in procession out of the
monastery. A cripple coming to touch the holy body, kissing the habit
remained sound, and left two crouches with which he went. Likewise a sick
religious which had a very great swelling, and many pains, touching the dead
body, was healed. The same succeeded to another man, who had a great pain in
his teeth. The procession in which they carried the holy body to the sepulture,
returning to the convent, they found messingers with letters from great
persons, who demanded to have the burial differred until they should come,
for they were now in the way. And so they detained her five days unburied;
that most sweet odor of which we have spoken, always proceeding from the dead
body.

2. The people that came from Madrid, from Toledo, as also from diverse other
places were so many, that they covered the fields, for which cause, and for to
avoid the disturbance, which was great, they determined to commit that
precious treasure to the earth, burying her without coffin, or any thing else
of defense that might conserve her entire: but rather after they had covered
her with earth, they cast a great quantity of water upon the sepulture, as
ordinarily the custom is. And although it seems to have been want of
consideration, and a kind of rudeness, having experienced so great maruaills,
it was surely a particular instinct of God, that so much the better his power
might be manifested, in that which afterward was seen when the holy body was
translated; which having been under ground seven years, at the end whereof,
very grave Ladies which had been devoted to the servant of God, making great
instance, and inespeciall the Lady Do^na Isabell de Mendoca, the wife of Don
Gonzalo Chacon, Lord of the town of Casarrubios of the hill, consultation was
held of placing the bones of the glorious Ioane in a more decent place, (whose
sanctity and miracles were so notorious) whereupon there was made an arche at
the right side of the high altar, in the wall which divides the chancell from
the cloister of the monastery, where a hollow hole was left, of two yardes in
a high place and eminent, wherein might be contained a gilden chest, which the
said Lady Isabell had commanded to be made, with two strong grates, one of the
side of the chapel, and another of the side of the cloister, that without
peril, as well the religious, as the seculars, might enjoy of the relics of
the servant of God.

3. This done, the sepulture was opened, making accoumpt that the body was now
resolved into ashes: which yet was found so entire, so fresh, and with so
sweet a savor, as when it was first buried. All being amassed at the sight,
their devotion increased, and the habit wherewith she had been enterred, was
divided into relics, and they vested her with another of sad colored damask.
And laying her in the said chest, with great veneration, it was put in the
place above mentioned, with the grates of iron very strong and gilded, and a
lamp of silver which burns before the holy body: where it is much
worshipped, not only of the people of the country, but of many others also who
come to visit it, from very remote and far places performing there their
nouenas. On the day that this blessed woman dyed, the town of Cubas
celebrateth her feast, with great devotion, and goes in processio^ to the
monastery, with other of the adjoining towns, and high mass is sunge before
the body, on a portatible altar, which to this effect is set up. The
excellencies of the servant of God are preached, and the town gives bread,
and wine, and cheese, to innumerable people which repair thither against that
day. And the devotion increasing in the people, through particular benefits
which they have received of the servant of God, they have offered to her nine
lamps of silver, which burn day and night before her body, wherewith she is
had in great veneration.

4. Since the said translation, it is not known that the chest has been
opened, until the year one thousand five hundred fifty two. Which appears
by a testimony sealed and signed of John de Villores, public scriuener of
his majesty, testifieng, how on the 14. day of the month of September in the
said year, on the day of the Exaltation of the holy Cross, a devout
procession having been made by the nonnes of the monastery, there being
present for witnesses the Lords, Don Bernardino de Mendoza, and Toledo, and
the Lady Marie de Pisa, his wife, Lords of the town of Cubas, and ^rinnon;
And Don Alonso de Mendoza his Son, and the Lord Don John Pachieco, brother of
the Lord Don Alonso Thellez, Lord of the town of the Puebla de Montaluan, and
the Lady Donna Leonor Chacon, wife to the Lord Don John Pacheco, which had
been Lord of the said Puebla de Montaluan, and the Lady Donna Isabell de
Mendoza, wife of Don Consalo Chacon, Lord of the town of Casarrubios, with
infinite other people. Before whom was discovered the body of the blessed
Sister Ioane of the Cross; and the said scriuener affirms, that it was
entire, retayning still a most sweet odor, and such disposition through all, as
caused in the beholders notable admiration.

5. And although the said testimonies be of sufficient authority, to prove
our intent, albeit the holy body had been afterward dissolved, as it has
succeeded in the bodies of other Saints, which for some time our Lord
conserved without corruption miraculously, and afterward were dissolved, yet to
prove the incorruptibilitie of the body of this servant of God, there is little
necessity of ancient testimonies, for all ceasseth with the evidence which at
this day we have before our eyes. When being eighty years since she died it
lies with the same integrity freshness and fairness, with which they found
it when it was translated after it had lain in the bare earth seven years
together. The first time that in these days it was discovered, certain things
succeeded worthy of memory, which I will relate, because they are very grave
persons and all alive, which were then present.

6. In the beginning of the year 1601. came to Madrid the most reverend Father
freer Francis de Sosa, the first time after he had been chosen minister
general of our sacred Religion, having been there some days, he departed
toward Toledo, with determination to dine at Grinnon, and to take his rest in
the convent of Oliua, and the next day to come to Toledo. Departing out of
Grinnon, immediately after dinner, because it was cloudie, having gone a little
more then a quarter of a league, the clouds were dispersed, and the sun
scorched, and therefore their journey being short, he would return to Grinnon.
And the Father freer Peter Gonzales de Mendoza, who this day is the most
worthy Archbishopp of Grannada, and then was Provincial and went in company
of the said Father General, told him, that it would be better to go to the
convent of the Cross, which was about the same distance, and he should see
that monastery, before the setting of the Sun. They did so, and after that
Father general had been received with the accustomed ceremony of bringing
him to the quire in procession, and the religious had taken his benediction,
and he having made them a spiritual exhortation, as the custom is, he went to
the infirmarie, where there was a very ancient religious woman, who had been
at the last translation of the body of the blessed sister Ioane of the Cross;
The Father talked with her a good while, of things concerning the blessed,
Saint, and where her body was, until it was time to depart.

7. Passing along the cloister, where the window was which goes to the said
sepulture, by chance Father General said, that he could be glad it were not
so late, that he might call wo^ckmen to open the grate, and take down the
chest, to see that which the ancient nonne had related to him. And such was the
instance, which as well the religious which accompanied Father General, as the
nonnes of the convent made (that although it seemed to little purpose, it being
now late, and no worckmen at hand, nor instruments such as were necessary)
the said Father General suffered himself to be overcome. And seeking
ladders, and hammers, he himself being the first at work, with much a do
they took away the grate, for it was great, and heavy, and garnished with
very great cost. Afterward they took down the arcke wherein the blessed body
was; but under it they did not find the keys, which were not there, where the
nu^ne affirmed they had been put. And because they would not break the
locks, they vnnailed three bar^es of iron, and carried the chest in procession
to the quier of the nonnes, where they opened it, and with great admiration of
all, they found the holy Body entire, and fresh. The servant of God was vested
with a habit of sad colored Damask, with two very white attires upon her head,
(for when she dyed the nonnes had not the black veil) she had a Cross in
her hand, and a little string of beads of orange about her neck. And all
with great consolation and many tears worshipped the holy Body, and they
brought it to the grate, that the people which were there might see it. It was
a marueillous thing to see, that the convent standing in a desert, and the
resolution of opening the arck having been suddenly taken in hand, yet the
Church was as full of people, as if it had been published in all the province
for many days before. Father General took away the kercher from the head of
the servant of God, and the orange beads which she had about her neck, and
divided them among the freers and nonnes. And taking from one of those that
stood by her veil, and another string of beads, put them upon the blessed
Ioane.

8. Shutting up the arcke, and calling worckmen to put it in the place again,
he took his way toward the convent of Oliua; where talking with the Religious,
of that which had passed, they noted one thing, which before they had not
considered, and this it was. The servant of God desired much in her life time,
that her nonnes should vow encloasure, and take the veil: and not having
obtained the second in her life, she obtained it of our Lord after her death,
in such sort, as now all the religious having the black veil, she alone had
it white in her sepulture. And because to veil the nonnes, is to be the act of
a Prelate and Superior by Apostolical privilege, God brought the most
reverend General of all the order to the said monastery, so unthought of and
by chance: who without more a do, put the black veil upon the bl^ssed
deceassed, it being the first time that he had come to the said province,
after his election, and before he had exercised the principal acts of his
jurisdiction therein. For then he went to celebrate the Provincial chapter,
God having delivered him in Madrid from a perilous infirmity. And more, the
same day also succeeded a marvelous thing, that Father General taking from
the said body the little toe of one foot, it was apparent afterward, that
blood had issued out of it, as was seen by the clothes which she had on:
although at that time it was not marked, for that the said Father General
took the toe in secret, pulling it off with his hand. Since that time the
chest has been opened diverse times, the testimonies being continued of the
incorruptibilitie of the said body, which are kept in the said monastery,
and the last is of the tenor following.

9. In the monastery of our Blessed Lady S. Marie of the Cross, being of
professed nonnes of the regular observance, and third order of the Seraphicall
Father S. Francis, near to the town of Cubas, and within the bounds and
jurisdiction thereof, on the fourth day of the month of February, in the year
of our Lord one thousand six hundred and nine, there being in the said convent
the most reverend Fathers, Brother Archangell of Missina, General minister of
all the said order, and brother Peter Gonzales de Mendoza, Commissarie general
of the same in the Cismontane family, having had notice, that in the said
convent was the body of the blessed Ioane of the Cross, which had been
sometime nun and Abbess of the said monastery, it being more then
seauentie years since she died, her body being kept in a chapel which is in
the hollow place of the wall of the chancell of the Church of the said
monastery, on the Gospel side, where always it has been worshipped, and
esteemed as a holy Body, and the said most reverend Father General, having
had notice that her life was miraculous, and she always holden, and commonly
reputed for a Saint, and for such was always reverenced, as well of the nonnes
of the said convent, as also of all persons that know her, a great number of
people coming together, as well of the said town of Cubas, as from other
places, asking and praying with great insta^ce, that the arcke might be opened
wherein the body of the said Saint Ioane of the Cross was: and the most
reverend Father General having seen the instance, and supplication of the
said concourse of people which came thither, and of the rest of the Fathers
which were in the said convent, the Abbess and nonnes thereof, for the honor
and glory of our Lord, commanded to open the said chapel and arck, wherein
the said body was: which being done, the iron grate was taken away, which was
set in the said chapel on the side of the convent, and the said arcke taken
out, and carried to the low quire of the said convent, where the most reverend
Fathers being present, and much people (so many that it caused a great press^)
in my presence, John Fernandez de Plaza, scriuener of his Royal majesty, and
Notarie of the holy office, neighbor of the said town of Cubas, the bars
of iron of the said arcke were vnnayled, and the cover of it being taken away,
the said body was found entire, and with very good savor: And to the end that
those which were present, might see the same, the said most reverend Fathers,
caused it sometimes to be lifted it up on high, whence there was very great
content received, as well of the said Fathers, as of the Nuns of the said
convent, giving thancks to our Lord God, and presenting their Rosaries to be
touched at the said holy Body, by reason of the great devotion and estimation
all there about who reverenced it had thereof. And the said most reverend
Father General called me, that I might see it, and he lifted it up and raised
it from the said chest and arcke wherein it was. Moreover, he moved the arms
and hands of it, that I might give testimony thereof: and I saw all the above
said. At all which were present: fr. Paul de Cheuarri, secretary of the said
Father General, and freer Didacus Barassa, secretary of the said Father
General, freer Antonie Xaca, fr. Peter de Castro, his companions, fr. Francis
de Mora Guardian of Pinto, fr. Luis de Miesses, Guardian of Escalona, fr.
Didacus de Herrera Vicar of the said convent, fr. Ba tholomew Lopez, his
companion, fr. Peter de Chosas, co^missarie of Jerusalem, fr. Peter de Royas,
fr. John of Ricaro of the Province of Saint Joseph, fr. Francis Pascuall of the
said Province, and the Licentiate Peter Gonzales^ de Sepulueda Priest,
Co^mis^arie of the holy office, neighbor of the said town of Cubas, Blase
Martinez, Priest of the said town, and fr. Blase Delgado, of the order of
Saint Dominicke, fr. Marck Losano, of the order of Carmelites, Peter Tartallo,
and John Martin Crespo, orcinarie Alcaldes in the said town of Cubas, Didacus
Navarre, Francis Hernandes Regidores of the same, Isidore Garcia scriuener of
the said town, and many other people. And some of the said persons
subscribed it with their names; all whom I know. The Abbess also and
discreetes of the said convent subscribed thereto, fr. Didacus de Herrera, fr.
Bartholomew Lopez, Anne of the Conception Abbess, Agnes of the Mother of God,
Anne of Saint Raphaell Vicarisse, Marie of the Purification, Agnes of Jesus,
the Licentiate Peter Gonzales of Sepulueda, Blase Martinez, Peter Tartalo, John
Martinez Crespo, Isidore Garcia scriuener, before me John Fernandez de Plaza*
And I the said, John Fernandez de Plaza, scriuener of his Royal Majesty, and
Notarie, of the holy office, neighbor of the town of Cubas was present at the
above said, and put to my sign, in testimony of the truth, John Fernandez de
Plaza.

10. After the above said, on the first day of Iulie of this present year
1610. the most reverend Father, fr. John de Guzman Provincial minister of the
holy province of Castile, at my instance, that with more certainty, and truth.
I might write this history, made the body of this blessed one be showed me,
his paternitie being present with other religious. And I saw it and touched it
many times. And that those that were in the Church might see it, Father
Pro^inciall lifting it up in his arms, and I with him we showed it to all two
or three several times, vested and dressed as she was, so that she seemed a
live religious. And one thing I noted worthy of much consideration: that the
blessed virgin being so stiff and cripled when she dyed (for with the force of
her doloures all her members were wrested and gathered together) even so yet
now her holy body remains wrested and drawn together retaining that most
sweet savor which it had when she died; being a celestial savor that
comfort; entire, without any thing wanting to it, saving the little toe of
one foot, which as has been said, the most reverend Father General took
away for his own devotion. As also for our sakes who were there, Father
Provincial took away the veil from her head, which was divided amongst all*
and with the part that fell to his own lot (and was put upon his head) was
taken from him a very strong ache which he had. And a Lady of Toledo was healed
of a great pai^e of her head, with the same piece of veil, although taking it
from her, the pain returned: But yet our Lord would, to have the miracle more
manifest, that putting it on her again, the pain should be wholly taken away
by the intercession and merits of the blessed Ioane, whose history so
miraculous, and divine, written with great desire that God may be glorified,
ends here, leaving many other things, which in the above mentioned
originalls, and other manuscriptes I have found, as not finding them very
authenticke, and to avoid prolixitie, it seeming to me that these spoken do
suffice, to the end that those who hitherto have not had so much notice of this
servant of our Lord, may know some of her sanctity, and of the many marueiles
which daily God works by her intercession and merits. And those who now have
it, may be confirmed in their de^otion. All to the greater glory, and honor
of our Lord Jesus Christ, who lives and reigns world without end.

JESUS, MARIA.

The Approbation of the Readers in Divinity.
The Readers in Divinity of S. Francis of Valladolid, who here set down our
names, have seen by the command of our Father Fr. Louis Velasquez, Minister
Provincial of this Province of the Conception, the book of the life and
miracles of the glorious Mother Saint Ioane of the Cross, composed by the
Father Fr. Antonie Daca, diffinitor of the same Province, and general
cronicler of the order: and all which in it is contained, is Catholic, and
the revelations of the Saint are admirable, and most conform to the sacred
scripture, and doctrine of the Saints, teaching the way of heaven, with
notable sweetness and spirit of our Lord, whereof they are all full. For the
which the said book, may and ought to be imprinted hoping with much
confidence, that it shall be for the honor and glory of God, and utility and
profit of the faithful. And this is our opinion in the said Convent of S.
Francis of Valladolid, the 8. day of Iulie, of the year 1610.

F. Alonso de Herrera. Fr. Francis Aluarez. License of the Order.
Free^ Louis de Velasquez, of the order of our seraphicall Father S. Francis,
Minister Provincial in this Province of the Conception, and visitor of all the
religious women thereof, by these presents do give license to the Father Fr.
Antonie Deca, Deffinitor and Father of the ^ame Province, that he may imprint
and publish a book which he has composed of the life and miracles of the
Virgin Saint Ioane of the Cross Religious, which was in the monastery of the
Cross, of the holy Province of Castile, considering that by our commission,
learned persons of the Province have seen and approved it: keeping in the
rest, which the customary law of these kingdoms do dispose of, concerning
the impression of books: given in our Convent of S. Francis of Valladolid, the
22. of Iulie, of the year 1610.

Fr. Lewis de Velasquez Minister Provincial. Approbation of the Vicar of
Madrid.
By commission and commandment of the Lords of the council, I have caused
this book of the blessed Ioane of the cross, composed by the Father Fr.
Antonie Daca, Diffinitor of the Province of the conception, and cronicler
general of the order of Saint Francis to be visited. Being a book of much
learning and devotion, and of much profit for those that shall read it:
containing nothing contrary to faith, nor to good manners, and so license may
be given him to imprint it. Dated in Madrid, on the 4. of August. 1610.

Doctor Gutierre de Cetina his Approbation.
By particular commission of your Highness, I have seen and read this book,
entitled, the history, life, and miracles of the blessed Ioane of the Cross,
composed by the Father Fr. Antonie Daca, Diffinitor and chronicler of the
sacred order of the seraphicall Father: and I wish (as says Saint Hierome,
writing the life of Saint Pa^la) that all the members of my body, might become
tongues, to set out the extraordinary favors which God has communicated to
this blessed Saint: but the author fulfilleth what he promises, explicating
her miracles, ecstasies and revelations, with so great erudition doctrine and
truth, treated with a delicate and acute wit, authorized with the sentences and
sayings of the Saints, manifested Catholiquely and piously, and therefore hold
for certain that it shall be much esteemed, and with edification read of all,
and of many imitated. And so I judge, that the license which he requires,
ought to be given him. Dated in this Convent of the most holy Trinity; in the
street of the Atocha of Madrid, on the sixth day of August, in the year, of our
Lord one thousand six hundred and ten.

The Presentado. Fr. John Baptista. Approbation and licenc^.
I Doctor Galipie^zo, first Reader of sacred Divinity, by commission of the
most excellent and most reverend Lord, Don Francisco Virgilio, Bishop of
Lerida, and of the counsel of his Majesty: have seen and with attention
read, this present book whose title is, The life and miracles, ecstasies, and
revelations, of the blessed Virgin sister Ioane of the Cross, wherein there is
nothing which contradicts the holy Catholic faith, nor good customs:
rather there are great motives to serve God; particularly for religious
persons, for the many graces and favors which of his divine hand they receive
who with fervor do serve him; as is seen in the blessed Ioane of the Cross:
and so is very just, that it come to light, and therefore have signed it with
my hand, on the seventeenth of June, one thousand six hundred and thirteen.

Doctor Antonie Galipienzo. Approbation.
To the Catholic Majesty of our Lord the King, Don Philippe the third.
Because the little offering is properly of him that can little (although in
the eyes of a prince, it be qualified with the will of him that offers it)
and because that how much less it is which goes to the market of the world,
it has so much more need of valorous protection, I was bold to dedicate to
your Majesty this book: little, in as much as it is a work of my hands, but
great in the subject thereof; It is the life of the blessed Virgin sister Ioane
of the Cross, by whom our Lord has wrought and works daily so many
maruailes: amongst the which one has been, and not the least, to have
excited the most pious mind of your Majesty, to command that this book
reuewed by persons of all sufficiency, come to light again: wherewith it
comes out much honored and secure from all emulation. Our Lord keep your
Majesty for the help and protection of his church, as this vnworthly
chaplain of your Majesty desires.

Fr. Antonie Daca.
Reasons of the truth, and authority of this history.
Truth is the soul of a history, and the history that wants it, is as a
body without a soul, for it deserves not the name of a history, chiefly if
it be of Saints, where to lie, is sacrilege; being they are not honored but
with sincerity, and truth. The truth which has been kept, in writing the
life of this holy Virgin, is the greatest which in the law of history can be
found, collected out of these papers following.

First of all, what concerns the apparitions, and miracles of our B. Lady
(which are written in the first Chapter of this book) has been gathered of
three authentical informatio^s made with ninety and three witnesses before R^y
Dias of Madrid, scriuener de Cam^ra, and public notarie, and before Peter
Sanches, and John Gonsales, public notaries, and the Kings scriueners of the
town of Cubas. They are authorized, and bound together as a book, in the
archiue of the Convent of the Cross.

Likewise the life and miracles of the glorious Ioane has been gathered out
of a book very ancient, in written hand, of a hundred sixty and four leaves
in quarto, with twenty eight chapters, bound in boarde, with two broken
claspes sowed with white thread, written by a religious disciple of the B.
Ioane, called sister Marie Evangelist, who neither knew how to read, or write,
until miraculously our Lord granted it her to this effect, as is proved by an
information made for the auouching of this point. And the book with the
marks above said, is originally kept in the Archiue of the cross.

Item of an information made with twelve witnesses, by commission of the
council of the most excellent Lord, Don Bernardo de Roxas, Cardinal and
Archbishop of Toledo, made before Louis de Siles, Public notarie, and the
Kings scriuener in the city of Toledo. The original is in the office of the
secretary Francis Salgado, in Toledo.

Item of another information made in diverse places with seventeen witnesses,
by commission of the council of the foresaid most excellent Lord of Toledo:
the authentical copy whereof, is in the Archiue of the Cross.

Item of another information with fourteen witnesses, made in diverse places by
commission of our most reverend Father Fr. Archangell de Messina: the
authentical copy whereof, is in the Archiue of the Convent of the cross.

Item of another information with eleven witnesses, made in diverse places by
commission of our most reverend Father John de Gazinman, Minister Provincial
of the holy Province of Castile, which is originally kept in the Convent of the
Cross.

Item of another informatio^ which was made by the commission of the council
of the most excellent Lord Don Bernardo de Roxas, Cardinal and Archbishop of
Toledo, in Villanuena, and Gamarra, towns of the said archbishopricke made for
to qualify some miracles of the holy Brother, Julian of S. Augustine. The
original is in Toledo in the office of the seer Salgado.

Item of five informations made in Valladolid, by Doctor Don Fernando de
Valdes, Provost general of the diocese of Valladolid, with interuention of the
Fiscall before John de Vega notarie in the audience episcopal of Valladolid,
in whose office the originalls lie, and their authentical copies in the
Convent of the Cross.

Item of another information made in Palencia by lice^tia^e Manuell Garcia de
Miranda, Provost of the Diocese of Palencia, before Francis Harris de Rueda,
Apostolical notarie, the original^ is in the Convent of the Cross.

Item of two informations made in Valladolid, by Doctor Or^ega de Salazar
Lieftenant of the corrector, the one before Peter de Auila, public scriuener
of the number of the said city and the other before Julian Garcia scriuener
they are originally in the Convent of the Cross.

Item another made by the justice of the town of Cubas, before John Fernandez
Munnos the Kings scriuener, and of the number, the original is in the Convent
of the Cross.

Item of a testimony sealed, and signed of seven of the Kings scriueners and
public of the number of Valladolid, the original is in the Convent of the
Cross.

Item of another sealed and signed of seven scriueners of Madrid, and of one
Apostolical notarie: the original is in the Convent of the Cross.

Item of a testimony of John Fernandez de Plaza, the Kings scriuener, and
notarie of the holy office, neighbor of Cubas: the original is in the office
of the said scriuener.

Item of another testimony of Isidro Garcia, public scriuener of the town
of Cubas, whose original is in the Archiue of the Convent of the Cross: and
of others which are in the same Co^ue^t.

Approbation.
The Bishop Freer Francis de Sosa, of the council of his Majesty, and
general inquisition; to the Christian reader.
For as much as I have committed the reuiew of this book of the life and
miracles of the blessed si^^er Ioane of the Cross, which has been spoken of
in so many manners; and for that it is so natural to enerie one to defend
that which once he has said, it seems to me I have obligation to satisfy
all, and I speak to all: for although in other cases we must follow the
opinion of Cassiodorus, in Praefat. lib. 11. who says that the satisfaction of
some defectes may be excused, because the discreet without giving it them, do
pardon others errors, knowing their own, and to the rest no satisfaction is
due: yet in matter of doctrine, the opinion of the Apostle S. Paul is, Romans 1.
that we are debtors, to the wife and to the unwise: following which advise, I
will satisfy both the one and the other, in as much as my little sufficiency
will attain to.

Being the life of this servant of God was written in a vulgar tongue, and
contains things so strange: although the book having been printed so of^in
so little time, and the great profit it has done, do well prove the piety of
Spain, which has also been the cause, that some things therein have been
noted, by persons learned and discreet, it seeming to them incon^enient, that
they should go in a vulgar tongue through the hands of all: the censure of
such like persons has been seen, approved, and esteemed, as reason is. But
because a speech was made of correcting this book, some scrupulous persons,
although well intentioned, began to censure it* though more touched with that
bitter zeal, whereof S. James speaks, Jacob. 3. cap. 3. then with true
science: and with this they noted a great number of errors, and their own
consisted in their understanding, for that they hit not upon the subject of
these errors, judging it to be the book it was not. And because the said
satisfaction does presuppose some things, which are as certain and general
principles, it seemed to me convenient to propose them in the beginning, as
grounds of my intention, which is to satisfy all, for more claritie, and to
avoid often repeating of them.

The first thing to be considered is, that many grave things are written in
Latin, Greek, and Hebreue, which are not permitted to go in vulgar tongues,
not because they contain evil doctrine, but because all can not go without
danger, into the hands of all: and this is with as little disparagement to the
authors, as is seen even in the sacred scripture, whose author is the holy
Ghost, and yet is not permitted to go in the vulgar tongue without a Comment:
which thing the heretics do much condemn, Lutherus praefat* assertionis
articulor. a Leone Pontifice damnator. Brentius in prolegomenis contra Petru^^
a Soto. saying, that we deprive the Mother tongue of great mysteries, and that
superiors will reserve to themselves the divine mysteries, granted to all, whom
they deprive of reading the sacred books, wherein things are learned
necessary to attain eternal life, without fiction of arbitrarie expositions.
And with these inue^tions they deceive the ignorant people, being disparates
altogether without appearance of truth. For setting aside the doctrine of the
Saints, as S. Ambrose. Saint Augustine, S. Hierome. S. Gregory, S. Basile, S.
Iraeueus S. Chrysostom, Origene and many others, D. Ambros in epist. 24. ad
Constantium. Aug. lib. de. fide, and operibus cap. 15. and 1^. lib. 2. de
doctrinae Christiana. c. 6. lib. 12. confessionum cap. 14. ep. 3. and epist.
119. c. 21. Hieronymus in epist. ad Pau. linum. Gregor. Homil. 6. ia
Ezechielem. de Basilio. and Gregorio Nazia^zeno. Ruffin. 9. lib. 11. historiar.
cap. 9. Irenaeus lib. 2. cap. 47. Chrysostomus Homil. 40. ad Joan. and Homil.
44 in Math. Origin. lib. 7. contra Celsum. and Homil. 12. in Exodum. Lucae.
Actorum. 8. 2. Petri. cap. vltimo.
to whom they give no credit, of the sacred scripture it self which they
confess for infallible, it is manifest that it is very difficult to
interpret as the Regal Prophet says in many places: and specially. In the
118. Psalm, and S. Luc and the Apostle S. Peter do affirm, that in the
epistles of Saint Paul are many things difficult, which the unlearned and
unstable do falsely interpret. And finally of the ^iuers expositions which
presumptuous men have given upon the sacred scripture, have sprung almost all
heresies.

To prove this we need spend little time, for to themselves it is manifest,
that the sects are innumerable which daily they invent, and their books are
full of contradictions in this kind, as appears when Osiander confuteth
Philip Melancthon ( Osiander in confutatione aduersus Philippum) who affirms
that there were propounded by the confessionistes, twenty contrary
propositions, in the matter only of justification. The same does Luther (
Luther* contra. Zing.) Oecolam. against Zuinglius, Oecolampadius, and upon the
Psalms: and in the book of counsels, he confesses concerning the obscurity
of the sacred scripture, that which he denies in the said book against the
articles of Pope Leo. Finally there can be no greater blindness, then to deny
the Pope and General Counsels, that, which they themselves grant to an
artificer, which is the exposition of sacred letters. For the which with most
holy prudence it is prohibited, that the canonical books go not abroad in
vulgar tongues: and that not absolutely as the heretics do feine, but when
they have no commentary; for with it there is no prohibition at all; Rather if
we consider that which goes written in such a multitude of spiritual books,
with great facility may (whosoever is well read in the^) they have notice, not
only of that which is in the sacred scripture necessary to salvation, but of
the letter itself, and of many difficulties, and curiosities of the same: so
that, as much as they allege, are false deceiptes; for neither is the Mother
tongue deprived of great mysteries, nor those that are learned, of holy
doctrine, but of the danger of erring, which the Apostle Saint Peter teaches:
and this is greater in some matters then in others: and in few so great, as
when matters of revelations, are treated of through the great experience which
has been had of cases, in which Satan transforminge him self into an Angel
of light, has deceived, not only persons vain and vicious, but many very
spiritual, as the glorious Saint Vincent Ferer has advertised us in his
commentary of the spiritual life. Cap. 12. and 13. and Saint Antonine of
Florentia in diverse places, in so much as he speaks these words following.
D. Anton. 3. part. sum. Theo. tit. 8. cap. 2. and 3. Non omnia etiam Sanctorum
hominum visa, aut si maius reuelationes indubitatae fidei, and veritatis esse,
quia nonnunquam viri pij hallucinantur. And to avoid this danger grave books
are prohibited, and of authors well known and esteemed, and others have been
commanded to be corrected, as those of fr. Louis of Granada, which without
aggreuance of as many as in our times have written in vulgar tongues, have as
great place in piety and doctrine and propriety of language, as any
whatsoever, and yet were prohibited which had been printed until the year
1561. For that they contained certain things about the grace of God, and the
signs thereof being shown in some persons more sensibly: and being true and
taken out of the doctrine of the Saints, and relating sometimes their own
words, it seemed inconvenient it should go in a vulgar tongue: and the author
him self amended it, and his books have gone and go in all languages, with
much edification and mighty profit of the Christian people.

Secondly is to be considered, that some histories and examples, which against
this may be alleged out of books, in which is much peril, and are not
prohibited, do not prove any thing against what has been said. First
because notice can not be had of all: and then because the foundation of such
prohibitions is only to avoid danger of erring; this goes according to the
necessity of the times; after the which prudence teaches that things may be
permitted, which in another occasion have been prohibited, for why the cause
ceassing, which was the danger, the effect also may cease. Ca. 6. de consecra.
did. 3. 6. Synod. Clear is the example of Alexander the first by whom was
prohibited the power of painting Christ our Savior in figure of a lamb; and
the same we read in the Sixth General Synod in the canon 28. where the author
of the sum of the councels notes, that it was then also forbidden to paint
the holy Ghost in figure of a dove. Council. Nicen. 2. And in the second Nicene
council in the action 4. and 5. the opinion of Saint German is approved, which
condemns the painting of the eternal Father in figure of a man; and that of
the divine persons only the person of Christ our Savior ought to be painted,
who was a man. And this sentence follows S. John Damascene and Saint Augustine.
Joan. Dam. lib. 4. fidei Orthodoxae cap. 17. D. August. lib. 7. de fide and
symbolo. This seemed convenient for that time, in which the heretics
Anthropomorphitae, did trouble the church, but that necessity ceassing, who
sees not with what veneration the holy church does use, and reverence such
like pictures, and the many decrees which in their favor have been given? ex
6. anathematismo. 5. Concilij Constant. ex 6. anathematismo edict: imperatoris
Iustini. ex Euagr. cap. 2. lib. 11. Ioannes Damasc. cap. 1. lib. 3. de side
orthodoxa. And the same heed was taken in the manner of speaking; for we read
in the 5. Council of Constantinople, and in the edict of Justinian the
Emperor, and in Euagrius, and S. John Damascene, and other grave authors, that
it was prohibited to call the Virgin our B. Lady Christotocos, which is to
say, Mother of Christ, because the hereeike Nestorius gave her that name,
denying that she might be called Theotocos, that is, Mother of God: and so
only she might be called, Mother of Christ. But after the devil had taken away
Nestorius, and that there is no fear that a^ie one in Europe will follow him,
we confess Christ our Savior for true God, and as properly and commonly we
call the most holy Virgin, Mother of Christ, as Mother of God. And of these
examples many might be related, of which the heretics do pretend to help
themselves, for to put a vain change in the decrees and use of the church. But
their calumniation does clearly appear, because novelty ruled by the times
necessity, is not Instabilitie, but Prudence: and hence springs that it is
permitted in one time, what in another is prohibited, and prohibited at one
time what at another was permitted, to take away whatsoever occasion of peril,
without having for many of these things new decrees, with express reuocation
of the ancient; When the universal custom suffices, tolerated by the church,
and head Bishop. As proves Paulus Borgatius, with the authority of grave
authors, and specially of Hostiensis in his Sum, and of the Cardinal, Paulus
Borgatius in tracta. de irregularitatibus. tit. de decimes. Hostienfis and
Cardinalis. in C. nobis de decimis.

The third thing to be noted is, that there are many kinds of Saints, or
blessed persons, whom the Christian people may and ought to worship. The first
degree, has those which are declared for such in whatsoever of the canonical
books of the new and old testament, whose sanctity if it should be denied or
put in doubt, it would be a formal heresy, as it is to doubt of the truth of
the holy scripture.

The second degree, is that of the ancient Saints, whom the tradition of the
universal church holds from their beginnings for such Saints, building them
temples, altars, and celebrating their feasts, inuocating their intercession:
and the sanctity of such is authenticke, in so much that the heretics
themselves confess and reverence it, although they confess not the
intercession of the Saints: and to deny the sanctitio of such, should be the
same error, as to affirm that the universal church which the holy spirit
does enlighten, may err in a matter so grave as this is.

The third degree, is of the Saints which we call canonized, not because those
of the second degree are not so, which are also by the universal church, as
has been said, canonized; but because notice being had of certain
deceiptes which some particular churches had in admitting for Saints those
which were none, approving false miracles wherewith the devil did procure to
deceive the people, the Roman Bishops as universal Pastors, and the general
Councels, willing to procure an opportune remedy to this damage, reserved to
themselves this case of of canonizing Saints, which is, to propose them for
such to the universal church, after having sought out their life and miracles;
with so much diligence as we see it done, and this began in the year of our
Lord eight hundred and three, when Pope Leo the third canonized, at the
instance of the Emperor Carolus Magnus, Saint Suitbertus Bishop, although
afterward the reservation of this case to the Roman church, was more expressed
by Alexander the third, as appears by the chapter, audiuimus. (de reliq. and
veneratione Sanctorum.) and the solemnity of ceremonies with which it is now
used has been continued, and there have been canonized seauentie and three,
adding eleven to the computation which Freer Angelus de Roca made, in the book
which he wrote upon this matter, where he says, that although being sacristane
of the Pope, he used great diligence, yet he holds for certain, that some
have been forgotten by him: and so it is that he put not Saint Elzearius, and
seven Martyrs of our sacred religion, which suffered in Cepta, and with three
which have been canonized after he had written, which are Saint Raimundus, S.
Francisca, and Saint Charles, is made the said number of eleven: and of the
said seauentie and three, forty and three are religious, and of these,
twenty and five only of our order, counting those of the third rule.

The fourth degree, is of Saints which in different places are worshipped, and
are called Beatified; for the process of their life and miracles having been
seen by persons to whom the apostolical sea commits this charge, license
has been given that they may be worshipped, and inuocated with public
prayers by some religion, or people, or kingdom, etc. in the mean time that
the cause of the canonization be concluded.

The fifth degree, is of Saints which are worshipped by the faithful in
different places without being canonized, or beatified, in the manner spoken:
the which although they dyed after that the Roman church reserved to it self
the decree of the canonization, the custom of celbrating their feast with
public prayers in all the universal church, are nevertheless so ancient and
so notorious, as the said use and permission is holden for a tacit
canonization, and such like in all and through al, we worship as canonised
Saints; as for example sake Saint Roch, is neither canonized, nor beatified in
the form above said, yet almost through all the church generally his feast is
celebrated, his name is inuocated, and churches are dedicated to him etc. with
so notable permission of the sea Apostolic, as this same passes in Rome it
self. And of these many are worshipped in diverse kingdoms.

The last degree, is of those who by the notice which is had of their holy
life and miracles before and after their death, the faithful do worship with
particular veneration, and not public and solemn: and these are of more or
less authority, conform to the antiquity, and notice which is had of their
life and miracles, and the approbation or permission of the superiors. It
remains now to see the veneration which to such Saints may and ought to be
given lawfully.

Fourthly it is noted, that in as much as touches the veneration due to the
Saints, it is not here treated of that which co^cerned the Saints of the five
degrees proposed, because it is not a thing in controue^sie among the
Catholics, and that which against the heretics is defined by the church,
and the Doctors do write, is not matter for this purpose, but only that which
touches those of the last degree: in which is the blessed Ioane. I say
therefore that the understanding of this truth fundamentally presupposes
another truth, which is, that there are two manners of celebration, veneration,
or invocation of Saints: the one is public and general; this is made in the
name of all the church, and with the authority thereof express or tacit; and
another particular, and this latter is divided also into particular secret, one
commending him self to the prayers of whom he holds for a Saint: and into
particular public and notorious, as proclaiming one for a Saint, hanging up
lamps and making otherlike demonstrations.

This supposed, two things are certain, and in one is the difficulty which
makes to our purpose. The first thing certain is, that the veneration
public and general in the name of all the church, only can and ought to be
done to the Saints of the first five degrees, keeping in what concerns the
beatified in the order of the confession: because in some it is more limited
then in others. And the second thing also certain, is, that the veneration, or
invocation particular and secret, every one may make to whomsoever he holds
for just, alive or dead, without having more defect herein then in giving more
credit to the sanctity of any one, then prudence teaches, but in fine his
intent is good, as only to esteem and honor virtue, a thing which the very
light of nature teaches, as Aristotle (1. Ethic. cap. 5.) affirms. And that
this honor is due, not only to the living, but also to the dead, the
philosophers came to know, as Plato, and others, with Eusebius notes it. (
lib. 13. de praeparat. euangel. c. 6. and 7.) yet the Saints have proceeded
further, proving that the honor and veneration done to the good, living and
dead, is done to God him self in his Saints: and so says Saint Basil. ( D.
Basil. in orat. in 40. Martyr. lib. 4. cap. 16.) Honor quem bonis conseruis
exhibemus beneuoli, erga communem Dominum significationem de se praebet. The
same Saint John Damascene proves almost in the same words: and Saint Hierome
in his epistle to Ripario, does say: honoremus seruos, vt eorum honor redundat
ad Dominum. (sermon. 6. in fine.) And in the life of Saint Paul, he celebrateth
much the devotion wherewith she cast her self at the seere of the eremites,
not thinking her self worthy to kiss them, and the Saint says, so much she
worshipped, as if in every one of them she worshipped Jesus Christ. ( Lib. de
Virginitate.) Ac si in singulis Dominum adoraret. And it is no merueile for
why, S. Athanasius in his book of virginity, says: St homo iustus domumtuam
intrauerit, adorabis humi ad pedes illius: Deum enim qui illum mittit adorabis.
So as if one reverence him whom he holds for a Saint, dead or alive, he does
not sin, although the same were no Saint, for his intention is not but to
reverence true sanctity: as if one adored a host unconsecrated, thinkinge it
to be consecrated; it is clear that he meriteth (as Doctors do note) by the
same reason. Medina 3 p. q. 25. a. con. 4.

In like manner as these two things of public veneration in the name of all
the church, and of the particular of every one, are certain, so that which
supposes the doubt, and makes to our purpose is, in the particular public,
which is called particular, because it is not general, nor is made in name of
the church: and it is called public, because the actions of veneration are
so, as is declared.

Concerning this manner of veneration, two extremes must be fledd, and the
middle may be followed. The one extreme is, that of those who with appearance of
piety, approve false miracles, and other actions, by which the people
proclaims one for a Saint, with great peril of approving feigned sanctity,
whereupon have been seen pitiful cases, of which the histories are full,
procured by the devil; not so much for to deceive in that article, as to
discredit true virtue: and so all that which in this matter shall not be
censured and judged by the superiors to whom it belongs, is holden
suspected. And in these cases, as the judgments and opinions of men are
diverse, so also are their effects and feelings; for some w^epe, and others
laugh, and others are dismay^d, and of all the devil draws much gain. The
other extreme, is of them who so much streighten this matter, as they affirm
to be prohibited what some ever kind of exterior veneration, as to hang up
lamps, to offer gifts, to call one a Saint, although it be in particular,
without special approbation and decree of the sea apostolic. So thought
Francis de Pegna, auditor of the Rota in a treaty which he composed of this
matter. ( cap. si quis hominem. 11. q. 3.) where he affirms that so it was
decreed by the chapter, si quis homin^m, and by the first and second chapter,
de reliquijs and veneratione Sanctorum: and is the sentence of Hostiensis, whom
commonly the canonistes do follow upon these textes, and that it is proved in
proper terms by Zanguinus in the treaty de Haereticis cap 12. number. 8. and
the author of the Repertorie of the inquisitors, verbo canonizatus.. and si
tales, and from hence he infers that which without doubt he took for
assumpt in that treaty, which was to condemn certain pictures and stampes of
one Beatus, whose canonization was treated with such rigor of words, as,
although in a certain manner they show more submission to the sea apostolic,
little malice is necessary ^o know that some passion or affection went
between, when neither the texts which he relates do prove what he
pretends, nor the authors which he alreadgeth do speak so cruelly; for why
the chapter, Si quis hominem, is no decree, but certain words which Gracian
took out of Saint Hierom upon the epistle of Saint Paul to Philemon: and
speaks not of this matter, but much in general, against those which sell the
evil for good, and in the chapter 1. and 2. de reliquijs and veneratione
Sanctorum, Alexander the 3. c^^demneth the reverence which was done to one
Ebrius, whom they worshipped for a Saint: and the Doctors canonistes upon those
texts, do not depart from the middle sentence, which is the truth. And
although some do not speak with so much distinction: others, as Hostiensis
and Innocentius, do distinguish very clearly between public prayers,
obsequies and sac^ifices, made to the Saints in the name of the whole church,
and of the particular and private which are made to any Saint, for the
notoriousnesse of his holy life and miracles, and they confess that the
prohibition of the said texts is understood of the first, and not of the
second: which also all the divines do affirm with more claritie, who follow
the said middle sentence. ( Suares. 3. p. q. 25. a. 1. d. 52. sect. 3.)
conform to which is to be affirmed, that the said texts prohibit the public
and solemn veneration in name of the whole church, but not the particular,
although there come with them public actions and notorious, as has been
said, in consequence whereof must be approved or reproved such like actions,
according to the ground which there is for the same, and for their use; for if
it be weak, they shall be worthy of reprehension, as light and vain; but of
it be reasonable, they shall be pious and laudable: and so is the veneration
particular and public, which in so many places is made to many Saints,
which although they are not canonized nor beatified, their sanctity is known
by the notoriousnesse of their holy life, and the manifestation of their
miracles, and by other signs in which is grounded the common acclamation of
the Christian people: and such like, although we call them Saints, as we would
say the holy Freer Didacus, the holy freer Raymundus etc. we do not yet give
them the title of Saint absolutely, as to say Saint Raymundus, Saint Didacus,
until they be canonized; For to graduate them with this title, the church
reserueth for the action of the canonization, as is manifest of the first book
of the sacred ceremonies, ( sect. 6. cap. 2.. antequam.) where treating of the
process of the canonization, this title of Saint is not given until the
sentence diffinitiue, in the which are put these words: Decernimus and
definimus bonae memoriae N. Sanctum esse, etc. And that which to the contrary
Francis Pegna would persuade, besides that it is contrary to what himself
required to see himself in Rome with the blessed Francisca, and many other
blessed bodies, which neither are canonized, nor beatified, it is scrupulous
without appearance of ground. First because the most ancient custom has so
received it, as we see in such a number of grave authors ancient and modern,
which to such like do give the name of Saints, and refer the veneration
which in diverse parts, is made them: of this are the books full, not only of
those who have written the lives of Saints, as Surius, Lipomanus, Vincentius
Bellouacensis, and others, and the chronicles of Religions with infinite grave
authors: but even in the very books of the holy Fathers, and which is more, in
the General Counsels is found this manner of speech. Nor is it against this
to say, that those authors were before the said decrees; for some of them were
after, as S. Bernard, S. Raymundus, S. Bonauenture, S. Antoninus of Florence,
and many others, whose language to condemn would be temeritie. Secondly,
because not only books of history, but the Roman Martyrologe it self, which
every day is read in the divine office at Prime, calls Saints many
centenaries yea thousands of persons, which neither are canonized nor
beatified. Thirdly that which cleerlie conuinceth (as well notes Azorius Tom.
2. p. 2. lib. 5.) among those things which are commanded by the Pope of Rome,
to be avouched for the canonizatio^ of a Saint, is the fame which has been of
his sanctity, and the veneration which the people do him: and so in all the
Bulls which to this end are dispatched, is put a clause with this demand
following. An magno pietatis affectu and studio eum fuerit populus prosecutus?
an apud populum haeatur pro beato, qui in coelesti patria vita perfrui aeterna
credatur, quam frequenter eius sepulchrum visitare solet, eius opem and
patrecinium apud Deum implorando, and multa offerendo, and tabellas gratiarum
ab eo obtentarum indies appendendo. These things then be lawful and holy,
when the Popes do command to avouch them for an argument of the definition
which they pretend to make in so grave a matter.

This supposed, it remains to satisfy in particular the censurers of this
book, who (as has been said) are some learned and prudent, and others
scrupulous and ignorant: the first think it convenient to take away some
revelations and other cases, which not being for all, it is not good that they
go in vulgar tongues, for the reasons spoken of in the first and second
presupposition, and so it has been done: and not only in the places which
they pointed out, but also in many others, without making thereby any want in
the history, it being no wrong to retain in silence some truths; neither
yet is any injury done to the originals so worthy of credit, for they are kept
with all their authority, until it shall be necessary to recur to them.

There have been also some things cut off, and others declared touching
Purgatory, and other matters, which although they be true in rigor of
Theology, yet are not so manifest to those who have not studied; to whom it
might serve for a rock of scandal, what well understood were matter of
edification.

Likewise in what concerns the virtue of the beads, which Christ our Lord
blessed at the instance of this servant of God, has been taken away all
whatsomeuer sounded of jurisdiction, as are indulgences; not because we do not
believe but that there are many gained, as tradition has received, but for the
reason which in the 10. chapter is declared, which is, that concession of them
is not constant with that distinction which is convenient for the publication
of indulgences, and the miracles which hitherto have been au^uched, although
they prove alike other great virtues, yet not that there are indulgences
gained: and so this is left without wrong to the truth for if the indulgences
be granted, they may be gained, and if they be not, the other virtues are such
and so maruailous, as they are sufficient, that the Christian people may make
such estimation of these beads, as always they have done, and with so great
reason as by and by we will prove. Also the title of Saint, has been taken
away, which might have been used with the modification expressed in the fourth
supposition; that is to say, the Saint Ioane, and not S. Ioane absolutely, as
before it was; ( Sancta Ioanna, that is, the Saint Ioane, or the holy Ioane.)
ou^ now that this was mended, it seemed goo^ to take it away altogether, for
the greater satisfaction of those who in this matter do speak with too much
rigor, without condemning for all this the common language of the people, who
call this servant of God the Saint Ioane, nor that of so many grave authors
which give her this title: and even the Lord Bishop of Mantua in his chronicle
calls her sanctissima: who all speak: with much decency and propriety, as
is proved in the fourth note The Bishop of Mantua of the Seraphical Religion.
Bishop of laen lib. of the veneration of relics. Barespo. 4. P. Chronic. N
Pereclo. lib. of our B. Lady of Atocha. Villegas in the flos Sanctorum. Fr.
Peter de Salazar and others.

The second sort of censurers are the scrupulous, although well meaning; and
the first thing whereat they stumble is, in that there are related in this
book, a great multitude of miracles, without being approved by the ordinary,
conform to the decree of the holy counsel of Trent, and the truth is, that
this decire for proving miracles and relics, is not new, but a confirmation
of many others most ancient, by the which if these scrupulous would pass their
eyes with a very little observance that they might make for the understanding of
them, they should be very far from giving such censure: For there is very
great difference between approning miracles and relics, and relating them in
a history, the first is reserved to Superiors, according to the quality of
the end for which the approbation is intended: and the second is granted to
all as many as have been borne in the world; seeing that since the beginning
thereof, have been related and written diverse miraculous cases, without that
any one have more obligation for the truth of the history, then to relate the
things as he knows them, and every one gives him the credit that according
to prudence seems good unto him: and to whom this shall be w^nting he shall
give it him that will, so that nether the historiagrapher, nor the h^^ o^e
shall therefore lose or gain more cred^^ then before they had. And Aristotle
says. (1. Ethic. lib. 3. cap. 7.) from whom Cicero took it, that all things
must not be handled with such subtilitie, that a mathematical demonstration be
made of them, but that the arguments wherewith that shall be proved which is
related, must be according to the subject whereof is treated, and the end
wherefore it is treated. In such manner as to relate by word or writing, a
miracle which God did by the intercession of any Saints, it is not more
necessary, then to have he^rd it, of persons worthy of credit. But to publish
with solemnity this miracle, and to celebrate it with festiuitie in
thanksgiving, or to take it for argument of the sanctity of that Saint, for
to canonize him or beatifie him etc. the approbation of a superior is
necessary, to whom according to the law it belongs, according to the end for
the which it is pretended to be approved: so also to worship and hold in
reverence a relic which is given to any one, and to believe with piety that
it is true, suffices the authority of a person worthy of credit, who affirms
that he found it in such a place or church, worshipped and had for such. But if
a church or monastery which should much esteem a relic, had in this manner,
as we might say a head of the eleven thousand Virgins, would recite of them on
their day with a double office, and not of the Saint which the Calendar does
assign, as is granted in the rubriques of the breuiarie, it would be necessary
to have approbation of that relic, because one thing it is, to worship and
esteem it in particular, and another to approve it for public ministry,
whereof the said decree of the sacred counsel teaches, and the rest touching
this matter.

In consequence whereof to the objection it is answered. First, that the
miracles which are written in books, which are infinite, as in the cronicles
of religions, and other innumerable tracts; not for this are approved and
published authorizedly, which is that which the law prohibteth, commanding that
it be done with authority of the ordinary: and that which this book contains
is the same, with infinite others ancient and modern, where is recounted that
which in every part happened, and every one may give it the credit that he
will.

Secondly, that which is written of this servant of God, is the same which of
her have written so grave authors, as have been related: and if in their
histories this inconvenience was not found, there is no cause wherefore it
should be found in this book.

Thirdly and principally, with which it seems there remains no kind of
doubt in this matter, is, that being so many books which speak of miracles,
in few, or it may be in none shall be found the wariness that is in this, for
speaking in the context of the history of some miraculous thing, every one is
related as it was found, and as it is, for it is said such a miracle such a
one recounted, and such a one passed before such and such persons, and of such
a miracle was information made by commission of the ordinary, and is in the
archiue of the council of the most illustrious of Toledo, and of such an one
made information only the Justice of the people, and of such an one, the Father
General of the order with such witnesses, and of such an one is known no more
then what the party says, or is found by tradition. And this being so
clear, what has the approbation (which the holy council of Trent commands
to be made for the publishing of a new miracle) to do with this history,
written in imitation of as many authors as have written lives of Saints, from
the time that the church was founded, and from the same council unto this day,
and with more wariness then the rest, when they only relate the case, and the
author of this cronicle adds that which has been said?

The second objection which they oppose is, the greatness of the favors which
our Lord is shown to have done to this servant of God; the which are such and
so great, as with great reason may cause not only much admiration, but some
doubt in believing them. And I answer, that the admiration in the
consideration of the works of God, is for to acknowledge the greatness of his
clemency and liberality, and for it to give him thanks, consideraui opera tua,
etc. said the Prophet: of this admiration God draws light to all the virtues,
for, mirabilia opera tua, and anima mea cognoscet nimis. For faith is
confirmed, and charity is enkindled more for to love such a Lord and so
liberal, and hope is many ways nourished, by hoping that God will work in us
what he has wrought in our neighbor. But to draw out of the greatness of the
favors of God, coldness to believe them less, is to think basely of the
infinite liberality of God, and to measure the same by the shortness of our
mind, without consideration that it is consequent to the liberality of God to
be infinite in giving the most with best will: and so the desire and hope in
the things of the world, are different from those of things divine: for in
humane things, while that is greater which is desired, the hope of obteininge
it is less, and in divine things, contrariewise.

For being we treat with one that is infinitely most magnificent, while the
pretension more increases, the hope will be more firm: and this the Apostle
S. Paul calls to abound more in hope and virtue of the holy Spirit. Deus
autem spei repleat vos omni gaudio and pace in credendo, vt abundetis magis in
spe and virtute Spiritus sancti. (Romans 15.) and so the Prophet Helisaeus. (4.
Reg. 4.) willing to enrich a poor widow with giving her such abundance of
miraculous oil, that she might pay her debtors and live of the rest, fearing
in her some scantnesse of mind (as there is in these scrupulous persons)
advertised her to ask vessels, not of one of her neighbors but of all, nor a
few vessels, but many. Vade pete mutuo ab omnibus vicinis tuis vasa vacua non
pauca. And although she did so, and they were all filled, the Prophet demanded
if she had more vessels: and answering, no; the oil ceased; in such sort
that it failed not for fault of the giver, but for want of vessels to receive
it in.

And in like compete^ce always will God overcome; in such sort as the favors
done to the B. Saint Ioane are not less credible because they are great how
much more if we read the books a of the Saints, which are full of marvelous
cases, where is shown how our Lord has done very great mercies to thieves,
robbers, and to all sor^es of most heinous persons, when it seemed they lest
deserved it, for his secret judgments, and declaration of his infinite mercy:
then what great thing is it, that he has done the same for a chosen servant
from her mothers womb. And finally these are not amazed at the greatness, for
they know it not, nor can tell in what it consists, but at the novelty and
extraordinary cases: and in humane things this has some ground, but in the
divine, it is the part of blockheads not to consider upon the great things
which God does ordinarily, and to admire much at the extraordinary, as S.
Augustine pondereth, saving of such, vt non maiora, sed in solit ^ videndo,
stuperent, quibus quotidiana viluerunt. (Trac. 24. in Ioannem.) And those
aforesaid will fall into the accoumpt, if they shall make the consideration
that here shall be represented unto them, and this it is that they let loose the
reins of their understanding, and add to the favors which in this book are
related, that our Lord did to this his servant, other greater, more vnmed, and
admirable; in such sort as if it be related that in contemplation he visited
her sometimes, let these visites be in public, and with all the celestial
court, and many times every day: and more then this let them consider how
far the imagination can reach. And because the understanding of man is
short, let the most high Seraphin do this, and altogether as much as you can
imagine, and much more, comes not, neither in the greatness of the work,
nor in the finenesse of the love, nor in the nouelcie of the marvel, near to
the communicating one only time; for this favor can not have any equal, nor
the mystery any similitude.

Then let these men in a maze, tell how many times they have communicated?
What great admiration it has caused them? what thanks they have given to our
Lord? with what services they have acknowledged a favor so unequal to as many
as have been related of S. Ioane, and might be related of S. John Baptist, and
of all the Saints? of whom we take no advantage for her, as these ignorantly
do say, by the greatness of the favors, for why the degrees of grace and
glory, which the divines do call essential, are not measured with these
exterior demonstrations. And so Caietane says very well, that if by the
multitude of miracles, we must make computation of the greatness of the
sanctity, much advantage would Saint Antonie of Padua have of Saint Peter, and
great temerity it should be, to compare the one with the other, how much more to
advance Saint Antony, as Saint Thomas says, Lectio 5. c. 8. in epist. ad Romans
and 3. in cap. 5. ad Ephesians.

Secondly to some has been a great novelty, the term of consecratinge of
blessinge the Image of our Lady, and to others, that Christ our Lord himself
has done this ministry, at the supplicatien of this his espouse: and
although in all of them ignorance have place, yet it is more gross in the
former; because the ecclesiastical ceremony of blessing Crosses, Images
altars etc. is an apostolical tradition, of which are full not only the sacred
councels and apostolical decrees, but the manualls most ordinary, and in the
Roman Pontifical. ( Pontif. Romans 2. p. fol. 505.) there is an especial
rubrique with this title. De benedictione Imaginis Virginis Mariae. Neither yet
is it a new thing for Jesus Christ to do such like favors, when we read in so
many grave authors, ( Vincent. Valda. in speculo historiar. lib. 23. c. 36. and
37.) that in the year 644. our Lord Jesus Christ in his proper person, blessed
and consecrated the temple of S. Denis, near Paris: and so also he consecrated
the church of the monastery of Senon in France: at the miraculous consecration
whereof were heard the voices of Angels, which did sing, and there appeared in
the corners of the temple Crosses, which are wont to be put in churches which
are consecrated. The same is related of the glorious Apostle Saint Peter, that
miraculously he consecrated a church of his name of Westminster in London in
the year 610. and anointed it with holy oil: and after it was consecrated,
were seen in the walls of the temple, the Crosses which the Apostle had put,
and the candles of wax which had burned in the consecration: And Saint Mellitus
Bishop of that city being informed of this truth, doubted in himself if he
should again consecrate that temple, or no: and deferred the resolution until
being in Rome in a council, he consulted this matter with Pope Boniface the 4.
and it was determined that it ought not be consecrated again, since it had
been done by the Apostle S. Peter. This doerelate S. Bid, Surius, Caesar
Baronius, and is found in the second tome of the said counsels which anew
has been printed in the life of S. Boniface the 8. fol. 963. Beda. lib. 2.
hist. Angliae cap. 4. Surius Tom. 1. in vita S. Ianuarij. Baronius Tom. 8. Anno
610. Numer. 12. 13. and 14.

Thirdly it troubled many, to read that one Chapter of this book, which has
for title, how the holy Ghost spoke thirteen years by the mouth of Saint
Ioane, and that this manner of speakinge is many times repeated, which seems
reserved to the authors, only of the sacred scripture; when even of the authors
of the Popes definitions, and of the General Counsels, we do not say that
they had immediate revelation of the holy Ghost, but assistance that they could
not err. This superficially spoken, seems to have some appearance of reason,
but the truth cleared, no objection has been put against this book with
less ground; for the difference which is between an immediate revelation from
God to the authors of the sacred books, and the assistance of the church not
to err, is a matter very scholasticall, and which is not touched in this
book, nor is any thing to the purpose of that which therein is treated of many,
as the Doctors do teach.

For to declare this difference, and the language in saying, the holy Ghost
spoke by the mouth of such a party, is common to all kind of persons, not
only Saints, but without difference between good and evil: seeing Saint John
says, that the holy Ghost spoke by the mouth of Caiphas, and Saint Augustine
and Saint Hierom, by the mouths of the Sibills which were gentiles. Finally
the Prophets have said that God spoke in them. Haec dicit Dominut. And S.
Paul: Ego enim accepi a Domino: And Saint Augustine in diverse places, and
particularly in the preamble to the 118. Psalm. And our holy Father S. Francis
says in his testament: Nemo ostendebat mihi, quid deberem sacere, sed ipse
altiss^mus reuelauit mihi. (In testamento S. Francisci.) And the same may
whatsoever person say. And between the truth which God manifests by the
mouth of Isaias, or by the mouth of Saint Francis, or of whatsomeuer persons,
there is no difference in the reason of truth, for as infallible is the one as
the other, God being the author, who neither can, because he is infinitely
wife, be deceived, nor ca^, because he is infinitely good, deceive: but the
difference consists in knowing, or believing, that God has revealed this
truth, for that which Isaias says is not only of faith because God has said
it; but also it is of faith that God has said it, for so the holy church has
defined it, but in other truths, we hold them for such, because we believe
that God has said the^, because Saint Augustine or Saint Francis etc. has
said it. And to every thing of humane faith, is given the credit which the
author deserves: to Saint Augustine and Saint Francis, as to so great Saints:
and to whomsoever else, to such an one as he is. And this being so plain, there
is no improprietie in the said manner of speakinge, but rather much
conuenience; because not only the history proposes that the holy Ghost spoke
by the mouth of this his servant, the things she spoke being so holy, but also
for the manner so merueilous of preaching being elevated and absorpte: And if
the admiration grew out of this novelty, it is not a case which has not
happened to others, when the same has succeeded oftentimes to S. Catharine of
Siena, of whom most grave histories do recount, that being in ecstasies from
her senses, she made long speeches and most devout orations, which the holy
Ghost did inspire into her. S. Antonin. 3. p. hist. tit. 25. cap. 14.. 17.
Chronica de S. Dominic. 2. p. lib. 2. cap. 44.

And that God so communicates himself in this sort to this servants being in
ecstasies, and out of their senses, and to do them so great favors, is,
because the greatness of the things which he communicates them is so
superior to the forces of nature, and the capacity of man so short and
limited, that for those that it can receive it is necessary to estrange it from
the corporal senses, as was seen in Adam, of whom S. Bernard says, that when
God would eleuate him to things purely spiritual and divine, he cast him in a
kind of sleep, his soul being elevated in sublime operation, above all
material and sensible things: and that not as somethinke, because he should not
feel the pain of his ribbe which was taken out, for to that without a
particular miracle no sleep could suffice: and so the sleep of Adam,
according as is gathered of the holy scripture, and of diverse translations,
was not sleep purely natural, but extaticall and miraculous, as are those
which in the contemplative are called ecstasies and raptes, because the senses
ceassing and the imagination from corporal things, Adam might receive more
purely the spiritual and divine, which our Lord did communicate unto him; the
style most ordinary with which his majesty does communicate himself to his
Saints. ( Genesis cap. 2. misit Dominus soporem in Adam. The Greek translation
says estasin, and the Hebrew tardemach, which is profound sleep. Aquila and
Symachus translated it, grauem and profundum soperem, which is the same.)

And in this sort he is found to have communicated himself to this his most
deuote servant, for as his delights are always to be with the children of
men. ( Proverb. 8.) so the familiarity has been very great with which in all
times he has handled them. How can I do a thing that Abraham may not know?
said our Lord when he would destroy Sodom. ( Genesis 18.) And with Moses the
holy scripture says that that he spoke as one friend with another. ( Exodus
33.) Of this kind are the prophecies, visions and revelations of all the
Prophets of the old testament, and the raptes of the Apostles, as is that which
S. Luc. recounteth of the Apostle S. Paul in the acts of the Apostles cap. 9.
even to the third heaven, in which he knew such things, as after he could not
tell how to speak. The rapte of the sheet of S. Peter, Actorum. 10. where he
knew the conversion of the gentiles; and all the prophecies and revelations
which the Catholic church has had since the Apostles, which are almost
infinite, of which the chronicles and lives of the Saints are full: of the same
privilege and favor women have enjoyed, before and after the coming of
Christ, for God has not excluded them from this favor and these mercies: And
God who says by Oseas. cap. 2. I will lead her into solitude, and speak to
her in the heart; does not only speak with men, nor is his powerful hand
abbreuiated with women more then with them; for we know that the spirit of our
Lord breaths where it will, and that God is no accepter of persons (Ioannis
cap. 3.) to exclude women from so great a good.

Rather in all times and ages there have been many in the world with whom he
has communicated himself largely and most liberally. ( S. Aug. lib. 18. de
ciuit. Dei.) Witnesses are of this truth the ancient Sybillas, so esteemed of
the Saints, for S. Hierom. ( lib. contra Iouinian.) says of them, that God
gave them the gift of prophecy in reward of the virginity which they kept,
revealing to them many things of the future state of the church, and of the
coming of the Messiah, with other mysteries of his death and passion,
resurrection and glorious ascension to heaven. The revelations of S. Brigitt
are approved by the councels of Constance and Florence. ( Clem. Alex. lib.
storm. lib. of the reuelat. of S. Brigit.) and those of S. Hildegarde by S.
Bernard, and by Pope Eugenius 3.) In the beginning the general chronic. of S.
Benet. Tom. 1. centuria 1. cap. 1. Martyrol. Rom die 17. Trithem. de viris
illustrib. ordinis S. Benedict. lib. 3. cap. 222. And by the council of
Treuers those of S. Gertrude, Saint Matildis and Saint Elizabeth, Abbess of
the monastery of Esconaugia, daughter of the King, and a person of great
sanctity, grave authors do write, that her Angel keeper did reveal to her
great mysteries, and commanded her in the name of God to write them. ( Marc.
Marul. lib. 3.) which is the same that passed with our blessed S. Ioane. And
the revelations of Saint Angela of Fulgino have been very much esteemed of the
learned spiritual men of the world. ( legenda de beata Angela de Fulgino.
Those of the blessed Mother Teresa of Jesus in our time, have been so
admirable as profitable. ( The book of the life of S. Teresa of Jesus.) The
things of the glorious S. Catharine of Siena in her time ouershadowed the
world and stayed not until Vrbanus Sixtus the Pope commanded her to preach
before him, and his Cardinals, that she might persuade the peace of the
church, as at another time she had done in presence of Pope Gregory the
eleventh his predecessor. Anton. 3. p. hist. titulo. 23. cap. 14.. 17.

And besides all this remaining in ecstasies rapte of her senses, she made
speeches and marvelous orations; of the which Freer Marck Briganus composed a
book which goes with this title. Incipit liber diuinae doctrinae datae per
personam aeterni patris intellectui loquentis admirabilis, and almae Virginis
Catharinae de Senis, Jesus Christi sponsae fidelissimae, sibi sub habitu Beati
Deminici famulantis, conscriptus dictante ipsa vulgari sermon, dum esset in
extasi, sieve raptu, and actualiter audiente, quid in ealoqueretur ipse Dominus,
and corampluribus reserente. (Chronicle of S. Dominic. lib. 2. cap. 51. and
45.) And in the book of the epistles of the same Saint, which by order of the
most excellent Lord, Freer Francis Ximenez, Archbishop of Toledo, Cardinal,
inquisitor general of Spain, was translated into Spanish, there go imprinted
some of the orations and exhortations, which this holy Virgin made, being in
ecstasies, and abstract from her senses, and one with this title. The fifth
oration, which the holy Virgin made in Rome, on Friday the 18. of February in
the year 1573. being in abstraction after having communicated. Another says,
the eleventh oration, which the same holy Virgin made in Rome, on the day of
the annunciation of the most B. Virgin Marie our Lady: the which she made in
abstraction. Another says thus: the 22. prayer, made in rapte of elevation of
the holy spirit, on the day of the conversion of S. Paul: and they are full of
most high mysteries, and of many places of the sacred scripture, which the
Saint most highly declared being elevated.

Neither is it against this to say, that these are Saints canonized, for some
of them be not so, and none of them were when these merueills were written of
them: for S. Antoninus and Saint Raimu^ous who wrote the things of Saint
Catharine of Siena, died hundreds of years before she was canonized: and the
same is also of almost all the rest, rather these same things which were
written of these Saints and went about the world with so much edification of
the Christian people, were the most efficacious motive to deal about their
canonization, and to effect it: and the same I hope in our Lord shall succed to
our blessed Ioane. And nevertheless the title of the said chapter has been
changed from whence it was before, how the holy Ghost spoke thirteen years by
the mouth of S. Ioane; now it is, how by the divine virtue the servant of God
spoke for the space of thirteen years; and that which was taken away, is the
same which was put, in realtie of truth, but has another appara^ce of those
which have not studied.

Fourthly, it seemed also to those a thing worthy to have been kept in
silence, the miracle of the Angel having carried to heaven the rosaries, and to
bring them down again blessed by our Lord, being a thing unheard of, and so
extraordinary, but it is a correction without ground. First, because that
which is related of the miracle, was manifest by the testimony of a whole
convent, and the tradition of the same has been so continued for the space of
so many years, and confirmed with the sanctity of the servant of God, and
with so many and so famous miracles: and again, because it is not a case
without an example, but there are many in things which shall be seen, for
they descended from heaven, or howsoever it be, we enjoy them by the
ministry of Angels; And setting aside some of that which the scripture
treats, as the Manna, the sword or holy Knife which Hieremias brought to
Judas Machabeus. (2. Match. 15.) there are many others which the Christian
people venerate, as the Cross of the Angels, which is kept in the holy church
of Ouiedo, and that of Crauaca, the Casula of S. Ildefonsus: the piece of the
veil which the same Saint, cut from S. Leocadia, the crystal viol in which
appeared enclosed the miracle of the Eucharist which is conserved in Santaren:
the habit which our blessed Lady the Virgin brought to S. Norberte, wherewith
she vested him, when he was to institute his religion. ( Surius Tom. 3.) And
the same passed with other founders of religions. And Philip Proculus the most
holy Martyr celebrating Mass the Angels lifted up the chalice, and carried it
to heaven, and after two hours brought it him again, and said, Christ has
consecrated it, do not thou consecrate it again, but receive it: and so he
did, all admiring who were present, ( S. Antonin. 3. p. hist. tit. 24. cap. 13.
Aquilinus lib. 1. cap. 15.) And Nicephorus Calixtus wrireth in his
ecclesiastical history lib. 19. cap. 20. the excellencies of the glorious
Amphilochius, Bishop of Iterana: and among other things relates, how the
Angels did consecrate him. Peter Sanchez lib. of the Kingdom of God cap. 4.
Number. 34.

And very grave are the histories which affirm to have descended from heaven
the three lilies of gold, called floure-delis, which the Kings of France bear
for arms, Tritemius in compendio annalium lib. 1. p. 22. Casseanus in Catal.
gloriae mundi. p. 5. considerat. 3^. Ioannes Ludouicus Viualdus tractat. de
laudibus trium liliorum Franciae. Gregorius Turone^sis lib. 2. Surius Tom. 5.
in vita S. Remigij. Monarch. Eccl. 2. p. lib. 16. cap. 7.. 4.
God sendinge them by an Angel for a great favor to the King Clodoueus when
he was converted to the faith, and of a gentill was made a Christian, and when
Saint Remigius Bishop of Rhemes, would baptize the King, chrisme by chance
wanting, a dove brought it down from heaven in a little bottle or violl which
she brought in her beke: and before many people putting it into the Bishops
hands, disappeared, and he anointed forthwith the King with the miraculous
chrisme which God had sent him: the which is kept in the same violl, and the
Kings of France are anointed therewith on the day of their coronation, and
there is passed since a thousand and a hundred years that God conserueth there
that holy liquor. And there is not why we should be amazed at these meruailes
nor at many other greater, which are seen and experienced enery day; for God
is a great honourer of his servants: and so we see that as much he honored the
blessed Saint Catharine of Alexandria. ( Breuiarium Romanum.) that none being
to interre her body, (for the tirant that put her to death forbad it) he sent
Angels to enterre her. And of the glorious Saint Martha hostess of our Lord
says S. Antonin. ( S. Anton. 1. p. hist. tit. 5. cap. 20.. 1.) that our Lord
Jesus Christ enterred her, Saint Frontinus Bishop of Petragoria assisting at
the office of the burial: for so God honors those that honor and serve him.

Many other things of less substance did these scrupulous persons note with
impertinent ponderations, to which I do not answer, for with the grounds
already laid as before, they are satisfied. One said to my self, how can it
be suffered to be said that two days before the passage of this servant of
God, she had begone to enjoy the alacrity of glory; when even of the Virgin
our blessed Lady no such thing is said? and I answered him shewinge him the
Roman breuiarie, where of S. Marie Magdalen, and of others, are such like
things recounted: and in particular it is related of Saint Nicolas Tole^tine,
that the same passed with him for six whole Months before he died. So that
they speak by guess. Breu. Romans

But because in matter of this objection of the beads of blessed S. Ioane, and
those which were touched at them, some things have been said and done, which
might have been excused if the excesses of some superstitions did not oblige
unto it, as I believe, so I say, that setting this aside, most pious is the
devotion which with these things the Christian people does show, and most
opposite to the obloquies wherewith the heretics do procure to condemn it.
Theodore Beza a Caluinist heretic, wrote a treaty which he entitled of the
trifles of Saint Francis. ( Beza de nenijs S. Francisci.) and William Ritbelt,
another of the childish worship of the papists: and both of them mock much at
the deuote piety, with which the faithful do venerate blessed things, as the
water, the boughs, the candles, etc. and the said William does recount some
things with which it ^eemeth to him he confirms his disparates. He says that
being in Rome he saw with his eyes, that going the stations, the Pope himself
touched a rosarie which he carried in his hand at a glass window, which stood
before a relic: And he saw that on the first day of lent, the Pope and
Cardinals being in Saint Sabina, which is a monastery of the order of
preachers, the freers gave to the Pope and Cardinals, and to many others for
relics, or as a precious gift the leaves of an oringe tree, which our holy
Father S. Dominicke had planted: and upon these things, and others like, they
did descant mocking at the virtue of that glass, and of those leaves, and of
the habit of a religious which some do worshipp, and of the blessed beads and
others which are touched at them etc. that the esteem may be seen which of
such like trifles, grave men do make imitators of ignorant old wives, who
recite rosaries of Aue-marias to S. Peter and to S. Paul. With these foolish
aggrauations, these miserable men do provoke the rude people, and dispose them
to persuade them errors of the ancient heretics, which now many years had
lien buried in hell; one of the which is, to condemn the ceremonies and
ancient rites of the church, among which there is more or less, but in none
deformity, or if you please inconsideration.

For even as in the reverence which one does to his parents, or superiors,
there is more and less, and if he should fail in the more he should break the
precept natural and divine: and if in the less, as if he should not put of his
hat hearing the name of his Father in absence, or if his Superior, or
benefactor, yet for all this these acts be not condemned before used and
laudable, and acts in effect of courtesy and gratitude. In like manner there
is great difference between adoring and reuerencing our Lord God, and
worshipping the leaf of the tree which the glorious Saint Dominicke planted,
but all is good and springs of one ground. We adore God as Creator and Lord,
and we worshipp his Saints for servants of his, and that more or less
remotely, conform to the subject of the action, yet always with one intent:
in such sort as if we should ask one of these heretics, if it should be a
ridiculous action, or reprehensible, that one would take off his hatt, hearing
the name of the founder of a college where he was sometime fusteined, it
being a hundred years since he died, and is not known if he be in heaven or
in hell: and neither he nor any thing of his does see that courtesy? he will
answer (if he be not madd) that it is not an inutill act nor reprehensible,
but of good courtesy and gratitude.

Then why should it be ridiculous to reverence near hand or remotely, a Saint
which is enjoying of God and sees in him the veneration which to him is done,
although it be so little as to kiss the glass which is before his relic, or
the habit which he ware, or the religion which he founded, or the tree which he
planted, and the earth which he troade upon? and the same will also say that it
is not improprietie one to do service to his Lord, or friend in the person of
another, as if he did ^ernice to the King to please some Lord which had
commanded it him, or that he knows it will please him, although he command it
not. Then if this be so plain, what other thing is it to recite so many
Paternosters, or Auemarias, or to celebrate a Mass in honor of S. Peter, but
to do a service to our Lord God, or to his most holy Mother in obsequie of S.
Peter, who will so much be pleased that his deuotarie do serve God and his
Mother? So that the sayings of these seducers are vain aggrauations. And the
truth being made clear, they have neither substance nor appearance of ground,
as is manifest. More I could say upon this, but I leave to enlarge me, and to
apply that has been said not to hitt upon a known action in this matter;
every one shall take what touches him, it suffices to say, that the
veneration to these beads and to those touched at them is very holy, and the
comparation of their virtues very sufficient, and the doubt whether they be
certain, or not, of no substance, when with the same good faith we worship
relics and other pious things; in which the Christian people has more need
of spurs, then of a bridle, when it is not founded upon fandy things without
ground, or with suspicion of fiction.

But the things of this servant of God, are founded upon a most pure life,
most approved, and clarified, and upon a glorious death, and upon infinite
miracles, and upon veneration of the faithful so known, and upon the
vncorruptibilitie of her holy body so evident: and upon tradition of all this
of so many years, and so continued and approved. So neither the greatness of
the favors which God has done her, makes them less credible: nor saying
that the holy Ghost spoke by her mouth has indecencie, nor novelty: and much
less the miracle of the beads; but rather, of all is drawn much profit for
the greater glory of our Lord and honor of of his Saint.

Brother Francis, Bishop of Canaria.
The petition of Father Anthony Daca, given to the council of the holy
general inquisition, before the most excellent Lord Cardinal of Toledo,
inquisitor general, and those of his council in Madrid. The 19. of August in
the year 1610.

Most powerful Lord Brother Anthony Daca, diffinitor of the holy Province of
the Conception, and Coronist general of the order of Saint Francis, does say,
that for as much as I have composed a book of the life and miracles of the
blessed Ioane of the Cross, religious of the same order: the which, although
it be perused by the council of justice and by their commission seen and
approved by the ordinary of Madrid, and before al these approbations have gone
those of the lectors of Theology of our order, by commission of the same
religion, and the council having seen them, and the informations and
original papers, from whence the said book has been taken and composed: for
greater qualification and authority thereof, the said council will have the
approbation of your highness, to whom humbly I make supplication, that you
command it to be given, and your censure: for in the same shall be done to our
Lord great service, and to me a most great favor. For the which etc.

Brother Anthony Daca. The answer of the Council.
Let the Abbot of Fitero ouerloke this book, and give his censure, informing
first thereof the most excellent Lord Cardinal, inquisitor general.

Michaell Garcia de Molina.
The opinion and censure of the M. F. Don Ignatius of Iberus Abbat of the
monastery of Saint Marie the regal of Fitero, qualificator of the holy
office of the inquisition, and one of those which assist at the meeting which
is made in this court of his Majesty, for the new catalogue, and expurgatorie
of the prohibited books.

I the Master ^reer Don Ignatius de Ibero, Abbat of the Monastery of Saint
Marie the regal of Fitero, qualificator of the holy office of the inquisition,
etc. do lay, that by commandment of the most excellent Lord Don Bernardo de
Roias and Sandouall, Cardinal of Toledo, inquisitor general in the kingdoms
and Lordships of the King our Lord and of the council of state of his Majesty,
and of the Lords of the holy and general inquisition, have seen and read with
particular attention, a book entitled, the history, life, and miracles,
ecstasies and revelations of the blessed Virgin sister Ioane of the Cross, of
the third order of our Father Saint Francis, composed by the most learned, and
very expert Father, freer Anthony Daca diffinitor of the holy Province of the
Conception, and Coronist general of his order, for to give my opinion and
censure concerning the same. And not only I have not found in it any thing
which may be ce^lured, or which is worthy to be noted: but rather it seems to
me that the book will be of much profit and utility, for all those that will
make use thereof, especially for devout people, and those that treat of spirit,
and that all which therein is written, is doctrine very good and very app^oued,
and most conform to that doctrine which the Catholic Church our Mother
reaches, and her holy Doctors.

And because it has been commanded me, that besides giuinge my opinion and
censure of all this book, yet that I rather also tell in particular all what I
think of i^, and of the miracles and revelations which are written in it, I
shall be more large in this my writing and relation. For the which I have also
read, besides that which this book co^teineth, the authentical informations
which of the things in the same contained, have been made at diverse times, and
the original book from whence these were drawn, which is that, which a
disciple wrote of this servant of God who lived in her time, called sister
Marie evangelist, to whom (as the informations which of this have been made,
and the tradiditions of that Monastery do say) that miraculously to this
effect our Lord gave grace of knowledge to write and read: and it seems to
me, that in as much as has been possible for me, I have avouched to be
certain and true that which in the history is written of the life, miracles,
and sancti^ie of this servant of God: which is the first thing which ought to
be presupposed in writing the lives of the Saints, and that which the holy
council of Trent commands to the Pastors and Prelates, that they look much
to it when they are to bring to light, and publish histories of the miracles
and lives of Saints, to the end that with truth the meruailes of God and his
omnipotency be published ( Sess. 25. in decreto de purgatorio. de inuoc. and
veneratione Sanctorum.) For being that with these things God discovers how
admirable he is in his Saints, it is greatly to his service, that with things,
certain and true we praise him, and magnify his omnipotency and infinite
greatness, without telling fictions, or uncertain things: for as says holy
Job. ( Job. 13.) there is no necessity of them, for that which God pretends.

I hold then all this history for most true, and I understand (in as much as I
can atteine to with probability and humane says) that all that which here is
written, passed so as here it is said, not only in that which pertains to
the life exemplar, penitent, and holy, which this blessed Virgin lead, and in
the holy exercises, mortifications and penances which continually she did; but
also in that which is of raptes, ecstasies, visions, revelations, and
prophesies, of which in this history mention is made. And that which of these
revelations, visions, and ecstasies I do think, and that which seems to me
of the degree and quality in which we must hold them, is, that truly I hold
them all for divine, suparnaturall, and celestial, made and inspired by God
himself; and that in those raptes and eleuations, and profound contemplations,
God did speak by the mouth of this his seruante, as by an organ and instrument
of the holy Gho^^: for in all of them I find all the signs which the
Catholic Church our Mother, and her holy Doctors do hold, for to verify and
avouch that these works are supernatural, and divine, made and communicated
by God himself; as the prophecies, are true and revelations certain, to be
conform to the doctrine which the Ca^holique universal Church teaches and
holds and the holy Doctors thereof, to be to the seeminge of men learned and
pious, and inspired of the holy spirit, and to be found in them the truth and
purity which is proper to things taught by God himself without any mixture of
fa^^hood, or error, and finally to be such, that the person and the soul on
whom God does these merueiles, do remain by them bettered in humility, in
love of God, in devotion and in many other virtues. Apud Ioann^m de
Turr^c^emata in prologo defensionis super reuelationes S. Brig^dae. cap 1. 2.
and 3. ex S. Tho. 2. 2. q. 174. a. 5. ad. 3.

As these signs which I have considered and noted in this history of this
blessed woman, are the same which are found, and were found, when they made
proof of them, in many other lives of Saints, and miracles, and revelations
which are written of them. Such were those of Saint Elizabeth, sister of King
Eckbert the most holy Abbess of the Monastery of Esconaugia to who^ her Angel
keeper (as to our blessed I^ane hers) revealed many things like to these, and
on Gods behalf commanded her to write them, as in her life is written. Such
are those of Saint Hildegardis, Abbess of the Monastery of Saint Rupert, in
the diocese of Ments, who from her childhood, was much favored of our Lord
with revelations and visions from heaven. ( Marcus Marulus lib. 2. c. 4. and
Anton. Posseum. in Apparatu.) The which after ward at the instance and petition
of the glorious Father Saint Bernard, were confirmed by Eugenius tertius his
disciple, in a council which he celebrated in the city of Trerers, as the
authors do write which speak of that council, and of this Saint. ( Tom. 2.
Council. in Eugen. 3. Trithem in Theon. ^ir. Sang. anno 1150. Theodor. Abbas. in
vita eius apud Surium. Tom. 5. mense September) Such also were those of the
notable and most celebrated widow Saint Brigit, canonized by Pope Boniface the
ninth, which were examined by these marks, and approved by the diligences
which he Cardinal Don John of Turreciemata did make. In vita B. Brigidae and
in eius revel. cum notis Gansal. Duranti.

And of this same manner, and as these which I have related, are those which
are contained in this book of our blessed Ioane, the one very like to the
other, as well in the things revealed, as also in the manner by which God did
reveal them. And so also in this it is made very likely that all these
prophecies, ecstasies, revelations, and raptes of this blessed Saint, were
divine and celestial, and truly in^pired by the virtue of God, and
supernaturally. And this being so, certain it is that all contei^e^ in this
book shall be most profitable to souls, and a great motive to incire, and
inflame our hearts to virtue, according to that which S. Paul says, writing
to his disciple Timothy. (2. Tim. 2.) Omnis doctrina diuinitus inspirata
vtilis est ad a^cendum, and ad crudiendum ad iustitiam etc.

Some things I have found in this history very particular and rare, which
although they are true and most certain, it is good they be read with more
attention, and greater consideration: for, not being ordinary, ^or such as
commonly are known, they might seem hard to be believed, if with a little
consideration they be not pondered. And I my self suppose, that being such,
and of the quality and truth which I speak of, they are yet more certain and
more credible, because God has revealed them to this blessed woman. ( Habetur
cap. 17. huius historiae.) One of them is, that to this blessed Saint it was
revealed, how certain souls had their purgatory in places besides that which
is ordained and set down by God, to be generally of all the souls which are
to be purged, as in rivers, on ye, stones, and other things of this sort. And
although it be true, that according to the common and general law, all the
souls which need purging of the pain of their sins, go to the place which
to this end is ordained, within the bowels of the earth: yet by particular
order and dispensation of God, many times they have their purgatory our of
that place as in rivers, in fountains, in bathes, in ye, as S. Gregory
writes in many places of his Dialogues. ( Lib. 4. Dialog. c. 23. 40. 55.)
Peter Damian in his episi^es. ( Epist. 13* ad Desider. cap. 7.) And many other
authors. ( Bid lib. 3. hist. Anglo. cap. 19. and lib 5. c. 13. Greg. Niss lib.
de Anim. and resur* Chrysostom. de praemijs beator. Dionisius Cart. dial. de
iudic. and quatuor nouisfimis. and alij plures apud Pet. Tire, d^locis infest.
c. 1. and 3.) Of which S. Thomas Prince of scholasticall divines relates some
and in this part follows them, saying the same which I say, for out of him I
relate it, and he has taught it us expressly in his sentenciaries, and him
do all authors follow which since his time have written: and not only Saint
Thomas teaches this doctrine, but also out of these histories and revelations
draws this general rule. ( S. Thomas 4. sent. D. 21. q. 1. a. 1. q. 2. Cor.
Belarm. Tom. 2. Controuers. 3. de purgat. lib. 2. cap. 7.) Deloco purgatorij*
vbi non inuenitur aliquid express determinatum dicendum est secundum quod
consonat magis Sanctorum dictis, and reuelationi factae multis. Dicendum itaque
quod locus purgatorij est duplex; vnus secundum legem communem, and sic locus
purgatorij est locus inferior coniunctus inferno; alius est locus purgatorij
secundum dispen sationem, and sic quandoque in diuersis locis aliqui punirs
leguntur, vel ad viuorum instruction^m, vel ad mortuor^m subuentionem; vt
viuentibus eorum poena inuotescens, per suffragia Ecclesiae mitigaretur. This
says S. Thomas, and in these words not only he approves and teaches this of
particular purgatoties and extraordinary, but also he says more, that of these
particular revelations, made to holy men, it is confirmed that such there are.
And so there is nothing which may oblige us to doubt, but to believe that it
might be truth which this history tells of the purgatories of the souls,
which God revealed to this great servant of his, and that it is so when it may
be reached unto by reasons and humane probability.

There is also mention made in this history, of a very particular miracle which
God wrought by this blessed one, no less worthy to be pondered and considered,
then this of the souls of purgatory, concerning certain rosaries which the
Angel of her guard carried up to heaven, and brought from thence, with many
benedictions and virtues granted them by our Savior Christ, to the end that
the blessed one should recite upon them, and divide them amongst her nuns,
and other devout people, that all might enjoy the goods, and indulgences, which
from heaven, his divine Majesty imparteth: manifesting herin how much he is
pleased with the devotion of the holy rosarie of his B. Mother, and that he
will have us to praise her with the prayer of Aue Maria, saying it by the
beads of the sacred rosarie. And although this miracle is far above all as
many as in this matter I have read, it shall become easy to be believed,
consideringe, that in the sacred histories, in those of the councels of the
Catholic church, and in many sacred and ancient writers, are found others
very like to this, Vincentius Bellouacensis, Saint Hilandus, Saint Cesaria,
Thomas Brabautine, Gi^^es Aurificus Carthusian (if this were the author of
magnum speculum exemplorum, as says Father John Mayor) Pebartus, John
Bonifacius, and other authors of our times, do write innumerable miracles
which God has done, in confirmation of what the esteems, and how he is
pleased with the angelical salutation of the Aue Maria, and with saying it
freque^tly by the beads of the Rosarie, the faithful do praise his gloriouse
Mother, and our blessed Lady the Virgin Marie. In speculo hist. lib. 7. cap.
84. lib. 3. Magni Exord. Cisterciens. cap. 25. lib. 7. Illust. Miraculo. c. 26.
27. 28. 33. and lib. 12. c. ^. lib. 2. de apib. c. 29. p. 6. q. 23. and 24. in
magno speculo exemplor. did. 3. exemp. 32. and did, 4. exemp. 1. and did. 5.
exemp. 58. and did. 8. exemp. 60. lib. 1. page 4. a. 2. c. 4. p. 5. a. 1. c.
3. and lib. 12. p. vlt. c. 6. In histor. virginali. lib. 2. cap. 11.

The authors being many which I have related and very common I speak not of
them in particular, one only I will relate, for that he seems to me more
new, and more like then the others, to that we have in this book; And it is of
a tree very prodigious, which miraculously sprung up on a sudden in a great
field in the i will of Ireland, in the bishopprike of Corcke and Clon in the
county of Desmon, all laden with rosaries, like a vine when it is most laden
with clusters of grapes, and the cords or stringes of the beads cleaving to
the tree, and were fastened so to it, as are the stalks of the fruict which
grows out of whatsomeuer other tree: of this miracle make mention Francis
Belleforesto a grave author, and others who have written after him, and all do
note that it seemed God made it, that it might appear how he favored and
approved the use of holy rosaries. For this was in time that Almanie was
perishing with the evil sects of the heretics, to whom was abominable that
use of reciting, and chiefly that of the holy rosarie, and the indulgence which
therein are granted us. Peter Bouistau, Claudius Tesser and, Francis Belleforest
lib. 4. of the prodigious hictories. cap. 1. F. John Sagastizab. lib. of the
exhortation to the rosarie. lib. 6. c. 84. F. Geroni. Romans lib. of the
Comunwelth cap. 12.

And it is to be noted, that a little before this miracle of these rosaries and
blessed beads had fallen out, which the Angel brought from heaven to this B.
maid, and consequently it may be believed that God also wrought it, not only
for the comfort of his servant, and so dear espouse, but also as that other
of Ireland, for greater confirmation of the devotion of the faithful and
confusion of the heretics of those times, yet there is one thing very
particular and rare in these rosaries which her good Angel brought to the B.
Ioane, which I have not found, neither in the miracles which I have seen and
related of the rosaries, not in any other of as many things as by Angels have
been brought from heaven to the earth. For of those rosaries of Ireland it is
not read, that the Angels have carried them from the earth to heaven, but that
either they were created, and made there miraculously, or brought from heaven,
like many other things; as the casula of S. ^^de^onsus, which the glorious
Virgin Marie brought from heaven; the cross of Ouiedo; that of Carauaca and
other such things; which are said to have come from heaven, not because they
have been there in the supreme heaven, but because by ministry of the
Angels, they were formed and made in the elementall heaven; and in the ae^ry
part commonly called heaven, and for the same reason also it is said, that
the Manna came down from heaven; and the scripture calls it bread of heaven.
In Chronicis Hisp* post alios Vasaeus circa annum 662. Baron. in annalib. an.
657. Rode. Xime. lib. 2. cap. 22. Trith, lib. de script. Ecclesiastic. Pet.
Cresp. in sum. Eccles. litera M. and alij apud Locrium in August. Maria. lib.
5. cap. 41. Psalm. 77.

But the ^osaries of which our history speaks, according as in it is
written, were carried by the Angel from hence from the earth to heaven, to the
presence of the Majesty of thesonne of God Christ our Savior, where the same
Redeemer of the world, blessed them and touched them with his most sacred
hands. And that this miracle might not seem to the reader difficult to
believe, for making of it f^cill, we might well bring for example that which
some authors do say: and S. Thomas. (22. q. 73. a 5. and 6.) holds not for
impossible, supposing the infinite om^^potencie of God, how the Apostle Saint
Paul in his misterious rapte, was carried to heaven in body and soul so
mortal and corruptible as it was. But because the same Apostle does say that he
knows not if that rapte were, in corpore, ^iue extra corpus. (2. Cor. 12.)
(although he neither deny it, not speak it as a thing impossible) and the
glorious Doctor S. Augustine commands and aduertiseth us, that what the
Apostle confesses he does not know, it is not good that we our selves
determine. Lib. 12. sup. Genes. ad literam c. 3. post medium. Tomo. 3.

I will relate another history very authentical, and more near to our times
(although very ancient) of other things corruptible and earthly, which
miraculously were carried to the third heaven, and brought thence again, to
the end that this of the rosaries of our Beata, seem not incredible: Very
well known is that history of the child, which in (Chron.) the year 446. in
Constantinople in sight of all the people and of the Emperor Theodosius the
younger, and of the Patriarcke Proclus was carried to heaven from whence he heard
the blessed, which stood continually praising God; and after having been
there for the space of an hour, he was again brought to the earth: for why,
besides the historiographers, And Greek Chronistes, Marcellinus, Nicephorus,
Euag^ius, the Greek Menologie, S. John Damascene, and others: very particular
also Pope Felix the third writ^th it in an epistle decretall of his: the
Bishops also write it which were in the council of Constantinople, which was
celebrated in time of Pope Felix the third against the errors of Peter Fullon
Archbishop of Antioche. ( Lib. 14. cap. 46. lib. 1. Ecclesiast. hist. c. Meno.
25. sept. lib. 3. de fide orth. c. 10. and lib. de Trissa. Felix. 3. epist. 3.
decreta. Tom. 2. Council.) And all of them say that all the city of
Constantinople going in procession, for a great earthquake which for six
months continually did persevere in that city, doing in the same great
damage, and causing many ruins of the houses and walls thereof, in the
midst of a field where all the people was in public procession, a child
was rapte up, and carried to heaven, rursusque descendens (says Pope Felix)
nunciauit quae in athere audierat, dicens, de coelo quasi de multitudine
psallentium, huiusinodi lauds insonuisse auribus suis etc. That he heard there
in heaven the blessed, which praised God with that most holy hymn of the
Trisagio, saying: Sanctus Deus, Sanctus fortis, Sanctus and immortalis. The
same the Bishops write which (above) I have related of this council of
Constantinople. Acatius of Constantinople, Anteon of Arsinoi, Faustus of
Apolonide, Pamphilus of Auida, Asclepiades, and many other historiographers
old and new. Habentur horum epistolae Tom. 2. Council post Conc.
Constantinopolit. sub Felice 3. anno 483. vide Seue. Vinium in notis.

Then as there was no repugnance, nor impossibility, supposing the infinite
power of God, that child as he was to be carried up to heaven, neither is there
for us to believe that this might be so which of these beads, and rosaries is
written: and a mighty argument to believe this is, as also all whatsoever in
this matter else is written, to see the many miracles which with these beads
God does daily; of which the author does relate some, and I have seen with my
eyes the informations and authentical probations, and those of many sworn
witnesses, from whom with much truth and fidelity he has drawn all that he
says. And I will not tell what I have known that happened with one of these
beads, which by particular favor done me by God I have obtained and hold in
my power, that I may not more enlarge my self in this my relation: God grant
that in some other occasion it may be known.

It is also necessary to be considered, and I have considered, how that ought
to be taken which is recounted in this history. ( Habetur cap. 16. huius
historiae) How it was revealed to the B. Ioane, that the Archangell S. Michaell
did judge the souls after they departed from the bodies, doing the office of
supreme judge, of great power and preheminencie, with ensigns of crown
imperial, scepter, and tribunal of great Maieiestie. This, taking it in the
sense it ought to be taken, can not have difficulty for the belief, for it
neither is against that which the sacred and the scholasticall Doctors do
teach, nor does any thing derogate from the iudiciarie power of God. For taking
it for the supreme, absolutely it is only in God; and taking it for the power
of excellency and singular, immediately participated of that supreme, it is so
solely in Christ our Savior in as much as he is man, according to authors,
that for this they expound that place of S. Joan: 5. Omne iudicium dedit filio.
Nor is it hard to believe; for with this it is compatible, that there be other
inferior judges which participate of the power of God, and may be called
judges of souls. As it derogateth nothing to the eminency and independence of
the first cause, to have other second cases, together with the which it may
work, concur and do his effects. And so without any repugnance, in this
sense is it said that also the Saints shall judge the nations. ( Sap. 3.) and
to his holy disciples Christ promised, that sittinge with him they should
judge the twelve tribes of Israel. Math. 19. Luc. 22.

Then S. Michael being an Archa^gel of so great excellency and Majesty, as
the many and very great titles which the church gives him, and the honorable
epithetes which she sings to him do declare, ( Litaniae S. Michael Ambr.
Cathe. 1. ad Heb. and alij plures quos refert. Bla. Vugas in Apoc. c. 12.
Comment. 1. sectio 18.) it shall be very easy to believe that which of him this
blessed one has said, that our Savior revealed to her concerning the
judgment of the souls that go to the other life. The church calls him
praepositus and Prince of the Church, primate of heaven, head of all the Angels
of heaven, high standart bearer of the supreme Emperor, Victor of the great
dragon Lucifer, most valiant captain, receiver of the souls which go out of
this life, and judge of them. All these Epithethes and many others do the
Saints gather out of that which the sacred scripture (Daniel. 10. Apocalips.
12.) does say of Saint Michaell. And for this, and other reasons found in
authors, it is holden for most certain, that this glorious Archangell, has
this power and iuris^iction over the souls, that in the particular judgment
of them, which is when they depart from their bodies, he judge them, weighinge
and ponderinge the merits of every one of them, pronouncing and notifying to
them the definitive sentence of the supreme judge. B. Basil. in Homil. de
Angel. D. Greg. Hom. 34. in Euang. Clem. Alex lib. 5. Strom. ad fin. Pantaleo.
Diac. apud Lypom. Hom. de S. Micha. Amb. Cath. in t c. epist. ad Heb. Blasius
Viega cum alijs quos citat Commont. in 12. cap. Apoc. Comment. 1. fect. 18.

And this would God give to understand to this his blessed one in that
imaginary vision, and revelation, in which she saw this glorious Archangell
in that figure and posture of a great judge, with those imperial ^^signs and
royal crown. And this is very conform to the style and use which the church
has to declare us this power and this greatness of S. Michaell. For as very
well said the most learned and pious Doctor John Molanus in his book of
Images. ( Lib. 2. cap. 28.) This we have said, is the same which is
represented unto us in pictures where they paint S. Michaell with a balance in
his hand: for it is as much as to say unto us, that as a judge upright and of
great integrity, first he pondereth and weighs the merits of the souls
with great particularitie, and every one by it self, and afterward,
pronounces the sentence upon them. The same says that most stout defender of
the faith, John Eckius, and other authors. ( Hom. 8. de S. Michaele and relatus
a Ioanne Molane.) Which speak of the same, and after the same manner must be
understood what in that revelation our blessed one does say, that forthwith at
the same instant that S. Michaell has pronounced the sentence against the
evil souls, other Angels, as executors of this sentence, do begin to
chastize with rigorous stripes those souls; which is to say, that in the same
instant they do begin to feel and suffer the rigorous whipp of the just
chastisement of God, and of the pains which for them he has prepared. And I
say no more of that which remains of this history, for it is all very
facill, and there is nothing whereon to repair, and more I confess, that if I
were not commanded to speak what has been said, I could very well have
excused it, for all these things does the author very well declare and ponder
in their places so ^earnedly, that he leaves not whence to doubt in this nor
in any other thing: for not only in that which is historical he proceeds
with so much certeintie and security in this his work, speaking in most
things of it as an eye witness: but also in that which is Theological and
the reason of the history, he proceeds with great ground, and with reasons
very solid and with Theological: for the which are due to the author many
thanks for having undertaken this so holy occupation, and so important for the
spirit and profit of souls and for the greater glory of God, and of his
holy religion, and of the glorious Father and Patriarche Saint Francis, who
daily with new birthes and springings of Saints of his, does give us new
alacrity and spiritual joy in the church militant and triumphant. And for all
the aforesaid do admit him and approve him this book of his, that it may
come to light, and be communicated to all. This is that which I think, under
the censure and seeming most sure of your highness. In Madrid the sixteenth of
September, in the year one thousand six hundred and ten.

Fr. Ignatius de Ibero Abbat of Fitero. License.
In the town of Madrid the 16. day of September in the year 1610. the most
excellent Lord Cardinal of Toledo, inquisitor general in the kingdoms of his
Majesty, having seen this approbation of the Master Fr. Don Ignatius de
Ibero Abbat of Fitero, of the book of B. Ioane of the Cross, gave license as
Ordinary, that the said book should be imprinted putting in it the opinion
and approbation of the said Abbat. Before me Michaell Garcia de Molina,
secretary of the council of his Majesty, of the holy general inquisition.

Michaell Garcia de Molina.
Approbatio^ of the Lord Bishop Don Fr. Francis de Sosa, of the council of his
Majesty, and of the general inquisition, to whom the most excellent Cardinal
of Toledo committed the renew of this book.

Most excellent Lord, having seen by command of your Lordships excellency,
the book of the life and miracles of the servant of God sister Ioane of the
Cross, religious of the order of our holy Father Saint Francis, it seemed to
me not only to be convenient to reform in some places which occurred unto me
with different censures noted of the divines of the consistory of the catalogue
thereof: but also that it would be good to do the same in many other, being the
same reason concurred, which is to publish in a vulgar tongue things which is
not convenient that they go in the hands of all: the which is done without
note or disauthorizing of men so grave as at first did censure this book, by
commandment of the council royal of justice, and afterward of your most
excellent Lorship; for they could what they thought of the doctrine of the
said book, and experience showed afterward the same inconvenience, worthy
the remedy of your excellency which you and the holy office have put,
commanding it to be reuewed, that it might come out printed anew and corrected:
and the Christian people to enjoy so holy a history, for edification in
manners, and the greater glory, of our Lord. And because of this book it has
been spoken after diverse ma^ners, both pro and contra: and so notoriously that
to me was committed the reuew thereof; I thought I had obligation to give
satisfaction to all, as I do in a preface which shall be put in the beginning
to which I remitte me, given in Madrid the 24. of December, 1612.

Fr. Francis, Bishop of Canaria.
License of the most excellent Lord Cardinal of Toledo, inquisitor general.
Don Bernardo de Sandouall and Roias, by the divine miseration, priest
Cardinal of the holy Church of Rome, with title of S. Athanasius, Archbishop
of Toledo, primate of Spain, high Chancellor of Castile, inquisitor general in
the kingdoms and dominions of his Majesty, and of his council of estate etc.
by these presents we give faculty and license to Father Fr. Anthony Daca,
Coronist of the order of the glorious Father S. Francis, that he may use the
privilege which of his Majesty he has, to make to be imprinted the book of
the life and miracles of the servant of God sister Ioane of the Cross,
religious of the said order; provided that by our commission it has been
corrected, and those things amended which it seemed inconvenient should go in a
vulgar tongue, given in Madrid the 11. of January 1613.

The Cardinal of Toledo.
By commandment of his most Excellent Lordship Francis de Salago Secretary.

APPROBATIO.
EX mandato Reuerendissimi Patris nostri Commissarij Fratris Andreae a Soto
(Serenissimae Hispaniarum Infanti a sacris confessionibus) perlegi vitam hanc
Beatae Ioannae de Sancta Cruce, ex lingua Hispanica in Anglicanum idioma
transpositum, and iudico multum proficuam populo Christiano, and consolationem
religiosis, vel religionem anhela^tibus, cum viderint tam stupenda and
authenticae probata miracula, a diuina misericordia in approbationem status
religiosi exhibita, contra malignos huius temporis haereticorum oblatratus: sic
censeo 4. Feb. 1625.

Fr. FRANCISCVS a S. CLARA S. Theol. in Collegio Anglorum Recol. S.
Bonauenturae Duaci Lector.

APPROATIO.
EGo F. Francisous Crathorne, Monachus Benedictinus, testor hanc vniuersam
translationem cum originali diligenter fuisse collationatam, and eidem per
omnia esse conformem. Datum Duaci 7. Octobris 1624.

F. FRANCISCVS CRATHORNE Benedictus Anglus and in Collegio nostro Vedastino
Philosophiae Professor.

APPROBATIO.
VIsis Approbationibus Reuerendi Patris Crathorne, and Reuerendi Patris Fr.
Francisci a Sancta Clara, consentio vt vita B. Ioannae ex lingua Hispanica in
Anglicanam translata, imprimatur 10. Sept. 1625.

Fr. IOANNIS GENNINGVS Prouinciae Angliae Min. Custos Fratrum Minorum
strictioris obseruantiae.

FINIS.
TO THE HOLY IOANE OF THE CROSS LOPE-VEGA DE CARPio professed of the third
Order of our holy Seraphicall Father S. Francis. A SONNET.
THE noble Sun whose radian beams do clear,
The asurde sky, with his celestial light,
Yet often times an obscure cloak does wear
Of foggie clouds, like to the ^able night:
That whilst it lasts, the vilde earth thinks sure;
Heauns, and Sun, do violence endure.
Yet notwithstanding does his virtues send
Through all those clouds (which cortynde in his rays)
Eftesoones, his glympes; and greater glory lend
Unto the dismal earth; which hopeless stays:
Of all such comforth, so by means of this,
With doubled crown it more resplendant is.
Th^ice happy Virgin thus thy virtues rare,
Brighter then Sun, with deeds heroicke, shine.
Spouse of the lamb, when once they touched are,
Quicl lie doc show themselves, so pure and fine:
That no man henceforward, once dare call
Them into question, or make doubt at all
Lo thus sweet Saint, how these thy virtues blase.
Thorough all the world; thrice happy Ioane they do,
Whilst we with wonder, at such beauties gaze,
And what like clouds, unto us erst did show:
Clouds are noe more, but curtains sure they are,
Which do disclose thy Image far more fair.
Fr. Ludouicus a Sancto Francisco.

