ORTHOEPIA ANGLICANA: OR, THE FIRST PRINCIPAL PART OF THE ENGLISH GRAMMAR:
TEACHING The Art of right speaking and pronouncing English, With certain exact
rules of Orthography, and rules of spelling or combining of Syllables, and
directions for keeping of stops or points between sentence and sentence.

A work in it self absolute, and never known to be accomplished by any
before: No less profitable then necessary for all sorts, as well Natives as
Foreigners, that desire to attain the perfection of our English Tongue.

Methodically composed by the industry and observation of SIMON DAINES
Schoolmaster of HINTLESHAM in Suffs.

Perficit omnia tempus.

LONDON, Printed by Robert Young and Richard Badger for the Company of
Stationers, Anno Domini 1640.

(...) reduce this confused manner of practice to some regular form; whereby
the Teacher might be exonerated a great part of his burden, the Learner
encouraged with more facility and expedition to proceed, we, in general,
induced to repose more confidence and delight in our own Tongue, and the
stranger allured to the knowledge of it.

Now therefore, since the perfection of all Arts (whereto the knowledge of
Tongues ought to be reduced) consists as well in the Theory, as the Practice:
(the one whereof makes a knowing man, the other a ready) and this Theory in the
resolutive mood, or knowledge of Universals; we are, as well in this, as all
other Tongues or Languages, to have recourse to Grammar, as the general
fountain. This the Greeks call (...), or the knowledge of Letters. But according
to the acception of the term, it is usually (among the Latins especially)
divided into four parts, viz. Orthoepie and Orthography (w ch only differ in
this, that the one has respect to right speaking, the other to right writing)
Etymology (which teaches the knowledge of the parts of speech, and how to order
and propose them truly) Syntax (which treats of the construction of the
parts) and Prosody (which chiefly belongs to Poets) that expostulateth the
accent, rythme, quantity, and measure of feet in every word or verse. The two
former integrall Parts, to wit, Orthoepie and Etymology (as most necessary and
only absolutely requisite in our English Tongue) I have for our purpose
sufficiently discussed, and reduced into a classical method: The latter two I
remit to Practice in reading such Orators and Poets as our Tongue affords,
wherewith every Stationers shop is amply replete.

But for the present I have only set forth the first part, (as he that would
not spend all his shot at once, or the mariner that first rigs out his Pinnace
to certify whatseas) especially since it is more chiefly conducing to all
sorts, it being indeed dressed to sympathize with every palate. The
Etymologicall part being only intended for such as are to proceed in higher
Classes, shall (God willing) speedily follow, accompanying the Latin
Introduction, the better to demonstrate the difference between both Tongues.
The benefit that may hereby redound to the Learner, I will not here stand to
expostulate, after the custom of every idle Pamphleter, that is enforced to be
the blazer of his own praise to make his book sell the better. Let those that
shall make trial speak for me what they find: only this I dare presume, that
this little Treatise, rightly taught, will be enough to inform any ordinary
capacity the knowledge of our English Tongue, so far as concerns Orthoepie and
Orthography: whereby he that is to proceed further, shall not need to waste so
much time in English, and yet be sufficiently instructed.

The manner of teaching it I refer to the judgment of the Teacher, accounting
it too much to set up a light, and hold the candlestick too. The variety of
Impressions, (or Prints as we call them) will serve as an instance to my
purpose. For the child in A. B. C. (as it is termed) that I may begin with the
babe, I have caused a new Alphabet, or order of Letters, to be imprinted in the
three several sorts of Characters most usual in our English, and most Tongues
of Europe. When he is perfect in them, and able to distinguish the Vowels and
Consonants asunder, then let him enter this, going presently to the Dipthongs,
to be informed by his Master their number and use: thence immediately to the
Syllables mixed. The rest at the discretion of the Tutor (for I presume no
Teacher is so ignorant as shall need instructions for the ordring of his
Pupils.) Et siquid novit rectius, candidus impertiat; if not, make use of this
with me, that desire to assume no further to my self, then what may stand with
the glory of God, and the general good of my endeared Country.

This (as I said) I propose as a servant to all: for notwithstanding my whole
scope herein be only to assist the stranger and ignorant, and not to bring in
captivity them whose more happy Intellects may of themselves produce more
clear conception; yet if any scholar of our own shall vouchsafe the reading
of so poor a Pamphlet, he perhaps in somewhat may find the Proverb true, that
says, No tree is so barren but may yield some fruit, be it never so little. At
least I desire his censure of this Opusculum, but newly hatched, may be but as
mild, as my intentions real for the more certain and speedy advancement of
learning; lest the blossom be blasted ere it comes to perfection.

Thus courteous Reader (of what rank soever) accept of these small labors, as
thou shall find them beneficial. Many (I confess) as well friends as
strangers, have much animated and desired me to publish them for the common
good. But when they shall come to the open view of the world, I know not how
after the Press they will escape the Rack and Strappado; for books and
bondage are subject to the most heavy censures: Sed age Liber, vade liber, and
vale.

S. D.

Upon the English Orthoepie, To the Author.
I Tell thee, Sim, thou have done us double wrong
To live concealed to thy self thus long;
Seeing the want of some Directour, when
England has had so many Tongues as men,
And every one his way of speaking. And
Thus many spoke, that could not understand.
But thou wilt inform their judgments. Let it be.
Set up thy Light, that whosoever will may see
The ready way to Athens. This alone
Gives clearer light, then heretofore ere shone
From any English Lamp, in illustration
Of our own Tongue. (A glory to thy Nation!)
Go then, and let no fear of censure fright
Or wrong thee: Thou shall teach them to speak right.
M. TIMPERLEY Esquire.

Upon his friend the Author and his Work.
I Am none of the Muses sacred quire,
My braine's too cool for Helicon t'inspire.
But this I Will say in plain terms, Thou have done
What I but wished to live to see begun:
Which who ere reads, may easily discern
The Proverb true, We all may live and learn.
I. H.

In amicum, and eius Orthoandeuml;piam Anglicanam, simul ac Etymologiam
Anglo-latinum.
PLurima perspexi symptomata, plurimatandem
Et gravia amovi, trutinas aggressus eorum
Causas. (Morbus agit, morbum porrandograve; ista sequuntur.)
Cuncta sed haec inter gravius stipata (...)
Difficilem inveni, Stygio quifortandegrave; palude,
Germanove prius nostras resilivit adoras.
Noster enim morbus Linguae communis inhaeret.
Proprium at est cujusque suum. Sic Plica Polonis:
Jampridem been nota lues sic Gallica Gallis;
Quam simul Italiae tribuunt; Hispanaque fertur.
Aspicis ut neglecta diu jacet Anglo-Britanna
Lingua relicta suis, multis lacer at a catervis!
Tuque adeo Medicus potior, medicamine solo,
Atque labor uno, qui jam curator adesses
Tot simul, and semel. Haec tua laus, tua fama perennis.
Instruis errantes, tua nos dum Recti-loquelam
Orthoepia docet. Sed quid cum ver a docebis?
Perge, age, fac. Steterisque diu mihi magnus Apollo.
R. WOLVERTON Phil. and Medicus.

To his friend the Author, upon his elaborate and deserving work, the two
principle parts of the English Grammar.
WHere can one walk along the streets, but he
May Scholars, Courtiers, and good Linguists see?
But all for Foreign Tongues. Poor English now
Is only left for him that drives the plough.
How many have I heard chat French as fast
As Parrats! that being put to write in have
An English Letter would perhaps incline
To make a^^ct to pardon for each line
A solecisme! And this chiefly is,
Because for practice they instructions miss.
I Have often heard an English Grammars name,
That Foreign Countries might no more defame
Our Tongue for being irregular; but till now
Could never come to see one part: which thou
Have happily performed. Ben Johnson railed
On Vulcans fury that had his entailed:
But thine, in spite of Vulcan, shall ensue
To after Ages. It Is both Right and True.
T. B. Esquire.

In Authorem.
NEscio cur tu, Nescio, ais, dulcedine quavis
Ductus? dum Dux es, ducis and ipse tuos.
En nativus Amor (namque illum (...) amorem,
Cum dedit Esse, dedit) cogit, and instimulat!
Hic Homini communis inest: Qui sentit, habetur
(...) qui non, non benedictus Homo.
Te vero sentire probat, memor esse tuorum
Conatu hoc. Ergo, Tu benedictus Homo.
I. S. Artium Magister.

Upon the Author and his Work.
WHat shall I say? shall I the work alone
Applaud? or thee by whom the work is done?
In thee I find the Cause, in it the effect;
Let that then have the applause, thou the respect:
Only this difference is, thy self must die;
But this shall live free from mortality.
T. T. Phil. Cand.

The English Alphabet, Expressing the number, order, denomination, and figure,
or Charactericall form of the Letters, as well Capital as Small, according to
their use in the English Tongue: In the three most usual impressions
appertaining to most Tongues in Europe.
There be in the English Tongue four and twenty Letters, as here follows.
The old English print. Their names, or denominations. The Latin and Italica
prints now chiefly in use. Capital. Small. A a a Cap. Small. Cap. Small. B b
be A a A a C c ce B b B b D d de C c C c E e e D d D d F f of E e E e G g ge F
f F f H h * ach G g G g I i i H h H h K k ka I i I i L l el K k K k M m em L l
L l N n en M m M m O o o N n N n P p pe O o O o Q q qu, or kuh P p P p R rr er,
or ar Q q Q q S ss es R r R r T t te S ss S ss V v u u T t T t W w * double u V
v u V v u X x * ex, or ix W w W w Y y * wi X x X x Z z * ezard, or better
edsard. Y y Y y Z z Z z

Whereof these six, a, e, i, o, u, and y, be Vowels, all the rest be Consonants.

Which of these be invariable, or have always the force of Vowels, and which
sometime degenerate into Consonants, and when, see further in our Treatise of
Vowels in particular. This we have only set down for children, andagrave;
primo ingressu or their first entrance.

The Asteriskes denote those Letters, so marked, have somewhat peculiar, and
are particularly treated of more then the other Consonants.

OPERI PROEMIUM, OR A SHORT INTRODUCTION.
SEtting aside all inquisitive curiosity concerning the difference between the
two vulgar terms of Tongue and Language, or whether it be in respect of
primitive and derivative; nor undertaking positively to determine which be
Tongues, and which Languages, or how many divisions of speech were implanted
among men at the dissolution of the Tower of Babel (for so many, I conjecture,
may most properly be called Languages according to the strict sense) as truly
too curious and little conducing to our present purpose; we will immediately
come to treat of Letters, as the first Elements or Principles of speech in
every Tongue or Language whatsoever.

Of Letters in genere.
A Letter (according to Sealiger) is an individual part of a word, or the
least part whereinto any word can be resolved. But in respect of certain
Monograms, or words of one Letter, Master Danes in his Paralipomena has
defined it, An individual articulate voice, or sound: by articulate, meaning
that which is proper to men, to distinguish it from that of beasts.

What concerns the derivation of the word, the Latins call it Litera (whence
our term Letter came) quasi litura, says Calepine: So that, according to the
Etymology, or strict sense of the term, Letters are but certain Characters,
or notes, whereby any word is expressed in writing: and for this cause were
they by the ancient Latinists distinguished into Letters, as they be
Charactericall notes; and Elements, as the first grounds or Principles of
fpeech. But this nicety is confounded in the general acception, which
promiscuously terms them Letters; and this we shall follow.

In these therefore are we to consider their force and figure. As for their
name and order, so far as concerns our English Tongue, we refer you to
the Alphabet.

The force or power of a Letter (says Scaliger) is the sound whereby it is
produced in pronunciation, etc. To whom we remit, for further satisfaction, the
Teacher and learned Reader.

Their figure is diverse, according to their several Characters, and that
likewise varying in the diversity of impressions, wherein they be either
imprinted or written, in respect of their several use, and the relation they
have to several Tongues or Languages.

Their number (as I said) in our English Tongue be 24. But the Latin, nor few
Languages or Tongues whatsoever, at least Scholasticall, admit so many.

These Characters or Letters, in difference of quantity, be either capital or
small, as appears by the forms expressed in our Alphabet.

The Capital or great Letters (though in some diversity of figure) were
chiefly in use with our Predecessors the Saxons, and the most ancient Latins.

Of these, some be called Numerals; to wit, when they be used to express some
certain Arithmeticall number; as I, for one; V, for five; X, for ten; L, for
fifty;C, for an hundred, D, or D, for five hundred; M, or M, for a thousand;,
five thousand;, ten thousand; etc. Where note, that when a lesser number
precedes a greater, it takes from the greater number so much as the lesser in
it self contains; as IV, stands but for four; IX, for nine; XL, for forty;
XC, ninety; CD, for four hundred; etc.

Sometime Abbreviatives, viz. when either alone, or with some abbreviated
Character, they stand for some Proper name, or other peculiar word beginning
with the same letter; as F. for Francis, M. for Martha, Ri. for Richard, Tho.
for Thomas, etc. which is usual with us in Prenomens (which we call Christian
names) especially where the Surname is expressed at large, and oftentimes where
both name and Surname is specified by two capital letters, as R. S. for
Richard Shore. In some certain appellative words likewise, as Matie, Majesty;
Hoble, Honorable; Hd, Honored; Lop, Lordship; Rd, Reverend; Sr, Sir; Worpll,
Worshipful; Knight. Knight; Esqr, Esquire, etc. as in practice every where
occurres. For other Abbreviations we remit to rules of Orthography. Their
peculiar force of Pronunciation shall be exemplified in their further
particulars. In the mean time let this suffice for Letters in general.

Of Letters in specie, and first of the Vowels.
LEtters in genere be divided into Vowels and Consonants.

A Vowel is a Letter, which of it self yields a perfect sound, or has power
to produce a syllable. Calepine has it, Vocalisest, quae per seipsam, vel
suaipsius potestate pronunciari queat. Our term Vowell springs to us from the
Latin diction Vocalis, which they derive from the Verb Voco, or rather Voce
the Ablative case of Vox: Quia sine vocali non datur vox articulata a perfecta:
Because no syllable, or articulate sound, can be proposed without the help of
some Vowell.

The number of the Vowels with us be six, viz. A, E, I, O, U, Y.

Whereof A, E, and O, are always proper and invariable, the other three do
many times degenerate into Consonants, to wit, when in the beginning of a word
or syllable they be joined before themselves, or any other Vowel or Dipthong:
Only Y never precedes it self.

Some have introduced W for a seventh, in regard we sometime improperly use it
in stead of V. But by reason it is in it self a Consonant properly, and only
by custom abusively prevailing in the nature of a Vowel, I thought it not so
fit to be inserted in the number of Vowels, for these reasons:

First, because it is a combination compact of two Letters, and therefore had
it the force of a vowel, it would be rather a Dipthong then a Vowel.

Secondly, because without another Vowel it is not apt to be pronounced, or
make a syllable; therefore no Vowel.

Thirdly, by reason it exacts more then one Element or syllable in its
pronunciation, which a Vowel does not.

Fourthly, in regard of its general use, which has it only a Consonant,
except sometime after one of these three Vowels, A, E, and O; and that chiefly
in Monosyllables, and the ends of words, for the fuller sound sake, when it may
be said to make a Tripthong for the former reasons; but this Tradition has
imposed and made indeed only peculiar to us.

Let this therefore suffice for the number of Vowels, and now proceed we to
their several pronunciations in our English Tongue.

The pronunciation of the Vowels severally.
A, in it self ought to be sounded moderately full, and broad; but, joined
with other Letters, we ought to respect the several natures of the Consonants
whereto it adheres, or the syllable wherein it is included, and so sound it
more or less full according to the general custom of the Pronunciation of
such syllables, which we shall more amply demonstrate in our Treatise of
syllables. But having relation to its original propriety and general use in
all countries, it is far more tolerable to incline rather to too full a sound
after the manner of a Foreign Calfe, then with some that nicely mince it, to
make it resemble the bleat of an English Lamb; especially since it often bears
the same force with Au Dipthong.

E we usually pronounce not much unlike the Greek g, or Eta, whence, I
conceive, we derive the use and pronunciation of Ee double, whose faculty we
notwithstanding for the most part usurp in the pronunciation of the single E,
sounding it almost after the manner of the Latin I, (as it is truly uttered by
the Italians, French, Spaniards, and most nations of Europe) but not altogether
with the tongue so much restrained. And what they call E, we write with Ea, as
in Bread, Sea, and the like.

I, according to our modern and most commendable Orthoepiists, somewhat
imitates the sound of the Latin Ei dipthong (though not altogether so full) as
it is usually pronounced; or rather, indeed, the Greek Iota, whose force it
truly retains with us, though much differing in it among our selves: for many
of our Northerns especially abuse it with too broad a sound both single and
joined with other letters, like the Dipthong Ai, making no difference in
pronunciation between fire and fair. Others again on the contrary side, with
an affected imitation of the Beyond Sea pronunciation, striving to Latinize it,
would make a traveller, if not a Forreigner, of it. But I for my part, as I
esteem that manner of pronunciation most to be practiced, which best suits the
nature of the Tongue or Language whatsoever, as most proper to it, and which
has been most generally received among the learned; so hold I it the greatest
property and praise of a Linguist to attribute to each several Tongue its
native faculty: So that I most approve in the English Tongue the English tone,
accepted and delivered by such of our Ancestors as were able to judge, no less
detesting barbarisms, then novelty and affectation. This I conceive a medium
between the other two extremes, wherein we differ from the Latin, and most
Tongues of Europe, as much as they from the ancient Greeks; as every Language
has somewhat peculiar.

O for the most part differs little from that of Latium, whence we took it:
Only sometimes in proper names especially we abusivandegrave; sound it U, as
in Edmond and Edmund, Paighton, Paitun, short, etc.

U in like sort makes little other difference between us and the Latins, but
only in point of state; as when it concludes any word as a single vowell, it
exacts with us, by way of Orthographie, to be always, or for the most part,
attended with E; as in due, true, ensue, etc. where (as in many places else) E
serves but as an unnecessary Servitour, as shall hereafter be showed.

Y, which as a single Letter we call Wi, has in a manner the same force with
the Vowell I, and in the end of a word may indifferently be written in lieu of
I, or rather Ie, (for indeed we with the Dutch have learned to make a shadow of
the substance of many Letters) as in merry, or merry; mercy, or mercy, and
the like: and is most generally used in Monosyllables, or words of one
syllable, where it sounds I long, as in my, thy, by, why, which are always
written with Y; the rest be indifferent, as ty, or tie, etc.

But in the beginning or middle of a word it is seldom, and that less
properly, inserted as a Vowell, unless in some few words derived from the
Greek, expressed by ypsilon; or proper names, which in all Tongues be
irregular.

For the derivation of it, the word Symptom can testify sufficiently from
whence we had it. Notwithstanding, I know there are who would deduce it from II
double, whose sound (they say) it bears contractivandegrave;, as, Yet, quasi
II et, etc. But this I refer to the judgment of the Reader. As a Consonant it
has a peculiar power; which expect in its proper place. In the mean time let
this suffice for Vowels in particular.

Of Dipthongs, or the combinations of two Vowels in one syllable.
WHen two Vowels be comprehended together in one syllable, they be called
Dipthongs: wherefore a Dipthong may be defined, The combination, or (as some
have it) the comprehension of two Vowels together in one syllable, either of
them retaining a force in pronunciation. Or briefly thus, A Dipthong is the
contraction of two Vowels: which better suits our English Tongue, by reason we
have some Dipthongs where one Vowell loses its faculty in the pronunciation of
the other.

The word Dipthong, which the Latins call Dipthongus, is derived (according to
Calepine, and Johannes de Janua) andagrave; (...), vel (...), and (...) sonus,
vel qui proprie Vocalis est sonus. Et est (says one) conglutinatio duarum
vocalium vim suam servantium, etc.

The number of Dipthongs, and their manner of pronunciation.
THere belong to our English Tongue eighteen Dipthongs: viz.
1 aa as in Baal, Isaac. 2 ai as in Fair, Despair. 3 au as in Laud, Applaud.
4 ea as in Fear, Speak. 5 ee as in Feed, Bleed. 6 ei as in Receive, Weight. 7
eo as in Jeopardy, Geometry, George. 8 eu as in Rheum, Eustace. 9 ie as in
Field, Friend. 10 oa as in Boat, Goal. 11 oe as in Toe, Shoe, Phoenix,
Foelicity. 12 oi as in Void, Join. 13 oo as in Good, Food. 14 ou as in Blood,
Gourd. 15 ua as in Guard, Quake. 16 ue as in Guerdon. 17 ui as in Quire, Build.
18 uo as in Quoth.

Ae we never have in English, but only in such words as be merely Latin,
though dressed in an English garb; as in Praeheminent, praevalent, etc.
Praeamble, and similia: and is most usually written in this figure []

The first, to wit Aa, we only use in Proper names, and words derived from the
Hebrew.

Ai, we pronounce according to the Latin, as in fair, etc. excepting hair,
which we sound as if it were written hare, but a little brisker, or rather like
hear; and the verb say* which we for brevity sake call sa; and say, as sest;
says, as sath; said, as sed the Latin Conjunction, etc. though irregularly.

Au, the Dipthong we usually sound after the manner of the Latin au, except in
baume the herb, where it sounds A (as the French pronounce it) full.

Ea we sound like the Latin E, and it is always proper, or invariable; only
in Phleagme (which we borrow of the Greek (...)) it is for the most part
sounded with E short, and G omitted, as in Phleme.

Ee, is always the same in pronunciation with the Greek g and the Latin I, as
I said in the Vowels.

Ei, we generally pronounce like the Latin Ai, with little difference of sound;
as in receive, straight, etc. And what force the Latins give to their Ei
Dipthong* we attribute the same in effect to our single I, as in the Vowels is
said: where note, we abusively sound the word Heir, or Inh ritour, like Air,
unaspirate and full, as if there were no difference of Letters. But where Gh
succeeds, the Dipthong is sounded shorter, and Gh loses all its faculty, as
weight, quasi wait, etc. Some pronounce Ei like Ea in many words, and for the
same purpose write it so too, but altogether against rule or authority; as
receave, for receive; conceave, for conceive, etc. especially where it
precedeth V.

Eo, we pronounce in jeopardy and Leopard with the om^ssion of O, in Geometry
with the loss of E, and G different from it self in power when it goes before
O, calling it jometry short. Only in Geography this Dipthong is proper, and in
it self complete: but we make little use of it, other then in the four words
here recited.

Eu, bears the same force with the Latin Eu, in words from thence derived, or
proper names, as in Eustace; but in words originally English, we for the most
part sound it like u single, without the E, as in Rheum, quasi Rume, etc.

Ie, differs little in sound from the Latin I, and our Ee Dipthong, as in field
chief, Shrieve (which is truly written Sheriff) siege, etc. where we
pronounce E long without any I at all, and friend where E short, etc. But you
must observe by the way, that this Dipthong never happens in the beginning of a
word or syllable, for then is J always a Consonant, and never a Vowell,
whereby it cannot compose a Dipthong, which is the combination of two Vowels.

Oa, sounds generally after the Greek Omega, with the loss of A; as in boat,
coal, etc. Goal, or prison, is thus truly written, but pronounced like Jaile.

Oe, in the end of a word (as for the most part it seldom happens else in
words merely English, though usual in the Latin, and such as we immediately
derive from thence) is the same in pronunciation with O single, as in Toe, etc.
except shoe, which sounds shoo, as some pronounce the Greek Dipthong Ov; and
Phoenix, foelicity, etc. where it follows the Latin, bearing chiefly the
force of E.

Oi, is originally derived from the Greek, whose faculty in pronunciation it
truly retains with us, as in void, destroid, join, etc. But in many words
which we take from the French it imitates more their pronunciation, which a
little differs, and but a little, as in purloine, etc. where it inclines more
to our I, though with somewhat a flatter or more dull sound.

Ou, differs much in pronunciation. In bound, boule, (as to trundle a boule)
crowd (or throng) etc. it is properly in its native sound, deduced from the
Greckes, as it is by their best Linguists truly pronounced. But with Gh
succeeding, it sounds far more aspirate, as in bought, which we pronounce
bowt, after the manner of the substantive bow, (or that which men use to shoot
with) Gh having no other force in themselves. And thus it is in all Participles
of the Preter tense ending in ought as bought, sought, thought, and the
Adjective naught; except fought the Preterparticiple of fight, which sounds
fou't, after the manner of stout, bout, proper. In like sort bough (or arm of
a tree,) plough, through; except tough, which sounds with a brisk aspiration,
and enough, which many of us call enuff, (sed perperam.) U going before R in
the end or last syllable of certain words, loses its force, as in honor,
neighbor; except our, your, and all Monosyllables: Where note, that what words
we borrow of the Latin, ending in or, we write with our; as in labor the Latin
word, and labor the English: and some we take from the French, as Paramour. In
the word blood it is sounded without o, u short; in gourd, without u, o long.
In would, could, should, it is usually pronounced like Oo double.

Oo in Poor imitates in sound the Greek Omega, but in other words we usually
pronounce almost as the French and Waloones do their O in Tilmont, Paramont,
etc. and as some would have the Greek o, though falsely. It varies little in
pronunciation; as in these words appears, soon, boon, loome, moon, crook,
tooth, sooth (which some call suth) good, food; except wood, and stood, the
Preterperfect tense of the Verb stand, which we pronounce as they were wud, and
stud, and wool, quasi wul.

Ua is always proper when it follows q, as in quake; but after g, u is of
little force: where you may take notice, that all these Dipthongs which begin
with u, seldom or never follow any other Consonant but g, and q, whereof the
two last can only follow q, except ui in build and juice; the other two
indifferent. But when q precedes any of them, u retains its sound, which after
g it loses; as in guard, etc. except Language, as is instanced in the Table of
Dipthongs.

These three, Au, Ei, Ou, be many times sounded with a kind of aspiration, by
reason of Gh often inserted in the same syllable succeeding, and serving there
to no other use but to aspirate the Dipthong, as I said before in Ei and Ou. Ei
in the word Forreigner has G, in the nature of the Greek g, but short, and in
a manner altogether vanishing away.

Au with Gh in the middle of a word sounds like Af for the most part, as in
these substantives, daughter, laughter, which most of us pronounce dafter,
lafter; except slaughter, which is slater, with A broad and full, after the
manner of the French tone. The rest go according to the tenure of the
precedent rules, as caught, taught, etc. And thus terminates very many of our
Participles in the Preter tense.

There are (and those diligent Inquisitours in the English tongue) who would
inhance our number of Dipthongs to one and thirty, by the several connexions
of W and Y with the other Vowels, as if they were always Vowels. But I have
rejected them for these reasons: First, Y before any other Vowel always
degenerates into a Consonant (as will by provingit plainly appear;) and
combined in the same syllable after any other Vowell, it has the same force in
pronunciation with I, or in the end of a word with Ie, which is all one in
effect, and therefore frivolous to put them as different Dipthongs.

W has by custom so far prevailed, as to claim the title of a Vowell in
persuade, because it is to us transferred from the Latin Verb Persuadeo, and so
written with a W for difference sake; but in Proper names, and most other words
taken from the Latin, we usually keep U in its own place, as in Suetonius,
which we write Sueton; Suevia, Sueveland, etc. In words originally English, W,
preceding any other Vowell, is improperly said to make a Dipthong, having there
only the force of a Consonant, and not a Vowell; as in wary, wet, with, work,
weary, swear, swagger, sweet, etc. but may be combined after any of these
three Vowels, A, E, or O. But then is it more properly termed a Tripthong then
Dipthong, (as its Character and denomination implies:) whereupon I thought good
to insert it among the Tripthongs, where you may further see the difference
between U single, and U double. Notwithstanding, I acknowledge it altogether
irregular, and peculiar only to us and our Competitours, and thereupon hard to
be reduced to any certain rule. Wherefore concerning this, being a thing not
much material, let every man take his own opinion, if he can induce better
motives.

Of the Tripthongs.
A Tripthong is when three single Vowels are together comprehended under one
accent, or in the same syllable combined, as a Dipthong is when two are so
comprehended or combined.

These Tripthongs be in number ten, viz.

1 eau as in Beauty, Beaumont. These two Tripthongs we have immediately from
the French, and therefore ought not to alter their pronunciation,
notwithstanding we usually sound the former with omission of a, as it were
only eu; the other we generally pronounce like u single, as lu, etc. 2 ieu as
in Lieu, adieu, and one ending in w, that is, view. 3 uai as in Quail, quaint,
acquaint. These four always follow Q, and have their pronunciation entire and
proper to themselves. Notwithstanding, I remember no other words in our English
Tongue wherein we make use of them, more then those recited and their
compounds. 4 uee as in Queen. 5 uea as in Queen, queasie, squeake. 6 uie as in
Squieze. 7 uoi as in Quoit, quoife. This Tripthong follows the rules of the
four precedent, only the pronunciation alters in this, that qu sounds no more
but K, or C, after the manner of the Latin word Quod; as quoit, quasi coit,
etc. 8 aw as in Law, bawd daw. These three differ in this from the Dipthongs
au, ^^, ou, partly in respect of their use, partly of their pronunciation:
Their pronunciation, in that aw has a more full and broad sound then au* which
follows the Latin, from whence we took it: neither has it exactly the sound
of either Dipthong or Tripthong, as it were losing w, and retaining a full and
broad, as the French pronounce it. 9 ew as in Dew, new, stews. 10 ow as in
Now, know, how.

Ew* in these four words, dew* few, sewer, and Ewe (or female sheep) retains
the pronunciation of the Latin Dipthong Eu. In all other words it bears only
the force of U single, as new, quasi nu. etc.

Ow, in these words, now, how, adverbs; bow the Verb, Cow, Sow, substantives,
and these, brown, town, clown, down, gown, renown, vowell, towell,
trowell, has the same pronunciation with Ou the Dipthong. In all other words
it alters in a more quick and aspirate sound, as in know, low, trow, Bow the
substantive; bestow, flow, grow, Verbs, etc. What concerns their use, you may
here take notice, that when any word is to terminate or end in Au, Eu, or Ou,
we write it with U double: in the two first always, in the last generally,
except in these two words, thou, you, Pronounes; and such as have Gh after; as
plough, through, tough, bough, rough, and cough, which sounds quasi coffe, etc.
and youth, quasi yuth. The rest you have enough in the Dipthongs.

This therefore shall suffice for the Vowels single and combined. Now proceed
we to Consonants.

Of the Consonants.
A Consonant is a letter of it self not apt to be pronounced without the help
of some Vowell; or, which has not power in its own nature or being to make a
syllable, or any articulate sound; as the Etymology of the word it self
implies: as, Consonans quasi simul sonans. Calepine has it thus, Consonantes
sunt dictae, quia cum Vocalibus sonent, non autem per se.

And these be specifically divided into Mutes and Semivowels; names, who
rightly understands, shall need no further definition of them. For a Mute is
that which the Latins call Muta, quasi Liter a muta; and is as significant in
our English Tongue, that is, mute or dumb; because in it self it has no
faculty of pronunciation at all, without some pittance of a Vowell.

Of these there be in number eight* to wit, B, C, D, G, K, P, Q, T, which in
their pronunciation, beginning in themselves, are forced to borrow of the
Vowell E to help them out; as Be, Ce, etc. excepting only K, which ends in A,
and Q in U.

A Semi-vowell takes its denomination, as having in it self half the power
or vigor of a Vowell: and these be likewise eight, viz. F, L, M, N, R, S, X,
Z; all which begin their sound with E, and end in themselves; (notwithstanding
so many Infantuli produce R, quasi Ar) where you may observe the difference
between a Mute and a Semi-vowell, in that the former begins its pronunciation
(andagrave; quo) in it self, and terminates in a Vowell (ad quem;) the latter
begins with a Vowell, and ends in it self, and thereupon is said to be endued
in its nature or essence with a further faculty. Though F (I know) is strongly
among the Latin Grammarians disputed, and by Priscian convinced for a Mute; yet
neither his authority, nor the reasons quoted by his diligent Inquisitour
Master Deanes, be of efficacy sufficient (at least since they hold not good in
our English Tongue) to let us from ranking him in the forefront of our
Semi-vowels, and by that means to add one to the number of the Latin: wherein
let Scaliger speak, and end the controversy.

The discission of them into Liquids, etc. is too nice a distinction for us to
deal with. For if from the coasts of Italy any seed thereof was transplanted
into our English Tongue, it was only to grow in some Ladies mouth.

H and W are irregular, and have their particular powers; which shall be
further exemplified in their places. The force of these Consonants will appear
in the Syllables mixed: Their denominations you have in the Alphabet; only here
we have thought good to introduce a word or two concerning these four, viz. H,
W, X, Z.

H (which Scaliger, Alvarus, and most Latin Grammarians call Ha) we for the
most part, as well in what concerns our own Tongue, as the Latin, pronounce
it as a single letter, like Ach, or Hach, taken after the Spanish
pronunciation; who indeed come nearest us of any Nation in Europe, concerning
the use and pronunciation of this Letter: but to the French it is very
difficult to produce, especially as we do. The Latins only give it the
Character, but not the force of a Letter, and from the Greeks (who only make
it a note of aspiration, excluding it their Alphabet) produce sufficient
reasons for it. But we cannot do so; for without it our Tongue is altogether
imperfect: Whereupon with us it has the prerogative of being ranked and
esteemed as a Letter.

For the use, it is often proposed for difference sake (as has been well
observed in the Latin) for instance these two, All, and Hall, etc.

It may precede or be set before any of the Vowels, but no Consonant, except N
in John (which is merely a contraction of the Latin word Johannes) or where it
is inserted in the middle between two Consonants, as in Christ, etc. But is
apt to succeed in the same syllable any of these six Consonants, C, P, T, R, S,
G, as in Charity, Philip, Theorie, Rhetorique, Shame, Ghost. The placing it
after the first three we learned of the Greeks, notwithstanding (especially
after T) we use it in many words merely English. After R, of the Hebrews and
Arabians, as in Gomorrha, Rhasis. After S and G we have chiefly peculiar to our
selves.

W and Z differ from the other Consonants, in that they require more then one
element or syllable in their denominations, or pronunciation as single letters.
The one we derive from the Greek Letter Zeta, whose force it retains: the
other few Nations besides our own are acquainted with, especially to make the
use we do of it.

Further, X and Z are said to be a combination of two Consonants, and therefore
are not termed single, but double Consonants, as implying the force of two: For
example, we call X quasi Ecs, or (as some would have it) Ics; and Z (which the
Latins call Eds) we term Ezard, or Edsard, and bears the force of Ds* as may
be demonstrated in the Comicall oath Zounds, which they call D sounds, etc.

To these we may well add our Consonant W, as composed of two V Consonants
contract.

And this shall suffice for Consonants in specie. Wherefore we will immediately
proceed to treat of Letters as they be parts of a word, or produce syllables;
where the particular force of the Consonants will further appear.

Of Syllables.
FRom the conjunction or combination of Letters are generally deduced
Syllables, to wit, when one or more Consonants stand united with a Vowell, or
Vowels, under one accent, which we call Syllables mixed, that is, composed of
Vowell and Consonant.

Scaliger therefore has defined a Syllable, An Element under one accent; that
is, what can be pronounced at once. Priscian has it more plainly,
Comprehensio literarum, etc. A comprehension of Letters, falling under one
accent, and produced by one motion of breathing. But this was rejected among
some Grammarians, as imperfect, in respect of some Syllables consisting but of
one Letter, which are here excluded. Whereupon Master Deanes has framed this
definition of it, A Syllable is a literal or articulate voice of an
individual sound: For every Syllable must fall under one and the same accent.
So that Master Coot was not well advised to make able, acre, and the like, to
be but one Syllable, as shall be further demonstrated in its proper place. For
what appertains to the derivation of the word Syllable, the Latins call it
Syllaba, from the Greek word (...), (...), quod est, Comprehendo: So that
Syllaba, in respect of the generality or latitude of the term, may be taken
for any comprehension or connection in general; but according to the strict
acception, as it is here taken by Grammarians, you have sufficiently heard the
description of it.

The division of Syllables.
SYllables therefore are generally divided into Monopthongs, Dipthongs, and
Tripthongs; the two latter whereof we have already for our purpose sufficiently
discussed.

A Monopthong is, when a syllable is composed of one Vowell, whether alone by
it self, as in Monograms, or joined with one or more Consonants, and that
either making a whole word, or standing but for a part.

Where you may note this difference between the Latin and English Tongues: for
the Latin has always so many Syllables as Vowels or Dipthongs; which holds
not so generally in the English, as shall hereafter be further exemplified.
Wherefore our next step shall be to treat of Syllables mixed, as they be
integrall parts of a word.

Of Syllables mixed.
BY Syllables mixed, I understand such as be promiscuously composed of Vowell
and Consonant; to wit, when the whole Syllable is principally guided by the
force of one Vowell, whether joined with one or more Consonants. Whereby I
would distinguish them from Dipthongs, Tripthongs, and Monograms, one of the
Individuals of a Monopthong, and not exclude E final, and E in Es plural,
etc. which has its use, though little force, as will anon appear.

These, confusedly taken in their large sense, be in a manner infinite, by
reason of the great variety of words incident to every Tongue or Language: but
methodically resolved in a stricter measure, certain Principles or general
heads (as we vulgarly term them) will occur out of these Syllables, whereon
all words, consisting of perfect Syllables, immediately depend, as all
Syllables have their immediate dependence on the Letters.

These therefore are they, which by due examen of the Letters, we have
endeavored to reduce to some certain method, and put ob oculos; together with
their several rules or illustrations upon them, no less conducing to
Orthography then Orthoepie.

From the connection of Vowels and Consonants, proceed these syllables which
here follow, with their illustrations.

Crab, web, rib, rob, rub. ab, eb, ib, ob, ub


Babe, glebr, bribe globe.

Here observe as a general rule, that E in the end of a abe, ebe, ibe, obe.
word or syllable, thus following a single Consonant, after a Vowell in the
same syllable, is never pronounced, but only serves to make the precedent
Vowell long; as in Babe, glebe, bribe, robe.

These be chiefly used in Synaeresis, or contractions, as, abd, ebd, ibd, obd,
ubd.
crab'd for crabbed; and in Participles of the preter tense, as stabbed, snib'd,
robbed, rubbed.

Bs, thus may follow all the Vowels, and is usually abs, ebs, etc.
written with bbes, as in crabs, or crabbes; ribs, ribs, etc. But I approve
the succinctest way, especially where it bears the same force.

B before t is seldom sounded, as debt, doubt, quasi abt, ebt.
det, dout.

C, is the same with K, and indeed uses in writing to ac, ec, ic, oc, uc.
go always attended with K, or Ke; as crac we write crack; brec, brecke;
roc, rock; etc. whether for emphasis, or what reasons I know not, but I wish
custom were so confined to Classical rule, as we might leave this
apostemating our Tongue with unnecessary tumors.

A Long, E not pronounced, according to the first rule. ace, etc.
C in sacrifice sounds Z.

Ch, thus combined in the end of a syllable, in all Hebrew ach.
and Greek words sounds K, as in Mastich, Eunuch, etc. but in words merely
English, or what we borrow from the Spaniards, we retain their pronunciation,
as in much, etc. Drachme, quasi dram, and often so written.

Ck (as I said before) is no more but c or k single; as ac, ack, etc.
ak, or ack in pronunciation are but all one. Notwithstanding we may produce
this difference, that in the end of a word, the Vowell being short, ck is
written for k.

This combination is often used in Participles of the act, etc.
preter tense, and among Poets many times serves as an abbreviation of ked,
especially with the interposition of k; as backed, quasi backed slackt, slack'd,
or slacked, etc. but then ought it to be marked with a semicircle decressant;
where note, that in these three, verdict, victuals, horselicter, ct sounds but
t.

Had, red hid, rod, mud ad, etc. add.


The same in pronunciation with ad: For a Vowell before any Consonant doubled
(as in this example) is always s;hort, and the pronunciation ends at the
first Consonant. But I remember no word wherein d is exacted double in the same
syllable, but add the Verb, coming of addo, to distinguish it from the Latin
Preposition ad.

And for E in this nature, take here an addition to the first general rule,
That E in the end of any English word is never, or very rarely, pronounced,
except in Monosyllables where there is no other Vowell; as in the the Article,
me, be, where it is sometime single, sometime double; and thee Pronoune, we,
she, see, where it is always double: or in proper names or words derived of
some other Language, as in fesse, conge, which we have from the French;
Penelope, Epitome, etc. which immediately from the Greek.

Lade, mede, or mead, bride, rode the Verb, rude. ade. ades.


A long, E not sounded. Here likewise take another general rule; for E in Es,
in all Substantives plural, is never sounded, except where one of these
Consonants precedes, to wit, c, s, x, z, or g, (like the Consonant j;) or one
of these combinations, ch, or sh: nor in the third person singular of Verbs of
the Present tense in the Indicative mood, as in moves, knows, says, etc.
which we pronounce for the most part quasi sez.

Pads, beds, rids the Verb, gods, studs. ads. adst.


This combination is chiefly used in contractions of Verbs, and that especially
among Poets; as had, or had; bid'st, or biddest.

F, in the end of a word, especially where the Vowell going af, etc.
before is short, we usual double in writing, and put E last of all, though
needless either of both; as scof, we write scoff, etc.

A long, e not sounded, as before in safe, wife; the rest afe.
with Dipthongs, as brief, loaf. Staff is written with f double, but
pronounced single, quasi stafe.

Here take notice, that such Substantives as in the singular afes.
number end in f, with any of the Vowels aforegoing, in the plural number they
change this t into v; as life, lives; wife, wives; loaf, loaves; etc.

The Vowell is always short before ft. aft.


Bag, beg, big, bog, bug. ag.


E after g, in the same Syllable, at the end of any word, age.
makes g to be sounded like j Consonant: Wherefore it is against Orthography to
write e in the end of a word after g, where g is to retain its proper sound.

G before h in the end of a syllable is not sounded; but agh.
this combination we seldom use but in the word sighs, where i precedes, and
is pronounced quasi sithes, with an aspiration, i long.

This is seldom used after any Vowell but i, as in sight, aght.
night, might, right, and where g is not at all pronounced.

This some have put as a true combination of a Syllable, agn.
by reason of these words, benign, condign, oppugn, etc. but the same
reasons I bring against M. Coot in l and r, shall hold in this. And first, none
of these syllables are or ought to be written without e, for then are they
defective, and against Orthography. Secondly, any of these Consonants combined
with l, n, or r, may begin a Syllable but not end it; for no Liquid can follow
another Consonant in the end of a Syllable; for then should it be no longer a
Liquid, when all the force is drowned in another. Thirdly, e never is or ought
to be inserted but for some use: Now because e final in our Tongue is of so
little effect or estimation, any of these Liquids being in the highest nature
of a Semi-vowell, may justly claim as much faculty in the producing of a
Syllable, whereby (the one not giving to the other, but as equal competitours)
they make the Syllable imperfect, by reason neither the one nor the other have
the full force, and therefore not properly said to be a perfect Vowell:
whereupon I grant these kind of Syllables imperfect (as indeed imperfections
incident to our Tongue among some other which only time and industry can
amend) but yet distinct; which I prove in that they thus combined, exact more
then one motion of respiration or breathing, which is proper to a Syllable, as
appears by the several essential definitions thereof. And for the manner of
dividing them in spelling, by the same authority the Latin Grammarians command
scripsi to be spelled scri-psi, by the same will I admonish the spelling of any
those words occurring in that nature; for example sake, condign thus,
con-di-gne, so notable* no-ta-ble; mau-gre, etc. Also the like for plurals of
Substantives occurring in this kind, as fi-dles, a-cres, which sounds like
akers; and very many the like, specially produced by l and r

These we never use but as Interjections when we mark ah, oh.
them with an exclamation point, and that only after these two Vowels; as ah!
oh!.

H (as I said in the single Consonants) never precedes a ahn.
Consonant but in John, where it has no force of a letter.

A long, e not sounded, make, leake, strike, broke, Luke. ache.


These I discussed sufficiently in C, whither I refer you, ac, ack, ack'd,
ack't al, etc.
not loving reduplications.

A short and proper, as in allude; but when d or t follow, it sounds like our
Tripthong aw, or the French a, as in Alderman, malt, etc. any of the other
Vowels preceding are always proper and invariable.

Male, veale, style, stole, mule: O, in the Verb stole, ale.
short, in the Substantive stole, of stola, long.

A before ll, in the word all, ought to be pronounced all.
full and broad, after the manner of the French pronunciation of their a, or
our aw Tripthong. As likewise in all the derivatives, or words compounded of
all; as also, altogether, already, etc. and wheresoever all is final. Where
note, that when l is to terminate any word, we usually write it double for the
fuller sound sake. O before ll in roll, sounds ou dipthong, quasi roll,
aspirate.

Scald, feld, filled, fold, guld. A before ld sounds always ald.
as in all; and o like ow, as in old. And i long in diverse Monosyllables, etc.
vide post, alth.

This always follows the Spanish pronunciation, as in alch.
belch, and is seldom used with any other Vowell but e, or i, as Welsh, filch.

This combination we seldom use in words merely our alge.
own, unless in divulge, and that we derive from the Latin Verb divulgo, etc.
G sounds j Consonant.

Half, pelf, self, wulf, which some write wolf, indifferent alf.
with e or without. This combination is seldom used with o, but in proper
names and borrowed words; and then what seems to be f, is generally written
ph, as in Butolph, etc. Half and calf some pronounce with omission of l, as
they were haufe, caufe, (pronounced like the word fault) which I approve not,
unless in the latter to make distinction between tibia the calfe of a man's
leg, and Bovilla a calfe or a veale.

Walk, welkin, milk, folk, bulk. alk.


Calm, whelme, film, Colmes (a proper name) culme a word obsolete, or out of
use. alm.


Fallen, stolen. aln.


Scalp, whelp, culp, a word obsolete. alp.


False, else, pulse. alse.


This is little used in any of the Vowels. alsh.


Exalt, belt, milt, bolt, insult. alt.


Balthazar, stealth, filth. Th a sharp and brisk air.

alth.
Here note that al before d, (as I said before) k, l, m, n, p s, and t, sounds
as in all; and in alf, alk, alm, alp, the l, in pronunciation, often omitted,
as in calf, walk, calm, scalp, and after au in fault: Which yet is more
material in their Orthography then Orthoepie; which is in a manner
indifferent, and equal in the balance of custom. The Vowels, wherewith these
combinations be chiefly used, I have expressed in exemplary words: In all other
whereto they be combined, these Syllables are always proper; only o in olt
sounds ow, as in colt quasi cowlt; and in olm l is omitted, as Colmes, quasi
Comes, and so Colman, as Coman.

Al'n and ol'm be chiefly used among Poets, and that per Apocopen, and
therefore ought to be signed in writing with the badge of an abbreviation, as
in fallen quasi fallen, contract: stolen, the Preterperfect Participle of the
Verb steal, and swol'n or swelled, which is all one. But this combination I
remember not used with any Vowel but a or o, as by the words inserted appears.

I in ild in many Monosyllables is long, as in mild, child, wild, pil'd, til'd,
filled, styled, whil'd, exiled, beguiled, reconciled, etc. where note that in
all contractions in this sort the Vowell aforegoing is usually long.

Salve, helve, shelve, delve, silver, involve. E in the end alve.
of a word after u, makes v a Consonant, it self not sounded: and this is
likewise to be observed in many words plural, as I said before, as also in
some Verbs, etc. as salves, selves, involves. Salve some call save, a full and
broad.

A in the Verb am is short, in Cambrick, Cambridge, am.
long. Cham, Sem, swim, from, crum.

A long as before, blame, dream, crime, tome, fume. O ame.
in some pronounced like u, quasi sum; came and come the Verbs, quasi came, cum,
etc.

This is all one with am single, though many times unnecessarily amme.
written with m double, as stam, or stamme, hem, or hemme; him always is
single, the rest commendable so too.

B after m in the same Syllable is never sounded, as lamb, amb.
quasi lam; kemb (which some call kome) quasi keme; comb quasi co^^e, or
measure of corn; climb quasi clime, i long; thumb, quasi thum, u short, so
dumb, etc.

This we seldom use in one Syllable, unless in Hymn amn.
and its compounds, Greek words, where n is omitted, and sounds quasi Him.

Lamp, tempt, glimpse, pomp, thump. All Verbs ending amp.
in mp have their Preter-participle in t, as damp, dampt, exempt (which we take
immediately from the Supine of the Latin Verb, not having it in English) etc.
S after emp in Tempse is z, p not sounded.

Can, hen, pin, son, (or son, which we pronounce quasi an.
sun) tun, etc.

A before n in ancient, anger, ant, and all words where g after n sounds j
Consonant, is pronounced full and broad, as in danger, change, strange, etc. in
the rest short.

This is needless double with any of the Vowels in any anne.
word except the word Anne (which the Latins call Anna) the proper name of a
woman, notwithstanding it be usually doubled in son and begin.

Bane, bean, seen, shrine, tone, tune. ane.


A before n in this combination is always long and full in ance.
Monosyllables and Dissyllables, as France, chance, glance, inhance, etc. But
in Trissyllables short, as in countenance, utterance, etc. In all the other
Vowels this combination is short, as in hence, since, sconce, dunce.

Lanch, bench, pinch, bunch: ch proper, except in stinch, anch*
which sounds quasi stink.

Seldom in any English word thus combined in one syllable anth.


Drank, drink, drunk: seldom used with e or o. auk.


Hand, lend, wind, pond tunn'd, the Participle of the Verb and.
tun, for tuned of tune has u long. I in ind final is long in all or most
words, except in the Preter-participles of Verbs ending in in, contracted per
Apocopen; as pinned (which is written with n double to distinguish it from
pined, of the Verb pine) which comes of pin; skinned of the Verb skin etc. and
in these words, hinder, cinder, and tinder, or rather tunder.

Hang, wing, long, sung, g proper. ang.


Range, revenge, singe (or burn) sponge, which we pronounce ange.
sponge: G is in effect j Consonant by reason of e which is not sounded.

This combination we seldom use but in length and strength angth.


Can, ken'st, (a term known to Mariners) this is seldom anst.
used in other words then the two recited, whose Vowels be short, unless in
the second person singular present Indicative of Verbs ending in n, and that by
way of Apocope, as thou begiun'st, for beginnest, etc. But in lieu hereof we
have many Preter-participles ending in d, which bear the same force in
pronunciation, as chanced, fenced, minced, etc.

Trap, skep, whip, stop, up, sup. ap.


Escape, weep, tripe, trope, scoope, for scupe. ape.


The same that ap, therefore needless doubled. appe.


Trappes, whippes, etc. which would do better single, appes.
but only to please our fantasy in dreaming upon a word.

The same that af in pronunciation. For ph look in pha* aph.


Snapt, swept, skipt, under-propt, supt. This is used in apt*
Preter-participles, which somtimepromiscuously interchange d and t, as supped,
or supt.

This we use only with i, and that in certain words derived ique.
from the Latin, which should properly be only such as end in quus, as oblique,
of obliquus, and not such as terminate in cus; wherefore they do ill that
write Catholic, Rhetoric; Catholic, Rhetorique, etc. notwithstanding I know
it is usual among many Scholars. But this will be better proved in our*
Etymologicall part.

Far, Lucifer, sir, for, spur. ar.


A long, except in are the Verb, as they are, etc. which are.
sounds only ar short: spare, fear, fire, door, lure.

Star, deter, fur, abhor, curre. Here R bears an arre.
Emphasis, and therefore we write it double.

Scarce, fierce, force, nurce. C sounds s by reason of e: arce.
a in scarce long.

March, search, birch, lurch, ch as in much, these excepted, arch.
Monarch, Tetrarch, Patriarch, Arch-angell, etc. being such as we derive from
the Greek and Hebrew.

Hard, heard, erred, bird, afford, surr'd. A in ward has a ard.
full sound. Er is the same in pronunciation with ir, as appears. All
Preter-participles of Verbs ending in ire, contracted, have i long, as fired,
mir'd, of the Verbs fire, mire, etc. as also Participials terminating in ired,
as admired for admired. O long except where r is doubled: wherefore we must
write abhorred with r double, because abhor, the Verb, has it so; and stored
with r single, because it is so in store, etc. In like manner u where r is
doubled has a flat or dull sound and short, where the pronunciation of the
Syllable sticks chiefly in r, as in demurred, which, together with the Verb
from whence it is derived, ought to be written with r double, to distinguish it
from the adjective demure, where u is long, and has its proper sound: which
likewise generally holds in all Participles and Participialls ending in ut'd
contract, where r is single.

This is only used in these, garb, herb, disturb. arb.


Skarfe, skurfe: a is full and broad, as in wharf, dwarf, arfe.
u short.

This we use little but in such words as we take from the arg.
Saxons, as the names of certain Towns or Villages, which end in ergh, or
urgh, as Whinbergh, Orburgh, now written Whinborrough, Orborrough. The like use
we make in some derived from the Dutch, as in Hamburgh, etc.

Large, searge, forge, urge: G sounds j Consonant, because arge.
of e succeeding. Which, for this reason, we ought not in writing to omit,
where it serves for a difference in pronunciation. A in this combination is
short, o long.

Dark, yerke, forke, Turk, lurk. E final here makes arc.
no difference, and therefore indifferently inserted.

Snarle, Earl, girl, Sporle, the name of a Village; arle.
curle, or crispe. A has a full sound, o long.

Harm, term, firm, storm, murmur: a in warm, arm.
swarm, full and broad, o in worm sounds n.

Warn, herne, hirne, (or corner) which is rather hurne, arn.
horn, burn. A in warn full, in the rest more acute, as in barn. All the
other Vowels short.

Sharp, chirp, Thorp. A like aw in warp, the rest as in carp arp.


Sparse (of sparsum the supin, to sprinkle) insperse, hearse, arse.
worse, indorse, purse. S proper in all: the Vowels short: o in worse quasi u,
u in purse full.

Bars, erres, stirs, abhorres, burres. Here r ought arres.
to be doubled for the same reason as in arre, e not sounded for reasons
prescribed. The Vowels short; a sharp in all but wars, where it is somewhat
broader.

Marsh, or marish (of the Latin word mare) indeed moorish, arsh.
as it may truly be called: a sharp. In any other we little use it.

Smart, pert, or saucy, dirt, fort, hurt. A in quart, wart, swart, thwart,
sounds aw; in the rest as in the word art: art.
e in pert like ea, or the Latin e; o in fort, sport, long; in the rest short:
u flat as in ur.

Startch. But in this and all the rest, if there be any, t is artch.
needless, since rch is as much in pronunciation as artch, except the
exceptions mentioned before.

Wrath, wreath, tith, broth, both, Ruth, sits. Th in ath.
has, wrath, lath, bath, swath, substantives, has a brisk and its proper
sound, in the rest after a flat and more dull, as in seath, swath, tath, bath,
Verbs, etc. where a is long. After e it is always proper, and most usually
happens in third persons singular of the Indicative mood, as in moves, biteth,
etc. after ea*in death, breath, the substantive, bleath, heath, proper: in
wreath, sheath, bequeath, breath the Verb, flat: after i in with, stith, smith,
proper; in tith, blithe, since, dull and flat, i long: after o and u for the most
part proper, and has ever u long, and o only in both. In a word, h after t in
general produces a kind of lisping sound as we call it.

Narth, earth, mirth, forth, worth, which we sound quasi arth.
wurth. Forth the proper name we call Ford, o long: in the other forth,
indifferent.

Swarve, serve, nerve, which we sound nirbe: i, o, and arve.
u, in this combination I remember not. A full.

This we make no use of in our Tongue, but in lieu thereof arx.
ks, as in larks, etc.

Was, is, us* S when it is single, after a and i, sounds z, as as.
in these Monosyllables, as, was, is, his, and in Osee, Elisabeth, gosting (to
distinguish it from Gosting the proper name) husband, these, those, in ise or
ose final, or wheresoever s concludes as the last syllable of any word; and in
these verbs, muse, use, refuse. Wherefore in words wherein it claims its proper
pronunciation we write it with ss, sometime with e, sometime without; as in
pass, or pass, which is most usual in printing.

Purchase, please, advertise, expose, use: s, as before, by reason ase.
ce after any of the Vowels usurps the sound that properly belongs to s.
Wherefore we must write face, and not fase; disgrace, and not disgrase; peace,
and not pease, which is a kind of corn; vice, not vise; and advice when a
substantive, advise when a verb; truce, not truse, etc. only cease holds its
own, the better to distinguish it from the verb seize, which signifies to set
upon. Muse and use substantives have s proper, to distinguish them from their
verbs. As also chase the verb, to drive away: the substantive Chase, or
Forest, is written with c.

Chased, eased, advised, reposed, confused: these be all Preter-participles
as^d.
contracted per Apocopen: the s as before.

Pass press, piss, moss, trusse. S is proper, and has an as^e.
acute sound. The pronunciation cease in the first s, but ought to be written
double, as you see for the reason exhibited in as.

Trash, flesh, fish, bush. H after S in the end of a syllable, ash.
participates a Sibilus (as the Latins call it) or a kind of hissing sound: A
in wash full, in the rest all the vowels usually short. O in this combination
is seldom used, unless in proper names.

Mask, desk, frisk (or skip) busk, mosch, which ask.
we call musk. E final makes here no difference, the vowels short, S acute, K
proper.

Though we use this combination in spasme, which asme.
comes of the Greek word (...), Dunesme, Baptism, Chrysme; to wit Greek
words, and proper names, yet is it improperly taken as a single syllable. The
reasons you have heard already in agn. Wherefore they may be said to do well,
who, making but two syllables of Baptism, pronounce it with omission of s,
quasi Baptim. And thereupon (I believe it came) that some call Chrisme, Cream.
Their division in spelling ought not to be between s, and m, but i, and s: as,
Bap-ti-sme, Chry-sme, Spa-sme; and not Baptis-me; where e has the full force
of a vowell. For then should there be in Baptism, three perfect syllables
distinct, which is not. For, (as I partly said before) when e final follows
any of the Liquids after another Consonant in the same syllable, the syllable
thus combined is imperfect in its pronunciation, by reason it consists not of a
perfect vowell.

Clasp, hesp, crisp, s proper, the vowels short. asp.
Have, beast, best, whist boast, Ghost, must: O ast.
long; a indifferent; the rest short; s proper: only in Christ, i is long.

Cat, net, knit, knot, gut. The vowels short. at.


Delicate, seat, write, wrote, suit, or dependence ate.
in Law; for suit, or garment, is written suite, the like difference is
between Brute, and bruit, or beast. The vowels long, because of E final.

Mates, meets, mites, motes, mutes. E in es ates,
not sounded: the precedent vowels long. This is chiefly in Substantives
plural, and third Persons singular of Verbs, as I have often insisted upon.

Match, stretch pitch, botch, butcher; Custom atch,
has prevailed in our Tongue, to insert T in many words before ch, though the
sound be in a manner all one; but if there be any reason, it is for a kind of
Emphasis, or to put a little force to the syllable. But which (the pronoune)
rich, stich (or pain of the side,) all proper names ending in ich, much, such,
etc. be never written with T, most of the other are ch proper, the vowels short.

Sprats, frets, pits, pots, puts. The vowels ats,
short, the rest proper, used in Verbs singular, Substantives plural.

Wave, leave, wive, (the Verb) grove, u there is ave,
none, A always long. Ea in lieu of E, I in give, live, sive (or teme) and all
praeterperfect tenses of Verbs ending in ive, as rive of rive, strive or strove
of strive, is ever short; in the rest long, as in thrive. O in Love, move, and
glove, sounds V. Where note, that E after V in the same syllable always makes
V a consonant. And therefore concerning Orthography in writing, it must not at
any rate be left out, where it ought to be inserted, that is, where V
degenerates into a Consonant. For otherwise U, standing still in the nature of
a Vowell, makes a Dipthong, where there should be none, and so alters both
sense and pronunciation.

Saves, gives, groves, gloves. E not sounded. aves,
V a Consonont, the precedent vowels long, except the exceptions in ave.

Wax, sex, six, box. V in this combination none. ax.
Here ought the writer to be very careful, in that he writes not ax for acks,
etc. and e contra. Wherefore he may know by the way, that we in our English
Tongue make little use of this combination, unless in these words, flax, tax,
wax (both verb and substantive) relax of relaxo; sex, context, annexed, index;
six, mix, fix, pix, Rix, Hix; box, intoxicate, Pox, which are always written
with X; and perhaps some few more, which I remember not now: besides borrowed
words, and proper names, which no man can reduce to rule.

Amaze, gaze, blaze; frieze, snieze; size, assizes; aze.
gloze (which is better with S) toze, (a Verb among some vulgars) buz, buzard.
A long, E none single, but in Dipthong. I long, O long, V short. This is
seldom used at the end of a syllable in any other words of our own. And thus
much of syllables, where Vowels precede: Now will we examine what principal
syllables occur, where Consonants go before (a part assumentis) and Vowels
follow (a part assumpti.)

Of the Combination of Syllables (where Consonants precede) and what Consonants
such combinations may assume.
B BEfore A may assume almost any of the other ba.
Consonants, as appears by these words recited, viz. bab, back, bad, baf^^e,
bag, bake, ball, Bambridge, bane, Baptist, bar, bastard, bat.

With E these, beck, bed, beg, bell, been, Am-ber, be.
best, better.

With I, bib, bid, big, bill, Cherubim, or bin, by.
bird, bit.

With O, bob, bod-kin, bog, book, boll, bone, borrow, bo.
boast, bottle, box.

With u, as in bubble, buck, bud, buffe, buggery, bu.
bull, bump, bun, burre, bustard, but, buzard.

This some would have a Combination in Cambden, bda.
but however b is not sounded: neither truly can it stand for a Combination in
the English Tongue, though in Latin and Greek it is usual.

Blabber, black, bladder, blame, blast. bla.


Bled, blcake, blemish, blend, bless. For ble final ble.
expect further in rules of Orthographie, and Orthoepie.

Oblige, blind, oblique, bliss. bli.


Block, blossom, blot. blo.


Blubber, blood, bluffe, blunt, blurt, bluster, blutter blu.


Brabble, brad, brag, brake, brackish, brall, Brame, bra.
bramble, brawne, brat, brawle.

Breck, bred, bread, breast, brew. bre.


Bribe, brick, bride, bridge, Brill, brim, brinke. bri.


Brock, broad, broke, brook, broom, brow. bro.


Bruckle (a word the Peasant Shepherds know bru.
well) bruise.

Ca sounds like ka, as in Cag, cake, call, came, can, ca.
cap, car, cast, cat.

C before e, or i, sounds always s, as in faced, cell, ce.
center, certain, in-cest.

Like Si, as in homicide, cinder, cisterne, citterne. ci.


C before a, o, or u, sounds always k, as in Cob, cod, co.
coffin, cog, cockle, cole, colt, come, conny, cop, cord, costiue, cotton.

As in cub, cud, cuffe, cull, cummin, cunning, cup, cu.
curre, custom, cut.

Ch in Cha, and Chra, in all Hebrew words (except Cha.
Rachael, and Cherubin, which custom has exempted) Chra. etc
and in such words as we take immediately from the Greek, sounds as it were k,
sc. Cha, quasi ka, Chra quasi kra, or cra, as in these words, Alchymie,
Anchorite, Alchymist, Chaos, Character, Catechism, Chyliact, Chymera, choler,
Chyle, chyromancy, cichory, Echo, Enchiridion, mechanical, machination,
melancholy, Nicholas, Cham, Sepulcher. In other words not taken from hence, ch
is pronounced after the Spaniards, or our much, as in Chad, chafe, chalk,
chant, chap, charge, chaste, chat, chaw, chalder.

Check, chequer, cherry, chest, eschew.

Chicken, chid, child, chill, chip, chit.

Choke, chop.

Chub, chuffe, chun, churne.

Chr must of necessity hold its pronunciation of k, because h bears no force
in it. Nor do we make any use of it, but in words taken from the Greek or
Hebrew, and that only with i, o, or y, as in Chrismatory, Chrisme, Christ,
Christian, Christopher, Chronicle, Chronography, Chronology, Chrysocola,
Chrysostom.

Has crab, crack, Craddock, crafty, craggy, Cra.
crake, crall, or craule, cram, crane, craze.

Massa-cred, crept crest, crew. cre.


Crime, crip-ple, Nypo-crite. cri.


Croake, crome, crone, croope, crow. cro.


Crud, crust, and whatsoever are contracted before cru.
d, as accru'd, quasi crude.

Clab, clad, clam, clanke, clap, clasp, claw. Cla


All the participles of the pretertense derived of substantives ending in icle,
as manicled, but look further in Rules of Orthoepie for cle final, etc.

Cleft, clew. cle.


Clicket, clift, climb, in-cline, clip, clyster, Paraclite, cli.
or Paraclete.

Clock, clodder, cloak, close, clow. clo.


Club, cluster, clutter. clu.


Amina-dab, daggle, dally, dam, damn, Dan, Da.
dapple, dart, dastard, date.

Debt, cit-ta-del, den, deep, desk, dew. de.


Did, die, dig, dill, dim, din, dip, distich. di.


Dock, dog, con-dole, con-done (of condono) dop, do.
do, dote, dow. Doile, or Doily.

Double, dub, duck, Dudley, dug, dull, dumb, du.
dun, dirt, dust, conduit.

Drab, draft, drag, drake, dram, draw. Dra.


Dread, Mildred, dregs, chil-dren, dress, drew. dre.


Drib, drift, drill, drink, drip. dri.


Drop, dross, drowsy. dro.


Drugs, drum, drunk. dru.


Dwarf, dwell. Dwa.


Factour, fade, fag-got, fall, Fambridge, fan, Fa.
far, fast, fat, faith.

Fed, fell, fen, Luci-fer, fes-tee, fetter, few. fe.


Fiction, fiddle, fife, fig, fill, fim-ble, fin, fire, fist, fi.
fit, five.

Fod-der, fog-gy, folk, foame, fond, fop, for, foster, fo.
foot, fox.

Fud-dle, fumble, full, fun-dament, furre, fusty, fu.
fuy.

Flaer, flag, flake, flaile, flam; flannell, flap, flash, Fla.
flat, flaw, flax.

Fleece, fled, fleg, fleck, flesh, flet, flew, for fle in fle.
rifle, and where it ends any word, look in E final.

Flick, (or flitch of Bacon) flig, flight, flit, flix. fli.


Flock float, flow, flood. flo.


Flute fluster, flux. flu.


Frail, frame, fray. Fra.


Freckle, Frederick, freake, friend, fret, freeze, fre.
French.

Fri, fried, frig, frise, fritter. fri.


Frock, frog, from, front, frost, frow, froze. fro.


Fruc-tifie, fruit, frump, frown. fru.


Gad, gaf, gag; gall, gam, began, gap, gar, gast, Ga.
gat.

Gob, God, gof, goll, gom, gone, gor, gos, got, go.
gown.

Gug-gle, gull, gum, gun, Au-gur, gust, gut. gu.
G in ga, go, gu, is always proper, as in the pronunciation of the words
instanced appears. But in ge, and gi, many times degenerates to j consonant,
as in gentle, ginger: A perfect distinction whereof will be hard to reduce to
any classical method, but some instances, or slight instructions, you shall
have after the examen of their coherence with the other consonants.

Han-ged, estran-ged, gelly, geld, gem, gentry, ge.
sin-ger, dan-ger, ran-gest, sin-gest, get, gew-gaw, George.

Whereby you may see Ge before these four consonants, d, l, r, s, has a
different or various sound. Before m, n, and the dipthong Eo, it always sounds
j consonant: before t and w, g always proper: Before s likewise, where it
produces a distinct syllable, g in ge, sounds j consonant in all words, except
the second persons of such verbs as terminate in g proper, as ring, ringest:
wherefore the two words guess, and Ghest, or guest, ought truly to be written
with ue dipthong, like guerdon, which is expressed in the Table of Dipthongs.
Before d also the difference may in the like nature be resolved, being most
participles of the praeter-tense; for those that are derived of such Verbs, as
have their termination in g proper, retain in ged the force of g. But such as
be derived from those Verbs, that must have e final after g, seeming to
terminate in j consonant, do in their participles exact the same pronunciation,
as may be seen in these words, range, ranged, string, stringed. Before L, I
remember it only in the two words recited, whereof gelly sounds, quasi jelly,
and is usually written so; and geld retains the force of g proper, from hence
be many derivatives which keep the same pronunciation.

Before R, in Anger, beggar, bugger, conger, finger, linger, hunger, meager,
ager, monger, stagger, swagger; and in substantives derived of Verbs
terminating in g proper, as ringer of ring, etc. g retains its own force in
pronunciation. In all the rest it sounds j consonant, and in danger, manger,
etc.

Giblet, Gibson (a proper name;) giddy, Gifford gi.
(a proper name variously sounded, or rather two names written alike; whereof
one sounds quasi Jifford, the other g proper;) gig, gill (of a fish;) gill of
wine, quasi jill; gim, gimblet, ginny, ginger, giplie, girdle, give, gives of
give the Verb, were g is proper: but gives, or Pendants, sound quasi jives.

G in gi, where it precedes d, g, r, and v consonant in give, and such words as
be from thence derived, is always proper; as also in Gibson, Gifford (one of
the two names so written) Gilford, gill of a fish, Gilman, and several proper
names of this sort; gimblet, begin, beginning, altogether, Ginny (as it has
relation to the country) gild, gilt, or laid with gold, has its pronunciation
proper. Participles of the present tense ending in ging, have the same rule to
distinguish their pronunciation, that they of the preter tense have (which you
heard already) as in begging, of beg, and ranging, of range, may easily be
seen. In the rest Gi sounds quasi ji; But take this animadversion by way of
Orthographie, that when you are to set down in writing any word (whereat you
may chance to doubt) for which on the sudden, you can produce neither Rule, nor
Orthodoxe example; it is far more commendable to attribute to each letter its
peculiar and native faculty or force, than any wise to innovate; or to be
either the beginner or seconder of a bad custom: as some ignorant persons,
that only respect the denominations of the letters, and not their several
force: whereupon diverse of them write g before all the vowels for j consonant;
which is altogether absurd, and this comes for want either of due instruction,
or of care. Wherefore it is necessary for all that desire to be Orthographists,
or able to write English right (which likewise holds good in any tongue or
language whatsoever) to know perfectly and readily the particular force of
every letter, or what every letter severally or jointly implies.

This we seldom use in the beginning of a syllable, but in the word Ghost, and
certain proper names, as Gha.
Ingheenram, etc. But when they happen together, they ghe.
are to be taken as a combination, for which reason I gho.
inserted them. Through all the vowels (if used in all) Gh thus beginning a
syllable sounds g proper, a little aspirated by reason of the h. Some would
have Ghest and Ghess thus written; but (as I said before) they be far better
guest, and guess.

Glad, Glam-field, glan-der, glare, glass, Gla.
glaze.

Glib, glid, glie, glim, glister, glitter. gli.


Mingled, glee, gleeke, gleame, gleane. For gle.
this combination when it is final, you have more in L and R in the end of a
word, in their peculiar rules.

G before L in glory, is produced quasi DL.

Globe, glor, gloss, glow, glu, glusk, glum, glo.
gluc.

Gnat, gnaw, gne, A-gnes, gnit, gno, gnu. G in Gna.
this combination inclines to the force of N.

Grace, de-grade, graft, grain, grap-ple, grass, Gra.
grase, gray.

Gre, Greece, grief, Greek, mon-grell, di-grest, gre.
greyhound, grew, maugre, etc.

Ambergrice, or Greece rather, gridyron, grig, gri.
grim, grin, gripe, grist, grit.

Grog-gerin, grope, gross, groat, grow. gro.


Grub, grunt, grup. gru.


Gualter, guard, guerdon, guest, etc. These you Gua.
have in the Dipthongs.

Hab-berdasher, hacney, or hackney, had, haft, Ha.
hag, hah (an aspiration of ha, which is used when one is spoken to by another
familiar friend) hake, hall, ham, Hanna, hap, hare, heart, have, hat, have,
haw-thorne, hay.

Shed, theft, hell, hem, hen, her, Hester (quasi he.
Ester, E long) Hesset, hew.

Hi, hide, hill, him, hin-der, hip, hire, his, hiss, hi.
hit, hive, Hix.

Hobble, Hofma^, hog, hold, hop, hord, host, hot, how. ho.


Hub, huckle, hud-dle, hue, huf, hug, hukster, Hull, hu.
humble, hundred, hurry, Hus.

J is a Consonant: and here you may again take notice Ia.
that J in the beginning of a syllable preceding anothervowell, always
degenerates into a Consonant.

Iackson, Iacket, jade, iag, iakes, iam, ianisary, Jacques, iar, iay.

Ieffry, ielly, jest, iet, Jew, Ii, jill, Iermin, Iinny, Ie.
Iinkerson.

Job, iocky, iod (the Hebrew letter) iog, ioll of a Io.
Sammon; iostle, Jordan, jot, joy, John.

Iubs, juice, Iud, judge, iug, iusk, ium, just. And Iu.
generally whenever you have the denomination of g before a, n, or u, what
seems to be written with g, must be expressed by j Consonant, and never by G,
which has another force, as I have instanced before. Before E, or I, I
remember no more but those I have here inserted, that be written with j
Consonant, the rest with G, as I said before in G.

Katherine, Calendar, we use K before A in no other Ka.
words (unless perchance in some proper name) but C always: In these two
always K.

Keble, wicked, keg, kek, kell, kemb (or comb, as ke.
we call it) ken, kept, wicker, mil-kest, Ket, Kew, key.

Kibe, kick, kid, skif, kill, kim, kin, skip, kiss, kit. ki.
We note, always write K for C when it is to go before E, or I, and not
otherwise: for then C loses its own force, and sounds like S, etc.

These two we make no use to begin a syllable, but only when it is joined with
C, that C ended the last ko.
syllable, as in cuckold, cuckoo, etc. But we never begin ku.
a word with either of them.

Knap, knave. Kna.


Kne, knell, knew. kne.


Knife, knic, knip, knit. kni.


Kno, knock, knob, knod, knog, knol, knop, knot, kno.
know, Knox.

Knub, knuckle. Pronounce kn, as the Latins do knu.
their Cn, a little in the nose, or upper palate.

Slab, lack, lad, lag, lake, Lale, lamb, land, lap, La.
lard, less, lat-ter, lave (or wash) law, lay, lax, lazy.

Led, left, leg, leke, lem-mon, lend, leap, less, le.
let.

Glib, lick, lid, life, lige, like, lilly, limb, Lin, lip, li.
oblique, lire, list, litter, live.

Lobster, lock, loaf, log, lol, London, lop, lord, lo.
lost, lot, love, low, loy.

Lubber, luck, Luck, lug, luke, lull, lump, Lun, lu.
lurk, lust.

Mab (in Spencer) mackrell, mad, mag-nifie, make, Ma.
male, malt, malmesey (which we call mamsie) man, map, mar, mast, mat, maw,
may, maze.

Meed (a word out of use) ar-med, meek, melt, me.
men, met, mew.

Mickle (a word likewise obsolete) midriffe, mill, mi.
might, mine, mire, miss, mice, mise, mite, mix.

Mock, mood, moll, moon, mope (a vulgar word) mo.
mor-tifie, most, mow.

Muck, mud, mue, muffe, mug-well, mummy, mu.
mundifie, murder, must, mute.

This is no true combination in our Tongue; though Mna.
I have condescended to follow their example, that unnecessarily have inserted
it, in respect of Mnemosyne, which we some use, as she were our own. And
perhaps some one or two more, which we had immediately from the Greeks, as
chief Lords of the Fine.

Nag, nam (an usual termination of the names of Na.
many towns which we had of the Saxons) nap, nard, nasty, not, nay.

Neb, neck, ned, nell, nep, nest, net, new, neigh. ne.


Nib Nicholas, nig, nigh, nill, nip, nit, nive. ni.


Nock, nod, nog, nol, none, nor, nose, not, now, no.
annoy.

Nul-lifie, nun numb, nurce, nut, news. nu.


Pack, pad, page, pale, pommont, pan, pap, part, Pa.
past (where note, that past signifying a time gone, has A, short, past the
substantive for dow, A, long) pat, paw, pave, pay.

Peck, ped, pelf, peake, Pembroke, pen, iumper, pe.
pesse, pet, peeve.

Pib-ble, pick, pi'd (i long) pig, pike, pill, pimp, pi.
pin, pip, pirt, piss, pit, Pix.

Pod, poke, poll, pond, pop porke, posterne, pot, po.
pox.

Pud-dle, puff, pug, puke, pull, pum-mell, puppy, pu.
pus, put.

Ph is the same with the Greek ph, which we borrowed Pha.
of them, and now make our own; but only in such words as came to us along
with it. It sounds always like our F, as in Phalange, Philip, Phillis,
philter, Phleagme, Phlegeton, Phlegmatic, Fantasy, Philosophy, phantasma,
phrenetick, Phrenzy, Phae*ton, Phares, blasphemy, Polyphemus, Pheasant,
Elephant, Orphan, Dolphin, trophie, Prophet, prophecy, triumph, Epitaph, etc.
Which be all Greek words, and written as you see.

Phrases (a proper name) and phrases (or sentences) Phra.
Metaphrastes, Phrygia. Ph sounded as before.

Place, plague, plane, plain, plaster, or plaster, Pla.
platter, plaw, play.

Plea, plead, plenish, please, complete. ple.


Plied (y or i long) re-ply, plight. pli.


Im-plore, plot, plow, plower, im-ploy. plo.


Plug, plum, plump, plush. plu.


Prague (a city in Poland) prall, prank, prat, prave, Pra.
pray.

Distem-p'red (which is rather distempered, and pre.
therefore not well put in) prey, press, pretty.

Price, pride, prick, lam-prill, Prur-rose, prise, pri.
deprive.

Prog, prone, prop, prore, prostitute, prove, pro.
prow.

Spruce, prune (both Verb and Substantive, for a kind of fruit.) pru.


This we have of the Greek Psa, and use it as a combination Psa.
only in words derived from the Greek, as in Psalm, Psalter. In the
beginning of a word, as in Pseudo Prophet, P has little sound before S, but in
the middle is pronounced full, as if they parted: For as the Latins say
scri-psi, so we say dro-psy, of Hydrops; gipsy, rapsody, etc.

Squabble, squad, quaffe, quag-mire, quake, Qua.
qualme (quasi quawme) quail, quan, Quarles, quash.

Quest, quell, questor.

Qui, quibble, quick, Quid-nam (the name of a village) que.
quoth, quotient. qui.


Quod-nam (the name of another village) quoth, quotient. quo.


Q before uo sounds k, u not pronounced, as quoth, quasi koth, etc. as is said
before in the Dipthongs. The rest proper.

Rab-ble, rack, rad, rafter, rag, rake, rall, Ra.
ram, ran, rap, raze (quasi raze) race, rat, raw, ray.

Reck-lesse, red, be-reft, reek, rell, rem-nant, render, re.
Reps (a proper name) rest, ret, rue.

Rib, rice, rid, riffe, rig, Richard, rill, rim, ri.
rinse, rip, rist, Rix, rise, Rigsy, Ridge-by, Ridge-ly.

Rob, rock, rod, rogue, roake, roile, roll, to.
rom, roast, rose, rot, row, Rox-borrough, roy-all.

Rub, ruck, rud-der, rue, ruff, rug, rul-ly, rumble, ru.
run, rup-ture, rusty, rut.

Rhasis, Gomor-rha, Rhetoric, Rhotorician. Rha.
This (as I said before in the single consonants) we learned to combine from
the Hebrews, Syrians, and Arabians. H is of no force in pronunciation. The
Latin Grammarians admit not this combination, notwithstanding they have
Rhetor, Rhasis, etc. as well as we.

Sack, sad, safe, sage, sake, say, sale, sally, Sa.
same, Sampson, sand, sap, sart, sat, saw, say, Sax.

Sedge (or a kind of reed) siege, seek, sell, send, se.
set, sewer, sex.

Sid, sick, Sidney, sift, Priscilla, Sim: sin, si.
sip, Sir, sister, sit, sive (i short) six, size.

Se, and Si we seldom read in the beginning of words, other than those
recited, and some few more. But in lieu thereof we take Ce and Ci, as in Cell
(or private room) Cisterne etc. S in Se final sounds z, so does it in sie,
sy, sey, at the end of a word, as in Tansey, Quinsey, Kersey, which sound all
but zi, etc. except it follows one of these three Consonants, P, S, or T, as
in dropsy, massy, Chatsey, as also L in Chelsey, etc.

Sob, socke, sod, soft, sog, soke, solemn, some so.
(the Pronoune) Son (which we pronounce Sun) sop, sorry, sosse, sot, sow,
south.

Sub-till (where B sounds T) suck, sud, sue, Suffolk, su.
sully, sum (the Substantive for a quantity of money, etc.)

Scab, scaffold, scaine (which some write skeine) Sca.
scald, Scammony, scan, escape, scarce, scay (of little use.

Scepter, transcend, and whatsoever we derive sce.
from the Latin Verb scando, as ascend, descend, etc.

Priscilla, Priscian, etc. what shall occur from sci.
that (whence we take this combination) or any other tongue. Sce, and Sci,
sound always quasi Se, and Si, or Ce Ci: but sca, sco, scu, quasi ska, sko,
sku; Which are altogether in lieu thereof.

Scoff, Scog-gin, scope, score, scot, scould, sco.
scold, scour.

Scud, scuffle, scull, scum, scup-pit, scoope. scu.


This combination before A, O, and V, is unnecessarily Ska.
inserted, by reason we make very little use thereof, sko.
as I said in Sca, notwithstanding I grant they may be used, sku.
as well as sca, sco, scu, because they imply the same force. But the best of
our Orthographists in that kind use only C, I presume for this reason, in
respect the Latin admits no K, in it self, and it is our glory to come as nigh
the Latin as we can. But before E, and I, in that nature, Sk is always used,
and Sc, which before either of those vowels, imply no more but S (as I said
before) after the manner of the Latin.

Masked, Shelton, skeure, musket. ske.


Skip, skiffe, skill, skim, skin, skip, skit, skirt. ski.


This combination we had from the Greeks; though scha.
now it be our own, we make little use of it. In A, O, or V, Ch sounds K, as
in Schole (the name of a village) School or place of learning. But in E and I,
C is omitted in pronunciation, as appears in schedule; schism, which only
quasi sisme, as we generally pronounce it.

Scrabble, scrag, scramble, scrall, the Verb, scra.
scrap, scratch, scrawle, or bill in writing.

Screake, screek, screw. Descrie, scribbe, scrip, scre.
scro, scrot; scrue, scrub, Scroop. scri.


Shackle, shade, shad-dow, shaft, shag, shake, sha.
shall, shamway, shame, shape, share, shave.

Shed, she, shell, show, Shelfanger, the name she.
of a town.

Shib-ley, shift, shill, shim, shine, ship, Shirley, shi.
shit, Shipdham, the name of a town.

Shock, shod (for shooed) shook, shole, shone (the sho.
preterperfect tense of shine) shop, short, shot, show, shovell.

Shublie, shucke, should, shug, shuffle, shun, shut. shu.
S in the beginning of any word is always proper.

Shre, shrew, shri, shrift, shrib (a word of no use) shra.
shro, Shropham (the name of a village) shroud, shrow, which is better written
shrew: shru, shrub, shrump.

This combination is proper, though not much used (as you see) by reason of the
abundance of consonants, which the Latins especially abhor.

Slab, slack, slad, slake, slam, slander, slap, sla.
slat.

Misled (or mizled, of misle, or mizle) for that sle.
which comes of the compound Verb mis-lead, is misled. Sleeke, slender, sleep,
slept, slew.

Slick, slid, slift, slig, (a word out of use) slime, sli.
slip, slit, slive.

Slod, slop, slow. slo.


Slub-ber, slug-gard, slut. slu.


Smack, small, smart. Sma.


Smell, smelt. sme.


Smile, smit, smite. smi.


Smock, smote, smot. smo.


Smug, Smutter. Sme in the end of a word has its peculiar pronunciation, which
you shall see smu.
hereafter, when we treat of the Liquids severally.

Snack, snaffle, snake, snaile, Snape, snap, Sna.
snarle, snast.

Sneake, snellin, snew, the preterperfect tense of sne.
the Verb snow.

Snib, snick, snip, snirle (which some write snurle) sni.
snieze.

Snorle, snore, snot, snow, snort. sno.


Snuck, snuff. snu.


Spoke, spall, span, spare, spar, spat, spaw. spa.


Speck, sped, spell, spend, spert. spe.


Spice, spig-got, spike, spill, spindle, spit. spi.


Spoke (or spoke, the preterperfect tense of the Verb speak) O short: and
spoke of a Cart-wheele, spo.
where O is long: spot, sport, sporle, O long: spouse.

Spud, spue, the Verb, to vomit: spun, spurn. spu.


Squabble, squad, squall, squat, squeake. squa.


Squib, squit-ter. This combination is made little squi.
use of, but in words more barbarous. S proper, q sounds k, u, w.

Stab, stack, staff (quasi stafe, A long) stag, stake, sta.
stall, stam, stand, star, start, stave the Verb.

Steady, Sebbin, wor-sted, Stegwell, stealth, ste.
stem of systema, and steame or vapor, stip, Stephen, stew the Verb, stewed,
stews.

Stick, stiff, style, stiut, stip, stir, Styx for Hell sti.
among the Poets.

Stock, Stoke, stole, stolen, stop, stow. sto.


Stub, stuck, stud, stuff, Stuke, stunt, sturdy, stu.
stutter, stug (a vulgar word.)

Struck, Strand, straw, stray. stra.


Ministered, streake, Strelly, stretch, strew, the stre.
preterperfect tense of strew.

Strick, strike, strife, strive, strip. stri.


Strock, stroke, struck, strop, strove of strive, stro.
strew, de-stroy.

Struck, struggle, stumpet, strut. stru.


Swab, swack (an obsolete word) swaddle, persuade, swa.
swagger, swallow, swam of swim, swamp, swan, swap, swart, swear, swasher,
sweat, sweat (quasi swet, the preterperfect tense of sweat) swarve, sway.

Swell, swept, an-swer. swe.


Swib-ble (a barbarous word) switch, swill, swim, swi.
swine, swipe, swilke, Switzer, which we call Swisser.

Swore (for swear) of the Verb swear, sword, swo.
swound. In swound W is scarcely pronounced at all, and but moderately in
sword, and swore.

Swulke, swut, which is better both written and swu.
pronounced Soot.

Tabby (the name of a stuff) tackling, taffeta, Ta.
tag, take, tall, tale, tame, tammy, tan, tap, tar, tar-tar, taste, tatter,
tax.

Hoisted, teeke, tell, tele (a kind of wild-fowle) temz or temse, tend,
minister, tetter, teat, tew. te.


Tib, tickle, tide, tie, tiffle, tig, tike, till, tile, time, timorous, tin,
tine of a forke, tip, an-tique, ti.
tire, en-tice, adver-tise, it is (per Aphaeresin, for it is, contraction inter
Poetas usitatissima) which he that reads Poets must needs be acquainted with,
I short, in it is, S quasi Z.

Phthisick of Phthisis, a disease which the Greeks call (...), the Latins
Phthisis, or affactus marasmodes, and marasmus, we by the general term of
Consumption, as indeed it is Consumptio totius, etc.

Ptisand, or Ptizon: I set these words here as they occur, having no fitter
place, in regard of the general pronunciation of them. They be both Greek
words; neither indeed have we any such combination as either of them, in our
own tongue, for Ptolomie is a proper name and Greek word too. The first we
vulgarly pronounce quasi Tisick, the second Tisand, the third Tolomie, for to P
before T we scarcely give any sound at all, when it happens thus, as you see
very rarely; which made, I might not altogether omit them. But now to return
to Ti, from whence we are digressed.

Artist, abortive, ty or tie, the Verb.

To, the word being a sign of the Dative case, etc. to.
toe of a man's foot, the one always written with E, the other always without,
the sound all one: tow, such as women spin: Tod, a proper name, Toad a venomous
creature; tog, toll, or ring, quasi towle, Toll a proper name, o short, L
accented, or acute; and so Millars toll, toll-booth, etc. tome, tone, top,
tore, toss, totter, stove, or hot bath, toy, tose quasi toze.

Tub, tuck, stud, tuft, tug, tuke, tull, tumbrell, tun, tu.
turkey, tussock, tut, improperly used in pronunciation, for to' t a
contraction of to it, where o ought to sound in a manner like oo dipthong.

Thack, a vulgar word, Thames, which we call Tames, thank, that, thaw, or
dissolve. Thaxton, a Tha.
proper name.

The, the article is always written with E single, as, the house, etc. but
thee in the oblique cases of the Pronoune the.
thou, is always written with ee dipthong. There ought like to be a
distinction of sound, though we seldom give it, between them. Thed, the
termination of some Participles, whose Verbs end in th, as bequeathed,
bequeath, and others whereby it is more properly expressed. Theft, them, then,
there, the Adverbe, and their the Pronoune (thus always in writing
distinguished, though in sound they seem all one.) Thetford, these, or these,
theeve (the Verb) which some write thieve, because thief is usually written
so. They whch sounds quasi they, gather, altogether, etc.

Thick, thigh of a man's body, (gh not sounded) thy.
thimble, thin, thine (in one Th has a brisk sound, in the latter a flat)
thir-ty, this, thite (a word only used among the vulgars) thy.

Thoke (used only of country people, and old women) tho.
those, thou, though.

Thumb, thurle (a word obsolete) thus, Thuxton. thu.
Th has originally a brisk air, or an aspirate and nimble faculty in
pronunciation, after the manner of the Greek TH or Theta (whose force it ought
to retain) whence I suppose the Saxons fetched it, for from them we had it.
Notwithstanding that tyrannical usurper Custom (brought in at first by
carelessness) has in many of our words wrested it from its proper and native
force, to a duller, more heavy, and flat sound, as in these, that, the, both
Article and Pronoune, them, then, there, and their, these, they, thou, thine,
thy, this, those, though, thus, thence: fatham (which some pronounce fadam)
brothell, further, thither, father, Northern, worthy, heathen; and generally
in words ending in there, thed, theth, theft, and their participles of the
present tense ending in thing, as brother, breathed, breaths (which is better
only breathes) and therefore we shall seldom use theth, as in our
Etymologicall part will further appear: bequeathest, bequeathing. And in words
ending in therne, as Southern. Whereto add burden, farthing, murder, and the
words we recited of this sort for th final in ath. The rest be all proper, as
in thank, theft, third, etc. In burden and murder, many pronounce Th, like d:
which promiscuous use of D and Th, descended hereditarily to us from the Saxons.

Thrace, thrall, thrumb, thrust, thruttle (which is obsolete.) Thra.


Thread, threaten (where Ea sounds but E short) threw of throw. three.


Thrive, Thrilkin, thrip, thrice, thrive, i short, the preterperfect tense of
thrive. thri.


Throb, through, throp (the termination of some few proper names) throw the
Verbs, throws, or through.
pains, belonging to a woman.

Thrust, etc. Th before R always proper. thru.


Thwart, thwack, thwilke (a word obsolete.) Thwa.


This combination I remember not any where properly used but in thwart, nor do
I commend the use, more than for necessity, of such as are thus tedious and
difficult to produce. Our best Masters that Latium ever knew, rejected them,
and let us strive to come as nigh them as we can.

Trab, tract, trade or handicraft, trade the preterperfect Tra.
tense of tread, in lieu of trod: trammell, train, trap, trattle, straw, tray.

Tread, tred, the termination of diverse words; tree.
trell likewise a termination, tremble, Trent, Trepan, distress, treat, trey,
an instrument Dairy-maids are well acquainted with.

Tribe, trice, tried (a participle of try) trig, trick, trim, Trincalo, trip,
trite, or worn out of use like tri.
the word.

Trod of tread, trough, troll, trot, trow, Troy, tro.
trowle, trouble, which we call truble.

Truck, true, trug, trull, trundle, trust. In this true.
combination nothing is difficult.

Twaites, twain, twelve, twine, twist. The first is a proper name, the second
grown out of fashion, Two.
the third and last necessary and proper, the fourth useful enough. More I
remember not: their pronunciation is not hard.

Evade, Vafer, valley, vamp, vant, vant-guard, Va.
T not sounded, varlet, vast, Vaux commonly called Vosse.

View, ved, an usual termination of many Participles, ve.
vent, Verte, or light green, a term in Heraldry, vest, inveigh.

Vice, provide, vie, village, vinyard, virtue, or virtue, ad-vise, revive. vi.


Vogue (or agitation, a French word) volley of shot, vote, vow. vo.


V in the beginning of a syllable before any other vowell, is always a
consonant, as like before E final, vu.
as we already said. But in English it never precedes it self in the same
combination; in Latin often, as in vultus, and what comes of volo, etc. except
in the word vulgar, and the derivatives thereof, which we have immediately from
the Latin word vulgus.

Wade, wafe, a word little used; wag, weigh, quasi wai, wake, wall, wamble,
wan, of win the Verb; Wa.
wane, or decrease of the Moon, ware, war, was, wash, wave, way, wait,
Walter, which we call quasi Water.

Web, Wecker, wed, we, wef, week, well, wen, wept, were, were, west, wet,
weave. we.


Wicked, wide, widow, wife, Wigmore, wild (i long) wimble, wilderness, i
short; wine, window, wi.
wipe, wire, wish, wit, wive the Verb; Wix.

Wood (quasi wud) woe the substantive, o long, for woe.
misery; woo, or sue, which some write woe, but falsely; wooke, or awoke,
awaked, of the Verb wake; wool, quasi wul; womb (O long, B not sounded) wone
or wan, of win the Verb. Wort, worse (where note that O after W, before R,
sounds always U, as wort, quasi wurt, etc. wot, worsted, worrey, which we call
vulgarly wurrow.

W never precedes u in any word that I remmember, but always assumes o in lieu
thereof.

Where note, that W in the beginning of any word or syllable, is always a
Consonant: and never used as a vowell, but in the ends of words, or sometimes
for difference sake, being put after a Vowell in the nature of a Tripthong,
etc. except only that Custom has so prevailed to write it in some few words
in lieu of u, as persuade, swear, sword, etc. where it has the same force
with u.

Whale, wharle, whart, what, whay. Wha.


When, where, whet, wheat, whence, whether. when.


Whine, whim, whip, whirlwind, whist, white, whi.
why.

Who, the pronoune, whose, whom, (in these o who.
sounds oo dipthong) whole, whore, o long, w not pronounced.

Wrack, wrangle, wrap, wrestle, be-wray. Wra.


Wrest, wret, wren, Wretham, E short. wre.


Wright, as mill-wright, etc. write, the Verb, to write with a pen, where you
may note their difference wri.
in Orthographie. Wring, writ of write, and Writ or Prorsus in Law. Wrie, or
wry, awry, etc.

Wrong, wrote, of write; Wroxham, a towns wro.
name.

Wrung, the preterperfect tense of wring; Wrungey. wru.


Example (which the vulgar sort call Sample) exempt. Xa.


Exemplify, Xenophon a Grecian Philosopher. xe.


Exiled or exiled. Exotique, exustion, which indeed xi.
is ex-ustion of exuro.

This we have from the Greeks, and (as you see) rarely used in any English word
but example, and the derivatives thereof. The rest where X precedes are chiefly
Greek.

Yaune, or rather yawne, for to gape; yag, a vulgar Ya.
word.

Yap, or little curre; yard, yall.

Yell, yes, yet, yield, yesterday. ye.


You, youth, yonder, young, yonker (a barbarous word) yolke of an egg, which
they commonly call yo.
yelke. Y before a vowell always consonant.

Zanche (a Scottish name) zealous, row-zed. This Za.
we have like from the Greeks. For zeal comes from Zelotes, the Greek word,
etc. And thus much of syllables ze.
mixed.

Of the four Liquids, L, M, N, R, when they happen in the end of a word.
NOtwithstanding in the division of Consonants, I merrily said, Liquids were
only made to suit a Ladies mouth: yet in respect experience finds the
necessity, that enforces the general acceptance of them in our Tongue; I have
thought good to propose this little Treatise of them in peculiar: the rather,
in regard I have, in the syllables mixed, as occasion was offered, so often had
relation hereto.

Liquids therefore (which the Latins call Liquidae) take their denomination
from their clearness of sound; as, of all the consonants, coming nighest the
perfection of a vowell; which we above the Latins or any other Language, by
Trial in some cases approve. And this may serve for a description of them, to
wit, such semivowels as can partly of themselves produce an imperfect syllable.
Their number four, viz. L, M, N, R, common both to the Latins and us. Their
use in some cases more with us than them, in some less. For in the beginning
or middle of a word, we need not their distinction; unless it be, because L
and R be most incident to combinations, under any other consonant, wherein
there is an aptitude of combining. But in the end of many words their fault is
such, that whereas the Latins call them but semivowels, or half vowels, they
deserve of us to be entitled three-quarter vowels at least, in that the chief
force of the syllable relies upon them. For example, when any Liquid after
another Consonant in the same syllable terminates a word, as only joined with
E final, or Es plural, where E is the same. The pronunciation of that
syllable consists chiefly by virtue of the Liquid, as in ble, bles; cre, cres;
sme, smes; gne, gnes, etc. which we will more particularly instance, in words
exemplar. Where note L, and R, are the two Principle, as of most use in this
kind, and combined with most consonants: The other two less useful, and more
rarely happening.

L therefore may be thus combined under b, c, d, f, g, k, p, s, t, x, z. as in
fable, uncle, fidle, trifle, struggle, sickle, apple, misle, castle, axle,
drizle, which some write drisle, nor do I disallow it. These taken in the
plural number of such as be substantives, produce these words, fables, uncles,
fidles, trifles, sickles, apples, castles, axles; and in the third person
singular of such as be Verbs, come Struggles, misles, drizles, etc. and diverse
other of the same nature, proceeding from these consonants. Their pronunciation
we will specify under one general head of them altogether; when we have
examined the rest.

R generally may be combined under b, c, d, f, g, p, t, w. But taken in the
sense, is seldom put after any but c, g, and w. In many words with the two
former it remains invariable in this kind, as in acre, maugre, etc. Combined
with w, in this imperfect manner, may, and often is altered by interposing the
E between W and R, and so made a perfect syllable, as in tower, or tower, both
which be according to Orthography. Notwithstanding I most commend the latter
altogether, as a substantive; the former as a verb for distinction sake.

M in our English Tongue is only combined under S, as appears by the table of
syllables mixed.

N only under G at the end of a word, and that for the most part in such words
as we take immediately from the Latin, as condign, of condignus; oppugn, of
oppugno the Verb; benign, of benignus; etc. M we find thus combined, chiefly
in words either mediately or immediately coming from the Greek; as will
appear by comparing this place with our treatise of asme, in the syllables
mixed.

The manner of pronouncing them is thus as follows. Frame your voice as if you
would sound all the letters, and withal the E; but so soon as you have
pronounced the two consonants, there stop, and omit the E. As for example.

ble, in fable, Pronounce as they were only bl, quasi fabl. cle, in uncle,
Pronounce as they were only cl, quasi uncl. dle, in fidle, Pronounce as they
were only dl, quasi fidl. fle, in trifle, Pronounce as they were only fl,
quasi trifl. gle, in angle, Pronounce as they were only gl, quasi angl. ple,
in graple, Pronounce as they were only pl, quasi grappl. tle, in mantle,
Pronounce as they were only tl, quasi mantl. cre, in acre, Pronounce as they
were only cr, quasi acr. gre, in aegre, Pronounce as they were only gr, quasi
aegr. sme, in baptism, Pronounce as they were only sm, quasi baptism. gne, in
benign, Pronounce as they were only gn, quasi benign.

And so in the rest, whenever they shall happen thus combined in the end of a
word. As likewise when these combinations befall with es final, being either
the plurals to these substantives of the singular number, or the third person
singular in the present tense of the indicatie mood of such as be Verbes, you
shall pronounce them altogether with the omission of E, as more plainly
appears in this ensuing Table.

bles, Being final, as in fables, You shall as they were bls, As if the words
recited were written fabls. cles, Being final, as in uncles, You shall as they
were cls, As if the words recited were written uncls. dles, Being final, as in
sadles, You shall as they were dls, As if the words recited were written
saddls. fles, Being final, as in stifles, You shall as they were fls, As if
the words recited were written stifls. gles, Being final, as in straggles, You
shall as they were gls, As if the words recited were written straggls. ples,
Being final, as in apples, You shall as they were pls, As if the words recited
were written appls. tles, Being final, as in mantles, You shall as they were
tls, As if the words recited were written mantls. cres, Being final, as in
acres, You shall as they were crs, As if the words recited were written acrs.
gres, Being final, as in tigres, You shall as they were grs, As if the words
recited were written tigrs. smes, Being final, as in baptismes, You shall as
they were sms, As if the words recited were written baptisms. gnes, Being
final, as in oppugnes, You shall as they were gns, As if the words recited
were written oppugns.

Where though we have in these tables plainly demonstrated their pronunciation
by way of Orthoepie; yet in what concerns Orthography or right writing, E, in
these or the like words appertaining to either of the tables, ought not at any
rate to be omitted. Since it would argue a greater imperfection in our Tongue
to propose a syllable without the Character, than the force of a vowell, in
that we attribute a further faculty to the Liquids, than to the E, taken in
this manner: Which serves as a Cipher in Arithmetic, to fill up, or supply a
room, but only to add the greater vigor to the precedent Letters. And
whereas some would have acres, Tygres, and diverse others of this kind, to be
written akers, tigers, etc. would custom so permit, I for my part should never
refuse the accepting a perfect syllable, for an imperfect: by imperfect
meaning, such as be produced without the perfect force of a vowell. For further
satisfaction in any thing hereto concerning, I remit you to my former
treatises; not loving Tautologies, more than for necessity.

Certain brief Rules of spelling reduced to a method.
BY spelling I understand the due ordring of syllables in a just proportion, as
they are to be together comprehended under their several accents: or a certain
way of attributing to every syllable its true quantity or measure in the number
of letters thereto belonging; whether as an integrall part of a word, or
constituting the whole.

To this is requisite first to know the number of syllables in every word, then
their division.

For the number, we will produce a general instance, though not without its
exceptions.

The Latins have it as an infallible and certain rule in this kind: That so
many vowels or dipthongs, as are in a word, so many syllables. But we must
frame it in the English Tongue with more circumstance, which shall be thus.

So many vowels, as occur in any word, to be produced under diverse accents,
or with several motions of breathing, so many syllables.

I put this distinction as a restraint to the generality of the rule, by reason
of these exceptions.

First of the dipthongs, where two vowels coming together, are jointly
comprehended under one accent.

Secondly, of the Tripthongs, where three vowels are together combined in one
syllable.

Thirdly, of E final; which (as I said before) serves either to make the
precedent vowelllong, that goes before it in the same syllable, as in
Alchy^mie, where A is short, and ale, where A is made long by E succeeding L:
or for a difference in the pronunciation of G, as in rang, of ring; and range
or stray, etc. Or to add some life and vigor to a Liquid in the producing a
syllable, as you lately heard in the liquids.

Lastly, of E in es final, by me already so often mentioned, to wit, when S in
the plural number is added to such words as exact E final in the Orthography
of the singular: for in this case, E in es has in it self no force; unless
the consonant preceding in the singular number, be either C, G, or S; and then
E in the plural number before S final, makes a distinct syllable, as in ace,
aces; age, ages; nose, noses: as likewise after either of these combinations
ch, or sh; as in Church, Churches; ash, ashes, etc. The same rule for es
plural in Substantives, holds in all respects effectual in es final in the
third person singular of the present tense of the Indicative mood. Wherefore I
shall not need to instance any further particulars, concerning that; unless I
would be unnecessarily tedious, which is far besides my meaning. As for
certain adverbs and prepositions which might hitherto be reduced, I refer
them to the Readers observation; least in striving to be so exact, I might
produce a mountain of a molehill.

These four exceptions therefore duly pondered, and had respect unto, the
number of syllables will easily occur, being otherwise equal with the number
of the vowels. And thus much for the number; now for the division of syllables,
as they ought to be distinguished truly one from another.

This then we will endeavor to illustrate in these few ensuing rules.

First therefore when two vowels come together in the middle of a word, not
combined, that is, not being a dipthong, but severally to be pronounced, then
for the division of the syllables, you shall take the former vowell, as proper
to the former syllable; the latter to the ensuing. Likewise when two consonants
come so together, put the one consonant to the former syllable, the other to
the latter, as in tri-vi-all, lar-ger. Except the two consonants occurring in
the middle of the word be one of the combinations instanced in the table of
syllables mixed, which be these, bl, br, ch, cl, cr, dr, dw, fl, fr, gl, gr, gh,
kn, pl, pr, ph, sc, sk, sh, sl, sm, sn, sp, sq, st, sw, th, tr, tw, wh, wr; for
all those combinations that are apt to begin a word, are likewise apt to begin
a syllable, and therefore ought not to be divided in the spelling. But
whenever they happen otherwise together, either several consonant doubled,
they be always distinguished in the division of the syllables; unless when it
happens in the end of a word, that two consonants be unnecessarily doubled, as
in be-ginne, which is no more but begin.

Secondly, when any single consonant thus occurres in the middle of a word of
diverse syllables, you shall end the precedent syllable at the vowell, and let
the consonant fall to that succeeds; for no syllable in the middle of a word
can end in a consonant, unless the syllable following has another to begin
withal, except it be in words derivative, or compounded, where every syllable
exacts the letters appropriate to the simple word, as shall anon be further
instanced.

Thirdly, when three consonants so happen together, you shall divide them in
this manner: If the first be a single consonant, and the two latter a
combination, take up the single consonant in the former syllable, and let the
other two fall to the latter: and so e contra; for it is requisite that two of
them be a combination, and be thus divided, unless perchance it may so happen,
that H interposeth the two extreme consonants (which very rarely is seen but in
the beginning of a word) and so make a semi-double combination; for then all
consonants fall to the latter syllable, as in be-shrew. These kind of
combinations be only in some peculiar words, and not much usual, especially
Chr, Phr, Scr, Sch, Shr, Str, Thr, more frequently occur.

4 If four Consonants come together (as more cannot) and make a double
combination, they must be equally divided. But if the first be a single
consonant, and the other combined, take up the single consonant, and let the
other three fall, as in con-straine, en-thrall: so e contra.

5 If three vowels come together, not being a Tripthong, or combined in one
syllable. If the former be a dipthong, and the other a single vowell, as in
bayard, take up the dipthong in the first syllable, and let the vowell fall to
the latter: and so on the contrary part.

6 If X, as it often does occur in the middle of a word, you shall always
take it up in the former syllable, though there be no other consonant follow
wherewith to begin the latter: because it implies the force of cs, which is no
combination that can begin a syllable (in the English or Latin, but usual in
the Greek) end it may, and frequently does.

Lastly, when two complete words are compounded, or together united in one, you
shall in the spelling have respect unto them, as they were both simple; as in
save-guard, which has but two syllables. The like is to be had in
Derivatives, or words derived, which have always relation to their primitives,
though sometimes by way of mediation, as in strength-en of strength;
strength-en-ing of strengthen, etc. where E in the middle syllable is often cut
off by Syncope, and made strengthening.

For a conclusion of this treatise, we will only add a word or two concerning
Ti in the middle of a word.

Ti, before a vowell that is to begin another syllable in the same word, is
always ci or si in pronunciation, except it follows X, or S; or that the
syllable following be but an addition to a complete word ending in ti,
happening usually in adjectives of the comparative and superlative degrees of
comparison; and participles, whose verbs had their termination in ti, or ty, as
in lofty, loftier, loftiest; mighty, mightier, mightiest. Pity, pitying,
pitied, etc. which be the usual terminations of such words. Or lastly, where
it precedes es final, as in cities, unties, where it is all but one syllable
etc. For in these cases ti remains allwaies proper, otherwise not. And so let
this suffice our present purpose concerning this subject.

Only here for the further practice of little ones, that These hard words
mentioned are wittingly omitted, perceiving the volume to arise to too big a
bulk beyond the Author his intention or expectation.
their parents may need to buy them no other book for the reading English, we
have here annexed some hard words confusedly composed, though in an
Alphabeticall order; and after them the first Chapter of S. Matthew, to inure
them a little to those Hebrew names.

Abbreviation, Acknowledgment, Addiction, etc.

The first Chapter of S. Matthew.
The book of the generation of Jesus Christ, the son of David, the son of
Abraham.

2 Abraham begat Isaac, and Isaac begat Jacob, and Jacob begat Judas and his
brethren.

3 And Judas begat Pharez, and Zara of Thamar, and Pharez begat Esrom, and
Esrom begat Aram.

4 And Aram begat Aminadab, and Aminadab begat Naasson, and Naasson begat
Salmon.

5 And Salmon begat Boos of Rachab, and Booz begat Obed of Ruth, and Obed begat
Iesse.

6 And Iesse begat David the king, and David the king begat Solomon of her that
had been the wife of Vrias.

7 And Solomon begat Roboam, and Roboam begat Abia, and Abia begat Asa.

8 And Asa begat Iosophat, and Iosaphat begat Ioram, and Ioram begat Ozias.

9 And Ozias begat Ioatham, and Ioatham begat Achaz, and Achaz begat Ezekias.

10 And Ezekias begat Manasses, and Manasses begat Amon, and Amon begat Josias.

11 And Josias begat Iechonias and his brethren, about the time they were
carried away to Babylon.

12 And after they were brought to Babylon, Iechonias begat Salathiel, and
Salathiel begat Zorobabel.

13 And Zorobabel begat Abiud, and Abiud begat Eliakim, and Eliakim begat Azor.

14 And Azor begat Sadoc, and Sadoc begat Achim, and Achim begat Eliud.

15 And Eliud begat Eleazar, and Eleazar begat Matthan, and Matthan begat Jacob.

16 And Jacob begat Joseph the husband of Mary, of whom was borne Jesus, who is
called Christ.

17 So all the generations from Abraham to David, are fourteen generations:
And from David until the carrying away into Babylon, are fourteen generations:
And from the carrying away into Babylon unto Christ, are fourteen generations.

18 Now the birth of Jesus Christ was on this wise: When as his mother Mary was
espoused to Joseph (before they came together) she was found with child of the
Holy Ghost.

19 Then Joseph her husband being a just man, and not willing to make her a
public example, was minded to put her away privily.

20 But while he thought on these things, behold, the Angel of the Lord
appeared unto him in a dream, saying, Joseph thou son of David, fear not to
take unto thee Mary thy wife; for that which is conceived in her, is of the
Holy Ghost.

21 And she shall bring forth a Son, and thou shall call his Name Jesus: for
he shall save his people from their sins.

22 (Now all this was done, that it might be fulfilled which was spoken of the
Lord by the Prophet, saying,

23 Behold a Virgin shall be with child, and shall bring forth a Son, and
they shall call his Name Emmanuel, which being interpreted is, God with us.)

24 Then Joseph being raised from sleep, did as the Angel of the Lord had
bidden him, and took unto him his wife:

25 And knew her not till she had brought forth her first borne Son, and he
called his Name Jesus.

But now it is time that we leave our childish digressions, and persist with
what more directly intends to our Scope. Supposing therefore the premises
instructions enough, for the spelling, and finding out any English word; or in
what may concern the letters either several or combined; it only remains,
that we say somewhat of the stops, or pauses, between sentence and sentence, for
the more renable (as we call it) and distinct reading. Which notwithstanding it
properly belongs to Orthography: yet by reason Orthographie and Orthoepie be
necessarily so concomitant (as being impossible to be perfect in the one
without the other) and we have so promiscuously used them, to show their
difference as occasion served; we have thought fit to insert this brief
peculiar treatise hereof, as a Conclusion to our English Orthoepie; especially
since we have made that the chief title to this little book (as chiefly
undertaking what thereto appertains) and that the knowledge of these stops or
points is no less conducible, and hypothetically necessary to distinct and
ready reading (the perfection of Orthoepie) than to Orthographie, or right
writing: though I will not further infer, knowing it so requisite to both.

These stops therefore are by the Latins termed Comma; Comma-colon; colon;
periodus; Interrogatio; Parenthesis; Exclamatio; Apostrophe, sive contractionis
nota, vel signum.

Their number (you see eight) their figure and use ensues.

The Comma has its place at the foot of the line, and is marked with a
semi-circular form like an half Moon decrescent thus (,) The use only in
long sentences, in the most convenient places to make a small pause for the
necessity of breathing; or in Rhetorical speeches (where many words are used
to one effect) to make a kind of Emphasis and deliberation for the greater
majesty or state of the Elocution.

The Comma-colon, as you see by the name, participates of both the Comma and
the Colon; The one retaining his proper place, the other above the figure thus
(;) This to the Ancients was not known; but now in no less use than
estimation, especially among Rhetoricians. Who in their long winded sentences,
and reduplications, have it as a constant pack-horse, to make some short
deliberation as it were of little sentences, as the Comma does of words; the
time of pause about double that of the Comma generally, which yet is very small.

The Colon (which we vulgarly call two pricks or points) is deciphered in the
form of two periods, the one at the foot, the other at the upper part of the
body of the line, thus (:) It is chiefly used in the division of sentences, and
exacts half the pause of a Period; and half as much again as a Comma-Colon.

The Period is only a single point, set at the lower part of the body of the
line thus (.) This is altogether used at the end of every speech or sentence,
as the name it self implies (being derived from the Greek) and signifies
conclusion. The pause or distance of speaking hereto appropriate is sometime
more, sometime less: for (setting aside the Epilogicall distinction, as it
terminates whole treatises) when in the middle of a line it cuts off any
integrall part of a complete Tractate, which goes not on with the same, but
begins a new line, it requires double the time of pause, that it does when the
Treatise persists in the same line: being then four times as long as a Colon,
which in the same line is but twice.

I remember my singing-Master taught me to keep time, by telling from 1, to 4,
according to the nature of the time which I was to keep, and I found the
practice thereof much ease and certainty to me, till I was perfect in it. The
same course I have used to my pupils in their reading, to inure them to the
distinction of their pauses, and found it no less successful.

But here you must take notice, that many times this point or period mark is
many times set after great or Capital Letters single; not for any pause or
distance of time, but only as a note of abbreviation of some propername, or
other word beginning with the same letter. Which you shall thus distinguish.
For if the point succeeds such a capital letter, it argues only an
abbreviation, and no time of pause: but if the great letter succeeds the point,
it argues only a period pause, and no abbreviation. For as in Orthography such
abbreviations ought to be marked with such a point; so every Period ought to
have a Capital Letter immediately succeeding.

The Interrogation point is figured thus (?) taking both name and use ab
interrogando. Being only used when any question is asked. The pause it
requires, is more or less according to the matter and seriousness of the
question, but generally the same with the common Period, as it ordinarily falls
in the middle of any treatise.

The Parenthesis has the figure of two semi-circles or half Moons crescent,
and decrescent, either inclining to other, thus (). For pause it requires as
little as may be; exacting rather a distinction of tone, than distance of time.
By reason the use of it only is, when any thing is introduced in a sentence,
which might be left out, and yet the other sentence remain entire.

The Exclamation point is most subject to interjections or conversions of the
voice. It takes the name ab exclamando, the use from signs of exclamation and
wonder. The mark it bears is this (!) The pause that belongs to it, is
likewise to be reduced to that of the Period.

The Apostrophe or mark of contraction is variously subject (according to the
place it possesses) to the three figures, Apharesis, Syncope, and Apocope: that
is, according as the contraction be in the beginning, middle, or end of a word:
as in 'twill, Apostrophe est Aphaeresis nota, for it will: in strengthening,
Syncopes: in the intent, Apocopes, etc. The mark, as you see, the same with the
Comma, only the difference is of place, in that this stands over the upper
part of the line where the contraction is; almost in the same manner that the
Greeks set their note of aspiration, where they intend to aspirate any vowell.
For pause of time, it has none belonging to it, and therefore not so properly
inserted among the points, or stops. But only as I thought it convenient, by
reason of the Character; which is necessary to be known and distinguished.

Taken in the two first kinds, that is, by way of Aphaeresis and Syncope, it
chiefly appertains to Poets, who use it very frequently. By way of Apocope, it
is incident likewise to Lawyers, as chiefly prone to cut off entailes, where,
in their writings, two words occur, whereof the former ends, and the latter
begins with a vowell, they usually combine these two words in one, by
contracting the last vowell of the former, and including it in the other (as it
often happens in such, as to augment their own liberties have infringed other
men's) especially E single, as in the intent, th'Archangell, etc. for the intent,
the Archangell, etc. where after the common course of the world, the weakest
go by the walls, or rather the worst, and the great word ingrosseth in the
lesser, like usurers and fishes. And thus much for Apostrophe.

This ensuing piece of nonsense I have only of purpose framed and hereto
annexed to exemplify further the use of the precedent Points in their several
kinds, per Erotema.

Are there any certain histories (I pray you, if I may not too much interrupt
you) that might induce a man of judgment to believe, that there are in nature
such creatures, as be called Anthropophagi, or maneaters?

Oh Heavens! that ever any Scholar should argue himself of so much ignorance,
as to propose such a question! Has not Pliny? Has not Isidore? Has not
Columbus? Has not Albertus? have not the best of natural Historians and
Geographers sufficiently depicted them? But whether they did it of their own
knowledge, as having seen them; or that they had it merely from the relation of
others, that I cannot tell. But they all agree in this: India (say they) has
certain Islands wherein such creatures be: America many; and some in Africa.
Thus India is called their harbor; America their nurse; Africa their home.
Travelers, Merchants, Historiographers, report, assure, relate, partly what
themselves have seen; partly what approved in their woeful companions, left to
be entombed in the bellies of those monsters: while they themselves with much
ado escaped, only to be the doleful narratours of so sad a story. But
whereas some Philosophers and Physicians stand to oppose, it cannot be in
nature, neither that man's flesh can nourish, or yield any nutriment: And
whereas, on the other side, some produce arguments from experience, of savage
beasts, that will eat, devour, and (had they sufficient thereof) would live
only by such; which argues they are nourished by it; and thereupon conclude,
if it affords nutriment to such savage beasts; why not to those creatures,
almost as savage as the wildest bruit (notwithstanding as men they be
potentially endued with reason; but that so restrained by the organs, and
limited to sense, as they may truly in a kind be termed Rationis expertes)
it is not here my purpose to dispute, having already said more of them than at
first I intended.

Now therefore come we to make good our promise concerning some peculiar rules
belonging to Orthographie. Wherein we shall endeavor to be as succinct as may
be, (least our little volume rises to too big a bulk) especially since we have
so fully satisfied occasion (perhaps above the Readers expectation) in our
Treatise of syllables mixed, where you may find many particulars might hitherto
be reduced.

Certain peculiar Rules of Orthography.
ORthography is the Art of right writing; as the Etymology of the name in the
Greek Tongue implies, and the common acception among Grammarians approves. The
difference between it and Orthoepie, who so understands their terms in Greek,
may easily comprehend: the one appertaining to right speaking, the other to
right writing. Orthography (according to the present use) is chiefly versed in
the Letters, in respect of their Quantity; to wit, as they be decyphered in
Capital or lesser Characters, and the knowledge how to dispose of these in
writing: viz. when to use great letters, when small. And on the relation hereto
shall our ensuing discourse be chiefly grounded. For to infer here a general
treatise of Orthography, according to the latitude of the term, how it has
reference to the Letters, both single and combined, and that as parts of a
word; and so proceeding methodo compositiva; to treat of these words, as part
of a sentence; and sentences, as the integrall parts of a complete treatise;
and how distinguished by the points: were in a circular gyre to bring about a
needless repetition of what we have already bent the aim of all precedent
discourse; and for our own purpose sufficiently discussed; and (I think)
enough to satisfy any reasonable capacity: If not, since it is facile inventis
addere, let any one enlarge the foundation which we (so far forth as our
knowledge extends) have first laid in our English Tongue. But now to return.
Concerning the use of the Capital Letters, therefore take these along with you.

1 Every Treatise, or written speech whatsoever, is to begin with a great
letter, that is, to have the first letter of the first word of the Treatise,
written or printed, with a Capital, or great Character, in what hand or
impression soever the discourse is to be delivered.

2 The same is to be observed in the beginning of every distinct sentence, or
clause. For (as I said before) after every period point must ensue a great
letter.

3 The pronoune, or word (I) must always be written with a great letter; so
must every proper name, or peculiar denomination of every individual: as all
the Attributes of God Almighty, the names of Angels, Saints, and evil spirits;
the titles given by the Heathens to their feigned Gods ard Goddesses; the names
of men and women of all sorts whatsoever; the names of months, winds, rivers,
Cities, towns, Islands and Kingdoms: the particular name of any peculiar dog,
horse, or beast of any kind soever: The first word of every verse, at least
Heroique: any letter set for a number, as you had in the beginning of our
Orthoepie: Any letter standing for any such, or the abbreviation as we there
mentioned.

Lastly, all names or Titles of Magistrates, Arts, Offices, and Dignities, in
what respect soever taken. In these, I say, altogether consists the use of
Capital Letters, in all other we use only the smaller.

Where you may take notice, That in the abbreviations I spoke of to be written
with great letters, I included not any such Charactericall abbreviation of a
word, as and for and, ye for the, yt for that; and a thousand more commonly
occurring, besides what every man has peculiar to himself, which only
experience and practice must make familiar to you: but those which are thus to
be distinguished; to wit, when you would abbreviate any word, whether proper
name, or other word usual in such abbreviations, which is to be expressed by
the first letter of the word, then are ye to use a great Letter in all those
Abbreviations, otherwise not. For examples, I refer you to our treatise of
Letters in genere, in the first part of the Orthoepie here specified, in this
little book.

The next caution after the great Letters is for E final, or when it falls in
the end of a word, that you never omit it, where it ought to be inserted:
whether for distinction sake, as in win, the verb, and wine, the substantive:
or only to make the precedent vowell long, as in shrine: or after v, to make
it a consonant, which otherwise seeming to be combined with the former vowell
in the nature of a dipthong, might so alter the pronunciation, as in love,
which without the E would be sounded like lou, in loud, so move, live, and a
great many more of the like kind: or for difference of diverse words ending in
G, as well substantives as verbs, as in rang, and range, etc. which I instanced
before.

Or lastly, when in es, terminating either verb or substantive, it ought of
right to be put for any of the uses above rehearsed. Because many times as it
makes a difference in pronunciation, so it much varies the sense: as in these
words, made, mad, Cage for a bird, Cag of bear, rid, ride, safe, saffron.
Dame, or matron of a family, dam of a mill, and damn the Verb, to condemn.
Sack, sake (where note as a general rule, that when any vowell before k sounds
short, we always write c before k; as in stick, or rack; but when the vowell
is to be pronounced long, we always write it with k single, and add E final
to it, as in rake, etc.) man, mane of an horse: gap, or breach, gape: Ware,
war; tune of a song, tun of wine: hid, hide; mile, mill, where the vowell
before L is short, we usually double L in writing. Pin, pine, etc. diverse of
this sort. And here likewise take notice of what we instanced in Orthoepie,
That when any word seems to end in S proper, the vowell being long, we always
write it with Ce, as in race, slice, mace, mice, etc. for (as I said) S in this
case sounds always Z, except where it is written as a difference between the
Substantive and Verb, where both sound alike, as in raze, or demolish, the
verb; and race, that such an one ran; or race of ginger; race of wine, etc.
where their sound is all one. But otherwise the Rule holds general without
exception.

Furthermore, diligent observation ought to be had in writing of such words;
where diverse words of several Characters, and that of diverse meanings, are
alike pronounced: for example, Rain that falls from the clouds, ought to be
written thus as you see: the Reign of a Prince thus: the reine of a bridle
(which we usually and better sound quasi rean) so as is here demonstrated.
Their, the pronoune; and there the adverbe, or in that place. Wait the verb,
and weight the substantive, or quantity. Write, when a verb, to play the Scribe
(as we call it) and wright when a Substantive, as in Shipwright, and the like.
Prophet of the old Law; profit or gain. Read, proper in the present tense: but
in the preterperfect tense both of verb and participle sounds E short, quasi
red, yet ought to be thus in writing distinguished from red the adjective, or
fiery-colour'd. Heard the verb, hard the adjective. Here in this place, I
hear. Deigne, or vouchsafe, sodeine. Some men, sum of money. Neigh of an
horse, and nay a note of denial.

Also all adjectives derived of the Latins, ending in us, we write ous, as in
glorious, frivolous, victorious. But all monosyllables hold proper, as thus,
not thous; us, not ous, etc. And substantives derived of the Latin, which they
terminate in or, we write our; as in labor, honor, vigor, etc. Except our
monosyllables, and verbs, as or, ought not to be written our, which is another
word. For, nor, abhor, of abhorreo; repercusse, of repercutio, etc. Trusse,
discuss.

Lastly, the Article A, (whereof herafter God willing, we will further inform
you in our Etymologicall part) and the pronouns My, and Thy, being to precede a
word beginning with a vowell, usually assumes in writing N, in the first
single; in the two last with E final, as an, thine, mine; to avoid in reading
the great hiatus, or kind of gaping in pronunciation, which otherwise it would
produce; as an Ass, not a Ass: thine ear, rather than thy ear: mine injury,
rather than my injury; but the two latter be more indifferent, than the former.
So on the other side must we not say or write, an lamb; thine bullock; mine
sheep: but a lamb, thy bullock, my sheep. And not like the vulgar sort, who
annex this N to the ensuing word, as a nox, a nasse, my nuncle, thy naunt; for
an ox, mine uncle, thine aunt, etc. You must therefore be very cautious to
shun in writing the barbarous custom of the vulgars in their pronunciation, as
shoen, for shoes, an ordinary fault in some countries, to put N, for S, and E,
for I; as mell, for mill; delited, for delighted, etc. setting aside the
absurdities used among the vulgar in Sommerset-shire, and other remote places,
as not worth the nominating, so much as by way of reprehension: but follow the
custom of the learned, and observe their use among Scholars. The rest I
refer to our precedent rules, and your own practice, and diligent
observation in reading Classical Authors.

For a Conclusion therefore of this our first part of the English Grammar,
whereas Quintilian advises in the Latin Tongue, that Orthography should be but
as the Custos, or Depositour of Orthoepie, as a careful steward: and so by
consequence, that one should maintain the other: when he wills them by way of
institution to speak, as they write; and write as they speak, for their
further ease in avoiding multiplicity of rules: I could wish the same in our
English Tongue; but must have patience to expect, till time and further
industry have reduced it to a further method and perfection, by refining and
purging away those gross corruptions which so tumifie it with unnecessary
surfeits: Which for my part I should be glad to see; that there might be no
just allegation, why we should not have all the liberal Sciences in our own
Tongue, as well as France, Spain, and other Countries. It would, no question,
be a great furtherance to real knowledge. But in that kind I shall not be the
first to innovate, though I lay this stone for others to work upon, to build a
larger prospect for the pleasure of my Contrymen, and benefit of strangers.

Thus courteous Reader, Lege, perlege, elige, dilige; Qui te diligit, in
CHRISTO JESU. S. D.

Certain brief Notes, or Directions, for writing of Letters, or familiar
Epistles.
As Well in regard of my promise in the prescription or Title page; as to
satisfy the request of some peculiar friends, finding perhaps the general
defect (as well in themselves as others) of some illustrations in this kind: I
have annexed these few directions in general, for the inditing and writing
Letters (as we term them) or familiar Epistles, intended only for the benefit
of children, women, and persons either altogether ignorant in this respect, or
discontinued. As for Secretaries, and those who can better help themselves, I
leave them to their own practice, and observations. For to undertake to reduce
this confused quality, faculty, or art, (or whatsoever term you will attribute
unto it) to any certain method, or classical precept; or to seek out a radix,
consisting of such principles, whereon every particular must ex hypothesi
depend (would I, or any Secretary more commendably versed in those ways,
attempt it) as we should find it a work no less tedious than difficult, and
almost impossible (unless it were possible to know every private man's
occasion) so might we to little purpose and effect frustra oleum and operam
dare, since Quot homines, tot sententiae; and it is connaturall for every one,
that is able to apprehend, to like his own imagination best. Neither would
ever any of the Latins (who knew too well several men have their several
occasions) take such a burden upon them, in a tongue more incomparably pure;
and times far more addicted to industry and knowledge, in what concerned both
speculation and practice. Macropoedius (I know) showed a will to do somewhat
herein, and prescribed certain general rules; but such as would better suit
an Oration, than a familiar Epistle, which delights in brevity and plainness.
The Paradigma's or examples there, be well and commendable; but not consorting
the stream of English Secretaries, more taken with Seneca's succincter style.
But for examples, I refer you to others, since there are every where enough
to be had, intending only to deal by way of Instruction.

In the framing of Letters, we are to have respect to our selves, and the
quality of the Person to whom we write. For, as it behooves us not to use
always, and to all persons a like phrase, or manner of writing, so ought we to
be cautious in the performance of it respective, that is, without prejudice to
our selves, or derogating from the party to whom it is written. If therefore to
our Superior, or one of rank above us; then are we to frame our style in a
lowly and humble manner, yet (habito scriptori respectu) according to the
distance of degree; the worth of both the objects; and the subject of our
Letter. For, it befits not a Gentleman to use those submissive and incroaching
terms to one of higher state, and fortunes; which may well become a Peasant to
one of far meaner rank. Neither would we endeavor to insinuate our selves so
far in any other respect, as when we have some suit to prefer, or some
request to make. And in general, it is more tolerable to be argued of too
plain a style, (so as I said, it be done with due respect) than by any
Rhetorical flashes of elocution, to incur the censure of a Sycophant, as it
is incident and usual to such as use many words to little purpose, to be
either rejected as idle and impertinent; or else suspected of some farther plot,
than perhaps the party himself is guilty of. Let therefore your Letters of
what nature soever, be as succinct as possible may be, without circumlocutions,
which be tedious to Persons of quality, and such as have much business. And if
it be so, as they be replete with matters of consequence; come presently to the
business of most importance, conveniently introduced: then persist in order:
for otherwise, if your Letter be copious, and carries not (as the Proverb
says) meat in the mouth, or matter at the entrance, it may hazard (if not
well solicited) to be cast by, without so much as once reading over, as I have
known some my self among men of worth, who have been much employed.

This I speak not though, utterly to debar the use of civil Complement,
which is both requisite, and no ways inconvenient, so it be used with
discretion, and not (as they say) to make a pain of pastime. Complement
therefore is most seasonable, when it accompanies either present or visit, I
mean as well in paper as in person. And that always better introduced in the
close of a Letter, than at the beginning; unless the whole subject be only by
way of complement, and nothing concerning any serious business. A thing
ordinary, and many times expected between friend and friend, upon occasions of
writing offered. And then is afforded liberty of using wit, and readiness of
Genius, to such as be endued with pregnant fantasies; having still a care not
to be over-shot by selfe-opinion; least a flash of windy matter produce such
bubbles, as carry no other substance, but only to vapor into air; or perhaps
turn worse than nothing.

If it be to be written to one inferior or some degrees beneath you; be
plausible and courteous to win respect and love: but not too familiar: since
too much familiarity breeds contempt, especially among people of the meanest
sort, most apt in such cases to forget themselves.

If to a stranger of equal rank, show courtesy in a full proportion, yet
clothed with a petty kind of state; as well to avoid all suspicion of
intrusion, as to show a kind of niceness in intimating too sudden
familiarity. For wise men will consider, things easiliest wun, are most easily
lost; and he that comes fastest on, goes quickliest off. Give me the
friendship comes slowly by degrees, for that is most likely to attain
perfection, and longest to continue, as having the surer ground for a
foundation of it.

If to a servant, let love and mildness so proceed, as may not loose its
distance; for, too much rigor loses the servant, and too much love the
Master; who may easily discern love from a servant tempered with a little awe,
is always most available to the Master; as acts voluntary go beyond
enforcements.

If to a Master, let the style be such as may demonstrate all obsequy and
duty. This I speak in respect of servants (as servants) in general: not, but
that I know, as there are differences and diverse degrees of Masters, so ought
there several respects to be had to servants, according to their place, and
manner of service. For it were absurd to think, that Gentlemen in those places
that may befit their rank and fortune, though subject to their masters call,
should be tied to the obsequious terms of every pedantique Groom. As first,
he that waits voluntary, and at his own expense; then Secretaries in their
several ranks; then such as serve in the places of Gentlemen, as Ushers, and
the like. Then Clarks to men eminent, and of quality; and Clarks appertaining
to Offices, Factors, and Apprentices (especially about London) men perhaps (as
is usual in that kind) better derived than their Masters. In this respect, I
say, ought the servant to consider the relation, or respect to be had,
according to his Masters rank, his own person, and the nature of his service.
yet generally speaking, all servants (as servants) of what nature or calling
soever, ought as well in writing as otherwise, to show a kind of respect
extraordinary. Though (as I said) some be tied to terms more incomparably
strict than others.

If we write to a Parent, our style and manner of writing must be such, as may
show all dutiful respect and obedience, exacted from a Child to a Parent, by
the Laws of God and Nature.

If to a father or mother in law, that is by marriage, we will tender our
selves in such terms, as may profess service and obedience; but not duty: At
least, not equal to the former: though I grant, we ought to think our selves
tied in a firm obligation of civil, and more than common respect.

If to a child, love and care: But the passionate expressions of tender
affection, better fit a mother, than a father: for men ought to govern their
affections by the rule of reason, least otherwise they chance to set a bad
example of letting loose the reins of passion, of it self too apt to run out
of one error to another.

In a word, if to a friend, friendly. If to an adversary, harsh, as you think
good, according to the nature of the offense, and quality of the person
offending. But not railing, or too invective; which will argue more passion,
than judgment or discretion, and be a means to make other men suppose a want
in you of somewhat might make you rightly capable of an injury.

But if it be to a familiar and intimate friend, you shall be restrained to no
other rule, but only your own imagination, and the best liking of your friend,
according as you shall observe his conceits most addicted, or inclined this way
or that. Only take it as a general and infallible rule, let the body of your
letter be succinct and pithy, such as may express much matter in few words:
and let that be your greatest study by way of inditing: And by the way of
writing to have respect to Orthography, according to those rules we have before
prescribed. But to come with a bundle of Circumquaques, after the manner of the
vulgar sort: whose common custom is to begin their Letters thus (Loving
friend, The occasion of my writing unto you, at this present time is, to let
you understand, that I should be very glad to hear you are in good health, as
I am at the writing hereof, God be blessed therefore, etc.) on in a whole
bederoule of ribble-rabble is most ridiculous and absurd, in the sight of one
which knows the manner of inditing. For to be glad to hear of their welfare,
is implicit in the title of friend: and to send word of your health, it
suffices to tell if it be not so: if not, the other is easily imagined. And so
many prayers and thanksgivings as some put in, were better spent in their
closet, where no air might circumvent them, than inserted in ordinary letters
(excepting such as pass between man and wife; parent and child) which passing
through so many hands, may chance to get infection; or at least exposed to the
wind and open air, may chance cool their fervor of devotion. But here we
likewise exempt Apostolical benedictions, sent from Ministers (befitting their
function and calling, and answerable to the Word of God) who in that rightly
imitate the worthy President S. Paul in his Epistles.

Having therefore marked or creased (as we call it) out the paper (which ought
to be in folio, or in quarto, that is an whole sheet, or an half sheet
doubled) and having in the top, after the usual custom (especially writing to
persons of worth and quality) left a sufficient space for a vacuum, and as
ample a margent (but that is to be ordered more or less, according to the
quantity of your paper, and the subject, whereon you are to write) then in the
first place are you to order the superscription, or the title to be attributed
as an entrance. For your assistance wherein, you shall (as I said before) have
respect to the quality of the person to whom it is written, and your self; and
that whether as an acquaintance, or stranger; intimate, or less familiar;
having relation or dependence either of other, or not; friend, or adversary,
etc. and then order your title in this manner.

If therefore it be a Lord (for higher I will not ascend, presuming any, to
whom these be directed, to have little intercourse with Emperors, Monarchs,
Kings, Princes, Dukes, Marquestes, Earls, etc. or if they have, let them seek
other assistance, or send to us, and we shall do our endeavor to supply their
want) if it be so, as he holds his title only by some place, or dignity, by
way of Office or Magistracy, we seldom superscribe any other title than, My
Lord, and by the way, still in the body of your Letter, put him in mind of his
Lordship, and now and then his honor, etc. If he be a Count, or Baron, by
descent of noble pedigree, our title is chiefly, Right Honorable: Right
Honorable, and my very good Lord (this from a retainer, or one that has
dependence on his honor) Most noble and illustrious Sir, Right Honorable and
renowned Sir, and diverse others to this effect. And from a Gentleman only, My
Lord, will suffice. But still we ought in addressing our speech to him, to do
it with the attribute of His Honor, and now and then for change we may say,
Your Lordship, or, Your good Lordship, from one of meaner rank. To a Baronet,
Honored Sir, as the most usual and befitting title to such a degree: which is
likewise often attributed to other Knights, and sometime to Esquires, and other
Gentlemen, by way of Complement. Gentlemen writing to Knights and Baronets,
often give only the title of Sir, and noble Sir; worthy, or most worthy Sir;
sometime Most Noble, and the like. But I like the plainest best, especially
when one has much business, and little leisure to complement. The usual
superscription from one inferior, or of meaner rank is, Right worshipful,
etc. sometime Right renowned, or right worthy Sir, and this comes sometimes as
a Rarity from a punie Scholar, as tumbling from his thumping pen. And under
the degree of a Gentleman, or a Gentleman's mate, it behooves in writing to have
his or your Worship, by the end along, so often as his speech has relation to
the Baronets or Knights person. From a peasant, your good Worship will not do
amiss. But from a Gentleman, ridiculous; as arguing little breeding. One
Gentleman or Esquire writing to another, usually attribute only the title of
Sir, especially if strangers, or less intimate: if better acquainted, many
times some other addition, of Noble, Worthy, Courteous, Generous, Kind, and
the like, according to their intimacie, affection, and difference of eminency
and fortunes. Sometime, if very intimate, more familiar terms, which they
ordinarily use in discourse. But from one of a meaner sort, or not a Gentleman,
would be thought a sauciness, or arrogance at least, to do so; unless from
such make-sports, as Gentlemen make use of only to fool with. From a
Tradesman therefore (of the ordinary sort I mean) writing to an Esquire, the
title of Worshipful Sir, or Worthy Sir, or the like, and now and then to pull
your Worship out of his pocket (especially if to one any ways eminent or of
quality) is no more than beseeming and requisite. To less eminent, or of mean
fortunes, or younger houses, Sir, will suffice. The like ought to be observed
in farmers, and countrey-people, of meaner rank. Gentlemen of quality, whether
Knights, Esquires, or other Gentlemen of worth and fortune, writing to Yeomen
of the more substantial sort, such as go under jurisdiction of the common
attribute Mr, and whom such men please to make their companions in table and
discourse, if they be any thing intimate, usually begin their title, Honest
Thom. Kind Ieffrey, Good Will such an one, etc. if less acquainted, or when
they are to be beholding to them for any courtesy, then it will not be amiss
to hang on their noses, as spectacles, at first entrance, Mr such, or such an
one, etc. writing to any kind of Scoggin, or hanger on, or the like, then
nothing but Dick, Thom. etc. I prithee do such a thing, etc. To an ordinary
yeoman or tradesman, Goodman, etc. is a good beginning. But always let
Scholars and younger Brothers give the highest of his attributes to any
wealthy man, for it is the money, and not the man they are to respect and court.
But in personating a Letter from one to another under the degree, or at least
the title of a Gentleman, he will be accounted more woodcock than wise, that
shall study any other complement, than to begin with the ordinary title
appropriate to them, and so persist. The same kind of common title appropriate
to the Person, is to be used in civility, when we write to one we hold as an
adversary, as to a Knight of what sort soever, Sir such an one, etc. To an
Esquire, if much above our rank, it is decent to say Sir, if not the same that
to a Gentleman. If to a Gentleman of what rank or nature soever, Mr such an
one, putting in his surname. If under, then Goodman thus or thus; or from a
Gentleman to one much inferior, John, Thomas, Richard, So and So, etc. And
thus much for titles or superscriptions. This is usually placed in the first
corner in the margent space, above the body of your Letter. But I had like to
have forgot the Ecclesiastical title of Reverend Sir, or Most Reverend, etc.
according to their worth and dignity. Having therefore thus instanced the
several sorts of Superscriptions, we will now come to the Subscriptions, (for
the body of a Letter can be reduced to no precise or particular rule, without
too much needless labor and innovation) and in general, we have already said
what we determine.

The same general rule therefore, that ties you, in the superscription and
body of the Letter to have respect to the party to whom you write, and your
own individual person, ties you to the same conditions in the subscription,
and indorsement, or outward superscription, which we be still to treat of.

To a Baron therefore, or to a Lord, we usually subscribe thus. Your honors
most humble servant, My Lord, Your eternally devoted Honourer, and thrice
humble servant. Your Lordships most faithful and most humble servant. Your
Lordships till death, Your Lordships to command, Your Honors most obliged,
etc. diverse of this sort. Subscriptions indeed as common as Hackney horses on
Dunstable rode, to meaner persons than Barons, or Knights either, only leaving
out Honor and Lordship. But Your thrice humble servant, and the like, I have
often heard from such as (I presume) understood not the word.

From Gentleman to Gentleman, if equal, and acquainted, then Your assured
friend to serve you, Your truly respective friend, or the like. But if less
acquainted, or different in degree, There is so much service professed, as they
forget all friendship. Nothing then but Your servant, Your humble servant, Sir,
at your command, and the like innumerable, which I leave to observation and
practice. Only take this by the way, that one of inferior rank writing to a
person eminent in degree above him, by the Laws of our best Secretaries, shall
commonly write his name at the foot of all the Letter, or paper, be it never so
large, and the contents never so small, to show his acknowledgement of
distance. The other subscription about middle distance, between the body of
the Letter, and the name. And that either double or single, as occasion is
offered of your expression, and the quantity of space, or void paper. Sometime
they make it in a treble space, by interposing My Lord, or Sir, or noble, or
worthy Sir, and the like, according to their degree. From an inferior person
to a Baronet or Knight, Your Worships most humble servant, Your Worships to
command in all due respect, and the like. The same is to be observed in one of
mean rank, to an Esquire, especially if of worth, or any wise eminent. To or
between men of ordinary quality, whether under the title of Gentlemen, Citizens
and tradesmen, or the like, the usual subscription of Your loving friend, Your
very loving friend, Your assured, Your faithful, Your true, (and sometime,
Your respective friend, for change, or where the party written to has the odds
in estimation) is most commendable. In brief notes, no more but Yours, N. N.
To a Gentleman of ordinary quality from an inferior person, Your servant,
Yours to command, etc.

To an adversary, Yours as you use me. Yours to use, but not abuse. Yours if
you please; if not, mine own. Yours as I see cause. Yours when not mine own,
and the like, as your judgment, and the occasion offered shall suggest.

To a servant under hire, from a Gentleman of rank, only his name. To such as
are tied to less servile conditions, or from Masters which are of meaner
degree, Your loving Master, Your very loving Master, Your assured etc. To a
retainer only, or voluntary waiter, Your loving friend, N. N. etc. To a parent,
Your dutiful, Your most dutiful, or, Most dutiful and respective, Dutiful
and most obedient, till death, etc. whether son or daughter. To a child, Your
loving father, Your affectionate mother: Affectionate is likewise much used
between friend and friend, especially Lovers. Your truly careful, etc. diverse
in this kind, which we leave to observation. And thus much for subscriptions.

Having thus written or subscribed your Letter, date it from such or such a
place, and set down the day of the month, and (if much distance interposeth
the writer and the party written to) the year, after the usual manner of
dating. The place allotted for the date is in the margent space, just under the
superscription, or title, a little beneath the body of the Letter. This done,
fold up your Letter after a decent order, and seal it. To a person of quality
we usually propose it in a large fold, kept very fair. To others at your own
discretion, especially of equals. Now therefore only rests, that we say
somewhat of indorsements, or outward superscriptions, and so commit them to the
Post.

Your title on the indorsement to a Lord shall be, To the right Honorable,
Thomas (or whatsoever other Christian name) Lord such or such an one, adding
the highest of his titles, at such a place, these present. To the right
honorable and his very good Lord, of or from one of any dependence. To the
right honorable and most noble, Most renowned, Right illustrious, etc.
multitudes of Epithetes in this kind. To a Baronet from a Gentleman, To his
most honored friend, Sir N. N. and Much honored and most noble friend, Most
worthy, Very noble, Renowned, etc. as you (...) think fit. The same we commonly
use to any other Knight: but especially to a Baronet is appropriate the title
of Honored. From a person of meaner quality, To the right worshipful, Sir N.
N. at such a place, etc. If in any familiarity, To the right worshipful and
his most honored friend, etc. From an inferior person, To the right
worshipful and most worthy Sir N. N. or the like, leaving out friend. From one
Esquire or Gentleman to another, various, in respect of intimacy, degree,
affection, or courtesy: To his noble friend: To his worthy, approved, much
respected, much esteemed, much honored; and to meaner, Very loving, etc. From
an inferior person to an Esquire or Gentleman of worth, To the worshipful:
The rest he may take out of the precedent Epithetes. From a Gentleman to such
an one, To his loving friend, etc. To a parent, To my most endeared etc.
Father, Or Mother: To a child, To my loving son or daughter; To my dear, or
tenderly respected, or beloved, may do well enough from a mothers affection.
From one inferior person to another, To my loving, To my very loving, To my
approved friend, and the like of this sort best befits. To an adversary, For
Sir such an one at such a place, For Mr, or Goodman so or so: For Tho. For
Richard, etc. according to the quality of the writer, and the person written
to. Only setting his name with his common attribute, the place whither it is
directed, with For, instead of To his, or my etc. And now I think it will be
time to conclude, for the Carrier is in have.

This therefore shall suffice to satisfy our present purpose concerning this
subject. Only take this by way of peroration.

1 Let your Letter be kept fair, without blots, or soiling, especially to one
of superior rank.

2 Be cautious, by way of Orthography, to write true English.

3 And lastly, (what I have often instanced) let your Letters be succinct and
pithie; A quality incommendable estimation and practice among our modern
Secretaries; and no less pursued among the ancient Latins. For who in his
familiar Epistles more succinct than Cicero? In Orations, and otherwise, who
more profuse? The rest I leave to observation, easily enough to be acquired,
since many of our Secretaries have a singular faculty in that kind. This I
have written for such as want instructions; for those that be better able to
help themselves, I shall be glad and thankful to be instructed by them. Non
omnia possumus. I confess it incident to humane imperfection, and to my self
most peculiar. But Nihil est pudoris vel discere, vel melius addiscere. At
least always so reputed by me.

S. D.
Laus Deo.
FINIS.

