A PROTESTATION AGAINST POPERY BY way of a Confession of Christian Religion
collected for the benefit of private friends.

Apoc. cap. 18. ver. 2. Cecidit, Cecidit Babylon illa magna.

Senec. in Troas. -- Haemanus Troiam erigent?
Nullas habet spes Troia, sitales habet.
AT OXFORD, Printed by Joseph Barnes, Printer to the University. 1607.

(...).
I unfeignedly believe that there is one immortal uncompounded unlimited
Essence which created this world and furnished the shop thereof with wonderful
variety: who since does guide and govern the same by a prescribed and regular
order, taking immediate notice not only of Angels offices and men's actions, but
of every yea the smallest and basest thing in the world, not permitting any
thing to the lust of fortune or command of destiny this supernall power J call
God, and avow him to be the maintainer and rewarder of virtue, the revenger and
judge of wickedness, and J ascribe unto him heaven for his throne, and the ball
of the earth for his footstool, and J subject unto his absolute command all
the powers of heaven and earth, and render unto him obedience prayer and
thanksgiving for his tribute.

That there is such a God J appeal unto the conscience of the most desperate
forlorn wretch in the world, tell me whosoever thou be that have thy
conscience most deaded and seared with a hott iron, when thou committest a
sin, and think that thou have a veil cast before the eyes of God, and
resoluest thus in thy heart, Who sees me? J am compassed about with darkness,
the walls cover me, whom need J to fear? the most high will not remember my
sins; yet tell me J say why is thy heart so disquieted within thee? why is thy
countenance cast down for shame? why do thy knees smite together and thy
ioints shiuer for fear? Jf there be no power that does know or ca^ punish thy
fault what need this anguish? But J wot well that these stiring motions within
thee, are as so many summons to put thee in mind that there is a God in thy
conscience which sees thy sin, and will arraigne thee for the same, and award
comdemnation against thee, if thou prevent not his judgment by repentance.

I believe this God is one as it is said in Deuteronomie, Audi Israel Deus tuus
Deus vnus est: there is not for every kingdom a God, a God for Zidon, a God
for Amon, a God for Moab, and a God for Ekron, but one alone God manageth the
affaiers of the whole world, for if it be true in government of an earthly
kingdom (...), much more in the being of a Deity, for a multitude of Gods
would cross and incumber the designs one of another and none should be
omnipote^t, and so there should be a tumultuous disorder in the government of
the world, which Ovide points out unto us saying, Mulciber in Troiam, pro
T'roia stabat Apollo. And Homer in the 21. of his Jliades, (...),
(...).


This God is simply one in nature and essence, yet this one God does subsist in
three persons, each of them severally communicating in the whole of that one
nature and essence: yet so as we cannot say that there are three Gods, but one
God, for though the persons be distinguished in number, yet they be not divided
in Essence: which is a mystery to which man's understanding must veil bonnet,
seeing that it has not pleased God wholly to reveal it to the sons of men,
and that the Cherubins do cover their faces before it, as being not able to
apprehend the persit view thereof. wherefore let us say with holy Moses, Hid
things belong unto thee o lord, but revealed things unto us and our children;
and let us only learn as much of this unity and Trinity as it has pleased
God to reveal unto us in his word, always remembering that saieing of Arnobius
-- De Deo loqui etiam vera periculosissimum est.

That there are three persons in the Deity the father, the son, and the holy
Ghost, as it may be proved by many pregnant places of scripture, so it is
evident from the baptism of Christ in Jordan, where the Son was baptized by
John, the holy Ghost descended in the visible form of a dove, the father gave
witness from heaven that this was his well-beloved son, etc. upon which place
St. Augustine gives the note, Qui nescis trinitate^ ito ad Iordanem; And yet
that there is likewise an unity of Essence of which without inequality the
whole Trinity does participate may be proved by an usual form of speech in
the Hebrew original, when speaking of God a nowne of the plural number is
joined with a verb of the singular, as in the beginning of Genesis. 1.5. In
principio creavit Elohim (1) Dij caelum et terram-Dij for the persons in the
plural number and creauit to note the unity of the Essence in the singular
number.

This Trinity of persons thus conspiring in the unity of Essence, is
notwithstanding distinguished by attributes, and proprieties.

These attributes or proprieties are twofold 1 Incommunicable. and 2
Communicable.


Incommunicable proprieties are, 1. Of the father, to be unbegotten. 2. Of the
son, to be begotten, the curious search of whose generation is sealed up with
that saying of Gregory Nazianzene, (...). 3. Of the holy Ghost to be proceeding.


How the generation of the son, and the procession of the holy ghost do
differ J cannot tell, only J say with St. Augustine that they do differ sed
ego distinguere nescio, non valeo, non sufficio.

The co^municable proprieties are, simple, infinite, immutable, eternal, just,
merciful, only wise, omnipotent, of which the three persons do inseparably
communicate.

Out of these proprieties do issue Apotelesmata and actions, in which the
Trinity do likewise severally, yet inseperablie communicate. These outward
actions of the Trinity do belong unto one of these three heads.

viz 1. Creation, 2. Redemption. 3. Sanctification.


Creation is 1. Of the world in general. 2. Of man in special.


God created the fabric of the world of nothing, bestowing but six days for
the making and adorning of the same, and ever since by his watchful eye of
providence has and does carefully govern the same. Which Plato could teach
us, who avoweth it to be one, and the self same supreme powers office, to be
(...), and (...) We condemn therefore the blasphemy of the Epicures, which make
our God an idle and careless God, like unto Baal in the book of Kings which
was asleep and must be awaked; as also the opinion of Auerroes (upon how goodly
pretense soever builded) who hemd the providence of god within the circle of
the moon saying as it is in Job, The clouds hide him that he cannot see and he
walks in the circle of heaven, thinking it absurd ad hoc deducere Dei
maiestatem vt sciat quot culices nascuntur. for we concerning our God have
learned of a better master that although he has his dwelling on high yet he
abaseth himself to behold things in heaven and earth; Alfon^ Rex ^niae (...)
Si cre^ affuiss^ dum ordina^ a De^ gatus.
that he is a God not only of the mountains, but of the valleys likewise,
lending his prouidenc^ to the examination of things of the least consequence as
feeding of Ravens, lighting of sparrowes upon the ground, clothing of lilies,
and numbering of hairs. A doctrine not fully believed of them, who, when they
see the wicked to build heaps of sin as high as Babble, and yet to escape the
vengance of God, when otherwise the godly are under his rod and punishment, do
break out into blasphemy, and foam out openly, that which David's fool did but
say in his heart- No^ est Deus-*Henc Cato would feign have God to give him a
reason-why Caesar overcame Pompey and Hercules in the Poet complains in the
extremity of torment, Morn^ ver, R^ Christ
that he which had freed the world of robbers, and savage beasts, and been
profitable to al men, had lived in misery, and should die in shame: when on
the contrary, Euristheus a tira^t did live in the ruff of pride, and was
liues-like, and the rod of God was not upon him. Et sunt qui credere possunt
esse Deos? Nether did the minds of heathen me^ only, but of Gods Saints also
totter and reele in their judgments concerning prouidence-for there was a time
when Ecclesiastes complained, Behold the tears of the oppressed and none
comforts them: and likewise Habacuck, Thou art a God of pure eyes and can not
see evil, thou can not behold wickedness, wherefore do thou look upon the
transgressors, and houldest thy tongue, when the wicked devours the man that
is more righteous then he? But to stop the mouths of heathen men, and the
better to settle the struggling thoughts of all Christians, J will say no more
the^ that which Ecclesiastes and Habacuck, upon better advise of gods always
righteous judgments, and after the tempest of the thoughts was alaied have
avowed before me; to wit, that howsoever God does seem not to see or to winck
at the wicked yet indeed if we suspend our hasty judgment a while and wait in
patience till he has whet his glittering sword, and his hand shall take hold
on judgment, we shall find that of Moses to be true, That he rewards to their
face them that hate him, to bring the^ to distructio^, for so speaks
Ecclesiastes. If in a country thou see the oppression of the poor, and the
defrauding of judgment and justice, be not astonished at the matter for he that
is higher then the highest regards, and there be higher then they; and
Habacuck likewise, o Lord thou have ordained them for judgment and o god thou
have established them for correction, if not in this world, yet undoubtedly in
the world to come-for J remember that the Apostle gives it for a note, that
bccause the Thessalonians were afflicted with persequutions by wicked men, 2.
The
that this was an argument, that there is a judgment to come in which it should
go well with the^ and as ill with their enemies.

This God having created al things in the stage of the world by a word only of
his mouth, being come in the 6. day to create man, as being a work of more
excellency, and therefore more difficulty, does as it were call a council, and
advise with the other persons of the Trinity, Venite faciamus hominem, nor
simply so, but a more excellent creature then the rest, In similitudinem
nostram, nor only let us make man, but let us invest him with liberties and
privileges above other creatures, and make him a Nonesuch in the world, to
rule over fishes of the sea, birds of the air, and beasts that walk upon the
plane of the earth.

So then man was created of the dust of the earth, and God breathed into him
the soul of life, and had infusde from above such supernatural graces, that he
was indeed the mirror of Gods creatures, and minio^ of the world, like unto
God, upon whom the alone God had conferred in abundant measure all his special
ornaments; for he had no darkness in his understanding, nor perverseness in his
will, nor Rebellion in his affections, no sickness nor crasines in his whole
body, nor never should have had, if never mispending this rich dowry of God,
he did never run bankerupt beyond the bounds of Gods commandments. But this
man thus highly exalted in the love of God Peacock-like taking a view of his
own glory, discontinued his wonted obedience to his Sovereign, nor only so,
but having all that he could ask or thought he should receive from God, sicut
betook himself to the Devil to serve him upon * credit only of better pay,
thinking by violence to break into heaven, and to exalt his throne by the
throne of the almighty.

But foolish man by this his Apostasy and wilful disobedience forfeited his
former more blessed estate, and was stripped of his Masters livery, and all his
excellent graces, dispossessed of Paradise and sent unto the Devil to pay him
his wages for his former service, and al his posterity by the guilt of his
transgression have their nature defiled, and are abandoned of God, and entitled
to the Devil for his children and offspring, a wicked seed, witches children,
and sons of Beliall. And now o ye sons of men, says God by his Prophet
Micheas Remember what Balak king of Moab had devised, and what Balam the son
of Beor answered him, that you may know the righteousness of the Lord, for so I
hope I may apply this prophecy. O ye sons of men now at this time, during our
bondage under the devil, remember what the Prince of darkness had devised
against us, and how Jesus Christ the son of the living God, has answered
him, and stopped his mouth with a voice of blood, and nailed his accusation to a
Cross, that ye may know the righteousness, nor that only, but the exceeding
love and rich mercy of the Lord to mankind: for there being no way to free us
out of the power of the Devil, but by satisfying the justice of God for the
former transgression, God the Father in the fullness of time sent his beloved
son made of a woman and clothed in our flesh, by the shedding of his precious
blood to redeem out of the power of the Devil al those, that by faith apply
the merit of his passion unto themselves, and do afterward show their
thankfulness unto God for so great Redemption: having always in their minds
those words of the Lord which he spoke by his Prophet J say, Remember these
things o Jacob and Israel, for thou art my servant, I have formed thee thou
art my servant o Israel forget me not, I have put away thy transgressions
like a cloud, and thy sins as a mist, turn unto me for I have redeemed thee.
Rejoice ye heavens for the Lord has done it, showt ye lower parts of the
earth, burst forth into praises o ye mountains, o forest and every tree
therein, for the Lord has redeemed Jacob and will be glorified in Israel.

I believe that God, J do not say approved, or suggested, or furthered, but
permitted and directed and J may truly say, willed and ordained the fall of
Adam, that thereby he might take occasion to manifest his glory, and that in two
respects.

1 In erecting a consistory and tribunal for his justice.

2 Jn exposing to the view of all men the inexhaustible treasure of his rich
mercy, or that J may speak in the words of a prophet In opening of a fountain
of mercy to the house of David and to the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, and to all
the Israel of god, for sin, and for uncleanness.

Concerning the first, J confess that there can no other reason be assigned of
the reiection of the wicked, but that of Christ in the Gospel, Etiam pater
quia sic placuit tibi: or to speak to the capacity of the ignorant, but the
alone absolute will of God ordeining, and as J may so speak, adiudging to
destruction the wicked before they were presented upon the stage of the world,
or had done either good or evil. For has the potter power of a lump of clay,
to make a vessel to dishonor, and shall not the almighty Jehovah by his
unlimited and transcendent power, ordeine vessels of wrath for the evil day
and for destruction? Seeing he is the lord in the parable of Matthew who said
Anno^ licet mihi quod volo facere in meis? yet again J confess that God
condemns not into hell any man, but for sins and trespaces, for I hold this
to be a true position in divinity, that sin is not the cause of reiection;
yet may be, and indeed is the meritorious and impulsive cause of damnation;
wherefore whosoever thou art that set thy face against heaven, and openest
thy mouth in blasphemies against God, lay thy hand upon thy mouth, and look
back unto the fall of Adam, and consider what thou broughtest with thee from
thy nativity, and from thy fathers house. Do not censure God in thy
blasphemous thoughts, as if upon lust only and not of deserved justice he did
award sentence of condemnation against thee: and J could also wish that many
men would be more sparing to scann this doctrine, and chose rather to admire
and magnify then strictly to examine by the Canon of our reason, the secret
and hidden will of God; saying with St. Paul, o the deepnes both of the wisdom
and knowledge of God, how unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past
finding out. And with St. Augustine, Disputare vis mecum mirare mecum et
exclaema, o altitudo! Ambo consentiamus in pauore, ne in errore pereamus.

Concerning the second I believe, that all men being infected from Adams sin
(not only with imputative guilt, as Pighius would have it, but by natural
corruption also as S. Paul avoucheth) have just cause inhering and residing in
them at their birth, for which they should be rejected of God, and left
weltering in their filthy blood to the contempt of their person, yea to be sent
into hell to have their original impiety expiated with brimstone: but that
God for the glory and riches of his mercy being loath to wreak his fury in the
general perdition of all mankind, not of foreseen either works or faith,
but of his good pleasure and only mere mercy has called some out of the
cursed estate of al mankind, on whom to bestow fauout, and the kingdom of his
love, ordaineing them in his secret c^unsell to be Citizens with the Angels of
the heavenly Jerusalem, and heirs of heaven, and coheires with Christ, And
does call them at due time, some at the third hour, and some at the eleventh,
if not outwardly all by his word, yet inwardly all by the hidden virtue and
efficatious power of his holy spirit, out of the power of darcknes to be of the
household of God and in the bosom of the Church, there to be consecrated by
Baptism, nourished at the Lords table, instructed by the word, governed by his
spirit, and even then he bestows upon them his Beloved, and with him (...) he
gives remission both of sins and punishment, and all the benefits and
meritts not of his passion only but of his incarnation also: and has given us
the hand of faith, to reach and apply them unto our selves, yea to own, and
possess them as truly as if ours not by imputation only, but originally and
by inhaesion; so that before God all the company of the faithful are accounted
as only one Numericall body with Christ, for the spirit of God by his
sanctifying power by little and little does work away the old man of our
corruption, and does put on us a new creature making us reallie partakers of
the substance of the flesh yea of the whole person of Christ, and his proper
ornaments and graces, as righteousness and sanctification. The which great
blessing of our every way undeserved redemption, when I seriously revolue with
my self, I cannot but break forth into praise, in the words of Zachary,
Blessed be the Lord God of Israel because he has visited and redeemed his
people etc. and use those words of admiration otherwise applied I confess in
the book of Numbers; According unto this time, it shall be said of Jacob and
Israel what has God wrought?

Man having received these rich favors of God in his creation and redemption,
has nothing charged upon him for his tribute, but only to show a good
faithfulness to adorn his christian profession, and to be careful to show
forth good works. Wherefore I confess unto the glory of God that every one of
Gods children, which has his sins washed away in the blood of the Lamb, has
it not left unto him as Arbitary, but has a necessity laid upon him to do
good works, and that in these respects following.

1. In respect of God, it being his will and commandment that they should be
done, by such our obedience to testify our thanckfulnes for his great mercies
of Creation and Redemption.

2 In respect of our selves, that we by these fruits of Sanctification may be
led backward to a certainty of our Justification and effectual Vocation and
Election, and so finding our names written in the book of life, may be
persuaded Certitudine fidei, cui no^ potest subesse falsu^, of our future
glorificatio^

3. In respect of others. 1. Ne quis de nobis conqueri possit Philip. ca^ 2

2. That other men seeing our good works may be allured to glorify our father
which is in heaven, and to say as the Gentiles to the Jews in the prophecy
of Zachary, Ambulabimus vobiscum, for we have hard that God is with you. This
truth being always resolved on, that our best works are not perfect in their
own esteem and valeue, if examined according to the precise rule of the
decalogue (lex spiritualis est, ego autem homo carnalis) and in the district
judgment of God, and therefore away with meritt, and let us say with St.
Augustine Vae laudabili etiam vitae hominum, sire mota misericordia discutias
eam Domine, and assuredly every one of us may confess with Anselmus Terret me
vita mea, na^ diligenter discussa apparet mihi aut peccatum, aut sterilitas,
tota vita mea,

God makes his will known two manner of ways. 1. By his works (...), of
which I have spoken in the creation.

2. In his word.

Of the word of God.

Not (...), the substantial word of God, of whom before.

But (...) and (...), the enunciatiue and created word of god, called sometimes
simpy the scriptures, sometimes with an Emphasis, the holy (Romans 12.) and sacred
(2. Tim. 3. ch.) scriptures.

That they are 1. The word of God, 2. Sufficient to salvation. 3. Plain and
therefore to be translated. 4. By whom they are to have their sense.


I acknowledge all these books which make up the body of holy writ which we
call the holy scriptures, to be inspired by the holy Ghost, and to be
undoubtedly the true word of God, of which I am persuaded not so much by the
judgment of the Church, as for these reasons following.

1. From the Majesty of God, speaking in the scriptures, for in them nothing
is set down in so easy and simple form of words, but I do perceive
characters engraven by the finger of God et genium humano maiorem.

2. From the efficacy of the scripture, for me thinks, while I read, my heart
does burn within me, as the hearts of the 2 disciples that went with Christ to
Emaus: so that J confess with the Prophet. Surely as the reign comes down,
and the snow from heaven, and returns not thither again, but waters the
earth and causes it to bring forth and bud: so is my word that goes out of my
mouth, it shall not return unto me void, but it shall accomplish that I will,
and prosper in the thing whereto I sent it. This I confess against all those
Vatican Rabsakes, who having adamant hearts, the which the spirit of the Lord
cannot pierce, do impeach the power of this word: Hosius that does call it, or
approues it to be called, egenum quoddam elementum, Stephen Pal^tus, rem
inanimatam, Melchior Canus, mortuum iudicem, and Eckius more blasphemously
atramentariam scripturam and I condemn Angelus Politianus, as blasphemous,
that preferred Pindarus his Odes before the Psalms of David Quid palea ad
triticum? Nonne verbum meum est instar ignis (dicit Jehovah) tanquam malleus
conterens petram?

3 From the event of prophesies, every one complete in his proper time,
although foretold long before, to wit, The people of Isreal's bondage in
Egypt, and delivery from thence. The kingdom to continue in the line of
Judah, until Christ came in the flesh. The prophecy of Josias, given by name
three hundred years before his cradle. The captivity into Babylon, and freedom
by Cyrus. The time, place, and manner of Christ's birth, The reiection of the
Jews, and calling of the Gentiles. So that God might well proclaim of himself,
as it is in Isay. I am God and there is none other, and there is nothing like
me, which declare the last things from the beginning, and from of old the
things. etc. saying, my council shall stand, and I will do, what soever I
will, eve^ so, good Lord, thy word, is the word of Truth, yea as one of thy
Apostles has it more Emphatically, (...): it is truth it self, and one iod
thereof shall not fall unto the ground unfulfilled, for though the Scheme of the
world were a way, and the Prophets do not live for ever, yet thou o lord with
thy Angels wilt come to perform their prophesies in their moments.

4 And especially from the testimony of the spirit of God, which persuadeth
unto our souls and consciences, the undoubted truth of that word, which some
do contemn and deride as foollishnesse; and hence I judge it to be, that
martyrs being resolved by the powerful persuasion of this spirit, of the truth
hereof do boldly offer to seal the same with their blood protesting that
nothing shall remove them from profession of this truth * non minae, non blandi
menta, non vita, non mors, non palatium, non satellites, vin
non imperator, non imperium, non homines non daemones.

2 I believe that almighty god has made known unto us in his written word so
much of his will as is sufficient for the instruction of the faithful, without
the patching too of Traditions; So that I account that Canon of the Council of
Trent to be blasphemous, by which it is provided, that Traditions are to be
received paripietatis affectu, with the written word of God, and concerning
Traditions, J am wont to say with St. Ambrose, Quod non legi vsurpare non
debeo. That which J find not in the scripture either expressed, or deducable by
easy consequence I ought not to use, and again, Caeli mysterium me doceat
Deus, qui me condidit, non homo, qui se ipsum ignorauit, and with Origene. Non
sum aliorum sermonu^ discipulus nisi caelestum.

3 This scripture so sufficient, I acknowledge to be easy, and facile, fitted
to the capacity of the simplest, whose understanding God has not shut up in
that judgment, vobis non datum est nosse misteria regni: ^. 12.
so that the weaklin in faith thence may draw milk for his weak stomach, and
the more able Christian, may have stronger meat to better his groath in the
mystery of faith: wherefore J could wish that the scriptures were permitted to
every nation, ^ee say of ^o^e as S. ^m of ^ehem unque ^teris a ^situam
alielu^cantas ^ans (...) psal^ a vo^curua ^aens (...) falce ^n ali^ Daui ^n
can^it inep
and language under heaven, in their own familiar tongue that so every man may
have and read them to his comfort: for why should I not wish that the spirit of
God did not only rest upon Moses, and the seauenty ancient men in the book of
Numbers, but that Eldaed and Medaed, yea and all the Lords people were
prophets, and that the Lord would put his spirit upon them.

But since Scripturae non sunt in legendo, sed in intelligendo, as St. Hilary
well observes and seeing in them somthings are so difficult, as that we may
truly say with the Eunuch to Philip, Quomodo possum intelligere, si non
aliquis viam praemonstret mihi? J would have you for the sense of scripture not
to advise with humane reason, which is blind in matters of piety nor 2 with any
Swenfeldian Enthusiast that vaunts of immediate revelations from the spirit of
God: for a lying spirit may speak in the mouths of such Prophets. In all ^ 270
B^ and of out of 187 a^ make this r^ Olaus^nus wa^tled ^ of vps^ Go thi^ Rob.
V^tius Arm^ of Ar^ Irelan^ whence never ^ed pen^ common ^. Duo ip^ depreh^ in
adu^ and occij^ whit^e^
Nor 3 with the Pope, that Tarpeian oracle, for J find not warranted by
scripture any infallibility in his judgment, seeing he may err. Nor 4 with
Councils for they cannot be called so often as the Church may want decision for
sense 2 they are often times an assembly of malignant persons against the Godly
as the council at Carmell against Elias, and at Gilead against Micheas, and at
Trent against the Protestants howsoever Campian be Hyperbolicall in its
Commendation, Bone Deus quae Gentium varietas, qui delectus episcoporum totius
orbis, qui Regum et Rerum pub: splendour, quae medulla Theologorum, quae
sanctitas quae lachry mae, quae teiunia, qui flores Accademici, quae linguae,
quanta subtilitas, quantus labor, quam infinitae lectio, quantae virtutum, et
studiorum divitiae Augustum illud sacrarium impleuerunt? Nor 5 with fathers,
for they are men, and may, and do err, and again they abrogate this
authority from themselves, Quos non sy^ flores s^tius v^ nomina Humf*
for so S. Augustine Talis ego sum in scriptis aliorum quales ego esse volo
intellectores meorum and how did S. Augustine read other fathers writings he
will tell you himself Cypriani literas non vt Canonicas habeo, sed considero
ex Canonicis. But with any Child of God, I say with any child of God, who has
the gift of interpreting, who^ J would have not upon any Praetorian authority
to command men to believe whatsoever he list, as they in the Poet, Quod volumus
sanctum est: but to prove his sense of scripture by scripture and to follow
these 6 rules following.

1 To be acquainted with the words and Phrases of Scripture. 2 To humble
himself in prayer unto Almighty God: upon this hope. Qui dedit, vt quaeras
addet vt invenias: 3 To mark antecedents and consequences. 4 To observe
heedfully the occasion of the text the maine scope, and circumstances thereof.
5 To parallelle like places. 6 To have always before his eyes, for his (...),
the measure of faith in the Articles of the Creed.
Of the Church 1 The authority thereof. 2 The matter. 3 The form. 4 The
affections. 5 The head. 6 The Notes.


1 I confess that by this immortal seed of the word, God has begotten him a
Church. So that the Scripture is the mother of the Church, and the Church the
daughter of the Scripture: how preposterous then, I will not say, blasphemous,
is the judgment of the Church of Rome, who set Hagar above Sara, and the
daughters foot in the neck of the mother, and subject the oracles of God to
the censure of men, avowing the authority of the Scriptures to be such, and
such only as the Church does afford it, yea more blasphemouslie that the
Scripture without the censure and approbation of the Church is in it self no
more, and no more to be esteemed then Aesops fables: know ye not ye Vatican
Rabsakes, that blasphemers, and al liars shall have their part in the lake which
burns with fire and brimstone? Yea they debase the authority of the Scripture
so far below the Church, as, that they say expressly -- non omnem (...) esse
peccatum: that every obliquity to the law of God is not a sin: and yet
Andradius erecting himself upon his Portingall buskin, proclaims Quic quid a
pralatorum Ecclesia ac maxim a Romans pontificis iussu dissidet immane esse
peccatu^ and again maiori scelere inuolui cum qui pontificias quam qui diuinas
leges prefregerit and they account none to be obedient sons to their Sea but
such as will say with Erasmus, that although indeed he did know another sense
then that of the Pope of Rome to be more consonant unto the Text of scripture;
yet, Sed tamen, si hoc ecclesiae iusserit credam: captiuabo. n. intellectum
meum in obsequium Ecclesiae.

The matter of this Church is 1 Angels 2 men
1 Angels for not to conceal any thing I know I like not the sentence of M
Beza, and M Perkins be it spoken with reverence to so worthy men, ^o bi^e tus
(...) sta ^lt no^icit e^etus est.
but chose rather to tread in the paths of Antiquity, seeing the learned
Zanchius is persuaded that Angels be parts of the mystical body of Christ and
members of the Church, seeing they receive by the mediatio^ of Christ, these
benefits ensewing.

1 To be confirmed in their blessed estate.

2 To have a more perfect Revelation of the will of God touching the calling of
the Gentiles.

3 To be reconciled to man, from whom they were averse before, as being
executioners of Gods wrath upon our sins, and hence is their joy for our
several conversions.

And I believe that this opinion is strongly mainetained, and abetted with
these places of Scripture: Ephesians. 1.10. Coloss. 1.20.

2 Men. 1 Not Hypocrites, or wicked men, for howsoever they carry an outward
profession of Sanctity, and the livery of Christians, yet indeed are they not
true and living members of Christ's body: for otherwise this would follow, that
the Hypocrite being to receive his portion in the fiery lake, that Christ
should condemn into hell, his own members; only I must advise you, that in
the judgment of Charity you do esteem all those for true members of Christ,
which fashion themselves to an outward co^formity in the church, always
remembering what St. Augustine answered Petilian charging him to be a reprobate.
In area domini sum vel frumentum, vel palea: sed huius area ventilabrum non est
lingua Petiliani.

But 2. holy men, elect children, and Saints of God, for their sins being
washed away in the blood of the Lamb, they only are clothed with the stole of
righteousness, and have palms in their hands, and do follow the lamb
whither-soever he goes, singing honor, and praise, and immortality to him
that sits upon the throne, and to the Lamb for evermore.

3 The inward form of this Church is the bo^d of the spirit, by which the
Saints of God dispersed over the whole earth of diverse times, are knit
together and linked in a union to Christ their head and a communion amongst
themselves.

4 I believe this Church to be invisible in respect of this inward form, for
although Momus desired, yet God never granted a window to the breast of man, so
that we cannot enter with a Ca^dle to see their faith, their election, the
Graces of the holy Ghost and in respect of the better part, to wit, the Saints
blessed in heaven, to who^ as we cannot extend the torments of malice, or the
scourge of our tongue, so neither bodily eyes: yet visible in some particular
churches, ^to ^eti ^st ^lt ^ici ^eti ^es^
as now in England (for the welfare of which church my prayer has ever bin
that in the Canticles, Arise o North and come o South, and blow on this garden,
that the spices there of may flow out) yet so as subject to change, haueing a
waxing, and a waning like the moon: for sometime we read that Christ says of
his Church who is she that looks forth as the morning, fair as the moon,
pure as the son, terrible as an army with banners. Sometimes again we read of
the Church, that she is driven by the red dragon into the wilderness and has
sent after her, a river of water, to swallow and drown her up.

5 This Church is a body coupled together by ioints. Ephesians. 4.16. and therefore
must have a head, the which head I confess Christ, and Christ alone to be
according to that, Coloss. 1.18. Et ipse caput corporis (t) Ecclesiae: for no
other Creature whatsoever ca^ perform the offices of a head to this body,
which are, vi intus agente, as Paul speaks, Ephesians. 5. To give efficacy, and
quickening to the same, and to power forth oil in great abundance into the
seven lamps which stand in the golden candlestick in the temple, Gregor Mag.
(...) the bes^ shops o^ and im^ate pre^ for t^ Bonifa^ tragic^ clamit^ go aut^
denter^ quia q^ quis s^ ^uersal cerdo^ cat; ve^ ri de si^ in ela sua A^
christi^ prec ^ quia biend^ teris ^ ni^*
as it is in the vision of Zachary: and therefore the first, and best Bishops
of Rome never durst arrogate unto themselves, to be the general fathers, and
heads of the Church, nor any in more corrupted times, until Boniface the 3.
about 600. after Christ, having absolved from Parricide Phocas, who had killed
Mauricius the Emperor and his Lord, obtained in lieu of this Church blessing
to be called the Oecumenicall and general head of the Church; which ever since
the Bishops of Rome have continued, and do seek to mainetaine by a distinction
minted by them. That Christ indeed is the head of the triumpha^t, and Militant
Church both, and the Pope of the Militant only again, That Christ is the head
of the Church by sovereign pre-eminence, in a more divine, ample, absolute,
excellent, and transcende^t sort, but the Pope is Head only Ministerially.
Foolish men, that seek to cover their ambition with such Figleaues, as these
are, for what need Christ of a ministerial head, to supply his presence in the
Church, and if the Pope of Rome be that head, how wisely has Christ provided,
that Error and Heresy shall never prevail in it? seeing the Pope may err, non
solum actu externo, in quaestione facti, errore exempli, in declaratione
opinionis propriae, in iis quae obiter dicat, in mediis ante conclusionem, sed
etiam in rebus fidei, vt summus pontifex, vt publicum os ecclesiae, in
definitiua sententia; for many of them have bin Heretics, witness Liran in
Matthew 16. legimus multos pontifices apostatasse a fide and this Bellarmine
does in some sort grant when he faintly deuieth it if not rather, insinuates
the same. ^b. 4. de ^ontif.
Non est proprie Heretica ista sententia, puta, papam errare posse. it may be
as Stapleton will have it, an erroneous, a scandalous, ^ont. 3 ^4.
an offensive position, but non est proprie heretica.

6 The true marks and badges of this Church are only two the sincere preaching
of the word, and the 2 lawful dispensation of the sacraments, not Antiquity,
nor multitude, nor miracles, nor the rest which Bellarmine repeateth to the
number of fourteen.

1 The sincere preaching of the word to which we admit nobody but he that is
lawfully called by the Church, and Christian magistrate; neither do J see how
the Papists can object unto Luther, and other ministers in the Reformed
Churches to have no lawful calling, seeing they receive their ordination from
themselves, and we do not deny but the Popish Bishopps, in creating ministers,
howsoever they use more ceremonies then need of, truly to confer the office
upon whom they lay their hands.

I profess that ministers thus called have a right to the use of the Keys.
The keys of the Church are the power of binding and loosing, of retaineing and
remitting of sins.

I believe that sins are only remitted, by god, for I acknowledge it to be his
incommunicable property to forgive sin according as he proclaims of
himself, Ego, ego sum, qui deleo iniquitates tuas propter me etc. and that man
has but a secundary and ministerial power, to wit, to publish forgiveness of
sins, to those, whom God in heaven has forgiven, for we are but Ambassadors
and do entreat for Christ sake Reconciliamini Deo: otherwise if the minister
do take upon him, (...), upon any absolute power resting in himself to
forgive sins, the sinner to be absolved may say unto him, as Augustine has
it: Quid ego homo, nisi ager sanandus? vis mihi esse medicus mecum quaere
medicum, for he sinful man as he is has need of one to forgive his sins
likewise.

I acknowledge power in the minister to retain sin, and to award
Excommunication, against desperate and scandalus offenders, only I could
advise, they would remenber, and practice these few rules following. 1 That
such ecclesiastical curses be denounced according unto the word of god.

2 That they put a difference between private and public sins, between
delicta and scelera.

3 That they be not too sharp in their censures, remembering that of
Chrysostom Si Deus est tam benignus, vt quid sacerdos eius tamausterus?

Against the first, the Bishopp of Rome highly offends, when every Easter day
he excommunicateth the Reformed Churches, before his solemn Mass; for whereas
the Pope denounces his curse against us, Quod haretici, we know the cause is
false, and therefore the curse not effectual seeing, as it is in the Proverbs. A
curse causeless shall not come and therefore we say with Tertullian Dum a vobis
damnamur, a Deo absoluimm.

2 The second note of the Church is the rightful administration of the
Sacraments.

Now Sacraments are only two 1 Baptism. 2 The Lords supper


I confess Baptism to be a leale of the couena^^ of grace, and therefore
children being contained in the covenant (promissio facta est vobis, et liberis
vestris) are to receue the seal of the covenant, and to be baptized; howsoever
first the Pelagian, and since the Anabaptist with great fury, and greater
phrensy teach the contrary: and we have nothing so commonly in our mouths as
that comfortable saieing of Christ in S. Augustine, Baptisma quare Domini, ego
quaesiui serui howsoever Campian does put on a whores-forehead and impudently
charge us, to make Baptism but (...) si habeas recte, sicareas, nihil da^ni.

Yet do I not avouch that Baptism is simply necessary to salvation, for I am
persuaded, that child may be saved which is prevented in his Baptism, by
sudden death, and that saying of Saint Bernard always was of authority with
me, Non privatio, sed contemptus Baptismi damnat, and that of Saint Ambrose.
Qui Sacramentum omittunt (to wit, in the case above specified) gratiam tamen,
non amittunt; and I think, that Saint Augustine, if soberly understood, is
not so much my enemy in this point, as Papists and some Protestants do believe.

I confess original sin to be weakened, and bridled by Baptism, yea taken
away quoad reatu^ and imputationem, but not quoad actum, and totali abolitione,
as the Papists would have it, for it still remains in us as long as we walk
sub onere carnis, and is indeed a sin; howsoever in Christ not imputed unto
the person in whom it is: or if you will so have it, I will give you my judgment
of Concupiscence, remaining after Baptism in Saint Augustines words,
Remittitur in Baptismate, non finitur. And again, Sed sufficit (inquis) quod
in Baptismate accepi Remissionem omnium peccatorum? nunquid quia deleta est
iniquitas, finita est infirmit as? Adhuc carnem fragilem portas, adhuc corpus,
quod corrumpitur aggrauat animam, adhuc vtique dicis, donec sanentur languores
tui, Dimitte nobis debita nostra. ^scis an ^s pie dix ^esse repe ^dum ^g.
Baptism is only to be dispe^sed by a minister, not by a lay man, much less
by a woman: yet I am persuaded, that if a lay man, or woman have de facto
baptized observing the form of words the baptism is not to be repeated, and I
rest in the judgment of a learned father amongst us, whose words they are, pie
fit, fi minister tingat solus, at fit etiam siting at alius, and again male
factum est, silaicus, peius, D. Ab^ lec de ^
si feminare^ sacro-sanctam hanc attigerit, sed factum est, and quod factum
est, infectum esse non potest.

2 The other Sacrament is the Eucharist, in which the true body and blood of
Christ is given us under the visible form of bread, and wine to be received by
the mouth of faith of every believer. And J am persuaded that as truly as the
bread and wine is received by my hand, and conveyed into my stomach, so
assuredly the body and blood of Christ Jesus is received by the hand of faith,
and conveyed unto my soul, and conscience, and this certainly is assured unto
me by those Emphaticall forms of speeches peculiar in the sacraments by which
the bread is termed the true body, and wine, the blood of Christ: so the^ the
body of Christ is present in the sacrament, vere non imaginary, how be it non
corporali presentia, sed spirituali according to that of S. Augustine. Quid
paras ventrem, et dentes? creed, et mandacasti.

Away then with the when ten Idol, the mass, and Popish Transubstantiation,
for that there ca^ be no such (...) or Transubstantiation, I protest upon these
seasons.

1 It crosses the institution of Christ, he bideth us to receive his supper In
mei recordatione^ now we know that Recordatio is Rei absentis no^ praesentis.

2 Christians would then be Anthropopnagi and the Lords table should be like
the house of Polyphemus in the poet, et trepidi tremerent sub dentibus artus.

3 This implies a blasphemy, for then Christ being chewed, and eaten in ventrem
cederet, and therefore according to the doctrine of the Gospel in latrinim
abiiceretur.

4. Then the wicked should eat his flesh and so have eternal life.

5 We fee the Accidents of bread, and wine to remain, and therefore the propper
substances of bread, and wine, must remain, except we would have an Accident
to subsist without his proper substance which is absurd in reason.

And I do account that gloss which the master of the sentences does set upon
this matter very rediculous, to wit, that therefore the bread and wine being
indeed vanished away, their accide^ts must remain to cover the flesh, and
blood of Christ

1 Ne abhorreat animus, Aver^ 12. m^ Quon^ christi^ mandu^ Deum adoran^ anima^
cum pl^ phis.
si carnem ipsam oculi vsurparent.

2 Ne ab incredulis Religioni Christianae in sultetur as if they did eat man's
flesh. I protest likewise against the (...) and consubstantiation of the
Lutherans, who do feign a Coexistence of the body of Christ, in sub, or cum
pane, and I could wish that they would use more moderation against their
Opposits.

J conclude my judgment of both sacraments with this doctrine that neither
sacrament has vim causatiua^ gratiae, as the Papists speak, that I may
explicate my self to the capacity of the simple, that there is not in the
corporal elements of the Sacraments any supernatural Grace inhere^t and
essential, but that the sacraments are instruments and means by the which the
holy ghost is effectually powerful to offer exhibit, and apply the merit of
Christ's passion to every believer.

That which pessime and pertinacissime Eut^ches, as I read of him, I hope J may
truly and from a sober and Christian resolution aver: In hac fide genitus
sum vsque body vixi in ea, et opto mori.

Etiam sic sentio, sic credo. I. D.

His qui contradicit, aut omnino a Christi
nomine alienus est, aut est Hereticus.

To the Reader.
THis little Book for private use,
was penned some time ago;
And now diuulg'd for private friends,
His Author wills it so,
But if it come to others hands,
And they some profit gain:
Then thank his friends, that for their sakes,
He has took all this pain.
ROGER KNIGHT.


