THE COPY OF A LETTER written by E. D. Doctor of Physic to a Gentleman, by
whom it was published. The former part contains rules for the preservation of
health, and preventing of all diseases until extreme old age. Herein is
inserted the Authors opinion of Tobacco. The latter is a discourse of Emperiks
or unlearned Physicians, wherein is plainly proved that the practice of all
those which have not been brought up in the Grammar and University, is always
confused, commonly dangerous, and often Deadly. ECCLES. 38. 1. Honor the
Physician with that honor that is due unto him; for the Lord has created him.

LONDON Printed by Melchisedech Bradwood. 1606.

THE PVBLISHER to the Reader.
GEntle Reader, let it not seem strange that I publish unto thee a private
letter. There are three principal causes which have moved me hereunto: First,
a world of examples both of modern and ancient Writers, whose epistles,
perhaps privately intended, as this was, have now their public use. Secondly,
my love unto the Author, a man deserving love of all, but specially of me,
unto whom I am beholding (next unto God) for that health which Ienioy. Thirdly,
the worth of the work it self; wherein, look not for hyperbolicall phrases,
or curious affectation: for as in his life he prefers deeds before words, so
in his writings shall thou find more substance than shows. Yet so has he
joined profit with pleasure, sound discourse with sweet delight; that (if my
love deceives me not, and some learned Physicians, who at my request have
perused it) as the Poet says, Omne tulit punctum. His rules of health (unto
those that will be ruled by them) are full of health: his discovery of bastard
Physicians will make wisemen beware: their ignorance, their arrogancy, their
rashness is here laid open: not with jesting terms (for that he accounts no
less than an artificial injury) but with such evident demonstrations, as he
that hereafter shall know them, and will not eschew them, shall be deemed
accessory to his own overthrow. I have named the former part Healths
Preservative, and the latter, A Discourse of Empiricks and unlearned
Physicians. I wish as much good to come unto thee by this my friends labor, as
was meant unto my self. Be thine own friend. Take heed of Empiricks. And so
farewell.

Healths Preservative.
SIr, I have here sent you an answer to your kind letters, though not so soon
as you expected, yet as soon as my business, and the large handling of the
matter, protracted far beyond my first purpose, would permit. Your request
stands upon two scuerall parts: the one is, To set down rules and directions
out of our Art for the preservation ofhealth, and preventing of diseases: the
other is, To deliver my opinion concerning Empericks. Touching the former,
though health be a precious thing, and the greatest blessing belonging to this
life, yet the means of preserving it are little thought of, and lightly
regarded of most, that have full fruition of it, and are in their flourishing
years. If this your request proceeds from a resolution to observe those
things which you desire to hear, Dignus es Nestoris annis, and Crotonis
salubritate: You are worthy oflong life and perfect health. Some place their
felicity in honor, some in wealth* other in other things: Hippoc. de diaeta.
lib. 3.
but if health be not a continual attendant upon these, this supposed
happiness is soon changed into misery. An ancient Poet says, (...), etc.
O blessed health, when thou art present, all things flourish as in the Spring;
without thee no man is happy. To this agrees that of Pindarus; (...), etc.
What health is.
If a man possess riches joined with health, and has with them a good report,
there is no cause why he should desire to be a god. Health is thus defined by
Galen: Cont. Iulianum.
Sanitas est calidi, frigidi, humidi, siccitemperies: an equal mixture or
proportion of the four elements: not equal by just proportion ofweight of
every element alike; which is called temperatum ad pondus; but temperatum ad
iustitiam: such a proportion as is most agreeable to the preservation and
continuance oflife and health; and as it were due by the right ofiustice. The
same author in another place Lib. 1. de sanit. tuenda. eam corporis
constitution^, etc.
shows more plainly what health is, in these words: We call that constitution
of body health, wherein we are not vexed with pain, nor hindered in the actions
of our life. This perfect constitution is altered and impaired two ways; the
one by inward, the other by outward Three enemies to*life.
ward things: The inward are bred and borne with us, and it is not in our power
to resist them: they are in number three; Dryness, continual decay or wasting
of the substance of our bodies, and breeding of superfluous excrements. Of
these Galen discourses at large in the foresaid book: but I omit them, as
things out of our power, and come to the outward, which have equal or greater
force to overthrow our health, if they be lightly regarded: and much virtue to
preserve us from sickness, if we use them rightly. These are almost in our
power, and most of them may be observed by us, if we endeavor Qui lib^ram vita^
nactus est, etc.
to live free from sickness. That they have ability to effect this, it does
plainly appear in the book before cited, in these words: He Qui boni ha^itus
sunt, etc. de feb. diff. li. 1. ca. 3.
that leads a free life, and has a care of keeping his health, shall never be
troubled with so much as a bile. And in another place: They which have a good
state of body, and free transpiration, and use not too violent exercise, and
keep their stomach and liver warm, it is impossible for them to have an
ague. This warrant of so great a Physician, to live until extreme old age
without any disease, may move you to a careful and diligent observation of the
rules required to this happy state of life. These outward things are in number
six: The air, meat and drink, exercise and rest, sleep and waking, expelling
and retaining of superfluities, and the affections of the mind. All these are
in our art comprised under the name of Diet, as In Hippoc de morb. vulg. li.
3. (...). 3. 9.
Galen does testify in plain words. These are called things not natural,
because they are not of the essence or nature of the body. They are called by
Galen, Causae couseruatrices, because they keep and preserve the body in
perfect health, until it comes lege adrastriae, by inevitable fate near the
grave, being withered and consumed for want 1. The air.
of moisture. Of these six, the air has the first place, because our life
begins with that, and we have a continual use of it as well by night as by
day, both sleeping and waking: it is of it own nature bot and moist; but it is
subject to many alterations from the earth, from the waters, from the winds,
and from the heavens: it ministers nourishment to the spirits and cools
them, and receives their superfluous fumes: it passes by the mouth, nose and
arteries, into the brain, lungs, heart, and all parts of the body: what
substance or qualities soever be in it, those it infuseth first into the
spirits, then into the humors, and so into the whole body. Clear, subtle,
pure, sweet and temperate air lighteneth the spirits, clarifieth the blood,
dilateth the heart, and lifts it up with joy and delight: it preuenteth
obstructions, stirs up natural heat, increases appetite, perfecteth
concoction, and inableth every part to expel it superfluity at fit times.
These are the excellent properties, which Hippocrates, Galen, and other ascribe
unto a good air. De re rustic^. lib. 1.
Columella advises them that buy land to regard principally the healthfulnesse
of the air lest they purchase the means of shortening their lives. Also
P^lit. 7. 11.
Aristotle counsels that cities should be built in a pure and clear air.
Herodotus affirms the Egyptians to be the healthfullest of all nations,
because the air of that country is so pure and not subject to alterations, as
in other places. The best air is commonly about the highest places, that a^e
open toward the East; for there the Sun has most perfection to clarify it,
and the wind most power to disperse the grosnesse and superfluity of it, as
Hippocrates testifies. S. Lib. de aere, etc.
Edmunds-Bury is the most famous place in this country for good air: Sol non
vidit vrbemsitu elegantiorem.
Lelandus makes it inferior to no city of the world for situation: and the
Physicians of Cambridge do usually send their Patients diseased in the lungs,
to live here; whereby many have recovered their health. On the contrary part,
gross, thick and impure air, receiving continual exhalations from moors,
fennes, bogges, and such like* or being barred from the benefit of the Sun
and wind by hills, woods or other means, is an utter enemy unto health; for
it oppresses the heart, infecteth the lungs, dulleth the wit, diminishes
natural heat, hinders appetite, weakeneth concoction, and subiecteth the
body to many other infirmities. Therefore since there is so great power in the
air both to preserve and overthrow a perfect state of body, you are to have a
special care to live always in a good air, and also to avoid all objects
offensive to the sense of smelling. Here I may fitly give you a taste of
Tobacco, for it is taken not Tobacco.
much unlike to the drawing in of air by breathing; and it has great power to
alter the body. This Indian simple is hot and dry Monard.
almost in the third degree, as those that wrote first ofit affirm, and The
first qualities of Tobacco.
the smell and taste do confirm. In respect of the excess of these first
qualities it can not be safe for young and sound bodies, though it Not safe for
youth.
yielded pure nourishment: for the diet of young men must be moist without
excess ofheat; and in choleric complexions, somewhat cooling, as Galen
affirms: but it is a strong purger (as has been Comment. in lib. de victu
s^lub.
often tried by experience) and an utter enemy to most stomachs; for a small
quantity of it infused, moves violently upward; and in many, downward also.
In this respect it is very hurtful to all sound Aphor. 2. 37. corpora salubri^
difficulter feru^ medic.
bodies: for Hippocrates says, healthful bodies do hardly bear any purging at
all. And Celsus in the very beginning of his book has these words;
Nourishment is fit for them that are in health, and physic Alimenta sa^^.
medicamenta aegris, etc.
for the sick only. What though it be usually taken by fume, and not in
substance, or infusion? yet that way it works the same effect in many; and in
all it draws thin and moist humors, which all beholders perceive distilling,
or rather flowing from the mouth, nose and eyes of the takers of it. But admit
that it does not purge; Sound bodies need no alteration.
which is very evident; yet it alters the body much: and how can that be done
in young and strong men without hurt? It consumes the moisture, and increases
the heat of perfect constitutions, as the fire and Sun do sensibly heat and
dry things exposed to them. Heat and moisture, in their just mixture, are the
preseruers of life: if the proportion of heat be increased, it consumes
moisture the faster: Humiditas caloris pabulum.
if moisture be diminished, there follows a necessary decay of heat: for it
is maintained and fed by that, as a lamp with oil: therefore Tobacco, being
armed with the excess of both these qualities, professed enemies to youth,
does exercise cruel tyranny upon it. Qui maxim sunt bu^idi, maxim sunt long
aeui. de san. tuenda. lib. 6. Breuioris esse vitae eos, qui calidas regiones
incolunt. It shorteneth life.
Galen says; Moistest bodies live longest. To this agrees that of Aristotle;
They that inhabit hot countries are of shorter life: for the heat of the Sun
draws out much moisture from the body, and the continual drawing in of hot
air by breathing, does dissipate and consume it, and consequently hasteneth a
dry and withered distemper, the messenger of death approaching. Does not
Tobacco then threaten a short life to the great takers of it? The often drawing
in of this hot and dry fume, makes them somewhat like those that live in hot
regions: though this be not continual, as that is, yet 2. de legibus: quia eos
ad libidinem and iram praecipites reddat.
the heat and dryness of this does far exceed that. Plato would not allow
young men to drink wine, though moderatly, because it carries them headlong to
lust and anger. Does not Tobacco this much more? Wine is hot and moist: Tobacco
exceeds it far in heat; for from the excess of that, it has the strong
smell and fretting taste, Siccitas caloris stimulus.
and it has dryness associated to it in stead of the others moisture. Beside
this, Wine nourishes; Tobacco purges. So it is every way far more hurtful
than Wine. It is in greatest request amongst our yoonger and stronger sort of
gentlemen; and the quicker spirits and Cereus in vitium flecti, monitoribus
asper: sublimis, etc.
hoter complexions are carried most violently to the often taking of it, being
like to the young man that Horace describes. Every man, that has but tasted
of Natural philosophy, may easily comprehend it to be a dangerous and
pernicious thing to choleric constitutions: It breeds many diseases.
it inclines them to burning agues, phrensies, and hectikes; or carries them
into an untimely melancholy: for the unkind heat of it, exceeding the natural
heat of the body, does waste and destroy that, and so breeds a melancholicke
distemper by the long continued use of it. Choler is like to a coal burning
clear with his full heat, whose moisture as it consumes, so the heat
diminishes, and It breeds melancholy.
in time it becomes black, dry and cold: even so the often drinking of this
herb, does by his vehement heat burn the choleric blood, and makes it
gross, thick and black. This is wrought by Sens^n sine sensu.
small degrees and insensibly, youth, together with often pouring in of drink
(which is usual with them) not suffering such alteration to De sanit. tuenda.
optimi temperamenti, optimi mores.
be made in short time. Galen says, the best complexions have the best manners:
and he writes a whole book to prove that the affections of the mind follow
the temper and constitution of the body. What though that be specially
understood of the original temperature that we have from our parents; yet as
that changes with our age naturally, or accidentally by Tobacco, or any other
outward means; so there is with that, great change of the affections, and
inclinations It hurts the mind.
of the mind. As heat and sharpness increase in the blood, so do hastiness
and fury in the mind: and when the blood grows thick and gross, the mind
is dull and sad. This is too apparent in many, though it be obscured by
discretion in some. I see not therefore how Tobacco can be acquitted from
procuring the overthrow of the perfect state both of body and mind: and that
not only in It is ill for their issue.
Tabacconists themselves, but in their posterity also; for the temperament and
constitution of the father is ordinarily transfused into the children, and the
affections of the mind also, depending upon the other. This is verified
likewise in distempered and sick bodies. Est in ^uuencis, est in equis patrum
virtus. Quocunque morbo pater gene^ans afficitur, ider^ i^ prolem transit. Mas
formam, foemina materian^ dat. De semine.
Fernelius says, what disease so ever the father has, that goes into the
child. The father gives the form, nature and essence to the child, as Galen
affirms. Therefore where the humors of the body have contracted a sharp
heat and dryness by drinking of Tobacco, there the father gets a child
like to himself, wanting that kind moisture that should protract his life
unto old age, and incline him to an ingenuous, courteous and kind carriage.
But many take it, imagining that it does enable them in some actions. I
confess that it puts a sharp and fretting heat into the blood, which does
incitare: but they shall the sooner fail in their course; for heat can not be
preserved without moisture: and Tobacco consumes that, by infusing a dry
quality into the body, by excess of heat, and by drawing out of moisture.
Therefore Tobacco; though never so sparingly taken, can not be good for you,
nor for young and sound bodies: and the often use of it in such bodies, drives
them lentis gradibus into their grave long before that time that nature had
assigned them. It shortneth life.
Hippocrates says, that which is done by little and little, is done safely:
Quod paulatim fit, tuto fit. Aphor. lib. 2. 4. de cib. boni and mali* succi.
ca. 2.
and in diet as well as in other things, he commands all to be used with
moderation. Galen speaking of gentle opening medicines, affirms that the
often use of them dries up the solid parts of the body, and makes the blood
thick and gross; which being burnt in the kidneys, breeds the stone. This
may as well be verified of Tobacco; for many take it oftener than ever such
opening medicines were taken: and it has also more heat and dryness than
those had; and therefore greater power to hurt sound bodies. There may
peradventure be a profitable use of it in cold and moist bodies: but it must be
taken very seldom, and with great regard of sundry other circumstances. To
conclude, since it is so hurtful and dangerous to youth, I wish (in compassion
of them) that it might have the pernicious nature expressed in the name, and
that it were as well known Youths-bane.
by the name of Youths-bane, as by the name of Tobacco. 2. Meat and drink. Lib.
1. de sanit. tuend.


The second thing is meat and drink. Our bodies, as Galen affirms, are in
assiduo fluore, in a continual wasting, the inward heat always consuming part
of the very substance of them. The use of meat and drink is necessary for the
restoration of this daily loss. These rightly used according to the rules of
physic, have great Lib. 1. de morb. causes cap. 14. Nulla calamitate, etc.
power to preserve the body from diseases. This is verified by Galen in the same
book. To him Fernelius assenteth in these words; He shall be troubled with no
disease, that lays temperance for the foundation of his life. And in the same
chapter he adds, That neither the air, nor the affections of the mind, nor
any other cause, does breed diseases, unless there be a disposition in the
body proceeding from some error in diet. Galen says, De cib. boni and mali
succi, ca. 4.
In victu salubri, etc. In healthful diet the two chief things are meats of
good juice and not stopping. Here, to avoid tediousness, I pass over meats of
good nourishment, most of them being well known to you, and I will speak only
of some few that are badde. Meats of ill juice fill the body with gross
humors subject to putrifafaction, Initio lib. 1. de sanit tuenda. and initio
lib. de cibis boni and mali succi.
which is one of the principal causes of most diseases. Galen reports, that
when there was great scarsitie of corn thorowout the Roman Empire, the people
being compelled to eat roots and herbs of bad nourishment, fell into diseases
of sundry kinds. Initio lib. 5. de sanit. tuenda.
This he does further confirm by the example of his own body; for during the
time of his eating of ordinary fruits, he was troubled with agues almost every
year: but after that he left them, and fed only on good meats, he protracted
his life until extreme old age without any sickness. Flesh.
The worst meats that are in use with us are, of flesh, Bulls beef, the blood
whereof being accounted poison amongst Physicians, may justly make the flesh
suspected, specially for cold and weak stomachs. All old beef is of hard
digestion, and breeds gross and melancholic blood. Bores flesh is much of
the same nature, and the older and greater, the worse. There is the like reason
of Bucks, Male-goats, and Rams, in their kind: their ill juice increases
with their years, and those vngelt are of harder and grosser nourishment.
Blood.
Blood, howsoever it be prepared, is utterly condemned by Galen: De aliment.
facult.
so are the inwards of beasts, and the feet also, specially of the greater sort
of them. Fish.
Of fishes the greater and older are the worst, and bring most labor to the
stomach: those that live in muddy or standing waters are far worse than
those of the same kind that keep in grauelly or clear rivers. Ecles are
justly excluded from the number of wholesome meats, because they breed of
putrefaction. Fruits.
Most English fruits are forbidden in diet. Many of them are profitable in
medicines: De cibis bon. etc. cap. 5.
therefore Galen says, Apples, Pears and Medlers are not to be used as meats,
but as medicines. Therefore called (...)
The sooner ripe and the sooner subject to corruption, are most condemned,
because they are easily turned into putrefaction in the body. Cucumbers are too
usual with us, being utterly rejected by De aliment. facult.
Galen for their ill juice, and if they be not well concocted (as they are
never in a cold stomach) they are De cib. bon. and mal. suc. ^ap. 5.
almost like to deadly poison. Our common raw salads are full of danger. Salads.
Lettice is one of the best of their usual ingredients, which though it be good
in a hot stomach, yet being taken in a great quantity, it pierces to the
heart and kills, as Galen affirms. De simp. medic. facult. lib. 3.
It is not safe for any man in the use of these bad meats to presume upon his
strong stomach; for though naughty meats be well concocted, yet De aliment.
facult. li. 2. ca. 6..
Galen tells us, that when the juice of them is carried into the veins, it
reteineth the old nature. This point is more largely handled by Ludouicus
Merca^us a learned Italian. De indicat. li. 1. ca. 1.
But I conclude with Galen in the foresaid place; we must abstain from all
meats of bad juice, though they be easy of concoction: Omnibus praui succi
^dulijs abstin.
for by the use of them our bodies will be filled with matter ready to putrify
upon every light occasion; whereupon malign and dangerous agues will follow.

The quantity.
this must not be proportioned to the appetite, but to the strength of the
stomach to concoct it perfectly: for the fault or defect of the first
concoction is never amended in the second or third: if the liver receives the
chylus or juice of meats raw and inconcocted from the stomach, it conuerteth
it into gross and impurel bood, and so sends it into the lesser veins,
where there is no power to refine it. It were superfluous to speak of defect
in this point, for gluttony, that Plures interimit crapula quam gladius.
great murdering tyrant of the world, has subjected most of the richer sort,
and lead them by pleasant variety to the cruel prison of sickness, and from
thence to merciless execution. 2. Aphor. 17. vbi cibus, etc.
Hippocrates says, Where meat is taken in too great quantity, there it
breeds diseases. 6. Epide^. 4. sanitatis stud^um, etc.
Health requires little meat and much exercise. Socrates makes meat and
drink, taken beyond hunger and thirst, the breeders of sickness. De senect.
tantum cibi and potionis, etc.
Tully prescribes meat and drink in a small quantity, that we may thereby be
refreshed and not oppressed. De morb. cause. lib. 1. ca. 14.
Fernelius a learned French man makes gluttony the mother of all diseases,
though they have another father. Of all the five things before mentioned, the
error in quantity is most usual, and most dangerous, and therefore most
carefully to be avoided. A full diet stuffeth the body with gross humors, and
with wind; it breeds obstructions, after which follows putrefaction, and
agues of sundry kinds: also it begets many cold diseases, as gouts,
dropsies, palsies, and such like: it oppresses both the outward and inward
senses: it suffocateth and extinguisheth the natural heat, as a lamp with too
much oil. In Hippoc. aphor. lib. 1. 3.
Thus were some of the great champions, that used to contend at the solemn
games of Olympus, suddenly choked with fullness, as Galen reports. Also it
breeds thick and gross spirits, whereby the wit is made obtuse and blunt,
and the judgment dull and weak. Finally, it makes a man unfit not only for
natural and civil actions, but also for divine meditations, according to that
of Galen: Animus sanguine and adipe suffocat.
The mind choked with blood and fatness, can not meditate of heavenly things.
Quin corpus onustum besternis vitijs, etc. sorm. li. 2 sat. 2.
Horatius also speaks to this purpose: The body being oppressed with the
former errors in diet, cloggeth the mide, and presses it down to the ground.
A slender diet brings forth contrary effects. Many of these are set forth by
Galen Mores probos reddit.
in his first book De sanit. tuenda. Vna tempera^tia totius est iucundae, etc.
Fernelius in the place above cited says, Only temperance is the governor of
a pleasant and healthful life. De sanit. tuenda, li. 5.
Galen brings in sundry men that lived in health, with perfect use of their
outward and inward senses until extreme old age, by the continual use of a
slender diet. Philostrat. 9. li. 3.
There is a memorable history of one Apollonius Tyanaeus in the reign of
Domitian, who having excellent gifts of nature, and confirming them by daily
hearing, reading and meditating, obtained such deep and admirable knowledge,
that he could tell many strange things, yea and foretell things to come:
whereupon he was accused before the Emperor to have conference with devils: but
he cleared himself with this answer; That he did always seed on light meats
in a small quantity, and without variety: This kind of diet, said he, has
given such an excellent perspicuity to my inward senses, that I do clearly
see, as in a glass, things past and to come. De bello Jud^ico. lib 2.
Josephus reports that the sect called Esseni, inioyed life and health far
longer than other men, by their slender diet. Panem and mel Atticum.
The great Philosophers of Pythagoras sect had for their usual diet only bread
and honey. To conclude this point, variety of meats is the greatest mean to
allure the appetite, and consequently to procure ouerfeeding: therefore all
Physicians do inhibit many sorts of meat to be eaten at one meal; for beside
the hurt of the quantity, the difference of their qualities procures labor to
the stomach, and hinders perfect concoction. Consil. 246. deterius est vti
ciboru^ salub variet. qua^ vnico, v^cunq sit prauus.
The opinion of Montanus is very strict in this point, for he does rather allow
one dish of meat, be it never so bad, than variety of good. One thing more is
here to be observed, that after you be past that flourishing state and full
(...), vigor.
strength of body, which you now enjoy, then as your years increase, so the
Sensim sine sens^.
quantity of your meat must be diminished; for there will be a decay of your
natural heat, which you shall not perceive, and consequently of perfect
concoction, if the usual quantity of meat be continued. Out of this the
stomach will breed raw (...).
and incocted juice, which will fill the body with matter fit for diseases,
before there be any sensible feeling of it. This is confirmed by 1. Aphoris. 14.
Hippocrates in these words: Old men have little heat, and therefore should
eat little meat; for as an heap of green wood quenches a little fire, so,
much meat extinguisheth the decayed heat of the stomach. In this respect
Montanus forbids old men to go to feasts, lest by long sitting and enticing
variety of meats, they should eat much.

The qualities of meat.
The third thing to be considered in meat is the quality: in which it shall be
sufficient to observe these two rules out of Hippocrates: Similiasimilibus
conseruantur, and contraria contrarijs curantur; an equal and perfect temper
of the body is to be preserved by meats temperate, and without any excess of
heat, moisture, cold, or dryness* but if this eucrasia or perfect mixture of
the elements be decayed, so, as some of these qualities have obtained dominion,
then the body is to be reduced to his former state by contraries; as when it is
too hot, the diet must be cooling; and so of the rest. Also the diet in Summer
must be much cooler and moister, than in Winter: for in that season we draw in
by breathing far hotter air: the Sun also infuseth into us a burning heat,
and sucketh out much of our moisture. Furthermore, young men and old are to
observe this difference in respect of their years: for that age is like to
Summer, and this to Winter.

The times.
The fourth thing that is to be observed in eating, is the times. New meat may
not be put into the stomach before the former be thoroughly concocted and
digested; for so should both be corrupted, as Initio lib. de dissol contin
Galen affirms. I know that De indic. lib. 1. cap. ^.
Lud. Market. counsels otherwise, whereof a strong stomach may make
experience without hurt; but I think it not safe for others to imitate. The
judgment of Lib. 1. de morb. causis, cap. 14.
Fernelius is freer from danger, where he commends fasting as the best means
to concoct crudity: Non se, sed suam perniciem alunt.
They that are full of superfluous humors, says he, can hardly endure fasting:
and yet while they endeavor to repress the violence and fury of the humor by
taking meat often, they nourish not themselves, but their own destruction: for
all the offense that grows by fasting, will soon be taken away by the
continuance of it. The custom of our meals not agreeable to physic.
The custom of our nation, for the usual times of eating amongst the better
sort, agrees not with the rules of Physic: for a large supper following so
soon after a full dinner, heapeth up crudity, fit matter for diseases.
Breakfast and supper without any dinner, would agree far better with those
that have cold and moist bodies, or that use little exercise, as Lud. Market.
affirms in the foresaid place. This opinion is confirmed by the custom of
the ancients. De sanit. tu^nda, lib. 6. The champions diet.
Galen used a piece of bread only for his breakfast, and abstained until
supper. The great champions, that were purposely fed to be strong to fight at
Olympus, used bread alone for their breakfast, and porke for their supper,
without any dinner. Lib. de acre, etc. pransores.
Hippocrates calls gluttons diverse, in disgrace of their eating one meal in
a day more than was at that time usual; as In Hip. prognost. li. 2. 13.
Heurnius notes. Also Lib. 3. de di^tae. Two meals. Suid^^.
Hippoc. setting down a diet agreeable to Winter, allows but one meal in a
day, except to those that have dry bodies, that by two meals they may be more
moistened. It can not be strongly objected against this, that the Grecians at
the siege of Troy used to eat four times daily; or three of those meals were
only of bread and wine in a small quantity, and their supper was far larger of
flesh. It seems that this often eating was extraordinary, according to their
extraordinary labor in the wars: for Galen, De sanit. tuend. lib. 6.
speaking of the custom of the country, makes mention but of a light
breakefast or dinner, and a larger supper. Horat. coena d^bia.
But to shut up this point, since you are continually at a plentiful table, and
also at unfit and unequal distances of time, if you do not feed very
moderately and sparingly at dinner, it were healthful to inioyne your self a
light penance by abstaining altogether from supper: for although the abundance
of natural heat, in these your flourishing years, will not permit you any
light feeling of this error in laying one meal upon another, yet this bad
custom lays a secret and hidden foundation for sickness, whereupon you
shall daily build without suspicion, until it rises to the full height of
some dangerous disease. Li. 1. fen. 3. doct. 2. ca. 8. senectus luet
adolescentiae peccata.
This is confirmed by the testimony of Auicen: Old age shall smart for the
errors of diet committed in youth.

The order.
The fifth and last thing to be observed in diet* is the order of taking sundry
meats at one meal. Gal. in Hippoc. de vict. rat. com. 3. 22.
The custom of this land differs in this also from the common received
opinion amongst Physicians, which is to eat those meats first that are lightest
of concoction, that they may first pass out of the stomach. But this opinion
is rejected in a book De dissol contin.
ascribed to Galen, and a reason annexed to disprove it: therefore in this
doubt, I hold it safest for you to follow your woonted custom, which, as
Hippoc. says, 2. Aphor. 50.
is not suddenly to be broken, though it be a little worse. Custom not
suddenly to be broken. Two dishes at one meal.
The safest way to prevent all danger of disorder is, never to eat of above two
dishes at one meal; which is an excellent mean to preserve health. What
though Epicures object, Qui medice viuit, misere viuit? yet you shall thereby
be happy in the fruition of your health, when they shall be wretched and
miserable by the grieuances that follow the full pleasure and delight of the
taste.

Of drink.
Touching drink, there are three usual kinds of it with us, as every man
knows, Wine, Ale, and Bear. Wine.
Wine is first both in time and excellency: those which be sweet, are hot and
moist: that which is white, sharp and new, has manifest power of cooling, as
Galen affirms. De cib. bon. ca. 8.
The older that wines are, the hoter they are. The benefit of wine is set forth
by Galen: Lib. an animi mores, etc.
it does greatly help concoction, digestion, breeding of good blood and
nourishment. But this is to be understood with distinction of wines, of
complexions, and of years: Lib de cib. bon. cap. 8.
for new wines have in them a gross and earthly substance, by reason whereof
they are so far from helping the concoction of meats, that they themselves
are hardly concocted, as he says in another place. And hot wines are utter
enemies to all infirmities of the head. They are also very hurtful to hot
complexions; therefore they are generally forbidden to youth and flourishing
years: as is plain in sundry places in De sanit. tuend.
De morb. cause.
Galen. L^. ca. 14. fructum accelerat, sed arb^rem per^mit.
Fernel. says thus of wine: It is to men's bodies as chalk to trees; it
hasteneth the fruit, but it kills the tree. This is to be understood of hot
wines, in young men and hot constitutions. I omit Plato his strict allowance of
wine, confuted by Lib. an animi mores.
Galen. Ale is cooler than Beer, because it wants the hop; it fumeth not up
to the head, as wine and beer do: therefore it is most healthful in
infirmities of the head; but it is windy. Hoppes, which make the difference
betwixt ale and beer, are hot and dry; therefore beer is far hoter than
ale, if they be equal in other things: it is also much more opening. The use
of drink is to restore the moisture which the heat of the body daily
consumes, as Li. 1. de sanit. tuenda.
Galen says. In Hip. de vict. ratione lib. 3.
It is also cibi vehiculum: it makes the chylus or juice of the meat more
liquid or thin, that it may be the casier carried into the veins, and
distributed into all parts of the body. Labor, cibus, potus, somnus, venus.
Hippoc. says, exercise, meat, drink, etc. and all in a mean. Here is a
plain and manifest rule for the moderate use of this: that it be never taken
in great quantity. The words also contain a more obscure rule for the time of
drinking: that is, meals must begin with meat, and then drink to follow: for
so Galen expounds that place, that the order of the words is to be observed,
and the things performed accordingly: first labor, then meat, after that
drink. Not to drink between meals. Sack before supper not allowed.
This condemns the common custom of drinking betwixt meals or immediately
before them. Sack before supper is as hurtful, as usual, it carries the
unconcocted relikes of the meat into the veins before the due time: also it
procures a false appetite, whereby new meat is taken before the former be
digested; which is a pestilent enemy to health. The quantity of drink must be
proportioned to the meat, with a regard of the temperature of the body, and
season of the year: for lean and dry bodies are allowed more than fat and
moist; and a greater quantity in Summer than in Winter. Very little drink
hinders concoction in some stomachs, and distribution in most. The hurt of
much drink.
A great quantity oppresses the stomach, hinders concoction, breeds wind,
offends the head, and fills the whole body with superfluous moisture.
Drink betwixt meals.
Drink may sometimes be allowed betwixt meals to choleric bodies, after the
meat is concocted in the stomach, as De indic. lib. 1. cap. 2 consil. li 1.
Ludouic. Market. affirms* Also Epist.
Crato, a learned Germane, counsels him that has a hot liver, to drink
after the first concoction. In Hipp. aphor. lib. 5. 27.
Galen allows drink in the night, but to those only that are extremely
thirsty: but this liberty of drinking betwixt meals procures much hurt to
flegmaticke bodies, and to those that drink for pleasure or custom without
great thirst. Hippoc. forbids drink to them that are ready to go to bed,
because sleep moisteneth sufficiently.

Exercise.
The third thing to be considered for the preservation of health is exercise
and rest. Exercise is defined to be a vehement motion of the body, whereby
breathing is altered, or weariness procured. De sanit. tuend* lib. 2.
Galen says, That all motion of the body is not to be accounted exercise, but
only that which is violent, even to the drawing of breath shorter. Exercise is
not safe in all bodies; for if there be plethora, or cacochymia, fullness of
blood in the veins, or of some bad humors in the whole body; Gal. de sanit.
li. 4. arthrit. sciatica, gon^gra, etc.
there it may drive the superfluous matter into some principal part, and so
breed dangerous diseases: or into the joints, and procure extreme pains.
Therefore in this case the safest way is, first to take away this fullness by
opening a vein, or by purging, or by a slender diet, and then to begin with
gentle and moderate exercise, increasing it daily by small degrees: for all
sudden changes are dangerous, as Hippocrates affirms. The fittest time for
exercise, is the morning upon an empty stomach, when the supper is perfectly
concocted, and fully digested: Celsus.
for if any man feels any relikes of his supper after he arises in the
morning, it is far safer for him to follow the counsel of Celsus, and betake
himself to sleep again, than by exercise to send raw Gal. de sanit. tuend.
lib. 4.
humors into the habit of the body. Much more is that exercise to be condemned
that is used soon after meat. De cib. bon. etc.
Galen says, he that auoideth crudity, and does not exercise himself after
meat, shall never be sick: and when exercise is omitted before meat, De
dissol. contin.
he teaches a remedy for that, parcius cibandum, the meal must be th e
lighter. De d^aet^.
Hippoc. sets forth the commendation of exercise moderatly used, and at fit
times, in these few words; Corpus robustum reddit, It makes the body strong.
And in De morb. popul. lib. 6.
another place he says; Labor is to the joints and flesh, as meat and sleep
to the inward parts. In Timaeo: exercitium roborat, etc.
Plato shows the benefit of exercise, and the hurt of much rest: Exercise
strengthens, Rest breeds rottenness in the body. Ovid.
To these accords that of the Poet; Cernis vt ignauum corrumpant otia corpus:
vt capiant vitium, ni mo^eantur aquae: De indic. lib. 1. cap. 12.
Idleness corrupts a sluggish body, as waters soon putrify, if they be not
stirred. Ludouic. Market. in commending exercise, says it helps three ways:
First, it increases the natural heat, whereby comes perfect concoction, and
plentiful nourishment: Secondly, the spirits thereby are carried with greater
force, which cleanses the passages of the body, and expels the superfluous
excrements better: Out of these two rises a third commodity, that the
isntrumental parts of the body do by this motion gather hardness and
strength, and are more enabled to resist the diseases incident unto them.

Sleep. 2.
Lib. aph. 3. 7.
The fourth thing to be observed for continuance of health, is sleeping and
waking. Lib. aph. 68.
Of this is that aphorism of Hippoc. Sleeping, or waking, exceeding measure,
are both ill. This he further confirms in another place: Too little sleep
hinders concoction, and too much is an enemy to distribution it hinders the
carriage of the chylus or juice of the meat into the veins: by this gross
humors are engendered, the body made heavy and lumpish, and the wit dull. The
Hipp. and Gal. in Hipp. de morb. vulg. lib. 3. 6.
night is much fitter for sleep than the day, because the spirits move inward
by reason of the dark. I will not trouble you with the Cardan. in Hipp. Andr.
Laurent.
dissenting opinions of our authors about the manner of lying in sleep: it
shall be sufficient to note that it is not good to lie all night upon one side;
and that the worst manner oflying is upon the back. The length of time allowed
for sleep is seven or eight hours: longer sleep is required after a large
supper than after a light. De sanit. tuend. lib. 6.
Galen seems to allow nine hours for sleep, which In Hipp. prognost. 11. 12.
Cardan, a great patron of long sleep, takes hold of. Sleep moisteneth the
body, therefore larger sleep is permitted to drier bodies. The old rule of
rising Gal. s^pe. Celsus. lib. 2. a. 17.
early presupposes light suppers, which are hardly warranted by Physic, but
when full dinners go before, or where there is some infirmity of the head.
Sleep is not allowed until three or four hours after supper: for upon a full
stomach a whole cloud of fumes and vapors ascend to the head in sleep, a
great part whereof is dispersed in waking. Sleep after dinner ill.
This reason does inhibit sleep after dinner, as an utter enemy to the head:
but when the stomach is weak and the head strong, a short nap sitting is
allowed, because it helps concoction, by drawing the heat inward.

Retention and expulsion.
The fifth thing for continuance of health, is retention and expulsion of
superfluous excrements at fit times. Every concoction has it several
superfluity: if any of these be retained or kept too long in the body, or
expelled too soon, or with great violence; health is thereby impaired: if the
bowels empty not themselves at fit times, the neighbor parts suffer offense
thereby, and the head also receives unkind fumes: if the liver and spleen
want their timely vnloadings into the kidneys and bowels, diseases of sundry
sorts follow after if the kidneys and bladder hold their unprofitable burdens
beyond their just times, they are weakened by that heavy weight, by extending
the parts, and by increasing of heat: if sweat or insensible transpiration be
hindered, obstructions and putrefact^on succeed, and after them, agues of
sundry kinds: if any of there or any other humor rush out of the body with
great force, or issue quietly in too great quantity, the natural heat and
spirits pass out with them, whereby the whole body is weakened. Herodotus.
There was a custom amongst the Egyptians, to empty their bodies with medicines
three days together in every month, that no superfluous humor might hold
long possession there. By this it appears what great danger they esteemed it
to nourish their enemies within the walls of their city. But this course can
not be justified by the rules of physic: it agrees far better with health
to prevent this fullness by a slender diet, and moderate exercise. The errors
committed in these two, are commonly the cause of the excess and defect in
this point.

The affections of the mind
The sixth and last thing is, the affections of the mind: the excess of any of
these overthrows the natural and perfect state of body, as Galen affirms..
De art m^d^^. cap. 85. ^oy.
Plato held opinion, that all the diseases of the body have their beginning
from the mind. Moderate joy and mirth do both preserve health and drive away
sickness: the spirits are thereby stirred up, heat is increased, and the
humors are extenuated and clarified. Quintus Fabius, that renowned Roman
captain, being twelve years afflicted with a quartane ague, was freed from it
by the joy of a victory obtained against Hannibal. Chaucer.
An ancient English poet sings thus: As long lives never thee, as ever thee,
and a year the longer for his meritee. But this affection how profitable soever
it be, ifit exceeds the limits and bounds of moderation, it is sometimes
deadly: therefore Fernel. says, Instar subuinis spiritus dissipa.
it disperseth the spirits like lightning, that they can not return to
maintain life. There is a lamentable example of one G^lli^ lib 3. cap 15.
Pusillanimes ex gaudio per^er^^t.
Gal. de symptom. causis lib. 2.
Di^goras, who had three sons crowned Victors in one day at the solemn games
of Olym^us: and whiles he embraced them, and they put their garlands upon his
head, and the people rejoicing with them, cast flowers upon him; the old man
ouerfilled with joy, yielded up his life suddenly in the mids of the
assembly. But examples of this kind are rare, and therefore not to be feared.
Sorrow.
Sorrow and grief has great power to weaken the ablest state of body: it does
(as Plato speaks) exercise cruel tyranny. Tuscul. quest. Cum omnis
perturbatio m^sera est, tum carni^icina est agritu. do, etc.
Tully, discoursing of the affections of the mind, has these words: Every
perturbation is miserable, but grief is a cruel torment: lust has with it
heat; mirth lightness; fear baseness: but grief brings far greater
things; wasting, torment, vexation, deformity; it teareth, it eats, and
utterly consumes the mind, and body also. Histories afford many examples of
those that have been brought into consumptions, and to death, by sorrow and
grief. Fear.
Fear is an expectation of ill; it is commonly the forerunner of grief; it
calls the blood suddenly from the outward parts to the heart, and leaves
them destitute of their natural heat; for want whereof they tremble and shake:
the heart then suffers violence also, as appears by the weak and slow
pulse: and it is sometimes suddenly overcome and suffocated by the violent
recourse of blood. Fear kills many.
Thus Publius Rutilius and Marcus Lepidus ended their lives, as Pliny reports.
There are sundry examples in histories of those that through extreme fear
have had their hair changed into a whitish hoarenesse in one night. Skenk.
obseruat.
This opinion is confirmed by Scaliger contra Cardan. and the reason annexed.
Anger
Anger may add somewhat to health in cold and moist bodies; for it is an
increase of the heat of blood about the heart. Gal. de sanit tu*enda. lib. 2 ex
Aristot.
This brings much hurt to choleric bodies: it is comprehended under the
first of the five general causes of agues it is also sometime the cause of an
epilepsie, or the falling sickness, as De locis affectis lib. 5 cap. 5.
Galen affirms in the history of Diodorus the Grammarian: but this affection,
be it never so violent, takes not away the life suddenly, as De sympt. cause.
lib 2.
Galen and most other Physicians affirm: for in cold and weak constitutions
it can not be vehement; Magnani^s ob nullam animi aegritud. moriuntur. Gal. de
locis affect. lib. 5.
and the strength of hot bodies, wherein it is always most violent, will not
yield unto it. I know that some Cardan. consil. 1.
are of contrary opinion: but I may not enter into controversies, having been
already so long. Other affections I omit, as being near the nature of some of
these, and having less power to hurt the body. You see sir with what efficacy
the affections of the mind work into the body: therefore it is as necessary
for health to hold a mean and moderation in them, as in the five other
forenamed things. For though we live in a sweet and pure air, observe a strict
diet, use sleep and exercise according to the rules of Physic, and keep fit
times and measure in expelling superfluities out of our bodies; yet if we have
not quiet, calm and placable minds, we shall subject ourselves to those
diseases that the mind, yielding to these passions, commonly inflicteth upon
the body: these are many in number, grievous to suffer, and dangerous to life.

Thus I have briefly run over these six things, which being rightly used with
special care and regard, will preserve all strong bodies in continual health,
and prevent all diseases until the radical moisture be consumed, and no oil
left to maintain the light of the lamp.

A Discourse of Empiricks, or unlearned Physicians.
A Preface to the Reader.
THe life of man is so precious, as that all which a man has he will give for
the ransom thereof. Neither is this care of preserving his own life alone,
naturally implanted in the heart of man; but that he may save the life of
others also, how dangerously will he adventure! sometimes casting himself into
deep waters to save one from danger of drowning; sometimes breaking into an
house flaming on every side, to deliver one from perishing in the fire. And
this natural instinct has been the cause also, that public persons have by
wholesome laws provided for the safety thereof, and private men have spent
their thoughts in discovering those stratagems whereby the life of man is
oppugned. Now because none are more pernicious enemies to the same than are
these Empericks (who under color of drawing out the thread of man's life, do
most cruelly cut the same in sunder before the time) there have been some in
all ages, that have vehemently inueighed ^ga^^st them, and labored with all
diligence to suppress them, as it were to quench some gri^uous fire. But
hitherto all labor has been lost, that was spent that way: for (like the
Lernean monster against which Hercules fought) in the room of one, seven
others have arisen, and have by opposition grown, both in number and
estimation also with many: and that partly by their own devilish and
detestable practices, and partly by the folly of others. And first for
themselves, they will falsely vaunt what admirable cures have been performed by
them: that No mottall man is able to do more than they can do. They will
promise confidently to cure any disease though never so desperate; as, to
break a confirmed stone in the bladder, or else To lodge it in some part of the
bladder, that it shall never pain them after. And unto such as are therefore
left by the judicious Physician, because sentence of death has already passed
against them on an That is, a day that shows what shall happen on the
Indicatory day, or day of judgment, as the 4, 11, 17 days, declare the issue
of the sickness the 7* 14, and 20 days.
Indicatory day, they will warrant life, and that to the end they may be
employed after their betters, which is no small credit unto them. Now if they
be found to have missed the cushion, and the party dies (as was foretold) then
will they pawn their lives that the disease was mistaken by the first
Physician, and that if they had been called to the cure but one day sooner, it
had been a matter of nothing to have saved his life, for the party died
because he was let blood (if that were advised by the other with good
discretion) or because he was not let blood (if that were omitted upon just
cause.) On the contrary, the learned Physician (though he have no religion)
will not, for his credit sake, be found to utter any untruth; is very sparing
in reporting his own cures, thinking it a part of high wisdom, that another
should praise him, and not his own lips: and knowing how coniecturall in his
Art many things are, dares not promise more than he can justify by Art, lest
he make himself ridiculous: and not being ignorant of the desperate condition
of some, and how incurable many diseases are, does freely and ingenuously
profess (though he be many times dismissed for his labor) that they admit of
no perfect cure, and will not feed men with a false hope, that he may be fed by
their purses: nor will seek his own praise by unjust censuring of others.
Neither is the number of Empericks thus only increased by these their cunning
sleights and crafty cousenages, but also by the childish dealing of those that
employ them. For (as a learned D^uine of our times says of witches (one sort
of Empericks) they do so M. Greeneha^ To^^^. in a sermon of a good name.
dote upon them, that though she fail in twenty things, yet if she do but some
one thing aright, and that very small, the world loves her and commends her
for a good and wise woman: but the Physician if he work six hundred cures, yet
if through the waiwardnesse of his Patient, or the punishment of his Patients
sin, he fail but in one, that one fail does turn more to his discredit,
than his manifold, goodly and notable cures do get him praise. The chiefest
cause why they be thus addicted unto them, and magnify them above the learned
Physician, is partly because they can employ them for a less reward (wherein
notwithstanding they are often times deceived) and partly because they will
supply the place of a fool to make sport with, as well as of a physician to
cure their infirmities. Therefore are they called in the beginning to the cure
of ordinary sicknesses wherein is no danger at all; whereas the other is then
sent for, whenas either by medicines, not fitting the disease, the sick person
is brought to the pits brinke, or at the least by trifling away the opportunity
of time with medicines that do no good, the disease becomes incurable. Here
if the sick person dies, all the fault will be laid by those that favor
these Empericks upon the last Physician, that they cannot see but that more die
under the hand of the learned Physician than under others, that they have no
good luck, because they often times die to whom they come. By these and the
like speeches, sick persons are discouraged from sending for any other
Physician than him whom they first employed for fear they should die. But it
were well if these silly persons knew how dangerous a thing in sickness a
little delay is: for then would they consult with the most able Physician in
the beginning of any infirmity how slight soever it seemed to be. For it is not
so in this business as in matters of law, where if any error be committed in
the first proceeding by the ignorance or insufficiency of him that was
employed, it may be reuersed or (to use their own term) trauersed, and come
to a new trial, by which it will plainly appear what difference there is
between the learned and ignorant lawyer: But in this matter of greater
importance where the life is in question, the opportunity of time that is let
slip can not be recalled, and therefore though the learned Physician knows
what things should fitly have been used at the first, yet when he is called to
the cure, there is no place for him, because remedies are good in their season
only, and then are they Gods hands: but when the opportunity of using them is
past, then either they are nothing or hurtful. And here kind neighbors also,
especially those of the better sort, come now to be censured as faulty; who
visiting a sick person persuade him to such a course, or such a medicine, as
formerly they have had experience to have done good to others in the like case.
Here if they mistake the disease or the nature of it, who conceiueth not what
hurt may ensue, though altogether against their wills? But admit the thing
prescribed be not hurtful, yet whilst the remedy is used, the seasonable time
slippeth away, and the disease grows desperate: and thus by their
unseasonable good will they hurt them more than if they hated them.
Notwithstanding, because that which they do, is in unfeigned desire of their
welfare, and of a compassionate affection they have of the distressed estate of
their neighbor; they are rather friendly to be admonished that hereafter they
desist and advise nothing without the direction of a Professor of that Art,
than to be sharply reprehended. As for the Empericks (amongst whom also you may
reckon our common Apothecaries) because they have not so much humanity in them
as to mourn in the miseries of others; but all that they hunt after is how
they may enrich themselves, though it be with the loss, not of the goods
alone, but of the lives of men also, they must be proceeded against with all
rigor and extremity, as we do with members that have the Gangrene and are now
come to perfect mortification, whereunto we apply nothing either to cleanse or
comfort the part, but cut it off that it corrupt not other sound parts. But
this is the magistrates duty, and must be left unto him. That which is to be
done by private persons, that is, to inform the magistrate of things amiss,
that he may redress them; and to give a caveat to such as will be warned, is
performed by a learned man in this Treatise; wherein such multiplicity of
reading is joined with plainness and perspicuity, that such as be learned may
find that which will thoroughly satisfy them, and the simpler sort shall have
no cause to complain of the obscurity thereof, to whose understanding also he
labored to frame this book. If any shall read it without prejudice, he shall
be constramed to confess that the world is much abused by this kind of
(ravenous birds shall I call them which pray only upon dead carcases? nay, of)
sauadge and cruel beasts, which feed upon living men, and make many carcases
for the worms before the time; unless (peradventure) they so torture them
before, as that there is no flesh to be found on them, but only the skin to
cover the bones. Much bound unto him therefore is this age, and the ages
succeeding for this his learned pains, if men will not wilfully run the
brittle bark of their life upon the rocks and sands, discovered by him as by a
skillful pilot. Let him therefore be of high account with thee (good Reader)
not only because he is learned, but also for that he has so well deserved of
humane society, aduertising all men of great danger which they may prevent,
descrying and uncasing these masked enemies of mankind, that hereafter, not the
asses ears will be seen through the lions skin, but they will appear to all
that will not wilfully shut their eyes to be such as they are indeed. Encourage
him by thine acceptance of the first fruits of his endeavors, and and;so may
thou reap greater fruit of his labors in time to come. Farewell.

A Discourse of Empiriks, or unlearned Physicians.
THe second thing which you require of me, is to set down at large my opinion
concerning Empiriks. This I know, if it should be known, would be a work
subject to much envy and hatred. For whether I mitate such authors as I have
read, or speak out of my self, I shall be compelled to lay a grievous
accusation upon Pro Pub. Syl seruit^s est non dicere in quem vel^.
them. And although Tully says, it is a bondage not to speak against whom we
l^st* yet he seems to speak that as an Orator in pleading, and not from h^s
own judgment: for in sundry other places he inclines In Verrem* saepe^
grau^tis vidi of fendere animos auditorum, etc.
to the contrary. He came always joyfully to the defense and acquit ng of the
suspected, but heavily and as it were drawn to the accusing of any, as plainly
appears in the first inuectiue that he made. One reason hereof he renders in
these words: I have often scene those that have ripped up other men's faults
openly, to have more grievously offended the minds of the hearers, than those
which committed Mul^o liberior est vita ^orum, qui n^mine^ accusant. Qu^d far
recusant, quid veleant humert. Horat.
them. And another he gives in these: The life of them, which accuse no man, is
much freer. Therefore having duly examined mine own strength, I would gladly
have eased my weak shoulders of this heavy burden, did not the continual
flow of your manifold kindness toward me, provoke me to the performance of
any office, that may seem acceptable unto you. I am further encouraged unto
this, first, by the nature of the accusation, that stands upon a manifest and
infallible truth: next, by the hamous facts of the accused, which tend not to
the loss of credit or goods, but of the precious life of man: in regard
whereof I might rather to be judged, as carried with a desire of the public
good, than with an humot of any piruate or personal respect.

(...) What an Empirike is.
The name of an Empirike is derived from the Greek word which signifies
experience: and by an Empirike is, as you know, understood a Practitioner in
Physic, that has no knowledge in Philosophy, Logic, or Grammar: but
fetches all his skill from bare and naked experience. Ignorance then is the
difference whereby these men are distinguished from other Physicians. But
because ignorance is sometime clothed with the outward garments of knowledge,
and men are commonly judged of by that which is most apparent, The outward
marks of an Empirike.
I will set down some outward marks, whereby they may easily be discerned.
Langius brandeth them with this mark in his Epistles, and compares Lib. 3. 6.
(...).
them to geese that are always gagling. Empirici: Rome was full of these when
Galen came thither: they had more than a superficial knowledge in the ground
of Gal. in H^p. de morb. vulg lib. 6. comment. 3.
Physic, and wrote many learned books. I purpose not to speak of any such, but
only of those that have no taste of learning, but spent their youth either in
mechanical trades, or in some other course of life that barreth them from the
knowledge of any of the liberal sciences. Neither shall my words extend only
to the baser sort of them, whom I hold not worth the naming, but unto all,
whosoever they be, that having not applied their tender years to study in the
Grammar school and University, are notwithstanding sometimes fortunate by
multitude of patients, and famous by popular applause. And The division.
to avoid confusion, first, I w^ll lay down the difficulty of the Art of
Physic, Medici rationales.
are as far behind rational Physicians (as they are called) in the knowledge
of our Art, as Thersites was behind Achilles in fortitude; or as far as an
ordinary man comes short of the strength of that mighty Sampson. Neither is
it my purpose to vouchsafe them that cred^t, as to compare them with such a
Physician, as Tully faineth his Orator to be, or Castilio his Courtier, one
complete, absolute, perfect, as Hippocrates was, of whom a learned man of this
age speaks Lipsius.
thus; Qui in hominibus excessisse mihi humanum fastigium videtur: but the
contention shall stand betw^xt the best Empir^ks that can be, and S. c parts is
co^ponere mag^a sole^^^.
the ordinary and middle rank of scholars that pract se Physic. And yet you
shall find, I doubt not, that of the Poet to be here true, Great things are
compared with small.

1 The difficulty of the A^te.
Touching the first, the deep and profound knowledge contained in this Art,
the long time of study that it requ reth, the ambigu ty and hardness of
judgment, and the peril of experiments are Hippoc. vita breu^s, ars longa,
etc.
all expressed in the first aphorism of the renowned father of our Art, The
life of man is short, etc. as if he should say, After that a man has spent
almost his whole life in the painful and diligent study of Physic, he shall
not then be able to see into the depth of it: his experiments shall be subject
to danger, and his judgment shall meet with many ambiguous scruples. And in
Lib. de flat. mulum laboru, etc.
another place speaking of Physic, he says, it brings great labor and
trouble to him that professes it Furthermore, he In lege. De const^tut. artis
medicae. Natura, institutio a puero, industria, locus studijs aptus, optimos
quosque audire, methodum tenere.
appoints six guides or leaders to the study of this Art. This is confirmed
by Galen, with some difference of words, but they agree in substance; He that
will attain to the knowledge of Physic, must first be apt and fit for it by
nature; then he is to apply his mind to study in his youth; and of continue
with labor and diligence: this is to be done in a fit place, that is, in
schools of learning; there he must hear the best learned men, and read the
most approved authors; there he must learn the method of the Art, and then he
shall be fit to begin to practice. De pulsibus. totam vitam ad pulsus cognitionem
requiri.
The necessity of this timely beginning, of hearing many learned masters, and of
long perseverance in diligent study, is proved by that which Galen speaks of
one particular thing in Physic, Empiriks condemned by Hip. and Gal.
The whole life is required to the perfect knowledge of the pulse. What can be
here said in defense of Empiriks? Hippocrates and Galen, the most competent
judges of all matters belonging to our Art, require many things in all the
professors of it, two whereof are not to be found in the best of them: for
whosoever examineth their education, shall find that they never applied their
youth to study; never had learned man to instruct them; never understood
method or order of study, and therefore can follow none in their practice: for
want whereof all they do is confused, disordered and dangerous. Physic is a
profound study.
The ancients did signify the difficulty of this Art, by placing a cragged or
knotty staff by the picture of Aesculapius; meaning thereby that it was a
deep, intricate, and profound study, full of knots and doubts, which can not
be explaned or dissolved, but by such as have long labored in the diligent
search of the secrets thereof. Idem deus supientiae and medicinae.
Apollo was accounted amongst the heathen to be the god of Physic, and to
have revealed it unto Aesculapius his son: Medici dcorum filij.
so there is the same god of Wisdom and of physic: and learned Physicians
were called by the ancients, The sons of the gods. But Empiriks whose young
years were never blessed with the knowledge of inferior Arts, cannot in their
riper age attain to any mean knowledge in this divine profession. He that
applies not his mind to the study Qui in (...) M^rcur^^ no^ l^ tat.
of the liberal sciences when he is young, shall practice Physic dangerously
in his full age. It is well known that scholars bestow almost twenty years in
study, first in the Grammar school, and then in the University, before they
can take the degree of Doctors. Frustra sit per plura, quod fi^^^ potest per
pa^cicrae,
If there had been a more easy and compendious way to this knowledge, all
ages had greatly erred in following this long, laborious, and chargeable
course. I might enlarge the difficulty of this Art in setting down the
definition and division of it; but I desire to avoid ted. ousnesse: therefore I
will omit the former, and touch the latter briefly. This I note by the way,
that the knowledge of both these ^s necessary to every mean Physician, being
the first step and entrance into that study. This can not be comprehended
without Grammar, Logike, and Philosophy: I^bi desinit philosophus, t^t inc^p^e
Med^c^es, Arist. Emparic^ medicastri and pseudemedic^ sunt. (...).
for where a Philosopher ends, there a Physician begins; and the other two
are necessary guides to this. Therefore Empiriks being ignorant of all these,
are not to be called Physicians, the Artists name being justly denied to them
that understand not the Art. Physic is divided into five parts: these have
no proper English or Latin names, and therefore are strange to the best
Empiriks. Galenus floru^t a^no Christi 140.
Galen wrote 659 books of them. That which has been written since will fill
great libraries. No part of Hip. or Gal. in English.
Out of all the best of these the learned professors of our Art have increased
their knowledge, and confirmed their judgment: whereas Empiriks have not read
any of them, being ignorant of the languages wherein they are written, and also
destitute of other learning necessary to the understanding of such books. Of
the five foresaid parts of Physic Empiriks have little to do with four; for
under these the theory and speculation of our Art is comprised, and that is
far above their capacity: therefore they exercise themselves in the last, wh
ch comprehends the practice only. This reason is sufficient alone to bring
all their practice into contempt with all men that have any taste of learning:
for if of five parts necessary for every Physician to know, they be utterly
ignorant of four, and have but a slender and superficial skill in the fifth;
if they rush into the practice of an Art, Empir. ignorant of four parts of
Physic.
having never learned the theory, which is in all learning accounted necessary
to be known before the practice can happily be attempted, they shall be driven
into infinite errors, and precipitate many of their patients into the grave. I
need not add further proof of the antecedent, I know you see a manifest and
undoubted truth in it: Indicatio est comprehensio rei i^^^^e^ and nocentis Gal.
de opt. se^^a.
those things are to be learned in schools only, into which Empiriks were
never admitted. Further, there are in the Art of Physic sixteen
indications, as we ca^l them: the knowledge of these is as necessary to direct
a Physician in the cure of diseases, as the Pilots Card in sailing. They are as
guides and conducters to lead us into the understanding of all things that may
help or hurt our patients. Omissa vnt, curs. tio saepe claisdicat. prax. lib.
3.
The consideration of every one of these is so necessary, that the omitting of
one does often times mar the cure, as Heurmus affirms. Empiriks can not
attain to the knowledge of these, though they had the experience of Nestors
years. If it please you to hear some few of the observations, that the
methodicall cure of one disease requires, you may thereby conjecture the
difficulty of the healing of that and others. Of a pleurisy.
I take for example a Pleurisy; wherein I omit as impertinent to this place,
Empiriks commonly mistake diseases.
the usual error of Empiriks in taking other diseases for this, and the
danger of the sick by the course of Physic built upon a false foundation.
First the learned Physician is to search out the proper signs of this disease,
and by them to distinguish it from others that have some affinity with it: then
he looks into the cause of it, into the differences, and into the symptoms
or accidents that attend upon it: he examineth the natural constitution of the
patient, his present state of body his former course of life, his age, his
strength, the time of the disease, the season of the year, etc. he considers
the qualities and quantity of the humors; from whence the matter of the disease
flows; whether from the whole body, or from one part; by what passages it
moves; whether swiftly, or slowly; whether vehement pain draws it, or the
sharpness or plenty of the humor stirs up or provoke the motion. Out of
an advised consideration of all these, first a diet is to be appointed: this
can not be the same in every one that labors of this sickness, but it
requires great variety and alteration agreeable to the foresaid circumstances.
Then follows the consultation of the means of the cure: Donat. Alsom. de
pleuris.
what kind of euacuation is fittest; whether opening a vein, or purging, or
both, or neither: for sometimes the matter of the disease is discussed by
outward medicines, and requires neither of these two helps. Sometimes there is
a fit use of fomentations, and after them, of bleeding, as Hippoc. did, De
morb. vulg. lib. 3. in historiae Anaxionis.
when the disease could not be mitigated by these outward means, he opened a
vein the eighth day. Prax. li. 3. ca. 9.
In many other cases it is necessary to take away a great quantity of blood in
the beginning: therefore Heurnius says, Blood can not be taken away too soon,
nor in too great a quantity, if the patient be strong: but in weakness it must
be done often and by small quantities. In some bodies Art forbids taking
away of any blood, ^en. consuls. riol. obser.
though the patient be strong, and inioyneth purging. In some cases the passages
are to be stopped, and the humor to be made thick after bleeding, lest new
matter should flow to the place affected. After the flux is stayed, then the
weak parts are to be strengthened, and the matter impact in the side to be
prepared or tempered, that it may be cast up by coughing with greater facility.
Here is a broad gate opened to a large field of medicines of sundry sorts, as
ointments, S^r. pr^^. ^yr depapa^^.
plasters, syrups, potions etc. Some of these are very hot and much opening;
some very cold and binding. In the use of these, and also of all the former
things, the Empirike is plunged into many doubts, and the patient into as many
dangers: if he take away too little blood, he takes not away the disease; if
too much, he takes away life: if he purges when he should open a vein, or
does this when that is required, he commits a pernicious error: if he
judges not rightly of the humor abounding, of the complexion etc. (of which
only Art is the competent judge) he can attempt nothing in the cure safely,
nor so much as appoint a fit diet. If he prescribes local or outward
medicines of too hot operation, the heart is thereby inflamed the ague
exasperated, and life endangered. If there be in them any defect of heat, the
matter of the disease is bound faster into the side and chest with as great
peril. If inward medicines be not proportioned to every unnatural affect in
the body, and to every offensive quality, as now heating, then cooling; now
moistening, then drying: sometimes extenuating or making the humor thin,
sometimes incrassating or making it thick; sometimes opening, sometimes
stopping, etc. the patient does never receive any good, but commonly much hurt
by them. Argent. consult.
Neither is the Pleurisy only to be respected, but there must be a vigilant eye
upon the Ague also, which always accompanies the other, and may kill the
patient as well as the Pleurisy. Moreover there may be great malignity in the
humor, as Gesner reports in an epidemiall Pleurisy all died in whom a vein
was opened, Epist.
and all lived that received cordials. In the great variety of these doubts,
difficulties and distinctions there is a necessary use of sound judgment,
confirmed by long study and profound knowledge both in Philosophy and Physic.
It is therefore clear that the practice of Empiriks, being destitute of these
helps, must needs be unfit and full of peril. It may well be compared to his,
that Forestus mentions, Vromant. lib. 3. cap. 1.
who wrote out sundry receipts over night, and put them confusedly into a bag:
in the morning when patients came to him, after he had looked on the urine, he
put his hand into the bag (saying to the party, Pray that you may have a
happy lot) Precare vt sorti^re been.
and plucking out that which came first to hand, he gave it as a remedy for the
disease. Though our Empiriks have a far better color for their practice than
this was, yet in effect they often agree.

2. The errors of Empiriks.
But I proceed to lay open some few of their gross and palpable errors in
their practice, for to speak of all requires a whole volume. I will begin
with their mistaking of diseases, a common error with them, and exceeding
dangerous to their patients. Diseases are known (...).
and distinguished by their signs. The knowledge of this is comprehended under
the second part of Physic before mentioned, whereof, because they are
ignorant, they must needs fall often into this fault. This is seldom
discovered but when rational Physicians have opportunity to look into their
practice; then they see the disease taken to be in the liver, when it is in the
lungs or kidneis; to be in the heart, when it is in the head or mouth of the
stomach; to be in the breast, when it is wind in the stomach extending that
region: and many such. What though they can judge of the gout, the palsy, and
the dropsy? so can simple women do: but to judge rightly of the causes and
differences of these diseases, of the manifold differences of Agues, of simple
and compound sicknesses, and of sundry diseases of the head; that requires
Art, which is not in any Empirike. Lib. de aere aquis, etc.
Hippoc. shows the misery that fell upon many of the Scythians by mistaking
their disease and the causes of it, The danger of mistaking diseases.
and thereupon by taking a wrong course in the cure; of strong and able men,
they became as effeminate as weak women, and spent all the remainder of their
wretched life in the offices of that sex. In Hippoc. prognost. page 181,
Heurnius reports that an unlearned Physician by mistaking the cause of the
disease, put his patient into a bath, wherein he died presently; and the
Empirike was justly accused for killing of him. De calc ren.
Guanerius sets forth the deadly error of another in the cure of a sick
man, who after extreme and intolerable pains, ended his life. A learned
Physician having a melancholic patient deprived of the right use of his inward
senses, amongst other things in the cure, appointed his head to be shaven, and
then to be anointed and bathed according to art: Senseless. imitation.
an Empirike hearing of this cure, gat the receipt of the outward medicines used
in it; and not long after, lighting upon one sick of a phrensic or
inflammation of the brain, thought it to be the same disease with the former,
because both the patients were mad: therefore he followed the steps of the
other, with great confidence of the cure: this grievous error in mistaking both
the disease and the cause of it, brought the miserable man to a speedy and of
his life, far more cruel to himself, and more terrible to the beholders
than the sickness could have done. The reason of this is plain and evident to
every mean Physician. The cause of rauing in the former, was a cold humor; in
the latter, a hot: therefore hot medicines, which were fit to cure the one,
were as fit to kill the other. But admit the Empirike had been called to the
cure of the same disease, proceeding from the same cause, yet he could not have
observed the circumstances which art required, and therefore his receipt was
vain and unprofitable. If the course of these blind practisioners could be
observed, it would be found to be like to this in every disease. Our books are
full of such woeful examples. A huge volume will not contain all the tragical
histories of the sick of this age, manifestly killed by the ignorance of
Empiriks, being not able to discern one disease from another, or to
distinguish of their causes, or to proceed orderly in the cure. The eye can not
discern colors but by the light* nor Physicians diseases but by learning. In
the night not only indiui lua, but species are mistaken; as a man for a beast,
or a tree for either of them. It is alw^^es night with Empiriks: ignorance is
darkness, and knowledge is as the clear light of the sun. And doubtless the
learned Physician has as great advantage over Empiriks in discerning of
diseases, as they that judge of the eyes object by the sun, over those that
judge of it by the stars. They do the oftener fall into this error, because
some diseases agree in two or three signs, and yet are far different. The
perfect examining and comparing of signs, and referring of them to their
several causes, can not be performed without Art. But suppose they could
distinguish of most diseases, whereof they come far short; yet to know the
disease is not one step to the cure, unless the method and manner of proceeding
in it, be as well known. But to proceed in discovering their errors: the two
most effectual and usual means for the cure of most diseases, are opening a
vein and purging. The special observations that are required in both these,
are far above the apprehension of unlearned Empiriks; therefore they can not
undertake any thing fitly and safely in either of them. Of opening a vein.
What a great regard is to be had in preserving blood in his natural quantity
and qualities, is evident in that it gives nourishment and strength to the
whole body: and it is as it were the meat whereby the native heat is fed, as
Galen says: Pabulum natiui caloris. de nature. facult. lib. 2.
therefore it may not be drawn out of the body without mature deliberation.
Gal. de sang miss. cap. 6.
The things that are to be observed in opening a vein, are reduced unto ten
heads: these I must not mention, because I labor to be short. Many of these
contain such doubts and difficulties, as require much reading and deep
knowledge. Empiriks always take away blood without due examination of these,
(for how can they examine those that they know not?) therefore often times they
take away life also. Experientia st^^^torum magistra.
Experience, their only mistress, can not teach the difference of diseases, of
complexions, and of the rest. What though they can judge of them in a large
latitude, as to perceive a difference betwixt a great disease and a light,
betwixt strength and weakness? this every idiot can do: as when two plots of
ground are object to the eye, the one far exceeding the other in greatness,
every beholder perceives a great difference; but the just proportion of that
difference can not be found out, but by measuring them according to the rules
of Geometry. So Empiriks for want of learning can not judge of these things in
so strait a latitude as art requires. But beside the foresaid ten heads,
other consultations are necessary, whereof Empiriks are less capable than of
the former: as what vein is to be opened; whether a large or small orifice be
fitter; what quantity of blood should be taken; whether it be safer to do it
at once, or at sundry times; whether emptying simply, or reuelling, or
diuerting be required; at what time of the disease it should be done; how many
things do inhibit opening of a vein, or persuade delay. The learned Physician
is bound by the rules of his Art to consult of all these and many other,
before he dare attempt so great a work: Audaci^ imperitiam artu significat.
but the Empirike not foreseeing the peril of omitting these consultations,
runs rashly into it, and abuses this excellent remedy to the loss of the
life of many a patient, Hippoc* de arts. De Venae sec. contra Erasist.
as Galen plainly shows. Many deadly errors in letting of blood.
Errors in this kind are obuious and common to them: one opens a vein under
the tongue (by following some English book, or imitating some learned
Physician, not knowing the observations necessary in that he attempteth) in a
squinsie, the patient being full of blood and the disease in the beginning:
whereupon follows present suffocation, by drawing a greater flux to the place
affected. An other, as ignorantly, opens a vein on the arm upon the
critical day, when there are signs of the crisis by bleeding at the nose: by
this action nature is crossed in her regular course, and compelled to yield to
the disease. A third omitteth letting of blood in a sharp disease, sundry
indications, which he understands not, concurring to persuade it, and none to
dissuade. A fourth takes away too little Deadly errors.
blood in a great disease, or too much in a light. All these Empiriks increase
their credit out of these deadly errors, by extolling their own skill,
falsifying strange cures performed by them, and affirming that if they had come
in time, they would not have failed in the cure of these diseases: now they had
performed all that art required: the best Doctor in the land could have taken
no other course. They that are eye and ear witnesses of these secret
tragoedies, can hardly suspect the ignorance of these confident and glorious
Empiriks to have been the cause of them. Thus you see Sir, how unfortunate, or
rather indiscreet they are, that commit their bodies to the cure of an
Empirike, whose ignorance often brings death, where the disease threateneth
no danger at all. Miserum est cum ma^us periculu^ a medico, qu^m ^ morbo
impendet.
It is a miserable thing when greater peril hangs over the patient from the
Physician, than from the disease. The country is full of such pitiful
practice. The Empiriks lance is often times as deadly as the Butchers knife. He
that promises life with his tongue, brings the instrument of death in his
hand. Therefore whosoever regards his life, let him not suffer a vein to be
opened without the advice of a learned Physician. Bleeding dangerous to many.
In other cases where life is not presently endangered, gr^euous effects
follow. The taking away of blood from women and weak men, casts them into
palsies, gouts, dropsies, and such like di^eases. Galen in many places does
inculcate the danger of opening a vein often; it wastes and consumes the
spirits, diminishes natural heat and strength, and hasteneth old age
accompanied with many infirmities. Yet the common people, ignorant of this,
flock together to Empiriks in the Spring to be let blood, as if it were a
preservative against all diseases. Few or none are refused, because they bring
money; few receive good, many hurt, because the fornamed observations are
neglected. The blame of this public hurt lies justly upon the head of
Empiriks, who partly for their own gain, and partly for want of judgment,
have led the multitude into this error.

Of purging.
Touching purging, as it is more common and usual than letting of blood, so
the errors committed in it are as many, and in many cases procure equal
danger to the sick. Ludouic* de indic l^. 1. ca 6 ^p^^ magnum.
It is called a great work, for it brings great ease and comfort to the
afflicted when it is performed according to the rules of Art; and on the other
side, it tormenteth them, doubleth the disease, and indangereth life, when it
is undertaken rashly and unadvisedly by such as understand not all things that
are to be considered in it, as none of our Empiriks do. I confess that
experience will teach them what medicine will purge gently, and what strongly;
but what is that to the whole mystery of purging? for the same author says in
the same chapter, Qui quenquam purgatur^^ sit, s^opos fere infinitos, etc.
He that will purge any man must diligently observe and mark almost an infinite
number of things. In which words he utterly excludes all Empiriks from meddling
with it, because they are ignorant of the limits and marks whereby they should
be directed in it. Nemo debet sine maxima consideratione, etc.
Al^o in other place discoursing of the danger of purging, he concludes thus;
No man ought to give a purging medicine without great consideration. Lib. 1 de
morb. pop. nihil temere, etc.
Hippocr. in sundry places shows the peril of rash purging; against which he
gives this precept: Nothing is to be done rashly or negligently: speaking of
that action. Ignorant boldness in the use of purgers, with dangerous success
attending upon it, was never so common as in this age. Malum quo communius ^o
peius. Bacon. de retard. se^^ct. In quacunque re Deu^ admirab^lem v. m, etc.
Purgers are too full of peril for the unlearned to touch. One says well of
them; In what thing soever God has placed admirable power and virtue, there he
has also placed danger, as it were the keeper of that virtue. This has an
undoubted truth in most purging medicines; the hurt and danger whereof
commonly breaks out when they are used by such as can not order them
according to Art. In respect of this danger the Herbalist, and others that
have written of simple or compound purgers in our vulgar language, give this
necessary caution; Not to use them without the counsel of a learned Physician.
And this is usual amongst those of our profession; The further that any of
them has waded into the depth of it, and the profounder knowledge that he
has, the more hardly he is drawn to communicate the use of purgers with those
that have not studied the Art: Purging is subject to many dangers.
because the errors in giving them are many and great; and the safe and fit use
is hidden and locked up with other mysteries of Physic, in the writings of
Hippoc. and Galen. A light error herein brings often times exceeding danger;
if the medicine be too strong, or too gentle; if the quantity fails in defect
or excess; if the first qualities agree not with the disease and temper of the
body; if it be hastened before the just time, or delayed after: the An purgandum.
patient has either his disease prolonged thereby, o^ his life shortened. The
first consulation about this action, is* Whether it be fit to purge, or not.
Here the Artist discourses methodically of every particular concerning this
point, which I pass over to avoid tediousness, holding it sufficient to point
at the generals. After this point is cleared, and that Art persuades purging;
then there arise other things very advisedly to be considered: as the nature of
the humor offending; whether it requires preparing, or not; in what part of
the body it lies most; what kind of medicine is fittest; whether it should be
in a solid, or a liquid form; whether it should be brought out at once with a
strong medicine, or often with gentle, etc. Empiriks can not consult of these
things without Art, much less iudicially resolve of so many intricate
circumstances and deep points of learning: therefore their practice must be
subject to many errors. Vnda vndanda^; p^ll^t. Fin^ vnius mali grad^^ est
futuri.
Alas then, in what miserable estate are their patients? for one error
follows in the neck of another, like the waves of the sea. Every new
medicine threateneth a new danger. Confusion attends upon ignorance: Meth
m^dendi.
only Art observes order and method, without which no disease can be
certainly cured, as Galen affirms. Omnium purgant^um maxim cacost^ma^hum.
The usual all manner of purging amongst Empiriks is, To give a medicine full
of scammony; which, as Galen witnesses, is of all purges the greatest enemy to
the stomach: it draws ill humors unto it, and leaves a long offensive
loathsomeness behind it; it ouerheateth the body, breeds wind, raceth and
excoriateth tender bowels, and so procures incurable fluxes. This is their
common purger, because it works plentifully, and is of small price: the one
pleases the vulgar, and the other profits themselves. They that use gentler
medicines are also subject to dangerous errors; one draws the humor
downward, when nature attempteth to expel it upward; another prepares that,
which should without delay have been sent out of the body; a third purges raw
humors, 1. Aphor. 22.
contrary to that approved rule of Hippoc. all of them wanting Art to observe
natures operation toward a perfect crisis, do often times hasten her sure and
steadfast course, and drive it into such violence, as can not afterward be
stayed. All these and infinite other errors Empiriks commit in their practice,
which learned and judicial Physicians, guided by the rules of their Art, can
not fall into. Many killed by purging.
There is one sort of these Empiriks, that use but one kind of purging drink
for all diseases. This is a lamentable kind of practice: it drives many into
incurable dysenteries, hectike fevers, and consumptions, and casts them by
heaps headlong into their graves. But I leave these as the baser sort of them,
and most worthy to be purged out of the common wealth, and return again to
the great magnifico's. Fluxus epidem. us.
There was about six years since an epidemiall or popular flux raging through
most places of this land. This disease stood upon great putrefaction and
corruption of humors. The course for the cure was to resist this putrefaction
to temper and prepare the matter offending, and to drive it out with gentle
purgers fitted to the humor, complexion, strength, and season. Then the parts
weakened were to be corroborated and strengthened both by inward and outward
medicines. Opium was then in great request.
Empiriks, being not acquainted with this disease, and finding little written in
their English books for the cure ofit, took a contrary course, and first of
all gave strong binders. This was very acceptable to patients for a while, for
it stayed the violent flowing of the humors, it procured present sleep, and
mitigated pain. By this preposterous and dangerous course, though some few,
that had strong bodies, and received this medicine toward the end of the
disease, when almost all the infectious matter was expelled, recovered their
health; yet a great number had their lines cut off: Opium. ^apiuac. de venenis,
cap, 9.
some died sleeping, being stupied with that poisoned medicine: others had their
ague increased, by stopping in the corrupt humor: in many the flux broke forth
again with far greater fury. Gal. de compos. phar.
If these Empiriks had ever read of the danger of this medicine, that it is
never to be given to young or old; nor to women; never to any but only in great
extremities, and with many cautions; they might have avoided this deadly
error. But it was strange to see how the multitude flocked to those that were
boldest in the use of this medicine; for the fame of it for present remedy was
spread abroad by them that gave it, and the danger concealed. Thus the simple
people greedy of the pleasant bait, swallowed down the killing hook. It was
not easy for one to take warning by another, the subtle Empiriks had so
provided for the credit both of the medicine and of themselves: for when any
died, they gave out that the medicine was not given soon enough, (whereas the
sooner it comes, the more peril it brings) or that the patient committed
some fault, which was the cause ofhis death: for many had been cured by this
in other places. Another pernicious error, whereinto ignorance carries them,
is to seek out medicines in the titles of diseases: as in some English books
in the title of an Ague, they find that Sorell is good for it, and Carduus
ben^dictus also; the one being very hot, and the other cold. Here Art is
necessary to distinguish of the humor and the complexion: for he that gives
that which is not fit for both these, brings no light danger. De compos.
phar. l^. 3. ca. 8. phar. maca indefi^ita.
Galen utterly condemns medicines given without distinction, and shows the
danger of them by an example in the practice of an unlearned Physician, who
having cured many of patnes in the cares proceeding from a cold cause, gave
the same medicine in a hot cause with unhappy success. In H^pp. prognost.
comment. 1,
Also he reports a greater error in another Physician, who in the beginning of
a sweat brought his patient into a bath; whereupon followed present death. If
all our learned Physicians should bring together all the pitiful examples that
they have observed in the practice of Empiriks, they would fill large volumes.
In Hipp. de morb. vulg. li. 6. pl^rimi mor^^ntur, etc.
Galen says, many die because they obey not their Physician. But they that
ob^erue the practice of our Empiriks, may as truly say, many die because they
obey their ignorant and unlearned Physicians. If their deadly errors could be
perceived by others, as well as by those that profess the Art, Quot agros
Themison autumn^ occider^ vno D^ dieb. decret l^b. 1. quoties aegros adeu^^,
etc.
some of them might be as famous as Themison, of whom Iuuenal says, Old age
is subject to as many infirmities, as Themison killed patients in one Autumn.
Galen sette^h forth their errors very lively in these words; As often as they
visit their patients, so often they err by their inartificiall attempts. But I
will examine their errors no further.

Experience
The reasons brought in defense of Empiriks are now to be confuted. De optun^
sectae. Eu^ quod saep^u and codem mo^o, etc.
The first and maine reason is, their experience, the very foundation of all
their practice. It is thus defined by Ga^en; It is an observation and
remembrance of that which has fallen out often and after the same manner. This
definition utterly maimeth the practice of our best Empiriks: for by this it is
clear that experience reaches not to the theorie and speculation of the Art;
it teaches not the knowledge of the difference of the constitutions of men's
bodies, nor of the causes of diseases, nor method of curing them: Many things
in Physic can not be learned by experience.
for none of the^e fall out after the same manner: but it respects only some
few things in the practice; for in that also are many occurents, that fall not
out after the same manner, and therefore can no^ be learned by experience.
Diseases, as they have sundry causes, so their symptoms and accidents are
variable. Mill ^^odis medicum illudi^ slat. hypochon.
Heurnius speaking of one disease, says, it deludeth the Physician a thousand
ways. What can experience learn in this great variety? I confess it is a
necessary and effectual mean to confirm the knowledge of a Physician. The
event and success of things past must be carefully observed and laid up in
memory to be compared with things to come. Many things also are found out by
experience alone, as the nature of simples; wherein Galen commends it highly:
De simplic. phar. f^^^lt.
In finding out the virtue of medicines we must begin at exper ence, says he.
Meth. medend^. li. 10. ca. 10. G^^ner^ ^pist
To this agrees that which he speaks of the same argument in another place.
This first taught that Rubarbe purges choler, and Agarike phlegm. Gesner
amongst others, was exceedingly industrious in this kind, and found out many
things in our Art by his experience, as he affirms in his Epistles. But this
brings nothing to the credit of Empiriks: for what are these few things in
comparison of all those that are required in a Physician? One reports that a
young man walking by the sea side, and finding an old boat, purposed to build a
ship therewith, never considering what a great number of other things were
required to so great a work. Experience helps no more toward that great
building of the Art of Physic, than that did toward a ship. No learned man
ever ascribed any commendation to experience in this Art, but when it was
joined with learning. Lib 29 cap. 1. Discunt per* cul^ nostris, etc.
Pliny speaks thus of them that practice by experience without learning: They
learn by our perils, and they try experiments by our death. Experience alone,
with a little help of nature, makes men skillful in mechanical trades, in
merchandise, and in other kinds of buying and selling; but the deep knowledge
contained in the l berall sciences, and in other learning rising out of them,
requires much read ng, long study, great meditation; and after the theoric or
speculation of them is obtained, then practice and experience confirms and
establishes them: but without the former, the latter is weak, lame, and
maimed. ^ Meth. cap ^. de compo^ phar. lib. 2 cap 1.
Galen in sundry places expresses the danger of experience without learning,
and shows into what grievous errou^s Empiriks fall for want of knowledge. A
(...) remedi^ adaliud temere* etc.
They run rashly and without reason from one medicine to another, hoping at
the last to find out that which shall help. A dangerous and desperate kind of
practice, when for want of the light of Art, they are compelled to wander
gro^ing in the dark dungeon of ignorance, (...) D^dilus (...) ^rrore vias.
not knowing wh ch way to turn. And yet in Galens time there were no such
Empir^ks, as in this age; it was not then heard of, that a man utterly ignorant
in the foundation of all learning, durst presume to intrude himself into the
practice of that deep and intricate science. De mor. ad (...)
The difference betwixt an Artist and him that works by experience, is set
^oorth by Aristotle: an Artist knows the causes and reasons of things subject
to his Art: an Empirike knows many things also; but he is ignorant of the
causes of them. What thought he can in some things satisfy the ignorant vulgar
with some show of reason? every simple man can do this in his trade: yet in
the great and maine points of the Art, Empiriks can yield no sound reason,
being vo d of the knowledge of Philosophy, from wh ch the causes of such things
are drawn. Meth. ^ed^nd. lb 9. cap 6.
Galen sets Physic, as a perfect man upon two legs; Learning, and
Experience: All Empiriks lame.
therefore the best Empirike is but a lame and left-legged Physician. It is a
full consent of all learned in Physic or Philosophy, Methodus est vitae ac
spiritus sc^entiarum.
That nothing can be happily done in the Art of Physic without method and
order: and it is as true that experience can not teach this method. This is
confirmed by Plato; Qui artent sine methodo etc.
He that thinks he has learned an Art without the method of ^t, let him know
that he has but the shadow of the Art, and not the Art it self. Therefore
all the practice of our long experienced men, being destitute of order and
method, can have no approbation amongst the learned, but it is to be utterly
rejected and banished out of the commonwealth, as a pernicious and perilous
enemy to the lives of men. It is like to the walking of a blind man in a
known path, wherein, if there be a hole dug, or a block laid, he is in
danger of falling so if there be any hidden thing in the disease, in the
causes, or symptoms of it, as there is commonly, the Empirike is beyond his
skill, Galen de locis assect. li. 3
he stumbleth and falls; and the life of the sick is in ieopardy. What can
Empiriks do in rare diseases*
Moreover, if an Empirike light upon a rare disease, not seen before by him, or
upon a new disease, whereof he never heard, what safe course can he take here?
he wants learning, and experience has taught him nothing that brings any
spark of hope in this case. Here he is utterly confounded: yet he will never
confess his ignorance, and counsel his patient to send to a learned
Physician: but not knowing what to do in the disease, nor able to give any
reason of it, he p^onoun^^th the patient to be bewitched; and so leaves him.
Therefore though the vulgar may suppose that experience is sufficient for the
cure of common and ordinary maladies, yet it is absurd and senseless, to
imagine that it can enable then: in rare, extraordinary, and new sicknesses.
Feb. symptoniat.
An Ague, that seems to be but an ordinary and light sickness, may have some
malignity in it, or may be secretly fixed in some principal part, Morbus
complicat.
or be accompanied with some other disease. Here experience can not
distinguish: that must proceed from Logic, and from knowledge in Natural
Philosophy, but especially from anatomy and the grounds of Physic. No patient
secured by Empiriks.
Therefore experience is a blind and weak guide to direct in these cases; and
no patient can assure himself that his disease is not within the compass of
some of these. How can any man then call an Empirike to the cure of his body
without great danger? You see, sir, what a weak ground experience is to build
all the practice of Physic upon. Learning is as it were the very soul of
this Art, which has his full perfection when it is confirmed by experience:
but this without that is to be condemned as a dangerous thing. But some men are
so full of gross ignorance, and so dull of conceit, that notwithstanding all
that has been said, they will be obstinate in their senseless opinion, that
sufficient knowledge for the practice in Physic may be gotten by experience
alone. I will not deal with these unlearned men; I write only to you whom I
know to be learned and judicial, and therefore satisfied in this point: and yet
I will add this out of Galen: In Hipp. prorrhet. qu^ speculationem ex
obseruatione sine sc^ent^a aecer^^are, etc.
He that hops to heap up the speculation of the Art of Physic by
experience without learning, has need of a thousand years. This grand reason
of experience is further urged of some by the example of Atturneys at the
common law: Atturneys.
most of these have nothing to direct them but experience and observation, and
yet sundry things pass through their hands as substantially and effectually
performed, as by learned Counselors: therefore unlearned Physicians well
instructed by experience may do some cures as well as great scholars. The
answer to this is easy: There are many things in law which belong merely to
Atturneys, and require no learning: also they follow presidents and usual
forms, and many things wh ch they do, are plain transcripts, written out of
books verbatim, wherein they cannot err, if they follow their pattern. But it
is far otherwise in Physic: there is no usual form to follow in judging
or curing of diseases; things seldom fall out after the same manner; the
Physician must alter and change his course, as the disease and accidents
require, wherein experience can not guide him, but the rules of the Art. But
if I should grant that Empiriks are as Atturneys, then it must follow that
learned Physicians are as learned Counselors: and as Atturneys in doubtful
cases ask the opinion of them, so should Empiriks do of the other: this would
make their practice far freer from danger, and preserve the ^ues of many of
their patients. But the case of an Attorney and of an Empirike is not alike: if
by his fault his client lose the day, the matter may sometimes be brought about
again; but if life be lost by the error of the Empirike, it can not be
restored.

English book^.
The second reason brought in defense of Empir ks is, That they read English
books sufficient to instruct them in their practice. This reason seems to
proceed from one that understands his mother tongue only: for if his
judgment were confirmed by the knowledge of learned languages, he would not
urge this weak argument. All the large volumes of Hipp. Gal. Auicen and all
other famous Physicians both new and old, were first written in the Greek or
Latin tongues, or afterward translated into one of them; the ignorance whereof
has in all ages been accounted a strong ba^^e to exclude all men from the
profession of that Art. That which is written in English is very little and
light in respect of the whole: nether can it be perfectly understood without
the help of Grammar and Logic, as every mean scholar will confess. All
nations Christian, wherein the civil law is used, can not afford one man of
any mean account in that profession, that understands not the Latin tongue,
wherein their large books are written. And I dare confidently affirm, that
Physic is as profound and intricate a study as the Civil law, and requires
as much reading and knowledge o^ tongues, as that does. Therefore I see not why
the practice of our most famous Empiriks should not be brought into base and
contemptible account. English (...)
What though there be a profitable use of Ministers in our Church, that
understand English books only, being yet able to execute their office in some
commendable manner? yet this reason holds not in Empiriks: for first there is
far more Divinity than Physic written in our vulgar idiome; all the grounds
and principles of religion are set forth at large in it: whereas no part of
Hipp. Gal. etc. is translated into that tongue Secondly, Ministers have far
greater helps in hearing the learned of that profession, and in frequent
conference with them: whereas Empiriks labor always to avoid the presence and
company of learned Physicians, The fox cando^:meth not near the lions den.
being not able to speak any th ng sensibly in their profession, nor willing
to have it known that they ask counsel of any man, because they carry
themselves as if they had the complete and absolute knowledge of the Art.
Thirdly, the manner of teaching differs far from the manner of practice, and
is not subject to so many errors. But on the other side, as no Minister is
able to confute a learned adversary, that has not skill at the least in the
Latin tongue; so no Empirike is able to encounter with sickness, that great
adversary to nature, without weapons fetched from the Greek or Latin tongue.
M. Latimer says in one of his sermons; English Divinity will never be able to
expel Popery out of this land: and it may as truly be said; English Physicians
can not cure English diseases.

Their cures.
The third reason is; They do many cures. Th^s makes much for their credit
with them that perceive not the falsehood of it. All cures are artificial,
natural, or casual. No man of judgment can ascribe artificial cures to them
that are not Artists. Natura est omnium morborum medicatrix.
I am not ignorant that nature is said to cure all diseases; nor how that is to
be understood: Natural cures.
but by natural cures I mean those that are performed by the strength of
nature alone without any help of medicines; and doubtless many of their cures
are of this kind: for when the disease is dangerous or unknown, as it is
often to them, there the most circumspect of them commonly gives some light
medicine, that has no power to alter the body, or mitigate the disease, as is
required: Lud Market. de indic.
this is, as one says, to leave a ship in a great storm to the violence of the
waves. If in this case the patient recover by the aid of nature, then this
fortunate Empirike and his companions extol and magnify the cure, as if rare
and extraordinary skill had been showed in it, when it was merely natural.
Casual cures.
By casual cures I mean not such as are merely casual, and beside the
purpose of them that give the medicines: of this kind are the histories in
Galen, De su^sigurat. empir. ^o. 1,
of two desperately sick of the leprosy, to both which was given wine wherein
a viper had been drowned: both the giuers had a purpose to kill them; the one
of compassion, the other of hatred: but both the patients were cured by the
secret and admirable virtue of the viper. Solenan l. consil. sect 5.
Like to this is that which we read of a woman that gave her husband the powder
of a toad to rid him out of a painful dropsy; but by the violent operation of
the poison all the matter of the disease was expelled, and the man recovered.
But by casual cures I understand such as are performed by hap or chance in
respect of the Art, Aschams Toxo philus.
being done without order or method; as when one shoots neglecting all the
five things required in an Archer, and yet hitteth the mark: this is a mere
chance, and falls out seldom. (...).
Such are the cures of Empiriks. Fullness of blood in the veins, and of ill
humors in the body, are the common causes of most inward diseases: here the
learned Physician first collecteth all the signs of the disease, then he
refers them to their causes; and having diligently reuolued in in his mind
all the indications belonging to the Art, he proceeds to the cure by taking
away the cause of the disease. The Empirike in the same case, not knowing how
to gather the signs of the sickness, much less how to refer them to their
causes, attempteth the cure without consultation, and by a weak and
inartificiall conjecture opens a vein, or gives a violent purger; by both
which rash and unadvised courses many lose their lives: but when any recover,
the cure may fitly be called casual, more by good hap than by learning. De
v^t^ri med^cina.
Light errors in the cure of a disease do never appear in a strong body, as
Hippoc. says, nor in a light disease, no more than the ignorance of a pilot in
a calm: but a great disease and a violent storm tries the skill of them
both. Sometimes gross and gricuous errors are obscured and hidden: for where
the strength of nature wears them out, and the patient recouereth his health,
the Empericke can never be stained with the blot of them. Therefore since
almost all inward diseases proceed from fullness, some are cured in strong
bodies by emptying, though that be done confusedly and without Art. But this
reason is further enforced, that sundry sick persons recover under them,
which came out of the hands of learned Physicians. This is no argument of their
knowledge, for in long diseases patients are commonly desirous of change, when
sometimes the cause of the disease is taken away before, and nothing required
but time to gather strength. Moreover they that are tired with long sickness,
do usually submit themselves to a stricter course both of medicines and diet
under their second Physician: and though nothing be administered in either of
these agreeable to Art, yet some few may escape, as a ship or two, in the
loss of a great fleet, may pass by rocks and sands, and a^iue at the wished
haven. Also some that have been afflicted with long sickness, are willing to
submit themselves to a far stricter course under their second Physician, than
under their first* and are easily induced both to abstain from things
hurtful, be they never so pleasing to them, and to take that which is
offensive. And although the best of these unlearned Practitioners cannot
prescribe diet or medicine fitting to the temper of the body, and agreeing to
the nature of the disease: yet a slender diet of roasted meats, and a drying
drink (which is a common course with them all) does sometimes cure an old
disease proceeding from a cold and moist humor, though all things be done
confusedly without order or method. De morb. cause. lib. 1. cap. 14.
Fernelius affirms, that some great and dangerous diseases have had an happy
end by a slender and strict diet onel^e, without any Art. And this is the
reason why learned Physicians do sometimes fail in the cure of diseases of
this kind, because intemperate patients will not be barred from eating and
drinking according to their appetite, but as fast as the Physician diminishes
the matter of the sickness by emptying, so fast they renew it again by
filling. Morbi fac^lius ^^rantur in s^r^is, quam in liberi^. C^ls. lib. 3. cap.
^1.
Therefore a servant, that by the baseness of his condition, is bound to follow
all that which is prescribed agreeable to the rules of our Art, is cured in a
shorter time and with more facility, than those which are free, and will not
subject themselves to ordinary means. An Empiricke then, that has
opportunity to draw patients from their own houses, where they have all
pleasant things at command and to bring them into his strict custody, may well
heal some by abstinence only: as Lib. 7. cap. 8.
Plin. reports of one Julius a Roman, and Cap 13.
B^neuenius tells of a patient of his: both which were cured of a dropsy by
abstaining from drink. Hippoc. de ^^te.
Furthermore, ignorance, the mother of boldness, makes Empiriks more
aduenturous in their practice, and more hardy in the use of strong and violent
medicines: by reason whereof they pluck up the root of some disease which a
wary and circumspect Physician, forseeing the peril, would not attempt. And
although this kind of practice be always full of danger, and brings many a
man to untimely death, yet it is in daily use with many ignorant practitioners.
And when one amongst many receive health by it, then the Emperike takes
occasion to magnify himself, and to disable the former Physician, were he
never so learned: his own fame together with the others infamy is blased
abroad. But if their practice with other men's patients were well examined, it
would plainly appear, that for one that recouereth, very many end their lives,
or increase their disease. Qui totum diem iaculatur.
Tully says, he that shoots all day long, is like to hit the mark
sometimes: and they that have many patients may cure some in despite of Art. O
beat^s medicos, quorum praeclara facta sol videt, errores terra abscondit.
Nicocl^s.
Their cures are far more noted because they do earnestly endeavor to make
them objects to the eyes and ears of all men, and labor as carefully to
conceal the dangerous and deadly effects of their ignorant and desperate
practice from the view of the World. Men that run through many great actions,
if the few happy and fortunate they perform be set upon a stage in the light
of the sun, and all the bad and unhappy hidden in the dark, the vulgar
shall find much matter of commendation, though some few sharp sighted shall
see just cause to condemn them. It is usual with Empirikes to extol and
magnify their own cures, and with their smooth tongues to allure simple and
credulous men to applaude and give credit to their hyperbolicall and amplified
discourse, and vain glorious brags of their wonderful and rare cures. But
learned and ingenious Physicians account it an odious and hateful thing to
boast of their cures, and therefore they have commonly less applause and
commendation of the multitude. Erasmi m^ria.
When men's actions merit no true and just praise, they are wont to seek for
false: and he is allowed to commend himself, whom no other will commend.

Rare medicines and secrets.
The fourth reason to enable Empiriks is, that they have excellent medicines,
yea some of them have rare and admirable secrets. This is like a plain iugling
trick, wherein things seem to simple beholders far otherwise than they are.
Hippoc. Gal. and other renowned Physicians had no secrets, though some things
in their books have a sound and outward show of them. Res sacrae profanis non
etc. in l^ge de sa^it tu^nd. nos neq, German^^, etc.
For Hip. says, holy things (meaning the secrets of Physic) are not to be
discovered to profane persons. And Galen speaks to the same purpose, we write
not these things for the Germans, nor for other rude and barbarous people no
more then for Bears, or Bores, or Lions: but for the Grecians, and for those
that imitate their studies, though they be of the stock of the Barbarians.
This they wrote to show the base account that the learned Grecians made of the
rude and illiterate Barbarians: But it is manifest out of their works that they
had no purpose to conceal the mysteries of their Art from learned men. In
iureiurand.
For Hipp. swears to teach his scholars all the mysteries and secrets of
Physic. Comment. in Hip. prognost.
And Heurnius, speaking of Hippocrates, says, so great was the bounty of that
great master, that he knew nothing whereof he would have us ignorant. Also
Galen has these words, A lover of the truth ought to hide nothing that he has
found out. De respir. veritat^ cultor.
And in another place he utters his disliking of concealing secrets in these
words. De theriaca valde rusticum.
It seems to me a very rude and clownish part to hide those things which
belong to health. De compos. phar.
And he protests that he has communicated to others all the secrets that he
had found out. If it were esteemed odious and intolerable amongst them that had
no knowledge of God, to lock up those things in secret, which might preserve
the body in health, or bring an happy and wished end to grievous diseases:
much more ought it to be condemned amongst religious Christians. But in this
boasting of secrets the common sort are carried into a double error: for
First, Empiriks have no such secrets: Secondly, if they had, they cannot make a
fit and safe use of them. For the former, no man of judgment can imagine that
they have them by their own reading, that read so little, and understand
far less: and (that which is much more) that are ignorant of the languages,
wherein it is most probable these secrets should be enclosed. Neither is it
credible that any learned man should discover them rather to this ignorant
brood, than to those of their own rank, learned and ingenious. All the
secrets contained within the Art of Physic are soonest found out by the
profoundest scholars and greatest students. Therefore if any be in the hands of
Empirikes: the same, yea many more are known to the learned. Touching the
latter, it is evident (as has been partly proved before) that diseases are
not cured by medicines and receipts, but by a learned and methodical use of
them, whereunto Empirikes cannot attain. And if it were possible for any of
them to ingrosse all the secrets of the world, yet his practice should deserve
never the better estimation, for they should be but as so many sharp weapons
in the hands of a mad man, wherewith it is liker he should do hurt than good.
The sharper a tool is, the more skillful workman it requires: and the more
effectual or excellent a medicine is, the greater knowledge should be in him
that uses it. An ancient Physician says, medicines used by the unlearned are
poison. Herophilus, medicamenta ab inde^^^ ^surpata venina sunt. Gal. de
compos. phar. 4. 6. Gal methodo medendi.
Apollo the God of Physic is said to hold sharp arrows in his left hand,
threatening danger to the patients where medicines are sinisterly or unlearnedly
used. Medicines cannot be rightly used, but by them that understand the whole
method of Physic. The unlearned Physician before mentioned abused his
excellent medicine for the ears. De aliment. facult Lib. 1.
Galen taught one a present remedy for pain in his stomach, which he using
afterward in the same disease, but proceeding Gal. de compos. ph^^. lib. 6.
from another cause, was far worse for it. Medicines therefore do oftener hurt
then help, be they never so excellent, if there be not Art in the giving of
them, to fit them to the cause of the disease, and other circumstances
required. But to impart to you my confident opinion of these secrets grounded
partly upon my own observation, and partly upon intelligence from learned and
honest Physicians: they are but triuiall and common things known to every
mean Apothecarie, or of baser account than the meanest drugge. One of these
ignoraut and vain glorious fellows having spent a few months in following
the wars beyond the seas, and being desirous to live at home with more case
and less peril, resolved to become a Physician. To the effecting hereof he
procured some common receipts from an Apothecarie and returned hither. Here he
gat some shifting companions to him, promising them part of his gain, if they
would extol his skill and magnify his medicines as rare and admirable
secrets, far fetched, and bought at a great price. An admirable secret
discovered.
Thus he obtained great fame. One of these medicines so highly commended, came
by chance to the hands of an Apothecary: it was a very fine and pure white
powder: and being diligently examined, it was found to be nothing but the
simple powder of an egg shell: yet the cosener valued it as thirty shillings
the ounce. Thus subtle and deceiptfull Empirikes grace their vile and
contemptible medicines with the name of secrets, that they may the easier
allure and illude the simple people, who are delighted with the supposed
nouelty and rareness of them. And as they deceive many with that falsely
imposed name, so they use another subtlety to conceal them from those that
know all usual medicines by their color, smell or taste: for they mingle
something with them only to alter these qualities. By this trick, that
sauoureth of cosenage, and requires a false tongue to purchase credit to it,
many of our Empiriks extol their fame and increase their wealth. All these
things duly considered, may make the very name of a secret, out of the mouth
of an Empirike, to be as a watchword to all men of judgment to beware of the
medicine, The subtlety of ^mpiriks.
and of him that boasts of it: for there is always much falsehood and deceit
in the one and commonly little good, or rather much danger in the other. They
which are known to have no learning, seek to establish their credit by these
means, and they have prevailed much, not only with the vulgar, but with many
of the better sort, whose judgment, though it be sound in most politic and
civil affairs, yet in this it is much defective. For they esteem too lightly
of the deep and intricate art of Physic, (wherein all the helps of nature
do fail without a learned teacher, diligent and long study, and continual
meditation) and are too forward in commending and using them, that have raked
up together a little practice out of Centoms co^su^ud^.
English books or the bills of learned Physicians, and have no ground of any
learning to direct them.

Their skill in vrines.
The fifth and last reason to grace Empirikes, is their great skill in vrines,
whereby they oftentimes tell the disease as well as a learned Physician. This
makes as little for their estimation, amongst men of judgment as any of the
former. For diseases have many signs whereby they are made known, all which
must be compared together and examined: the urine is but one sign and that
doubtful and uncertain: Many diseases can not be known by the urine.
for those diseases that are in the lesser veins, or in others parts of the
body without the veins, cannot be discerned by it. The head is subject to
many diseases that appear not in the urine: so are the ears, eyes, nose,
mouth, throat, neck, breast, midrife, bowels, ioints, flesh and skin:
diseases incident to all these parts do never discover themselves by the
urine alone. No medicine is to be given by the urine alone.
Moreover sometimes the same kind of urine is to be seen in diseases of a
contrary nature, as in a frenzy, which is a hot disease, and in a cold
distemper of the stomach, the urine is often in both of them pale and raw. In
this case, he that gives medicines out of the urine, indangereth the life of
the sick. For the deceitful urine pursues hot medicines, which in a frenzy
are deadly: also the urine is sometime red and high colored as well in the
weakness of the liver, as in a vehement ague: if in the former, the Empirike
trusting to the water (as many have done in this case) opens a vein, he
sends the patient headlong to the grave, Quo melior, ed peior.
whom Art might easily, or peradventure nature would alone have recovered. In
the plague sometimes the better the water is, in the greater danger the sick
is: for the pestilent humor is impact into the heart, and nature not able to
expel any of it. Forestus says, Obser. de pleurit.
that in a great pleurisy with a vehement ague, the water is sometimes good,
though the patient dies. And even in those diseases wherein the urine
affoordeth most knowledge, as when the disease is in the great veins, liver,
kidneies or bladder, there are sudden changes and alterations able to hinder
the judgment of a learned Physician. Vrina hodie bona, cras mala.
Therefore Galen says, the urine is sometimes good this day, ill to morrow, and
the third day good again. Beside, rubarbe or saffron makes it high colored:
so does fasting, watching, and violent exercise. Leeks and such like gives it
a green tincture, and cassia makes it black. If you require further proof
of these bare assertions, and a full discourse of the light and doubtful
conjectures that are gathered from vrines, I refer you to a learned treatise
written of that argument by Forestus. There it is substantiallie Vromantia.
proved by sound reasons, and the testimonies of our most famous authors, that
the urine in most diseases gives no light to a learned Neither conception
known nor sex distinguished by urine.
nor is at this day in Italy and other places: but that it is newly brought in
by ignorant and deceitful Empirikes partly for their own gain gain, and
partly to disgrace learned and honest Physicians, who abhor to tell strange
and plausible things out of the urine, which Art and a good conscience cannot
justify. Lib. 2. cap. 3. Portentosa and splendida mendacia, impostura and
fraud referea.
The foresaid Author in the same book, speaking of these unlearned Physicians,
says, their discourse out of urine contains nothing but monstrous and
glorious lies, full of cosenage and deceit. And by this foolish babbling out of
the urine, the vulgar are caught in a snare, spoiled of their money, and often
deprived of their lives. The less knowledge an Emperike has, the larger
discourse he makes out of urine, the more subtillie he examineth the
messenger, and gathering from him part of the disease, he repeateth the same in
other words, amplifying and enlarging his speech, so as the simple hearer
imagines that he utters much knowledge out of the urine: but if any man of
judgment heard him talk, he should find no truth in the matter, nor any sense
in the words. If it please you to consider what manner of men most of these
Empirikes are, (such as have forsaken that occupation or last and laborious
course of life wherein they were brought up in their youth, and addicted
themselves to profess that Art whereof they are utterly ignorant) you may
easily perceive that they are compelled to use all staudulent and deceitful
means to establish their credit. Ignorance cannot purchase estimation, unless
it be covered with the cloak of knowledge. Craft and subtilty will prevail
when simple and honest dealing shall be of no account. Large and strange talk,
be it never so foolish and false, is pleasing to the multitude, but bare and
naked truth, uttered in few words, is lightly regarded. False discourse out of
vrines.
This allureth the common people to flock to Empirikes and leave learned
Physicians: for there they shall hear that the brain is perished, the heart is
swelled, the lungs are consumed, the liver is dried and the spleen wasted: and
in all these they will warrant the cure: whereas first it is certain, they can
discern none of these by the urine: The facility of iudgeing of vrines as
Emperiks do.
and then it is as certain that they can cure none of them. Their light
conjectures out of vrines stand upon such casie and plain rules, that a simple
woman used to be about the sick, may understand them. For sick vrines are for
the most part high colored, or very pale. In the former, they speak of a
fever that offends the head, procures short and troubled sleeps, takes
away appetite, brings a loathsome taste to the mouth, oppresses the heart,
and causes pain in the back: this lesson serves for all yrines of that
color: and often times it fares thus with the patient, for most agues have
these common symptoms. In pale vrines they have another lesson: there they
pronounce the stomach to be weak, phlegm to abound, want of digestion,
heaviness after meat, inclination to sleep, the body full of wind and
subject to stitches. These two observations with a nimble tongue, and much
tautologie are sufficient to get a great opinion amongst the multitude. Unto
these two rules they add a careful cie to him that brings the urine:
Vroma^^ lib 2. cap. 5.
they observe his countenance, his apparel, the vessel wherein it is, and
such like. There is a pretty history of this in Forestus: An history of a
cousening Empirike.
A poor man brought his wives urine to a famous Empirike: it was in winter, and
some of the water was spilt and frozen on the outside of the pot. The Physician
marking the heavy countenance of the fellow, coniectured thereby that the
patient was some dear friend of his, and very sick. And having viewed the
urine, he said, is not this your wives urine? I perceive she is very ill. The
simple clown answered, Sir, your skill is excellent: you have judged right.
But what see you more? The subtle Empirike seeing the urine to be well
colored, and to give no suspicion of any inward disease, gessed it to be some
outward thing. The credulous and foolish man said, I wonder at your cunning: go
on I pray you and tell me how her side came to be black and blew. The Empirike
taking hold of these plain words, imagined that it happened by some fall or
blow, and asked him if she had not a fall. He taking this question to be an
absolute and undoubted assertion, still magnified his skill, and said further
unto him, if you can tell me where and how she fell, I will hold you to be the
only Physician in this land. The Empirike smiling at his simplicity, and
considering with himself the manner and fashion of poor country houses,
answered, it was like she fell off a ladder. This simple fellow admiring the
answeares as proceeding from rare and extraordinary skill, asked further if he
could see in the urine from how many staves she fell. He presuming that the
poor man's house was low, said, from eight staves: the clown not satisfied
with this, shaked his head, and desired him to look better in the urine, and
he should find more. This crafty imposter perceiving that he had gessed too
few, and remembering that which he had spied before on the pot, demanded of him,
if he spilt none of the water by the way, which being confessed, he said, there
you may find the rest of the staves, for I am assured there are no more to be
seen in this urine. This is their usual manner of telling wonders out of the
water, when they meet with rude and seely people. Liquido co^stat, etc.
Therefore the same author says, it is clear that this divining Art of
telling strange and admirable things out of vrines, is mere cosenage, whereby
they do craftily circumuent and deceive the credulous and unwary multitude.
How light account Hipp. made of vrines in respect of other signs, does plainly
appear in that he wrote so largely of them, and so sparingly of this. De
praesag.
For discoursing of sharp diseases, he fills all the first book, and part of
the second with other signs and marks to know and judge them by, before he
makes any mention of the urine: and when he comes to that, he passes it
over briefly. The pulse also gives a far greater light to the Physician,
than the urine. Vires agrotantium medicorum hera.
Therefore Gal. wrote 18. books of that, which are extant, besides that upon
Archigines, which are lost; and not one of this. Rhases says, the strength of
the sick is the mistress of Physicians, and the urine never shows that
strength consists of the symmetry and perfect temper and proportion of the
natural, vital and animal spirits. The fountain of the first is in the
liver: of the second in the heart: of the third in the brain. The urine shows
a little of the first: much less of the second, which is far more to be
regarded: and nothing at all of the third. If they that had the perfection of
Art cannot judge of the strength of the sick by the urine, into what danger
do Emperiks bring their patients in purging and letting of blood by the urine
alone? they must either arrogate to themselves far deeper insight into
vrines, than these men had, which is absurd, or else confess that they have
led the people into a gross and dangerous error, by persuading them that their
diseases may be perfectly known and perceived by that alone. I have presumed
upon your patience in being so long in this point, because it is the great
pillar of their credit.

The causes of Empiriks fame.
Now I come to the fourth and last part, which is to show the causes of
Empirikes fame. These are derived partly from themselves, and partly from the
vulgar. Some of those from themselves have been touched before, as the
extolling and magnifying their own cures, both with their own mouths, and by
procuring popular fellows which frequent Innes and Tauerns, to be trumpetters
and sounders abroad of their praise, without any regard of truth. Their
boasting of rare and admirable secrets, known to no other man. Stultiloquium
urine.
Their large, senseles and fained discourse out of vrines. To these before
mentioned may be added sundry reasons, Lang. epist.
as the carriage of themselves in all their practices, so as they may seem to
be ignorant of nothing appertaining to Physic. This cannot be effected
without a false tongue and colorable actions. Pismater, diaphragma, aromatise,
orifice.
Also they interlace their common talk with strange and unusual words and
phrases, not understood of the common sort: they rap out lame sentences of an
English book (alas poor Priscian) having not a rag of Grammar to cover their
naked ignorance with. They hold this as a rule, to be full Str^nu^^ are magis,
quo magis art rudis.
of words, and sometimes violent in their babbling, all tending to publish their
own skill and disgrace others. Some of them show to their patients and
acquaintance such books as themselves understand not, as if they learned their
practice out of them. Others have anatomies of men's bodies, which they show at
every opportunity, holding the beholders with long and foolish discourse out
of them, and pointing at the very place, where they imagine the disease to be
seated. This pleases plain and unlearned persons exceedingly, and brings
them into a confident opinion of the truth of all that is uttered, and also of
profound knowledge to be contained in it: in both which they are deceived, for
ignorance is an inseparable mark to all Empirikes, and falsehood to most.
Empiriks steal cures.
It is usual with the best of them falsely to grace themselves by stealing
away the credit of other men's cures: as when a learned Physician prescribed a
course to a patient, and by reason of the distance of place, or his emploiment
otherwise, leaves the execution of this to one of them dwelling near: if this
patient recouereth, the Empirike makes it his own cure, and yet he was but
the instrument directed by another, and did no more then belongs to an
Apothecarie. This fraudulent devise has added much to the credit of some: for
when any of these cures are performed, the Empirike publishes with
protestation that he followed not the course set down by the Physician, but
took another far fitter and more effectual. But in this case, if the
patient die, then he la^^th the blame upon the other, affirming that the
medicines were unfit: and if the cure had been committed to him, he would not
hauefailed in it. Their brags.
There are yet more devises amongst them to enlarge their credit, for some of
them are risen to that height of impudency, that they blush not to brag of
their degrees taken in the University, and that they have disputed with
Doctors, and been approved by them, and might take that degree: and yet they
never came in any schole of learning, nor are more able to reason with any young
student in that profession, than to contend with a Lion in strength. Their
large promises.
Moreover they promise the cure of all diseases committed to them, wherein when
they fail, they impute the fault to some error committed by the patient, or to
some secret thing in the body, which Art could not foresee. Also they make
diseases seem greater and more dangerous than they are indeed: affirming every
light cough to be a consumption of the lungs: every common ague to be a burning
sever: every stitch on the side to be a pleurisy: every little swelling in the
body or feet to be a dropsy every old ulcer to be a fistula, and every
ordinary bile in time of infection to be the plague: by this deceit they get
much more money, and far greater credit, when they cure any of these, than
they should do if they dealt truly. Their false tongues.
Further they persuade their familiars that they are used in their profession by
the chief personages in, or near the place they inhabit, often naming those
whom they never saluted. Last of all they conceal the course of their practice
from all that can judge of it: for the better effecting where of they never
send their bills to the Apothecaries, as learned Physicians do, nor will admit
any other of that profession to have access to their patients. For their own
consciences accusing them of ignorance, they may justly fear that by either of
these means their unfit and dangerous practice should be discovered, and
consequently their credit impaired. Here they are often compelled to arrogate
much unto themselves, and to assure their patients that they are not inferior
to any man in the skill of their profession. Thus masked ignorance, affecting
and pretending knowledge, is induced to violate both natural and religious
laws, in preferring gain and estimation before the health and lives of men:
in suffering none to be admitted to those cures which themselves cannot
perfect, and might with facility be performed by others. By these and such like
reasons they increase their reputation and enlarge their practice amongst the
common sort. Other reasons hereof are drawn from the simplicity of the
vulgar, who being utterly ignorant of the causes of natural things, are
thereby void of suspicion and so credulous that they believe every thing they
hear of these Empirikes, and are by these means brought into an ouerweening
of them. Out of this erroneous opinion they ascribe as much unto them, as unto
the profoundest Physicians. Lib. 1. de not. Deorum.
Tully reports that they which inhabited the Island called Seryphus, and never
went out of it, where they saw no other beasts but hares and foxes, Seryphi
nati, nec unquam egressi, etc.
would not believe that there were lions or panthers in the world: and if any
man told them of the elephant, they thought themselves mocked. So it is with
the simple multitude, they know only their neighbor Empirikes, which are but
as hares and foxes: and if they hear of lions, that is, a sort of Physicians,
as far above them in the knowledge of the Art, as the lion is above the hare
and fox in strength, they will not be brought into that opinion, but reject it
as a false and fained fable: for the first conceit of the admirable skill they
imagine to be in those whom they know, has taken so deep root in their minds
that it cannot be plucked out. How Empirikes, be they never so ignorant, are
magnified by the simplicity of the rude and sottish people, A tale of an
Empirike, a fool and an ass.
Poggius sets forth in this tale: there was one of the meanest of these
Empirikes that had but one kind of pill for all diseases or infirmities
whatsoever: and by this together with his cogging, had purchased great fame,
and was esteemed cunning in all things. There came unto him a foolish clown
that had lost his ass, desiring his counsel for the finding of him: the
Empirikes skill reached not beyond his pill, yet seeming to be ignorant in
nothing, and desirous to take his money, he gave him that to swallow down, and
told him that by the virtue thereof he should find his ass again. The simple
fellow, returning homewards, felt the operation of his pill, and going out of
the high way into a field, spied his ass feeding there: thus being in
possession of that which he had lost, he confidently believed that this was
wrought by the extraordinary learning of this cosening Empirike, and extolled
him above all other Physicians. Credulity leads men into many gross
opinions, and specially in this Art. Lib. 29. cap. 1. in hac artium sola
eu^nit, etc.
Pliny says, it falls out only in this Art, that credit is given to every
one that professes himself skilful in it, when as no lie brings greater
danger. Moreover the base opinion that the ignorant multitude conceiueth of the
deep and profound Art of Physic, makes much for Empirikes: The simplicity
of the vulgar.
for the common people having nothing in themselves, but that which experience
and observation has taught them, cannot lift up their dull conceits any
higher, but confidently imagine that all knowledge is obtained by that alone,
and needs no help of schools. Therefore they judge no otherwise of this
learned and mystical profession, than of ordinary mechanical trades,
supposing it to be as soon and easily learned, as the plain craft of a tailer
or carpenter. This foolish and senseles opinion increases the reputation of
Empirikes and procures them many patients: for hereby their light and
superficial skill is esteemed equal to the complete and sound knowledge that
is in the most judicial professors of that Art. Even as a plain country
fiddler is thought by his neighbors not to be inferior to cunning Musicians.
Another reason that moves the vulgar to use them, is the hope they have to be
cured by them with less charge. But this deceives them on both sides, for often
times their diseases are left uncured, and commonly the subtle Empirike
draws more money from them than a learned Physician would do. Their practice
is also further enlarged by the ignorance of the common sort, who when they are
sick, use to inquire after one that has cured the like disease. Here is
work for these popular fellows, who have filled many credulous ears with a
false report of their cures. The custom of the Egyptians.
I confess it was an ancient custom amongst the Egyptians to lay their sick
in open places, and to inquire of them that passed by, what they had heard or
tried to have helped in the like case. But this was before the Art of Physic
was perfected and brought into a method. Physicians are to be made choice of
by their learning, not by their cures.
Now the case is far altered: there is a learned and judicial course
confirmed and established for the cure of all diseases. Therefore now the
patient is to enquire after him that has greatest knowledge and soundest
judgment in the Art, and not after him that is reported to have cured the like
sickness: for many cures are falsely attributed to Empirikes: and besides
that, some diseases are healed by chance, and some by nature, as is before
showed. There is yet another error in the multitude that profits these
ignorant men much. For many bind themselves to that Physician whom they have
used before, be he never so ignorant, supposing that he knows the state of
their body better than a stranger. But in this they are also utterly deceived,
for no Empirike can know the state of any man's body: No Empirike knows the
state of any man's body.
Philosophy teaches that and not experience. All that he can know is but
whether the body be easy or hard to purge, and what is that in respect of all
other things before mentioned, which are necessary in every Physician?
Therefore let every man of judgment use him that can by Art find out the
complexion and constitution of his body: that knows how to distinguish one
disease from another, and prosecute the course fit for the cure, turning and
altering it to every occurrent. And let him that has recovered out of the
hands of an Empirike, rest satisfied in his happy fortune, and ever after
commit his body to the best learned. These are the weak and lame reasons
whereupon the fame and great practice of these ignorant men is built. If in
this Gal. de praecognit. hi in montibus and syluis, illi in vrbibus insidiantur.
tractate I had imitated Galen, and others that have written of them, it should
have been far sharper and much more pearcing. For Galen compares them to
thieves: these, ^aith he, lay wait for men in mountains and woods, those in
towns and cities. Langius and Lib. 3. epist. 6. integr^e phalanges etc. ausim
deterare aliquot ^ill a, etc. Thousands killed by Empiriks.
Oberndorf, two learned Germans lay gri^uous accusations upon them. The former
speaking of their patients, says, whole armies of them are killed, but very
few cured. And in the same Epistle he adds, I dare swear that thousands of
their patients perish every year by their deadly errors. And doubtless many
of our Empirikes in England are not inferior to those of Germany in boldness
and ignorance. The other forenamed Germane imposes many base terms upon
them, as coseners, mountibankes, murderers, and such like. Ad prosequendum
indoctos empiri^os and impostores.
There is much odious matter heaped up against some of them by Guin^er, Erastus,
Libauius, Cardan and many others, all which I omit. leonem ex vngue. The
Physicians of the college of London take an oath at their admittance, to
pursue unlearned Empirikes and impostors, confounding the names, as if all
Empirikes were coseners. Thriuer in Cells. lib, 1. cap. 1.
One calls the baser sort of them, analphabetos nebulones, not having learned
their crissecrosse. No man can here object with judgment, that all these
learned men wrote out of a weak perturbation, and that it was, as the Poet
says, one envying another: (...)
and that these are contentions amongst Physicians rising from variety of
opinions, as in other professions. For all these men oppugned are utterly
ignorant and unlearned, and dare never attempt to speak one word of their
profession in the presence of a learned Physician. It is therefore knowledge
against ignorance: Scientia contra ignorantiam.
natural and christian compassion moving these learned and ingenious men to
protect the lives of their brethren by opposing themselves to the blind
practice of Empirikes, who fight with their eyes shut against sickness,
Andibatarum more clausis oculi^ cum host d^m^cant.
the great enemy to nature, as the men called Andibatae did against their
enemies. I remember a story of a blind woman famous for her skill in Physic,
by whose door a porter passing with a heavy burden upon his back, fell down
and cried out for help: the compassionate woman came speedily with aqua vitae,
and feeling for his mouth, offered to power in some, whereas half an eye would
have served her to have eased him of his burden. All Empitiks are blind.
It is usual with Empirikes, for want of the eye of learning, to bring as
ridiculous and senseles means of help to their patients: for when they see
not the cause of the disease (as they do very seldom see it fully) they cannot
fit a medicine to it. They may fondly purpose, foolishly consult, and largely
promise to perform great matters in Physic: Hermogenes apes.
but in execution they will be found like to Hermogenes his apes, who assembled
themselves together to take counsel how they might be secured from the violent
incursions and assaults of greater beasts, they concluded to build a strong
fort: they agreed upon the matter and form thereof. Every one was assigned to
his several work: some to cut down timber, some to make brick, other for
other offices. But when they met to begin this great building, they had not one
instrument or tool to work withal, so their counsel was overthrown. So
Empirikes may attempt to build up health in a sick body: they may promise the
cure of diseases; but what can be expected at their hands since they want all
the tools of Galen and Hippocrates necessary for so great a work? Empiriks
as unskillful pilots.
The consideration of all these things has often moved me to compare their
patients to them that cross the seas in a small leaking boat with an unskillful
pilot: they may arrive safe at the wished haven: but wisdom trusts to the
strongest means, which always promise, and commonly perform greatest
security. One thing I will add more of this odious generation: the multitude
of them in this country is incredible. Out of one rotten and malign stock
spring many riotous branches. Mali corui malum ouum.
One master sends forth many iourneymen, which have been his apprentises. If
these old breeders be maintained, we shall have, within these few years, more
Empirikes, than butchers; more killers of men, than of oxen. The great number
of Empiriks.
The number of them is so increased, that they are at enmity one with another.
It is a sport to hear one of the most eminent of them (being placed in a
chair for his great skill) rail upon unlearned Physicians, The hering man
mockes the fisher man.
and yet he himself was never admitted unto Grammar school. But this does
exempt them from all suspicion of ignorance amongst the vulgar, and procures
them many patients. But the more they are admired, and the greater number of
patients they have, the more they exceed in craft and falsehood. Ignorance can
not purchase admiration.
For ignorance cannot purchase admiration, unless craft and subtilty be
ioint-purchasers with her. But to draw to an end, since Empirikes are utterly
disabled by the difficulty of the Art of Physic: The conclusion.
by their education in their youth* by the want of grammar, logic and
philosophy: by their palpable ignorance in the theorie and speculation of that
they profess: by the manifold errors they fall into. Since experience cannot
teach them the method and order of curing diseases: nor reading of English
books afford them any mediocrity of knowledge. Since most of their cures are
natural, or casual: all their secrets triuiall and common * their discourse
out of vrines, grounded upon subtlety and deceit: their fame and multitude of
patients rising from fraud and falsehood in themselves, or from folly in the
vulgar. Finally, since there is a full consent of all learned Physicians justly
condemning them. I may firmly conclude that their practice is always confused,
commonly dangerous and often deadly. Therefore whereas Ludouicus De indic bonum
medicamentum est etc.
Mercatus says, it is a good medicine sometimes to take no medicine at all.
And Vromant.
Forestus affirms, sometimes the whole work is to be left to nature, which
when Empiriks see not, they often kill the sick. In my opinion this
distinction of time may be cut off, and both these sayings made general; for
where the pactise is wholly engrossed by these men, there the best medicine is
always to take no medicine at all: No medicine to be taken of Empiriks.
and the whole work is ever to be left to nature, rather then to be committed
to any of these. For though they cure some, yet they kill many: the way of
erring in the practice of Physic is so ample and broad, and the path, leading
to the methodicall cure of diseases, so narrow and straight. Thus, Sir, you
have that which you required, directions for your health, and my opinion of
Empirikes. God almighty bless you with the benefit of the former, or preserve
you from the peril of the latter.

Ipswich, the third nones of July. 1605.

