A SVRVEY OF THE GREAT DVKES STATE of Tuscany. In the year of our Lord 1596.

AT LONDON Printed for Edward Blount. 1605.

To my worshipful good friend Master Robert Dalington.
Sir:
BEing well assured that this your work (out of your own protection) would in
the end present it self to the general view; and likely enough some one that
loves you not so much, nor knows you at all, might have the passing of it: I
have put my self in the way of your reproof; and am become a these of this
nature, to steal no more from you then I will again give to you. If I could
persuade you there were a fault in modesty, you would bid me publish the virtue
which you tie up in too straight bonds. My fault is, I have done that which
would have been done; and the offer is so full of love, that it looks for a
punishment accordingly.

Edw: Blount.

The Analysis of this discourse.
In Tuscanie I observe the Country here the Seite here the Cosmographie. Here
of the Clime, the Degree, the Planet that rules the disposition of the air,
etc. Chorographie. Here, of the length, breadth, circuit, how situate,
confined, limited, what, Rivers, Ports, etc.
Parts these either Indiulduall. here of each City in particulare how many,
how peopled, built, etc. General these either Mountains here of the
commodities, as Marble, Nutts, Olives, etc. Valleis here of their Herbage,
fruit, grain, harvest, soil etc.


Government here of the Governor this either Prince here of his name, family,
descent, issue, parentage, arms, style, title, Court, order, riches, forces,
entrate, expenses. Law: here the Minister: here of the^ of the Crown and of
the body Politic. Ministration: either civil, or criminal.

Governed here: of the peoples nature, wi^^ aptnes, diet, apparel, language,
jealousy.



THE SVRVEY OF THE great Dukes State of Tuscany.
TVscany, anciently called Hetruria, The Clime.
lies under the Regiment of Sol, in the fifth Climate, between the Degrees
forty one, and forty four: a Country almost equally distant from the
Equinoctial and North Pole, and therefore by consequent of an air temperate,
were it not that the Montaines cause some little excess of both the passible
qualities, heat and cold. Of this in winter, by reason they be mantled with
snow, whereby the wind vireth with a more piercing sharpnes: of that in
summer, by the repercussiue force of the Sunbeams from the sides of those
Hills, at the foot whereof are most their Cities seated. Not having any
valleys so large but that the situation of the Town therein, makes it
communicate in the passion of both these extremes. For as writers well affirm
that the hills Appennines are one fourth part of Italy: so is it also
determined that they and their Spurs, are three fourth parts of Tuscany.

It is in length, if you measure along the Seacoast, The length.
two thousand five hundred furlonges, which make three hundred and twelve
miles: but if you measure by the Diameter, according to Ptolomey, assigning it
three Degrees, and forty seven miles to a Degree, then it is some hundred
forty and odd miles: if according as the ordinary Road lies, which is
neither so much about as by the coast, nor so direct as by the Diameter, it is
one hundred and seauenty miles. And thus does Leander Alberti the latest and
exactest Surueyour of Italy, reconcile the authorities of Strabe, Plyny, and
Ptolomey. But allowing sixty miles to a Degree, it is in length one hundred
and nintie miles, which is now the received opinion.

It is in breadth, one hundred where least, The breadth.
and in Circuit six hundred and twenty, or as faccio vberei says, seven
hundred.

Il giro suo per quel che si ragiona,
E' misuratu settecentu miglia,
E Roma qui, l'honor che l'incorona.
It is limited, The limits.
West, with the River Magra, and Mountains of Lyguria, East, with Tyber:
North, with the Mountains Appennines and South, with the Sea.

The confines.
It confineth South with the Terra di Roma South-east with the Duchy of
Spoletu, East with the State of Vrbine, Northeast with Romagna, North with the
state of Bologna, Northwest with Lyguria, West and South-west with the Sea.

These are the limits set down by Polybius, The antitiquity.
Plyny, Pomponius, Mela, Solynus, Ptolomey, and all other ancient writers:
neither are we to enlarge this country so far, as they that affirm the
Tuscans possessed all between the Adriatic and Mediterranean Seas, from Nola
in the kingdom of Naples, to the Mountains Rhesy, which is now the Grisons
Country, and they say are come of the old Tuscans. True it is that these
Tuscans were a mighty and powerful people, such as oftentimes forced the
Romans to create a Dictator (which but in great extremities they might not
do) to defend themselves from them: until the four hundred and seventh year
after the foundation of Rome, when they were utterly overthrown at the Lake of
Vadi^one, as Lyuie in his ninth book affirms. Nor did the Romans bring
home only glory, triumph and spoils, from the conquered Tuscans, which argued
the greatness of this nation: but they brought with them also (which argues
their antiquity) the habit of their youth, called Pratexta, the roabe of their
elder age called Toga, the twelve Bundles of Rods and Axes carried before the
Consuls, called fasces: the seat of their Praetors and other Judges carried
upon wheels, called Seeds curulis the Robe of the chief Magistrate,
triumphall ornaments, and many other such ensigns of ancient greatness and
Majesty; all which were brought thence to Rome by Tarquinius Priscus: whereof
Syluius Italicus in his 8 book reports, confirmed by Dionisius
Alicarnosseus. From this Nation likewise whom the Greeks called Tirrheni of
Firsos their poor kind of Cottage, and the Romans first called Hetrusci of
their religious worshipping the Gods, did the Romans also bring many of those
rites and ceremonies which they afterward used in their religion.

As Delphos is called by Ptolomey Vmbelicus Mundi, The Srite.
the Nauile of the world, so may we say of Tuscani, that it is Vmbelicus
Italia: howbeit in a Geometrical proportion, that is, in the midst of the
forces of Italy: having on the one side the state Ecclesiasticke, the kingdom
of Naples, and Duchy of Frbyne: and on the other counter-peasable to these,
the States of Venice, Myllan and Genoa, the Dukedomes of Ferrara, Manto^a, and
Parma, and this State in the midst of the balance, on which side socuer it
inclines, ouerweighing the other.

This is that which Guiccardine says in the very entrance of his History,
that the wisdom of Lorenzo Medici, and the situation of the state of
Florence, Mantennero le cose ^ Italia bilanciate, vpheld the affairs of Italy
in equal Balance. On which ground also Lodouico Zforza Duke of Millan lays
his foundation, for the reason he uses in the third book of the said
history: who very jealous of the Venetians greatness, having now undertaken
the protection of Pisa, and fearful withal of the Frenches return into
Italy: he labors the Pope and King of Aragon, to enter into a confederation
with the Florentines, and to re-inuest them of Pisa, inferring, that by this
means the French forces might be diuerted, which otherwise with the help of
this state (being seated in the midst of Italy* might effect matters of
prejudicial consequent to all three: so fitly stands it either to dispeople
the enemies forces, or to reinforce their own. And therefore Guiccardine very
iudicially determines, that it was a powerful estate, rather per
l'opportunita del cito, che per la grandezza del Dominio, by the fitness of
the situation, then by the greatness of the Dominion.

But if we define the midst of Italy in an Arithmeticall proportion, that is,
the center equally distant from both extremes, it will appear to be true which
Pliny and Varro report, confirmed also by Leander Albert^, concerning Lago di
p^e del luco, which Taci^us in his first book calls Lacus Velnius, in Sabina
which they hold to be the midst of Italy.

Concerning the Rivers of worth there be few, The Rivers.
of name many: for the Italian has a name for every ditch, whereof if we allow
them not Tiber, Arno is their chief: This River was so named by Hercule
Lybicus whose surnames were Libarno, that is, the Lion of Lybia: and Musarno
that is, the learned and valiant, for Ar in the Arabian tongue signifies a
Lion. He was the son of Osyris and Isis, called Jupiter and Juno by the
Greeks, and grandchild of Ianus called by the Greeks Ogyger, and by the
Chaldeans and Hebrews Noah: whereupon stand the Cities of Florence and Pisa,
Serchio which runs by Lucca: Ombrone by Pistoia, Bisentio by Prato, Chiana
which passes by the vale of Arezzo, and falls into the Arno: Mogn^ne which
runs near Ciuita vecchia into the Sea, Fiero which deuideth the great Dukes
state and the Popes toward the Tuscan sea, and Paglia which deuides those two
states toward the Appennin^^, over which we pass by a bridge built by Gregory
the 13. in our journey from Florence to Rome between Rodicofany and
Aquapendente: that, belonging to the great Duke: this, to the Pope. True it is,
that Guicciardini in the 4. book of his History, and namely in that part of
the book which by order of th'inquisition is left out of all allowed copies,
(because in this place, though himself were the Popes creature, and had great
charge under him,) yet he fully, learnedly, and truly shows how by little and
little, and by bad means the Church grew to her greatness, how she came not
only to quit her obedience to the empire, but to have also a power and stroke
in the election of the Emperor himself, not only to make the Pope governor
of Rome, but to incroach also upon the Territories and Cities of Romagna, the
Marquisate of Ancina, the Duchy of Spoletum and Beneuentum the superiority
over the kingdom of Naples* and the possession of that part of Tuscany (now
called the Patrimony of S. Peter) he I say, divides the Popes state in this
Country from the rest of Tuscany, thus. Eterminata dal torrente di Pescia and
dal Castello di San Luirico nel Con^ado di Siena da vna banda: and dall altra
dal Mare di sotto, and dal fuime di Teuere: that is: it is limited on the one
side with the River Pescia, and the Castle Saint Luirick in the territories of
Siena, and on the other, with the River Tyber, and the Tyrrhene Sea. But, I
rather tie my self to the former limits, for that the Paglia is far beyond
Saint Luirick, whether the great Dukes state now reaches. There is also C^cina
which rises a little above the City of Massa, and so passing along the
Country of Volterra fulleth into the Sea, with many such other, which in
England we rather call Brooks or Riuerets; for of all these there are few sit
either for burden or Boat in Summer, except the Arno, yet here often times
scarce water for a Mill, as by their devises at Florence to pen it up
appears. The reasons that the waters of this State are so small, be two: the
former is, the violence of their downfall from the hills, the better is
because their heads are so near to the Sea as they cannot have space to be
enlarged by the receipt of other lesser Brooks; by which means only all
Rivers grow great, as namely the Rheine and Danowe, whereof this last has from
his head, which is in the Forest Nera to the Mare Maggiore, where he pays
his tribute above two thousand miles, and receaueth into his bed by the way
three score nauigable Rivers.

The Lakes in this State, are neither many nor great, nothing so fair or
fruitful as those of Lombardy namely Lago di Garda, The Lakes
Lago d Ise^, Lago d Como, and Lago Maggiore: the chief in Tuscany are these,
Lago di Trasimen^ under the Pope, who lets it out to diverse Farmers for ten
thousand Ducats the year, which have the fishing, whereof it is very
fruitful and yields them also no little gain. The profit which the Duke of
Ferrara raised by the Lake of Comacchi^, who they say in Venice made thereof
yearly foure-score thousand Ducats, makes this more probable. But this Lake
of Trasimene now called Lago di Perugia is much more renowned for the notable
overthrow given there by Hanniball to the Romans, near whereunto is that
fair plain called Ossaia of the bones of the dead there flaine by the
rashness of C. Flaminius the Consul, as Polibius in his third book, Liny in
his two and twentieth, and Plutarcke in the life of Haniball auowe. The other
memorable blow given them (if it be not here impertinent to remember) was that
at Can in Puglia, called by Liu^e in his twenty and one book Ca^nusium,
where was slain P. Emilius, the Consul L* Acilius, and L Furuis Biba^ulus the
Quaestors, one and twenty Tribunes of Soldiers, fourscore Senators, forty
thousand foot, two thousand and seven hundred horse, all Romans, and as
many Anuiliaries* as Plutarch in the lives of Hanniball and Scipio, and Solinus
Italicus in his ninth book confess: There are diverse Lakes between Pisa and
Liuorne, but small and of no name: There are more not far from the City
Colle, Laego di Bolsena, called by ancient writers Lacus Vulsiniensium, L^go di
Bassanello anciently called Lacus Vade^onius, where the Romans utterly
subdued the Tuscans, Lago di Bracciane, called formerly Lacus Sabbatinus: Lago
di Vicco, called by Virgill in his seventh Aenead, and Siluius Italicus in his
eight book L^cus Cimini, of the Mountain so called, standing between this
Lake and the City of Viterbo, Lago di Mont^ Rosa, not large but deep near
Rome, with few others.

The Plains are also few, (for they before are allowed but one fourth part)
the chief are these. The plains.
That of Florence wherein live above two hundred thousand persons: that near
Arezzo called Vald' Arno, because the River passes by it the most fruitful:
that of Pisa the most low and therefore subject to the ouer-flowing of Arno,
whereof it has tasted this present Winter to the Countries great loss: That
of Lucca environed with Hills, and the City in the midst like a center in a
circle: That of Carsigniana under the Dukedom of Ferrara. And lastly the
Plains of Maremma in the State of Siena, the most large, and whither for the
Wintering of their Cattle they are sent in October from the Mountains. It has
the name of Mare the Sea; and therefore we ^ay well English it the Marshes of
Siena, it runs along the Seacoast almost seauentie miles in lenghth,
between the two Rivers Gornia and Pesua, not much inhabited with people
through the badnesse of the air.

The Ports are, Ciuita Vecchia in the Popes State, The ports.
for Ottia is on the other side of Tyber, Orbitello, Port-ercole, Telamone,
Castiglione in the Maremma, howbeit under the King of Spain, as is also the
Monte Argentaro and the Port of Piombine. The only Port of worth under the
great Dukes State, is that of Liuorne, capable of any Fleet whatsoever.

It is rather to be called a Road then a Harborough, Liuorno or Ligorno.
and to be observed that this Sea neither ebbeth nor flows. Here his
Highness daily builds, meaning to make it a City, the walls and
fortifications being almost finished. It is in form six square, in circuit a
mile three quarters, the length of the Curtain is two hundred and sixteen
paces, the face of the Bulwark, is one hundred thirty and eight. From the
Spur which is fifteen paces thick, to the Flanker which is so many broad,
are eighteen paces. The Diameter of the Piazza is four hundred and fifty.
This proportion no doubt swarueth from the strict rules of fortification,
neither can I warrant the relation true by the line; I was forced to pass it
in have, and sanquam aliud agens, to avoid all jealousy; whereof I thought fit
to advertise the curious Reader, and to prevent the envious detracter. Here is
bestowed great cost, being indeed the only Keye by which all commodities are
transported and brought in, not only for the use of Tuscany, but even for the
most places of Italy so that it brings in a very great enrate to the great
Dukes coaffers, as I must more particularly and more fitly advertise
hereafter.

The Princes and States interessed in Tuscany are these. The Pope, Princes
interessed in Tuscany.
who possesses all from Tiber to Fiore and so right up from the Sea to the
ridge of the Appenin^, which is some fourth part of the whole. The Spanish King
has the coast of Maremma, and the Ports thereof as is above said, wherein he
keeps garrison, besides Pontremoly, and one other Forte or two on the side of
Liguria. The Dukedom of Ferrara has the valley of Carsigniana. The State of
Genoa, Serezzana. The state of Lucca has all her possessions herein. The Dukes
of V^b^^, Parma, and Brauian^ have also each of them a Piece (howbeit most of
this is in the church part which is called the Patrimony of Saint Peter.) There
is also the Signior di Pcombi^e, the Marquess di Massa, and other inferior
Princes interessed in this Country of an other fourth part. So that there
remains a Moitie under the great Dukes government, whereof I have undertaken
to give this superficial survey which follows.

This State, The great Dukes state.
besides that it is enclosed with the Mountains as with a wall on three-sides,
and with the Sea on the fourth, and so consequently by situation passing
strong: it has also many Castles and Fortresses, as Rodicofany, Monte-falcon,
Pelegrine, Castles.
Charole, Sansubastians, Lusignano, Monterisine, Empoli, Castrecaro, Saffa, and
diverse others, to the number of thirty, wherein is garrison more or less: But
of others which stand rather to show the manner of fortifications in elder
ages, and the force of time by which they are ruined, then for any use of the
time present, there are above three hundred. By which number may very probably
be coniectured their many and diverse States in this small circuit in former
times: for as it appears by History, not only Florence, Siena and Pisa
(which of late years were reduced into one government) but also Pistoia,
Arezzo, Volterra, and almost all the Cities now under the great Duke, had
every one their several and distinct state. Whereupon it was necessary, each
State should have her Castles and Fortes to affront those that confined upon
them. As for those former wherein is garrison, the most of them in the judgment
of men experienced, have their defect either in their form and manner of
fortification which is All' Antica, or in their Piazz^ which are very little,
and so thought vncapale of sufficient number to defend them. But besides these
he has in each city a Cittadell, and therein a garrison, which are all very
modern and strong: the use of which Pieces are not so much for defense of the
Towns where they be, as to keep in awful terms the cities themselves; as
by the cittadell at Florence and Fortress of Siene appears.

Of Cities there be sixteen, Cities.
the one half in the state of Florence, the other in that of Siena: of the
fonner state these be the names. Florence whereof is an Archbishopric, his
name that now is Alexander Medici: Pisa an Archbishopric also, his name
Carolus Antonius ^uteus: Pistoia, Arezzo, Volterra, Certu^i^, Burgo san
Sepolchro, and Monte Pulciano. Of the other state are these: Siena an
Archbishopric, his name Ascanius Piceothuomineus, Motalcino, Grossetto,
Chiusi, Soana, Pienza, Massa and Celle christened a city five years since.
Many of these I saw not, and therefore presume not to speak of at large: in
the four chiefest, Florence, Pisa, Siena and Pistoia. I spent some time, and
hold them worthy of some little remembrance in this discourse, before I come to
speak of the general parts of this state.

Florence is seated at the head of a very fair valley, Florence.
and environed with high Mountains, especially toward Bologna, it has the
streets very long, straight, large, and fair, paued with a broad stone which
they call Lastra, so as no weather makes them foul: it is beautified with many
stately Palaces, which have more del Reale then del Cittadinesco, as that of
the Signioria, that of the Pitti, where is always the great Dukes court: that
of the Medici that of the Strozzi and many others: it is graced with many large
Piazze^, and in them many Statues, some of Brass, as that of Cosme, the first
great Duke, and others very many and very curious; some of Marble, some of
Alabaster: it is divided with the River Arno, and upon this four fair Bridges
of Stone to pass from one part of the city to the other. It is adorned with
many fair Monasteries and churches, but above all with the most magnificent
and admirable Fabric of the Duome, the workma^ship of that excellent Architeck
Brunelleschi dedicated to Santa Maria del ^iore, and is (they say) the true
Modle of the church of Santa Sofia in Constantinople. The body of this church
from the West to the Cupula, is one hundred paces, the breadth forty six: the
Cupula is in circute three hundred paces; with a guilt Ball of Brass on the
top, wherein twenty men may stand upright. (...) of the Church of San Lorenzo
is a very fair and beautiful Library, built and furnished with Books by the
family of Medici: the roof is of Cedar very curiously wrought with knots and
flowers, and right under each knot is the same wrought with no less Art in
the pauement. In this Library I told three thousand nine hundred books very
fairly bound in Leather, after one sort, all bound to their seats, which were
in number sixty eight: and, which is the greatest grace and cost also, very
many of the books were written with the Authors own hands. There is also ^t
the farther end of this Library one other of prohibited books, which I could
not see.

The great Seal of Florence is the Lion and Hercules: their Arms were in
former times a Flower de Lise argent in a field gules, but upon the banishment
of the Ghibelline faction, they are altered to the contrary; the Field to the
color of the flower, and the flower to the color of the field. Within these
hundred years have been of this City three Popes, John and ^^lius Medici,
L^^ the tenth, and Clement the seventh, and Hippolisus Aldebrandiui called
Clement the eight that yet lives. Here have also flourished many famous men in
matter of learning, as Francesco Guicciardini for a judicial Historiographer:
Nicolas Machianelli for a worldly Politician; Michel Angelo for an excellent
Painter; Petrache and Dante for singular Poets; and Boccace for his pleasant
garb and refining their language, and many others.

Having gazed your fill upon the beauties of this Town, if for varieties sake,
and your better recreation, you will walk abroad into the Villa per spasso,
as the Italian says; you shall have there in view, so many, and such goodly
Palaces, for the space of six or seven miles compass, as (they say) would
make one other Florence. But above all, the great Dukes Palace of Pratolino,
built by his brother Francesco, is the most admirable, not for the Palace it
self, or manner of the building; for there are many can match it, if not
excel it. But for the exquisite and rare invention of Water-workes, wherein it
is excellent, and thought to exceed Tiuoli by Rome, so much in this kind
commended. The house it self is built in form of a Roman T, the head of the
letter which is the front of the house, being in length seauenty paces, and the
other part fifty four: the rooms for offices of Court, and lodgings are
seauenty, whereof these are all of one bigness, form, and furniture: with
three goodly Halles richly furnished, running along the midst of the Palace,
from the one end to the other, and the one opening into the other, so as
according to the wind or sun, he may give his intertainement for the best
ease of them he feasteth: It is seated between two high Hills, upon a third
lower then they, from which hills ye descend some quarter of a mile, by a way
set with quick-set, and kept after our English fashion: ye mount up to the
Terreno of the Front by twelve stairs, very fair of Stone, directly
whereupon, at the head of a Garden set round with Statues of the Muses in a
ground sencibly ascending, is seen a huge Giant cut out of the maine Rock,
with all his parts, as arms, hands, legs, and feet, symmetricall to his
head, wherein may stand a dozen men: In it are kept Pigeons; the loouers
whereat they come in and out, are his ears; the windows which give light to
the room, are his eyes. Out of his mouth falls into a very fine poole, all
the water that serves the work on the other side the Palace, among* which are
many sights yielding very great content, as Noah's Ark with all kinds of beasts,
Hercules fighting with a Dragon, Birds artificially singing, Organs musically
playing, showers of Rain plentifully down pouring, and infinite sort of such
devise, more delightsome to be seen then pleasant to be discoursed of. To
conclude, the devise so good, the workmanship so rare, and the charge so great,
as it is said constantly that it cost Duke Francesco three hundred thousand
Crowns.

The great Duke has another Palace, two miles from Florence, called Castello,
only for pleasure, but not so beautified nor full of water-workes as this of
Pratolino: an other distant 10. miles off, called Il Poggio Imperiale, more
profitable then they both, in form quadrangular, fifty six paces square; Where
besides the pleasure it yields of hunting, it yields also summering and Hay
for his Horses, and keeps the great Duches a dairie of three hundred Kine: a
commodity worth the remembering in this state, where in threescore miles are
not seen threescore head of Cattle; nor so much good pasture ground (that I
saw) in the whole country.

I am now before I proceed to the other chief Cities, to remember in a word,
how and when the Florentines came impatronized of diverse other states of
Tuscany, and what form of government they had in former times, until Leo and
Clement, for I must there needs begin, when I shall come to speak of the great
Dukes title.

This City of Florence, after many conflicts with the old City of Fesulae,
(whereof now almost remains no memory, but the hills whereon it stood)
getting the upper hand, and many of that old town following the fortune of
the winner, coming hither to dwell, it grew to bear the name of a great and
rich City: which till then (ever since the time of Sylla, by whom they say it
was first founded and made a Collony of the Romans) bare rather the name of a
Bourough, then otherwise. And after a combination of these two Cities into one
Comminalty, they quartered the Arms of Fesulae, which were a Moon Azure in a
field Argent, with those of Florence, being a Flower de Lise Argent in a field
Gules. It was afterward subject to diverse sackings and subuersions by the
Goths, Gauls, and Lomgobards, partaking with other Cities of Italy in those
miseries which these Nations inflicted. Insomuch as there was nothing remaining
of their ancient glory, but ruins and desolation, and what the barbarous
cruelty of such an enemy could not tyranise upon. In these terms Charles
the great found it, who caused it to be reedified, appointing for the government
thereof two Consuls, and a Senate of an hundred. After this, they altered the
government, conferring it upon ten called Antiani Aldermen, (as I take it) in
the year 1254. Shortly after in the year 1287. they wan the City of Pistoia,
(...).
and about the same time they purchased their liberty of the Emperor Rodolphe
for threescore thousand Ducats: And again changed their form of government,
to eight Priori, and a Gonfalonier of Justice, who was to hold his place for 2.
months only. Presently after they bought Arezzo of Mastino della sala, for
forty thousand Ducats. And in the year 1471. they wan by force Volterra, one
of the 12. first Cities of Tuscany and honored with the birth of the Poet
Persius. They got also Pysa and the whole State thereof, of whose revolt, and
recovery, what parts taking there was, and what time was spent, and how many
Millions it cost them to be repossessed thereof, Guicciardine very fully
discourses, and were here too tedious to be particularly related. The
government of a Gonfalonier was altered by Gualteri Francese Duke of Athens, who
at the Cities request requiring aid, was sent thither by Robert king of
Sicilie, and at his first coming deposed the Gonfalonier and Priory, and
usurped himself; but he was quickly expulsed, and the former officer
reinuested: till the time of Pope Alexander the sixth, whose son Casar Borgia
duke Valentinois sought to bring in the three banished Medici, Piero, Giouanni,
and Guiliano; whereupon the Florentines made Piero Sederini their Gonfalonier
perpetual, as Buonacorsi an approved Italian writer, and Guicciardine in his
fist book does testify. These alterations have been since the restoration of
the city by Charles, (which notwithstanding) Guicciardine lib. 1. car. 17.
says, was openions inneterata benche falsa, che Carlo l'hauesse reidificat^,
an old but false conjecture, that Charles did reedifie it: besides those also
which it suffered afterward, which shall more fitly be remembered hereafter.

From Florence I must pass to the City Pistoia, seated at the other end of
this valley, 20. miles off. But the Castle of Pratu being in the way, and
commanding the passage, I dare not but salute it; the rather for that I spent
four months in that Town.

There are in Italy among I know not how many thousands, Prato.
four principal Castles above the rest reputed, as Leander Alberts in his
view of Italy discourses: Barletta in Puglia in the kingdom of Naples;
Fabriana in Marca Anconitana, under the state of the Church; Crema in
Lombardia, under the Venetians, and Prato in Tuscana under the great Duke. It
is here to be observed; that these are called Castles, not that they be only
Fortresses and places of strength, but that they be large towns fortified with
wall and Bulwark, and have their Territories; they only want Bishops Seas,
wherein they differ from Cities. It stands in the midst of this Valley
upon the river Bisentio; it is in form sex-angular, at each corner a Bulwark
alla Moderna very defensible; the walls in circuit two miles, with an old
piece at the East built (they say) by Frederico Barbarossa. The Contado (the
Territory) of this Town is in length eight miles, in breadth four, in circuit
four and twenty, within which compass (with those within the Town) are
fifty nine Churches, eight and thirty Monasteries, and other religious
houses, and of all sorts of people sixteen thousand, whereof two thousand are
religious. Here is (they say) the Girdle of our Lady brought thither by a
Merchant from the Indies, whether it was first carried by S. Thomas the
Apostle, a Relicke which they hold in high esteem, keep with very great care,
come to see with great devotion, and is showed to the people with great
reverence once in a year; that is, on our Ladies day in September, in the time
of their Fair, and when is most concourse of strangers. There came that day in
devotion (to see me, not the Girdle) two English Gentlemen my friends; we
observed (if it be not impertinent here to remember) that there were in view
upon the Market place of people at the showing of this Relicke, about eighteen
or twenty thousand, whereof we judged one half to have Hattes of Straw, and
one fourth part to be bare legged; that we know all is not gold in Italy:
though many Travelers gazing only on the beauty of their Cities, and the
painted surface of their houses, think it the only Paradize of Europe. But if
they would with me, -- fordida rura Atque humiles intrare casas and visere
gentem: they would surely grant, that poverty and famine had not a greater
kingdom in those countries where Crassus starued his Army, then they have
here. But no marvel though Prato be poor being so vnlustly and cruelly
sacked in the year 1512. ^468.
by the Spaniards under the conduct of Raymondo Cardona, for want of pay which
the Florentines ought him and his Soldiers: who most vilely gave the sacking
of this pretty (and then rich) town, to the barbarous insolency of the proud
Spaniard, and came themselves with bags of Crowns to purchase the lands of
the poor harmless Pratesi, wherewith they were forced to redeem their
liberty, after the rauishing of their wives, killing of their children, robbing
their shops and houses, and other such insolent outrages; whereof Guicciardine
lib. 11. complains, that from their avarice, lust, and cruelty, nothing was
safe. And Buonacorsi says, that they spared neither virgin, infant, nor
church, and Paulus Ionius affirms, that the Spanish cruelty in this sack of
Prato, did far exceed that of the Dutch and French, at the sack of Brescia so
much detested. Hence is it that at this day the name of Spaniard is there most
odious, for among all other names of infamy and reproach, when they have called
one Poltrone, Furfante, Manigoldo, Traditore, and all that naught is, they end
always in this Spagnaolo intending (it should seem) that there is not a worse
name under the sun.

But leaving them expostulating this injury of the Florentines, and bewailing
their own miseries, I will proceed to the City of Pistoia.

It is seated at the West end of the Valley, Pistoia.
in circuit two miles and a half, the walls old and weak, built by
Desiderius king of the Lombards: Howbeit the Bulwarkos are very modern and
strong, with a Cittadell built by Duke Francesco, and manned with a sufficient
garrison to keep the town in awe. This Town is called of Cato and Pliny,
Pistorium; and of Ptolomey, Pistoria quasi Pestoria (says one) of the
pestilence that there reigned among the soldiers, which remained of Catelines
Camp after he was overthrown, who (they say) was the first builder thereof.
Others will have it called of ^isis and opos, that is the faithful Territory.
Others because it is the door of the Mountains which the word also
signifietl^, for from hence is away to pass through the ^pennines into Frame^
by which the French forces passed into Tuscany, and so to Naples, in the time
of Charles the eight, as by the history appears. All which are either false
conjectures and carry no correspondencie of truth with history, or at least
are idle suppositions, and carry with them no matter of import. For what reason
is there that the Grecians should give names to towns in Tuscany, who never
came over the River Tener? or that they should christen this and no other? or
that a Roman should be the Father, and a Greeks the Godfather: but were it
so, it little imports, and therefore I have purposely avoided these
fruitless etimologies: else could I have said before, that Florence was called
either (Fluentia) because it stands between the two waters Mognone and Arno,
or (Fiorentia) of Fiore a flower, because it is the flower and beauty of Italy:
or (Firenze) which Giambolare one of their writers deriues from a Caldey word,
and signifies (he says) a valiant Soldier; as who would say the Florentines
were such: which I have not yet read, and I am sure they of Siena will not
confess: who will not let to brag how often they have beaten them in the
field. Indeed I well remember, that writers give them the attribute of
(Ingenious and wise) as namly Macciauelly in his Florentine history, and
Guicciardine in the very beginning of his book Cart. 2. Howbeit I could easily
condescend to the opinion of Imbalt a French commander, who upon good
experience Guicciardine lib. 5. cart. 144. Non saptua dove consistesse,
lingegne tantu celebratu de Fiorentini could not find where that great wit
of theirs lay. So likewise these word-founders will have their City Arezzo
to be so old as that it was built when for want of a fit name they were feign
to call it (Earth) for so in the Hebrew tongue it signifies. But seeing that
Tully and Varro call it ( Aretium) and not ( Arezium) me thinks they might
better derine it from Mars (which the word well bears) for I am well assured,
that history makes the Arrettines and their neighbors the Perugians, far
better Soldiers then the Florentines.

But I will not ouer-charge this short discourse with deriuations, I had rather
leave them with the capriccious Antiquaries of Tuscany, and returning to
Pistoia, say: that though it be very little, it is very rich, as having a
Contado full of oil and wine: insomuch as it is said, they press yearly one
hundred thousand Barrels of Wine, whereof they send the one half to Florence,
of which the great Duke has ( gabell) a custom one Guilio, (sixpence
sterling) for every Barrel, at the entery into every City gate, besides the
tenth levied upon it before, and an imposition after upon every tavern, as
shall more fitly in the discourse of his entrate be advertised.

This Town is famous, or rather in famous, for the two factions of the Bianchi
and Nery, which ruined themselves, and troubled the peace of Florence also: it
began thus. Two young Gentlemen of the town falling out, and so proceeding
from words to blows, it chanced one of them received a light hurt, The father
of the other (because he would kill all motions to a farther quarrel) sends
his Son to ask pardon of the Father and Parentage of the other whom he had
hurt: but he causing his servants to lay hold on him, commanded his right hand
to be cut off, and sent him away with this answer, Va dal tuo Padre and digli,
che le ferite non si curano con parole ma colferro; Go to thy father and tell
him, hurts are not cured with words, but with the sword. Hereupon grew that
great and bloody enmity between those two houses, which drew into it all the
great families of Pistoia, as also them of Florence, where the Donati banded
with the Neri, and the Circhi with the Bianchi. Since which faction, there has
also another risen no less dangerous then the former, between the Cancellieri
and the Panzadici, scarce yet so composed, but that upon every small occasion
it is ready to break out.

This Town pretends to be much privileged above all other Cities under the
great Duke, for at the time when they yielded to the State of Florence, it was
among other Capitulacons concluded; that in any Bando (Proclamation) whatsoever
except the City and Contado of Pistoia were expressly named, it was to be
understood exempt and freed from the same, which indeed is still observed,
howbeit a course is taken never to leave that clause out: so that I see small
reason they have to brag so much thereof. The people in and without the City
are supposed sixty four thousand: the Religious are much about the the rate
of them in Prato an eight part.

I cannot pass the direct way from hence to Pisa, whether the course of this
discourse directs me, unless I pass under the walls of Lucca: which being no
part of this State, I know not how I may speak of; that have undertaken to
write of nothing else: and yet passing so near, I know not how to avoid some
mention thereof, that am likewise to advertise of what I have seen. Wherefore
between a doubt which is less fault, to digress in my narration, or be
diuerted out of my way, I will speak so little, as if it be a fault to
digress, it may be excused, because this little is nothing, and if it be a
fault to write so little, it may be answered I durst not digress.

Lucca.
The City of Lucca was anciently called Fredia, and afterward being the first
of the twelve old Cities of Tuscany that received the Christian faith, and
light of the Gospel, it changed the name of Lucca, a Luce, herewith accords
Fuccio Vberti; Ma perch alluminata della feed
Fu pria, ch altra Cittade di Tuscana,
Cangio il suo nome, e Lucca le si diede.
It is seated (as is before said) like a Center in a Circumference, in the
midst of a fair and pleasant valley, environed with wast and huge
Mountains: The walls in circuit two miles, are of Brick very new,
strengthened with a very thick Rampart, and fortified alla moderna, with very
many and defensible Bulwarks. Insomuch as it is thought, that when the
Bulwark that is now in the making at the North-west of the town is finished,
with one other at the East which is already purposed, and the Terra-pieno
(Rampart) of this East side made answerable to the rest, which is also
intended, it shall then have in all, eleven Bulwarks, and will without
exception be one of the best fortified towns in Italy. They keep in the town
a garrison continually of three hundred Soldiers, and are able (they say) to
draw into their City at two days warning out of their own territory,
thirty thousand able me^ for service; for which number they have provision of
arms, victuals, and all things necessary upon occasion. I was in their
Granaries, where I saw, as they credibly rated it of Wheat, Rye, Beans, and
Chestnut Mealn the quantity of six hundred thousand Stays, which of our
measure makes about fifty thousand quarters, besides so much more kept in
diverse conuents and Monasteries of the town which they call their Prouisione
d' Abondanza (store). All which provision is able (in case of a Siege) to
maintain the City for two years, at the number of threescore thousand
people, allowing twelve Stays a man the year; a proportion in those parts,
and such cases very large. The reasons of these fortifications, garrisons, and
provisions which they make, is the jealous fear they have of the great Duke,
of whom all their State which is somewayes fifty miles in length is every way
environed, whose greatness is nothing pleasing to the Lucchesi neither can
they well digest that his title ( di Toscana) and therefore the Signoria of this
State, sending letters of congratulation (they say) but it is more probable
about some other their affairs to Cosmo Medici, presently after his creation
of great Duke, they styled their letters thus. All' Ilsmo e Ec^smo principi
Cosmo Medici gran Duca (m) Tuscana. To which garbro of theirs the Italia ^rime
also alludeth, which says thus; S' il Duca hauesse Lucca e Serezzana,
Saretbe il gran Duca (di) Tuscana.
Implying that it is no reason he should be entitled great Duke of the whole,
having no more but the one half, But how sooner this town stand prouista as
it braggeth, and are able to keep him out of themselves two or three years
together, more then probable it is, that the fear of the Spanish King, to
whose protection it is recommended, does curb his desire in attempting the
action, watching over this pretty State with an ambitious and covetous eye, come
Lo sparuicre alla quaglia, as the Hawk over the Quail, hoping one day for an
oppertunitie.

I am now by order-leauing Lucca to look to her self, Pisa.
to pass the Monte Saint Julian, and arrive at Pisa: a City in former times
very populous as any in Tuscany, now so dispeopled as there are not judged
above fourteteene thousand persons, though in circuit it be little less then
Florence: the Walls for the most part are of Brick, but in some places of
square Stone, the Ramparts convenient, the Bulwarks not many nor
correspondent: the piece of cheifest import is the Castle upon the South-west
of the town, wherein is a garrison of fifty, with munition and other
necessaries, for the use as is abouesaid of keeping the City in awe. The site
hereof is in a Plain upon the River Arno, which passes through the midst
thereof with one bridge only, and falls into the Sea some six miles below;
whereby it appears that the land has lately gotten much upon the Sea on this
coast, as we find in diverse places upon our coast in England, for that in the
time of Strabo he reports, it was but twenty furlongs off, which is two miles
and a half distant from the Sea.

Out of this River is cut a Ditch from this Town to Linorno, fifteen miles
long, for the more convenient carriage of such wares as arrive in that Road,
and are thence conveyed by water from Pisa up to Florence; and so by land into
other places of Tuscany, Romagna, Lombardia, and Rome also. The Boats wherein
these wares are carried are but small, in number between six and seven
hundred, which our English Merchants Burlando (gibing) call the great Dukes
fleet. The nature of this plain is for the most part marish, though in times
past it was fit either for pasture or tillage, as by the commodity thereout
reaped for the maintenance of the city appears by Guicciard. But since that
the City being conquered by the Florentines, and most of the ancient Pisani
departed, some into Sicilia, other into Sardegna, Corsica, and other places,
preferring a voluntary bannishment, before a forced subjection: the Town has
been so desolate as there have not been people sufficient to maintain this
plain against the fury of Arno, whereby it has been much wasted, as has
partly been said.

There are, besides the commodity of the seat, lying between Florence and
Lyuorno, three other causes, that this City is frequented, otherwise it would
be very desolate. The first is the especially favor of the Prince himself,
who because he was here borne, bears an extraordinary affection to the place,
as by his often coming and long tarrying appears. Another is, for that it is
the place where properly the order of S. Stephen is resident, where the Knights
of this order have their Palace, Officers, and other dependances. The last,
for that there is a study as they call it in Italy (a University) erected by
Cosmo, and is reasonably frequented.

In this Town among many other Churches and Monasteries, is that excellent
Fabric of the Battisterio, built (they say) in fourteen days: It stands
hard at the West End of the Duomo, which for the beauty thereof might have
compared with that of Siena so much commended, had it not by mishap been
burned in the year 1595. in October; it is now in the repairing at the great
Dukes charges: Howbeit in liew hereof, he has raised the price of his Salt
five. Quatrini in the pound, throughout this State for the space of ten years:
and it is to be thought (by examples too many of like nature in other places)
that being once granted, it shall not then be ended. On the North of this
Church is the Campo Santu, as they call it, their Golgetha or place of burial,
the earth whereof was brought in ships from the Terrasanta, as their Histories
record: and as they affirm, the dead consume there in four and twenty hou^es.
Not far from this place is an old ruinous Tower, called by them (Torre di
fame) in memory of the mercylesse cruelty of Ruggiero the Archbishop, who upon
suspicion of treason immured therein Conte Hugolino a Noble Pisano, and his
four children, causing them to be starued: of whom Dante the Poet in his 33.
chapter dell'inferno, very elegantly discourses, faining, that there for a
torment due to such a fact, the Conte li^eth upon the Bishops-head with a never
satisfied greediness. Here is also an Arsenall wherein the Duke has two or
three of his Galleys in mend^ng, but no new in the making, neither Artillery
or any thing else worth the remembrance. Here the great Duke has a Palace,
but so ill contrived, and so unworthy the presence of so great a Prince, as it
is said, the deviser thereof looking for great praise at the Dukes hands for
his rare plotte, and finding after that it disliked his Highness, in a
melancholy discontent threw himself into the Arno: he has also another
lesser house lately built, wherein are many small Statues of Marble and
Metal, many Medalles and Pictures, some painted, others of Feathers very
exquisitely artificial. Besides pieces of Ure untried both of gold and
silver, Coral unpolished, whereof ye shall see some grow upon the Sculles
of deadmen, with infinite such like, more delightful to be seen, then
needful to be related of. Unto this building is adjoining a Garden of Simples,
not much inferior to that of Padoa: But the thing of best use and greatest
cost, and therefore unfittest to be forgotten, is a Conduict of water upon
Arches into the Town from Valdeculci five mile off, where with the better part
of the City is served. Other buildings I remember not, worth the remembering;
except the Campanile, which Architecture has this variety, that the top
thereof by a line perpendicularly downe-falling to the ground, and shows that
it is prominent or hanging over the Basis ten or twelve foot by the square. As
for the City it self, it is the greater half void, wherein is nothing but
Gardens of herbs and roots; the houses that there be, are for the most part
so old and ruinous, as that the great Duke has lately given commandment, that
every one according to his ability should either build new, or at the least
repair and trim them on the outsides for the better grace of the town. So
unlike is Pisa to it self; which in former times was able to wage battle at
land with the Florentines, at Sea with the Genoese; yea and with Venice also:
And before that, to conquer Sardigna, to overcome the King of Carthage, and
bring him prisoner to Rome, to recover Palermo in Sicilia from the Sarazens, to
assist the French with a mighty Navy in their voyage to the holy land, to send
forty ships to the recovery of Alexandria for Almerick King of Jerusalem, to
aid The Emperor Frederick Barbarossa against the state of Millan; besides many
other their famous and victorious conquests; whereupon one says: Erat Pisa,
altera Roma fuim^^ Troes, f^^ Ilium, nunc seges vbi Trola fuit.

To speak of the diverse gouerments of this Town and the many alterations it
has suffered, were a discourse, though not altogether needless or
impertinent, yet so large or rather tedious, as would be altogether
disproportionate to my former brevity: I will leave it therefore altogether
untouched, and go forward my journey to Siena.

This City chalengeth the title of much Antiquity, Siena.
being built by Sanesius the son of Remus, Romulus his brother, which may
seem to carry some matter of truth, for that the Arms of the City is a
Wolf, with two Infants sucking upon her: which Arms are to be seen in diverse
places of the Town both in Marble and Metal. It is called by Pliny, Colonia
Senensis, and by Tacitus in the 20. book of his History, but whether it was
built by Sanesius, or the Galli Senones that went with Brennus into Italy, I
leave indifferent to the Reader: this last is alleged out of Ptolomies Fables,
though I rather subscribe to the former. It is seated upon the tops of diverse
small hills, very nearly meeting together, which with their declinings makes
the Situation very uneven, and such as I have not elsewhere seen: by reason
whereof it is judged infinitely strong, as not having any commanding hill
near, whereby it might be prejudiced, nor any way by which forces may be
brought before it; save only at the two gates toward Rome and Florence: and
yet there so narrow, as there cannot possibly come above ten Soldiers alla
filata in rank. So that as Liuorno is the key by which all forces must pass
that by Sea would approach Florence, so is Siena the Port or gate by which
they must enter, that either from Naples or the Churches state would come to
anoye it. For from the way of Romagna or Bologna, there is very hard passage
for an Army, so sharp and inaccessible are the mountains, which being well
considered by Cosmo (then Duke) of Florence, no marvel though he never rested
till he had got the town and whole state of Siena into his hands.

The means thus; The City about forty five years since, being besieged by
the forces of the Pope, Charles the fifth, and Cosmo Duke of Florence, rendered
it self at length to the Emperor, and received a garrison of Spaniards, but
keeping still their manner of government which they before used. The Emperor by
earnest solicitation of the D. d'Alua, in whom the Duke of Florence his purse
(they say) had got him great interest, was content to render it into the Duke
of Florence his possession, for certain sums of money to be paid, besides a
yearly rent, with a recognition that it was holden of him, and certain other
covenants which some say were never performed, as also that this contract was
made without the consent of Philip king of Spain that now is, whereof were not
his hands full of actions in other places, it is thought some stir might
arise. So that Cosmo de' Medici the second Duke of Florence united that state
with this of Siena, which is by estimation bigger then the state of Millan, and
the most fruitful part of all Tuscany. Whereupon he altered his Style which
before was Dux Florentiae, and entitled himself Dux Florentiae and Senarum.

The ornaments of special note in this town are three: The first is the
Duomo, no great but a fair and rich Fabric, all the outside of Marble, so is
the Pauement, the roof guilt; and at the foot thereof, are very curiously cut
in stone and gilded, also all the Popes from the first till within these
eighty years. The second is the Citterne, a place, whereout of the Rock
flows abundance of waters, and have their Citterne and Pooles very well cut
of Stone to receive the same. The last is the Piazza, one hundred and sixty
paces in length, and one hundred and ten in breadth, vety steepely descending.
At the head hereof is a very fair Fountain, and at the foot is the Palace
of the Signoria. round about it are very fair and high houses. I have not
seen a Market-steede, excepting that of Sancto Marco in Venice, so beautiful.
The fairest Palace of this City, not excepting the great Dukes, is that of
the Piccol huomini, begun by Pius Secundus, and ended by Pius Tertius, both of
this family; which needs not much envy the most stately of those in Florence.
The walls of this City, as also the houses and streets are all of Brick.

They have here (they say) the arm of S. John Baptist, The arm of S. John
Baptist.
which they very religiously and with much reverence hold as a relick; It was
sent by the Turk to Aeneas Siluim Piccol huomini, being Pope, by the name of
Pius Secundus, in liew whereof, this Pope sent him the half Moon for a Crest.

There is a Fortress at the North-west of this town, The Fortress.
reputed strong: howbeit the form being Quadrangular and therefore the angles
not so obtuse as in those of five or more; it is judged of modern Enginers, as
namely of Maggi, a late Italian writer in the subject of fortifications, not to
answer the reputation it hath^n general. The Artillery herein (they say, The
Artillery.
for we may not enter it) much and good: the garrison but five and twenty at
this present, the end, is to command the town upon any occasion.

This City like that of Pisa, People decayed.
is noted to be much decayed since their subjection to the family Medici, there
not being now above two and twenty thousand persons, where in times past were
always above fifty. The Gentri^.
The Gentlemen of this City are noted to be generally more civil, affable,
and courteous to strangers then they are in other places. Their course of
living.
They live altogether upon their revenues, without exercising any trade of
Merchandise or exchange upon the Banck, which course notwithstanding, all the
Nobility of Florence and Pisa, even to the great Duke himself do take: as
likewise they of Venice, Genoa, Rome, and generally all places and states of
Italy, except Naples.

Having in brief discoursed of three chief Cities of Tuscany, The three
chief cities, and why?
Florence, Siena and Pisa, which deserve so to be called, either for that each
of them has in times past had her several State, or for that they be the
Seats of three Archbishopricks: it now remains I advertise of the
commodities of this country, beginning with the Mountains and their fruits,
Commodities out of Mountains.
which because they bofor the most part craggie and barren, as they allow
those that possess them but little profit; so they yield me that write of them
but little matter: no marvel then though the discourse be like the hills
themselves, barraine.

There is dug out of these hills a kind of Freestone, Freestone.
passing hard, Diverse colors.
of color according to the nature of the place whereout it is taken, white,
read, and black, or to say more properly, enclining to these colors: of all
which sorts there be in Florence and elsewhere, very gallant and stately
Palaces builded. Marble diverse colors.
They have also in many places, pitts of Marble, white, blew, and
party-colored excellent good: namely in the Territory of Massa, but especially
in the Mountains of Carrara and Lunigiana: hence daily they dig for the
building of their Churches and Palaces of Genoa, Florence, Bologna, Rome, and
France also, whereout mig^t be dug enough to serve a world of building, if
the transporting it into other places were not so chargeable, or rather the
impossibility to bring it from the pits where it is dug, to the Port where
they should load it, by reason of the cragginesse of the Rocks. Of these Marble
Pits Iunenal seems to make mention, where he says: Procubuit veluti qui
saxaligustica portat Axis.

And Vberti in his sixth Canto says thus: E vedimmo Carrara, oue la gente,
Troua il candido Marmo in tanta copia,
Che n' assai haurebbe tutta l'oriente.


The building of Italy fairer then ours, and why.
This is the reason the buildings of Italy so far exceed ours, especially
their Churches: as for any other thing in that land, the truth is they can no
way compare with us, nor make good the great opinion the world has thereof.

The other fruits of these Mountains which are indeed useful and necessary
for the sustenance of the inhabitants, are Acornes, Acornes.
Olives, and Chestnuts: of Acornes especially in the state of Siena are very
great store, wherewith, over and besides those they eat themselves, they feed
their Swine, not having of Beans or Pease to spare for this purpose; The great
Duke makes yearly of certain woods he has in this State above a thousand
Ducats.

Olives.
They have also Olives, but not in such plentiful manner as to be able to send
any Oil into other parts: for they want hereof to serve their own turns;
being a commodity so necessary, as without it, it were not possible they
should live, feeding as they do upon nothing else but cold fruits and raw
herbs; Their scarsity and necessity.
insomuch as the Villano and poorer sort feeds not upon flesh once a month,
and then most sparingly; as for Butter and Cheese, were it not for Lombardie
they should scarce know what it meant.

The third benefit of the hills is the Chestnut, Chestnuts.
the countrimans bread, as water is his drink, who (except he be sick) which
we then refuse, drinks no Wine, Their use.
and except very seldom eats nothing but those Nuts; the sterility of the
country being such as not to afford bread of corn for one fourth part of the
year. Corn scarce.
Such is the wretched penury of this Nation, abounding in nothing but in
quaint terms, which discover their humor, but satisfy not their hunger;
whereof shall be more fitly discoursed hereafter. It may here suffice to
infer that the greater part of this State being hills, and the most of those
barraine, and much of these other nothing but Stone: no marvel then, though
they build like the Agrigenti^es and live like the Scythians, though they dwell
like Princes, and feed like Pesants, though their houses be great and their
tables small, though the women have in one day more riches on their back then
they spend in three ages on the sustenance of their body. And yet that glory
and wealth there is, is in the City, and in the hands of few, to whom all the
fruits of the country are conveyed: as for the Artificer he can do no more
but live, whereof scarce one in a city ever grows rich, and the poor
Contadines life is such, as if naturally he were not proud in this extreme
misery, it would move any stranger to pity his estate.

I have stood in my lodging on a market day, when the country has come in, and
when commonly they attire themselves in their best robes: yet have I observed
seaue^ or eight bare legged, for one otherwise, and in this proportion have
they passed for two or three hours, the rest of their apparel holding suitable
conformity therewithal; yet cannot this people talk but with his hatt on his
head, and with his hands by his sides, with action also and words, either
beseeming none at all, or at least one in better clothes.

But to leave the high minds and low fortunes of the Tuscanes, the great hills
and small commodities of their country, upon which we may well turn the
Proverb, Par^uriunt Montes, exit Mus; I will descend into their valleys, which
indeed (not to defraude them of their right) are like Gardens, whether you
respect the small quantity of each man's several, or their diligence in their
keeping, or to say truth, the variety of the fruits thereof.

For the first I can auow, that going up with another English Gentleman to the
top of a steep hill, some two miles high right over Prato, to give our eye the
view of that pleasant valley, we could not discern any one piece of ground
above one Acre and a half in our opinions, (except the great Dukes pastures
about his Palace of Poggio) all which ground being bare and the hedges green
with the Vines, gave a very pleasant and delightful prospect, resembling very
fitly a Checker table. Now if the good Stars raise one of them to the fortune
to be possessed of one of these garden-plots, and a Cappanuccia (a silly
shelter covered with Reeds) thereupon ye shall never get him from the
discourse of his Villa, his Podere, and his Entrata, his farms, his lands, and
his rents; that one would think him Lord of some goodly Palace, and as much
land at the least as a Nag might well pace about in a day; when, if we come to
see it, it proves not God knows above the Giornata (a days journey) of a
Snaile, and she poor beast is taken damage faisant in danger to be seized upon
to the Lords use of the soil; for Snailes, Frogs, Hedg-hogs, and such like,
are accounted among the Delicatezze, the delicates of Italy.

As for their diligence in digging, setting, sowing, manuring and weeding of
their ground, it is such as therewith the Dutch diligence in their Root
grounds may not compare. And lastly for the variety of those commodities which
these Valleys yield, it shall suffice to comprehend them under these three
heads; Fruit, Herbage, and Grain, with particular mention of such as I
remember, howbeit in Italian names, because many of them grow not, nor are yet
Christened in England.

Fruit. Herbage. Grain. Une. Finocchio. Formento. Fichi. Lattuga. Orzo.
Aranci. Inuidia. Segala. Albicocchi. Cicerbita. Miglio. Pesche. Borragine.
Sagina. Mele. Fiorancio. Panico. Limoni. Aneto. Fane. Cedri. Bietola. Ceci.
Manderle. Cauolo. Faginoli. Noci. Spinacci. Piselli. Albatre. Basilico. Riso.
Cotogne. Radici. Farro. Poponi. Porri. Gioglio. Cedrioli. Carotte. Mochi.
Cocomeri. Rape. Vena. Zucchi. Fior di Velluto. Spelta. Mele granate Nepitella.
Ceriegi. Menta. Pere. Cardi. Nespole. Gobbi. Susine. Selerii. Cypolli.
Pastinacchi. Agli. Mori.

These are the fruits of the earth whereof they feed, for of others I speak
not: and to give these their due, many of them be very delicate and pleasant;
as their Vna Moscutella, and Rimaldesca, their Figs, Apricocks, Musk-mellons,
and such like: howbeit considering either the little time they last, or the
small quantity they have thereof, the benefit is not so great as is imagined;
for none of these last named lasts above two months, except it be the grape,
whereof some few are hanged up in the Palco roof, to serve the richer sort in
Lent. As for the poorer, their chiefest food is Herbage all the year through.
Indeed for the months of August and September, while Grapes be ripe, he
keeps a continual feast, making them his only food.

The Vine.
The Vine which without comparison is the greatest commodity of Tuscany, if
not of Italy; has these uses. Of the Grape they feed, of the juice they make
Wine; of the shreedings they make small bundles, like our Fagots of gaul in
Cambridge, and sell them for two quatrini a piece for firing: of their leaves
they feed their Oxen, or else dung their land; and lastly of the stones they
feed their Pigions, which after the Vintage they riddle out of the Grap: being
dried, and these they sell at 20. soldi the Staio.

There are diverse sorts of Grapes, the names of such as I remember are these;
Vna Canaiola, good either to eat or for Wine; Passerina a small Grape, whereof
Sparrowes feed, good only for Wine; Trebbiana the best sort of white Grapes
for Wine, whereof they make their Vin Trebbiano, Zibibbo; these are dried for
Lent: Moscatella with a taste like Musk, not for Wine, but to eat; Vna grossa
not to eat, but for Wine; Rauerutta, of itself neither to eat, nor for Wine,
but a few of these put among a great vessel of Wine, gives it a color, for
which use it only serves; San Columbana and Rimaldesca a very delicate Grape,
either for Wine or to eat; Luglisla which has his name of the month of July
wherein it is ripe, better to eat then for Wine; and lastly Cerisiana, named
for the taste it has like a Cherry, better for Wine then to eat.

They have also as many names for their Figs, the best are the Brugiotti, which
being needless to recount, as also to stand thus particularly upon all the
rest, I will omit to speak: only in a word I will speak of the Mulberry, for
that the mention thereof draws consequently therewithal the discourse of the
Silke-worme, which being another of the greatest commodities of Tuscany I may
not forget.

In the two months of May and June this worm labors, Silke-wormes.
the rest of the year they be only seeds kept in some warm and close
places, where they may neither be endangered by cold nor thunder, for either of
these destroys them. When she has wrought her self into a bottom, they put
it into warm water to find the end thereof, but if they would preserve the
worm for seed, then they find the end without putting the bottom into water
(for this kills the worm) which being found, and wound upon a Cane, they
suffer the worm to lie upon a woollen cloth, till growing to a Fly it
engender with another, whereof come infinite seeds, which are as is said, kept
close all the year till the beginning of May, when they are laid in the Sun
and so hatched, but for want of heat, and to have of them betimes, the women
will hatch them in their bosoms. Mulbery.
So soon as they be worms they have of Mulberie leaves given them, whereof
they only feed, to which purpose are daily great store of trees planted: the
leaf is sold at four quattrini the pound. Of this sort of trees the great
Duke has planted such plenty along the banckes of Ar^o, and about the Ditches
of towns and other public places, as it is probably judged they will within
these few years be annually worth thirty thousand Ducats. And whereas
heretofore the Silke-workers of Florence, besides their own, were usually wont
to buy from Naples, Lombardie, and Greece, so much silk as yearly amounted to
three hundred thousand Ducats, it is now thought that shortly they shall have
enough of their own; for ye shall observe, that they of Siena are richer in
lands then they of Florence, and therefore trade less in all Mechanical
professions: I saulsi ricchi d^ entrada, i fiorentini ricchi per industria:
which is the reason that the Florentines exceed the other so far herein:
insomuch as it is thought here are yearly made of Florence Rashes to the worth
of two Millions of Ducats, and of Silket and Clothes of gold and silver, to
the value of three Millions; hence grew this Axiom of Aristotle; The more
barraine the soil, the more rich the City: as he observed by Athens in
Greece, and we find by Norremburge in Germany. Good reason they of Florence
have to increase this commodity, by all possible means, without the which I
see not how they should be able (not exhausting in few years their estate) to
be releiued with the necessary commodities of other countries: a^ Corn from
Sicilia, Leather from Barbaria, Tin, Lead, Hearing, Chauiar, and other such
provision from England, and from diverse other places other things as needful:
their State not having any Merchandise to spare, Alume.
except a little Alume to counternaile this great charge withal. So that their
helpers an industrious paine-taking in the making of these silks, Silks.
their clothes of gold and silver, Clothes of gold and si^uer, etc.
their Rashes, and painting of Leather for Hangings (a trade much used among
them) howbeit the matter it self coming from Spain and other countries,
whereupon they work, and only the workmanship their own, the advantage can
be but small.

Another help is their egregious and incredible Parsimony in feeding, as also
their frugality from extraordinary spending, for should they either fare, or
exceed in other charges, as we do in this country, it were impossible but
their state should be ruined.

Concerning Herbage, Herbs and Roots.
I shall not need to speak, but that it is the most general food of the
Tuscan, at whose table a Sallet is as ordinary, as Salt at ours; for being
eaten of all sorts of persons, and at all times of the year: of the rich
because they love to spare; of the poor, because they cannot choose; of many
Religious, because of their vow, of most others because of their want: it
remains to believe that which themselves confess; namely, Flesh.
that for every horse-load of flesh eaten, there is ten cart loades of herbs
and roots, which also their open Markets and private tables do witness, and
whereof if one talk with them fasting, he shall have sencible feeling.

But for the better proof of the little flesh here spent, it shall not be
amiss to remember what the Chancellor of Prato told me concerning this matter,
who seemed by his discourse a man of good understanding, and who ought by his
office to have the knowledge hereof very familiar; upon some conference with
him had about the great Dukes impositions and Gabell which he had in that
state, he told me among diverse other matters, which shall be remembered
hereafter, that he had out of Prato and the precincts thereof, a thousand
Ducats communibm annis for the flesh there eaten, at the rate of five denari
the pound, for so much he has. Now if we reduce Ducats to denari (which are
the fourth part of a Quattrino) and divide that number by five, we shall find
the number of pounds of flesh eaten there, after the rate of twelve ounces to
the pounds (for so is their weight of all things whatsoever) which sum by the
rule of three we may reduce to pounds English of sixteen ounces, and then
dividing by fourteen, know how many Stone is there eaten in a year. According
to which computation we shall find 18000 Stone: the people there being, as is
already said 16000 persons, so that there is little more then a Stone a piece
for the year: a proportion which in Newgate market, and S. Nicholas-shambles
will hardly be believed.

Pythagoras found by the dimension of the foot the perfect Rieratte of
Hercules and Phidias of Athens, found by the paw of the Lion, the true
proportion of the whole body: so by this small store of flesh spent in Prato,
may well be conceived what proportion is spent in the whole state of Tuscany.
It may here not impertinently be remembered (speaking of flesh) of a kind of
meat which the Italian has out of Barbaria, howbeit in no great quantity,
which they call Micista, Micista.
it is a powder made of Beef dried and sold in their shops; for the nature of
the flesh of Africa being such not to take Salt, (the Alarbaes of that
country) dwelling in tents, which they always remove when their cattle have
eaten up the pasture, to some other place, do bake their flesh in Ouens so
dry, till it may be beaten to powder, which done, they barrel it up, and
carry with them for a kind of very good food. And I have heard also that the
Tartars bring of this into the wars, whereof they feed, and wherewith putting
about two handfuls of it into water, they give their ^ors^s, which without any
other prouinder keeps them fat and ^isty.

As concerning their grain in Tuscany, Grain.
it is very much in kind and very little in quantity: whereof most years they
have too sencible feeling, and are supplied out of other places, as Sicilia;
Sardigna, and sometimes England and the East-countries: they have of Wheat more
then either Rye or Barley, yet of neither sufficient: as for their Sagina,
Panico, Miglio, Surgo Turco, and such like, they are fine names, but make but
course meal and bread only for the poorer sort, who, (might they not want
thereof) would think their market much amended.

Their harvest is in June, Harvest.
they mow their Wheat and Rye, and reap their Barley, quite contrary to the
common course in England: they cut their corn while it is somewhat green, I
take it, least it should shill: they suffer it afterward to stand in shocks
^ill it be well withered and dried, then making a store on the ground where it
grew, they presently thresh it; and stack up the Straw for their necessary
uses: the same ground which has carried this crop, if it be in heart is again
presently tilled, and sowed with Miglio, Panico, Sagina, or some pulse or
other, which again they reap in September. They measure their corn by the
Staio, as we ours by the Strike or Bushel, it contains in weight fifty five
pounds, at twelve ounces the pound. And as we measure our land by the Acre, so
they theirs by the Staioro, which takes his name of the Staio: because one of
these parcels of land, if it be on the hills, will ask a Staio of corn to
feed it, otherwise in the valleys every measure will ordinarily feed four
Straiora, I suppose that six of these make one of our Acres. The countryman
will stir of them (as we call it) eighteen with his two yoke of Oxen; the
one yoke feeding while the other labors in one day. He has for his labor
four Crazie a piece, which is threepence starling; so that he and his beasts
earne some four shillings sixpence sterling the day: how this agrees with
our rate in England, I cannot say, I went not out so good a husband. The
staioro does ordinarily yield seven and eight staia crop, which is little
short of the proportion of four quarters an Acre.

The nature of the soil is generally light and sandy, Soil.
laid in small ridges like the fields of Norfolk, which as I take it, argues
the lightness. But by reason of the Cities and great towns near, and the
number of people, it is much forced, and made more fruitful. For there are
those who all their life time do nothing but with their Ass go up and down
the cities, gathering up the dung in the streets, and carrying it to the land
of those with whom they have bargained, paying out of every Asses burden one
quattrino to the Duke before they pass the gates, but this is a discourse for
another place.

It remains to speak of the Salt, Salt.
another commodity which they have here in Tuscany in some reasonable manner.
It is very white and good, much better then that of the Churches Salt, which
has almost the color of Saw-dust, or that of Liguria which is little better.
The two places from whence they have this commodity, is the City of Grossetta
in the Maremma, and the pits not far from the City of Volterra: howbeit they
make of it at these pits in greater measure; where it is reported are daily
made throughout the year twenty four Moggie, every of these measures being
four and twenty Staia, that is of our measure some sixteen Strike a piece: so
that there are daily made 48. quarters. They know when it is sufficiently
boiled by the throwing in of an Egg, for if it sinck, then is it not yet
perfect, Sulphurius waters effect.
but if it swimmeth ( a galla) then they boil it no longer. There are not
far hence (may I digress so far) waters of such a scalding and sulphurious
nature, as if a Dog or such like creature be tied to a rope and thrown therein
for the space of a quarter of an hour, ye pull out nothing but the bare
bones. And true it is, that the air here abouts sometimes of the year is so
contagious, as the inhabitants abandon their homes. The place being so
dangerous, I will dwell no longer upon the discourse thereof, but return to
the Salt Pits, out of which the great Duke makes no small benefit, considering
he buyeth it at one quattrini the pound, and sells it again at twelve, and
in some parts of his State at fifteen, which being bought at this rate comes
to two Ducats the Staio: Howbeit, it is said of some, that it costeth him five
quattrini the pound, which I rather believe, and so his gain is but two third
parts. Sure I am that there is a Bando upon a great penalty, that none presume
to buy but of his officers only. And seeing here is mention made of the great
Dukes impositions upon Salt^ I will also annex his gain raised by Wheat,
though I must confess their place more proper when I shall speak of his
Reuenew.

After the Raccolt^, Wheat engrossed.
(harvest) when wheat is at the cheapest, a note is taken of every man's
particular croppe, how much he has, what will seed his ground; and serve his
house; the rest the officers will buy at the price of the Market; he is not (as
I take it (directly forced to sell it: but a Bando is sent forth, that no man
shall buy, and so by consequent, because he must needs have money, with an
unwilling willingness he is content they shall have it. This is bought under
pretense to have the Cities well stored, whether it is carried into the great
Dukes Granaries, in which places for any accident either of dearth or of war,
(though for the one the country is well secured) here is very good store to be
found: It was reported in the Magizini (Storehouses) at Pisa when I was there,
there was no less then one hundred and fifty thousand Staia. And it was
likewise holden for certain, that some years of plenty, he buieth eight or
nine hundredth thousand, at the rate commonly of four or five Livers the Staio;
(a Liver is nine-pence sterling) and sells it again as this year he did for
above ten. Now by buying such an infinite Mass, and selling it at such a rate,
the gain is easily computed to be almost as many Ducats as were Staia bought:
His subjects will tell us of a Millons gain some year, but that were
infinite. Now least when the new Corn comes into his Granaries, he should not
vent the old, as being sustie, or having some other fault, a Bando is sent out,
that the Bakers shall bake no other. There is another inconvenience stranger
then this, a case wherein a man may not serve himself of his own, which had
it not been told me by a Gentleman Sanese of good credit, I should hardly
have believed, much less have adventured to advertise thereof. If a Gentleman
of Siena have a Villa in the Territory of Mont Alcina, near by; and therein
good store of Wheat to serve his turn for the maintenance of his house in
Siena, and whether, it may be with little cost brought, as not being far off,
and where perhaps he cannot well spare money to buy of others: notwithstanding
he cannot be suffered to bring of his own to his house, but must there take of
the great Duke to make his provision. How hurtful these Monopolies and
ingrossings are, the laws made against them in well governed states do
witness, and the people where they be practiced do feel.

Of their Pastures and feeding for Cattle, Pastures.
I shall not need to speak, for they be not herewith acquainted, as not being
able to spare one Staiora from tillage, except in the Maremma and lowes of
Pisa, which being little and soon spoken of, and not having whereof to be
spoken, but that it is little, I will leave: as also all other things to be
observed in the Country itself, and proceed to the government.

The Government (to speak in one word, The government.
and not to use a harder term) is merely Despoticall. The Prince himself is
of stature mean, of color by complexion brown, The prince
by age grisled, of body corpulent, of age somewhat above fifty, his name
Ferdinando, who (till his brothers death) was Cardinal, His name.
which dignity he has since renounced, having attained this Scepter, whereof
he had not been capaple, if he had before entered the order of Priesthood. He
is of the family Medici, His family.
a noble house of Florence, the first raiser whereof was Lippo, not three
hundred years since (whose Father, though a Colliar) yet he by his virtues and
his posterity also succeeding from time to time, advanced the reputation of
this name to the greatness wherein now it is: whereof has been many
Cardinals, Archbishops, Bishops, and other personages of great place; besides
two Popes, two and twenty Gonfaloniers, and four Dukes: of these, three have
had the title of (Great) as elsewhere is showed.

The descent of this Prince might be derived from Lippo, His disce^t.
but for breuities sake I will omit four or five, and begin at Giouanni the
Father of the first Cosmo, because from him come the two houses that have had
the Signiory of this State, as in this table following appears.

The line Masculine of the family Medici.
Giouanni. Cosmo: Contessina Bardi. Piero: Lucretia Turna buoni. Lorenzo
Clarice orsina. Piero Alfonsa orsina, Lorenzo Maddalcha di Bologna. Alexandro
D. di Fioe Mar^ d'Austria. Caterina Regina di Francia.

Giouanni Leo 10. Guigliano D. di Nemors filiberta di Sauoia. Hippolito
Cardinale. Asdruball Cauall: Gierusalemme.


Guigliano. Guiglio Clem. 7

Giouanni Gineua Alessandri. Cosimino
Carlo
Lorenzo Gineura caualcanti. Pierfrancesco Laudomia Acciaioli. Lorenzo
Semiramus Appiana. Pierfrancisco Maria Soderini. Lorenzo This is he that
murdered Alexander first D. of Florence, in detestation of which fact, the
house where it was committed, stands ruined as in the Via Larga there
appears. Francesco gra^ D. Giouanni d'Austria. Don Philippo Pre^cipe di
Tuscana morto. Don Antonio D. di Capistrano bastard. alive.
Giouanni Cardinale. Don Piero morto. Don Garzia morto. Ferdina^do gran D.
Christina di Lorena. Don Cosmo Prencipe di Tuscana. Don Francesco. D^^.

Guigliano Vescouo.
Auerardo
Giouanni Caterina Zforza. Giouanni Maria Saluiati. Cosmo Gra^ duca di Tuscana
Leonora di Toledo. Don Piero Leonora di Toledo. Don Cosmo.
Don Gouanti^ bast. alive.






The descent and issue of the great duke appearing in this table, His Parentage.
it remains that I speak of his parentage. His Highness matched in the
house of Lorraine, with Madama Christina that Dukes daughter Don Caesare d'
Este, base son to Alphonso the second, the Duke of Fexrara, that now is
married to his Sister. Don Virginio Orsin^ Duke di Bracciano that now with the
Duchess his wife, sister to the Cardinal Mont' Alto is in Court, is son of
another of his Sisters. The Duke of Montona married Madama Leonora of this
house; he has also near alliance with the family Zforza: And it was said in
the Court at my coming from Liuorno, that Rannuio Fernese Duke of Parma,
should marry Maria sister to Leonora, both daughters to Francesco his brother:
Howbeit it was afterward reported that he should marry the sister of Cardinal
Mont' Alto, niece to Sixtus Quintus, (whom sinde he has married: and Maria is
wife to Henry the 4. King of France.

His Arms are six Apples or Balls of gold in a field Azure, His arms.
unto which some say is added since his obtaining the Scepter, the Arms of
Florence the Flower de Lise, But having the authority of one so approved as is
Guicciardine to the contrary, I rather say with him, that this addition was
given of special favor to the family Medici by the house of France; by whom
in his first book page 16. it is plain, that when Charles the eight intended
his voyage for Naples, he sought (as a league much importing that action) the
friendship of the Florentine State, and that as he there says, if they would
not join with him in the service, yet at least they would grant him passage
for his army, and victuals for his money: whereto he labored by letters both
the State in general, and Piero Medici in particular, in which his letters to
Medici he puts him in mind of the ma^ie favors and honors done by Jews
the eleventh to Lorenzo his father, and to his ancestors: that they had given
molte dimostrazioni per conservation della grandezza d'essi. Many proofs of
willingness to preserve the Medicies greatness: and that they had honored in
testimonio de beneuolenza, l'insegne^ora con l'insegne proprie della casa di
Francia, in show of their love, their arms with theirs of France.

His style.
Concerning his Style, it is to be observed, that since the government came to
the hands of this family, it has altered four times: for first, when by
Clement the 7. his means, who was a Medici, Alexandro had obtained the signory
of Florence, he was entitled Prior perpetual: after that matching in the
house of Austria, he was created Duke of Florence. The title yet changed twice
more in the person of Cosmo, father to this great duke now living, for having
united the States of Florence and Siena, he was entitled, Dux Florentiae et
Senarum: And after by Pius Quintus he was created Magnus Dux Hetruriae for some
special service done to the Church.

This title of Duke is not of any great antiquity in Italy; for although Titus
Liuius speaks of Duces, yet he means Captains of Soldiers, or rather such
as had the leading of an Army by the Senates appointment, and not such as have
absolute authority over Cities and Countries. The first bringer in of this
name into Italy, was Longinus King of the Lombardes, one hundred sixty six
years after the declination of the Roman Empire. By him at the first were
created four, which bore their title of these places; Beneuentum, Turine,
Fruily, and Spoleto: At which time also were instituted the two Marquesarts of
Ancona and Treuiso, which still live in the names, though dead in the persons
that should have them: and it should seem in some sort, this title of
Marquess was better then that of Duke. For in their language (says Biondo) it
signifies Perpetuum Magistratum, because they might leave their title and
Signorie to their heirs, which the Dukes could not do, but by the leaves of
the Kings of Lombardie. Some say this word of Marquis is derived from the
French (Marque) which signifies a Province; as that a Marquis should signify
the President of a Province. Others think it is derived of the Dutch word (
Marchk) among whom this title is in great honor, and signifies a Signor over a
Country to some limit or mark, for so Altimeri in his Scholia upon Cornelius
Tacitus interprets. As for this title of great Duke, there never was any
before in Italy, nor I think in Europe, but he of Musconia: Of Dukes there be
diverse in this Country of Italy, as the Dukes of Ferrara, Muntoua, Parma,
Vrbino; besides four and twenty in the kingdom of Naples.

Concerning his claim and right to the Crown, His title.
it is beyond the compass of a bare relation, (as this is) to dispute how good
it is but rather to discourse what it is, neither to determine how justly his
Predecessors got it, but how lineally it is deuolued from the^ to him. The
means how this house rose to such superiority in a commonwealth, where was
always maintained such equallitie, is by the Florence history easily
discerned to be their popularity and insinuatiue stealing into the peoples good
opinions; over who^ they oftentimes in cases of insolences and oppressions by
the nobler sort, undertook the Patronage, and became as it were the Tribunes
of the people in Rome, or the Auogadori del Commune in Venice, who (as I take
it) are Advocates and Intercessors for the c^tize^s, preferring their suits to
the Courts. Howbeit there is a difference, for this is an office instituted,
that was a favor enchroched upon, this is by law limited, that was by ma^s
nature so infinite, as it staid not running on this plausible race till the
wished goal was gotten. Venice has been wise in this case, where it has
been danger for a great man to deserve too well, and be loved too much; for
which cause only (as in their Annals appears) some of the^ have lost their
lives, fearing what this popularitie of theirs might effect, if it were put to
the trial: and holding belike that principle good in a commonwealth, which is
a ground in matters of the Church, which says; Melius est pevire vnu^ qua^
vnione^) It is better one perish then unity: factions being as dangerous in
the one, as schisms in the other. To which purpose Athens and Rome can afford
many fit examples, and indeed so many, as it were needless to recount, either
that of Scilla and Marius, Caesar and Pompeius, Octavius and Anthonius: or any
other particulars, either of the one state or the other. And but that the
(colors Noble and Popular) were in seventy six in good time united in the
City of Genoa; there had not wanted at this day an example in that City also,
either of the family, Doria, Spinoli, Grimaldi, or Fieschi, as by Oberto
Foglietta, a very judicial writer of these times is proved.

But to return to the history of the family Medici, it is to be understood,
that Lorenzo grandchild to the first Cosmo, who for his well deserving of the
Commonwealth was sir-named Pater Patriae, and uncle to Clement the 7. who for
deserts clean contrary merited the title of Ruina Reipub: He I say, after the
death of his brother Guigliano, who was slain by the families Saluiati and
Pazzi governed the State of Florence with all wisdom gravity and moderation,
without respect of any particular advancement of his house, but only of the
weal public. To him had all the States and Princes of Italy recourse in all
their matters of controversy to be ended, and of counsel to be guided:
insomuch, as in his days, Florence seemed another Delphos and he another
Oracle: as he would, were all officers chosen, all families preferred, and all
common actions of the State carried. So that as in Genoa the Adorni and Fregosi
were by the people exalted, to curb the unbridled insolences of the Color
Nobile: as in Siena the Petrucci were made great to restrain the disordered
humors of some aspiring Citizens: as in Perugia the Baglioni were advanced to
empeach the proud desseignes of the Raspanti, of whose proceedings the City
grew jealous; and as in Bologna the Bentiuogli were preferred to extraordinary
honors and authority, through the hate they bore their Nobles: So likewise
the first raising of this family Medici, was their plausible carriage toward
the meaner and base^ rank of Citizens, by whom they were chosen for a head
against the greater and more powerful sort. And not contented with this
prehemenencie, their desires rested not: until (as in the person of Alexander
shall appear) one of their house came to be Duke of so great a State, brother
to a King of France, and son in law to an Emperor. So ordinary and natural
a thing it is in the mind of man, in matter of ambition and greatness, to
keep no mediocrity, that when ye give him the authority and command over
few, and in small matters, he cannot list his vast thoughts within the limits
prescribed, but is so carried beyond himself with a desire to rule, as without
consideration either of virtue by which, or of friends by whom, he was
advanced; he is violently driven with the stream of that his ambitious
passion, to oppress as well those by whose means, as those for whose cause he
was at first advanced. Which ambitious humor of reigning (though it reigned
not in this good Lorenzo who with the reputation of a great wise man, and no
less good Citizen dyed in the year 1492. with whom says Guicciardine dyed
the glory and peace of Italy:) yet it made the way to those garboiles and
troubles which his childrens greatness (by his desert) and aspiring minds (by
their own corruption) d^d afterward cause in Florence. For leaving behind him
three sons, Piero, Giouanni, and Guigliano; the first succeeded his father,
but not with like moderation in that authority wherein his fathers virtues left
him in: but asserting a lordly superiority and sole government; and as my
Author says; Con consiglio dirittamehie contrario a consigli paterni ne
communicato ^o cittadini principali, with a counsel quite contrary to that of
his father, and kept still secret from the chief Citizens; he sought to carry
all matters after the unbridled sway of his own affections, so greatly to the
dislike of the Citizens, and to the prejudice of their liberty, as ^e with his
brothers were worthily banished; who after many attempts to be reimpatriate,
yet still repulsed, were notwithstanding at the last by the means of
Ferdinando King of Aragon and Naples restored (I mean the two younger
brothers, for Piero was now dead) ripigliando quell antica grandezza de
Medicima gouuernandola pu^ imperiosamente, e con arbit^io pui assoluto di
quello che'st soleua: taking upon the^ again the former greatness of the
Medici, and carrying it more lordly, and with a more peremptory swinge then
they were wont, Guicciard. lib. 11. car. 318. This restoring of the Medici and
subjection of the City, was in the year 1512. after they had been eighteen
years banished, in which lordly course of carrying themselves, they continued
fifteen years, till 1527. when Clement the Pope being in dangerat Rome, and
fled into the Castle S. Angelo, the Florentines taking advantage of the time,
attempted the recovering of their liberty. Howbeit at the Popes instance, the
Emperor Charles the fifth made Alexander Medices Prior perpetual. And after in
35. (as has been before said, speaking of his Style) having matched in the
house of Austria, he created him duke, causing an emblematical statue to be
made of Brasle in the chief Piazza of the town, with this inscription in the
name of the Emperor, Te filsi si qu^^ Leserat, vltor ero. My Son I will
revenge thee, if any dare to hurt thee, as a threat to the City if they
offered to recover their liberty. This Alexander first Duke of Florence, being
murdered by his cosen Lorenzo, and having no issue, the government fell to Cosmo
son to Giouanni de Medici and Maria Saluiati, heir in the next line, and
Father to this great duke that now lives, to whom by the death of his elder
brother Fra^cesco, this state is deuolued.

His Court.
Concerning his Court, it is the general opinion, that it is greater then of a
Duke, less then of a King; which compared with other Dukes of Italy is true:
howbeit if it be considered either what number of persons are therein, or what
provision there is made, I think it may hardly compare with the houses of the
Nobility of England, comprehending in this number none but such as live and
have their diet in Court, whereof there be very few. For this Court does yield
two sorts of courtiers: della bocca, and della Casa, (of the mouth and of the
house) that is, of such as feed there, and of such as retain only. Of the
first sort is the great Duke himself, the Duke Bracciano, their Dutchesses,
their children, and some few servants besides to the number as I have creadibly
heard not above four and twenty: of the other sort are other officers of
Court, which notwithstanding live at their own private tables, as Monsignior
Puteo Archbishop of Pisa, and thereto his Highness, by whose counsel he is
especially advised, Il Signior Piero Vsimbaldi, il signior Caualliere Conci^o,
il Signior Beliario Vinta, il Signior Caualliere Serguidi, il signior Piero
Conti his Secretaries, and diverse others his officers. To these if we add Don
Giouanni and Don Antonio, both Medici, the one his brother, the other his
Nephue illigitimate, Il signior Camillo del Monte, general of the foot, Il
signior Conte Gherardesca Collonell of the horse, Il signior Francesco Montauti
general of his galleys, besides the L^arant' Otto, and diverse others Countes
and Nobles of Florence, you shall see a very honorable and noble presence.

The order of this discourse requires that in this place I briefly advertise
of the order of San Stephano, His order of S. Stephen.
whereof his highness is grand-master, which was first instituted by Cosmo his
father, and confirmed by Pius Quintus. But because the ordinances and statutes
thereof be very many, as well concerning the inuestiture as degradation, and for
that there is a book written thereof entitled della Religione di san Stephano:
I will only remember that the Gran Maestro conferreth diverse other offices
belonging to this order, and of chief accoumpt, upon persons of principal
quality in his state: as the office of Gran Comandator, Gran Contestabile, and
Gran Priore. There be three degrees of this order; the first is of Cauallieri
querrieri, the second are Ecclesiastichi; the last Seruienti. Of the first sort
have been made (as in their Palace at Pisa appears) about one thousand and
twenty. The second are Priests and persons of the church, not so honorable as
the former. The last are such as have baser offices either about the Palace,
or about their lands, and receive annual wages for their pains. The
Cognizance or badge of this order, is a cross, in form like that of the
knights of Malta, but differing in color, for that of Malta is white, this is
red. They are bound to wear it always upon their upper garment, which the
great duke himself also observes. They are bound also to serve at Sea in the
Grand Masters wars for six years (as I take it) if need be whereas they of
Malta are bound to serve against the Turk all the days of their life. The
Knights of this order may marry, and hold temporal possessions, which they of
Malta may not. This order is lineally to descend from the father to the eldest
son, without any more creation, like the Titles of honors in England,
unless his father upon demerit be formerly degraded. What other privileges
they have, in the book thereof written appears, and what use the Grand-master
has of their service in all his occasions, is as easily coniectured.

It follows to speak somewhat of his riches: Riches.
a matter whereof one may discourse by probabilities, but can determine nothing
of certain: for if they which marry our rich widows in England be many times
deceived in the reckoning, finding the accoumpt fall far short of that the
world judged and they themselves hoped: how easy a thing is it to err in the
valuing of so great a Prince as the great duke of Tuscany? Besides if one
should undertake to write of every thing he has seen, and give it the
Italians valuation (who in matters of their own, ever speak alla larga) I
assure my self he should be very much deceived, and gain the imputation of a
notable Gull for his credulity, and a notorious Bugiarde for his delivery,
against which, note his far travail neither gives him warrant nor
supersedeas. I was in a Florentines gallery, who has sometimes been in our
Country, where besides one table of Tutch, and three other of Serpentine,
Agate, and such like, very curiously wrought and bordered with flowers of their
natural colors (which might be painted for ought I knew): howbeit he
protested they were all the natural colors of the stone, and of the infinite
charge it cost to cut so many, before they could find such as should give the
true luster of the flower, which surely is there done most lively: and besides
many Statues of Marble, Alabaster and Brass, he showed us a Cupbord of Boxes
yet unfinished (which he said) has already cost four and twenty thousand
crowns: we see also diverse Medalles, at the least five hundred, which he
valued some at twenty and thirty crowns the ^eece: for the value of his
Cupbord I know not, but for his Medalles I am sure that in Venice a man may buy
as good and as Antique of a Montibanck for two gazets a piece, which is not two
pence sterling. Now if one had swallowed this Gudgion of one hundred and
twenty thousand Crowns (for so much he said these toys in this Gallery did
cost) he must needs either have sur^eted of a fullness, or else have discovered
his infirmity by venting it to others.

But to return to the great Dukes riches; in the Gallery at Florence where is
his Guarda-roba his Wardrope, and Armory, there is very much and massy Plate,
with one Cupbord of pure gold, the value I cannot estimate. There is also one
Table in making for the Emperor, which has already cost (they say) twenty two
thousand ducats set with very many and very fair Stones. There is one Deske
worth (as they dare affirm) one Million. There are likewise Rapiers with hilts
of gould, and in their Pomels either the Spheres or Clockes very curiously
wrought. There be swords so artificially made, that they may be thrown out the
length of three, and being at the full length, it discharges a Pistol: there
is the Sword of Charlemaine greatly prized. There be Targets which with a Pin
turned make Daggers fly out of all sides. There are besides the diverse weapons
of most Nations, with many other things for the richness and rareness worth
the remembering, as also the great Dukes chain of Diamonds, and the great
Duchesses chain of Pearl which they wear daily, two jewels no doubt of
exceeding value: besides all other their jewels and treasures not seen. But
the thing which most argues his Riches, and whereof he and other Princes have
their daily uses, and whereby they be valued, is ready Money and Coin; which
the world (and no doubt upon good reason) judges to be very great: insomuch as
the Neopolitan calls him the King of coin: for in their play at Primero
(their four suits of cards being denari, Coppe, Spade, Picche, Coin, Cups,
Swords, Pikes) when (as the manner is) ye ask him for what Card he pulls,
if he pull for a Denaro he answers; I pull for the great Duke of Tuscany. And
truly I am of opinion (submitting my self to better judgments) that as in
France there be four great Rivers far excelling the rest of that country in
general, and yet one another in some one particular: Loyre the greatest, Rhone
the swiftest, Said the richest, and Sone the sweetest. So in Italy there are
four great States, above all the other without exception, which
notwithstanding in some one particular compared together, exceed one another.
The Pope greatest in authority, the kingdom of Naples greatest in
landforces; the Venetians mightiest at Sea; and this great Duke mightiest in
purse. Of whose present money some let not to say that he has thirty millions
of Ducats, others talk of five and twenty, none under twenty; but how truly,
must be left to every man's pleasure to judge, as a thing utterly unknown,
except we may guide our conjectures by this inference, which may thus be
collected.

Duke Francesco in the year 1576. reported to the Venetian Ambassador, that
his father Cosmo dying, left him in debt eight hundred thousand Ducats: for
the payment whereof he was forced to take up great sums of the Genoeses, at
unreasonable interest. Notwithstanding it appears by the relation of the said
Ambassador, that within ten years after he was cleared of that debt, and had
imbursed to his coffers five Millions. It may then be probably argued, that if
in ten years there were six millions increase, in twenty years more, there be
at least twelve more added. But if it be objected that Duke Francesco in the
term of those ten years had many hundred thousand ducats confiscate to his
coffers by the treason of Pucci, who with his accomplices had plotted to enuite
the Duke, the Cardinal, and Don Piero to a feast, and there to murder them
all, and so to recover their liberty; It may hereto be answered that he was
likewise a Prince of very great expenses, and that for instance in that very
time, he built the Palace and water-workes of Pratolino, which cost him at the
least three hundred thousand ducats. As for this great Duke now living, his
expenses are small for so great a Prince, as by the small number of them which
live in Court may appear. And yet every Carneuale time he retireth himself
from Florence, where is much to be spent, to Pisa where is somewhat to be
gained: he says he does it for the affection he bears that town; his people
say, for the love he has to spare; our English Merchants there say, it is for
love of their commodities, which about that time arrive, and are brought up by
his officers.

It is likewise known he has great sums of money in banck, which must needs
bring in their yearly gain, besides threescore thousand ducats entrate,
which he yearly detaineth from his brother Don Piere, who lives in Spain, and
the gain of Wheat before remembered; all which with his yearly revenue may
make one strongly persuaded, that his ready money is little less then that
which is judged of them which rate it at the highest. I should surely think it
an incredible mass, but that I have read for certain, that in the year 1592,
the ready money of Amurath, father to Mahomet the third, the great Turk now
living, was at the least fifty millions. And although the disproportion of
their Entrates may seem much to weaken the force of this comparison: yet I see
not, considering on the other side as great difference in their expenses, but
that it may carry some good show of likelihood. To conclude this point, it
appears, that the great Duke has two Revenues whereby he grows rich; that
is, great impositions, and great sparing (for sparing is a great revenue.)
There yet remains two other means to make him absolutely rich, the love of
his subjects, and their private wealth (for the wealth of the Subject is the
wealth of the king, and where the people is rich, the Prince is not poor. But
sure it is that he has neither the one, nor they the other.

His forces.
It is to be thought that he which has money such store wants no forces (for
money is called the sinews of war) I will therefore to this short discourse
of his Riches, add in a word what is thought of his forces. His strength at
Sea is not great, for he has not above six Galleys, neither has had since the
overthrow that the Turks gave him at the little Islands Formiche, where he
lost two of his best Galleys and one Galleon. In these that remain he has
besides Munition ordinary, (that is eight or ten a piece,) about two hundred
Soldiers and eight hundred slaves. He has also much good Munition, and a
competent number of Soldiers in his Fortes of the Porto Ferrario, Potto Ferario
in the Island of Elba: of which place his Father was impatronized by the Lord
thereof, the Signor di Piombino, with the consent of Charles the fifth: both
because the Patron thereof was not able to defend it against the Corsari which
daily robbed and spoiled it: as also, because for the small defense it had, it
might have fallen into the hands of the Turks, and so by reason of the Site
(standing very fitly for such a purpose) it might have prejudiced the whole
country of Italy. Notwithstanding all the revenue of the Isle is left free to
the Lord of Piombino, and under his command are all other the towns and
unfortified places. In this Port which is capable of what fleet soever, do all
ships that trade from the Le^a^ westward and contrariwise touch, as in a place
as necessary, fit, and secure, as are the Terseres to the Spaniards failing to
the West Indies: so that if he with this Isle had also a good number of Galleis
and a purpose to offend, he might very easily infest all the Seas upon the
coast of Barbary, upon Pronence, Lyguria, Tuscania, and all that side of
Italy, and in a manner make himself Lord of those Mid-land Seas. He has also
(as is reported) one hundred Soldiers, and good Artillery in a Fort he holds
at Marseilles called Castle dite; by the sufferance of which piece the Genoeses
ship was in January last taken, (whereof the parties grieved complained lately
to the great Duke) where besides four hundred Spaniards put to the Galleys,
was also found four hundred thousand crowns, sent thither from Spain. He
has also in those thirty Castles and Fortes before spoken of (wherein are
garrisons but very small, as in some fifty, and in others five and twenty, in
others not above fifteen and in some fewer by reason of the good terms he
stands in with his neighbors Princes, or at least by the good favor of the
time, for that they be otherwise diuerted, that would be busy, to the number
of six hundred in all. He has likewise in all his sixteen Cities, garrisons
of Soldiers more or less, as in the Cyttadell S. Miniato, and the new
Fortress at Florence one hundred and twenty, in Pisa fifty, in Siena twenty
five, in Liuorno two hundred and twenty, etc. In all which places he is said to
be very well provided of Munition, Armor, weapons, Powder, shot, and such
like military provision; the certain quantity whereof I cannot certainly
inform, because, but upon especial favor, and by commandment, they dare not
let one come into their Fortes. And to write what others say, were to err
himself and seduce others. I was by good means in the Castle at Liuorno,
where I told of field pieces threescore and four, whereof (they told me) that
twelve were canon, and demi-canon; by which proportion it is to be coniectured
that he is very well furnished.

These Soldiers of whom is already spoken, are all in pay; he has also a
Rassegna, his trained Soldier (as we in England call them) about the number
whereof there is great difference, between that which is written by way of
relation, and that which is by way of conference reported. Relations (the^
which nothing is more false) write that there be thirty six thousand: but I
talked with a Captain, who has the mustering and charge of three hundred
within the precincts of Prato (then whom no man should know better) and he
told me but of fifteen thousand. In this diversity of report I have no other
guide to direct me, to whether of these I should give credit, then by a
rateable proportion of the part with the whole, to infer whether of these two
comes nearer to the truth, in this manner. It is now certainly holden, that
the number of people in the States of Florence and Siena united together, are
about eight hundred thousand, and that they which reckon six in the one and
five in the other, and so make one million and one hundred thousand, do
somewhat ouershoot the true number, much more they that reckon 800000. in the
state of Florence, and 600000. in that of Siena, not considering that the
people of Siena and Pisa with their precincts are much decayed, as has already
been partly said. Now then if sixteen thousand people (the number of the^
within the distretto (the precincts) of Prato) do allow the great Duke a
Rassegna of three hundred, which I have seen four times trained (for they
muster and are exercised once a month throughout his state) then eight hundred
thousand will allow fifteen thousand after that rate. But if it be answered
that upon the frontiers of the church and in the Maremma, there is a greater
Rassegna then in other places, and so the proportion not to hold, I reply, to
answer this with sufficient recompense, there is no mustering of Soldiers nor
any Rassegna in the city of Florence, which is a good part of the whole. So
that of this I am sure, that in Florence, Prato, Pistoia, Pisa, and their
territories, there are not in all above two thousand two hundred* I should
therefore think it strange and very disproportionate, that there should be
above twenty thousand in all. It may be demanded why they of Florence are not
trained as well as the rest; the reason is, manet alta mente reposta tyrannis
Papae, and consensus Imperatoris, Pope Clements usurping, and Charles the fifts
consent, sticks still in their stomachs. For they have not yet forgot that
their fathers were free and commanders over others) and therefore they are not
only prevented of this means which peradventure at sometime or other they
might take, but they be also debarred the having of any Arms in their houses,
or of wearing any weapon by their sides, except he be a knight of the order, or
a trained Soldier, or an officer, or one that has especial license for the
same, whereof there be many Gentlemen in Florence, according to the favor they
have with the Prince, and as he is secured of them. The like is through the
whole state, insomuch as many will sue to be trained Soldiers (a thing which
with us they would gladly avoid) because they might be privileged to wear
weapon, but especially (which is also a freedom granted to men of this
profession) because they might not be arrested for debt.

His forces at Sea and land are these already remembered, beside one hundred
Lances which he keeps in Siena, and some fifty light horse in his own
stables at Florence, besides four hundred more in other places of his state.

His Entrate, His entrate
is by diverse men diversely estimated, some say one Million and a half, others
one Million and a hundred thousand, and some there be that say it is as much as
both these sums. Howsoever it may be thought that the least of these is a
great matter for so small a State, whether we call it small in regard of the
circuit, the number of the People; or lastly the barrenness of the soil, out
of which the Subjects wealth and Princes Taxes should be raised. This may well
be proved by comparing this state with that of the Duke of Ferrara, which is
not much less in continent then this of the great Duke, and the soil
generally much more fruitful, yet is the revenue of this great Duke almost
thrice as much as that other. An apparent argument of the ouer-charging of his
people by Taxations and impositions more then their neighbors: yet are the
subjects of the state of Venice less charged then these, and they under the
Duke of Parma least of all; only they of the kingdom of Naples have as much
cause to complain as the Tuscanes, or any other subjects in Italy whatsoever.
As for the truth of those three opinions, which of them has best interest
therein I dare not determine; I will only add to these generallities such
particulars as are commonly known, and of all confessed, with some other
specialties which are of most men either purposely (because uncertain)
omitted, or else negligently related.

The opinion of them that rate his Revenue at 1100. thousand Ducats is
directed by this particular: He has say they, out of the Gabell or Toll of the
Gates of Florence 100. thousand Ducats. Dogana or Custom House at Florence
100. Gabel upon Salt through that State 120. Upon Corn through that State 120.
Upon flesh through that State 80. Upon Dowers and Bargains 70. Upon
condemnations and Suites in law 65. Pisa and Liuorno yield yearly 70. Pistoia
yields yearly 60. Arezzo yearly 20. Volterra yearly yields 15. Cortona
yields 20. Monte Pulciano yields yearly 10. Fiesole a desolate City
yields 2. Colle a City of five years old yields 3. The City and State
of Siena 240.

All which together make the sum of 1095000. which within five thousand
Ducats agrees with the said sum.

This account shall appear not to swerve much, if we examine each particular.
First for the Toll of the gates of Florence and custom out of the Dogana, it
is apparently known that the great Duke lets it out at two hundred thousand
Ducats the year at the least, reckoning withal of all other impositions one
fourth part of that whole State, which is probably supposed to be gathered
hereout. There is paid also throughout the whole state, eight ^n the hundred
for marriages, as if the womans portion be a thousand ducats, the Prince has
thereout eighty. The like proportion is paid for buying and selling of houses
or land. But the letting of houses or land pays the tenth: for Cattle bought
and sold, he has also a guiglio, that is sixpence Sterling in every two
Ducats, and though the Beasts be bought and sold twice in one hour, he has
still after the same rate. Furthermore, besides his impositions upon the
Bancks, he has at every alienation eight in the hundred* that is, when the
father or possessor dies, the son or next heirs pays after this rate for
his patrimony left him. He has also an entrate out of the Burdello stews,
Burdello.
which is thought at the least thirty thousand crowns a year in Florence
only there being some eight thousand Curtizans in the town, these pay every
month a liver nine-pence sterling to the great Duke, because here the market
is somewhat quick, though in Siena they pay but a guiglio monthly, they pay
also a Liver a month not to wear the yellow list the badge of their trade, if
they stand out of the Burdello, if they be privileged to go to any man's
lodging, or if they wear man's apparel, for each of these privileges they pay
Gabell also. The Jews here also from fifteen years upward, pay two Ducats
the year.

Concerning the Gabell upon bread, Bread.
true it is, that he has upon every Stay that is ground two Crazie, three
halfe-pence of ours, so that by this rate he has of every quarter of our
measure, the sum of eighteene-pence of our money. If then it be supposed that
every one in the state of Florence eat twelve Staia a year, which is as
before a proportion ordinary, the sum will not much differ from the rate of
one hundred and twenty thousand Ducats.

Concerning the flesh, Flesh.
it is to be understood, that the great duke has for every pound that is eaten
five denari, whereof 20. make a Crazia, so that he has of every Stone that is
eaten of our weight, the value of threepence of our money.

He has upon every pound of Salt spent, ten quattrini gain, that is three
halfe-pence of our money: so that after the rate of four and twenty Moggia the
day, for three hundred days in a year, allowing the other sixty five for
holly-dayes, he gains two hundred and sixteen thousand, seven hundred sixty
one Ducats, whereof allowing almost one half for the state of Siena, because
there he has no imposition upon Salt, the sum will accord very nearly with
the particular abouesaid.

As for the Dogana of Lyuorno, Dogana of Lyuorno.
being the Gate as it were through which all merchandise pass into those parts
of Italy: and for Siena, being the road from Venice and Florence to Rome, it
is to be credibly supposed, that both the one and the other yield no less
benefit to the Prince then is above rated; the like is to be thought of the
other Cities.

But over and besides all this, it is to be considered, Gabel by Pole.
that in the whole state of Siena he has a Gabell by the Pole as we call it in
England, that is upon every head a certain rate, (I think eighteene-pence)
besides an allowance for feeding of their cattle, whereof in this State is
reasonable good store, much more then in that of Florence, whose wants it
supplyeth, especially of Swine, by reason of their great store of Mast, for
which they pay half a ducket the Swine, whereas in times past they paid but
one guiglio: they pay also for the killing eighteene-pence, and other such like
impositions. Insomuch as talking with two Gentlemen of Siena concerning these
matters, men of good quality and experience, they auowed that the great Duke
had as good as a Ducket upon every masted Swine before he come to the owners
table. They farther alleged, that howsoever they were exempt from the Gabell
of the Macina as they call it, that is of paying for their Meal, Salt, and
Flesh, yet notwithstanding all things considered* their burden was no whit
lighter then their neighbors of the other State, that paid all these. To which
purpose they protested, that of their Villa which they let to half to the
Contadmo (the labourer) there fell not in the reckoning, (all taxes, tallages,
and impositions defalked) above one third to themselves, another to the Fermar,
and the rest to the Pr^nce. A strange proportion we may think, that live in
such blessed happiness, and far beyond all Taxes, Subsidies and Priuy-seales
whatsoever. But what compare I the heavy Dinasty of small Tuscany, with the
flourishing Monarchy, and happy government of great Brittany.

Camere Lo^ande, and Innekeepers.
He has also no small matter of the Camere Locande lodgings for strangers, and
the Innes in the State; of some forty, of others fifty, and of some
foure-score Ducats, every third year: he has also in some places his
Bake-houses, where the Innekeepers are enjoined to take their bread of him.
Though this exaction be so great upon the Innes at Florence, and in the road
way to Rome, notwithstanding in Pisa the yoke is not so heavy, there the
manner of raising the Gabell is thus. At every three years end, all the
Inne-keepers in the City are to appear at a Court in the Dogana kept for
that purpose. There it is cried by the Officer, that such, and such an Inn,
paid these last three years so many Ducats to the Prince, who bids more?
There is a Candle set up light and while that lasts, it is lawful to lone
and bid for the same, and he that bids most shall have it. Wherein this one
thing may seem more strange, then that which has been already informed
concerning a man's Corn, that in some cases he cannot make his provision of his
own; for here if another will give more for the Inn then I, though the house
be mine own, he shall have it, paying me only my rent, and I shall be forced
to seek another. I have only this privilege above another, that I offering
as much as he, I shall be first served. The Inne-keeper of Pisa where lie our
English Merchants, auowed this to be most true; he paieth for these three
years forty Ducats. His Highness has also upon all things sold in shops,
Matricula.
a Matricula (as they call it) which is not to be paid every year, but only
once, when the shop keeper sets up; which in some shops comes at least to
an hundred ducats. One that sells stockings, trusses, shirts, sockes and
such trash, told me that at his first beginning he paid his Matricula for
Woollen cloth twenty Florens; for Linen cloth as much, and for Buttons Silk
and Thread as much, which in all comes to thirty gold crowns. To conclude
this point, there is not that trade, nor that man or woman whatsoever, but of
them this Prince has his Tribute, more or less, not so much but the poor
seely widow, which the whole year Spinneth, pays seauenteene Solls, that is
about eight-pence Sterling.

Lazaretto.
I have not heard of any that are free but the Lazaretton or Hospidall, and the
beggar that goes from door to door only; for (which has partly been said)
there is not that poor Asses burden of dung that go^th out the gat^s, nor
that Radish root that comes in, that paieth not his Gabell; except they have
the cunning to deceive them that keep the gates, men whose eyes will pearce
what Veligia or basket soever: and if it chance they be detected, they loose
the thing hidden without redemption. I saw a poor Contadina Countrey-woman,
who coming to the gate to pay her toll for a Basket of Lettice she brought
in: one of the foxes who I think could smell a goose, for he could no^
possible see any, searched under the herbs, and finding one dead without
feathers, sent the poor woman away ha'fe dead for sorrow, without her goose.
And they told me, that if a Gentleman of Siena should come out at Florence
gates, with a chain of gold new bought about his neck, howbeit worn between
his doublet and Ierkin that it might not be seen to save the gabell, that
being discovered he should not loose his Chain only, but his horse also.

Concerning all the taxes and impositions, certain it is, Imposions and Taxes
ordinary.
that they which rate the great Dukes Entrate at eleven hundred thousand
Ducats, comprehend only such as are ordinary and certain but of the rest
which stand on casualty, Casualty.
and are uncertain they cannot determine. And sure I am of this, that besides
many particulers here remembered, as also the Rents and Revenues of his proper
lands belonging by many descents to him, of others not accounted in this
valuation of his yearly Entrate, there is yet one thing behind untouched or
thought of by others, which will appear no small matter, and is this.

In every City and town corporate (as I may say) in Tuscanie Co^munita
there was before their subjection to the family Medici a Co^munita that is, an
Entrate in common of the City, by which all public charges were defrayed, all
officers maintained, and many other good and charitable works performed. This
Entrate arose upon the Tenths and Tithes of every man's crop or fruit: (for in
Tuscany the parish Priest has them not, he has only his offering and
Church-rights, with a house and some certain ground thereto belonging; as ye
would say Glebe-land.) It grew also upon the bread and flesh, thus; every file
of bread as they term it, cost a quatrino the signing, every Bullock cost
four Livers the killing, every Swine two, every Weather cost two guigly, There
were also in times past people of charitable disposition, who dying without
children made the Communita their he^re to their goods and land, which they
call the Entrate of the Geppo, that is, the Stock, and is a member of the
Communist. Now that which did yearly remain of the Entrate, all charges
deducted, was put to the common Treasury for to help in time of dearth or
war, or such like public necessity. An example hereof I will take the town
of Prato. Here the Entrate of the Communita is twenty six thousand Ducats the
year, Ceppo.
the Entrate of the Ceppo is eight thousand, in all thirty four; hereout they
allow the P^desta one thousand, the Captain of the trained Soldiers, six
hundred, the Chauncellor five hundred, they allow for a feast every two months
among the eight Pricori at the choosing of their Gonfalioniere twenty ducats.
They allow their Judge, who is a Doctor of the Civil law, five hundred,
Catchpols.
also the wages of the Bargello and Sbirri (as one would say the Vnder-shiriffe
and his Sergeants) the wages of the Trumpetters, the stipend of four
Schoole-ma^sters, the salarie of two Physicians and two Chirurgions, the
keeping often Scholars at the University in Pisa, also the maintaining of two
Hospitals, one of Bastards the other of sick, aged, and impotent persons,
whereof there are in all to the number of three hundred and fifty: besides the
giving of portions to poor maids that are married from hence, or to young
boys that are put to some occupation, as also the Alms every Friday of
fourteen Staia of Corn, two barrels of Wine, and one of Vinegar given to the
poorer sort. And lastly that which they give to the Poueri Vergognosi, that is,
such householders as are poor and are ashamed to beg, whereof there is
consideration had by the four that are in office for that purpose: These and
all other their common charges, as trimming of Churches, repairing of Bridges,
mending of high ways, and such like, being defrayed, it is certain, that
there yearly remains one fourth part' at the least: which now goes not to
the common treasure, as in times past, but to the great dukes coffers: the like
is to be said of all other places in this Dukedom.

But it is to be observed, that before this money which resulteth of the
Communita be carried to Florence to the dukes Exchequer, Monte di Pieta.
it is put into the Monte di Pieta the Bancke of Pity: a place where any poor
man may pawn his household stuff, or clothes, or whatsoever else is worth
money (provided always the gage be worth more then the money) he takes this
money he has for a day and a year after five in the hundred. And if at the
time he return not to redeem the thing engaged, it is sold by Trumpet, for
what can be gotten where-out the principal and interest being taken, the poor
man shall have the rest. So that the great Duke having this overplus, for now
it is their Proverb, Il'Duca e la Communita in every City and great town,
and the use besides for the money, which will amount to a round sum through
the whole State (for there be of these Banckes in every place) it is to be
coniectured, that his whole Entrate is a greater matter then it is ordinarily
taken for, of them who esteem it at one Million and one hundred thousand
Ducats, I should rather condescend to them, that rate it at one Million and a
half.

Concerning his expenses it is harder to guess at, His expenses.
then his Entrate those of the Duke Francesco were supposed about five hundred
thousand Ducats; these of this Duke they say be much lesser. And as the Duke
his brother had diverse Captains and men of command his Stipendaries, who
received of him some three thousand five hundred ducats the year, some three
thousand, some two, and some less, according to their nobility, and the
quality of the place, wherein they had charge, so is it to be thought, that
the General of the foot, the Collonell of his horse, the general of his
Galleis, and other inferior Commanders, who upon occasion are bound to serve
him in their places, are with sufficient pension rewarded, each particulers
pension, how much it is without more certain information then I had, I dare
not presume to say: choosing rather to be defective in a generallity, then
being too particular to err.

As for his expense upon his troop of horse, His expe^ce on horse.
the Lance has 7. Piastras (1. five shillings 3. pence a piece) a month, the
lighthorseman has three now in the time of peace, in wars a better
proportion. The Soldier in all his garrisons has four Piastras a month, the
officers proportionate, each in his place to this rate. As for the trained
Soldier, he is (in peace) no charge to the Duke for he finds himself shot,
powder, armor, weapon, and all things necessary, and is bound to keep them in
good order; the Captains and officers of these are paid out of the Communita
as has been abouesaid. The charge of his Galleys allowing (as Don Antonio
Doria in his discourse how to resist the Turk at Sea does proportion, that
is,) each month five hundred gold crowns a Galley, comes in the half year
which time they be commonly at Sea, to the sum of eighteen thousand gold
crowns. The charge of his Court, as by the number of persons therein above
informed, may be collected, cannot be great. I have heard one of his servants
say, that the Steward is allowed for Spezierie, Spicery, fifteen thousand
ducats, and that all other charges may treble so much more. As for all
officers of Court, but these few before remembered, they feed at their own
tables; His Pages (which are Gentlemen's sons of the City, or other places)
in number as I take it sixteen, are at his charges kept at School and at diet
in the City: His Staffieri or Footmen are allowed six Piastras the month,
they are about thirty. His guarde of Swisses have four Piastras the month;
both these and they feed at their own charge, or soiorne at some place, for
they have no allowance out of the dukes kitchen, not so much but the Cooks as
I have heard, having done their office, go to their own houses to meat. A
builder this duke is not at Liuorno, where indeed is very great cost bestowed,
and very many daily working: howbeit considering the labor of his
Galley-slaues, which all the winter are there employed, and of many poor men
in the country which upon light faults are thither confined, whose labor he
has paying nothing, it may appear the charge is not half so much as it would
cost another. There are also to be considered these expenses, which they call
spese segrete, secret charges, and no doubt are very great, for that this
Prince makes his way to many effects of much importance by money; as namly in
the Court of Rome, where although the Pope that now is was chose^ without the
good will, or rather quite against the desire of this Prince, and although the
family Aldobrandini was always an empeacher of the Medicies greatness, and
though likewise the father of this Prince executed the father of this Pope; and
albeit lastly this Pope desires nothing more, then that by his means his
native country might recover her former liberty yet notwithstanding so strong
is this Princes faction in that College, and so many his friends by means of
his money, as he rests secured from any such danger. The like intelligence it
is said he has in the Spanish court by presents and pensions to the Infanta,
and others of the Counsel, so as by his money he is able to divert what
purposes soever. He has also at his maintenance secret espials in Florence for
his better security, as not yet forgetting the treason of Pucci in his
brothers days.

Concerning his Coins, there is the gold crown of eight Livers; Coins.
the Ducket of silver seven Livers (which is there called a Piastra, and so
much must you value the ducket in all this discourse; the half Ducket, the
Testone, two Livers; the Liver one Giuglio and a half; the Giuglio which is
sixpence sterling; the half Giuglio; all these are of silver. The Crazia of
Brass, with a surface of silver, the value three-farthings sterling; And lasty
the quattrino, which is the fifth part of a Crazia: there was also in times past
the denaro, the fourth part of a quattrino, whereof one hundred and threescore
were sixpence sterling, but now there are few of them to be seen, none to be
paid. They of the country will complain that now they have none but Moneta
grossa great money: It was a good world say they, when we might have changed a
quattrino into 4., denari, and with these have bought herbs, vinegar, oil,
and Salt, the 4. substantial parts of a sallet, and this the better part of an
Italian dinner; whereas now it will cost the^ so many quattrini: a great
alteration, a gross sum.

As touching the manage of matters of state, His absolute rule.
the administration of Justice, and the disposing of Offices, true it is that
the great Duke, though all matters do absolutely and plenarily depend upon his
will and pleasure, yet notwithstanding he will for the most part have the
judgment and counsel of the Archbishop of Pisa, a man who for his dexterity
of wit, and experience in matters of State, has purchased himself great
credit and reputation with his Prince; next unto him he has other his
Courtiers, to whom sometimes he will communicate some causes, but neither all,
nor always: which causes the Prince to be more absolute, procures his
Counsels a more secret proceeding, gives his actions a more speedy dispatch,
and peradventure also a more happy issue: so that it cannot properly be said of
this Court, that there is a Counsel of state, but that every thing immediately
has his motive, process, and ending of the Princes will and pleasure.

Concerning the adm^nistration of Justice, and election of officers,
Administration of Justice.
it differs not much from the ancient custom of that City when it was
free, the diverse Magistrates and the manner of new choosing them is this.

There is in the City of Florence the Gran Consiglio, The Magistrates.
the Seminary as it were out of which all other Magistrates are chosen. Of
these some are elected by the great Duke himself, as the Quaran^t' Otto of the
chief Citizens, and such in whom his Highness most affieth. Of which number
there must always be one at the least in any other of importance. But the
Lieutenant of the City, and the Sei Consiglieri must be all out of these
forty eight, and these also chosen by the Duke, as likewise the Dodeci di
Collegio. Other Officers are chosen by Ballot, as the Commissari, the
Proueditori the Capitani, Vicari, Podesta, and diverse others. For all they that
have office and place of command throughout this state of Florence, are
Gentlemen of that City, as they of the other are all Gentlemen of Siena.

There is also in Florence the Gl'Otto di guardia e balia, Gl'otto di Guardia.
an office of great authority, for these only give sentence of life and
death, and judge in criminal causes, these have their place only four
months. In this office the Prince has always a Secretary, a Beneplacito,
his name now in place, is Buoninsegni, Buoninsegni a Secretary.
who ever goes to his H^ghnesse to inform him of the matters in the Court,
before they be by the Otto determined, and this office has intelligence of all
matters in all criminal Courts in the state, by whom the Courts have
directions from the Prince before they proceed, to the judgment or execution
of the malefactor.

An instance of this we had this January last past, The dukes kind respect of
the English.
which I the rather remember to make known, what care his highness has to
give our country good satisfaction, of whom all English Gentlemen receive very
gracious favors, as to be admitted to the presence at any Veglia, Reuells, or
other time of extraordinary sight, also to have the privilege to wear Arms,
and other such like. An English Gent'eman was by a base groom of the house
where he lodged, thrown into the Arno, for the money he was supposed to have
in his lodging; the offender, upon suspicion being apprehended, and receiving
the Strappado diverse times, and in the highest degree, notwithstanding
persisted obstinately in the denial. The law is there that except he confess
the fact he cannot be executed, how pregnant so ever the presumption be against
him; insomuch it was thought he should have been discharged: whereupon the
court sent to his Highness for direction; he returned them order to use all
manner of torments which possible, or in any cases that court could inflict,
and if yet he would not confess to torture him till he dyed. According to this
commission they gave him the Sueglia, a kind of torture, where having received
a drink to procure sleep, the Tortures ever when he noddeth whip him with
small plummets, he sits bare upon an Iron like the back of a knife and hott
Brickes under his feet to burn him, if he would ease himself that way. It is
reported he endured this also, till they came to give him L'Arco the Bow, at
which he confessed. This done he is carried before the court, there freely to
say, whether he confessed for fear of torment, or that it is the very truth he
said: if he auowe it, they proceed to judgment, if otherwise, he is returned to
the torture; for this is the only way to proceed as is before said, how
apparent soever the matter be, unless it be proved by two witnesses. As for
witness, it is there hard to be had, being holden a dishonorable thing to be
a witness, or an enformer, a Spia, as they term it. Insomuch as if an offense
be committed in the streets in the view of diverse Gentlemen, though they were
not of the action, no nor of the company, notwithstanding they shall have the
Strappado to confess the matter, which rather then do, they will suffer. So
that to have the Strappado, in Florence is no disparagement, except the cause
make it so. But to return to this matter, which I have of purpose remembered,
to make it appear how these courts even in small matters receive directions
from the Prince. After this fellow had avouched to the Court that he did the
fact, they sent again to his Highness to know how they should proceed. He
returned, that the malefactor should loose his right hand at the door where
was the Gentleman's lodging, and from thence to be drawn to the place of
Execution, there to be hanged and quartered, which was accordingly performed.

To d^scourse th^^s at large of each other officer and Court in this City of
Florence, would be over tedious: I will therefore only name the rest, or at
least with one word or two pass the^ over. There is the office of the
Proconsolo. The six Capitani delle parti. The six Vffizials de Monti; the
Vffizio delle Prestanze, Li noue, an office of great authority, without whose
especial license, no man may arrest or commence suit against a Courtier or a
Soldier, or a stranger. There are the Otto Conseruatori delle leggi. There be
the six Guidici della Ruota, which judge in all causes civil, these only may
not be Florentines. Also Li sei della Mercantia, before whom come all matters
of paying or receiving of debts, these only have authority to commit to prison
for debt. There be also the Maestri della zecca, Mint masters, La Banca de
Pagatori, these pay all Courtiers, soldiers, and other Prouisionati and
servants of his highness. Furthermore, the Vfficio d'Onesta. These have
authority over all actions and pleas of controversy arising in the Burdello:
here the whore shall have remedy against her customer that denies payment of
the price agreed upon and if he allege her unworthiness, she shall be
searched, and according as the Court finds, sentence shall be given: with
much other such stuff, which better beseems that Court, then this d^scourse
to treat of. The office de Pupilli; the office di Cambio; the offices della
farina del sale, della grascia, dell'abondanza, delle decime and many such
other; besides the offices of the seven companies, the Doganieri in the
Custom house; the Gabelliers at the gates; the Buon'huomini dello stinco, to
provide for Prisoners; the Buon h^^omini di san Martino, to provide for the
poor, and infinite such other inferior offices.

Concerning all these offices abouesaid, Officers of the crown
me thinks that some of the^ may fitly be called officers of the Crown,
because they be appointed by the Prince in all chief towns of his state, to
govern and to look into the counsels and actions of others, as having places
in them, but no voices. These hold their office for a year, and then are
either utterly discharged, or else removed to some other. Such officers of the
crown we may call the governor of Siena, the Commissary of Pisa and Pistoia,
the Podesta of other places.

As for all other officers, Officers of the body politic.
they may well be called of the body politic, because they retain the same
number, order, and proceedings (with some litt'e difference already touched)
which they did when it was a free state. Thus does the great Duke serve
himself of persons to administer Justice, and to command under him with names,
such as in former times they had, that by this small shadow of ancient
liberty, in some sort he might satisfy the ambitious humor of the citizens,
which desire to be in authority, and also pleasure them with profit and gain,
which by these honors and public offices they do make.

Concerning their law it is imperial, The Law.
intermingled notwithstanding with some exceptions and prouisoes Municipall. As
touching their punishments, which be either crumenall or criminal of the purse
or of the person, they have part^y bin remembered already: there be also others
as of condemnation to the galleis, of confining, of banditing and such like:
but omitting what else here^n might be said, I will end this discourse with a
word or two of the last branche of this relation, namely of the people
themselves.

The consideration of the civil fashion and honorable carriage of the Nobler
and better sort of Tuscanes, The People.
and of the savage and Gotish behavior and insolence of the Pesant, makes me
of opinion with Lipsius, that those are of the race of ancient Romans,
retaining still a relish of their virtue from whom they are derived: and that
these are descended from the barbarous Goths and Cymbrians (who sometimes
swarmed in Italy) having still the tainte of their inhumanitie. True it is,
that this judgment* holds generally more in the Pesant the^ the Nobility, for
that we find these more to decline from virtue, then those to swerve from the
vices of their Progenitors. And to prove that this is true, I will without any
further censuring refer you to the report of an Italian, who being their
countreyma^ should know them better, His nature.
or at least (I am sure* be more partial. Boterus in his universal Relations,
speaking of the Florentines says; they be, Parchi, ritirati, poco amici da
forastieri, tenaci del denaro, prouidi dell' auenire, cupi, cogitabondi, d'
animo sempre riuolto all'interesse, intenti al quadagno: and in an other place
he gives them Sottigliezza d'ingegno, parsimonia, accortezza, dilligenza,
attitudine all'Arti un procedere per appunto, un star sul vantagio, un non
trascuraro cosa alcuna: that is; they be niggards they live to themselves, they
love no strangers they are close-fisted they have an eye to the back-dore, they
are hard to be sounded, they are ever biting the lip, their mind ever on their
penny, their study still how to gain. Also, they are men of a shrewd wit, of a
spare diet, of a wary and discreet carriage, very industrious, very apt to
learn, they proceed for an inche, they stand upon the advantage, they will not
loose the droppings of their nose. This writer has gotten (and worthily) for
many his ouersights in that book, the imputation of a notable liar, and for
his egregious partiallities on the Spanish side, the note of a notorious
flatterer. But sure had the rest of his Book been able in the Balance of
truth to have holden counterpeasable to this judicial report of the
Florentines, he had well deserved the Pasport of Seen and allowed, Cum
Priuilegio.

And yet by his leave I cannot believe without some good reason, His wit.
that the Florentine generally has such a perlous wit, and such a subtle
conceit I would sooner subscribe he had a subtle diet: for as has before
been said, I am of that French-mans mind, that could not find where that
great wit of theirs lay, whatsoever either by Macciauell his report in his
history, or in his person may to the contrary be alleged. I have heard of
some English Gentlemen, whose abode has been there longer, and therefore
their experience greater, and means also very good to entertain conversation,
that the Florentine will be very affable and ready to observe us with all
possible complement, so long as we will consort him to the Bardello, and give
his loose and lascivious discourse the hearing, which is ever of his Mistrisse,
if not of a worse theame^ But if at any time we offer the occasion of any
better talk, and would discourse with him about some matter of policy, or
history, or Art, or such like, he straight shakes us off with a shug of the
shoulder, actu^ est, scilicet, we have lost our companion: in this only wise,
that he will not talk because he cannot* For who will think that this people
which do all things alla mostra^, and speaks always alla grande (witness
their great houses and small furniture of the one, their great words and small
matter of the other) would be squeamish of their knowledge if they had it, that
have such quintessence of terms to grace it? Ind^ed I ve^^ly think, that when
the Florentine was Lord and Patron of Pisa, Pistoia, Volterra, Arezzo; and
those other Cities, that then he had wit. But now I see not why we should not
say of him, as we use to do of young unthrifts, that were left rich, and have
foolishly spent or lost it ( They were well if they had had wit to keep it) I
dare say, that if Maccianell were again living, and should see them, that were
wont to rule a state, now not to bring a few Lettice from their Villa, but at
the gate to toll for them he would unsay that which he had formerly said, and
swear they had no wit. I would not have said thus much, but that their
writers will needs all of them put the (wit) upon them, and they for sooth
will needs take it. As though wit were confined to Florence, and band^ted
from all other cities. Let it be concluded of Florence as of all other places
(without this singularity) that there be some wise men, but more fools, and
so I will leave them.

As for their aptness to learn, His aptnes.
where of this author speaks, if he mean mechanical Arts it is not seen
in their shoppes; where ye shall almost have nothing handsomely d^ne except
works in cloth of gold and silver. An^ as for their liberal Sciences, it is
not seen in their Schools, where in one University ye shall scarce find
two that are good Grecians, without the which tongue, they hold in our
Schools in England a man never deserves the reputation of learned. Indeed it
cannot be denied, that in two faculties this town ha^h had famous men in
Painting and Poetry: and I verily think that herein Italy generally excels.
An^ no maru^ile, when all their time is spent in Amors, and all their churches
decked with colors.

Their nature (he says) is close and retired, His courtesy.
but sure it is, that after some small acquaintance (especially if he hope to
gain any thing by you) his manner is to offer you all possible courtesies, his
house, his servants, himself, and what not, he will proffer you his Jewel, or
any thing which likes you, and ever importune you to dine with him, with all
ceremony and complement; (for here they grow) m^rry he holds it for the
greatest discourtesie in the world, and a mala creanzaille, manners to accept
any his offers, it is not the fashion of Tuscany: for were this custom of
taking once up, the complement of offering would soon down.

What else Roterus says I hold most true, His industry.
either of the Florentines industry and greedy gaining, or of his parsimony and
thin feeding. Especially at his own table, or at his Inn, where he paieth
according to his feeding; His diet.
but let him come to another man's table, or to a certain ordinary, and he will
hold the last vie with the tallest Trencher-man of all M^dia. Of whom one may
rightly say, as the Poet speaks of the harlott in the Comedy: at their own
board, Nibil videtur niundius, nec magis compositum quicquam nec magis elegans,
but at another cost ye shall note, illorum ingluuiem, sordes, inediam. Though
concerning the place it is quite contrary, for the harlots do pitissare abroad,
and deuorare at home.

As touching their apparel, Apparel.
it is both civil, because black, and comely because fitted to the body.

For their names, Names.
they be those of the old Romans only altered with an Italian pronounciation
and determination.

Concerning their language, it is the best of Italy. Language.
As for those ungrateful Tuscans, that in no case will acknowledge to be
beholden to the Latins but will either have it a mother tongue of it self, or
at the least the daughter of the Caldean tongue, for that it has the Afixa as
me, te, se, ne, ve, and such like, very agreeable with that other language, I
dare not give them credit: for if it were plumed of the Romans feathers, I
think it would be but a naked language. True it is, that from the French and
Dutch tongues it borrows much, and somewhat from the Greeks. As abbassare,
allogiare, auanzare, comminciare, donna, gaglicardo; and infinite others from
the French, Arnese, becoo, brano, brindisi, elmo, fiasce, fresce, giallo; and
many more from the Dutche. They have also from the Greeks, as Battezzo,
catedra, catarro, golfo, gamba, mottegio rimbombo, rio, etc. So that if the
Gothe and Vandall had also theirs, I think this Tuscane tongue would be left
nothing but her quaint diminiti^es, wherein consists her only grace; as of
Pouero the plain song, she runs a descant of Pouerone, Pouerino, Poueretto,
and Poueraccio, and so almost of any word whatsoever. This Language also
challenges to have a singular grace in her vocal terminations, as in such
words as these, Rinfrescatoio, Temperatoio, Cuoio, Asciugatoio, and such like;
which they of Tuscany say are of a more sweet desinence then any of the
Latin, and so I think, how beit they must needs acknowledge the borrowing of
this elegancie from one of the Greek dialects, for what can be more like to
(...) and (...).

Different speech.
As for the difference of speech among the Tuscanes, I think it be as great as
was ever the difference of minds among the Italians, and has as many
factions: for as we had in times past the factions Sassadelli and Vaini in
Imola: the Cerchi and Donati in Florence: the Bianchi and Neri in Pistoia: the
Fregosi and Adorni in Genoa: the Lambartazzi and Gerenei in Bologna: the
Colonni and Orsini in Rome: the Imp^rialls and the French in all: So have ye
at this day one language of the Florentine, another of the Saneze, the third of
the Luccbese, and the fourth of the Pisan, but the worst of the Pistolese. Yea
and in Florence it self, the language has now a faction Gu^phe and
Ghibelline, Howbeit of these diversities it is generally held, that the
Florentine has the best words, but his pronunciation is somewhat too
gutturall; and that the Sanese has the best pronunciation, but his words
relish too much of the Latin: for so says their prouerbe^ Fauella Florentina
in bocca Sanese: So that, he that shall have the terms of the one, and the
accent of the other, Omne tulerit punctum, shall hit the mark.

His customs. His jealousy over his wife.
It remains I speak of their customs, differing from ours; The husband (for
the most part) when he goes abroad, locketh up his wife (not because he is
jealous, (he protests) but because it is the custom.) The Tutor is abused by
the Scholar with all odious misdemeanour, yet dare he not correct him least
his father should brave him: His in^ulgence over his child.
I know not two worse estates in Italy, then that of a fair wife, and this of
a teacher; the one is ever a prisoner, the other always a slave; the one no
better then a Bird in a Cage, the other no better then Geta in the Scane.

Concerning quarrels, His valor.
they are carried thus: the party wronged (if not in some high degree) will
challenge the other to fight, if they be both provided it is presently
vndertak^e, otherwise it is deferred till the next day, or some such short
date; the place appointed is commonly in the City, and in the chiefest
street: here they encounter with a good Scull under their hattes, a large
Maile to their knee under their apparel, besides their Gauntlet; so that if
they had a Supersedeas for their face, and would do as the boys do in
England (bar striking at shinnes) or as the Scholars of Padoa, who have
plates for this purpose: no doubt but Dametas and Clini^ might thus make a tall
fray. I saw two gallants in Pisa fight thus completely provided, where after a
very furious encounter, and a most merciless shredding and slashing of their
apparel, with a most desperate resolution to cut one another out of his
clothes; They were (to the saving of many a stitch) parted, and by mediation
with much ado made friends.

But if it be a wrong wher^of he purposes a revenge, His reu^ege
he will wait an opportunity seven years, but he will take you at the
advantage, or else do it by some others, whom he will hire for the purpose. In
this sort were two slain in Pisa while I was there, the on^ a rich Ma^chant
the other a Knight of the Order, the one coming from his whore, the other
go^ng thither. Two also in Siena in seven days. And a^ my coming hither to
Venice, (for this is general through all Italy) there were on Shroue-sunday
at night seauenteene slain, and very many wounded: besides that they there
reported, there was almost every night one slain, all that Carnoual time. The
occasion of most these quarrels and mischiefs arise from the Burdello. This is
also to be observed, that the party wounded, whereof perhaps in few days he
dies, will never discover by whom he was hurt, except to his Confessor, though
he konw him very well: neither will the brother or son of him slain, take
any acknowledgm^nt of the dooer, though by circumstance and presumptions they
be very sure thereof, but rather awaite the good hour to cry quittance.

Concerning the wooing and winning of his Mistress favor, His wooing.
(I mean as our English phrase is, in the way of marriage) he must (as the
Poet says, Extrema linea amare) love fair and far off: he may solicit his
cause with passionate Letters, or amorous glances before her window, or at the
Church, (the only place where such matters are managed) but other either time,
or place, or means, he has not which are ordinary* Insomuch as many times the
match is made before he know either how the humor of her brain, or vapor of
her stomach will be pleasing to his sen^es of hearing and smelling, which may
be one chief cause why so many husbands dislike, and of their straying to
forbidden fruit.

I should take the course in this Relation, which many husbands do in their
wishes, that is, presently after marrying to talk of burying^^ which also
differs much from ours in England: but if I should speak thereof being a
Church action, I should also speak of other Church matters, whereof I
purposely omit to speak; as also of all other their manners and customs
common with other people of Italy.

I will therefore knit up this little Treatise of this great Duchy, with this
abrupt period, namely: That this People lives much discontented, as appears
by their daily and great, (but Private) complainings: having fresh in their
minds their former liberty, and heavy on their backs their present yoke.
That this State is like a body which has lately taken Physic, whose humors
are not yet well settled, or as a stomach weakened so much by purging, as there
is now nothing left but melancholy. Concluding of this people, as of a person
that lives always under the hands of a Physician, Qui sub Medicis vinit,
misore vinit.

FINIS.

