AN EVERLASTING PROGNOSTICATION of the change of Weather: Collected and
compiled for the common use and profit of all Country men.

By Kinki Abenezrah, a wandering Jew.



Printed at London for M. S.

An Everlasting Prognostication of the change of weather, collected and
compiled by a wandering Jew, being useful for many.
Predictions of hot weather.
IF a mist or hoare frost do fall either in the spring time, or autumn, it is
a token that that day shall be hot.

If night Battes come in great numbers, and more timely in the eueuing then
they were wont, it is a sign of great heat to follow.

If Humble-Bees or Drones fly abroad in an evening, it is a sign of great
heat.

The rising of any white smoke, steame or rike upon the waters, meddowes, or
marshes, before the rising or setting of the Suune, or in the night time, it is
an evident sign of very hot weather.

Predictions of cold and frosty weather.
IF it begin to freeze with an Easterly wind, it is a token that the cold
weather shall last a long time.

If the Move be blackish, and dark and thick, it signifies winter and very
cold.

If the Moon rise or appear with two or three clear circles about it* it is
sign that the air shall be very cold.

If in the beginning of a frost it snow but softly, and the Snow be drizeling
small, it is a sigue of cold weather.

If Sheep or Oxen about harvest time be seen to scrape and dig up the
ground, and that they stand with their heads close together, it is a sign that
winter is at hand.

If in Winter time clouds appear whitish about the Horizon, it is a sign of
extreme cold weather.

If the stars in Winter time appear more bright and clearer than ordinarily
they are wont, it is a manifest token of evil weather.

If Stars do send forth any little sparckles, it is a sign of extreme cold
weather.

If Sea birds or fowls forsake the sea, it is a sign that a cold Winter is at
hand.

Predictions of Snow.
IF in Winter the clouds be whitish it is a sign of Snow at hand.

If when it raines the air be troubled and ouercast, and that the Clouds be
more whitish then they are wont, it is a manifest token of snow: and so much
the more if the air be warm and soultry.

If for two or three days together i^ Winter the clouds be very whitish
toward the evening, it is a sign of much snow.

Predictions of storms and tempests.
IF the moon rise and appear with bluish, blackish or darkish circles about
it, it is a token of tempest: and so much the greater, by how much the more
those circles are broken, greenish, or more dark.

If it thunder toward the evening, it is an evident token of some tempest at
hand.

If the wind blow hard in the South, and presently change to the North, it is
a token of a very great tempest, namely upon the Seas.

Predictions of thunder.
IF in summer time the clouds be pale and whitish, it is a sign of storms and
tempests, together with thunderclappes, and belts to fall shortly after.

If the thunder in the evening, it is a token of sudden change of weather, and
great tempests to follow, with fall of thunderbolts, and great flashing of
lightning.

If the Rainebowe appear in the West, it is a token of thunder.

If great store of stars be seen to fall and run in the air, it is a
token of thundering and lightning to follow very shortly.

Predictions of earthquakes.
IF Conduit or Pipe Waters be heard to make auy extraordinary noise or to
stir violently, it is a token of earthquakes.

If any earthquake be at hand, the Sea will give manifest tokens thereof unto
the skillful Mariner, for though no wind be stirring, the sea will swell and
mount with billows and great waves as in a Tempest and storm: Moreover,
whatsoever a ship is fraighted and balasted with, all shall be seeue to shake
and stir as if it were in any other building or land.

Small, long, and whitish clouds like unto long lines toward the West, are
commonly manifest tokens of ensuing earthquakes.

If the Sun and Moon appear dark, red bloody, or fiery, it is a token of
some succeeding Earthquake.

If any earthquake be at hand or likely to follow, all birds and fourefooted
Beasts are commonly wonted to leave and forsake their accustomed and ordinary
homes, nestes, caves, dens, or habitations, and to seek for new dwellings or
harborough seeking thereby to avoid the injury of foul weather.

Predictions of corruption, blasting, rotte, or infection.
IF the Summer be moist, wet and cloudy, it is a sign that all Fruits, Corn,
and all kind of pulse shall be blasted and corrupted.

If the spring time be very cloudy, and full of mistes and hoary frostes,
namely when trees do bud and blossom, and that the fields wax green, it is
a manifest token that all fruits of the earth shall be blasted, rotten, or
destroyed.

Predictions of plenty and abundance.
ANd if there do great store of snow fall on the plain, it is a token that
the Frost shall not continue long, and that great plenty of Fruit and Corn
will follow.

Great store of rain and water in winter betokens a good and plentiful
year after.

Predictions of dearth and want of Corn.
IF in the spring time or Summer there fall great store of waters, or that the
sky be ouercast for some days together with clouds, hoare frostes, and
mistes, or that the wind keep any while in the South, it is a manifest token
of a great ^earth, and the rather if these things happen at what time the
Trees begin to bud and blessome, or when the cornefieldes be green.

The truest, and most likely and manifest token of an ensuing dearth an^
barrenness, is the cruel and bloody Wars, caused by the Ambition of
unsatiate and greedy Tyrants, by their instruments, the licentious,
merciless, and couetons Soldiers, who neither regarding succeeding want, nor
any Christianlike motion, kill and lauishly was^ all sorts of Cattle, spoil
and fondly consume what Corn soever they can lay hands upon, never regarding
to keep any seed for a new year, subuerting houses, burning Towns,
oppressing or imprisoning all sorts of persons, of what sex soever, to the
great hearts grief and undoing of all men.

Predictions of rain.
SMall store of water in winter does signify a moist and wet spring to follow.

The appearing of the Rainebow in any clear and fair weather, is a token of
rain presently to follow.

The greener the Rainebow is, the greater store of rain it does signify.

If in the evening it lighten only in the North, it is a token of ensuing
rain.

Lightning in a Summers evening, is a token of rain to follow within three
days after.

If Oxen feed apace when it raines, it is a token that the rain shall
continne many days after.

The sky or element being red or fiery in a morning, foresheweth rain to
follow.

If Crows or Ravens fly together in great number, and that they croake and
flutter their wings, it will rain shortly after.

If Cats do lick their forefeet, and with them wash their head, it is a sign
of rain.

Dusky and black clouds in the air signifies rain.

The extraordinary crowing of Peacockes, is a manifest token of rain.

If the Hearne-shaw cry extraordinarily, it is a certain token of rain.

If it thunder in the South, it will rain shortly.

Any gale of wind coming from the West, signifies moistness and water.

Predictions of Storms and Wind.
THe Rainebow appearing very red, it is a sign of ensuing winds.

If in an evening it lighten toward the North, it foretells great winds to
ensue that way.

If in a clear night it lighten from the South and Southwest, it shows that
there will winds come thence.

If any fiery sparks take hold of pots, pipkins, or pannes, when they are
taken from the fire, it is a sign of stormy winds.

If the Moon appear small and red, and if that part which is not lightened
with the help of the Sun, be fiery or sparckling, it is a token of winds to
follow.

If the sea be more greenish or bluish then it is wont, it is a token of
Sotherly winds, if it be dark it is a sign of Northerly winds.

If the clouds appear small, thick and dry resembling flocks of sheep, it
is a sign of winds.

If there be any circles red, or of diverse colors about the Sun when it
rises, it is a sign of wind.

If it thunder in the morning, it is a sign of wind.

Those winds that begin by day time, are of more continuance then those that
rise in the night.

Predictions of fair weather.
THe rising of the Rainebow very high in any rainy weather, foretells clear and
fair weather.

If the Rainebow appear in the winter* without any wind, and some rain
withal, it is a token of fair weather.

If the Moon appear in the West with clear horns, with no vapors about it,
three days before the opposition, and three days after the conjunction, it is
a sign of much fair weather.

If the Sun rise and set clear without any vapors, it is a token of fair
weather.

Any wind coming from the North, and slirring many clouds, signifies very
fair weather.

The sky being red in an evening, foretells the next morning to be fair.

The saying of Dawes in the morning declare fair weather to come.

If the Moon appear the third day before the conjunction with small horns, it
signifies fair weather.

Predictions of foul weather.
OXen eating more, and feeding more greedily then they are wont, and if they
lie on their right side, it is a sign foul weather will follow.

If dogs do lie upon their right side, it is a sign foul weather will follow.

When Rams do skip and leap more then ordinary, and when they butt and shocke
one another, it is a sign of foul weather.

If Cocks do crow by night more timely then they were wont, it is a token of
change of weather and very great storms.

If the Moon rise or appear with two or three blew or black circles about
it, it is an evident token of stormy weather.

If clouds appear whitish in Summer, it signifies very foul weather, and
furious storms.

If it thunder in an evening it is a token of foul weather.

If in the beginning of winter, small birds do flock together in the fields,
it is a sign of much foul weather.

FINIS.

