CANAANS CALAMITY Ierusalems Misery, OR The doleful destruction of fair
Jerusalem by TYTVS, the Son of Vaspasian Emperor of Rome, in the year of
Christ's Incarnation 74. Wherein is showed the wonderful miseries which God
brought upon that City for sin, being utterly ouer-throwne and destroyed by
Sword, pestilence and famine.

AT LONDON, Printed for Thomas Bailey, and are to be sold at the corner-shop in
the middle row in Holborne, near adjoining unto Staple Inn. 1618.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL M. Richard Kingsmill Esquier, Justice of peace and
Quorum in the County of Southampton, and Surveyer of her Majesty's Court^s of
Wards and Liveries. All prosperity and happiness.
Having (Right worshipful) often heard of your extraordinary favor, showed in
the depth of extremity, to some poor freindes of mine, remaining in your
pleasant Lordship of High-cleere: by means whereof, they have had no small
comfort for the recovery of their wished desire: I have been studious how I
might in some measure declare both their thankfulness and mine own for so
great a good. But such (...) our weak abillity that we cannot requite the
least point of that life prolonging kindness, which the riches of your courtesy
did yield: nevertheless to make apparent, that our poor estates shall not
obscure, or clowd with ingratitude, the well intending thoughts of our hearts:
I have presumed to present to your worship this little book, an unfeigned
token of our good affection, hoping that like the Princely Pertian you will
more respect the good will then the gift, which I confess far unworthy so
worthy a Patron in respect of the simple handling of so excellent a matter: But
a plain style does best become plain truth, for a trifling fable has most
need of a pleasant pen. Wherefore if it shall please your Worship to esteem
of my simple labor, and to let this pass under your favorable protection, I
shall have the end of my desire. And resting thus in hope of your worships
courtesy I cease wishing you all hearts content in this life, and in the world
to come eternal felicity.

Your worships most humbly affectionate: T. D.

(...) Three stately walls begirt this City round,
Strongly raild up of gallant squared stone,
Impossible in fight foes should them confound,
By warlike Engines seized thereupon.
The spacious gates most glorious to behold,
Were all gilt over, with rich burnisht gould.
And round abo^t Jerusalem likewise.
Were pleasant walks prepared for recreation,
Sweet dainty gardens feeding gazers eyes,
With works of wonder and high admiration,
Where in the midst of sweetest smelling flowers,
They built for pleasure, many pleasant bowers.
In treasures store this City did excel,
For pomp and pride it was the only place,
In her alone did richest Merchants dwell,
And famous Princes sprung of Royal race:
And fairer Dames did nature never frame,
Then in that City dwelt and thither came.
Christ's Prophecy of the destruction of this City and how it came to pass
accordingly within Forty years after, showing the cause that moved the
Emperor to come against it.
Our Savior Christ tracing the bordring hills,
When he on this fair City cast his eye
The tears along his rosia^l cheeks dist^^les.
Mourning for their destruction drawing nie.
O Jerusalem Jerusalem quoth he,
My heart bewailes thy great calamity.
The time shall come and near it is at hand,
When furious foes shall t^ench thee round about,
And batter down thy Towers that stately stand,
All thy strong holds within thee and without:
Thy golden buildings shall they quite confound,
And make thee equal with the lowly ground.
O woe to them that then gives suck he says,
And lulles their Infants on their tender knees,
More woe to them that be with child those days,
Wherein shall be such extreme miserye^:
Thou might have shund these plagues had thou bin wise
Which now for sin is hidden from thy eyes.
This dreadful Prophecy spoken by our Lord,
The stubborn people naught at all regarded,
Whose Adamantine hearts did still accord,
To follow sin, whhich was with shame rewarded:
They flouted him for telling of this story,
And crucifide inspite the Lord of glory.
Reprochfully they fleered in his face,
That wept for them in tender true compassion,
They wrought his death and did him all disgrace,
That sought their life, and waild their desolation:
Their hardened hearts believed not what was said,
Until they saw the siege about them laid.
Full forty years after Christ's passion,
Did these proud people live in peace and rest,
Whose wanton eyes seeing no alteration,
Christ's words of truth, they turned to a jest:
But when they thought themselves the surest of all,
Lo then began their never raised fall.
Their mounting minds that towred past their strength
Scorning subjection to the Roman state,
In boiling hatred loathed their Lords at length,
Dispis'd the Emperor with a deadly hate:
Rejecting his authority each hour,
Sought to expel the pride of foreign power.
Which foul contempt the Emperors wrath inflamed,
Mighty Vespatian hot reueng did threat,
But all in vain they would not be reclaimed,
Relying on their strength and courage great:
And hereupon began the deadly jar,
And after followed bloody woeful war,
The sign^s and tokens showed before the destruction, alluring the Jews to
repentance, and their little regard thereof, interpreting all things to be for
the best, flattering themselves in their sins.
YEt mark the mercy of our gracious God,
Before the grievous scourge to them was sent,
That they might shun his heavy smarting rod,
And heartily their filthy faults repent:
Strange signs and wonders did he show them still,
Forerunners of their ruin woe, and ill.
For one who^e year as well by day as night,
A blazing star appeared in the sky,
Whose bushie tail was so excelling bright,
It dimmed the glory of the sunns fair eye,
And every one that on this object gazed,
At sight thereof stood wondrous sore amazed.
In right proportion it resembled well,
A sharp two edged sword of mighty strength,
The percing point a needle did excel,
And sure it seemed a mi^^cle for length:
So strange a star before was never seen,
And since that time the like has never been.
And over right that goodly famous City,
Hung still this dreadful apparition,
Which might have moved had they bin gracious witty,
For outward follies, inward hearts contrition:
And never did that wonder change his place,
But still Jerusalem with woe menace.
The wondering people never looked thereon,
But their mistrusting heart suspected much,
Saying great plagues would follow thereupon,
Such privy motions did their conscience touch:
But other-some would say it was not so,
But sign that they their foes would overthrow.
Think not quoth they that Jacobs God will leave,
The blessed seed of Abraham in distress,
First shall his Sword the heathens lives bereave,
As by this token he does plain express,
His fiery sword shall shield this holy town,
And heaw in heaps the proudest Rom^ins down.
Thus flattered they themselves in sinful sort,
Their hearts were hard, their deepest judgments blinded
What godly teachers did to them report,
They soon forgot, such things they never minded:
Their chiefest study was delight and pleasure,
And how they might by all means gather treasure
Men would have thought this wa^ning had bin fair,
When God his standard against them did advance,
His flagge of Justice waued in the air,
And yet they count it, but a thing of chance:
This bad them yield, and from their sins con^art,
But they would not till sorrow made them smart.
Then in the air God showed another wonder,
When azurd skies were brightest fair and clear,
An host of armed men, like dreadful thunder,
With hidious clamours, fighting did appear:
And at each other eagerly they ran,
With burnisht Falchions murdering many a man.
And marching fiercely in their proud array,
Their wrathful eyes did sparkle like the fire,
Or like enraged Lions for their pray,
So did they strive, in nature and desire:
That all the plain wherein they fighting stood,
Seemed to men's sight all staind with purple blood.
This dreadful token many men amazed,
When they beh^ld the uncouth sight so strange,
On one another doubtfully they gazed,
With fearful looks their color quite did change:
Yet all, they did interpret to the best,
Thinking themselves above all other blessed.
The conquering sort that did with warlike hand,
Suppress the other in the bloody field,
Declares quoth they that Iudaes sacred band,
Shall make unhallowed Romans die or yield:
And over them we shall have honor great,
That proudly now usurps King David's seat.
See how the Devil does sinful souls beguile,
Filling the same with vain imagination,
Thinking themselves cock-sure, when all the while,
They stand upon the brink of desolation:
All faithful Christians warning take by this,
Interpret not Gods fearful signs amiss.
Yet lo the Lord would not give over so,
But to convert them, if that it might be,
He does proceed more wonders yet to show,
All to reclayme them from iniquity:
That so he might remove his plagues away,
Which threatened their destruction every day.
The Temple gates all made of shining brass,
Whose massy substance was exceeding great,
Which they with iron bars each night did cross,
And locked with brazen bolts, which made them sweat,
Did of themselves start open and undo,
Which twenty men of might could scant put to.
Upon a day most high and festival,
The high Priest went after a sacred manner,
Into the glorious Temple most maiesticall,
To offer sacrifice their God to honor:
What time the Lord a wonder did declare,
To all men's sight, prodigious, strange, and rare.
A goodly Calfe prepared for sacrifice,
And laid upon the holy Alter there,
Brought forth a Lamb most plain before their eyes,
Which filled some men's hearts with sudden fear:
And sore perplexed the passions of their mind,
To see a thing so far against all kind.
Soon after this they heard a wailefull voice,
Which in the Temple shreeking thus did say,
Let us go hence, and no man here rejoice,
Thus figuring forth their ruin and decay,
All men did hear these speeches very plain,
But saw nothing, nor knew from whence it came.
And four years space before the bloody fight,
One Ananias had a youthful son,
Which like a Prophet cried day and night
About the streets as he did go and run:
Showing the people without dread at all,
Most woeful plagues should on the City fall.
And in this sort began his doleful cry:
A fearful voice proceeds from the East,
And from the West, as great a voice did fly,
A voice likewise from blustering winds addressed:
A voice upon Jerusalem shall go,
A voice upon the Temple full of woe.
A mournful voice on wretched man and wife,
A voice of sorrow on the people all,
Woe and destruction, mortal war and strife,
Bitter pinching famine, misery and thrall:
In every place these threatenings still he had,
Running about like one distraught and mad.
With lofty voice thus ran he through the town,
Nor day and night did he his clamours cease,
No man could make him lay these threatenings down
By no entreaty would he hold his peace:
Although he was in Dungeon deeply laid,
Yet there his cries did make them more afraid.
The Maiestrates that most forbad his cry:
And saw his boldness more and more arise,
With grievous scourges whipped him bitterly,
Yet came no tears out of his pleasant eyes:
The more his stripes, the higher went his voice*
In sorest torment did he most rejoice.
But when the Jews perceau^d how he was bent,
And that their ears were cloyed with his cries,
They counted it but sportfull merriment,
A nine days wonder that in short time dies:
So that a fresh their fol^ies they begin,
And for his speech they passed not a pin.
But as the holy Scriptures do bewray,
To dainty cheer they iocondly sat down,
And well refresht, they rose again to play,
In smiling sort when God did fircely frown:
And never more to mirth were they diposed,
Then when the Lord his wrath to them disclosed.
The tidings brought of the enemies appoach, and the fear of the citizens:
their provisio^ of victuals for twenty years burnt in one night, by one of
their own captains, of mere malice, which caused a sudden dearth to follow:
their sedition and division between themselves while the city was besieged.
But whilst that they their sugared Iunkets tasted,
Unto the City came a tired post,
Full weak and weary, and with travel wasted,
Who brought the^ word their foes were on their coast:
Which when they knew, their merriments were dashed
These doleful news made them full sore abashed.
Three Cipres Tables then to ground they throw,
Their silver dishes, and their cups of gould,
For haste to meet the proud inuading foe,
Fear ma^es them mad, but courage makes the^ bold:
And to defend the brunt of future harms,
They leave their Ladies and embrace their Arms.
Instead of Lutes and sweet resounding Vials,
They sound the Trumpet and the rattling drum,
Their barbed Steeds they put to diverse trials,
How they can manage, stop, carry, and run:
Their cunning harpers now must harness bear,
Their nimble dauncers warlike weapons wear,
But ere their wrathful foes approached near,
The storehouses the Gouerners did fill,
With wholesome victuals which for twenty year
Would serve two hundred thousand cast by bill,
But all the same by one seditious Squire
Was in one night consum^d with flaming fire.
For why the Citizens to discord fell,
So giddy headed were they always found,
And in their rage like furious fiends of hell,
In murdering sort they did each other wound:
And when they entered in this devilish strife,
They spared neither Infant, man, nor wife.
Into three parts the people were divided,
And one against an other hatred bore,
The chiefest sort sediciously were guided,
Whereby vnciuell mutines vexed them sore:
So that the sorrow of the forr^ine war,
Was nothing to their bloody civil jar.
And so malicious did their rancor rise,
That they the holy Temple did defile,
All such as came to offer sacrifice,
They murdered straight, remorce they did exile:
The Sacrificer with the sacrifice,
Both bathed in blood, men saw before their eyes.
Thus did they make the sacred Temple there,
The slaughter house of many a humane soul,
So that the marble pauement every where,
was black with blood like to a butchers bowl:
And with the fat of men so slippery made,
That there for falling, none could go vnstayd.
And by this wicked means it came to pass,
The streets and temple full of dead-men ^ay,
With wounds putrified, where burial was,
Which raised a grievous pestilence that day:
So hot, and fell, that thereof dyed a number,
Whose foul infection all the town did cumber.
And that which was more heavy to behold,
As men and women past along the street:
Their weeping eyes did to their hearts unfold,
A map of Murder at their trembling feet
Some saw their Fathers fetching deadly groans,
Some their Husbands brains scattered on the sto^^s
Here lay a woman stabbed to the heart,
There a tender Infant one a soldiers spear,
Struggling with death, and sprawling with each part:
The channels ran with purple blood each wheare
A thousand persons might you daily see,
Some gasping, groaning bleeding fresh to be.
Lo, all this mischief was within the town
Wrought twixt themselves in wondrous hateful sort,
While noble Tytus beat their bulwarks down,
And at their walls did show them warlike sport:
But by distress to bring them unto thrall,
He brake their pipes, and stopped their cundits all.
A description of the horrible Famine within (...) the City of Jerusalem.
FOr true report r^^g in his royal ears,
That bitter Famine did afflict them sore,
Which was the cause of many bitter tears,
And he to make their misery the more,
Deprived them quit of all their water clear,
Which in their want they did esteem so dear.
Alack, what pen is able to express?
The extreme misery of this people then?
Which were with Famine brought to great distress,
For cruel hunger vexed the welthiest men:
When night approacht, well might they lie and wink,
But cold not sleep for want of meat and drink.
For by this time full Fourteen months and more,
Had warlike Titus sieg'd that famous town,
What time the Jews had quite consumed their store,
And being starved, like Ghosts went up and down:
For in the markets were no victuals found,
Though for a Lamb, ^hey might have twenty pound.
When bread was gone, then was he counted blessed,
That in his hand had either cat or dog,
To fill his empty maw: and thus distressed,
A dozen men would fight for one poor frogge,
The fairest Lady lighting one a mouce,
Would keep it from her best friend in the house.
A weazell was accounted daynty meat,
A hissing snake esteemed a Princes dish,
A Queen upon a moule might seem to eat,
A veanom neawt was thought a wholesome fish:
Worms from the earth, were dig'd up great and small,
And poisoned spiders eaten from the wall.
A hundred men under this grievous cross,
With hunger-starued bodies wanting food,
Have for a morsel of a stinking horse,
In deadly strife, shed one an others blood.
Like famisht Ravens, that in a shole do pitch,
To seize a caryon in a noisome ditch.
But when these things, were all consumed quite,
(For famines greedy mawe destroys all,)
Then did they bend, their study day and night,
To see what next unto their share might fall:
Necessity does seek an hundred ways,
Famines fell torment from the heart to raise.
Then did they take their horses leather reigns,
And broyling them supposed the^ wondrous sweet,
A hungry stomach naught at all refraines,
Nor did they spare their shoes upon their feet:
But shoes, and boots, and buskins, all they eat,
And would not spare one morsel of their meat.
But out alas my heart does shake to show,
When these things failed, what shift these wretches made,
Without salt tears how should I write their woe,
Since sorrows groundwork in the same is laid:
All English hearts which Christ in arms do hem
Mark wel^ the woes of fair Jerusalem.
When all was spent, and nothing left to eat,
Whereby they might maintain their feeble life,
Then does the wife her husband dear entreat,
To end her misery by his wounding knife:
Maids weep for food, and children make their moa^e,
Their parents sigh when they can give them none.
Some men with hunger falls raging mad,
Gnawing the stones and timber where they walk,
Some other staggering, weak and wondrous s^d,
Dies in the streets, as with their friends they talk?
And other some licks up the vomit fast,
Which their sick neighbors in their houses cast.
Nay more then this, though this be all to much,
Josephus writes, that men and maidens young
The which of late did scorn brown-bread to touch,
Sustained themselves with one an others doong.
Remember this you that so dainty be,
And praise Gods name for all things sent to thee.
All things were brought by famine out of frame,
For modest Chastity to it gave place,
High honored Virgins that for very shame,
Would hardly look on men with open face,
One bit of beead never so course and brown,
Would win them to the foulest knave in town.
The seditious Captains Schimion and Iehocana^ search all the houses in the
City for Victuals, they take from a noble Lady al^ her provision, ^^auing her
and her Son comfortless, showing the great moan she made.
THe cursed seditious Captains and their crew,
When they perceived the famine grow so great,
In all men's houses would they search, and view,
In every corner both for bread and meat:
If any did their bold request deny,
On murdering swords they were right sure to dye.
Among the rest where they a searching went,
Unto ^ gallant Ladies house they came,
And there before her victuals quite was spent,
With hardened hearts, and faces void of shame:
They took her store with many a bitte^ threat,
And left her not one bit of bread to eat.
The noble Lady on her tender knees,
With floods of tears distilling from her eyes,
Their cruelty when she so plainly sees,
In mournful sort unto them thus she cries:
Upon a woeful Lady take some pity,
And let not famine slay me in this City.
Of all the store which you have took away,
Leave on brown loaf, for my poor child and me:
That we may eat but one bit in a day,
To save our lives from extreme misery.
Thus holding up her lilly hands she cried,
The more she craved the more she was denied.
If you quoth she cannot a^^orp me bread,
One dried stock fish do one me bestow,
For my poor Infants life I greatly dread,
If thus distressed you leave me when you go:
Brave men of might, show pity for his sake,
And I thereof a thousand meals will make.
O call to mind my child is nobly borne,
Of honorable blood and high degree,
Then leave us not brave Captains thus forlorn,
Your countries f^iend one day this child may be:
O let me not this gentle favor miss,
I may one day requi^e far more then this.
Then answered they in harsh and churlish sort,
Tut tell not us of honorable state,
And if thou will we will cut thy Infants throat,
So shall he need no meat, then cease to pra^e:
Men must have meat, let children dye and s^arue,
If we want food, in wars how can we seru^.
With bended brows they s^roue to get away
But she upon her knees did follow fast,
And taking hold on their confused array,
This sad complaint from her hearts palace past:
Renouned Lords, our Cities sure defense,
O let me speak once more, ere you go hence.
If you lack money, see I have good store,
Wherein great Cesars Image is portrayde,
Therefore of gift, I will demand no more,
To buy me some food, let me not be denayd.
For five red herriugs, ten Crowns shall you have,
I Will pay it down, with vantage if you (...).
That damned coin quoth they we do de^est,
And therewithal thy self, which all this while,
Has^ kept our foes foul picture in thy chest,
Which seeks this holy City to de^i^e:
Thou getst no food, and therefore hold thy toungue
Hang, starve, and dye, thou can not dye more young.
O pardon yet (quoth she) my earnest speech,
Do not my words to poison so convert,
Take here my chain, I humbly do beseech,
Of pearl and Diamonds for one silly sprat:
One sprat (sweet men) cast upon the ground,
For this fair chain, which cost a thousand pound.
Talk not to us, quoth they of Iems and chains,
Of Diamonds, Pearls or precious rings of Gould,
One sprat to us is sweeter gotten gains,
Then so much silver, as this house can hold:
Gould is but dross, where hunger is so great,
Hard hap has he, that has but gould to eat.
With that the testie Soldiers get them out,
Proud of the purchased pray which they had got,
The woeful Lady e did they mock and flout,
Her plaints and tears regarding not a iott:
She sighs they smile, she mournes, and they rejoice,
And of their pray they make an equal choice,
But Megar famine covetous of all,
Envying those that should thereof have part,
In sharing out there purchasse bread a brawle,
Wherein one s^abd the other to the heart:
This fellow said the other did deceive him,
He swore again enough they did not leave him.
Lo thus about the victuals they did fight,
Look who was strongest bore away the prize,
And for a crust of bread, in dead of night,
They cut their Fathers throats in woeful wise:
The mother would her childrens victuals snatch,
And from his wife, the husband he did catch.
How the noble Lady and her young S^nne went to out the dung of beasts to eat,
being ready to dye with hunger, and could find none: showing what moan they
made coming home without,
But now of Miriams sorrow will I speak,
Whom the seditious Soldiers so distressed,
Her noble heart with girfe was like to break,
No kind of food had she, then to reliue her,
With gnawing hunger was she, sore oppressed
Nor for her child: which most of all did grieve her.
Alas quoth she that ever I was borne,
To see these gloomie days of grief and care,
whom this false world has mede an open scorn,
Fraught full of misery passing all compare:
Blessed had I been if in the painful birth,
I had received sweet sentence of my death.
Why has the partial heavens prolonged my life,
Above a number of my dearest friends,
Whose blessed souls did never see the strife,
How happy were they in their happy ends:
Great God of Abraham hear my mournful cry,
Soon rid my life or end this misery.
With that her little son with eager look,
Unto his woeful mother crying came,
His pretty hands fast hold upon her took,
Whose presence brought, her praying out of frame:
And to his Mother thus the child did say,
Give me some meat, that eat nothing to day.
I am (dear Mother) hungry at the heart,
And scalding thirst, makes me I cannot speak,
I feel my strength decay in every part,
One bit of bread, for me good Mother break,
My lesson I have learnd, where you did lay it,
Then give me some what: you shall here me say it.
The sighing Lady looking quite a-side,
With many ^obs sent from her woeful soul,
Wroung both her hands, but not one word replide,
Sighs stopped her tongue, tears did her tongue co^troul,
Sweet Lady mother, mother speak (quoth he?)
O let me not with hunger murdered be.
Dear child she said, what would thou have of me?
Art thou a thirst, then come and drink my tears,
For other succor have I none for thee,
The time has been, I could have giueu thee pears:
Rose coulered apples, cherries for my child,
But now alas, of all we are beguild.
But come quoth she, give me thy little finger,
And thou and I will to the back-yard go,
And there seek out a Cow-cake For thy dinner,
How say thou son art thou contented so?
The joyful child did hereat give a smile,
When both his eyes with water ran the while.
Then up and down with wary s^arching eye,
In every place for beasts dung does she seek,
As if a long lost Jewel there did lie,
Clo^e hidden in some narrow chink or creek:
When she looked and naught at all had found,
Then down she coucheth on the sluttish ground.
And with her fair white fingers fine and small,
She scrapes away the dust and draffe together, and so does search through out
the Oxes stall,
For dung or hoofes, or some old piece of leather:
But when in vain her pains she did bestow,
She paid her heart the interest of her woe.
And lifting up with sorrow her bright eyes,
She called her little Son to come away,
Who sought as fast for spiders, worms and flies,
As she for Ordure among the moldy hay,
O stay a while good mother did he cry,
For here even now I did a maggot spy.
At which sweet sight my teeth did water yet,
Even as you called, she fell her in the dust,
An hour were well spent, this prize to get,
To let her slip, I think I was accursed:
My hungry stomach, well it would have stayed,
And I have lost her I am sore afraid.
I, I, my Son, it may be so (quoth she,)
Then come away: let us together dye,
Our lucklesse stars alots it so to be,
Peace my sweet boy, alack why do thou cry,
Had I found any thing, thou should have seen,
That therewithal we would have merry been,
Then be thou still (my son) and weep no more,
For with my t^ares, thou kilst my wounded heart,
Thy need is great, my hunger is as sore,
Which grieves my soul, and pinches every part:
Yet hope of help alack I know not any,
Without, within, our foes they are so many.
Dear mother hear me one word and no more,
See here my foot so slender in your sight,
Give me but leave to eat my little toe,
No be^ter supper will I ask to night:
Or else my thumb: a morsel small you see,
And these two joints, me thinks may spared be.
My son quoth she great are thy cares God wot,
To have thy hungry stomach filled with food,
Yet all be it we have so hard a lot,
Dismember not thy self for any good:
No brutish beast, will do so foul a deed,
Then do not thou against nature so proceed,
But O my son, what shall I do quoth she*
My grief of hunger is as great as thine,
And sure no hope of comfort do I see,
But we must yield our selves to starve and pine:
The wrath of God does siege the City round,
And we within fell famine does confound.
The sword without, intends our desolation,
Consuming pestilence destroys here within,
Ciuell dissension breeds our hearts vexation,
The angry heavens, the same has sent for sin,
Murders, and ruin through our streete^ do run,
Then how can I feed thee, my loving son?
If pale faced famine take away my life,
Why then, with whom should I trust thee my sonen
Far here is no love, but hate and deadly strife,
Woe is that child, whose parents days are done:
One thee sweet boy no person would take pity,
For mild compassion, has forsook the city.
Once I retaynd, this joyful hope of thee,
When ripened years, brought thee to man's estate,
That thou should be a comfort unto me,
Feeding my age, when youthful strength did bate:
And have my meat my drink and cloth of thee,
Fit for a Lady of so high degree.
And when the span length, of my life was done,
That God and nature, claimed of me their due,
My hope was then, that thou my loving Son,
In Marble stone, my memory should renew:
And bring my corpse, with honor to the grave,
The latest duty, men of children crau^,
But now I see (my sweet and bonny boy)
This hope is fruitless, and these thoughts are vain,
I see grim death, has seaz'd my earthly joy,
I or ^amines dart has thee already slain:
Thy hollow eyes and wrinckled cheeks declare,
Thou art not marked, to be thy Fathers heir.
Look on thy legs, see all thy flesh is gone,
Thy ^ollie thighs, are fallen quite away,
Thy a^mes and hands, nothing but skin, and bone
How weak thy heart is, thou thy self can say:
I have no food, to strengthen thee (my child,)
And here thy burial would be too too vilde.
Wherefore my Son least ugly Ravens and Crows,
Should eat thy carcas^e in the stinking streets,
Thereby to be a scorn unto our foes,
And gaul to me, that gave thee many sweets:
I have prepaird, this my unspotted womb,
To be for thee an honorable Tomb.
Then since thou can not live to be a man,
What time thou might have fed thy aged mother,
Therefore my child it lies thee now upon,
To be my food, because I have no other:
With my one blood, long time I nourisht thee,
Then with thy flesh, thou oughtst to cherish me.
Within this womb thou first receiuedst breath,
Then give thy mother, that which she gave thee,
Here had thou life, then lie here after death,
Since thou had been, so welbeloude of me:
In spite of foes, be thou my daily food,
And save my life, that can do thee no good,
In blessed Eden shall thy soul remain,
While that my belly is thy bodies grave,
There is no taste of famine woe or pain
But joys eternal, more then heart can crave:
Then who would wish, in sorrow to persevere,
That by his death might live in heaven for ever.
The Lady with hunger is constrained to kill her best beloved and only Son,
and eat him: whose body she Roasted.
When this was said, her feeble child she took,
And with a sword which she had lying by,
She thrust him through turning away her look,
That her wet eyes might not behold him die:
And when sweet life was from his body fled,
A thousand times she kissed him being dead.
His mil^e white body staind with purple blood,
She cl^nsd and washed with silver dropping tears,
Which being done, she wipte it as she stood,
With nothing else, but her fair golden hairs:
And when she ^aw, his little lims were cold,
She cut him up, for hunger made her bold.
In many pieces did she then divide him,
Some part she sod, some other part she roasted,
From neighbors sight she made great shift to hide him,
And of her cheer, in heart she greatly bosted:
Ere it was ready, she began to eat,
And from the spit, plucked many bits of meat.
The smell of the meat is felt round about: the seditious Captai^^ thereupon
came to the Lady, and threatens to kill her for meat. Whereupon the Lady, sets
part before them.
THe sent thereof was straight smelt round about,
The neighbor then out of their houses ran,
Saying, we smell roast-meat out of all doubt,
Which was great wonder unto every man:
And every one like to a longing wife,
In that good cheer did wi^h his sharpest knife.
This news so swift, in each man's mo^th did fly,
The proud seditious, heard thereof at last,
Who with all speed, unto the house did hye,
And at the doors and windows knocked fast:
And with vilde words and speeches rough and great,
They asked the Lady, where she had that meat.
Thou wicked woman how comes this quoth they?
That thou alone have roast-meat in the town?
While we with griping famine dye each day,
Which are your Lords, and leaders of renown:
For this contempt, we think it right and reason,
Thou should be punished as in case of treason.
The lovely Lady trembling at their speech,
Fearing their bloody hands and cruel actions,
With many gentle words, did them beseech,
They would not enter into further factions:
But listen to her words and she would tell,
The certain truth, how every thing befell.
Be not she said, at your poor handmaid grieved,
I have not eaten all in this hard case,
But that your selves might something be relieved,
I have kept part to give you in this place:
Then sit you down, right welcome shall you be,
And what I have, your selves shall taste and see.
With diligence the Table then she laid,
And silver trenchers, on the board she set,
A golden salt, that many ounces wayde,
And Damask napkins, dainty, fine, and neat:
Her guests were glad to se this preparation,
And at the board they sat with contentation,
In massy silver platters brought she forth,
Her own Sons flesh whom she did love so dear,
Saying my masters take this well in worth,
I pray be merry: look for no other cheer:
See here my child's white hand, most finely dressed,
And here his foot, eat where it likes you best.
And do not say this child was any others,
But my own Son: whom you so well did know,
Which may seem strange, unto all tender Mothers,
My own childs flesh, I should devour so:
Him did I bear, and carefully did feed,
And now his flesh sustaines me in my need.
Yet allbeit this sweet relieuing feast,
Has dearest been to me that ere I made,
Yet niggardize I do so much detest,
I thought it shame, but there should some be laid,
In store for you: although the store be small,
For they are gluttons which consumes all.
Herewith she burst into a flood of tears,
Which down her thin pale cheeks distilled fast,
Her bleeding heart, no sobs nor sighs forbeares,
Till her weak voice breathed out these words at last:
O my dear Son, my pretty boy (quoth she)
While thou did live, how sweet wast thou to me?
Yet sweeter far, a thousand times thou art,
To thy poor mother, at this instant hour,
My hungry stomach have thou eased of smart,
And kept me from the bloody Tyrants power,
And they like friends do at my table eat,
That would have killed me for a bit of meat.
When this was said, wiping her watery eyes,
Unto her self, fresh courage then she took,
And all her guests, she welcomed in this wise,
Casting on them, a courteous pleasant look:
Be merry friends, I pray you do not sp^re*
In all this town, is not such noble fare.
The Captains and their company were so amazed at sight of the child's limbs
being by his mother set upon the table in platters, that wondering thereat, they
would not eat a bite, for the which the Lady reproues them.
THE men amazed at this uncouth sight,
One to another cast a steadfast eye,
Their hard remorcelesse hearts full fraught with spite
Were herewithall appalled suddenly,
And though their extreme hunger was full great,
Like senseless men they sat and would not eat.
O why quoth she do you refrain this food,
I brought it forth unto you for good will,
Then ^corne it not (dear friends) for it is good:
And I even now did thereof eat my fill:
Taste it therefore and I dare swear you will say,
You eat no meat, more sweet this many a day.
Hard hearted woman, cruel and unkind
Can thou (quoth they) so frankly feed of this?
A thing more hateful did we never find,
Then keep it for thy tooth, lo there it is.
Most vild and odious is it in our eye,
Then feed on man's flesh, rather would we dye.
Alack quoth she, does foolish pity move ye,
Weaker then a woman's, is your hearts become,
I pray fall too, and if that you do love me,
Eat where you will, and i will with you eat some
What greater shame to Captains can befall,
Then I in courage should surpass you all,
Why, wast not you, that did with many a threats,
Charge me with eager looks to lay the cloth:
And as I loved my li^e to bring you meat,
And now to eat it do you seem so loath?
Mo^e fit I should, then you, heerewith be moved,
Since it was his flesh whom I so deerly loved.
It was my son and not yours that is slain.
Whose roasted ^imbes lies here within the platter,
Then more then you I ought his flesh refrain,
And ten times more be grieved at this matter,
How chance you are more merciful then I,
To spare his flesh, while you for hunger dye.
Yet blame not me for this outrageous deed,
For wast not you that first did spoil my house?
And rob me of my food in my great need,
Leaving not behind a ratt or silly mouse:
Then you alone are authors of this feast,
What n^ed you then this action so detest?
The starued Jews hearing this doleful tale,
Were at the matter smitten in such sadness,
That man by man with visage wan and pale,
Dropped out of doors, accusing her of madness,
And noting we^l, their famine, war and strife,
Wished rather death, than length of mortal life.
And hereupon, much people of the City,
Fled to the Romans secret in the night,
Upon their knees desiring them for pity
To save their lives, that were in wo^ull plight,
And finding mercy, told when that was done*
How famine forced a Lady eat her Son.
Tytus the Roman General wept at the report of the famine in Jerusalem*
especially when he heard of the Mother that did eat her Child.
THe Roman General hearing of the same,
Tytus I mean, Vespasians famous Son,
So grieved thereat, that grief did tears constrain,
Which down his manly cheeks did streaming run
And holding up to heaven his hands and eyes
To this effect, unto the Lord he cries.
Thou mighty God, which guides this mortal round,
That all hearts secrets sees, and knows my heart,
Witness thou can, I came not to confound,
This goodly City: or to work their smart:
I was not author of their bloody iarrs,
But offered peace, when they embraced wars.
These eighteen months, that I with warlike force,
Besieged their Cittiy* (Lord thou know it well,)
My heart was full of mercy and remorce,
And they always did stubbornely rebel:
Therefore good Lord, with their most hateful rage,
And wondrous deeds do not my conscience charge
My eyes do see, my heart does likewise pity,
The great calamity that they are in,
Yet Lord, except thou will yield me the City,
I Will raise my power, and not behold more sin:
For they with famine are become so wild,
That hunger made a woman eat her child.
When Noble Titus thus had made his moan,
All those that from Jerusalem did fly:
He did receive to mercy every one,
And nourisht famisht men at point to dye:
But cruel Schimion that seditious Jew,
And Proud Iehocanan, more mischief still did brew.
For albeit brave Tytus by his power,
And warlike Engines, brought unto that plece,
Had laid their strong walls, flat upon the flower,
And done their City, wonderful disgrace.
Yet stubbo^nly they did resist him still,
Such pl^ce they gave, to their seditious will.
Tytus overthrowing the walls of Jerusalem enters the Cyty and Temple with his
power burning down the silue^ gate thereof, which led the way to the Sanctum
Sanctoru^: and setteh Soldiers to keep it from further hurt.
ABout that time with wondrous diligence,
They raised a wall, in secret of the night,
Which then was found their Cities best defense,
For to withstand the conquering Roma^nes might:
which once rac^t the C^tty needs must yield,
And Jews give place to Romans sword and shield,
Reno^ned Tytus well perceiving this,
To his best proved Captains, gave a charge,
That new raised wall, the Jews supposed blis,
Should scattered be, with breaches wide and large:
And hervpon, the troops together met,
And to the walls, their battering Engines set.
The fear of this, mademany a Jewish Lord,
That ioynde themselves with the seditious train,
To steal away, and all with one accord,
At Tytus feet, sought mercy to obtain:
Whose mild submission, he accepted then,
And gave them honor, mong'st his noble men.
By this, the mellow wall was broke and s^aled,
With fierce allarms, the holy town was entered,
Romans took courage, but the Jews hearts failed,
Thousands lost their lives, which for honor ventred:
Schimion, Iehocanan, all did fly for fear,
Jews mournd, and Romans triumphed every where,
The fair Temple, Gods holy habitation,
The worlds non pareli, the heathens wonder,
Their Cities glory, their joys preservation,
To the Roman power, must now come under:
There many Isralites for lives defense,
Had locked themselves, and would not come from thence
The famous City being thus subdued,
The Romans heads, with glad-so^e baies were crowned
For blesfull victory on their side ensued,
While on the Jews the worlds Creator frowned:
The Captains of the foul seditious rout,
To hide their heads did seek odd corners out,
The R^maines resting in triumphant state,
Unto the holy Temple turned their course,
And finding shutthe silver shining gate,
They fired it, retayning no remorce:
And when the fires flamde did sore abound,
The melting silver streamd along the ground.
Their timber work into pale ashes turning,
Down dropped the goodly gate upon the flower,
What time the wrathful Romans went in running,
Shouting and crying with a mighty power:
The glory of which place, their bright sight drew,
To take thereof a wondering greedy view.
Yet did that place but only lead the way,
Unto the holiest place, where once a year,
The high Priest went, unto the Lord to pray,
The figure of whose glory, did there appear:
Sanctum Sanctorum so that place was called,
Which Tytus wondering mind the most appalled.
Which holy holiest place, when Tytus saw,
Having a view but of the outward part,
So glorious was it that the sight did draw,
A wounderous reverence in his soul and heart:
And with all meekness on his Princely knees,
He honors there the Majesty he sees.
This place was closed in with goulden gates,
So beautiful and super excellent,
That Princely Tytus and the Roman states,
Said sure this is Gods house omnipotent:
And therefore Tytus who did love and fear it,
Commanded straightly, no man should come nere it.
And through his Camp he made a proclamation,
That whosoever did come near the same,
He should be hanged up, without compassion,
Without respect of birth, desert, or fame:
And more, a band of men he there ordained,
To keep the Temple not to be profaned.
The seditious set upon the Roman guard that kept the Temple, and suddenly
slew them: whereupon the Roman soldiers set fire on the golden gate of
Sanctum Sanctorum and spoiled the holy place with fire. Titus sought to quench
it but could not, for which he made great lamentation.
While qu^et thus the Roman prince did ly,
Without mistrust of any bloody broyle,
Proclaiming pardon, life and liberty,
To euey yielding ^^ule, in that fair soil:
A crew of ^rayt^rous Jews, of base condition,
Assailed the Roman guard, without suspicion.
All Tytus gallant Soldiers which he set,
So carefully, the Temple gates to keep,
Upon a sudden, they against them get,
In dead of night, when most were ^alne a sleep:
And there without all stay, or further words,
Each man they murdered on their drawn swords.
Not one escaped their bloody butchering hands,
Which noble Tytus hea^ing, grieved sore,
And thereon raised, his best prepared bands,
Slaying those Jews, and many hundreds more.
And with such fury, he pursued them still,
That who escapt, fled up to Syon ^ill,
But yet the Romans full of hot revenge,
For this vilde deed, by wicked Jews committed,
Troopt to the Temple, with a mighty swinge:
And having all things for their purpose fitted:
Did in their rage, set on fires flame,
Those goodly goulden gates, of greatest fame.
And as the flaming fire gathered strength,
Great spoil was practisd by the Roman rout,
The melting gould that streamed down at length,
Did gild the marble pauement round about:
The gates thus burned with a hidious din,
Sa^ctum Sanctorum Romans entered in.
Who having hereby won their hearts desire,
With mighty shootes they showed signs of joy,
While the holy place burnt with flaming fire,
Which did, earthes heavenly paradise destroy:
This woeful sight when Tytus once did see,
He sought to quench it: but it would not be.
For many wicked hands had busy been,
To work that holy house all foul disgraces,
Which Tytus would have ^au'd as well was seen,
But it was fier'd in so many places:
That by no means the spoil he could prevent,
Which thing he did most grievously lament.
He ran about and cried with might and main^,
O stay your hands, and save this house I charge ye,
Fetch water up, and quench this fire again,
Or you shall smart, before I do enlarge ye,
Thus some he threatened, many he entreated:
Till he was hoarse, with that he had repeated.
But when his voice was gone with crying out,
He drew his sword, and slew the disobedient,
Till faint and weary, running round about,
He sat him down, as it was expedient:
And there twixt wrath and sorrow he bewailed,
With froward Soldiers, he no more prevailed.
The Priests and Jews that erst themselves had hidden
Within the compass of that holy ground,
Against the Romans fought: and had abidden,
For to defend it many a bleeding wound:
But when they saw, there was no way to fly,
They lept into the fire, and there did die.
So long they fought, until the parching fire,
Did burn the clothes, from their sweating backs,
The more they fought, the more was their desire,
For to revenge the Temples woeful wrackes:
They laid about, as long as they could stand;
Or move a leg, or lift a feeble hand.
And all this while did noble Tytus mourn,
To see Sanctorum spoiled in such sort,
Laid on the ground, there did he toss and turn:
And smote at such as did to him report,
The woeful ruin of that holy place,
And from his sight, with frowns he did them chase
Titus with great reverence, entered into the Sanctu^ Sanctorum, and greatly
wondered as the beauty thereof, affirming it to be the house of the God of
heaven.
THe cruel fire having wrought her worst,
When that at length the fury thereof ceast,
Titus arose, all open and untrust,
Of many tears vnburdned and releast:
With head uncovered, mild and reverently,
Into Sanctorum humbly entered he.
And seeing the glory and magnificence,
The wondrous beauty of that sacred place,
Which there appeared, for all the v^hemence,
The flaming fire made, so long a space:
Tytus did stand amazed at the sight,
When he considered every thing a right.
And thereupon into this speech he broke,
How came I in this Paradise of pleasure,
This Place Celestial, may all souls Provoke,
To scorn the world, and seek no other treasure:
Do I from earth ascend by elevation?
Or see I heaven by divine revelation?
Vndoubte^ly the mighty God dwolt here,
This was no mor^al^ creatures habitation,
For earthly Monarkes, it was all to dee^e,
Fit for none, but him who is our souls salvation:
O ea^thly heaven or heavenly Sa^ntes receauer,
Thy sweet remembrance shall I keep for ever.
Now well I wot, no marvel it was indeed,
The Jews so stoutly stood in fence of this:
O who could blame them, when they did proceed,
By all devices to preserve their blis:
Since first I saw the Sun, I never knew,
What heavens joy meant, till I this place did view.
Nor did the Gentiles, without special cause,
From fardest parts both of the East and West,
Send heaps of gold by straight command of laws,
This sacred place with glory to inuest:
For rich and wounderous is this holy seat,
And in man's eye the Majesty is great.
Far does it pass the Roman Temples all,
Yea all the Temples of the world likewise,
They seem to this like to an Asses stall,
Or like a stie where swine still grunting lies:
Great God of heaven, God of this glorious place,
Plague thou their souls that did thy house deface'
Tytus, thus wearied, gazing up and down,
Yet not satisfied, with the Temples sight,
Departed thence, to ^odge within the town:
Things out of frame, to set in order right,
Where while he stayed the stubborn hearted Jews,
Did there most wicked actions daily use.
For when they saw that fire had so spoiled,
Sanctum Sanctorum in such pitious sort,
Their diuillish hearts that still with mischief broyled,
The treasure houses all, they burnt in sport,
And precious Jewels wheresoever they stood.
With all things else that should do Romans good.
The rest of the Temple, likewise did they burn,
In desperate manner, without all regard:
Which being wrought, away they did return,
But many escaped not, without just reward*
The Roman Soldiers, quickly quenched the fire,
And in the Temple wrought their hearts desire.
Where they set up, their heathen Idols all,
Their sence-lesse Images, of wood and stone,
And at their feet, all prostrate did they fall,
Their offering sacrifice to them alone:
In plain derision of the conquered sort,
Of whom the Romans made a mocking sport,
A false Prophet arose among the Jews, telling them that the Temple should
again be builded by it self, with out the help of man's hand, willing
therefore to destroy the Romans: which they going about to do, brought
further sorrow upon themselves.
A False and lying Prophet then arose,
Among the Jews, at fair Jerusalem,
Which then an absurd fancy did disclose,
Among them all, who thus encouraged them:
Most valiant Jews play you the men and fight,
And God will show a wonder in your sight.
Against the cursed Romans turn again,
And beat the boasting heathen to the ground,
For God will show unto your sights most plain,
His mighty power: if you do them confound,
The Temple by it self shall builded be,
Without man's hand or help, most gloriously.
That Jacobs God, thereby may show his power,
To those proud Romans: which do glory so,
In there one strength: tryumphing every hour,
In this our spoil, and woeful overthrow:
Then fight O Jews, the temple sanz delay,
Shall by itself be builded up this day.
The wild seditious believing this lie.
Did set a fresh upon the Roman band,
In such fierce sort, that many men did dye,
But yet the Romans got the upper hand:
Who in new wakened wrath, that late did sleep
Slew down the Jews like to a sort of sheep.
Schimion and Iehocanan come to seek peace with Tytus, but refuse to be in
sub^ection to the Romans: whereupon Tytus will show them no favor, but
presently assailed them with his power, whereupon Schimion and I^hocanans
followers by some, and some forsake them, leaving them in distress: who
there-vpon hid themselves in Caves.
THen came false Schimion and Iehocanan,
Chief Captains, to the seditious train,
With many followers, weapned every man,
Requiring peace, if peace they could obtain:
To whom Prince Tytus with his chiefest state,
Did thus reply you seek this thing to late.
How comes it now that ye entreat for life.
After so many mischeiefes by you wrought,
When you have slain and murdered man and wife,
And thousand thousands to destruction brought:
Who then as faint as ever he could stand,
Came to submit himself, to Tytus hand.
How often have I entreated you to peace,
And offered mercy, without all desert,
When you refusing it, did still increase,
Your traiterous dealings, your chiefest smart:
It pitt^ed me to see your woeful case,
With your innumerable men dead in each place.
How can I pardon these outrageous acts,
Your many murders and ^alse sedition,
With diverse other abominable facts,
For which I see in you, no hearts contrition:
You seek for peace, yet armed do you stand,
You crave for pardon, with your swords in hand.
First lay a side your swords and weapons all,
And in submiss^ue manner ask for grace,
So shall you see what favor may befall,
Perhaps I may take pity on your case:
And graciously withal your faults suspense,
And give you pardon, ere you go from hence.
With bended brows proud Schimion then did look,
On gentle Tytus: Iehocanan likewise,
In scornful manner all his speeches took,
And both of them disdainefully replies:
By heavens great God, we both have sworn quoth they
To make no servile peace with thee this day.
For never shall earths misery provoke,
Our undaunted hearts to stoop unto thy will,
Orbend our necks unto the Roman yoke,
While vital breath our inward parts does fill:
Then unto us this favor do express,
To let us part and live in wilderness.
At this contempt was Tytus greatly moved,
And does your pride continue yet quoth he?
Will not your impudency be yet reproved?
Nor yet your stubborn hearts yet humbeld be?
And dare you say that you will swear and vow,
That to the Roman yoke you will not bow,
At this his wrath was wounderous sore inflamed,
Who hereupon gave straight commandment,
By strength of sword to have those rebels tamed,
On whom the Romans set incontinent:
Who chased the Jews and scattered them so sore,
That they were found to gather head no more.
For secretly the Jews from Schimion fled,
By some and some they all forsook him quite,
With false Iehocanan which so misled,
And for^^ the^ against them selves to murderous fight:
Who leaving them, to noble Tytus came,
Desiring grace, who granted them the same.
Iehocanan and Schimion seeing this,
They were forsaken, and left post alone,
In their distress lamented their amiss,
Closse hid in caves, they lay and made their moan:
Where they remained perplexed with famine great,
Till they were ready, their own flesh to eat.
Iehocanan enforced by hunger comes out of his cave and submits himself to
Tytus, who caused him to be hanged.
AT length out of a deep dark hollow cave,
With bitter hunger Iehocanan was driven,
Like to a Ghost new risen from his grave,
Or like Anotamy of all flesh beryuen:
Who then as faint as ever he could stand,
Came to submit himself, to Tytus hand.
Into this Princely presence when he came,
With all submission fell he at his feet,
Saying, O King of most renouned f^me,
Here am I come as it is right and meet:
To yield my self into thy Princely hand,
Whose life does rest, upon thy great command,
My disobedience, do I sore repent,
That ever I, refused thy offered grace,
Bewayling my ^ewd life, so badly bent,
And my foul actions, against this holy place:
Yet with thy mercy shadow my amiss,
And let me taste what thy compassion is,
Not from my self, did all my sin proceed,
Though I confess, my faults were too too many,
But was prouokt to many a bloody deed,
By him that yet was never good to any:
Blood-thirsty Schimeon, led me to all en^ll,
Who does in malice, far exceed the Devil.
Too long alas, he ouer-ruld my will,
And made me actor, of a thousand woes,
What I refused his outrage did fulfill,
And his devise, did make my friends my foes:
Then worthy Victor, mittigate my blame,
And let thy glory, ouer-spread my shame.
No more quoth Tytus, stay thy traitorous tongue,
Infect us not with thy impoysoned breath,
I Will do thee right that have done many wrong,
Thy end of sorrow, shall begin thy death:
And by thy death, shall life arise to such,
To whom thou thoughtst, a minutes life too much.
With that he wild his Captains take him thence,
When he with iron chains was ^ettered fast,
And afterward (meet meed for his offense)
Through all the Camp they ^ed him at the last,
That he of them, might mocked and scorned be,
And then in chains they hanged him one a tree.
This was the end of proud Iehocanan,
That in Jerusalem did such harm,
And this likewise was that accursed man,
That in his malice with a fierce alarm*
Burnd all the Victuals laid in by the Peers,
That was enough to serve them twenty years.
Which was the cause, that in so short a space,
So great a famine fell within the town;
Yea this was he burnt, King Agrippaes place,
And in the temple slew so many down:
But not long after he was gone and dead,
Out of his den did Schimion show his head.
SCHIMION in like sort being driven with hunger out of his den, apparelling
himself in princely attire, desired to be brought before ^itus, supposing he
would have saved his life: but he commanded his head to be stricken off, and
his body to be cut in pieces and cast to the dogs.
WHo staring up and down with fearful looks,
Least any one were nigh to apprehend him,
Like to a Panther doubting hidden hooks,
That any way might lie for to offend him:
Driven out with famine, hungry at the heart,
He sought for succor of his earned smart.
And having dressed himself in Kingly tire,
In richest manner that he could devise,
That men at him might wonder: and desire,
To know what Monarke did from earth arise,
Far off he walked as it were in boast,
And showed himself unto the Roman host.
For his great heart could not abid to yield,
Though gnawing hunger vexed his very sou^e:
Thus faintly walked he up and down the field
With lofty thoughts: with famine did control,
Supposing firmly, though he lived in (...)
He should find favor, for his high estate:
For though (quoth he) I did the Romans wrong,
Yet in my deeds, I showed Princely courage,
Bearing a heart, that did to honor throng,
And there upon their Camp so often did forage,
To haughty acts all Princes honor owes,
For they must think that war has made us foes.
Considering this, Prince Tytus may be proud,
To such an enemy he may favor show,
And herein may his action be allowd,
That magnanimity he will nourish so:
And by his mercy make a friend of him,
That in his wars so great a foe has been.
Which in this honor, he himself did flatter,
Of him the Romans, had a perfect sight,
And round about him, they themselves did scatter,
Yet were afraid, to come within his might:
And that they feared this was the only reason,
They knew his craft, and doubted hidden treason.
But Schimion seeing, that they shund him so,
He called unto them in courageous wise,
Maiestically walking to and fro,
And in this sort, his speech to them applies*
If any gallant Captain with you be,
Let him approach, and talk one word with me.
With that stepped out a brave courageous Knight,
With weapons well provided every way,
A noble Roman of great strength and might,
Who with his weapon drawn these words did say
Tell me, who art thou that in such attire,
Walks in this place, and what is thy desire?
I am (quoth he) undaunted Schimeon,
The wrathful Captain of seditious Jews,
That slew the Romans, in their greatest throng,
The deed whereof I come not to excuse:
Nor do I pass what you can say thereto,
I am the man made you so much a do.
Yet let me thus much favor crave of thee,
As to conduct me to great Tytus sight,
Thy noble friend: but enemy to m^,
Yet doubt I not, but he will do me right:
Bring me to him, what chance so ere I find,
That he may hear, and I may show my mind.
The Roman Captain his request fulfild,
To Tytus royal presence was he brought,
Whose hateful person, when the Prince beheld,
He did refuse to hear him speak in ought,
Away with him he said, let ^im be bound,
For of all woe this villain was the ground.
And like a Captive first let him be led,
About the Camp to suffer scoffs and scorns,
And after that strike of his hateful head,
The mansion house of mischiefs pricking thorns:
And let his carcass be in pieces torn,
And every gobbet unto dogs be thrown.
What Titus charged was put in execution,
And in this sort was Schimio^s hateful end,
Who went to death with wondrous resolution,
Not like a man, but like an hellish fiend:
Thus Titus conquered that most precious Iem,
The beauteous City fair Jerusalem.
The number of those that had bin slain at the siege of Jerusalem, and the
number of the Prisoners that Titus carried with him to Rome.
THE perfect number of the people there,
The which with hunger and with sword was slain
A leaven hundred thousand did appear,
As books of records did declare it plain:
Beside all such as did unburied lie,
And diverse more that did in fire dye.
And when to Rome the Conqueror went his way,
The number of his prisoners were full great,
Full sixteen thousand men that instant day,
Were carried captive to the Roman seat:
Among the rest the man that wrote this story,
Who by his wisdom purchased endless glory.
Thus Christ's prophecy truly came to pass,
Which Forty years before he had expressed,
But with the Jews of small account it was,
Till they did find themselves so sore distressed:
He soght their life, his death they wrought with spite.
Wishing his blood on them and theirs to light.
The which according to their own request,
The Lord in wrath did perfectly fulfill,
There channels ran with blood and did not rest,
Their blood was spilt, that Jesus blood did spill:
God grant we may our hateful sins forsake,
And by the Jews a Christian warning take.
FINIS.

