THE OFFICE AND AVTHORITIE OF SHERIFES.

Abridged by the former Author MICH. DALTON, of Lincolnes Jnne, Esquire.

Mon intent est de bon^ amoure. IN DOMINO (...) printer's or publisher's device

LONDON, Printed for the Company of Stationers. 1628.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable, THOMAS, Lord Coventrie of Allesburrough, Lord Keeper
of the Great Seal of England, and one of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy
Council.
Right Honorable,
THe Office of a Sheriff, as it is a Place of great Authority and Trust, in
the government of this Commonwealth, so withal is it and Office of great
peril and danger, not only to the Sheriff himself, but also to the Kings
Majesty, and to his Subjects in general, if the same be not truly and
carefully executed in every behalf. It were therefore meet, that such as
shall be appointed thereto be men of Worth and Note, not only for the
sufficiency of their estate, but also for their sincerity and honesty:
Neither are all these sufficient, where the High-Sherife shall trust his
Vnder-Sherife with the whole business. And it is further to be wished, That
the Gentlemen of the Country, upon whom the burden of this office lies, would
keep this their Office in their hands, and their Vnder-Sherife in their
houses, that so by their continual eye over their Officers, and care of their
business, they might the better discharge their duty herein. And for that I
conceived, that a plain discovery of this Office would give encouragement to
the Gentry, so to undertake the same, the consideration thereof caused me
formerly to present to the view of the world, my Labors in this Business
(though before they came to any ripeness: And albeit I have sithence learned
little of the Mysteries and secrecy of the same Office (I mean as it is
commonly practiced by some under Sherifes) and therefore cannot yet bring it to
any perfection: Nevertheless I thought it fit according to my poor ability
still to endeavor my self therein, and to bring the same at least to a more
short, easy, and ready Method. And accordingly I have herein set down their
Authority and Office, far more plainly and briefly than before, with
reference to my book at large, where the Reader may receive more full
satisfaction. And I have presumed to labor in this business, the rather to
give occasion to others, better able and experienced, to perfect a work so
needful. I acknowledge this my weak undertaking, far unworthy of your
Lordships judicious Eyes, much more unworthy so great a Patronage; and yet for
that I stand bound in duty to submit and lay down my Labors where I owe my
Service; and again for that your Lordship in regard of your high Place, has a
principal charge under the Kings Majesty, for the appointing and naming of
these great Officers of Justice; and in regard of your profound Judgment,
Wisdom, and Experience, your Lordship is best able to judge of the
mischiefs, and to give remedy therein; as also for that I have a peculiar
relation to that Honorable Court, where your Lordship is supreme Judge: To you
therefore I humbly and submissiuelie present this little Treatise. The God of
Heaven and Earth preserve your Honor long amongst us, to the good of his
Church, and of this Commonwealth.

Your Lordships, in all humble duty, MICH. DALTON.

To the Noble and Right worthy Knight Sir Gyles Alington.
Sir,
THough it be most safe and easy for a man (with the Psalmist) to commune
with his own heart in silence, according whereto the Proverb also says, Been
vixit qui been latuit; yet for that it is more behoouefull to the Common good
(either in Church, or Common wealth, for one of which all men are ordained)
that such Talent wherewith God has enabled any, be it never so small, should
be employed and communicated to the good of others; The consideration hereof
has moved me to adventure this, (as other my former weak Labors) to the
view of the World. And although I have offered in this my labor, to the
honorable Patronage of one to whom I am in duty bound; yet withal, out of
that respect which I do owe to you, I am bold to tender also this little
Treatise to your view, and to desire your acceptance hereof, as a token of my
Love to you, to whom I must acknowledge my self, for many your favors, much
obliged, and shall ever remain,

Your brother in law, unfeignedly honoring you, MICH. DALTON.

The Office and Authority of Sherifes.
CHAP. I. Their Name, Antiquity, and Charge.
COmes, Comes.
The Earl or Countee, had anciently the government of the County or Shire
under the King, and that charge and custody which the Sheriff now has for the
executing of all matters of Justice, was anciently committed to the Earl.

Vicecomes, Vicecomes.
the Sheriff, est vicem gerens, seu vicarius Comitis, or is as the Earls
Deputy, and was first ordained to do that service in the executing of matters
of Justice within the County in the absence of the Earl, which the Earl
should do.

After Earls by reason of their high employments and atttendance upon the King
(being not able to follow the business of the County) were delivered of that
burden, (only enjoying the honor) and the authority for the administration
and execution of Justice, which the Earl formerly had, is now committed to the
Sheriff.

And yet the Sheriff has this his authority from the King, by his Letters
Patents immediately, and not from the Earl.

Subuicecomes.
And the Sheriff may make his Deputy, scz. his Vndersherife, who in matters
concerning their ministerial Office, at this day wholly executes the place in
the right of the High-sherife.

But where the Sheriff has a judicial power, or is made Judge of the cause,
there it seems he must execute it in person, and not by his Vndersherife, or
other Deputy. See hereof hic, Cap. 4.

Sherifes were long before the Conquest, Their antiquity.
and were first ordained by King Aelfred, about An' 872. as some write: yet
others think them to have bin long time before.

They are the Kings Deputies within their County, and their charge Charge.
is to defend and keep the Kings peace within their said County, and to
suppress and punish malefactors there; to execute the commandments, Process,
and Precepts of the King and his Justices, and to keep the Kings rights of his
Crown within their County.

They are also to be attendant upon the King in time of war; and to cause
all the People of their County to go with the King for to defend the Land
against the Kings enemies.

They also have the administration of Justice (in some cases) committed unto
their charge within their County, scz. within their Turn they are to enquire
of and deal with matters concerning the King and Commonwealth, and in their
Countie-Court, to hear and determine particular suits and matters between
party and party.

What manner of persons.
They must therefore be men of sufficient estate of lands within the same
County, and such as may attend it wholly.

They are (usually) to be nominated yearly by the Lords, etc. and after are
appointed by the King.

Their election or nomination shall be yearly in the morrow after Al Souls, at
the Exchequer.

This Office is determinable Determinable
at the Kings pleasure. But it cannot be determined or apportioned as for one
Town or Hundred, or other part of the Shire, but must continue entire for the
whole County: except where any Town is made a County of it self, and has a
Sheriff within the same Town, etc.

Neither can this Office be determined, nor any part thereof, until a new
Sheriff be made, except by death of the King, or of the Sheriff.

Neither may the Sheriff be abridged of any thing incident or belonging to his
Office.

CHAP. 2.
THe new elect Sheriff at his entrance into his Office must first (by himself
or his Deputy) enter Recognisance with sufficient sureties in the Exchequer
(in the Kings Remembrancers Office there) before he receives his Patent; 1.
Must ent^ Recogn^.
or exercises any part of his Office, sub poena a hundred pounds.

The form of the Condition of which Recognisance you may see hic, Cap. 125.

Next, he must procure his Patents, 2. Must pr^cure his Patents.
(from one of the Clerks of the Chancerie) scz.

The Patent of his Office, whereby the custody of the County is committed to
him.

The Patent of Assistance, whereby all the Kings Subjects within that County
are commanded to be ayding to him.

He must also procure a writ of discharge to the old Sheriff, to discharge him
out of his Office; the which would be delivered with speed, for until that be
delivered to the old Sheriff, he may still do execution of all Process, or
other thing belonging to his Office.

3 Must take his Oaths.
Also the new Sheriff (before he meddles in his Office) must take two corporal
Oaths.

The one, to the Kings supremacy.

The other, concerning the due execution of his office.

These Oaths may be taken before one of the Judges of the Assizes of that
County, or before a Master of the Chancerie, or else before Commissioners in
the Country, by a Dedimus potestatem: The return whereof see hic, Chap. 81.

But until the new Sheriff has taken these oaths, he may not intermeddle in
his office.

If he shall exercise his Office before he has taken both these Oaths, he is
fineable in the Star Chamber.

So if he shall not perform his oath concerning his office (in every behalf)
he is fineable as aforesaid: besides, it is perjury.

The parts of his Oath concerning his Office, are these.

First, Truly to keep the Kings rights of his Crown, scz. his Lands, rents,
franchises, suits, etc.

Secondly, Not to respite the K. debs

Thirdly, to do right to all in all things belonging to his Office.

Fourthly, to acquit at the Exchequer the Kings Debtors, he having received
their debt.

Fifthly, truly to serve and return all Writs.

Sixthly, Nota.
Not to have to his Vndersherife any of the Sherifes Clerks of the year last
past.

Seventhly, to take no Baylifes but such as he will answer for, and such as be
true and sufficient in the County.

Eighthly, To make each of his Baylifes be sworn for the true execution of
their Office.

Ninthly, to receive no writ unsealed.

Nor any sealed, but by justices having authority, etc.

10 To suppress Heresies, (called Lollaries) and to assist the Ordinary
therein. See hic Cap. 100.

11 To be resident in his County, except by license.

12 Not let to farm his Sherifwick, nor any Bailiwicke.

13 To set and return reasonable and due issues, after the estate of the
parties.

Nota.
14 To make the Pannels himself, and of persons dwelling near, sufficient, and
not suspect nor procured.

15 To execute the Statutes of Winchester, and of Vagabonds.

Now concerning the statute of Winchester, the Sheriff

1 First, is to proclaim the same statute in every Hundred of his county,
and in every Market town (by his Baylifes) four times in the year; yet this
seems now little in use.

2 He is to keep horses and armor, to follow hue and cry.

3 If any suspected persons shall be taken upon Hue and cry, or by the
Constables or townsmen upon their Watches by night or by day, and shall be
delivered to the Sherif, he is to inroll the same, and to commit them until
the coming of the Justices of Jail delivery; and in the mean time the
Sheriff is to enquire of the offendour by a Jury, whose presentment therein he
must return before the said Justices, with the bodies of the offenders: But now
these Offenders are dealt withal by the Justices of peace at the Sessions, and
therefore the Sheriff not troubled with them, (as it seems) otherwise than by
inquiry in their Torn, which see hic postea Cap. 107.

But concerning the Statutes of Vagabonds, I see not what the Sheriff is to do
by virtue of his Oath, (or Office, by any Statute now in force in that behalf)
save only to arrest and commit them as suspected persons. Hic cap. 4.

The Sheriff also is to take the Oath of Allegiance whenever it shall be
lawfully tendered to him.

The new Sheriff (at or before his first County Court, 4 Must take all
prisoners and Writs.
or upon the writ of discharge delivered to his predecessors) must take over
from the old Sheriff, all his prisoners (which are in the Jail) by their
names, and all his writs precisely by view, and by Indenture to be made
between the old Sheriff and the new.

These Indentures must contain and express,

1 All the causes which the old Sheriff has against every prisoner (at the
peril of the old Sheriff) with the prisoners names.

2 All Writs, with the names of the Plaintifes and of the Defendants, and the
days of the Return.

For the new Sheriff shall be charged only with such prisoners, and with such
causes (or Executions) whereof he shall have notice given him from the old
Sheriff.

The new Sheriff is not bound to receive any prisoner from the old Sheriff, but
only at the Jail: And yet if the new Sheriff shall receive the prisoner out
of the Jail, the old sheriff is discharged by such delivery, and receiving of
the prisoner.

Also the new Sheriff may compel the old Sheriff to make delivery by
Indentures, of all prisoners, and of all executions against them, and yet if
the new Sheriff will receive them otherwise, it suffices.

But where the old Sheriff shall happen to die during the time of his Office,
there without delivery or notice, the new Sheriff is chargeable presently with
all prisoners; and is also to take notice of all Writs in the hands of his
predecessor, etc. and of the Contents thereof, and of all prisoners, and the
causes of their commitment, as it seems.

The form of the Indentures for seting over prisoners and writs between two
Sherifes, see in my book at large.

Note, that by the death of the king (or by his Resignatio) the authority of
the Sheriff (and of all his officers) does determine and cease: And therefore
it is used presently in the next Kings time, to sue out new Patents of this
Office, and of Assistance.

The old Sheriff may execute his office until he has his Writ of Discharge;
after he is discharged ( scz. after his writ of Discharge delivered to him, or
delivered to the Vnder-Sherife sitting in the County Court) neither he nor his
Vnder-Sherife ought to make any Warrant for the arresting of any man; Neither
may they make return of any Writ: And yet the Writs which are set over in the
Indenture between the Sherifes, if they have been executed by the old Sherif
the^ they must be returned by him, or in his name, and indorsed or subscribed
by the new Sheriff, after this manner:

Istud breue prout indorsatur mihi deliberatum fuit per R.S. Armiger' nuper
vic' prox, praedecessor' meum, in exit' ab Officio suo.

A. B. Miles vicecom'.

Also if the old Sheriff has served any Process, and before the day of the
Return thereof he be difcharged, (and that it happen to be left out of the
Indenture) and fears that the Writ should be embeaseled by his successor, he
may deliver the Writ so by him served, into the Court; and thereupon the said
Writ shall be delivered in Court to the new Sheriff, and a special entry
thereof shall be made in discharge of the old Sheriff.

Also the old Sheriff after he is out of his Office, may notwithstanding by
^he appointment of the Court, amend any Return by him erroniously made.

The old Sheriff after he is discharged, may also sell any goods formerly
extended by him whilst he was in Office.

Plus hic cap. 22.

5 The new sheriff at his first County Court holden (after his election, and
the discharge of the old Sheriff) must cause to be read his Patent of his
Office, and his writ of Assistance; and must also nominate his Vndersherife,
and must depute or appoint and proclaim four Deputies (at the least) in the
County, to make Repleuins in the sherifes name; which Deputies must dwell not
past twelve miles asunder, in every quarter of the County one.

Also the new sherif before he return any writ, must have a deputy of record
in every of the Courts of Chancerie, Kings Bench, Common place, and Exchequer,
there to receive all writs and Warrants to be directed to the Sheriff, etc. sub
poena 40. li. and treble damages, etc.

And such Deputies must be made by Warrant of Attorney from the High-Sherife,
and in writing.

CHAP. 3.
NO Sheriff, (Vnder-Sherife, nor Sherifes Clerk) shall abide in his Office
above one year, sub poena 200 pounds.

No Sheriff or Vnder-Sherife shall be in the same Office again (within the
same County) within three years after, etc. sub poena 200 li.

But yet persons inheritable to the office of Sheriff or Vnder-Sherife; and the
Sherifes and Vnder-sherifes of London and of Bristoll are excepted.

Also the King by his Prerogative may grant the Office of a Sheriff for years,
life, or in fee.

Every Sheriff must dwell and be resident in person within the County where
he is Sheriff, during the time of his Office, except he be otherwise licensed
by the King.

A Sheriff has no authority or power within another County: Neither may they
exercise their Office out of their County.

And yet the sheriff being out of his County, may make a pannell, or may make
any Return.

Also by force of the Kings Writ (to carry a prisoner out of the County,
etc.) the Sheriff may carry or send by baston, his prisoner to the place
appointed him, although it be through diverse other Counties.

Also if a prisoner of his own wrong shall make an escape, and fly into
another County, the Sheriff (or his Officers) upon fresh suit may there take
him again.

No Sheriff shall let to farm his Office in any manner; nor his County, nor
any of his Bailiwickes, or Hundreds, nor any of his Courts, sub poena forty
pounds.

And yet the Sheriff may appoint under him his Vnder-sherife, and his Baylifes
and Deputies, all which do use their place in the right of the Sheriff, and as
his servants; but they may not be Lessees or Fermors thereof, and so to occupy
their place, or take the profits thereof in their own right.

For the Sheriff may not let the profits, issues, or revenues of his County,
or the profits pertaining to his Office: Now these seem to be the fees,
annuities, rents, fermes, issues, fines, amerciaments, escheats, estrayes,
goods of Felons and fugitives, and other like casual profits belonging to the
Sherifes office to gather; and where the King makes one Sheriff sine compoto,
there the Sheriff shall have these things or profits to his own use, otherwise
the Sheriff shall be accountable for them; and yet he is not accountable for
them, saving in a gross sum for the ferme of the profits of the County.
Tamen quaere, See hic ca. 11. and 125.

CHAP. 4. The authority and power of the Sheriff.
THe authority of the Sheriff is in some cases absolute or judicial; and in
some cases ministerial.

Their absolute or Judicial power is in these things following.

By the ancient Common Law the Sheriff and Coroners were Judges, and in the
Turn Sherifes, and in the County Court the Sheriff and Coroners together did
hold plea of felonies, and of other things pertaining to the Crown. And in the
time of the Saxons, most suits in the Common Law were Viscountiel, and held
before the Sheriff in the County court: yea, until the Norma^ Conquest, a
jurisdiction of causes Ecclesiasticke was also exercised jointly by the Bishop
and sheriff, at the county Court. But now by the Statute of Magna Charta cap.
17. no Sheriff shall hold plea of any thing pertain^^g to the Kings Crown,
scz. They shall not hold plea of any Freehold or Lands, nor of any felony, or
trespass vi and armis, or of any other thing touching the Crown, or against
the peace of the King, his Crown, or dignity, to hear and determine the same.

And yet Appeals of Felonies, and of Mayhem and Rape, may be sued by Bill, in
the County Court at this day. Hic cap. 111.

Also the Sherifes in their Court Leet or Turn may enquire of Treasons,
homicides, and other felonies, and of common Trespasses; and in some cases may
imprison, fine, bind over, or otherwise punish offenders, Hic cap. 109.

In the County Court they may hold plea of lands by a Iusticies, but otherwise
they cannot.

In their County Court they may also by playnt hold plea de auerijs captis and
detent^s, etc. which plea properly belongs to the Crown.

In their County Court they may take a Recognisance for a deb^ between party
and party. Hic cap. 115.

He which has a pardon for any manner of felony, ought to be bound to the
good behavior before the Sheriff and Coroners, etc.

Also by the common Law the Sheriff is a principal conseruator of the peace,
and therefore upon request to him made, he may cause another to find suerties
for the peace, and may take the same suertie by Recognisance and that ex
Officio.

Yea the Sheriff may apprehend, arrest and commit to prison all Affrayors, and
such others as shall in any sort break or attempt to break the peace, in his
presence and within his County; and may cause them to find sureties for the
peace.

But yet a Sheriff ought not to execute the office of a Justice of peace in the
same County, (by force of any commission of the peace) during the time that he
is Sheriff.

Also every Sheriff by virtue of his Office may take Posse Comitatus in these
cases following: scz.

When any of the Kings enemies shall invade the land.

When any rebellion, insurrection, or riot, etc. shall be.

To pursue, apprehend, and imprison Traitors, Murderers, Robbers, and other
Felons, and that as well within Franchises or Liberties, as without.

To execute the Process and Warrants of the King, and of his Justices. Plus
hic cap. 95.

Also upon notice of any riot, unlawful assembly, Affray, or other offense
against the Peace, the Sheriff ought to raise the power of the County (if need
be) to apprehend and imprison such malefactors.

They may arrest and commit to the Jail all persons by them suspected, which
be vagrant, or which shall walk by night or day and be of evil name or fame:
And it seems they may bind over such persons with Sureties by Recognisance,
to the next Sessions or Jail delivery.

They may arrest and commit to the Jail all such as go or ride armed
offensiuely, scz. in affray of the Kings People; and may take away their Armor
to the Kings use, and prcise the same by the oaths of some present.

If any Subjects, Purueyour, or Cator shall take any man's goods, or any
carriage, against the ownors will, the Sheriff upon request and notice thereof,
is to arrest and imprison the offenders, etc. sub poena 20. li.

The Sheriff or Vnder-sherife, ( sub poena 100. li.) must join with the
Justices of peace,

1 To arrest and imprison Ryoters, etc.

2 To record the Riot in writing.

3 To enquire thereof by a Jury, if they were gone before the coming of the
Justices and Sheriff.

4 And to certify the King and his Co^ncell thereof, if the truth cannot be
found upon such inquiry.

5 If the truth thereof cannot be found by reason of any maintenance, they
must also certify the names of such maintainers, and their misdemeanors, sub
poena 20. li.

If any persons shall make resistance or disturbance, to the Sheriff (or his
Officers) in the execution of the Kings Process, it seems the sheriff may
presently imprison such Resisters.

Sherifes may bail prisoners in diverse cases Hic cap. 96.

Sherifes also have the keeping, and the Cognizance, and the correction of the
Assizes of bread and ale, and of false weights, and measures, and may enquire
thereof in their Turn, and may adiudge them to bodily punishment.

See plus hic postea tit. Torn ca. 109.

Also in the execution of some Writs, (as in a Writ of Redisseisin, in a Writ
to enquire of Wast, and in a Writ of admesurement, etc.) the Sheriff is both a
Judge and an Officer, and so has a twofold authority: scz.

As a Judge, to hold plea of the matter, to examine it, to give judgment, and
in some cases, to commit to prison, yea, and to make out Process against the
offenders.

As an Officer, to execute the Process, and to return the same.

But this judicial or absolute power the Sheriff cannot grant it over, neither
may he execute it by his Vnder-sherife or other Deputy, (as it seems) but
must sit and execute it in person, although it be within a Franchise.

CHAP. 5. The ministerial Office consists principally in these things
following:
1. TRuly to keep the Kings rights of his Crown, (within his County) scz.
the Kings Lands, Franchises, suits etc. Cap. 6, 7, 8.

2 To gather the profits and moneys due to the King within the County, Cap. 9
etc.

3 To seize to the Kings use the goods of Felons, Fugitives, and persons
outlawed, treasure troue, waifed goods, wrecks, etc. Cap. 14 etc.

4 To execute and return all writs and commandments directed to him from any
of the Kings Courts, Cap. 20, etc.

Note, that whatsoever the Sheriff shall do (in these former businesses)
Virtute Breuis, scz. by virtue of the Kings Writ, or other Warrant from the
Kings Courts is warrantable.

But what he shall do virtute, or color officij, is not always excusable, or so
safe

5 To impanell Iuries, and return them, Cap. 85, etc.

6 To be attendant upon the Judges in their Circuits, etc. Cap. 98.

7 To assist the Justices of peace, and to execute their Precepts, Cap. 99.

8 To execute the Precepts of other Commissioners, Cap. 100.

9 To execute the Precepts of Eschetors and Coroners, cap. 100.

10 To assist the Ordinaire in suppressing heresies, Ibidem.

11 Duly to keep his Courts, scz. His Turn, Cap. 106.

His County Court, Cap. 110.

12 To proclaim certain Statutes, etc. Cap. 102.

CHAP. 6.
FIrst, The Sheriff by his Oath is truly to keep the Kings Rights, scz. that
they be not decreased, cancelled, or withdrawn, be it in his lands,
franchises, suits, or other things.

Concerning the Kings Lands.

In ancient times Sherifes in their Tornes did enquire of alienations in
Mortmaine, and of alienations (by the Kings Tenants) without License; and in
such cases the sheriff might have seized the lands (so aliened) to the Kings
use, as lands forfeited or escheated.

At this day, where any man shall encroach upon the Kings lands, or upon the
Kings Highway, or shall levy or make any house or building, wall, or hedge,
etc. upon the Kings land or highway, Or shall make any enclosure thereof, these
are purprestures, and to be enquired of and reformed by the sheriff in his
Torn; and they may be seized by the sheriff into the Kings hands, or may be
pulled down, etc. Hic Cap. 107. Where without any offense found, or other
matter of Record, there is a possession in Law vested in the King, of any
lands, etc. scz. where the Freehold is cast upon him in law, there it seems
the Sheriff, or Escheator, ex Officio, may seize and take the Issues and
profits of the same lands, to the Kings use, making account for the same; As
where any lands, etc. shall come to the King by descent, Remainder, or Reuerter.

Also the Kings Officer may seize these things following, as Royalties
belonging to the King by his Prerogative, or otherwise coming to the King or
Crown by escheat or forfeiture, and to answer the issues and profits thereof,
etc. As

First, the lands and profits of the lands of aliens, within their County.

The lands and profits of such lands as come to the King by Attainder, Escheat,
and alienation in Mortmaine.

The mean profits of lands for intrusions and alienations without License.

But in most cases for Lands or Tenements, or the profits thereof, there must
first be an office found for the King, ( viz. an inquiry must be made by
twelve men upon their oath, to find the Kings title, and the certainty what
Lands or Tenements they be, and the yearly value thereof) before the Officer
may seize them.

And yet in these cases following, the Sheriff or the Escheator may ex officio,
(as it seems) and without any Office found, seize the same. scz.

In cases where any are attainted (during their lives) of high Treason: (and
here they shall forfeit all their lands and hereditaments in fee simple, or fee
tail.

So where the Kings Tenant in fee simple is attainted of petty Treason, or of
Felony, and is put to death, or dies of himself, the Kings Officer may seize
the same; for here a possession in Law vesteth in the King.

And in these cases the King shall have the forfeiture of their lands from the
time of the offense.

Also where a possession in Law of lands, etc. is cast upon the King by
descent, Reuerter, Remainder, or Escheat, vt supra.

So in cases of Wardship and Primer seisin; or during the vacancie of a
Bishopric: In which three last cases the possession in law of a Chattell is
vested in the King.

But in other cases the Officer may not seize any lands or Tenements, nor the
profits thereof, without an office found for the King; or other matter of
Record and Process, scz. a Scire facias made out against the parties, and
returned, etc.

As where the King is entitled to enter for a Condition broken, or for
Mortmaine, or for alienation without license.

So in case where the King is entitled to seize the temporalties of a Bishop
for a contempt.

So in Cases of Ideocie, Lunicie, and the like.

So where the King is to have Annum diem, and vastum, of the lands of persons
attainted.

Also where an Office is found which does not entitle the king to the
possession by Entry, but only die action, there the Officer must first have
process or other warrant for to seize the land, etc.

As where it is found by an Office, That the Kings Tenant for life or years,
has done wast.

Or that his Tenant in fee simple has cessed by two years.

Or that his tenant in fee, has made a feoffment by collusion, contrary to the
^^tute of Marlebridge.

^ote where the Office is found before the Escheator, there the Escheator is
chargeable upon his account.

But of lands whereof the Office is found before Commissioners, there the
sheriff shall be charged.

And yet neither of them shall be charged, but where there is an Office found,
(or that they shall meddle ex officio, etc.) And where there is an Office
found, they shall be charged only according to the yearly value found by the
Office.

And therefore in all these former cases, where the Sheriff shall seize any
lands or tenements, or the profits thereof, it is safest for the sheriff that
there be an Office first found thereof; or at least for him to have the kings
writ, other warrant of law so to do.

But the Escheator is more specially appointed for the finding out of the Kings
title to Lands, Tenements, and or other things.

CHAP. 7. Franchises.
A Franchise is a Royal privilege in the hands of a subject: And such are
every Liberty or commodity which of their own natures are appertaining to the
King, and are derived from the Crown, and by the special gift or grant of the
king, are come to a common person, or subject.

Of these some are more Royal; as authority to pardon Treason, Felony, Vtlary,
etc. Or to make Justices and the like; which none can do but the King. 27. H.
8. cap. 24.

Some are less Royal; as Conusance of Pleas, Chases, Parks, Warrens, Fayres,
Markets, Toll, Courts, Leets, or Hundreds, Wayfes, Estrayes, Wreckes, Catalla
felonum, fugitiuorum, and vtlagatorum, the correction of the Assizes of bread
and Ale, Pillory, tumbrell, and the like; these a subject may have.

Now if any man do hold, or use any of these last sort of Franchises, without,
or contrary to the kings grant or lawful Prescription, it seems to be
enquirable in the sherifes Turn, as a Purprestor.

Again as it is parcel of the Sherifes oath to keep the Kings Franchises, so
the Sheriff may seize to the Kings use, ex Officio, many of these things; as
namely wayfes, estrayes, wreckes, and felons, and vtlaws goods, etc. except
where some other person has the same by Charter, or by Prescription.

Note in the former cases (Capite precedente) the king is to have seisin, or
possession of the lands themselves, So as the King may let them, etc. But where
the king is not to have seisin of the land it self, but is only entitled to
the profits of the lands, there the sheriff ex Officio, and without any office
found, may seize to the Kings use, the profits of such lands: As the lands of a
Clarke convict of felony.

Also the profits of the lands of persons outlawed in a personal action, the
Sheriff (or Escheator) may seize ex offiico. See hic Cap. 15. what the Officer
may seize, do or take, in the name of the profits of lands.

Also goods Goods.
and chattels of felons, fugitives, and the like, the sheriff may seize ex
officio.

And yet dicitur that the Escheator is rather, and more usually accomptable,
for these: And that the Sheriff is not acccomptable, or chargeable for these,
save in a gross sum, for the form of the profits of the County. See plus
hic cap. 14 and 125.

And note that no subject can have these things, scz. bona seu catalla felonum,
fugitiuorum, and vtlagatorum, but by Charter, and not by Prescription.

Also Franchises or Liberties seized into the kings hands upon judgment given
in a Quo warranto, the sheriff shall answer the profits thereof to the kings
use.

But the Sheriff must first have a writ or precept directed to him for the
seizing of diverse Franchises, before he may seize them; for that there be
diverse Franchises which may not be seized, but at the Kings suit in a Quo
warranto (which writ is to try the validity of the Franchise, etc.) as
Conuzance of Plees, correction of the Assizes of bread, Leets, Hundreds,
Fayres, Markets, and the like.

CHAP. 8. Suits.
IT is parcel of the Sherifes Oath truly to keep the kings suits.

Now Suite is a service which a man ought to do, by reason of his land and
tenure; and to perform this he ought to go to the Court of the king (or of
some other) there to do that which appertains to the nature of his suite.

And both the Sherifes Courts, scz. his Torn and County Court, seem also to
be (both of them) the Kings Courts, by reason that the suite belonging to them
both is a Suite Royal, and due by reason of Resiancy within the County: And
therefore as the sheriff by his oath stands bound to keep the kings suits,
So inclusiue, he stands bound duly to keep his said two Courts, and to see
that all Suitors belonging to the same Courts, give their attendance, and do
their suit and service there.

Besides, the sherifes Torn is principally to cause every man to appear there
in person, to do their Allegiance to the King, and there to be sworn the
Kings Liegemen; And the sheriff there also is to enquire of things pertaining
to the King and Commonwealth, and to preserve diverse of the Kings rights, and
to reform and redress diverse common Nusances, and trespasses upon the
presentment of the suitors.

Also by the word Suits may be understood the kings Suits in law, scz. That the
Kings Suits in Law shall be preferred, and that the sheriff for the kings
profit therein, is to do his best endeavor according to his office, scz. That
the king be first paid, and his debt first leuyed, vide hic cap. 10. 19. 25.
and 58.

CHAP. 9. Rents.
THe sheriff by his Oath is also bound not to assent to decrease, to lessing,
ne concealment of the Kings rents.

Now the sheriff is Balliuus Comitatus, and as a Baylife of a Manor is to
gather up his Lords rents, so the sherifes Office is to gather up within his
Bayliwicke the Kings rents and moneys: though at this day for the kings rents
this rather belongs to the kings Rece^uers, scz. to gather up the Ordinary
Rents of the Kings lands.

And yet if the Sheriff shall distraine the Kings farmor or tenant for Rent due
to the King, and shall account for the same in the Eschequor, it is a good
justification for the Sheriff, in an action brought against him for taking the
Tenants cattle.

Also the Sheriff is accomptable to the King, of all Farms, Rents, Issues, and
profits of the County, which run in account under the name of Viscontiels; scz
for these the Sherif so soon as he is made Sheriff is accomptable yet in a
sum in gross.

But for the extreats of the green wax, and for Fynes and Amerciaments,
Issues, the Kings debts, and such, the Sheriff is not chargeable, nor to levy
until they be estreated unto him, or the same without process or other
warrant; and then when he has levied them, he is chargeable.

Also for the kings Ordinary Rents, the Sheriff (upon process to him directed
for the leuying thereof) may leuy the same, and that either upon the body or
goods of the Kings tenant, or of his sureties; or upon the lands of his
Tenants, or upon his heirs, or executors, or other possessors of his lands or
goods.

Note that there be certain fermes called Viscountiels, for which the Sheriff
for his time pays a certain Rent to the king, and makes what profit he can
of them; and for these the Sheriff is accomptable, vt supra, scz. in a sum in
gross, and presently.

And these Viscountiels are said to be certain duties of ancient time due to
the king, etc. scz. for Castle guard, for the Sherifes aid, for the Leet fee,
etc. And these are commonly called Certainties, which are gathered up by the
Sheriff or their baylifes.

CHAP. 10. The Kings Debts.
THe Sheriff also upon Process (as upon the green wax scz. upon the Estreat
to him delivered out of the Eschequor under the Seal of that Court) is to leuy
the kings debts.

And this the Sheriff may do either upon the body or goods of the Debtor, or
his sureties; or upon their lands in their own hands, or in the hands of the
heirs, feoffees, or any other person clayming or having the same from them by
descent, or by purchase.

Also the Executors, Administrators, Assigns, and other possessors of the
goods of the Kings Debtor, are chargeable to the kings debt.

And upon Process etc. the Sheriff may seize, (inroll, praise,) and sell the
goods of the kings debtor being dead, that praising of the goods must be per
visum vicinorum, etc. and according to the value of the debt.

But goods, or a lease for years, sold away by the Debtor bona fide, are not
liable thereto.

Also upon process, the Sheriff may distreine for the kings debt, in all
places within his County; and may impound the distresses in a common pound; and
after 15. days may sell the same away, if the debt be not satisfied in the
mean time.

But if any bring the Tally of payment of this debt in the Eschequor, the
distress shall cease.

Also if the debtor brings the Tally of any Sheriff or Baylife, of payment made
to them of the thing demanded, and will find Sureties to appear in the
Eschequor upon the next account, etc. the distress shall cease.

Also if the Kings Debtor shall find sufficient Sureties to the Sheriff to pay
the Kings Debt, before the day of the Return of the writ, the Sheriff must
deliver the distress.

These distresses made by the Sheriff, must be reasonable, after the value of
the debt; and must not be of Plow Cattle, nor of Sheep, if the Officer can
find other sufficient distress; nor shall be driven too far.

The reasonableness of the Distress must be by estimation of neighbors; scz.
That the goods be praised by neighbors.

Note that in these former cases where the Sheriff, etc. comes to levy or
distreine for the Kings debt, he must first show to the Debtor (demanding the
same) the process or Estreates under the seal of the Eschequor, for the
leuying thereof.

Also the Sheriff shall make Tallies or acquittances to all such as shall pay
him the debt: And the Sheriff must quite the Debtors thereof, at his next
account in the Eschequor, hic cap, 13.

If the Debt once paid be another time demanded of the party, he shall
recover treble damages against the sheriff, etc.

But the Sheriff for the Kings debts, etc. do by any Ecclesiastical person,
may not distreine in the Church., nor in the ancient fees or passions of the
Church, nor in the Kings high way, if he can find goods sufficient elsewhere.

Neither may the Sheriff distreine or take for the kings debt, etc. due by any
Ecclesiastical person, any goods which do belong to the Church, or to the
Parish.

The Sheriff may not distreine upon the wifes Dower, or inheritance, for her
husbands Debt due to the king after the Couerture. So he may not distreine
upon a joint Estate purchased by, or assured to the husband and wife, for this
debt due after.

What other goods the Sheriff may not distreine or meddle with for the Kings
Debt. See hic cap. 15.

But the kings Debtors, their bodies, Lands, and Goods, and their Heirs and
Assigns, and their Executors and Administrators, and all other possessors of
the goods (after their death) are chargeable.

Also the Rents of their Farmours or Tenants, yea the Tenants themselves, their
goods, are liable to pay the Kings debts, etc.

Note that the Kings Suits shall be preferred, and his debts shall be first
paid.

But for the kings Debts, the Sheriff is not chargeable or accomptable, neither
may he distreine for, or otherwise leuy the same, without Process, or other
warrant.

CHAP. 11. Issues.
THe word Issues (in our Law) seems to be taken three ways, or in three
manners to this our purpose.

1 First, For the Issues and profits of lands or tenements; as where the King
is entitled to have the Lands or profits of lands of persons attainted or
outlawed, or for alienation without License, or in mortmaine, for a condition
broken, or the like; whereof postea.

2 Secondly, For such Issues and profits of the County which go under the
name of Viscountiels, whereof hic Cap. 3. and hic postea.

3 Thirdly, For Issues to be lost for default of appearance, ( scz. by Jurors,
or by the Tenant or Defendant, etc.) of which here.

For this last sort, these Issues are sometimes set by the Court, as an
Amerciament, fine, forfeiture, pain, or punishment, for default of appearance
of Jurors, Mainpernors, or Pledges, and sometimes of Witnesses: And these
Issues or profits thus growing due to the King, are to be levied by the
Sheriff, etc.

Sometimes these Issues are set and returned by the Sheriff, to the end to
cause an appearance of Jurors, and of the Tenant and Defendant, and these also
are to be levied by the Sheriff to the Kings use.

Sometimes the lands themselves shall be seized by the Sheriff into the Kings
hands, for default of appearance of the Tenant in a real Action; as in a grand
Cape, or a petite Cape: And in these and the like cases, where by Writ the land
is seized into the Kings hands, the King shall have the lands to his own use,
and the Sheriff shall be charged with the Issues and profits of the said
Lands: from the time that the Lands were so seized by him, etc. Vide hic Cap.
62.

What is contained under the name of Issues, See Cap. 89.

How much the Sheriff must return in issues upon the Defendant or Tenant, see
Ibidem.

What Issues he must return upon Jurors, Cap. 90.

Upon whom, and what lands such Issues shall be levied, Ibidem.

If the Sheriff shall return a Iuror in issues, who is not sufficient, the
Sheriff is punishable, Ibidem.

So if the Sheriff shall return any issues upon any Iuror or hundred or, which
was not lawfully summoned, Ibidem.

Issues.
If the Sheriff shall return the Issues of any Recognisance, Pledge, or
Mainpernor, which at the time of the Return was not sufficient to answer the
said Issues and amerciaments, the Sheriff shall be charged there in the
Exchequer.

For all manner of Issues and profits of the County, which run under the
name of Viscountiels, the Sheriff so soon as he is made Sheriff, is
accountable for the same, yet in a sum in gross.

But for other Issues lost for default of appearance, the Sherif is not
accountable, nor shall be charged therewith until they shall be estreated
under the Seal of the Exchequer, and that the same estreats shall be delivered
to him: Neither may the Sheriff levy the same without such Warrant.

If such Issues lost for default of appearance, shall be returned by the Sherif
upon any man, the party has no remedy, be the Issues never so great.

Now for the first sort, ( scz. for the profits of lands) after the death of
the Kings Tenant in Capite, and an Office found, the King shall have Primer
Seisin, scz. the Issues and profits of all their lands from the time of the
death of his Tenant. Hic Cap. 6.

Also the King shall have the Issues and profits of the lands of such his
Tenant, aliening without license, scz. from the time of the Office found, the
Kings Tenant who gets Liuerie out of the Kings hands wrongfully, shall
answer the Issues behind, etc.

Where the King enters for a Condition broken, or for a Mortmaine, etc. the
King shall be answered of the measure, Issues, and profits of those lands, scz.
from the time of the kings title first accrued.

And of the Issues of the lands of felons, Fugitives, and Outlawes, etc. scz.
from the time of the Attainder, etc. Hic Cap. 14.

And so in all these cases the King shall be answered of all the Issues of the
lands, after an office thereof found; but before an Office found, the Sheriff
or Escheator is not to meddle. Hic Cap. 6.

An Abator shall be charged (and not the heir) for his time.

If such lands (whereof the King is to have the mean issues or profits) shall
be in diverse men's hands after the kings title accrued, every of them shall
answer for his time.

Issues lost for default of appearance either by the tenant, or in any other
case of a Distress infinite, as in case of Jurors after a venire fac, the
Sheriff upon the Estreats out of the Eschequor, etc. may levy the same upon
the lands in the hands of the delinquent of his wife of his heir in Tail, of
his Successor of his Lessee or farmour of him in reuersion of the purchaser,
yea in the hands of a stranger, whose beasts are their leuant and couehant.

And upon these Estreates the Sheriff is to leuy and gather up accordingly
these Issues, and to bring them into the Eschequor, and there to account for
them.

If any Officer, etc. shall collect or levy any Issues Estreated (to him) of
any other than of the right person charged by the Estreate with the payment of
the said issues, they shall be punished. Plus hic Cap. 89. and 90.

CHAP. 12, 13. Amerciaments and Fines.
AN Amerciament is properly a penalty assessed upon an Offender by his equals
(pro pares) scz. by the Country upon Oath: or assessed by the Court upon some
Officer of the Court.

A Fine has diverse significations; but to this purpose a Fine is most commonly
taken for a sum of money, which is set or assessed upon an Offender in some
Court of Record, by the Court or Judge there for some contempt or offense, and
which the offender does give for, and in satisfaction of his offense, default,
or contempt.

Again, that which is assessed by the Court upon an Officer of the Court for
misdemeanor, is called an Amerciament Royal; But being assessed upon an
Estranger for misdemeanour, it is called a Fine.

All Amerciaments and Fynes (for misdemeanors* contempts, defaults, or other
Offense) set or assessed upon any Offender in any of the Kings Courts, the
Sheriff upon Process or Estreats out of the Eschequer, etc. is to gather up
the same, and to account for the same in the Eschequer.

Those Estreats must rehearse and show the cause of the Amerciaments, etc. See
hic cap. 90.

What persons, and for what causes men shall be amercied, see my book at
large, and hic cap. 115.

Such lands, and such persons as are chargeable or liable to the payment of
Issues, shall also be chargeable to all Amerciaments and Fynes assessed in
any of the Kings Courts; whereof see hic antea cap. 11.

But Sherifes shall not be charged with, nor accomptable for any amerciaments,
issues, or fynes, other than those for which they shall have warrant to leuy
under the Seal of the Eschequer.

Neither are they to gather or leuy any amerciaments, issues, or Fines, until
they have received such warrant or Estreat under the seal of the Eschequer.

The king shall have all Amerciaments, Fynes, Issues, and forfeitures lost or
forfeited, before any of his Judges or Justices in any of their Courts or
Sessions; Or forfeited in the Courts of Eschequer, of Wards, or of the Duchy;
or before the Steward of the kings House, the Commissioners of Sewers, and the
Clarke of the market, etc. but these must be first Estreated into the
Exchequer, and from thence process goes out to the Sheriff to leuy the same
as aforesaid.

And those Estreats shall mention how much every one is to pay; and by those
Estreats, the Sheriff is to receive the kings debts, and these issues, fynes
and amerciaments, and to make acquittances or tails thereof to the parties,
and thereof to acquit the Debtors at his next account, Hic cap. 10, and 90.

And yet note that the Estreates of the Justices of Peace be an immediate
warrant for the Sheriff, to leuy not only the Fynes and Amerciaments, but also
all other issues and forfeitures whatsoever arising before them. Hic 125.

The King shall have all Amerciaments, fines, issues and forfeitures, forfeited
in any of the Sherifes Courts within Wales; and the Sherifes of Wales shall
account for the same: but not so of other Sherifes in England.

By the Statutes of 2. and 3. E. 6. cap. 34. it appears that Sherifes shall
be accomptable for all Fynes for Alienations and Intrusions, made by the Kings
Tenants, etc. within their County, as well as for Fines imposed upon
Offenders: And for such Alienation or Intrusion (after an Office thereof found)
and process out of the Eschequer received, the Sheriff or Escheator may seize
the lands for the fine.

CHAP. 14. Forfeitures.
Where the Sheriff may seize the Lands, Lands.
or profits of the lands of persons attainted for Treason or felony, etc. See
hic cap. 6,

For misprision (or concealing) of Treason, the offender being attainted, shall
forfeit to the King, the profits of his lands, etc. during his life.

In case of Praemunire, the Offender shall forfeit his fee simple lands for ever
and the profits of his intayled lands during his life.

Felons condemned, or which be fugitives, the king shall have the mean profits
of their freehold lands, from the time of the felony committed, until an
Office, etc. found for the king; and the year and day next after the Office
found.

And yet by some opinions the king shall have the profits of their lands, but
for the year and day after their attainder,

For petty Treason, or felony, the King shall have the profits of their lands
intailed, during the Offenders life,

So if Tenant in Dower, tenant by the Courtesy, or Tenant for life, commits
felony, etc. the king shall have the Escheat but during his life.

Where the person attainted is seized in right of his wife, the king shall have
the profits of such lands, during the husband and wifes life. Of Lease for life
or years, he forfeits the Term.

And in these cases the Officer may seize the profits of such lands, to the use
of the king. See hic cap. 6.

But in cases of Heresy, Coniuration, Witchcraft, Sodomie, and the like, there
shall be no forfeiture of lands for that the offenses be spiritual.

Goods.
All goods and chattells, real, and personal, mooueable and immovable, of
persons attainted for treason, felony, misprision, or Praemunire, or for
heresy, coniuration, or witchcraft, etc. shall be forfeit to the king. scz.
all such goods as they shall have at the time of their attainder.

And these the Sheriff or other Officer may seize ex officio.

And in these and all other forfeitures, the Town is chargeable with the
goods; and therefore they also may seize them wheresoever they be.

It seems by Master Glanuile, That in his time, for theft the Sheriff
himself had the felons goods, which were forfeited to his own use. But now
the Statute de Praerog. Regis, cap. 16. gives all felons goods to the king,
the words whereof are Rex habebit omnia catalla felonum, dampnatorum, and
fugitiuorum, etc,

And under this word Catalla, be comprehended Leases for years, the issues of
lands and tenements, corn growing, debts due by obligation, Statutes or
Recognizances, or upon an account, goods wrongfully taken from the felon, and
stolen goods, and Debts due upon a simple contract, etc.

An obligation made to two, or two possessed of a horse, ox, or other entier
chattell, and the one of them is attainted, the king shall have the whole debt
due upon the obligation, as also the horse or ox, etc,

But note that always when any forfeiture is of any selons goods, it ought to
appear of Record.

Neither may the Sheriff (or other Officer) seize the goods of any person
imprisoned (or indicted) for felony, before he be attainted of the same: but
yet the Officer may cause surety (presently upon the taking of the felon) to
be given that the goods be not imbeazeled. etc. and for want of Surety, the
Officer may seize them, and may preise them, and deliver them to some of the
neighbors of the town where the goods are, by them safely to be kept until
the Offender be convicted, or acquitted; yielding to the felon reasonable
maintenance thereout for himself and his family; so long as he shall be in
prison.

Also where one is found guilty before the Coroner; of the death of another, or
where it is found before the Coroner that one did fly for felony, in these
cases the Officer may presently seize upon their goods, without any conviction.

And if a man shall fly for felony, though his goods be not thereby presently
forfeited, yet the Sheriff may seize his goods, and the profits of his lands to
the kings use, until the fugitive shall be attainted, or acquitted.

Upon a fugam fecit presented before the Coroner, the goods ought presently to
be seized by the Sheriff or his Officers, and praised by an Enquest, and the
Sheriff shall cause the appreisement to be entered and enrolled in the Coroners
Roll, and shall then deliver the goods to the Town, etc. who shall be
answerable to the king for the same,

But for the issues and profits of the lands of felons, and fugitives, the
Sheriff is chargeable therewith (and not the Town) and the Sheriff shall seize
them into the kings hands without taking any Enquest.

A man arraigned for felony, stands mute, or challenges above 35, without
cause, he shall forfeit his goods.

A Clerk convict, and a Clarke attaint, shall forfeit their goods.

A man abiures before the Coroner for felony, he shall forfeite his lands and
goods: otherwise where a man does abjure for heresy, trespass, or other
offense.

A man arrested for felony, makes resistance, and so is killed, he shall
forfeit his goods; and yet no attainder. So felo de se, shall forfeit his goods.

But an infant, Non compos mentis, or a Lunatike kills himself, they shall
forfeit nothing.

If a Parson, (or other Ecclesiastical man) shall commit felony, or shall be
vtlawed, or otherwise shall forfeit his goods, the Sheriff, etc. may seize his
goods, and his Tithes received, wheresoever they lie or be.

The petty Jury attainted in a Writ of attaynt, shall forfeit all their goods,
and the profits of their lands during their lives. Affrayors before any Justice
sitting in place of Judgment, shall forfeit their goods, and the profits of
their lands.

So Affrayors in Westminster Hall, sitting any of the kings Courts.

Persons wearing any privy Armor in the kings Palace, or in Westminster Hall,
shall forfeit their Armor.

Persons riding or going armed Offensiuely, forfeit their Armor, and the
Sheriff must seize it, preise it, and shall be answerable for it. See plus hic,
cap. 11 12.52.

CHAP. 14. Other forfeiture of Goods.
GOods stolen and after wayued, scz. left or cast away by the felon (when he
is pursued) are forfeit to the king. And the Sheriff or any other may seize
them to the use of the king:, but if the felon had not the goods with or about
him when he fled, then they are not forfeit,

Goods confiscate, scz. goods stolen (or found in the felons possession) which
are lost by default of clayming them, or by disclayming them, etc. such goods
are forfeit to the king, and the Sheriff shall be charged therewith.

So of Goods stolen, if the owner shall not persecute and give evidence
against the felon to attaint him.

Estrayes, scz, where any beast or cattle, or swans comes within any
Lordship, and none knows the owner thereof, then it shall be seized to the
use of the King (or of the Lord, etc.)

But the Sheriff or other Officer that shall seize an Estray, ought to
proclaim it according to law, scz. (Once in the Church, and) in the two next
market towns.

Deodands, scz. any goods causing the death of a man shall be forfeit.

Note that the Jury which do find the death of the man, must also find and
preise the Deodand; and the Sheriff may presently seize the same for the king;
Or may leave or deliver them to the town; and the Sheriff shall be charged to
leuy the price thereof of the town, whether the same were delivered to them to
keep or no.

Goods of Egyptians, the Sheriff within one month after the arrival may seize
them to the Kings use.

And yet every person that shall prove by two credible witnesses before the
Sheriff, that any of those goods were craftily or feloniously taken from him,
shall be presently restored thereto by the Sheriff, upon pain to forfeit the
double value.

A man vtlawed for Treason or felony, shall forfeit his lands, etc. And all his
goods which he had at the time of the exigent awarded, or at any time after.

And although he shall be afterward acquitted of the felony, or shall yield
himself upon the exigent, yet he shall forfeit the profits of his lands, and
all his goods, for that such absenting himself, is accounted a flying in law.

Also for vtlary in any personal action, he shall forfeit the profits of his
lands, and all his goods real and personal which he had at the time of the
Vtlary pronounced; and the Sheriff or Escheator ex officio may seize to the
kings use, all the profits of the lands in his possession, and may mow, sever,
and take all the corn, and grass growing, and may take the feed and herbage
of the grounds, and take the rents of his fermors to the kings use.

But the kings Officers may not meddle with the possession of the freehold
lands, scz. to plow, sow, grant or let the same.

Neither may they crop any trees, nor cut any underwoods (growing up- the
Freehold) nor any other thing which is not cut or taken yearly.

And yet if Tenant for years be vtlawed, the kings Officer may seize that
land and term, and may plow, sow, and occupy the same land, and take all other
profits thereof as the termor might.

Also goods which the party vtlawed, has jointly with another, the kings
Officer may seize the whole for the king.

Goods bayled (by the party vtlawed) to another to keep, may be seized and
taken for the king.

The party vtlawed makes his Executor, and dies, his goods in the hands of his
Executor may be seized for the King.

A Ward shall be forfeited by vtlarie.

But no goods annexed to the freehold shall be seized for vtlary.

Dear in a Park shall not be forfeit by vtlary in a personal action.

Goods which the party vtlawed has as Executor, shall not be forfeite.

Goods demised or letten, nor goods pawned, or lawfully distreined, shall not
be seized for vtlary, quousque, etc.

Also where the Lord of a Manor or Franchise has by charter the goods of
felons, fugitives, or outlawes, there the Sheriff is not to meddle with, or to
seize such goods, etc.

When the Vtlary with the Exigent is returned by the Sheriff into the Court,
etc. then is it a good Vtlary to disable the party to sue, etc. And yet before
the return it is sufficient for the king, and therefore the kings Officers may
seize the goods of the party vtlawed presently after the vtlary pronounced, and
keep them.

But the Sheriff may not sell the parties goods before the Capias vtlagatum
comes to him: And upon the Capias vtlagatum, the Sheriff may either sell
them, or keep them to the Kings use.

And yet for that the Sheriff (by this writ) is not commanded to sell the
goods, therefore if the vtlary be reuersed by a writ of Error, the defendant
shall have restitution thereof, (although they were sold) except that the
Sheriff has accounted for them in the Eschequor before the Vtlary reuersed.
Vide hic cap. 59.

The Sheriff may not arrest the body of him that is outlawed in any personal
action, without a writ of Capias vtlagatum: But otherwise where the Vtlarie is
for Felony or Treason.

If the King shall pardon a man who comes in upon the Capias vtlagatum,
before that the party be satisfied, yet if it be after judgment, the Sheriff
must take heed that he does not suffer him to escape until the party be
satisfied.

Also upon Vtlarie returned by the Sheriff, a writ sometimes goes out to the
Escheator, to seize the goods and chattells, and the profits of the lands of
the party vtlawed.

CHAP. 16. Treasure Troue.
TRreasure Troue is where any money, plate, or bullion is found hidden in the
ground or earth in any place, the owner thereof being unknown: And such money
or goods the King is to have; and the Sheriff is to seize it to the Kings use.

Goods wrecked, or wrecke of the Sea scz. Goods cast or left upon the land by
the Sea; the King is to have (except where the Lord of any Franchise, or
Manor, etc. has it by Charter, or by Prescription.)

And where the King is to have these goods, the Sheriff may seize them to the
use of the King, and shall preise them by a Jury, and then he may keep them
himself; or deliver them to the town where they are found to keep, and then
they shall answer for them.

But the owner has a year and a day (after the seizure by the Officer) to
claim the^; so that if any within the year and day after the seizure, shall
prove that the goods were his, they shall be presently restored to him, paying
reasonable charges.

And therefore if the goods be such as may be kept sweet and good by the space
of a year, there the goods must be preserved during the year, otherwise the
Officer which seiseth them is punishable: But if the goods will not keep so
long, there the Officer may sell such goods, and deliver the money taken for
them to the town to keep; or else he may keep it himself, and answer for it.

But this claim, and proof of the property, by the owner is given only where
a man, dog, or some other quick thing escapes out of the Ship alive.

Note that except the Ship do perish (and be drowned) the goods cannot be
forfeite, nor said to be wrecke.

The goods of an infant, woman covert being Executor, a man in prison, or
beyond the sea, being wrecked at the sea, and not claimed within the year and
day, etc. shall be forfeit.

The King also is to have Whales, and other Royal fishes, etc,

CHAP. 17. Wards, Escheats, Idiots.
BY the Statute de Scaccario made An. 51. H. 3. Sherifes shall seize and keep
all such Wards, and Escheats, (that are not in fees) as belong to the King,
which be within their shires, and of the issues thereof they shall be
answerable in the Eschequer, when they account for their countries: and they
might let to ferme, or otherwise such Wards, and Escheates; and might seize
their bodies, etc.

Also by the Statute made 2. and 3. E. 6. Cap. 34. it seems that Sherifes
shall be accomptable for all Wards, Marriages, and Releifes, etc,

But at this day all the Kings Wards are to be within the order, survey, and
governance of the Court of Wards, together with their lands, rents, and issues
thereof. And the Escheator is now the Officer appointed to inquire thereof, and
to seize their lands, etc.

CHAP. 18.
BY the aforesaid Statute de Scaccario, Escheats.
Sherifes shall seize the Escheats that fall, to remain to the King in fee.

If the Kings Tenants (in fee simple) dies without an heir, and no other
person enters, the King is in by Escheate, and has a freehold without any
Office, and the Kings Officer may seize it for the King.

In cases of Heresy, Coniuration, and the like, there is no Escheat, hic cap.
14.

All Escheats within any City, perteine to the King.

Plus hic cap. 6.7. and 14. concerning Escheats, and the Sherifes duty therein.

CHAP. 19.
IF there shall be an Idiot ( scz. a natural fool) there may be a Writ
awarded to the Sheriff, Idiots.
or Escheater, both to examine him, as also to inquire by a Jury of such Idiot,
and of his lands, etc.

But there can be no seizure of the lands without an Office first found; nor
of the profits of their lands.

Also the King shall have the custostody of an Idiots body, and goods, as well
as of his lands, and that during their lives; providing them things necessary
for themselves, their wives, and family.

But all Idiots and their lands, etc. shall be in the ordering of the Court of
Wards.

And yet the King nor his Officers ought not to seize the lands (nor the Issues
of their lands) of an Idiot, until he be found an Idiot by an Office.

Lastly, the words of the Sherifes Oath are, You shall truly keep the Kings
rights, and all that belongs to the Crown: Now these former (and other the
Kings Prerogatives of the like kind) although they are a great part and portion
of the rights, profits, and commodities of the Crown, yet this Prerogative
does not only extend to such benefit and profits as the King is to have from
his Subjects as aforesaid: But also to the Kings person, to free it that it
shall not be subject to any man's suite; and also to his possessions, so that
they may not, nor can not be taken from him by any violence, or wrongful
disseisin, and to his goods and chattells, so that they are under no tribute,
toll, or custom, nor otherwise distreinable.

And in all these, and other the Kings Prerogatives, the Sheriff is to do his
best endeavor for the keeping and preserving thereof, so far forth as
belongs to his Office.

Note that the Kings person is so sacred, as that no violent hands may in any
case be laid upon him: neither may he be sued by action (as a common person or
subject may.) But wheresoever the King shall seize any man's land, or take away
any man's goods, (having no Title) there the Subject is driven to suite his
Soueraign by way of Petition only.

For the Kings possessions, or lands, that they cannot be extended or taken in
execution. See hic cap. 26.

So all the Kings lands are exempted from distresses for rent, etc.

For his Goods also, they cannot be taken for Wayfes, Wreckes, or Estrayes.

The King being Nonsuit, etc. cannot be amerced.

That he shall find no Pledges de prosequendo hic cap. 45.

CHAP. 20.
Direction and execution of Writs.
NExt, The Sheriff is duly and truly to serve and execute al manner of Writs,
Process, Judgments, and commandments, made or directed to him from any of
the Kings Courts.

And indeed the office of a sherif co^sists chiefly in the execution and
serving of Writs and Process of Law; and to do this, he is the immediate
Officer of the King and all his Courts, scz. To execute the Writs of the Common
Law.

And this he must do (or cause to be done) truly and duly, and in every
behalf as the Writs themselves commands, without any favor, dread, or
corruption, or else he is punishable.

By the ancient Law of this Land, all original Writs (purchased at the suit of
the party to maintain actions) are to be directed to the Sheriff of the
County where the cause of the suit does arise, and cannot be directed to any
other person than the Sheriff, unless it be in special cases, where there
shall be good cause of execution to or against the Sheriff; and there the Writ
shall be directed to the Coroner, who then stands in the place of the Sheriff.

And if the Sheriff be dead or removed, yet the Process shall not be
directed to the Coroners, but shall stay until another Sheriff be chosen.

Where there be two Sherifes, (as in London and York, etc.) and Process goes
out to the Sherifes, there one of them may not return the Writ alone, although
the other be dead; and yet it is used, that one of them does serve it, (which
is the serving of them both) but the return must be in the names of both of
them.

But in things spiritual the Ordinary is the immediate Officer to all the
Kings Courts, to serve their Process, etc.

Execution of Writs.
Sherifes and their Vndersherifes shall receive all manner of Writs in any
place, and at all times, within their County, when and wheresoever they shall
be delivered them; and shall make thereof. Warrant to their Bayliffe, etc. or
else execute it themselves.

A Writ delivered to the Sheriff, of or upon Record, is imbeaseled, See hic
Cap. 37.

After the Writ executed, the Sheriff must return the same into the Court from
whence it came.

If the Sheriff (or his Officers) shall not execute the Writ, or shall not
return it, or shall make any false return thereupon, he is punishable.

And yet in some cases, although the Sheriff executes not the writ, he may
excuse it by his Return. Hic Cap 38.

CHAP. 21.
ALl Writs are usually delivered to the Vndersherife, and executed by him.

And yet the High-Sherife may execute them himself, or he may by word only,
command his Vndersherife, Bailife, or other sworn officer, or his own servant
to serve or execute the same.

Or he may make or command any stranger (being neither a known nor sworn
Officer) to execute it; but then the Sheriff must deliver such a stranger,
either the Writ it self, or else a Precept or Warrant in writing.

And yet any stranger, by the commandment of the Sheriff, and as his servant,
may justify to serve and execute any Process, and that without any Precept in
writing.

Also the Vndersherife may either execute the Writ himself, or else must make
his Warrant (in writing, and in the High-Sherifes name) to the Baylife or other
officer to do it; or he may make such Warrant to any stranger.

The Bailife or other Officer to whom any Warrant shall be directed and
delivered, ought with all speed and secrecy to execute the same.

The Bailife or other such officer must execute the Warrant himself, and can
command none other to do it, neither by word nor writing; and yet they may
take what number of other persons they shall think meet to aid them in the
execution of their Warrant.

And so if the High-Sherife shall direct his warrant to his Vnder-Sherife, here
the Vndersherife must execute it himself. Quaere.

None shall be arrested for debt, trespass, or other cause of action, but only
by virtue of some Process, Precept, or Commandment out of some Court.

But by the custom of London, upon a Plaint or Suit for debt, first entered
before the Sherifs against another, the Sergeants may arrest the debtor by the
commandment of the Sheriff, (to appear and answer to the suit, and that
without any process, warrant, or Precept in writing.

The Sheriff, Vndersherife, Baylife, or other Officer, may (if need be) take
Posse comitatu, to execute any writ, or other lawful warrant directed to them,
and such as shall not assist them therein, being required shall make Fine to the
King.

The Sheriff (or other Officer) is not to dispute the authority of the Court,
or Justice: from whence or whom they shall receive any writ or warrant, but at
their perils are to execute the same.

And yet some cautions are to be observed therein:

1 First, where the Court, or Justices (out of which, or from whom; the writ or
warrant comes) has no jurisdiction of the cause, the Officer is not bound to
execute it, nay may not safely do it.

2 If the Sheriff shall be commanded (coment per breue le Roy de south son
privy scale) to surcease the Execution of any writ to him directed out of any
of the Kings Courts, the Sheriff may not safely surcease thereupon: For (by
Law) the Sheriff by no writ may surcease, etc. but only by writ or warrant out
of the same Court out of which he had his first commandment, 4. E. 4. fol.
17. and 14. E. 3. Fitz. Retorn de vic. 89.

Execution of Writs.
3 One being in Execution, the commandment of the Kings Court (immo del nostre
Seignior le Roy luy mesme) without writ, is no sufficient warrant to the
Sheriff to deliver the prisoner: But upon such command without writ, it seems
the Sheriff may carry the prisoner to any place, so as he brings him back
again. Quaere.

4 One being in prison upon an Execution, or upon a Capias vtlagatum, if the
Sheriff shall deliver him upon a writ of protection de seruicio Regis (or per
breue south Signet le Roy,) these seem no sufficient excuse to the Sheriff,
etc. Dyer. 162. Vide hic cap. 163.

5 And sometime again the Kings Writ under the great Seal is no sufficient
warrant to the Sheriff to deliver a prisoner.

As if the Sheriff upon the Writ de Homine repleg. shall deliver a prisoner
that is in for Redisseisin, he shall be amerced.

So if a prisoner condemned in arrerages before Auditors, shall be delivered
upon the said Writ de Homine replegiando, it is an Escape, and the Sherif shall
pay the debt.

And yet he which is imprisoned for a contempt only, may be discharged by the
commandment of the king, or of his Justices, by word only.

6 Also Knights and Burgesses of the Parliament, and Clergy men called to the
Convocation, etc. and their necessary servants (attending upon their masters)
during the time of the Parliament shall not de arrested upon any original
process for debt, trespass, or the like; but must have their privilege. Eund',
mora^d, and redeu^d' allowed them. Neither shall any such privileged person be
arrested upon any writ of Execution during the Parliament.

Neither shall any of their goods or cattels necessary be attached or taken by
the Sheriff, or other Officer, except it be in case of Treason or felony.

7. If a Knight or Burgess of the Parliament, etc. shall be taken upon an
execution, etc. the Sheriff ought presently to deliver them, being sent for by
the house, hic cap. 29. But yet upon a Capias vtlagatum they may be arrested
during the Session of Parliament.

8. Also all such persons whose a^tendance is necessary many of the Kings
Courts (at Westminster. or elsewhere) shall not be arrested, upon any original
process, but shall be discharged upon showing their Writ of Privilege. And so
note that in some cases, the Sheriff is bound at his peril to take knowledge of
the Law, and of the authority and jurisdiction of the Kings Courts and Justices.

But if a Capias, a writ of Execution, or Exigent shall come to the Sheriff
against a Duke, Earl, or other Noble man or woman, though it lies not against
them, yet the Sheriff, etc. ought to serve or execute the writ, and must not
argue or dispute the validity thereof.

CHAP. 22. The Officers duty.
THe Sheriff, Baylife, or other Officer (to whose hands any Writ or Warrant
shall come) ought with all speed and secrecy to execute the writ or warrant
delivered to him. And in the execution thereof he is truly to pursue the
effect of the same writ or warrant in every behalf, and according as the same
commands.

A sworn and known Officer, needs not to show his writ or warrant when he
comes to serve it; but then he ought to declare the contents thereof, ( scz.
at whose suite he makes the arrest, etc. for what cause, out of what Court,
and when it is returneable) to the end the party may free himself by payment,
etc. or by finding sureties. Yet this declaring of the contents of the warrant
by the Bailife or other Officer must be understood when the other party yields
himself to the arrest, and not when the party makes resistance.

A special baylife, or the Sherifes or Vndersherifes servant (being no sworn
baylife) must show their warrant to the party demanding it.

And it is safe for every Baylife (or Officer) to keep their warrants by them,
thereby to make justification if need be.

An Officer gives sufficient notice what he is, when he says to the party, I
arrest you in the Kings name; and the party ought to obey him (at his peril)
though he knows not him to be an Officer,

If the Officer comes to arrest a man, and he flies, the Officer may pursue
him, and take him again, though in another County: But if he were arrested,
and then flies, the Officer may not only pursue and take him, but may also
justify to beat him if he resists,

If there be two or more of one name; the Sheriff may return it so, and that
therefore he knew not how to execute the writ, hic cap. 61.

For to arrest one man for another, or to attach one man's goods for another, is
punishable.

If an Officer does arrest a man before he has a warrant, and afterward he
procures a warrant (or a warrant comes to him) to arrest the party for the
same cause, yet he is punishable for the first arrest.

A Sericant in London attacheth a man before the suite or playnt be entered,
the Sericant is punishable,

If the Sheriff, etc. shall make any warrant (to arrest or summon, etc. any
person) without an original writ as well the Sheriff or other party that made
such warrant, as also the procurers thereof, shall be punished to the king, and
party grieved.

And yet if a Capias, etc. shall come to the Sheriff without an original, and
the Sheriff shall make warrant thereupon, or otherwise execute the same, he is
excusable; and the arrest thereupon made is good.

If the Sheriff shall make his precept to the baylife of a Liberty, reciting
that he has received the Kings writ to take the body of such a man, whereas
there came no writ to the Sheriff, this is a good excuse for the baylife, and
the party is to have his remedy against the Sheriff.

An Atturny makes a Capias directed to the Sheriff, where there is no
original, the Atturny shall be grievously punished.

If the Officer arreste^h one upon a Capias, and after retornes non est
inuentus, he is punishable.

After the Officer has arrested a man, if he suffers the prisoner to go at
large to seek sureties, etc. Or to go by bail or baston, yet it is an
escape, and punishable, though the prisoner shall come again.

And if the prisoner comes not again (at his day) yet the Officer can not
after take or arrest him again upon his former writ or warrant.

Where a man is in Execution for Debt, and the Sheriff or Jailer lets him go
at liberty for a time, and then to return, and he comes again at the
time, yet this is an escape, and the Sheriff shall be charged for the debt,

But if the prisoner had escaped of bis own wrong without the Officers
consent, the Officer may take him again, when and wheresoever he shall find
him.

Old Sheriff.
If an Officer shall arrest a man by virtue of a warrant from the old Sheriff
after he is discharged, an action lies both against the Sheriff and Officer.

So where any man not having authority, shall make a warrant to arrest another,
and thereupon the Officer shall arrest the party, the action lies as well
against the Judge, etc. who made such warrant, as against the Officer.

If a man be imprisoned upon a warrant from a Justice of peace (for some riot,
forcible Entry, for the peace, or the like) and after a Capias (or other writ)
comes out of the kings court, to the Sheriff to arrest the same person, the
Sheriff upon the Capias must return this special matter, and must have the
body of the prisoner in Court at the day, whence after his answer put in he
shall be remitted by the Sherif into the country there to make answer before the
Justices of Peace,

Note when a man is in the Sherifes custody by process of law, or other lawful
warrant, and after another writ is delivered to the Sheriff, to take the body
of the same man, the Sheriff is now chargeable with him upon both the writs;
and if the Sheriff shall refuse to take the second writ, or shall not keep the
prisoner thereupon, it is an escape in the Sheriff.

Also note that any subject of this Realm may be sued (and arrested) be he
bond or free, woman or infant, The person.
or Religious person, or be they outlawed, excommunicated, or any other without
exception, See Plus hic 21. and 24.

And yet the body of a Noble man may not be arrested upon a Capias in process;
but upon a contempt they may,

Place.
The Sheriff (or other Officer) may execute the Kings Writ within the Churchyard
or Church, so that it be not done to the disturba^ce of diu ne service.

But no man may arrest any Minister, etc. which is doing any Divine Service.

The Sheriff (or his Officer) may execute any process, Time.
or do any other Ministerial Act upon the Sabbath day, at the suit of the
king, or of the subject.

The Sheriff (or his Officers) may also execute any process, or do any other
Ministerial act in the night time.

But the Sheriff, nor his Officers, may not break open any man's house in the
night time, to execute any process or to do any other ministerial act: or the
law gives no color to break a man's house by night.

Upon a Capias or Latitat, etc. the Sherif or his officers may arrest the party
the same day in which the writ is retornable, or which is the day of appearance
( scz. before the fourth day.)

If the Officer shall not arrest the party, when he finds him, and may arrest
him, he is chargeable to the Plaintiff for his whole damage.

Note that Writs concerning common Plees (Real, or personal) are of two
sorts, scz. Praecipees, or Si fecerit te Securum, etc.

Upon Praecipees the Sheriff is to command the defendants to do somewhat in
certain, which the Plaintiff sueth for, which if he do not, then the Sheriff is
to serve the process.

But upon Si fecerit te Securum, the Sheriff is to serve the process without
more ado.

CHAP. 23. Warrants upon mean process, their forms.
THe Sheriff or his Vndersherife, to whom any mean Process or Writ shall be
delivered, are either to execute it themselves, or else are speedily to make
out warrants to their baylife or other Officers for the execution thereof.

And these warrants must be made according to the several natures of the
Writs, which for the substance will direct them therein.

But whether these warrants be made in Latin, or English, it is not material,
so that they be made in due form,

The form of a warrant (from the Sheriff to the Baylife) to cause one to
appear.
A. B. Cantabr.
Miles vicecom' Com' pred balliuo Libertatis de E.

Omnibus balliuis meis, tam infra libertat', quam extra.

Omnibus balliuis meis infra comit' pred.


Hundred de R. Necnon I. W. and T. B. balliuis meis hac vice, and eorum
cuilebet.
salutem. Ex part Dom' Regis Vobis coniunctim and diuisim.

Vobis and cuilibet vestrum coniunctim and diuisim.


tibi mando, quod Capiatis, seu vnus vestrum capiat.
capias I.S. si etc. Et eum saluo etc. Ita quod habeam corpus eius coram Domino
Rege (if in the Kings Bench, etc. See cap. 75.)
Iustic' Domini Regis apud Westminster. in Die Iouis prox' post October.
Octobris* Sancti Hillar. ad respond C. D. de perlito Transgressionis.

Conuentionis.

Detentionis. etc.


Debiti. Et hoc, etc. Datum sub sigillo Officij mei decimo die Aug, An' regni
Domini Regis nunc Angliae, etc. 3.

Per A.B. milit vice com'.

Warrant de Destring'.
Cantabr.
A, B. (etc. vt supra) mando quod distring' I.S. de W. armig' per omnes terr'
and catalla sua, etc. Ita quod habeam corpus eius coram Iustic', etc. Ad
respondend tam Domino Regi quam I. D. de perlito transgress. etc. sub poena,
C.s.

Alias.

Ita quod habeas corpus eius coram Iustic' domini Regis ad pacem in Com' praed
ad prox' Session' suam apud C. tenend, ad respond dicto domino Regi de diuersis
transgress. vnde Indictatus est, etc. sub poena 40.s.

Another form of a Warrant.
Decimo die Aug. An' Dom' 1628.
By virtue of the Kings Majesty's writ to me directed, Cantabr.
retornable Coram Domino Rege apud Westmon. die Iouis prox' post quind sa^ct
Hillarij, etc. (reciting the words in the writ) you shall arrest I.S. if he may
be found within my Bayliwicke, to answer to C. D. in a plea of trespass, etc.
(or in a plea of debt, etc. according to the writ) Datum sub sigillo Officij
mei, die and anno superdictis.

per A.B. Milit' Vicecom'.

To I.P. and R. S. my special Bailifes in this behalf, jointly and severally
greeting.
A good form of a warrant to be used upon Executions, or upon a Capias
vtlagatum, etc.
Cantabr.
A. B. Miles vic' Com' praed omnibus balliuis meis tam infra libertat' quam
extra Necnon I.B. and C.D. balliuis meis hac vice tantum salutem. Ex part and
dom' Regis vobis and cuilibet vestrum coniunctim and diuisim mando, Quod
Capiatis seu vnus vestru^ Capiat I.S. si, etc. vt supra.

CHAP. 24. Executions how to be done and executed. And first upon a Statute
Merchant.
Upon a Statute Merchant, Statute Merchant.
the Sheriff upon the Capias must first take the body of the Conusor or Debtor,
if he be a Layman (and can be found;) and must keep him safely in prison,
until he has satisfied, (or agreed for) the debt and damages.

And after half a year (which time is given to the debtor being taken to sell
his lands and goods to pay his debts) if the debt be not satisfied, then upon
an Extendi fac' the Sheriff shall by a Jury preise the lands and goods, and
then shall deliver all his lands and goods to the Creditour, by a reasonable
rate, extent or value; and yet the body shall remain still in prison, until
the debt be paid.

Also upon the Capias, if (the party cannot be found, and that) a Non est
inuentus be returned by the Sheriff, an Extent (or Extendi facias) shall go
out, (against the Conusors lands and goods, and against his body) upon which
the Sheriff shall presently cause all the Conusors lands and goods to be
preised by a Jury, and to be delivered to the Creditor; or else he may cause
the goods to be sold so far as the debt does amount, and the debt to be
presently paid to the Creditor.

And the Sheriff shall deliver the same lands and goods, to the Creditor at a
reasonable price ( scz. as much as does amount to the debt, etc. And here if
the Sheriff shall return that he has extended the lands, etc. he must return
further that he has delivered the same to the Plaintiff. Hic cap. 58.

If the preisors of the lands or goods, ( scz. the Jurors) do over value them,
then shall the same lands and goods be delivered to the same preisors at the
same price, and they forthwith shall be answerable unto the Creditor for his
debt or duty contained in the Statute Merchant, and chargeable with the payment
thereof at such days, as the Rents or revenues are payable or receiuable.

CHAP. 25. Execution upon a Statute Staple.
Upon a Statute Staple, the Sheriff upon the Writ of Execution shall take the
body of the Conusor ( si laicus fit, etc.) And shall also presently by a Jury,
extend and value or preise his lands, Tenements, goods and chattels.

But the Sheriff must seize the lands and goods into the Kings hands, and shall
return the same extent and Presentment into the Chancery; whereupon a Liberate
shall come to the Sheriff to deliver those lands and goods according to the
same Extent or Preisement to the Conusee (if he will) to the value of his debt
and damages, etc.

And so note that upon a Statute Staple, the Extent and preising of the lands
and goods of the Conusor shall be first made and returned by the Sheriff; But
the Sheriff shall make no delivery thereof to the Conusee till the Liberate
come; upon which Writ delivered to the Sheriff, he shall then (without any
other Inquisition) deliver to the Conusee such lands and goods as were before
taken in execution, and according to the former valuation by the Jury.

And the Sheriff having taken the body of the Conusor, must keep him safely,
until he has satisfied the debt and damages, or otherwise agreed for the same.

If the preisors of the lands or goods do over value them, then they shall be
delivered to the Preisors, and they shall be answerable to the Creditor, as in
case of a Statute Merchant.

The Sheriff upon an Extendi facias (to have execution upon a Statute Staple)
does extend the lands of the defendants, and preiseth his goods, and seiseth
them into the Kings hands according to the Writ, but before the delivery
thereof to the Conusee another writ of Praerog. comes to the Sheriff out of
the Eschequor for the King, to leuy a debt for the King, the Sheriff must first
leuy the Kings debt, and to return that Extent into the Eschequor; for the
King by his Praerogatiue shall first have execution of those lands and goods;
for that the property of the goods, nor possession of the lands, are not in the
Conusee, until they be delivered to him by the Liberate. Plus hic cap. 58.

Also note that the King shall be preferred in all his suites and executions,
before any subject, scz. if his suite be commenced before the other has
judgment.

Again, for the Kings debt by specialty not only the body of the Debtor, but
also his lands and goods in his own hands, or in the hands of his heirs,
assigns, executors, administrators, or possessors are liable. hic cap. 10. Yea
the heir in Tail is chargeable.

And all obligations and specialties made to the King for any cause, shall be
of the force of a Statute Staple.

CHAP. 26. What lands shall be extended, or taken (by the Sheriff) in
execution upon a Statute, in case of a common person.
Upon a Statute Merchant or Staple, all fee simple lands which the Conusor had
at the time of the Statute acknowledged, or at any time after, are extendable,
into whose hands soever they shall come.

In a writ of Debt, execution shall be of any land which the defendants had the
day of the judgment given.

Lands intayled are liable only duing the life of the Conusor.

But if he sells the lands, then are they liable in the hands of his feoffee.

A Lease for life, or years is extendable.

The wifes lands are extendable during the Couer^ure.

Lands in Ancient Demesne are extendable: quaere tamen.

Copihold lands are not extendable.

A Rent may be delivered in Execution.

But an Anuitie cannot be delivered in Execution; Nor any other thing which may
not be granted or assigned over.

Lands come to the Kings hands can not be extended: and so all other the Kings
lands are exempted from executions.

Reuersions and Remainders shall be extended, eum acciderint.

If the Conusor be taken and dies in prison, yet his lands and goods may be
delivered to the Conusee in execution.

If the Conusor escapes out of prison, yet his lands and goods may be
extended, etc.

If the lands be in execution to another man; or that another is in possession
of the land by Descent; the Sheriff may not put them out of possession without
a Scire facias: And therefore in such cases the Sheriff ought first to return
such special matters upon the writ de Extendi facias, Vide hic retorn de
Elegit.

Goods.
All the goods and leases for years which the Conusor or Debtor had the day of
the Judgment, or at the time of the Statute or Recogn' acknowledged shall be
extended (by some opinions:) But yet by the better opinion, only such goods as
he had at the day of the execution awarded or sued, Plus hic cap. 20.

CHAP. 27. Execution upon a Recognisance.
Upon a Recognisance, the Sherfe is to extend the moytie of all the lands, etc.
which the Conusor had at the time or day of the recognisance acknowledged, or
at any time after; but this is after the Scire facias returned by the Sheriff,
and thereupon an Elegit awarded to the Sheriff.

And this Extent of the moytie of the lands, shall be made by the Sheriff, by
meets and bounds.

Also the moyty of the lands which the Sheriff hereupon shall deliver to the
Conusee, shall be to the Conusee until the debt be paid or leuyed at or by a
reasonable rate out of the annual rent of the land.

Also the Sheriff (upon a Recognisance) is to extend all the goods and chattels
of the Conusor; except his plow, cattle, and implements of husbandry.

And this extent (or valuing and preising of the lands and goods of the Conusor
upon a recognisance) must also be by an Inquisition or Jury of 12. men which
the Sheriff (in such cases) must charge to make enquiry according to the writ.

And if the preisors of the lands, or goods, ( scz. the Jurors) do ouerualue
them, then they shall be delivered to the Preisors, and they shall be
answerable to the Creditor for the debt, as in case of a Statute Merchant.

CHAP. 28. Execution upon an Elegit.
BY force of an Elegit, the Sheriff may take in Execution, and deliver unto the
creditor, the one half of all the Lands, Tenements, and Rents of the Conusor or
Debtor (at a reasonable extent) and all his goods and chattels, except his Plow
cattle) until the debt be leuyed upon a reasonable price, or rate, scz. so
that the Conusee (out of the goods and yearly rent of the lands) may be
satisfied his debt in some reasonable time.

And upon the Elegit the Sheriff may deliver in execution the moyetie of all
such houses, lands, tenements, and rents, as the debtor had at the time or day
of the Judgment given, or at any time after.

And the execution shall be made (by the Sheriff) of the moiety of the lands,
by meets and bounds.

The Extent or valuation of the lands, etc. and the appreising of the goods,
ought to be by a Jury, etc. for the Sheriff himself (in these and the former
cases of a Statute or Recognisance) can not appreise the goods, nor value and
extend the lands; neither may he deliver any goods in execution (upon an
Elegit, Statute, or Recognisance) or extend any lands, but such as are preised,
etc. by a Jury.

But upon an Elegit, if the Lands or Goods be ouerpreised, the preisors or
Jury, are not chargeable, nor shall have the goods delivered to them, as in
case of a Statute.

Note that in all cases where the Sheriff is to extend, value or preise any
Lands or Tenements, or any Goods, the Sheriff and the Jurors may lawfully go
together to the Lands, etc. to be extended, or into the house or upon the
grounds where the goods be, and there may value and preise them: But the
Sheriff may not break open the doors, or gates to this purpose.

Coppihold lands shall not be delivered (by the Sheriff) nor extended upon an
Elegit.

Nor lands in ancient Demesne shall not be delivered in execution by force of
an Elegit.

The Lands of a Bishop, or Lands which a man has but during the Couerture, may
be delivered in Execution upon an Elegit.

Upon an Elegit, if the Sheriff shall extend a Lease for years (the Jury
(which he shall cause to enquire thereof) must find the beginning of the
Lease, and also the certenty of the term to come.

And this certentie of the Term ought to appear upon the Sherifes return of
the Inquisition.

But upon a Fieri facias, the Sheriff may extend and sell away the Lease or
Term without reciting any certenty, scz. the Sheriff may (in his sale thereof)
recite that the Debtor has a Term of such a Close, pro termino diuersorum
annorum adtunc ventur': and that he sells the same to I.S, by force of the
Furi fac, etc.

But if the Sheriff will take upon him to recite the Term, and recites it
falsely, and so sells the same Term, such his sale is void; except withal
the Sheriff sells also, all the Interest which the debtor has in the same
land.

Also the Sheriff ought not (or at least needs not) to mention any certenty
of the Term in his Return of the Fieri facias, but generally quod fieri fecit
de bonis and catallis, etc.

And the Sheriff has election either to sell quite away a lease for years
remaining in the debtors hands; or else he may only extend and deliver the
same term or lease to the Conusee at a certain yearly value, which last
seems to be the most indifferent course, for that there still remains a
property in the Conusor, so as upon payment of the debt he may have his term
or lease again.

Note that no stay or delay of any execution shall be upon any writ of Error, or
Supersedeas, except there be security first given to the Plaintiff (in the
Court where the Judgment shall be given) to prosecute the Writ of Error with
effect, and to satisfy the debt, damages, and costs, etc. 3. Jacob. Cap. 8.

Plus hic Cap. 58.

CHAP. 29.
Execution upon a Capias ad satisfaciendum.
Upon this Writ the Sheriff must arrest and take the body of the party, and
put him into prison, and there must keep him without Bail or mainprise until
satisfaction (or agreement) be made to the Plaintiff, of the whole debt and
damages recovered against him.

So that if the prisoner do escape, the Sheriff must pay the whole debt and
damages, except the prisoner be presently taken again upon fresh suit.

Also if the Sheriff shall suffer such a prisoner to go out of prison, upon
Bail, or with a Keeper, (except it be by the Kings Writ) the Sheriff shall be
answerable for the debt.

And therefore the Sheriff must be sure to keep such prisoners safely, and
may put them in fetters and gyues.

But if such a prisoner do escape (of his own wrong, scz.) against the will,
or without the consent of the sheriff or officer, then the Officer may take him
again (by virtue of the same Writ, before the Return thereof) when and
wheresoever he can find the prisoner, although it be in another County.

Yea, it seems the Sheriff at any time may take such prisoner (making an
escape of his own wrong) again, and may keep his body in custody until he
has made his agreement with the Sheriff, etc.

Or where such a prisoner does escape of his own wrong, if he be taken
again by the Jailer, etc. the prisoner shall remain in execution for the
party again, if the party will.

And yet where a Knight or Bourgesse of the Parliament, or other person so
privileged, shall be taken in execution, the Sheriff ought presently to
deliver such prisoner being sent for by the House, etc. and the party may
after the Parliament have a new execution against the Debtor.

What persons may not be arrested and taken upon a Writ of Execution, See hic
ca. 21. and hic infra.

Such persons as are necessarily attendant in any of the Kings Courts, although
they being arrested upon any original Process, shall be discharged thereof
upon showing their Writ of Privilege; yet if they shall be taken upon any
execution, the Sheriff ought not to deliver them upon their writ of Privilege,
for then the party should be without remedy.

Where a man is in the Sherifes custody upon an execution, the Sheriff may not
deliver him, nor suffer him to go at large, (though with a Keeper) upon any
commandment of any of the Kings Courts, or Justices, (as it seems) without
it be by the Kings writ. Plus hic Cap. 21.

Yet if one in execution be suffered to go at large for a time, by the
commandment of the Court, and by the consent and agreement of the Plaintiff,
and after the prisoner returns again, this is not any escape.

But where the Sheriff has one in execution for debt, if an Habeas Corpus, or
Corpus cum causa, comes to the Sheriff, to have the body at Westminster, etc.
upon a certain day; here the Sheriff may not only carry his prisoner to
London through another County, but the Sheriff in these cases may go and take
what way or place he shall think to be most sure and safe for himself, and to
carry his prisoner.

And upon a Corpus cum causa, or a Certiorari, etc. procured by any person
being in execution, the Sheriff must return the truth or cause of the
prisoners in prisonment, that so the prisoner may be remanded, etc.

If the Sheriff shall arrest one upon a Capias ad satisfaciendum, and shall not
return the Writ, nor sat^sfie the Plaintiff, this is an escape, and the
Sheriff is chargeable for the debt; neither may the Sheriff arrest the party
again for the same cause, Vide hic cap. 54.

If the Sheriff has arrested one upon a Capias ad satisfac', etc. and after
the prisoner is rescued from him, this is an escape, and the Sheriff is
chargeable for the debt.

Execution upon a Leuarifacias.
Upon a Leuari facias the Sheriff cannot seize the lands, and deliver them to
the party: but he is only to take the corn, grass, and other profits growing
upon the lands, and the goods and chattells of the debtor, and may deliver them
to the party; and the Sheriff may take the Rents payable by the tenants (in
execution of the debt) and bring them into the Court.

Note that the Sheriff in debt, may deliver any land whatsoever that the party
had; the day of the Judgment given, or at any time after, into whose hands
soever they shall come.

But as to Chattells, the execution shall be of such only, as the party
defendant had the day of the Execution sued, scz. the day of the Test of the
writ of execution; So that if the defendant shall sell his goods bona fide,
after judgment, and before the writ of execution sued, those goods are not to
be taken by the Sheriff, nor liable to the execution; But if the defendant has
sold his goods by Couin after the Recovery or writ of Execution sued, there
the Sheriff may take those goods in execution. See hic cap. 61,

CHAP. 30. Execution upon a fieri facias.
Upon a fieri facias, the Sheriff is only to take in execution the goods and
chattels of the defendant, scz. his leases for years, (of houses or lands) and
his corn growing, or sown upon the land, or his moveable goods, as corn in
the barn, cattle, household stuff, money, plate, apparel, etc.

And here the Sheriff may either keep the goods himself, making his return
accordingly; or the Sheriff may deliver the goods (or money for the same being
sold) to the plaintiff in execution; or rather the Sherif may sell the goods,
and bring the money into the Court, and so the Court to deliver it to the
Plaintiff.

And upon the fieri facias, the Sheriff needs not to preise the goods by a
Jury; but the Sheriff himself may sell the goods as well as he can; and yet to
preise them by a Jury, and then sell them, is more indifferent and safe.

Upon a Fieri facias, the Sheriff may sell a Lease or Term for years, without
(enquiry of the value by) a Jury.

Note that the Sheriff is commanded and compelled by this writ of fieri facias
to sell the goods of the defendant: And the property of the goods seized by the
Sheriff upon this writ, are not altered by the seizure, but by the Sherifes
sale thereof.

For the words of the Fieri facias be Praecipimus tibi quod de terris and
catallis praed' I.S. fieri fac' C.s. Et illos habeas, etc. ad respond, etc.

And here though the judgment be afterward reuersed in a writ of Error, yet
the defendant shall have no restitution of his goods, but only shall have the
value thereof as they were sold; and the buyers thereof shall quietly enjoy
them, because the Sheriff had lawful authority to sell them,

Upon a fieri facias come to the Sherifes hands against A. If A. shall happen
to die before the writ be executed, here the Sheriff may execute the writ upon
the Executors, or Administrators of A. Or the goods of A, coming to the hands
of any stranger, the Sheriff may leuy or make Execution of these goods in the
hands of the stranger.

But the Sheriff (or other Officer) must be careful that they take none but
the defendants or debtors own goods in execution: for though they shall find
them in the possession of the defendant, yet if upon trial they shall be found
to be none of the defendants goods, then the Officer which shall take any such
goods in execution is punishable and chargeable to the right owner of the goods.

If therefore it shall be doubtful to the Officer, whether the goods be the
defendants or no, let the Sheriff take heed that he retorneth not that he has
taken so much goods of the defendants, and that he has Denarios illos paratos
ad reddend, etc. for so he may be charged double for them, scz. both to the
Plaintiff, and to the defendant for the same goods.

But let the Sheriff either keep the goods himself until the parties be
agreed: Or else let the Sheriff take security of the Plaintiff to save him
harmless, etc. And to stay the return of his writ until he be well advised
what to do therein.

Or rather where the property of the goods is doubtful, it is safest for the
Sheriff, either not to meddle at all with such goods as shall not plainly
appear to him to be the proper goods of the defenda^t; or else to enquire by a
Jury in whom the property of the goods be; for the Sheriff or Officer at his
peril must take knowledge in whom the property is; but being found by the
Jury, it excuses the Sheriff.

Also if the Officer shall attach goods which are not the proper goods of the
defendant; or shall arrest one man for another of the same name, in both these
cases the Officer is a Trespasser.

Goods gaged or pawned for debt, can not be taken by the Sheriff in execution:
nor goods demised or letten for years, nor goods distreined.

Upon a fieri facias, if the Sheriff shall leuy the money, and shall keep the
same in his hands still, the party Plaintiff may have his action of account
against the Sheriff.

And if the Sheriff shall return fieri feci, sed non inueni Emptores, then a
venditioni exponas shall go out; mes la party nauera vnques un nouel Execution.

Note that upon a fieri facias to leuy xx.l. if the Sheriff retorneth fieri
feci x.l. quas habeo ad diem, etc. at which day he has not the money, and then
a new Sheriff is chosen; here the Plaintiff shall recover that x. l. against
the old Sheriff, etc.

CHAP. 31. Summons.
ALl Writs or Process concerning the Common Law, shall be awarded under the
great Seal of England; and shall be made out in the Kings name only,

Summons is a writ directed to the Sheriff, commanding him to bring in the
party by a day, or to cite or warn the defendant or tenant to appear at a
certain day to answer to the plaintiff or demandant.

This Summons ought to be made by (or in the presence of) two Summoners (at
the least) being neighbors, and liberi and legales.

In Real actions the Sherifes order to execute this process (of Summoneas) is
to go himself, or to send his baylife to the land, with the Summoners, and
there to cite or warn the tenant or party, by sticking up of a white stick in
his land, which being done, the Sheriff must return two common Pledges for the
Plaintiff, and then the names of the Summoners thus.

Responsio A. B. vic' Com' infrascr'.

Pleg' de prosequendo Johannes Do. Richardus Roo. See hic cap. 45.



Summonit' infranom' I. S. (the defendant Rich. Den. Hen. Fen'.


This Summons or warning of the defendant to appear and answer, etc. is so
necessary by the Common Law, as that without the same, all the proceedings, yea
and the Judgment after, are oftentimes made frustrate, and besides the Sheriff
subject to punishment.

In Real actions the Sheriff (or his Officer) must summon the tenant or
defendant upon the land, demanded (be he tenant thereof, or no) and this
summons to the tenant must be first to keep his day of the return (naming
that in certain) to answer to the demandment, etc.

Secondly, to show the name of the demandant.

And lastly, to name the land in demand.

And in writs of Summons the Sheriff may not allege or return Non tenancie,
in him whom the writ supposes to be tenant.

In a Petite Cape the Sheriff must summon the tenant to answer to his default
only.

But in a grand Cape the tenant shall be summoned to answer to his default, and
further to the demandment.

And the Sheriff may come upon the land with the Summoners, and there summon
the party, yea if the Sheriff by information of the demandant shall summon the
Tenant in another man's lands, the Sheriff shall be excused for such his
Entree, etc.

But the Summons (in a Precipe) ought always to be done in the day time (
scz. between Sunne-rising, and Sunne-setting,) and not in the night.

Where the action is to reco^er the freehold of land it self, the Summons
must be made in the same land.

Where the action is brought against one as heir, there the Summons must be in
land that did descend.

Upon a Precipe, if the defendant be not tenant of the land in demand, yet the
Sheriff is to summon him upon the land in demand, eo quod petens testatur quod
tenens est.

So he in reuersion shall be summoned in terra petita, although it be another
man's freehold.

But the party can not be summoned by a rent service, rent charge, common, nor
the like, for that the soil is another man's freehold; nor by his goods.

And yet in Assizes of of Nouel disseisin, and Nuisance, where the original
process is an attachment, Pone per vadi^s and saluos pleg', there the defendant
may be summoned, scz. attached by his goods.

Also where a man has no land whereupon he may be summoned, there the Sheriff
may summon him by his person; as in actions of annuity, covenant, or the like.

In a writ of Right of Aduowson, as also in a Quare impedit, the Sheriff may
Summon the defendants in the Church.

In a Praecipe against 4. if the Sheriff summoneth one, that is a Summons to
all, Tamen vide hic cap. 70. that al must be summoned.

In an action of debt brought for damages recovered in a Writ of Entry, etc,
the Summons shall be to the person.

And so in all personal actions, the Sheriff must Summon the defendant by his
person.

In a Scire facias against a Clerk, the Sheriff is to summon him only by his
land, if he has any Lay fee; or else by his person; but not by his goods.

If the Sheriff shall return one summoned, who was not summoned, the Sh^rife
is punishable, hic cap. 70. and 85.

Note that in every writ, the defendant ought always to be summoned 15. days
at the least, before the day of the return of the writ.

By the book called the Mirror of Justices, reasonable Summons is when it is
testifiable by two lawful free witnesses, neighbors, and made to the person,
or at the house or tenement contained in the demand, with warning of the day,
place, party, Judge, and of the action, and with reasonable respite at the
least of 15. days, to make their answer, etc.

Note also that the Sheriff cannot summon himself, nor serve any other process
upon himself, hic cap. 44.

CHAP. 32. Attachment.
AFter the Summons, if the tenant or defendant comes not in, then there
issues an attachment, which is a Process authorizing the Sheriff to go to his
house, or land, and there to take Surety by pledges; or to attach him by his
hoods; to the end that he shall appear and answer to the Plaintiff or
demandant.

So that upon the attachment, the Sheriff (or his Officer) may either go to the
parties house, etc. and there take of him Sureties or Pledges for his
appearance, yet these Pledges are not to be bound in any sum, but only to
give their words for the appearance of the party and if he shall not appear,
then these Pledges shall be only amerced.

Or the Officer may attach the party by his goods, citing him to appear and
answer such a day, at such a man's suit, in such a Court, and for such a cause,
etc.

Or if the Officer shall only give warning to the tenant or defendant, (in the
presence of two others) to appear such a day, in such a Court, at such a man's
Suite, etc. it is good enough.

A Clerk or Ecclesiastical person may not be attached by his goods; but must
be summoned or warned by his person, or upon their lands if they have any lay
fee.

The tenant or defendant can not be attached by his land; nor by any parcel of
his freehold, as by a clod, etc. nor by any chattel real.

Neither may a table dormant, or any other thing which is fastened to the
freehold be attached (as a furnace, doors, windows, waynescots, pales, or the
like:) and if the Sheriff shall attach a man by any such thing, he is
punishable.

But an attachment ought to be made by such goods of the defendants own proper
goods as are moueables, scz. by mere chattells personals, which may be
forfeited by vtlary.

The party may not be attached by his horse whereupon he rides, if he has
other goods whereby he may be attached.

Neither may a man be attached by his Apparel which is upon his body.

No goods shall be attached but the proper goods of the defendant; and not
goods that are pawned or borrowed.

If the goods attached be quick cattle, the Officer may impound them in a
Com^on pound.

If they be dead chattels (as a pot, Pan, or the like) the Officer may take
and carry them away to his own house, etc. Or the Officer may first attach
them, and then take Sureties for the redeliuering thereof, etc. and so leave
them with the owner who was attached thereby, But this is not so safe without
taking good sureties, or taking an obligation of the owner, for the Redeliuery
thereof, if he shall make default of appearance, etc. which obligation so
taken seems to be good.

If the defendant shall not appear at the day of the return, then the goods
attached are forfeit to the king; and the Sheriff shall be answerable for the
value thereof.

If the Officer shall leave the goods or cattle attached with the owner (as
aforesaid) yet the Officer may take them again upon default of appearance.

A Baylife sworn and known may make an attachment without any warrant in
writing, for to him a command or warrant by word only is sufficient.

The servant of the Plaintiff (or any other stranger) may make the attachment,
if so he has the Sherifs warrant.

A woman Covert shall be attached by her husbands goods.

The defendant or tenant must always be attached 15. days (at the least)
before the day of the return of the writ.

And for default thereof, the Sheriff shall be amerced.

CHAP. 33. Capias ad Respond'.
IN real Actions, when the Tenant has been attached, and appears not
thereupon, or if he appear, and after makes default, then issues the grand
Distress, whereby the Sheriff is commanded to distreine the Tenant by all his
goods and chattels which he has within the same County, and also to answer
the King the profits of his Lands.

In Trespass, and other personal Actions, if upon the Attachment or
Distringas the Sheriff returns nihil, then there goes out a Capias and
Alias, Pluries, and Exigent, scz. if the defendant be not taken, nor yields
himself in the mean time.

This Process is to take the body of the Defendant: And upon this Capias ad
Respondendum, the Sheriff, etc. shall first arrest, and after imprison the
party; or else must take bonds of him, with good Sureties for his appearance,
etc. The form whereof See hic, Cap. 97.

Where the Sheriff has arrested one by force of his Writ, if the Plea shall
happen to be discontinued by the Kings death, or otherwise, the Sheriff may
there suffer such his prisoner to go at liberty without danger.

Note, that if the Pluries be not served, it is a contempt in the Sheriff,
whereupon an Attachment lies against him.

CHAP. 34. Venire facias.
THis Writ is of two sorts most usual.

The one is, to cause the party, ( scz. the Defendant) to come in and answer,
etc. And this is but as a Summons, and upon this, if the Defendant be returned
sufficient, and makes default, then a Distringas shall go out: but upon a
Nihil returned, a Capias, Alias, and Pluries goes out, Vt supra.

The other is, to cause the Sheriff to impannell and return a Jury.

Upon the Venire facias Iuratores, (which also is but as a Summons) if the
Sheriff shall return the names of the Jury, and they do not appear at the
day, then shall go out an Habeas corpora Iuratorum, and after that a
Distringas Iuratores, to distreyn them until they come, etc. scz. a Distringas
infinite.

There be diverse other sorts of this Writ, as you may see in the Register
amongst the judicial Writs.

Plus hic Cap. 78.

CHAP. 35. Distringas.
THis Writ is directed to the Sheriff, commanding him to destrein the party
(Defendant) or the Jury, for his or their appearance, etc. Or to distreine one
for the Kings debt.

A Distringas for the appearance of the party to come and answer, shall go out
infinite, scz. until the party comes in and appear.

The party, as also the Jurors, by virtue of this writ are to be distreined by
their goods, and by the issues of their lands, to come, etc. The which they
shall lose and forfeit to the King if they come not.

The wife shall be distreyned by the goods of her husband, which shall be
returned by the Sheriff in issues.

For the Sherifes distreyning of the Kings Debtors, see hic Cap. 10.

There be also diverse other sorts of this Writ of Distringas, in the Register,
amongst the judicial Writs.

Plus hic retorn' de Distring' ca. 56. and 78.

Note that this Distress infinite seems to be at the Common Law, in stead
whereof the grand Distress is now given in diverse cases, (by statute) by which
Writ the Sheriff is to distreine the Defendant by all his goods and chattells,
and also to answer to the King the issues of his lands: And the said writ is to
be read and openly proclaimed in the County Court, that the Defendant come in
at the day contained in the writ, to answer to the plaintiff, etc. And the
Sheriff is to make return of the same Proclamations, etc. Vide hic cap. 102.

CHAP. 36. Return of Writs.
NOte that in the execution of all Writs and Process the Sheriff must observe
two things:

First, he must in every behalf do all that which he shall be commanded by the
writ it self, and may proceed no further, nor otherwise than the writ
authoriseth him.

Secondly, the Sheriff is to return the same writ into the Court whence the
writ came.

These Returns are nothing else but the Sherifes answers, certifying the Court
touching that which they are commanded to do by the Kings writ, and are to
ascertaine the Court of the truth of the matter.

And these Returns seem to be the most difficult things belonging to their
office; for the Sheriff must be very careful and circumspect, that he makes
these Returns according to Law, both for substance and form, otherwise he
shall not only endanger himself to be amerced or sued for the same, but also
he shall indammage the parties, and may hazard the cause or suit it self.

For the manner and form therefore of Returns of writs you must observe these
Rules.

1 First, the Return must be made according to the ancient course and
Presidents, and by the usual words.

And therefore in a Praecipe quod reddat, or in debt if the Def. yields the
land, or pays the money, yet these are no good Returns. Hic Cap. 56. 70. and
78.

Also omission of words usual makes the Return void: As Residuum huius
breuis, for Residuum executionis huius breuis.

Scire feci. A. quod sit coram vobis, omitting these words, Ad faciendum quod
breue requirit.

2 The Return ought to answer the point of the Writ: As where a Scire facias
is to warn the heir of the lands of M. the Sheriff must not return that he
warned the heir of the said M. but he must return him heir of some lands,
according as the writ requires.

3 It ought to be certain in the year, day, and place, and in the person,
yea it ought to be certain to every intent: And yet these (or the like) words
in the Return, scz. Prout (or secundum quod, or ad faciendum quod) istud breue
exigit and requirit, do oftentimes help the incertaintie.

4 The Return must be true.

5 It must not be repugnant.

6 It must not be double.

7 It must not be contrary to the confession of the party.

8 It must not be contrary to the verdit of the Jury.

9 It must not be contrary to the Writ or Record.

10 It must not be contrary to a former Return made by himself, or by his
predecessor, except in some special cases. See hic Cap. 44.

11 It would be in true and good Latin.

12 Also the Sheriff is not to return any thing which should come in by the
challenge of the parties.

13 And yet Surplusage in a Return does not make void a Return, for as to the
Surplusage the Court takes no regard.

14. The Sheriff ought not to return Resistance, nor a Rescous, for that in
such cases he should have taken Posse Comitatus (except where the Rescous, etc.
were to the Bailife of a Liberty, or where the Return is, That the party was
rescued per ignotos) for there it appears not, that the Sheriff can have any
remedy against the offenders, quaere,

Also in a Repleuin he ought not to return that the cattle are in a Castle,
Fort, or Park, so that he could not make deliverance; Causa qua supra.

15. He might have returned (upon a Capias) that the party had taken Sanctuary;
but this privilege of Sanctuary is now out of use.

16. He may return that the party is fled into such a Liberty, and there
continues, so as he can not take him.

Yet in this case, if the king be a party, the return is not good, for there
the Sheriff must enter the liberty, and execute the Process.

Also if the Sheriff had once taken the body, and then had come with his
prisoner along by a Franchise, etc. and then the prisoner had claymed the
Franchise, here the Sheriff shall still be charged with the body, and may not
return quod fugit ad libertatem, etc.

Languidus.
17. Languidus in prisona seems to be a good return.

So if the Sheriff retorneth that the defendant is so sick that he can not
take him (or carry him) out of his house, without danger of his life.

Otherwise where the Sherfe was commanded to have the body there at a day,

Also if he return Caepi corpus, sed non possum habere pur malady. Quaere of
this.

18. Upon a Capias, Mortuus.
the Sheriff may return that the party is dead, Tamen quaere.

But it is a good return in these writs, scz. in a Corpus cum causa. Praecipe
quod reddat. Scire facias.


Upon an Habeas corpora Iuratoru^, or Distring' Iurator, if any of them be
dead, the Sheriff may return it accordingly,

But upon an Exigent it is questioned whether the Sheriff may return the
party, quod mortuus est; for that by the Exigent, the Sheriff has no authority
but only to call the party to appear, and upon his appearance then to take
him, etc.

And it seems that the Sheriff may not return the defendant Mortuus, but
only where there are words in the writ, to command the Sheriff to summon,
warn, or take the defendant, or to distreine him. Plus hic Atteynt, and
Repleuin.

Note that if the Sheriff retorneh that the party is dead in prison, he must
show further, that the Coroner had the view of the body.

Nihil.
19. In what writs the Sherif may return Nihil upon the tenant or defendant.
See hic postea throughout the retornes of the several writs.

How the return of Nihil shall be made. See hic cap. 45.

But the Sheriff cannot return Nihil upon him whom he has once returned
summoned, or distreyned in another writ, except it be upon some special matter
returned also by him See hic cap. 44.

If a Iuror be once returned sufficient, he may not after be returned Nihil.
Plus hic cap. 44.

But if the defendant be returned sufficient, he may after be returned. Nihil.
Plus hic cap. 44.

Also wheresoever the defendant is to be summoned, garnished or attached, if
the Sheriff retorneth him Nihil, etc. he shall not do amiss to return
further, Nec est inuentus in balliua mea. Non est inuentus.


20. Again wheresoever the Sherif retorneth the defendant Nihil, or Non est
inuentus, his return must therein be dire^t and general, without these or the
like words, scz. Prout mihi constare poterit; for he ought to take knowledge.

Also in Real actions, where the Sheriff may Summon the Tenant upon the land
demanded, it is no good return, Quod nihil habet, or Non est inuentus: for
that the Sheriff in such cases is to Summon the party in terra petita, though
the land be another man's.

The Sheriff returned Non inueni partem, etc. for Non est inuentus, it is
erroneous.

21. The Sheriff may not return an Inhibition out of the Arches; for he is to
perform the commandment of the kings writ notwithstanding the inhibition.

22. It is no good return for the Sheriff that the party will not pay his
fees, or costs or charges, and that therefore he did not execute the writ.

23. Upon a Capias, if the Sheriff has taken the body, and then the defendant
shall procure a Supersedeas, and deliver the same to the Sheriff, yet the
Sheriff may not thereupon let his prisoner go, and return the Capias with the
Supersedeas, etc.

But otherwise if the Supersedeas had been delivered to the Sheriff before the
party were arrested or taken. See plus hic cap. 53.

24. In every writ (except it be in an attachment, or upon a Capias) the
Sheriff may return Tarde, scz. (Quod breue, Tarde.
adeo tarde sibi venit, or sibi deliberat fuit, quod illud exequi non potuit
propter breuitatem temporis,) and it is good, if it be true.

But if the Sheriff shall make such a return where he has sufficient time to
serve the writ, he is punishable.

But also if the Sheriff shall return Mandaui balliuo libertatis, etc. qui
mihi respondit, quod breue adeo tarde venit quod illud exequi non potuit, etc.
the Sheriff shall be amerced, for here it shall be intended to be the Sherifes
default.

25. If the land, Mandaui balliuo.
or other cause of the suite be within a Liberty, then the Sheriff (having
received the kings Writ) must make his precept to the Baylife of the Liberty;
and the Sheriff is to return his answer.

But the Sheriff must return Mandaui balliuo, and not quod mandauit balliuo.
See plus hic cap 39.

26. Clerk.
Clerks or Ecclesiastical persons (being beneficed) upon Process out against
them, the Sheriff (in most cases) is to warn, garnish, or Summon them by their
persons, or else by their lands (if they have any lay fee:) And if the Sheriff
can not find such party (to summon him by his person,) Nor that he has any
lay fee; Then the Sheriff may return, Quod Clericus est beneficiatus, non
habens laicum feodum vbi potest summoniri, etc. Nec est inuentus in balliua
mea. Plus hic cap. 71. and 75. 56.

But such Return is only where a Distringas or Capias goes out. Nihil habet
is a good return in debt or trespass against a Clerk.

Infant.
27. An infant is impleadable by Law; and therefore in real actions the Sheriff
ought not to return that the tenant is an infant.

Also Vtlary returned by the Sheriff upon an infant is a good return, if the
infant be above the age of 14. years.

Woman Covert.
28. In actions against the husband and wife; where the process is an attachment,
the wife may be attached by the goods of the husband: (See hic cap. 35) Or
rather the Sheriff is to return pledges upon them both.

But the Sheriff may not return the husband attached, and the wife Nihil.

Where the husband and wife are divorced, yet upon a Scire facias against them,
the Sheriff is to summon both of them; and must not return that they are
divorced.

In a Real action, the Sheriff ought not to return that the tenant is a woman
covert.

29. Upon a fieri facias against Executors, Executors.
the Sheriff may return as follows. scz.

Quod nihil habent. Or, Non habent aliqua bona testatoris.

Quod bona elongata sunt,

(if it be true.)

And if the Executors have wasted the goods of the testator; or have employed
the same to their own use, the Sheriff may return a Deuastauerunt.

He may also return further, Quod nulla habent bona seu catalla, de bonis suis
proprijs, in balliua sua vnde, etc.

Upon a Fieri facias against Executors, the Sheriff retorneth that they have
sold the goods, etc. this is no good retorn; for the Sherif should have taken
other goods of the Executors to the value thereof.

So it is no good Return, that all the Executors save one have nothing; for
the Sheriff ought to make Execution of that which is in the hands of that one
Executor.

Upon a Deuastauit found, and judgment given against Executors, the Sheriff
upon a Scire facias against the Executors may seize the proper goods of the
Executors, if there be not sufficient of the Testators goods.

So if the Executors shall plead Ne vnques Executor, and that be found against
him, and judgment thereupon given, etc.

Plus hic cap. 61.

CHAP. 37. Where the Sheriff shall be amerced, or otherwise punished for his
Return.
IT appears in the former Chapter, that if the Sherifes retornes be not made
according to Law, both for substance and form, the Sheriff shall be punished.

So if the Sheriff shall make no return of the writ (in most cases) he is
punishable, hic cap. 38.

So if he shall not make a due Retorn of every writ that shall be delivered to
him.

So if his Return be incertaine, or otherwise insufficient.

So if he shall make any false Return.

If he returns a Capi corpus, or reddit se, and has not the body at the day
of the Return, he shall be amerced.

And if it be upon a Capias ad satisfaciendum, and the Sheriff retorneth C^pi
corpus, and has not the body at the day he shall not only be amerced, but
also he shall be chargeable to pay the whole debt.

If upon a Fieri facias, the Sheriff returns Fieri feci, etc. and has not
the money in Court at the day of the Return of the writ, he shall be amerced;
and yet he might have paid the money to the Plaintiff, and so have made no
return. See hic cap. 30. and 38.

Upon a Fieri facias, he Sheriff returned that he has leuyed 20. l. but that
he durst not bring it, etc. for fear he should have been robbed thereof, and
he was amerced for that he had not the money in the Court at the day, etc.

If the Sheriff retornes that he could not execute the writ for Resistance, he
shall be amerced.

So if (upon a Repleuy) he retornes that the cattle be in a fort, or Castle,
so as he cannot deliver them.

So if he retornes small, or no Issues upon the defendants.

So if he retornes not issues upon Jurors according to the Statutes.

So for not retorning Pledges.

The high Sheriff shall also be amerced or punished for the default of his
Vndersherife, in making insufficient retornes, etc.

He shall also be punished for the default of his Baylife or other Officer.

But for the defaults of Baylifes of Liberties, the Sherifes (at this day)
shall not be punished for any insufficient or false retornes of writs made by
such baylifes of Liberties, but the amerciaments shall be set upon the Baylifes
heads.

An Exigent which was delivered to the Sheriff of Record, was imbeaseled, and
the copy thereof was returned by the Sheriff, and he was amerced for the
return of the copy at 30. l. and for the imbeaseling thereof at 20. l.

The Sheriff for making a false return of an Exige^t was amerced at 50. marks.

CHAP. 38. Where the Sheriff makes no Return.
IF a Capias or other mean Process, be executed and not returned, the arrest is
tortious, and the Officer is punishable.

So if the writ be misretorned; as if the Baylife arresteth a man by virtue of
a warrant from the Sheriff, and after the Sheriff retorneth, Non est inuentus.

In case of Redissesin or Vtlary, if the Sheriff shall not return his writ,
the Sheriff shall be amerced for such his fauxity and concealment.

For note that until the writ be returned, the suit is not said to be
depending nor the Kings courts can not hold plea of the matter; and therefore
upon the original writ returned Tarde, an Alias and Pluries shall go out of
that Court where the original is returned, Test the Chief Justice, for that
by the Return the Court is possessed of the suit; but if no return be made,
the Alias and Pluries shall go out of the Chancery, from whence the first
original came.

And the third writ not being returned by the Sheriff ( scz, the Pluries,) it
is a contempt, whereupon an attachment lies against the Sheriff.

Upon a second deliverance, if the Sheriff shall deliver the cattle to the
Plaintiff, and shall not return the writ, the defendant shall have his remedy
against the Sheriff,

And yet in some case the Sherifes return is not so needful.

And therefore in all writs of Execution (except an Elegit) as upon a Capias ad
satisfaciendum, fieri facias, habere facias seisinam, vel possessionem,
Liberate, etc. if the execution be duly done, although the writ be never
returned it is no great matter, if so be that the Plaintiff has his demand,
scz his money paid him by the Sheriff, or his seisin or possession of his
lands, etc. delivered to him by the Sheriff.

Also where no Enquest is to be taken, but only land, scz. (seisin or
possession of land) to be delivered, or goods to be sold, etc. which are but
matters in fact, these are good although the Writ be not returned.

But in case of an Elegit, etc. where the Extent (or preising or valuation) is
to be made by an Enquest, and not by the Sheriff alone, that ought to be
returned by the Sheriff.

Upon a Fieri facias, if the Sheriff leuyeth the debt, but neither retorneth
the writ, nor pays the money to the Plaintiff, the Sheriff is subject to the
action as well of the Plaintiff, as of the defendant, besides he shall be
amerced; and yet the leuying of the debt was lawful, and the sale of the goods
(by the Sheriff) by force of the Fieri facias is good, though the writ be not
returned.

Also there be some other Writs which need not to be returned; as the writ de
Returno Habendo is not retornable.

Upon a recovery in a Quare impedit, the writs awarded to the Bishop, to
remove the Incumbent, or to admit the Clerk of the Plaintiff, are not
retornable.

And so in other cases, except the writ requires it, the Sheriff needs not
to make return thereof.

Note that if the writ be retornable, the day of the return is also appointed
in the writ.

Also all writs of Iusticies (or Viscountiel writs) are not retornable. Hic
cap. 113.

In some cases also, although the Sheriff executes not the writ, but excuses
it by his return, it is good. As.

In a Repleuin, the Sheriff retorneth that the defendant claims property.
Hic cap. 70.

In a Natiuo habendo, the Sheriff retorneth that the villain alleges himself
to be a freeman. Hic cap. 67.

So where the Sherifs of London return their custom.

Or the Sheriff of any County Pallatine, return that they have a County
Pallatine within themselves.

So where the Sheriff (of any County) returns Mandaui balliuo Libertatis qui
nullum dedit responsum, etc. Hic cap. 39.

So where the Sheriff retorneth that the Plaintiff non inuenit Plegios de
prosequendo, hic cap. 45.

So where the Sheriff retorneth Tarde, ibid.

CHAP. 39. Return de Mandaui balliue Libertatis.
AS the Sheriff is the immediate Officer of the King and his Courts, to execute
all Writs and Process, so to him all their writs shall be directed, although it
be of a matter) scz. of land or other thing in suite, or a thing done) within a
Liberty or Franchise; in which cases the Shdrife must write and send his
Precept to the Baylife of the Liberty, who must serve and execute the same,
and must make answer (or tetorne) thereof to the Sheriff; but the Sheriff
himself must make the Return of the writ into the Court,

And yet in a writ of Redissesin, and in a Writ to enquire of wast, and such
other writs wherein the Sheriff is made a Judge of the cause, there the Sheriff
must enter the Franchise, and execute such writs himself, and may neither
write to the baylife of the Liberty to execute it, nor may return Mandaui
balliuo, etc.

And so it is in other cases, as where the King is a party; or the baylife of
the Liberty a party; or upon the default of the baylife of the Liberty, etc.
See hic cap. 40.

For the forms of the Sherifes Precepts or Warrants to be made to the baylife
of the Liberty, they are to be made like to those which are made by the
Sheriff to h s other baylifes (which see hic cap. 2) Saving that where those
are direct Balliuo Hundred de, etc. these are to be directed balliuo
Libertatis de, etc.

Now after that the Baylife of the Liberty has returned his answer to the
Sheriff, then the Sheriff must make the return of the writ, and of the
baylifes answer, in these (or the like) words, Qui quidem balliuus mihi sic
respondit, etc. (according to the Baylifes answer) But the Sheriff may make no
other return, but according to that which the Baylife of the Liberty shall
certify him.

And yet if the baylife of the Liberty shall make an insufficient answer, or
shall make no answer to the Sheriff, them the Sheriff may make his return of
the writ in this manner, scz. Mandaui balliuo Libertatis de, etc. Qui mihi
nullum dedit responsum, etc.

For the manner and form of such retornes (de Mandaui balliuo Libertatis,
etc.) You must observe these things (or rules) in the Sherifes return.

1. First the Sheriff shall do well to show cause (in such his return) scz.
Eo quod praed' terr' and teneme^t' sunt infra Libertatem de, etc.

2, Or else the Return must have these words (or the like) Qui habet retorna
omnium breuium, and executionem eorundem: infra libertatem praedictam.

3. He must show in his Return whose the Liberty is, or who is Lord of the
Franchise or Liberty.

4. He must show or set down in his return, the names of the baylife of the
Liberty, scz. his Christian name or surname. Hic cap. 53.

5. Also where the Sheriff retorneth Mandaui balliuo libertatis, etc. he must
return further, Eo quod nihil habet inballiuam meam.

6. Also there must be such a Liberty within that County, for if the Sheriff
shall return Mandaui balliuo Libertatis where there is no liberty, he shall be
grievously punished.

Again the Liberty must have return of writs Reuera sub poena vt supra.

And therefore it is needful for the Sheriff to have a note (out of the
treasury of the Eschequer) of all the Liberties within his County, which have
return of writs.

If the Baylife of the Liberty (upon the Sherifes precept) shall not execute
the writ, That being returned by the Sheriff, then there shall go out a non
omittas propter libertatem, commanding the Sheriff to execute the same
himself, and there the Sheriff is to enter the Franchise himself, and withal
is to warn the baylife of the Liberty to appear and answer his default before
the Justices at the day contained in the writ.

There should or ought to be indentures made between the Sheriff, and the
baylife of the Liberty of every return which such baylife shall make. And this
is to the intent that the Sheriff should not change the return made by such
baylife, which if the Sheriff do, he is punishable.

But the Sheriff cannot serve or execute a writ in part, and write to the
baylife of a Liberty to execute the other part; but one of them must execute
the whole (in most cases) because the writ is entier, etc.

As upon a venire fac' Iurator': or a Distring' Iurator': or a Habeas corpora
Iurator: the Sheriff cannot return part of the Jury, and the Baylife of the
Liberty the other part.

And yet upon a Capias in debt, against three the Sheriff may return that he
has taken two of them, and that he has written to the Baylife of the
Liberty, etc. to take the other defendant.

And if the land in question do lie part within a Franchise, and part in
Guildable, there the Jury shall be returned part by the Sheriff, and part by
the baylife of the Franchise.

If the land in demand do lie in 2. Franchises, the Sheriff must make his
precept to each baylife.

Note that such part of the County as is contributory among themselves to pay
Common charges, is called the Guildable; and if there be any special Liberty,
that is called the Franchise.

Also wheresoever the Sheriff has served the first writ, he cannot after write
to the Baylife of the Franchise, Nor return Mandaui balliuo libertatis, etc.
except it be in some special cases; or that the Sheriff in his retorn shows
and certifieth some special cause thereof.

And herein this difference may be taken, scz. between a thing permanent, and
a thing remoueable.

For of a thing permanent, as in a Precipe of land, if the Sheriff serves the
first process, he ought not after to make his precept to the baylife of the
Liberty, for by his serving of the first process he has affirmed the land to be
within his jurisdiction,

But of things remoueable, as in debt, or trespass, etc. the Sheriff may serve
the process at the first, and when it comes to the Capias, the Sheriff may
make his precept to the baylife of the Liberty to take the body, for that the
body is remoueable, etc.

Also the venire fac' Iurator', may be served by the Sherif^, and upon the
habeas corpora Iurator' he may write to the baylife of the Franchise, etc. Et e
Conuerso.

Also in a Praecipe quod reddat of land within a Franchise, the Sheriff must
first take of the Plaintiff Pledges de prosequendo, and then he shall make his
Mandauit to the Baylife of the Franchise, etc. who is to execute the rest.

And yet in an Assise brought of land within a Franchise, the Sheriff may
return the whole Pannell, and it shall be good.

Yea in all cases, wheresoever the return or execution of the writ pertains
to the baylife of a Liberty although the Sheriff may more safely enter the
Liberty, and execute the writ, cum warrantum habuerit, scz. upon a Non omittas,
yet if the Sheriff does it himself without a Non omittas, it is good: But the
Lord of the liberty may have his action against the Sheriff for the same.

The Sheriff retorneth Mandaui balliuo Libertatis, etc. qui nullum dedit
responsum, or retornes that the baylife will not make deliverance, etc. upon a
Repleuin Alias or Pluries, these are no good retornes, for the sheriff in such
cases ought himself to have entered the Franchise, and made deliverance; yet it
seems safest for the Sheriff, to have a writ with a Non omittas, etc. before
he enter the Franchise, in these cases and the like.

CHAP. 40. Where the Sheriff may enter the Franchise, without a Non Omittas.
1. Wheresoever the king is a party, no Franchise shall be allowed; and
therefore in every writ for the king, or where the king is any ways a party,
the Sheriff himself (or his Officer) are to enter the Franchise, and to
execute the process; for none are to serve the Kings Process but his own
ministers.

2. Wheresoever the Sheriff is a Judge of the cause, he is to enter the
Franchise, and to execute the writ himself. Hic cap. 39.

3 Where the Baylife of the Liberty is party to the suit, he shall not make
the Pannell, or return the Jury, but the Sheriff ought to enter the Liberty,
and to panel the array. And so where a Capias or Fieri facias comes to the
Sheriff against the Baylife, the Sheriff must enter the Liberty, and execute
the Writ.

4 So where beasts are taken within a Liberty, and wrongfully withholden, and
the Baylife of the Liberty will not deliver them upon the Sherifs Warrant,
there upon complaint the Sheriff ought presently to enter the Franchise, and to
make deliverance, etc.

5 So in a Plea of Withernam in the County, by plaint before the Sheriff, if
the Baylife of the Franchise will do nothing upon the Sherifes Precept, the
Sheriff may enter the Franchise without a Non omittas; Et hoc Vicecomiti ex
necessitate conceditur.

Tamen quaere these two last cases; for by some opinions the Sheriff may not
there safely enter without a Non omittas.

6. Also upon an Extent of a Statute Merchant, it seems the Sheriff is to
enter the Franchise, and to execute the writ himself, and may not return
Mandaui balliuo Libertatis, etc.

Baylife of Fee.
Where there is a Baylife of Fee, the Sheriff shall send his precept to him, as
to the baylife of Guildable; and shall not return Mandaui balliuo, etc. but
the Sheriff shall make the return of the writ, as if himself had served it.

CHAP. 41.
ALl Process directed to the Sheriff ought to be returned into such Court,
out of which such Process shall be awarded.

And the Sheriff (as also the baylifes of Liberties) ^ught to set the Names,
scz. both their Christian name and Surname) to every Return by them made, so
that the Court may know of whom they took such Retornes, and for default
thereof they shall be grievously amerced; yea without the Sherifes name the
return is void.

Upon the return of every writ, the Sheriff besides his setting his name
thereto, must also subscribe or add this word, vicecomes.

And these Retornes made by the Sheriff, together with the Name of the Sheriff,
and of his Office, etc. are to be indorced on the back of the writ: And yet if
it be made or done on the inner side of the writ, it is good.

CHAP. 42. Auerment against the Sherifs Return.
FOrasmuch as the Sheriff is an Officer deputed by the Law, to the King and his
Courts, a man shall not be allowed to Auerre directly against the Return of
the Sheriff, except it be in some special cases: and the reason is for that
where Justice is to be administered and executed, the King and such as are his
Judges, and under him are to administer Justice, must necessarily put a trust
and confidence in some person; and if every man might auerre against that which
the Sheriff shall do, then Justice should never be executed, but should ever
or oftentimes be delayed, etc. And yet on the contrary, for that Sherifes and
their Officers have oftentimes been found faulty of their parts, in making
false Retornes to the Kings writs, etc. the which may arise in part by
corruption, and in part through their negligence and remissness; and also for
that such false retornes were and are oftentimes very mischievous to the Kings
subjects, therefore the Statutes and Laws of this Realm have in some cases
allowed men to auerre against the Sherifes Return.

See the Statutes of Westminster. 2. cap. 39. and 1. E. 3. cap. 5.

And therefore the Plaintiff may auerre that the Sheriff might have returned
greater issues upon the defendant.

A man may auerre (in diverse cases) him to be alive, whom the Sherif has
returned Mortuus.

Upon a Rescous returned, the party may trauerse the Return.

Vtlary returned in case of Felony, the party may auerre that he yielded his
body at the 5. County.

Upon the Exige^t the Sheriff returned the party but 4. Exactus, the other may
auerre that he was vtlawed.

But where the Sheriff retorneth one vtlawed, the party cannot auerre that that
he was proclaimed but at 3. or 4. Counties.

Also in cases where the Sheriff is a Judge, there the party may not auerre
against the Sherifes return, as in writs of Redisseisin, or to enquire of
wast. etc.

But otherwise where a man's inheritance, or the effect of his suit shall be
lost, or his person charged, as also in favor of life, the Sherifes return is
trauerseable.

In other cases if the Sheriff makes a false return, and that the party
cannot trauerse it, yet he may have his action against the Sheriff, etc.

CHAP. 43. The Sherifes Return in some cases shall be of the force of an
Indictment.
ALthough by the Statutes made Anno 9. H. 3. cap. 29. and 25. E. 3. cap. 4. No
man shall be imprisoned nor condemned by suggestion, etc. without lawful
presentment; and therefore the sherifes return of an Escape or of an Rescous
made to him, of one arrested by him for felony, albeit that such his return be
a matter of record, yet it is not sufficient to force such as made the Escape
or the Rescous to make answer thereto, except it were found by Enquest:
Nevertheless if a Rescous be returned by the Sheriff of one who was arrested
upon a Capias, or for any other cause (except for felony,) such return of the
Sheriff is in liew of an Indictment; and upon such return the other shall be
put to answer the same, etc.

And therefore where the Sheriff shall return such a Rescous, he must in his
return show the certenty of the place, day and year, that the same Rescous
was made, and of the persons.

But though the Return be without any addition given to the persons making
the Rescous, it is good enough.

CHAP. 44.
THe Return of the old Sheriff shall not conclude the new Sheriff.

And therefore where the old Sheriff returned a Jury de Visneto de D. afterward
the new Sheriff upon the Distringas returned, Quod non fuit tale visuetum de D.
in dicto Comitatu, and this return of the new Sheriff was holden to be good.

Upon a Fieri facias, the old Sheriff returned Quod caepit bona ad valenc' x.
l. ad quam non inuenit omptores, whereupon there went out to the new Sheriff a
vendic' expon' who returned that his Predecessor, Non cepit bona, etc. and it
was holden to be good.

And yet if the old Sheriff retorneth a Iuror in issues, and the next Sheriff
at the Distringas returns the same Iuror nihil, the last Sheriff shall be
amerced; for here he cannot return nihil, contrary to the former return of
his predecessor, but must pursue the last return. And therefore if any such
Iuror has sold his land, or that it be recovered from him, or that the Iuror
was seized in the right of his wife, who after died without issue by him, or if
the Iuror had an estate conditional, and the condition performed, and a
re-entrie made by the Feoffor, or the like; in these cases the Sheriff ought to
return the special matter, and to conclude, Et sic nihil habet, etc.

But if the old Sheriff has returned the Defendants sufficient, the next
sheriff may return him Nihil.

If the old Sheriff has returned a man sufficient, who is not, nor ever was
sufficient, whereby the next Sheriff is charged with issues, he shall have an
Action of Deceit upon the case, against his predecessor.

Note also, that a Sheriff cannot summon or distreine himself, nor serve any
other Process upon himself: and therefore if any Process shall go out
against him, it may be thus returned, Iustic' infrascript' certifico, quod ego
A. B. miles modo sum Viceco^' Co^' C. Ideo meipsum summonire, or, distringere,
etc. non possum prout interius mihi praecipitur.

And where the suit is against (A. B.) one of the Sherifes of a City, and
another person, both the Sherifes of the City may make their return after
this manner: scz.

Summon' infranom' B.C. (the other person) Ioh. Den. Rich. Fen.

Et quoad summon' infranom' A.B. Iustic' infrascr' certificamus, quod idem A.
B. and ego A. B. iam vnus Vic' Ciuit. Nor. sumus vnus and idem, and non alius
neque diuersus. Ideo ego prae fatus A.B. and H.H. alter Vic. Ciuitatis praed
meipsum secundum exigent. istius breuis summon' (vel Distr.) non possumus.

CHAP. 45. The forms of Returns of Writs.
HEre I will set you down briefly the manner of returning such Writs as are
most frequent and usual; and for the residue, as also for the more full
return of these, I must refer you to my book at large.

Note, that the form of every original writ is in this manner; scz. Rex
Vicecomiti, etc. salutem. Si A. (the Plaintiff) fecerit te securum de clamore
suo prosequendo, tunc, etc. Plegij de Pros.
By which words the Sheriff is commanded, that if the plaintiff shall find to
him pledges that he will prosecute the Suit, that then the Sheriff do execute
such Writ upon the Tenant or Defendant, in such manner as in the writ is
further mentioned: and thereupon the Sheriff is to return (upon the plaintifes
part) two common Pledges, De Prosequendo.

Also in every original writ where Summons Summons.
lies, (or where the writ is Summoneas per bonos Summonitores, etc.) there the
Sheriff must first summon the Tenant or Defendant to appear and answer, etc.
And this must be done in the presence of two Summoners, the manner whereof see
hic antea cap. 31.

After that the summons is made, then the Sheriff must return the writ in this
manner following: scz.

If the Tenant or Defendant be sufficient,

First, the Sheriff must return two common Pledges for the Plaintiff, Do
prosequendo, and then he must return the Tenant or Defendant summoned, or
attached, as follows: Responsio A.B. A^mig. vicecom. comitat. infrascript.

Plegij de presequendo. Ioh. Do. Rich. Roo.


Summonitores infranominati I. S. the Defendant. Symo^ Brown. Rob. Flack.




Attach.
And if the party has no land whereupon he may be summoned, as also in
personal actions, or otherwise, (if the writ be Pone per vad and saluos
plegios, etc.) then the sheriff must make his return thus: Infranominat. I.S.
(the Def.) attachiatus est per Pleg. Symo^ Brown. Rober. Flack.


Or if the Sherif cannot find the party, then thus: Infranominatus I. S.
attachiatus est per vnam vaccam etc. praetij xx.s.

But if this word Attachiatus be wanting in any Return where the party is
attached, it is no good return. Hic cap. 52.

Also such or the like return may be made for the summoning or attaching of
the Tenant or Defendant, in all real actions, if the Tenant or Def. be
sufficient.

But if the Defendant, Nihil.
etc. be insufficient, then the Sheriff may return the Defendant or Tenant
nihil, after one of these manners: Responsio A.B. Ar. Vic' Com' infrascript.

Plegij de Prosequendo. Ioh. Do. Rich. Roo.


Infranominatus I. S. nihil habet in balliua mea per quod ( or vnde) summoniri
potest.



And this return of Nihil, may be made in any Real action; or in actions of
Annuity, Covenant, Debt, or other writ where Summons lies: and yet if that
there be no land where he may be summoned, Quaere if this be a good retorn
without saying, Nihil habet, etc. vnde summoniri potest, and further, Nec est
inuentus in eadem, for that the party may be summoned by his person.

If it be in trespass, the return may be thus.

Infranom' I.S. Nihil habet in balliua mea per quod Attachari potest. But the
Sheriff may not return, quod Nihil habet, etc. prout ei aliquo modo constare
poterit.

In a Debt or Trespass, etc. Nihil habet is a good return without saying, Nec
habuit post receptionem breuis, or Nec habuit die receptionis breuis; for it
shall be intended.

Upon a Distringas, The return may be thus: Infranomin' I. S. Nihil habet in
terris, tenementis, and haeredit' infrascript' per quod ipsum Distringere
possum:

Or thus, Nihil habet per quod potest Distring'.



Upon a Fieri Facias, The return may be thus.

Infranomin' I. S. Miles, nulla habet bona seu catalla, terras aut tenementa in
balliua, mea vnde denarios infraspecific' fie^i facere possum, prout interius
mihi pracipitur. Upon a Scire facias, The return may be thus: Infranominat'
I.S, Nihil habet in balliua mea per quod ei Scire facere possum, Neque est
inuentus in eadem.

A. B. Ar. Vicecom.



Now if there be two defendants or tenants, then the return may be thus.

Infranominat. I. S. and I. D. Nihil habent, nec eorum alter aliquid habet, in
balliua mea, per quod summoniri, or Attachiari, etc. possunt. And if there be
more then two defendants, etc, you must then name but one of them, and say
further, Et ceteri defend. infranominati Nihil habent, nec eorum alter aliquid
habet in balliua mea, etc. vt supra.

And yet these two last retornes of Nihil habent, where there be two or more
defendants, are good enough without saying, Nec eoram alter, etc.

Or if the Sheriff will not make Execution of the writ, but will delay the
same, Then they will do it after one of these two sorts following.

Responsio A. B. vicecom. Com. infrascript.

1. Infranomin. I.S. non inuenit mihi Plegios de prosequendo, Ideo nihil feci,
etc. Or,

2, Istud brene mihi deliberat' fuit adeo tarde, quod illud exequi non potu^
propter breuitatem temporis.

And note that in every writ which has therein this clause, Si A. fecerit te
securam de clamore suo prosequendo, tunc, etc. There if the Plaintiff shall not
find sureties to the Sheriff, that he will prosecute the suite, the Sheriff
for default of the Plaintiff therein, needs not to execute the writ, but may
return as aforesaid, Non inuenit mihi Plegios, etc.

But let the Sheife beware, that these or other his retornes be true; for as
they are dilatory, and mischievous to the Plaintiff, so are they dangerous to
the Sheriff, being not only a breach of his oath, but also he is subject to be
amerced by the Court, and besides to be sued by the party grieved for such his
false return.

Now concerning Pledges pledges.
(or Sureties) which are to be found, either by the Plaintiff to prosecure his
suite; or by the defendant (or tenant) to appear and answer, etc. you must
observe these rules following.

1. First, the Sheriff ought to return none for Pledges, but only such as
consent thereto.

2. Such Pledges should be of persons which be able and sufficient, as well in
their Estate, as in Law.

And therefore if they be poor in estate, it is at the Sherifes peril.

So if they be persons within age, or women Covert, or persons outlawed, etc.

3. Also there should be at least two Pledges.

4. But at this day, for the Pledges de prosequendo, it is but matter of form,
and the use is to return Common Pledges in most cases, scz. Ioh. Do. Rich Roo.

And yet in a Repleuin, before that the Sheriff (or his Officers) shall make
any deliverance of any distress or cattle taken and deteyned, they are to
take sufficient Pledges or Sureties of the owner of the cattle, etc. Tam de
prosequendo, quam de Returno habendo, etc.

Or else the Sheriff may be charged for the price of the cattle, etc. if
Return be awarded. Plus hic postea cap. 114.

5. And as for the Pledges which the defendant finds (or is attached by) to
appear and answer, they are not to be bound in any sum, nor shall enter any
bond to the Sheriff for the appearance, but only to give their words for the
parties appearance; and if the party summoned, or attached by Pledges to come
and answer, etc. does not appear, but makes default, his Pledges shall be
amerced to the King by the Court.

6. Note further, that some persons are to find no Pledges de prosequendo.

First the King, nor Queen in regard of their Dignity and Prerogative are to
find none.

Neither shall an infant find any Pledges.

A poor man in stead of Sureties shall only give his Faith to prosecute his
suite; and the form of the writ for him is accordingly.

7. Again these Pledges de prosequendo may be found, either to or before the
Sheriff, or in the Chancerie where the writ is sued out; or in a Court where
the writ is returned; or at the Assizes.

8. Also these Pledges, not Mainpernors or Manucaptors, need not to have any
Addition, but their Names of Baptism and Surname suffices to be set down in
the Sherifes return.

9. Also in some writs the Plaintiff shall find no Pledges de prosequendo, as
in a Per quae Seruitia. Quid Iuris Clamat. Scire facias.


10. Nor where the Sheriff retorneth any for Pledges, they shall not be
received to say they were not Pledges, etc. contrary to the Sherifes return;
But yet if they be endammaged thereby, they may have their action against the
Sheriff for the same, and shall recover as much as they shall be indammaged.

In these writs following (amongst other) Plegij de prosequendo, must be
Returned.
Account. Annuity. Assise de nouel disseisin. Assise de Nusans. Atteynt. Ayel.
Besayell. Cessauit. Contra formam Collat. Contributione. Conspiracy. Covenant.
Cosinage. Cui in vita. Curia claudenda. Customs and services. Dare in
praesentment. Debt. Detinue. Disceit. Dower vnde Nihil habet. Dum fuit infra
aetatem. Dum non fuit Compos mentis. Eiectione firmae. Entree in le quibus.
Entree ad term. qui preterijt. Entree in casu prouiso. Entree in consimili
casu. Entree ad Communem Legem. Escheate. Eiectione custodiae. Entrusion de
Guard. Falso iudicio. Formedon. Forcible Entree. Forfeit. de Marriage. Homine
Replegiando. Intrusion. Iuris vtrum. Mesne. Moderata misericordia.
Monstrauerunt. Mortdaunc^st^r. Nuper obijt. Nusans. Particione facienda. Parco
fracto. Pone. Quare impedit. Quare incumbrauit. Quare eiecit infra Terminum.
Quod permittat. Quo iure. Rationabili part bonorum. Reparatione facienda.
Resco^^. Secta ad Molendinum. Second Deliverance. Sine assensu Capituli.
Trespass. Trespass sur le Case. Valere maritagij. Waste. Warrantia Chartae.
CHAP. 46. The Summons of the Assizes.
Upon this Precept (from the Judges of Assise and Jail delivery) the Sheriff
must make his warrant to every baylife of Liberties and Hundreds within his
County: which warrants must contain the whole substance of his Precept: more
particularly; The Sheriff by his said warrants must command every balife of
every Liberty and Hundred.

1. To warn 24. Jurors of their Liberty, or Hundred; all which several
Pannels must be annexed to the return of the Precept.

2. To warn for the great inquest, such whose names the Sheriff nominateth in
his said warrant.

3. To warn the Jury of life and death, such as the Sheriff or baylife shall
think meet within their Hundred.

4. To proclaim within every Hundred the day and place of the Assizes; and
that all persons that have any thing against any prisoner be there to
prosecute, etc.

5. To give special warning to all Justices of Peace, and Coroners, etc.
within their Hundred, to be their present.

6. To arrest, etc. all persons formerly indicted, etc. to appear there.

7. And by his said warrant, the Sheriff must also command every bailife to be
and attend there themselves.

Or else to the back of this warrant, the Sheriff may file a schedule, setting
down therein the Names of such as shall be warned for the great Enquest, and
for the Jury of life and death; and such other persons as are to be warned
thither.

The Sheriff also must make and deliver (to the Judge) a Calendar of the names
of all the Justices of Peace, Coroners, Stewards, and Baylifes of Liberties,
Baylifes of Hundreds, and of all the prisoners in the Jail, See Hic cap. 98.

And he must have all his prisoners there.

Also the Sheriff himself shall do well to chose and name the great Enquest;
and to keep a note of the names of such as for that service he would have
warned by his baylifes; and to chose some out of every Hundred within his
County.

CHAP. 47. The summons of the sessions of the Peace.
Upon this (writ or) Precept, the Sheriff also must make out his warrants to
his baylifes of Hundreds, commanding every of them to appear at the Sessions.

And to warn all High and petty Constables within their particular Hundreds
to be there.

And also to warn 24. Jurors in every Hundred to appear there.

And to proclaim within every Hundred the day and place of the said Sessions,
and that all such as will complain of any Artificers, laborers or servants in
husbandry for taking excessive wages against the Statute, be there also to
prosecute, etc.

And to warn all Coroners, and Stewards, and Baylifes of Liberties within his
County, to be then and there to do that which belongs to the particular
Offices or places.

And to warn 24. Jurors for the great Enquest and body of the County (as well
within Liberties as without) to be and appear there.

Now for the great Enquests (as well for the Assizes or general Jail delivery,
as for the Sessio^s of the Peace) it is mee^e that there be returned out of
every Hundred three or four: and that the names of such as be of one and the
same Hundred, be set together, and the name of the Hundred to be written in
the margent of the Return, against the names of the Hundredors.

And if the Sheriff shall return any such Jurors, without summoning or
warning them by his Baylife, the Sheriff is fineable. Hic cap. 85.

CHAP. 48. Accedas ad Curiam.
Upon this Writ, the Sheriff (taking with him four other discreet, lawful,
and sufficient men of that County) is to repair to the lords Court, or
Hundred Court, in the writ mentioned.

2 He is there in full Court to record the Plee, in the presence of those four
men, and of the Suitors of the same Court.

3 The Record so made must be annexed as a Schedule to the back of the Writ.

4 He is to return that Record (with the writ) before the Justices (under his
own Seal, and the Seals of four suitors of that Court which were present)
at the day limited in the writ.

5 And he is to warn the parties, Plaintiff and Defendant) that they be
before the Justices at the day prefixed.

And if no Court have been kept there between the day of the receipt of this
writ, and the day of the Return thereof, the Sheriff may make his Return
accordingly; but the Sheriff ought first to require the Lord to keep his said
Court, and then if the Lord refuses, the Sheriff is also to return the Lords
refusal.

So if the Lord, etc. in his Court shall refuse to show the Sheriff the plea,
or his book wherein the plea is contained, yet the Sherif in the Court ought
to show and read, or declare the contents of this writ, and after to return
the Lords said refusal. The Return:

Virtute istius breuis mihi directi in forma infrascr', accessi ad Curiam
infrascript', and in plena Curia illa recordari feci loquelam infrascrip' Que
quidem loquela patet in quadam schedula huic breui annex' and recordum illud
habeo, etc. ( as in a Recordare facias loquela. Hic postea.

A.B. Armig' Vic'.

The style of the Court.

Ad Curia Baron' Egidij Alington Militis, Horsheath.
ibidem tent' (tali die and anno) reciting also the style of the King.

R.B. quaeritur versus I.S. de placito captionis and unjust detentionis
aueriorum suorum. Quaerela.


Note, that nothing but the plaint shall be removed here.

CHAP. 49.
Admeasurement of Dower.
IF this Writ be Viscountiel, and sued in the County Court before the Sheriff,
then the Sheriff is Judge, and is by virtue of this writ to admeasure all the
lands which the Woman has in Dower within the same County: So that if there
be in her hands any overplus, it may be restored to the heir, etc.

But if this writ be removed out of the County Court into the Common Bank,
then the Sheriff cannot make the admeasurement, but first the Sheriff ought to
go to the lands, and then by a Jury to divide the lands, etc. into thr^e
parts, and to pre^se the same at a yearly value, and then to return two parts
by it self, and the third part by it self, and to return also their yearly
value, and so to leave the admeasurement to the Court: which return must be
under his seal and the seals of the Jurors.

And in this writ (where the admeasurement is to be by the Justices or Court)
when the suit is come to the grand distresses before the writ be returned,
days are given, so that there may be two County Courts holden, and in either
of the said Counties the Sheriff is to make Proclamation, that the defendants
come in and appear in court (at the day contained in the writ) to show cause
why admeasurement should not be made; and the Sheriff is to return the
Proclamations accordingly.

But quaere notwithstanding the Defendants default of appearance, the Sheriff
is not to make the admeasurement, but is to leave that to the justices or
Court, vt supra.

The Sheriff may return the defendant nihil, in this writ of admeasurement of
Dower.

If he return, That the wife has more than she ought to have, by so much per
annum, this is no good return, for the Court is to judge of the value.

Admeasurement de pasture.
Also if this writ be removed out of the County court, into the Common
Bank, and that the parties appear there, and agree that the admeasurement
shall be made, then there shall go out a writ to the Sheriff, commanding him to
make admeasurement, and then to make the admeasurement the Sheriff must go in
his proper person, to the Common or pasture to be admeasured, and there by a
Jury of twelve men must admeasure the same; and he must return the same into
the Court by Indenture, under his own seal, and the seals of the Jurors.

Also if this writ be removed into the Common Bank, when the suit is come to
the grand distress before the writ be returned, the Sheriff is to make
Proclamation in two County courts, that the Defendant come in and appear in
Court (at the day contained in the writ) to answer the plaintiff, and to show
cause why admeasurement should not be made: and the Sheriff is to return, that
he has made the Proclamations accordingly; and if the Defendant comes not
upon the Proclamations, then admeasurement shall be made upon his default.

But here also notwithstanding the default of appearance of the Defendant, the
Sheriff is not to make admeasurement without another writ to that purpose,
first to him directed,

But if this writ be Viscountiel, and sued in the County before the Sheriff,
he must first summon the parties, etc. who may plead there, and if the
defendant grant that admeasurement shall be made, or pleads or shows no cause
to the contrary, then the Sheriff shall give judgment, and shall presently
make admeasurement thereof; for the Sheriff in such case is Judge, etc.

In this writ all the Commoners shall be admeasured by the Sheriff, as well
those which did not surcharge the land, as they which did, and also the
Plaintiff himself, but the Lord shall not be admeasured.

In this writ of Admeasurement of Pasture, the Sheriff may return the
defendant nihil, and it is good.

For the form of the return of Proclamation of Summons, see hic cap. 70.

Note that no man ought to put more Cattle upon the Common, than serve to
manure the land, and then he can maintain and keep in winter upon his
Tenement.

And if the Common be not sufficient, so that all the Commoners may have
sufficient to their tenements, in such case the tenants shall be admeasured,
having regard to that the common will bear.

CHAP. 50.
Assise de Nouel Disseisin.
Assise.
THe Sheriff is to return this writ after this manner.

Plegij de Prosequendo. Ioh. Do. Rich. Roo.


Infranom' I.S. (the Defendant) attachiatus est per Plegios Per Plegios.
H.F. W.G.


Or thus: Infranom' I.S. attachiatus est per vnam vaccam, Per Biens.
(or vnum bouem, or vnum equum) pretij 40. s.

Or thus, if there be more defendants than one;

Infranom' I. S. and I. P. attachiati sunt, viz. I.S. per vnum bouem preiij 5.
s. and I.P. per vnum equum pretij xx.s. And yet it seems the Sheriff is to
return but five shillings and four pence price: Quaere of the use.

Residuum executionis istius breuis patet in quodam pannello ( or in quadam
schedula) huic breui annex'.

A.B. Armig' Vicecomes. Nomina Recognitor' in Assis. Nouae disseis. inter M.C.
querent', (seu petentem) and T.C. tenentem.

A.C. de S. Gener'. Et sic ad numerum 24. Le Panell.
D.E. de F. Yeoman. Et sic ad numerum 24.
Summonitor' Iurator' (sieve Recognitor') praedictor', and eorum cuiuslibet per
se I.D. and T.F. (or more.)

Manucaptores summonitorum praedict' and eorum vtriusque I.W.. and W.D.

And note, that the Sheriff at the first day shall only return Manucaptores
summonitorum, and not Iurator': but after he shall return Manucaptores
Iuratorum.

Note also, That if the Defendant be not to be found, nor has whereby to be
attached, the Sheriff may summon and attach his Baylife in an Assise.

Also the defendants bayli e may be attached by Pledges, and the Sheriff may
make his return accordingly.

By the Statute of Westminster, 2. cap. 25, The disseisor shall be attached but
by one Ox, of 5.s. iiij.d. price, or the value.

So then where the Tenant is sufficient and attached, the Sheriff must return
24. Jurors or Recognitors.

He must return Summonitores Iuratorum, and Manucaptores Summonitorum.

Or he may return quod quilibet recognitorum praed per se separatim Attachiat.
est, per Pleg' I.D. and R.R. And further, Exitus eorum cuiusl^bet v s.

And he must set down the names of the Recognitors, ( scz. the Pannell) and
all the rest in a schedule, and annexe the same to the back of the writ. etc.

But if the tenant or defendant be insufficient then the Return must be after
this manner.

Plegij de prosequendo. Ioh. Do. Rich Roo.


Infranominat. I. S. Nihil habet in balliua mea, per quod Attachiari potest,
nec est inuentus in eadem.

Or rather thus: Infranom. I.S. Nihil habet in balliua mea per quod Attachiari
potest: nec habet balliuos nec balliuum: nec est inuentus in eadem.

Also in an Assise the Sheriff may return, Mandaui balliuo Libertatis, Q^^
nullum dedit responsum, etc.

Annuity.
In a writ of Annuity Annuity.
the Sheriff retorneth that the defendant; Nihil habet in balliua mea per quod
potest Summoniri, this is a good return; (but per quod potest Attachiari, is
not good.

And the Sheriff may summon the defendant (in his writ) by his person, if he
has no land where he may be summoned.

So that the Sheriff is here first to take Pledges of the Plaintiff de
prosequendo, etc.

And then he is to summon the defendant to appear at the day before the
Justices, etc.

CHAP. 51. Atteynt.
IN this writ the Sherifes return must be made after this manner.

Plegij de Prosequendo. Ioh. Do. Rich. Roo.


Summonitores infranomin' I. S. (the defendant. H. F. W. G.


Residuum Executionis istius breuis patet in quodam Pannello ( or quibusdam
schedul' huic breui annex' ( or consut'.)

A.B. armig' vic'. Le Pannell.
Nomina viginti and quatuor milit' inter R.S. quer. and I.S, defend'.

A. C. D. E. F. G. etc. ad numerum 24. (And these must be Knights, Esquires, or
Gentlemen, having twenty marks per annum (of freehold at the least.)

Quilib' Iur' praed per se sepa ratim attach. est per Pleg'. C.D. E. F.


Summonitor' Iur' praed and eorum cuiuslibet. I. D. R.S.


Manucaptor' Summon' and eorum vtriusque.

I. P. R. C. F. D. R. G. quaere if these Manucaptors be needful.

Nomina Iurat' primae Inquisit. in breue huic Pannello annex. specificat. Le
Pety Jury.


A. S. C. D. H. F. etc. ad numerum xij.

Summonitor' ( or Pleg') Iurator' primae Inquisit. and eorum cuiuslibet. I.D.
R. R.

Manucaptor' Summonitor' praed' and eorum vtriusque, I. L. H. P. R.S.T.V.
quaere of these.

Note that Manucaptors of the Summonors, and Pledges, must be set down upon
the return, in an attaint, as also in an assise, quaere.

Also in an Attaint, the Sheriff must return the names of all and every of the
twelve that were of the first Jury; and must distreine or summon them, etc.

In an atteynt the Sheriff (upon the Distress) ^ay not return that the
defendant is dead.

In an attaynt the Sheriff returned a certain number of Jurors, but not to the
full number, and auerred in his return that there were no more within his
bayliwicke which might spend xx. l. per annum, this seems good.

The Sheriff may return the defendant Nihil in his writ, Tamen quaere, where
that the Sheriff may summon the defendant in terra petita: But where the
Atteynt is not of land, there Nihil may be returned upon the defendant.

The Sheriff is to summon the Tenant to be at the Recognition or trial.

The Grand Jury must be 24.

And these are to be warned the first day.

CHAP. 52.
Attachment.
Upon an Attachment the Sheriff may return that the defendant is attached by
Pledges, or is attached by goods, Vide hic cap 45. the form.

Where the Sher^^e attacheth one by Pledges, he must make his retorn thus.
Infranom' I. S. attachiatus est per Pleg' S.B. and R.B.

But he may not return Plegij infranom. I.S S. B. R. B.


For such return were not good for want of the word Attachiatus.

Also if the Sheriff shall but warn the tenant or defendant to appear and
answer, and shall return garnishment, it seems to be good.

If the defendant be a beneficed Clerk, he must be warned by his person, or
by his land if he has any Lay fee. Hic cap. 36.

Where the Sheriff attacheth one by goods, he must in his return set down the
certainty of the goods in Specie, as also the value of the goods: as thus.

Infranom' I. S. attachiatus est per vnum bouem ( or equum, etc.) pretij 40.s.
And where the attachment is made of a living thing or things, the Retorn must
be pretij; and so of a dead thing in the singular number.

But if it be of dead things in the plural number, then it must be ad
valentiam, and not pretij.

Note that wheresoever the writ is Pone per vad' and saluos pleg. There if the
Sheriff shall find the party, he may attach him by Pledges: and if he cannot
find the party, then he may attach him by his goods.

Also the Sheriff (upon an attachment) may return the defendant, Nihil Nihil.
habet in balliua mea per quod attachiari potest; but then he must return
further, Nec est inuentus in eadem.

Attachment sur Appell.
In an Appell of death or Robbery, Non est inuentus is a good return upon the
Attachment.

Also the Sheriff may return that the Plaintiff non inuenit Plegios de
Prosequendo, Ideo, etc.

CHAP. 53. Capias ad respondendum.
A Capias, Alias, or Pluries directed to the Sheriff, may be returned after
diverse manners, and as the case shall require, viz.

1. First, if the Sheriff will not, or cannot execute the writ, then thus.

Infranom' I.S. Non est inuentus Non est inuentus.
in balliua mea.

Or Infranom' I.S. and E.D. non sunt inuenti, etc.

Or Infranom' I.S. and caeteri defend. infranominati, non sunt inuenti in
balliua mea. Plus hic cap. 36.

2. And if the party be taken or found, then thus.

Cepicorpus.
Virtute istius breuis mihi directi Caepi corpus infranominati I.S. cuius
corpus coram Iustic' infrascript' ad diem and locum infracontent' paratu^ ha^eo
prout breue istud exigit. Or prout interius mihi praecipitur.

But upon such a Return the Sheriff must withal have the prisoner, so as he
appears at the day of the Return, or else the Sheriff shall be amerced.

And yet the Sheriff may keep the body after the day, for he is chargeable to
bring him in by his own Return.

In prison.
Virtute istius breuis vobis (Iustic' infrascript) certifico quod ante aduentum
istius breuis, praed I. S. captus fuit, etc. Et in tali prisona detentu^,

Pro si spitione feloniae. Pro Condempnation' in placito Debiti, etc. Per
Capias ad Satisfaciend in Debt.
Pur Arrerages de Account. Virtute cuivsdam Quaerele, etc. in placito D^bit^
super demand de xx.l. in tali Curia, ad s^^tam I.G. etc.
But in these and the like cases, the Sheriff in his Return must show the true
cause of his being in prison in particular; and nevertheless the Sheriff must
have the body of the prisoner in Court, or so as he appears at the day of the
Return.

Quod Commissus fuit per duos de Conci^io Regis, etc. but here the Sheriff upon
the Capias must arrest the defendant, though he had his body before; and must
have his body in Court at the day.

Quod ante istud breue mihi deliberat' fuit; Aliter.
or post quam istud breue (de Capias) mihi deliberat' fuit, Supersedeas.
and ante Captionem infranom' prefati I. S. Idem I. S. protulit mihi breue
Domini Regis de Supersedeas, quod huic breui est co^fut. Ideo vlcerius ad
executionem istius breuis, Nihil per me actum est, these are good Retornes.

Quod Cepi corpus, etc. qui postea protulit mihi breue Domini Regis de
Supersedeas, etc. Ideo corpus suum coram, etc. habere non possum, this is not
good.

Quod Caepi corpus, etc. and ipsum ad gaolam, etc. Posteaque viz. tali die,
etc. pretextu cuiusdam alterius breuis dicti Domini Regis mihi directi, cuius
transcript' vobis mitto huic breui annex' predictum I.S. a prisona illa
deliberari feci, Et ideo corpus suum, etc. habere non possum.

These two last Retornes seem not to be good, for after he was arrested or
taken upon the Capias, upon the Return of the Sheriff, he is to be delivered
by the Court.

Aliter.
Also upon a Capias, the Sheriff may make these Retornes:

Quod fugit ad Libertatem T.P. and ibid. morat', etc.

Mandaui balliuo Libertatis de, etc. See hic cap. 39. and infra.

That a Rescous was made, etc. Vide hic cap. 36.

Languidus, etc.

That the party is dead, quaere de hoc.

For these 5. last Retornes. See hic cap. 36.

Quod breue tarde Tarde.
venit, etc. is no good return upon a Capias, but the Sheriff shall be amerced
therefore.

Virtute istius breuis mihi directi mandaui I.D. balliuo libertatis N. Episcopi
E. qui habet retorn', Maudaui balliuo.
etc. ad capiendum and arrestand' infranom' I. S. Qui quidem ballinus nullum
mihi adhuc dedit responsum.

Or, Qui mihi respondit quod infranom' I.S. non est inuentus in balliua sua.

Or thus: Qui mihi respondit quod cepit corpus Infranom' I.S. cuius quide^
corpus ad diem and locum infracon' parat habet ad faciend' ea omnia quae istud
breue in se exigit and requirit.

Upon a Capias against a Clerk, what return the Shriefe may make. Clericus.
See hic cap. 36.

Where there be two or diverse of name. See hic cap. 61. how to make the
Return.

CHAP. 54.
Capias ad satisfaciendum.
VIrtute istius breuis mihi directi Cepi corpus Cepi corpus.
infranominati I.S. cuius corpus ad diem and locum infracontenta paratum habeo,
etc.

A.B. Armig' vic'.

But where the Sheriff retorneth Cepi corpus upon a Capias ad satisfac', he
must be sure to have the body in Court at the day otherwise he is chargeable
for the whole debt.

If the Sheriff has taken the body in Execution and after a writ of Praerog.
de habeas corpus out of the Exchequer (^r any other like writ out of any other
Court) shall come to the Sheriff against the same prisoner, so that the Sheriff
is thereupon to bring in the body, he must in his Return show the cause of the
imprisonment or deteyner of the prisoner, that so he may beremanded, or else
committed to some other prison upon the execution, and so shall the Sheriff be
discharged.

And if a man be in prison for felony, and be atteinted, and after a Capias ad
satisfac', etc. comes to the Sheriff against the prisoner, he may return
that the party is atteinted, and that therefore he cannot take him in Execution.

Or the Sheriff, (if he will) may serve the execution, but then he must be sure
to keep the prisoner, notwithstanding any pardon of the felony.

Upon a Capias ad Satisfac', Non est inuentus Non est inuentus.
is a good return.

Note that upon the Capias ad Satisfac', if the execution be duly done by the
Sheriff, Null Retorn.
and that the Plaintiff has his demand, the Sheriff needs not to return this
writ.

Plus hic cap. 29.

Capias vtlagatum.
Virtute, etc. Cepi corpus Cepi corpus.
I.S. infranom' cuius corpus coram Iustic' infrascript' ad diem and locum
infracontenta parat' habeo prout interius mihi precipitur.

Residuum execut' istius breuis patet in quadam Inquisitione huic breui annex'.
ss.

Inquisitio Indent' capta apud, etc. Qui dicun' super Sacrament' suum Quod I.
S. in dicto breue nominat. etc.

Also upon a Capias vtlag. Non est inuentus Non est inuentus.
is a good return. Infranomin' I. S. Non est inuentus in balliua mea.

Resid' execut' istius breuis patet in quadam Inquis. etc.

For note that upon a Capias vtlagat' whether the Sheriff retorneth a Caepi
co^pus, or a Non est inuentus, he must also enquire by a Jury of twelve men,
what lands or goods the party vtlawed had within the County the day of the
vtlary, or at any time after.

And the Sheriff must return the Inquisition thereof made, under his own
seal, and the seals of the Jurors.

But the Sheriff may not arrest or take the body of one that is vtlawed in any
personal action, without the writ of Capias vtlag' first delivered to him
(except where the party is vtlawed for felony or Treason.)

Upon the Capias vtlagatum, if the party be found, the Sheriff shall take and
put him in prison without bail.

And upon the Capias vtlagat', the high Sheriff shall do well to take bond of
his Vndersherife, or Baylifes, with condition to bring the defendant to prison
if he be arrested or taken: For that diverse Vndersherifes and Baylifes if they
have taken a man upon a Capias vtlagat', they first take money of the Plaintiff
to take the defendant: and after the defendant being taken, they take money of
him to let him go again, they pretending that it is to reuerse the vtlary,
which they have nothing to do withal, but are only to imprison him.

Also upon the Capias vtlagat' tbe Sheriff may seize and keep his goods, etc.
See thereof Plus hic cap. 15.

The Sheriff may return vtlary upon an Enfant, if he be above the age of 14.
years. And being taken, the Sheriff may imprison him, and may seize his goods.

CHAP. 55.
Capias ad valentiam.
Upon this writ the Sheriff is to summon the defendant ( scz. the vouchee) to
be before the Justices at the day mentioned in the writ, etc. And he is to
return the names of the Summoners with the writ.

The Sheriff also is (upon this writ) to seize the lands of the vouchee ( scz.
to such a proportion as the writ mentions) into the Kings hands, by the view
and valuation of neighbors or other lawful men of that County, and is to
retorn the certeinty of those lands and the day of such his seizure. together
with the names of those veiors, and of the Summoners under his seal.

And this seizure must be of such lands and tenements of the vouchee, as he
has in fee simple, by purchase, descent, or otherwise.

Upon this writ against diverse, the Sheriff returned that one of them had
nothing, etc. And that of the other he had taken according to the proportion;
but for that the Sheriff cannot apportion without a warrant he was amerced.

Covenant.
In breue de Covenant, Covenant.
whether it be to leuy a Fine, or otherwise, the Sheriff may make his Return
thus.

Plegij de presequendo. Ioh. Do. Rich. Roo.


Summonitores infranominati I. S. the Defendant. I. R. W. G,


In a writ of Covenant to leuy a Fine, Nihil Nihil.
seems to be no good return, for the Sheriff ought to summon him in terra
petita.

In other writs of Covenant, Nihil is a good return.

In writs of Covenant the Sherif may summon the Defendant by his person.

CHAP. 56.
Retorn' breuis Originalis in Debt.
Debt.
Plegij de Prosequendo. Ioh. Do. Rich. Roo.


Summonitores Infranominat. I.S. (the Def.) H R. W. G.


A. B. Armig' vic'.

And if the defendant be insufficient, then the return must be thus: Plegij de
prosequendo. Ioh. Do. Rich. Roo.


Infranominatus I. S. nihil habet in balliua mea per quod summoniri potest.



In this writ, Nihil habet is a good return without saying, Nec habuit post
receptionem breuis; or Nec habuit die quo, etc. for that shall be intended.

But in this writ it is no good return, that the defendant has paid the debt.
Hic cap. 36.

Detinue.
In Detinue, Detinue.
where it is awarded that the Plaintiff shall recover the thing demanded, he
shall have a Distring' ad deliberand', etc. And the Sheriff may thereupon
return Issues, or Nihil as the truth is.

Upon the Distring' ad deliberand', and to enquire of the value, the Sheriff is
to enquire by a Jury, and to return what damages, and costs the Plaintiff has
sustained, and also what the true value of the goods detained, be.

Also the Sheriff may return Mandaui balliuo Libertat' qui nullum dedit resp.

But in the writ ad deliberand', etc. in Detinue, it is no good return, that
there are no such goods.

The Sheriff s here to take Pledges of the Plaintiff, de prosequendo. And to
summon the defendant to appear at the day, etc.

Distringas against the defendant.

A Distringas directed to the Sheriff to distreine the defendant for his
appearance, may be returned after this manner.

If the defendant be sufficient, then thus: Manucaptores infranomin' I. S. I.
R. R. G.


Exitus -- 3.s. iiij.d.



If there de diverse defendants, then thus: 40. d. 40. d.

T. D. and A. R. districti sunt per caerras and catalla sua secundam formam
huius breuis, vnde exitus prout patet super eorum Capit': Et manucapti sunt per
I. D. and A. S. quod sint ad diem and locum infrascript' iuxta tenorem huius
breuis, etc.



And so note that in this Distring', the Sheriff must always return issues
upon the defendants to compel them to appear: which issues must be more then
the costs of the Plaintifes writ of Distring', (which seems to be xiij. d.)
See hic cap. 89. that they ought to be reasonable and to a greater value.

Also the defendant must find Manucaptors for his appearance.

In a writ of Account upon the Distring', the Sheriff returned Manucaptors, Et
quod non sunt Exitus, and it was adjudged a good return.

In Debt upon the D^string', the Sheriff returned Mandaui balliuo Libertatis
de, etc. qui nullum dedit responsum, and for that he did not retorn further,
Quod nulla habet Exitus in balliua mea, the Sheriff was amerced.

So that upon this Distring', the Sheriff must return reasonable issues upon
the defendant; and must return Distrinxi. Quaere.

And although the words of the distring' be, Quod d^string' per omnes terras
and catalla sua, etc. yet the Sheriff ought to distreine him but reasonably,
and not according to the words of the writ.

Also a Clerk may not be distreined by his goods (but see what return the
Sheriff shall make, hic cap. 36.

If the defendant be insufficient, then thus.

Infranom' I.S. Nihil Nihil.
habet in balliua mea per quod, nec vbi potest Distringi. Plus hic cap. 82.
Also in this writ the Sheriff may return Tarde.

Also the Sheriff may return, that the defendant is dead, except it be upon
the Distring' in an Atteynt.

Return de Summons in Dower.
Plegij de Prosequendo. Ioh. Do. Rich. Roo.


Summonitores infranom. I.S. I. W. W. C.


Et ad maxim vsuale ostium Ecclesiae, parochialis de P. infrascript. super
diem Dominicum, scz. quarto die Iulij, Anno infrascript. immediate post diuinum
seruic. nulla praedicatione adtunc and ibidem existente, public proclamari
feci secundum formam Statuti, prout istud breue in se exigit and requirit.

A. B. armig' vic'.

So that upon this writ the Sheriff must first summon the defendants upon the
land: And after he must proclaim the Summons at the Church door of the
Parish, where the land, etc. lies: and then must return all as before. See hic
cap. 102.

Return de Petit Cape in Dower.
Virtute, etc. tali die and anno Cepi in manus Domini Regis, tertiam partem
tenementorum infraspec' cum pertin' proui interius mihi precipitur.

A. B. Armig' vic'.

Upon the Petit Cape, the Sheriff must summon the tenant to answer his default
(only) and not to answer to the demandant.

Also the Sheriff is to seize the lands into the Kings hands, 15. days at the
least, before the return of the writ.

Retorn' breuis de visu in Dower.
Virtute istius breuis, etc. habere feci infrano^' B.C. visu^ de tertia part'
te^' infraspec' in presenc' N. C. R.D. M. B. and C.D. quatuor milit' ( or
homines) ex illis qui visui illi interfuerunt: Et vlterius certifico Iustic'
infrascr' quod dixi quatuor milit' praed' quod sint cora^ Iustic' infrascr. ad
diem and locum infracont' ad testificand' visum illum, prout per breue praed'
mihi precipitur.

In Dower if the demand be of a rent, the land, etc. out of which the rent is
issuing, shall be put in view.

See hic cap. 63.

Retorn' breuis de Seisina in Dote.
Virtute istius breuis mihi directi and huic schedulae anex' tali die, etc.
haberi feci P:B. vid. in breue pred' nominat' plenariam seisinam de tertia
part Manerij de B. cum pertin' in eodem breue specific', viz. de vna aula,
etc. tenend' praef. P.B. in separali per metas and bundas, nomine totius dotis,
etc.

So that the Sheriff (in Dower) is to make execution; and to put the wife in
seisin of the third part, by meets and bounds, if he can.

And yet in some cases the Sheriff is to assign the wife her Dower to hold in
Common per my and per tout, and not by meets and bounds; as of land held by
her husband in Coparcinery, or in Common;; so of the profits of a Mill, of
Common of pasture, or of an office.

In Dower of 3. Manors, or 3. acres, the Sheriff may assign to the wife, one
entire Manor, or one Acre for all: And he may assign the whole Manor with
the Aduou^^n; or he may assign the third part of each, and the third
presentment to the Aduowson.

The writ to the Sheriff was to deliver the wife ten marks per annum in land
and rent, and the Sheriff delivered her in land 5. marks per annum and 5.
^arkes in Rent issuing out of the land, whereof she was dowable, and holden
good.

Upon the recovery of a third part of a Manor in Dower, the Sheriff may
assign to the wife, a Copihold with other lands.

And the Sheriff may put the wife in seisin by a clod, or by an herb, or by
any beast being upon the land.

Plus hic cap. 63.

Upon an Habere fac' seisinam in dote, the Sherif returned, that the offered
the demandment seisin de tertia part, etc. by mee^es and bounds, and that she
refused it, this is a good return.

But if the Sheriff in the beginning retorns, quod habere fecit seisin',
(showing the parcells) que omnia obtuli deliberare, etc. but she refused it,
this is repugnant and void.

If the Sheriff shall deliver to the wife the moyty of the land in execution
for the third part, there seems no remedy against the Sheriff, but a Scire
fac' against the wife.

In this writ it is no good Return for the Sheriff, to allege Nontenancie in
him whom the writ mentions to be tenant.

Note that the Sheriff may execute this writ, scz. may assign the thirds to
the wife, himself without any Jury.

Retorn' breuis ad Inquirendum de dampnis in Dote. Executio istius breuis patet
in quadam Inquisitione huic breue annex'.
Inquisitio Indentat. capta apud, etc. ^oram, etc. per Sacramentum, etc. Qui
dicunt, etc. Quod infranom' I.D. (tali die, Anno and loco) obijt seisitus, etc.
de and in Tenementis infraspec' and quod tenementa praed' valent per annum etc.
Et quod sex Anni and 3. quarters Anni delabuntur a tempore mortis pred' I.D.
and quod A.D. infranom' sustinuit dampna occasion dotis suae. infraspec' ad
valenc' x. l. In cuius rei testimon', etc.

Upon the writ to enquire of damages, if the Jury will find no damages, and
the Sheriff makes his retorn accordingly, though the Return be not good yet
the Sheriff shall not be amerced for this default of the Jury.

Return de breue de Droit.
A writ of Right, the writ was, that the Sheriff should return 4. knights, to
choose the grand Assise retornable such a day, and the Sheriff returned that
there were no Knights but Burgesses, and the Sheriff was therefore amerced: for
in such case the Sheriff was to return them Knights, though they be no
Knights. See hic cap. 86.

And yet in a writ of Right, the Sheriff returned two Knights, and two
Esquires, to choose the grand Assise, and this was holden a good Return, so as
the Sheriff returns, That there were no more Knights within the same County.
But by others, if they were not all Knights, the Sherifes Return was without
Warrant: and yet it seems that the Sheriff may return others in default of
Knights. Hic cap. 86.

If there be not so many Knights in the County, as the Sheriff shall have in
command to return or to summon, the Sheriff may return, that there are not so
many Knights in his County.

A writ of Right was brought in the Lords Court, and removed by a Tolt into
the County Court, and after by a Pone it was removed out of the county in
Banco; and thereupon the Sheriff returned the Writ of Right, and the Pone, but
not the Tolt; and it was holden, that the Sheriff needs not to return the
Tolt.

CHAP. 57. Aetate probanda.
IN this writ directed to the Sheriff, to enquire of the age of the Kings Ward,
every one that shall pass in that Enquest, must be of the age of forty two
years at the least. And there ought to be twelve of the Jury, as in all other
Enquiries.

And the heir is to inform that Enquest by certain signs and tokens, of the
time of his birth, etc. which signs so given in evidence, shall be returned by
the Sheriff, as well as the principal matter. Quaere for the use.

Eiectione firmae.

Plegij de prosequendo. Ioh. Do. Rich Roo.


Infranom' I. S. attachiatus est per centum oues, pretij viginti librarum.

Or, Infranom' attach' est per pleg'. B.C. D.E.


Infranom' I.S. Nihil Nihil.
habet in balliua mea per quod attachiari potest.

CHAP. 58.
Return de Elegit.
VIrtute istius breuis ego A. B. Vic' Com' infrascript' (tali die and an')
Liberaui I. B. medietatem Manerior' in Inquisitione huic breui confut'
specificat' cum pertin': Elegit.
per extent' in dicta Inquisic' fact'. Tenend sibi and assign' suis vt liberum
tenementum suum, quousque idem I.B. debitum and dampna sua infrascript'
leuauerit prout interius mihi praecipitur.

A.B. arm' Vic'.

Executio istius breuis patet in quadam Inquisic' huic breui annex. A.B. ar'
Vic'. Aliter.

Inquisitio indent' capta apud, etc. per Sacram', etc. Qui dicunt super
sacram', Quod B. C. in breui praed nomin', (tali die and anno) fuit seisitus in
Dominico suo vt de feodo, de and in vno messuag' vocat', etc. iacent', etc.
modo in occupatione A.I. vid. clari annui valoris, etc. xl. s. Ac etiam de and
in vno alio messuag', etc. (Quae omnia and singula praed B.C. nuper perquisiuit
sibi and haered suis de, etc.) Quod quidem messuag' in tenura praed A.I. vna
cum, etc. cum pertin', pro medietate omnium terrarum and tenementorum praedict'
Ego praed Vic', deliberari feci I. B. in breue praed nominat'. Tenend sibi,
etc. quousque debitum suum de C.li. vna cum xx. s. pro dampn', etc. leuauerit
prout, etc. Et vlterius Iurat' praedict' dicunt, etc. Quod praedict' B. C.
Nulla alia sine plura habet bona aut catalla terras sieve tenementa in Com'
praedict' ad eorum noticiam. In cuius rei testimonium, tam ego praefatus vic'
quam Iurator' praedict' huic Inquisitioni sigilla nostra alternatim apposuimus
die, anno, and loco supradict', etc.

A.B. Armig' Vic'.

What lands and goods the Sheriff may take and deliver in execution upon an
Elegit, and in what manner, see hic cap. 28.

Upon the Elegit, the extent and valuation of the lands, and the preising of
the goods must be by an Enquest of twelve men.

Also the Sheriff is to make execution by meets and bounds. See Plus hic, cap.
28.

Note that if the land be in extent, or already taken in execution, and then
an Elegit comes to the Sheriff at another man's suit, yet the Sheriff may
seize and deliver the same lands again to the last man upon the Elegit, scz.
the reuersion thereof, Tenendum, etc. cum acciderit.

Or else the Sheriff may only extend and value, etc. the land, and return the
same valuation, and show further, that he did not, or cannot deliver the same
to the Plaintiff, (or make execution thereof) for that another had the same in
execution before.

But for the other moitie of the land which was not extended, etc. to the first
man upon his Elegit, the Sheriff may presently seize and deliver the same to
any other person, upon another Elegit or execution coming afterward to the
Sherifes hands, together with the reuersion of the first moitie, cum acciderit.

Upon the Elegit, Nihil, or Nulla bona, is a good Return.

Also the Sheriff may return the extent for lands, Et nulla bona. Or the
Sheriff may return the Extent of goods, and not lands. He may return Mandaui
balliuo libertatis, etc.

Upon an Elegit the sheriff delivered the lands in execution, without making
seuerance; and upon complaint thereof to the Court, another Writ went to the
Sheriff to make Seuerance.

A Writ of Extent awarded in the time of one King, and executed by inquisition,
but before the return thereof the King dies, and after the Sheriff returns
the Extent, etc. quaere if such return be not without warrant.

Upon the Elegit, for that upon the Inquisition it appeared, that the Defendant
had conveyed his land to another upon condition, etc. and yet took the profits,
the Sheriff thereupon returned, That he and the Jury were in doubt, whither
the land were extendable, and prayed the advice of the Court therein.

Note, That upon an Elegit against one that has two Manors, the Sheriff may
deliver the one Manor to the Plaintiff, in the name of the moitie of all, and
is not bound to deliver the moitie of each Manor. And so of two acres of land:
but this seems to be where the two Manors, etc. be of equal yearly value.

Breue de Estrepement. Estrepement.


Note, that the Sheriff by force of this Writ may resist them which are about
to make Wast; and if otherwise he cannot stay or refrain them from making
Wast, he may imprison them, or make his Warrant to others to imprison them: and
if it be needful, he may take Posse Comitatus for his or their aid.

Extent Extent.
sur Recogn', ou Statute.

Virtute istius breuis, etc. Cepi corpus infranom' I.S. cuius quidem corpus ad
diem and locum infracontent' parat' habeo, prout interius mihi praecipitur.

Residuum execut' istius breuis patet in quadam inquisitione huic breui annex'.

A.B. Armig' Vic.

Inquisitio indentat' capta apud, etc. 4. die Aug. Anno, etc. coram, etc.
virtute breuis Domini Regis mihi direct' and huic inquisic' annex' per
sacrament' etc. Qui dicunt super sacram', Quod B.C. in breue prad nom', die
recog' debit' in eodem breue specificat' fuit seisitus in Dominico, etc. de et
in manerio de A. in Com' praed clari annui valoris in omnibus exitibus vltra
repress. C. li. ac de et in Manerio, etc. Et vlterius iurat' praed super
sacram' suum p^d dicunt, quod praedict' B. C. die Recog' debit'. predici' seu
vnquam postea, nulla alia etc. ad eorum notitiam, quod extendi appreciari, aut
in Manus dicti Domini Regis cepi aut seisiri possunt. Quae quidem maneria Terr'
et Tenementa praedict' cum pertin' ego praefatus Vic die captionis huius
Inquisic' cepi in manus dicti Domini Regis per extent' praedict'. In cuius rei
testimon', etc.

I.S. infranom', non est inuentus in balliua mea, ideo ipsum capere non possum
ad praesens. Sed quoad extend et appreciand omnia terras et catalla ipsius I.S.
iuxta formam istius breuis, executio inde patet in quadam inquisic', huic bri'
consut'. Quae quidem terr' et catalla in dicta inquisit' content' in manus
Domini Regis seisiri feci.

I.S. infrascr' non est inuentus in balliua mea. Et vlterius certifico, quod
seisiri feci in Maner' Domini Regis Manerium, etc. in inquisic' huic breui
consut' spec', prout interius mihi praecipitur. Residuum execui', etc.

Upon an Extendi facias upon a Statute Merchant, the Sheriff may return, that
the party non est inuentus, and that he has extended the land, and delivered
the same to the Plaintiff.

Upon an Extent of a Statute staple, (which is to take the body, and to extend
the lands and goods) the Sheriff returned, that he has extended the land, but
speaks not of the goods; and though this be but part of that the Sheriff was
commanded to do, yet it was holden to be good for the land.

Upon an Extendi facias upon a statute Merchant, the Sheriff returned, that he
had extended the lands, but did not return, that he had delivered them to the
Plaintiff, whereupon he should have been amerced.

Upon an Extendi facias upon a Statute Staple, the Sheriff extended the lands
of the Defendant, and preised his goods, and seized them into the Kings hands,
according to the Writ, but delivered them not to the Plaintiff, (which he
indeed is not to do until the Liberate comes to him, although he ought to
have returned that extent and preisement) and after a Writ of Praerog' came out
of the Exchequer, commanding the Sheriff to leu^e first an hundred pounds for
the King, etc. and the Sheriff returned the special matter upon the Writ out
of the Exchequer, Et ideo nihil inde fecit, etc. and the Sheriff was therefore
amerced, and was compelled to return the Extent in the Exchequer, for the
Kings Debt.

Otherwise upon an Extendi facias the Sheriff may return the special matter,
scz. That he cannot make execution, for that another has those Lands in
execution by force of an Elegit, etc. or for that another is in by descent,
etc. for that they are not to be put out of possession without a Scire facias.

Upon an Extendi facias upon a Statute, it has been holden a good return,
that the party has no land but only in ancient Demesne. Quaere and vide hic
cap. 26.

Upon an Extendi facias (sued by two) upon a statute, the Sheriff returned,
That one of the Plaintifes was dead, and good. Or the Sheriff may return the
Conusor, Mortuus.

Upon an Extendi facias, the Sheriff returned, that the Conusor was dead, and
also an Inquisition of the Extent of the lands of the Conusor, but in the
Inquisition no certain estate was returned, but that the Conusor fuit seisitus
die Recognit', etc. de Manerio de A. without showing of what estate, and this
return was held insufficient, for that seisitus may be for life, or in tail,
in which cases the land after the death of the Conusor is not extendable: So
that where the Conusors death appears in the Return, there, of necessity
his seisin must be found to be of an estate in fee simple only.

Upon an Extent of a Statute, the Sheriff returned the extent of the land, and
not of goods, and it was allowed.

Upon an extent of a Statute Merchant, if the Sheriff returns Tarde, or
returns Mandaui balliuo libertatis, he shall be punished. Quaere.

The Sheriff returns, that none came to receive the land, per quod deliberat'
facere non potuit, good. Also he may return, Non est inuentus, nec habet bona,
nec terras.

The Jury may find, that the Conusor had no land but in right of his wife, and
that she ouerliueth him: or that the Conusee has purchased the land after the
Recogn', etc.

Plus hic cap. 24, 25, 26, and 27.

CHAP. 59.
Retorn' de Exigens.
VIrtute istius breuis mihi directi, Exigent.
ad Com' meum tent' apud C. in Com' C. infrasc' (tali die and anno) infranom'
I. S. primo exactus fuit and non comparuit. Et ad Com' meum ibidem tent' (tali
die and anno) praed' I.S. Secundo exactus fuit and non comparuit. Et ad Com'
meum (vt supra) tertio exactus fuit and non comparuit. Et ad Com. meum (vt
supra) Quarto exactus fuit and non comparuit. Et ad Com' meum (vt supra) quinto
exactus fuit and non comparuit. Ideo praed' I.S. per iudicium I.W. and R.S.
gen' Coronator' dicti Dom' Regis com' praed' secundum lege^ and consuetud'
regni Angliae vtlagatus est. ( or if it be a woman, waiuiataest.)

If there be above two defendants, then thus.

Infranom' I.S. and ceteri def. infranom' primo exacti fuer' and non
comparuer', nec aliquis eorum comparuit. Et ad Com' meum, etc. (vt supra) Ideo
praed' I.S. and ceteri def. infranem' (or name them all) per Iudicium, etc. vt
supra.

If any of the defendants yield themselves, then thus.

Virtute, etc. and ad com' meum ibidem tent' (tali die and Anno) I. S. and
ceteri def. infranom' Quinto exacti fuer' ad quem diem predictus I.S.
comparuit, and se reddit prisonae, Domini Regis Castri sui Cantabr. cuius
quide^ corpus coram Justice. infrascr. ad die^ and locu^ infraco^t. parat' habeo
prout interius mihi precipitur. Sed ceteri def. infrano^. non comparuer', etc.
Ideo, etc. vt supra.

The Sheriff also may Return, Languidus in pris. Mortuus. Tamen quaere de hoc.
Protulit supersed' See hic cap. 53. and hic infra.


But where upon the Exigit, the Sheriff returns Reddit se, he must have the
body in Court at the day: or else return Languidus in prisona.

If the Sheriff returns Mortuus, by some opinions the Sherif shall be amerced,
for that by the Exigent the Sheriff has authority but to call the party from
Country to County to appear and answer the Law, etc. and if he appear, then
to take and imprison him.

If after two or three Counties, the King shall happen to dye, and in the next
kings time, the other Counties be kept and proclamation made, and then the
Sheriff returns quinto exactus. this is error.

The Sheriff may return that the party is in Prison upon a condemnation for
debt; but then the Sheriff must bring him into the Court.

Also the Sheriff may return that the party yielded himself to the old
Sheriff who has not delivered him.

Where (upon the Exigit) the Sheriff returns, Protulit supersedeas, (or
protulit breue Domini Regis de Non molestando; or que le Roy luy maunde per
breue de Privy seal, que il auoit luy Pardon, etc. and command que ne soit
endamage, or the like,) Ideo vlterius procedere non potui, the Sheriff has
been amerced for such Retorns. Quaere ideo.

Also upon the Exigent, the Sheriff may make his Return thus. scz.

Quod pro defectu (Comitatum or Coronatorum) Nihil actum est.

And so note that he which is sued, if he do not appear (upon the mean
process, etc.) then upon the Exigent he shall be solemnly proclaimed, demanded,
or called by the Sheriff at 5. Counties, scz. from County to County, each one
after another, to appear, and to yield his body and answer to the Law, or else
that he shall be vtlawed; and if he comes in at any of the said five County
Courts, the Sheriff is to take and imprison him. But if he comes not in
within that time, then the Sheriff with the assistance of one Coroner (at the
least) is to pronounce him vtlawed, scz. to pronounce him to be out of the
protection of the King and his Law. But the Judgment is to be given or
pronounced by the Coroner in the 5. County. And then the Sheriff is to return
the same as before.

And the Sheriff in such his return must set down certainly the day, year,
and place, where and when his County Courts are kept, and the party so called.

Also it must appear in such Return, that it was per Iudicium Coronatorum;
for they be Judges of the Vtlaries.

An Enfant above the age of 14. years, may be returned vtlawed.

Note that the Sheriff has been deeply amerced, for imbeaseling an Exige^t,
or for retorning the same falsely hic cap. 37.

Return de Exigent inter duos vic'.
Istud breue prout indorsatur, mihi deliberat fuit per I. C. militem nuper vic'
Com' infrascr' prox' praedecessor' meum, in eius exitu ab officio.

Et ad Comit' meum tont' apud Castrum Cantabr. in Com' C. infrascr' (tali die
and Anno) infranom' I.S. Tertia exactus fuit and non comparuit. Et ad Comit'
meum tent' (vt supra) Quarte exactus fuit, and non comparuit, etc.

For the return of an Exigent allocato Comitatu, see my book at large.

Retorn' breuis de Proclam' super Exigent.
Virtute istius breuis mihi directi, ad Commit. meum ten' apud, etc. (tali die
and anno) Primo proclamari feci. Et ad generalem Session' pacis tentum apud,
etc. in Com' praed' (tali die and anno) Secund' proclamari feci. Et ad maxim
vsuale ostium Ecclesiae de B. infrascr. super diem Dominicum, scz. (tali die
and Anno) immediate post diuinum seruic' (Nulla praedicatio eadem Ecclesia
adtunc ibidem existens) vno mense ad minus antequam infranom' I.S. Quinto
exactus fuit, Tertio proclamari feci, Quod infranom' I.S. se reddat mihi prout
interius mihi praecipitur.

A.B. armig' vic'.

Aliter.
Quod infranom' I.S. and ceteri omnes def. infranom' se reddant mihi, Ita quod
habeam corpora little coram Iustic' infrascr' ad diem and locum infracont. prout
istud breue in se exigit and requirit.

And so note that upon every Exigent where a writ of Proclamation is awarded
(and delivered) to the Sheriff before any Vtlary pronounced, the Sheriff also
must make three several Proclamations as aforesaid. And for want thereof, etc.
the Vtlary shall be void; and besides the party grieved may have his action
against the Sheriff, and the Sheriff shall be further amerced at the discretion
of the Justices. Plus hic cap. 102.

Retorn' sur breue de Restitution apres Exigent.
An vtlary being reuersed, a writ of Restitution was awarded to the Sheriff,
pro bonis restituendis, The Sheriff returned that he had sold the goods for 40.
l. and brought the money into the Court; but the return was holden
insufficient, for that the writ de Capias vtlag' did not warrant or command the
Sheriff to sell the goods, Vide hic cap. 15. and 30.

Upon such a weit directed to a baylife (who seized the goods of one that was
vtlawed) the baylife may not plead that he was not baylife, but must answer
whether he had the goods or no, and how they are deuested out of his possession.

And so note that the Sheriff in some cases may seize goods, and may keep
them, but may not safely sell them. Vt hic supra.

And in some cases the Sheriff may seize goods, and may and ought to sell them;
and notwithstanding that the Judgment be reuersed, etc. yet there shall be no
Restitution of the goods, etc. hic cap. 30.

CHAP. 60.
Retorn' breuis de falso Iudicio.
VIrtute istius breuis, assumptis mecum I. W. etc. quatuor discret' and
legalibus militibus (or hominibus) de balliua mea, in propria persona mea
accessi ad Cur. Dn' Caroli Reg' Angl', de O. tent' apud O. (tali die and Anno)
and in plena Curia illa Recordari feci loquelam, vnde infra fit mentio, Et
record illud habeo coram Iustic' infraspec' ad diem infracontent' quod huic
br'i est consut' sub sigillo meo, and sigillis B. C. D. and E quatuor legalium
hominum qui record' illo interfuer'.

And here the Sheriff must set down and return the Names of the four Knights
of the County which go with him, as also the Names of the 4. Suitors of the
same Court whose seals be thereto, vt supra.

Virtute istius breuis, assumptis mecum C.D. E F. G. H. and I. K. quatuor
legalibus milit (or hominibus) de Com' meo, in propria persona mea accessi ad
Curiam E. tent' apud, etc. (tali die and Anno) et in plena Curia illa ab F. G.
etc. sectator eiusdem Curiae, and R. H. seneschallo ibidem, petij Recordum
Loquelae, quae est in eadem Curia, etc. inter. C. D. petentem and I. S.
tenentem fieri and mihi liberari': Qui quidem Seneschallus, and Sectatores,
Recordum illud inde mihi liberare nolueru^t, ob quod Execut' dicti breuis
facere non potui.

Or the Sheriff may make these Returns.
1. That he came to the Court to record the Plea, and that the Suitors would
not deliver him the Record, nor suffer him to have it, or that the Suitors
there refused to make the Record, or to Record the plea: Or that the Suitors
said that there was no such Plea; naming such Suitors by their proper N^mes,
etc.

2. That the Steward, the baylife, and Suitors, (naming them all) were present
in Court, when he came to return the Plea, and required the sight thereof,
which they denied him, etc.

3. That after the receipt of this writ, and before the Return thereof, no
Court was holden, so as he could not execute the writ.

4. That the Sheriff has required the Lord to hold his Court, and the Lord
would not, etc.

5. Quod breue adeo Tarde veuit, quod Executionem eiusdem facere non potuit.

And so note that upon this writ the Sheriff is to repair to the Court in the
writ mentioned, and there to require the sight of the Plea, whether it be
depending, or determined: Also he is to record the saine Plea, and to return it
with the writ.

The Sheriff is also to take Pledges of the Plaintiff de prosequendo: And to
summon or warn the defendant to appear at the day before the Justices to
hear the said Record; and to return the names of the Summoners.

He must also take with him to the Court four lawful men of the same County;
and must return the writ under his Seal, and the seals of four suitors of
the same Court, together with the Record.

CHAP. 61.
Return de Fieri facias.
1 VIrtute istius breuis mihi directi, fieri feci de bonis and catallis
infranom' I.S. ad valenc' 100. l. (or infrascript' 100. l.) quas quidem 100. l.
ad diem and locum infracontent' parat' habeo, prout istud breue in se exigit
and requirit.

Alias.
Fieri feci, etc. ad valenc' 200. l. and inde vendidi ad valenc' 100. l. quas
quidem 100. l. etc. vt supra. and quod residuum remanent intendit', etc. (Or
thus, Quae bona and catalla penes me remanent inuendit' pro defectu emptoru^.)

Alias.
Fieri feci, etc. quandam dimissionem and concessionem, eidem I. S. per quendam
T.G. Gen' per indentur' suam factam, de and in vno messuag', etc. scituat',
etc. infra balliuam meam. Et praedict' dimissionem, ac omne and totum ius
statum titulum terminum annorum, and demand quae praedict' I. S. modo habet de
and in praedict' praemiss. virtute eiusdem dimissionis aut aliter, venditioni
exposui and vendidi cuidam C.D. Gen' pro summa 56. l. 3. s. 4. d. Ac etiam
fieri feci de alijs bonis and catallis praedict' I.S. ad valenc' 40. l. Quas
quidem denar' summas ad diem and locum, etc. vt supra, Et quod praedict' I. S.
nulla alia sieve plura bona aut catalla in balliua mea habet vnde resid praed
debet 300. l. fieri sieve leuari possum secund exigent', huius breuis.

2 Virtute, etc. Cepi bona and catalla I. S. infranom' ad valenc' omnium denar'
infrascr'. Et illa venditioni exposui, ad quod non inueni emptores. Et ideo
denarios infraspec'. habere non possum ad diem and locum infracont' prout mihi
praecipitur.

Where there be diverse of one name.

3. Iustic' infrascr' certifico quod sunt diuersae personae in Commit. meo
Nomin' and cognom. de I.S. viz. I.S. de B.I.S. de C. and I.S. de W. Et quia non
continet' in isto breui, de cuius predict' I.S. bonis and Catallis denar.
infraspec' fieri facere^. Ideo ad executionem istius breuis procedere non potui.

4 Infranom' I.S. nulla habet bona seu catalla, terras sieve tenementa (or Nihil
Nihil.
habet) in balliua mea, vnde denarios (or debitum and dampna) infraspecific',
(aut aliquam inde parcellam) fieri facere possum, prout interius mihi
pracipitur.

Upon a Fieri facias, the Sheriff returns, quod nihil habet, it is not good,
without saying further, Nec habuit post receptionem breuis.

Where the Sheriff returns a Fieri facias, etc. he must withal have the
money in Court at the day.

Or upon a Fieri facias, if it be duly executed, and the money paid to the
Plaintiff, or he otherwise satisfied, the Sheriff needs not to return the
writ. Hic cap. 38.

Also upon a Fieri facias the Sheriff may sell a Lease for years, and yet
never make any mention thereof in his Return, but to return generally, Quod
fieri fecit de bonis and catallis. etc.

Upon a Fieri facias against I.S. who dies before execution, the Sheriff may
levy the execution of the Executors or administrators of I.S.

Upon a Fieri facias, if it shall appear to the Sheriff, that the Defendant
has sold his goods by couin, after the Recovery, there the Sheriff is to
make execution of the goods notwithstanding such sale.

Plus hic cap. 30, 36, and 29.

Upon a Fieri facias sur Deuastauit, upon a recovery had in debt, against
Executors, the Sheriff may return, That the Executors have sold and wasted
diverse other of the Testators goods, and converted the money to their own use.

He may return, That the Executors Nulla habent bona seu catalla, de bonis
suis proprijs in balliua sua, vnde, etc.

Also upon this writ, the Sheriff may take and seize into his hands such goods
of the testators as are remaining in the Executors hands.

Formedon.
Plegij de Prosequendo. Ioh. Do. Rich. Roo.


Summonitores Infranominat. I.S. I. H. T. S.


Upon a Formedon, the Sheriff may return Tarde, etc.

But in a Formdon the Sherif may not return, Quod nihil habet, etc. Or, Non
est inuentus, etc. For that in this writ the Sheriff may summon the Defendant
upon the land demanded, whither he be Tenant thereof, or no.

CHAP. 62. Garrantie de Charters.
THe Process in this writ, is Summons, Attachment, and Distringas infinite:
and upon every of these the Sheriff may return, as is before showed.

In this writ also, Nihil is a good return.

Brief de Guard.
In this writ the Defendant is to be summoned.

Upon this writ the Sheriff may return. That the Enfant is in another County.

In this writ, upon the Distress with Proclamation, the Sheriff may return
Tarde, scz. That the writ came so late; that he could not make Proclamation.

Upon the distress with Proclamation, the Sheriff returned, that as to the
distress, Mandauit balliuo libertatis, etc. and as to the Proclamation, That
he made it himself, this is no good return (by some opinions) for that the
whole return and serving of the writ belongs merely to the bailife. Tamen
quaere, for that the Proclamations are to be made by the Sheriff in the county
Court, and therefore he ought rather to execute the whole.

Grand Cape.
Virtute istius breuis etc. (tali die and anno) per visum R.H. and T.H.
proborum and legalium hominum de com' meo, Cepi in manus Domini Regis terras
infrascript' prout interius mihi praecipiter.

Summonitor', I.D.R.F.

Aliter.
Or, Cepi in manus Domini Regis, omnia terras and tenementa reddit' and seruic'
cum pertin' in breui isto specificat': secundum formam huius breuis.

Note that the Grand Cape must be served ( scz. the lands must be seized into
the Kings hands, by the view of lawful men) fifteen days before the day of
the Return, scz. before the primo die, and the Sheriff shall be accountable
for a the issues thereof. And yet by some opinions, those words Cape in manus
nostras, are but of form, and that the Sheriff ought not to seize the lands
into the Kings hands by force thereof, see hic cap. 11.

But the Sheriff must summon the tenant to answer to his default, and further
to answer to the Demaundants action.

Also the Sheriff must return the names of the Summoners, and veyours,

In this Writ the Sheriff may return that the party has nothing, per quod
Sommoniri potest.

He may return, Quod nullus venit ex part querent' ad ostendend mihi terras,
and ideo non potui Capere, etc.

He may return that there is no such Turn, etc.

He may return Mandaui balliuo libertatis, etc. Cepi in manus Domini Regis
duos solidat' redditus infrascr' per visum etc.

De Petit Cape, vide hic cap. 11. and 31.

CHAP. 63.
Habeas Corpus. Et corpus cum causa.
VIrtute istius breuis vobis Iustic' infraspec' certifico, quod ante aduentum
istius breuis infranom' I.S. Captus fuit (in tali loco) and prisone, etc.
Commiss. pro suspitione proditionis, feloniae, sur Capias vtlagatu^ (or excom')
sur Account, pro transgressione, or Virtute alterius breuis (Domini Regis,
cuius tenor' sequitur' etc.) Attamen corpus eius coram vobis ad die et locum
infracontent' prompt' habeo, prout interius mihi praecipiter.

And yet if a man be in prison for treson or felony, and be attainted, it
seems the Sheriff may return this, and that therefore he cannot have the
body in Court at the day, etc.

Aliter.
Infranom' I.S. Captus fuit etc. Et Prisone, etc. Commissus virtute cuiusdam
breuis de Capias ad satisfact': Ideo corpus eius ad diem etc. habere non possum
prout etc. But quaere of this return. ss.

For if a man be condemned in any Court for Debt or Damages recovered and his
body be thereupon taken in execution, and then he procures any writ to the
Sheriff to remove his body etc. The Sheriff ought to bring in the body at the
day, according as he is commanded by the writ, And withal the Sheriff ought to
return the special matter and cause of the condemnation that so at last the
prisoner may be remaunded, etc.

Infranom' I.S. languidus est in prisona, Aliter.
ita quod propter mortis periculum, etc. ipsum tute remouere non possum.

Infranom' I.S. per me non captus fuit, Aliter.
sed per I. C. militem nuper vic' praedecessor' meum, and mihi per ipsum minime
delibertat' in exitu ab officio suo. Ideo corpus eius, etc. habere non possum,
etc.

Also upon these writs, it is a good return that the party is dead.

Domino Regi certifico quod I.S. infrascr': Aliter.
non detent' existit in prisona sub custodia mea, Nec fuit die receptionis
huius breuis, nec aliqua causa detentionis ipsius I. penes me residet. Et ideo
corpus ipsius I. and causa detent' illius coram Domino Rege ad diem and locum
infracont' habere non possum prout interius mihi praecipitur.

And note that these writs (of Habedi corpus, and Corpus cum causa) are to be
executed by the Sheriff notwithstanding any commandment to the contrary from
the Lord Chancellor or other subject whatsoever (immo coment del nostre
Seignior le Roy mesme desouth son privy seal, ou auter son ordinary power
quant al execution de Justice; except tamen le absolute power del Roy.) And if
the Sheriff shall surcease to execute the Kings writ upon any such ordinary
commandment, the Sheriff shall be amerced etc. See hic cap. 21.

Note that this Writ de Habeas corpus, shall not be granted to remove any
prisoner, except the writ be signed with the proper hand of one of the
Justices of the Court, out of which the same writ shall be awarded.

Habere facias seisinam.
Virtute etc. Iustic' certifico quod (tali dic and Anno) Habere feci infranom'
A.G. plenam scisinam de vno messuag' cum pertin' in S. infraspec' in omnibus
prout istud breue, Aliter.
etc. Habere feci etc. seisinam de and in Tenementis infraspec'. Or, de manerio
de F xx. acr' terre. 40. acr' prati etc. cum pertin' in F. etc. secundum formam
istius breuis prout etc.

But upon an Habere fac' seisinam (or other writ, where land is recovered) the
Sheriff may not make these returns following, scz.

That there is no such land, and therefore he could not make execution, etc.
That a stranger is tenant of the land, and therefore he could not etc. That he
against whom the recovery is had, has nothing in the land; or is not tenant
thereof, etc.
For note that upon the Habere fac' Seisinam, the Sheriff ought to execute the
writ, although that a stranger be seized of the land, and that in truth, none
of the parties to the writ were ever seized thereof.

The Sheriff returned that he could not deliver seisin, by reason of Resistance
made by I.B. and other persons unknown, and was amerced, for that he might
have taken Posse Comitatus, etc. And yet such a Return has been allowed. Vide
hic cap. 36.

Note that upon the Habere fac' scisinam, as also upon an habere fac'
possession', if the Sheriff shall duly execute the writ, and that the
Plaintiff or demandant have his demand, there the Sheriff needs make no return
of the writ.

But upon the Habere fac' seisinam, the Sheriff may make these retornes. scz.

That he offered to the demandant seisin, etc. and he refused it.

That he (the Sheriff) himself was tenant of the land, and so he could not
serve the writ, etc.

That none came to receive seisin, etc.

That none came, Ex part petentis, ad ostenden' tenement' etc.

And yet in case where the same Sheriff made the Summons, there he cannot after
make this retorn. Quod nullus venit, etc. ad ostendendum Tenement'. Also note,
that upon the Habere facias seisinam, the Sheriff may put the party in seisin
or possession, as follows: viz.

1 Of a house, by the Ring of the door.

Or the Sheriff may open him the door of the house, and bid him to enter, etc.

2 Of land by a bough, twig, clod, or the like, upon the ground.

3 Of a Rent the Sheriff may put the party in possession thereof by Parrol.

Or by any clod or other parcel of the land, as a bough or twig.

Or by any corn, or herb, or other thing growing upon the land, out of which
the rent is issuing.

Or by Distress of Cattle leuant and couchant there: but the Sheriff (or
party) may not drive such cattle off the lands.

Also the Sheriff may deliver seisin or possession of land in one town, in the
name of land in diverse towns.

Also upon the Habere fac' Seisina^, or possessionem, the Sheriff may break
open the door, etc. and deliver seisin or possession.

Habere fac' visum.
Virtute, etc. Iustic' infrascr' certifico Quod (tali die and Anno) Habere fec'
infranom H.H. and I. vxori eius, visu^ de messuag', etc. infraspec' cum
pertin'. Et dixi A.C.D.E.F.G. and H.I. quatuor milit' ( or hom') de Com' meo, (
or ex illis) qui visut illi interfuer'. Quod sint coram Iustic' praedict' ad
diem and locum infracont', ad testificandum visum illu^, prout interius mihi
praecipit'.

In real actions, where the Tenant does not well know the land demanded, he
make pray the view scz. that he may be showed which is the land demanded.

And the Sheriff may return, That he was ready to make the view, and that the
Tenant (nor any for him) came not to have the view.

Also the Sheriff is not bound to know or to seek the land demanded, and
therefore except the demaundant shows it to him, he may return, Quod nullus
venit ex part petentis ad ostendendum mihi Tenementa petita, and ideo dicto
T.S. (petenti) de tenementis infraspec' habere visum non potui.

Or the Sheriff may return, Quod mandauit balliuo libertatis, de etc. Qui
respondit, quod petens non venit ad ostendend, etc. lou il fuit prist, etc.

If the demandant shall show to the Sherif a strangers land, by force whereof
the Sheriff enters, etc. he is no trespasser.

In a Praecipe of a Rent, the Sheriff (upon the view demanded and granted)
shall not return Habere feci visum in x. s. redditus: but he must return,
Habere feci visum de terra vnde redditus, etc.

If a rent be granted, but out of no land, and yet certain land is charged to
the Distress, if the rent be behind ther^ in an Assise, etc. this land so
charged shall be put in view.

If the Rent be granted out of one land, and other land within the same County
be charged to the Distress, here both these lands shall be put in view.

Where a Manor is demanded, nothing shall be put in view, but the Site with
the appurtenances, and not by parcells.

If the Manor be demanded, and the thing put in view is but a house, and a
Carue of land of another name, this is not good.

If a house and ten shillings Rent be demanded, and nothing put in view but the
house, it is not good.

If a house and land be demanded, each parcel shall be put in view.

Where part of a Manor is in demand, yet the view shall be of the whole.

Where a moitie, or a third, fourth, or other part of house or land is in
demand, yet the whole shall be put in view.

Where a Carue of land is demanded, the moitie thereof may be put in view.

In an Assise of land lying in two towns, the view ought to be made in both
Towns.

In an Assise the view ought to be made where the Disseisin began.

Upon a demand of ten acres of land, the Demaundant said to the Tenant, That
those ten acres were in such a field, and abuttalled by them, without bringing
the Tenant to any parcel thereof, and the Sheriff returned it accordingly,
and it was holden a good view.

Note, that when the Sheriff makes the view, he must go to the Tenements;
etc. demanded, or to some part thereof.

And he must have the Viewors present, who are to take view of the thing or
place in question, etc.

And he ought to give warning to the Tenant, of the time when the view shall be
made.

And he must return the names of the Viewors, (vt supra) and must warn them
to be before the Justices at the day mentioned in the writ, to testify their
view, etc.

Homine Repleg'.
Virtute, Homine Repl'.
etc. Iustic' infrascr. certifico, Quod statim post receptionem eiusdem breuis
accessi ad praed' I. S. de pleg' facere praed' B. quem praed' I. S. mihi
ostendere noluit, sed praed' B. ante aduentum istius breuis, ad loca mihi
incognita elongauit, Et post receptionem eiusdem breuis praed' B. non est
inuentus in balliua mea, per quod praed' B. repleg' non possum, prout interius
mihi precipitur.

Aliter.
Virtute, etc. certifico quod praed' B. clongatus est ad loca mihi incognita per
infranom' A.C. and D. per quod, etc.

The Sheriff also upon this writ may make these retornes following, scz.

That he could not have the view, etc. per quod, etc.

That the defendant claymeth the Plaintiff to be his Ward.

That the defendant claymeth the Plaintiff to be his Villen.

CHAP. 64. Inquisitions by a Jury.
FOr the form of the Inquisitions and return thereof. See hic cap. 58.
Inquisic'.
and 68.

Inquisitions, in what cases Upon a Writ of Admeasurement. hic cap. 49. Upon a
Capias vtlagat. cap. 54. Upon a writ to enquire of damages. scz. in Detinew.
cap. 56. Dower. cap. 56. Trespass. cap. 77.
Upon an Aetate probanda, cap. 57. Upon an Elegit. cap. 58. Upon an Extent.
ibid. Upon a partition. cap. 68. Upon a Proprietate probanda. cap. 73. Upon a
Redisseisin. c. 93 Upon a Secunda Superoneratione cap. 76. Upon a writ to
enquire of wast. cap. 79.


The Sheriff in all his Inquisitions taken and returned by him, must therein set
down the certainty of the year, day and place of the taking of the Inquisitio^.

If the writ appoints that the Enquest shall be taken at a day or place
certain, the Sheriff must return that it was taken at the same day or place.

Where the Sherif is to make an Inquisition; it seems to some, that none of
the Enquirors may be challenged, for that they are but an enquest of office:
but yet in a writ to enquire of wast (where the Sherif is both a Judge and an
officer) the Enquirors may be challe^g'd and if the Sheriff shall deny it, it
is error.

And so it is in a writ of Redisseisin: And so note that the Sherif may make
the Pannell, and after may aiudge the same to be quashed, if there be cause.

Where the Sheriff is to make Inquisition (by a Jury) and the Jury appear, and
have their charge, etc. and by reason of some difficulty the Sheriff gives to
the Jurors respite for certain days, and at the day so appointed to the
Jury to (bring in or) give their verdict, one of the Jury makes default,
quaere whither the Sheriff may not assesse a reasonable fine upon him, and
return the same fine, (especially where the Sheriff is made a Judge of the
cause.) And such giving of respit to the Jurors by the Sheriff, seems
warrantable.

Note wheresoever the Sheriff shall make a false return, an Action Sur le case
lies against him: but if the Sheriff shall make Inquisition by a Jury, and
return the same, although it be false, yet the party has no remedy against
the Sheriff, nor against any other. Quod nota been.

But if the Jury shall find any thing without warrantie, and the Sheriff, shall
take or return the same, he shall be amerced. See hic cap. 79.

What the Jury may find, and what not, see hic cap. 56, 58, 77, and 79.

In every case the Sheriff ought to make his inquiry by twelve men at the
least.

And when the Jury have appeared, the Sherif must swear them, and then give
them their charge, scz. to make inquiry according to the Writ.

After the charge given, if any of the Jury shall depart without giving up
their verdict, the Sheriff may return, That the Jurors were charged before
him, and that after, such of the Jury (or the Jurors) departed in despite of
the Court, without giving up their verdict; and such Return is good, and an
Attachment will thereupon go out against the Jurors.

Note that all Inquisitions made by the Sheriff, must be by writing indented,
and returned under the seal of the Sheriff, and of every Iuror.

An inquisition taken and executed by the Sheriff in the time of one King, and
then the King dies, quaere whether the Sheriff shall now return the same
inquisition without a writ first to him after directed for that purpose.

Upon an inquisition, if any doubt shall arise, etc. the Sheriff may return
that he and the Jury were in doubt, showing wherein, and so pray the advice
of the Court therein. Hic. ca. 58.

And in most Inquisitions, the Sheriff is to summon or give warning to the
parties, that they may be present thereat, if they will, scz. to plead; give in
evidence, or make their Challenge, etc.

CHAP. 65.
Leuari facias.
VIrtute, Leuari facias
etc. Cepi in manus Domini Regis, quoddam hospitium cum tribus shopis ipsius
I.S. infraspec': Quae valent per annum vltra repris. x.l. Et quod praed
hospicium cum shopis praed saluo custod donec aliud a vobis inde habeo in
mandatum.

Upon a Leuari facias, the Sheriff may return, that he has levied ten pounds
of the sum, the which he has delivered to the Plaintiff.

Plus hic cap. 29.

Aliter.
I.S. infrascr', nulla habet' bona sieve catalla, in balliua mea, de quibus
denarios infrascript' aut aliquam parcellam inde leuari possum, prout interius
mihi praecipitur.

Lattitat.
Upon a Lattitat, Nonest inuentus is a good return.

Also Cepi Corpus, and other returns may be made upon a Lattitat, as upon a
Capias ad respondendum, as it seems.

Liberate.
Upon a Liberate, Liberate.
if the Sherif has duly executed the writ, and paid the money to the
Plaintiff, he needs not to return the writ. Hic cap. 38.

Virtute istius breuis (tali die and anno) Liberaui L. S. infranom' Maneriu^
infraspec', cum pertin', Tenendum sibi and assign' suis vt liberum tenementum
suum, quousque sibi de debito infrascr', vna cum dampnis misis and expensis,
quae in hac part rationabiliter sustinuit, plenar' satisfact' fuerit, prout
istud breue in se exigit and requirit. I.S. infranominatus non est inuentus in
baltiua mea.

Vide plus hic cap. 25.

CHAP. 66.
Return de Brief de Medio.
PLegij de Prosequendo. Ioh. Do. Mesne.
Rich. Roo.


Summonitores in franomin' I. S. H. I. T. S.


In a writ of Mesne, the Process which is given by statute, is Summons,
Attachment, and the Grand Distress, which shall have day of Return by such
time that two County Courts may be holden, in which the Sheriff shall make
Proclamation, that the defendant come to acquire the Plaintiff or Tenant, etc.
And if the Defendant comes not, and that the writ be returned, the Defendant
shall be foreiudged.

For the form of the return of Proclamation of Summons, see hic cap. 70.

Nihil.
Upon the Writ of Mesne the Sheriff may return, Quod nihil habet medius vnde
potest summoniri.

Or, Nihil habet per quod potest attachiari.

Or, Nihil habet per quod potest distringi.

Retorn' breuis Eligend' Militis and Burgens. Parliamenti.
Virtute istius breuis mihi directi, in pleno Comitatu meo tent' apud Cantab'
(tali dic and anno) per assensum eiusdem comitatus Elegi feci duos Milites de
Com' meo praed viz. E. P. and I.C. ad faciend' prout istud breue in se exigit
and requirit.

Feci etiam praeceptum W.D. maiori villae de C. in Com' meo, quod de eodem
burgo Elegi fecerit duos burgens. ad faciend quod istud breue exigit, qui
quidem Mayor sic mihi respondit quod clegi fecerit de praed' burgo de C. duos
burgenses, viz. P. F. and I. W. ad faciend etiam prout istud breue in se exigit
and requirit.

Proclamari etiam feci omnia in isto breui content' secund formam and effectum
huius breuis, and prout istud breue requirit.

Residuum vero Executionis istius breuis patet in quibusdam Indentur' huic
breui annex'.

And then there must be indentures made between the Sheriff of the one part,
and some of the freeholders being chusers (of the Knights) of the other part;
in which indentures the names of the Knights shall also be set down, etc. See
hic postea cap. 92.

For the form of these Indentures, see my book at large.

The like Indentures also are to be made between the Sheriff of the one part,
(and the Mayor or Baylife, quaere) and some of the free Citizens or Burgesses
of the City or Borough (being chusers of their Citizens or Burgesses) of the
other part; In which indentures also the names of their Citizens or Burgesses
must be set down, etc. hic cap. 92.

The form of which last Indenture, you may also see in my book at large.

And all these Indentures must be returned with the said writ.

Plus hic cap. 92.

CHAP. 68. Retorn' breuis originalis in Partitione.
PLegij de prosequendo. Ioh. Do. Rich. Roo.


Summonitores infranominati R. B. and Eliz. vxoris eius. W.A. H. F.


A. B. Armig' vic'.

The Return of the writ of Partition,
Executio istius breuis patet in quadam Inquisitione huic breui annex'.

Virtute breuis Domini Regis mihi directi, and huic schedulae ( or huic
partition') Indent. annex' ego A.B. armig' vic' Com' praed' (tali die and anno)
in propria persona mea accessi ad messuag' ( or ad Tn'ta) in breui praed
specificat. Et per Sacramentum I. B. R. B. etc. (ad numerum xij.) proborum and
legalium hominum de Com' praed ac visnet' in eodem breui specificat' habito
respectu ad verum valorem eiusdem messuagij ( or eorund Ten'tor') cum pertin',
eundem messuag' cum pertin' in quatuor equales parts partiri feci, vnam partem
partium illarum, viz. etc. Tenendum H. S. and F. vxori eius in breue praed'
nominat' in separalitate per metas and bundas, in iure eiusdem F. Aliam partem
inde viz. etc. Tenendum B.R. and Eliz. vxori eius in breue praed' nom' in
separalitate, in iure eiusdem E. * Ac duas alias parts inde viz. etc. Tenendum
praefato I.S. in separalitate, in iure suo proprio. Et ego praefatus vic' dic
and anno superdictis eas deliberari and assign' feci, prout idem breue in se
exigit and requirit. In cuius rei Testimonium, etc.

And it is fit to name and abutte, and show the contents of the several
parcells.

* If any of the parties be absent, the Sheriff may make his return thus; Et
quoad duas parts residuum Teneme^torum praed' in breue praed' specificat' I.
S. in codem breue similiter nominat' ad particione^ praed' deliberand' and
assign' Iustic' infraspec' certifico, Quod nullus ex part ipsius I.S. venit ad
recipiend' de me easdem duas parts, Ita quod duas parts illas praefato I. S.
liberare and assignare non potui, prout breue praed in se exigit, etc. In cuius
rei Testimon', etc.

So that here the Sheriff must in person go to the Tenements, etc. He must
make the partition by the oath of x j. men. The partition must be made by the
Jury; who must do it equally; and then the Sheriff may assign the one part to
one, and another part to another, etc. at his election, and by meets and
bounds: and here the eldest sister is not to choose, etc.

Or upon the partition to be made between 2 parceners, of two Manors, the
Sheriff may assign the one Manor to the one, and the other Manor to the
other, so that both the Manors be of equal value. And so of 2. Acres of land,
etc.

The Sheriff must return the Partition by writing indented under his own
seal, and the seal of every Iuror.

Upon a partition to be made between tenants in Common, where one of the^ has
purchased other lands which lie intermixed, and cannot be known, the party
which purchased such lands, ought to show to the Jury the bounds (or the
certainty or number of Acres) of his land so purchased, but if neither party
will therein give evidence to the Jury, yet the Sheriff and the Jury are to
make the partition at the r perils, and as well as they can.

See a good form of the Return of this writ of Partition, Libro Intrat. fol.
452, tit. Partition div. 3.

CHAP. 69. Praemunire.
Upon this writ the Sheriff returned that the defendant was garnished
generally, but shows not what day, and it was disallowed: for such
garnishment ought to be two months before the return.

Upon this writ the Sheriff returned, Quod Praemunire fecit, etc. quod esset,
etc. coram. etc. ad faciend' quod istud breue exigit and requirit, this is a
good return.

The Sheriff may return that the defendant, Nihil habet in balliua mea per
quod eum praemunire facere possum ad praesens, nec est inuentus in eadem.

CHAP. 70.
Praecipe quod reddat of land.
IN a Praecipe quod reddat, the Sheriff may not make any of these 5. returns
following, scz, That the defendant is not tenant: for the Sheriff may summon
him in terra petita. That the defendant Nihil habet, vnde eum summonire potui:
Or, That the defendant Non est inuentus. Causa qua supra. That the tenant is an
Enfant, or Feme Covert. That the tenant has yielded the land to the demandant.


For if the tenant shall yield the land to the demandant, yet the Sheriff must
summon the tenant, and must return the same, for that such yielding of the
land must be in the Court, etc.

In a Praecipe against two, the Sheriff returns one of them summoned, and the
other not, this is not good, but he must summon them both, and so make his
Return.

In a Praecipe quod reddat, the Sheriff may return, That the Tenant is dead,
(or deposed, being an Abbot, etc.)

If the Sheriff shall return the Tenant summoned, where in deed he was not
summoned, the Sheriff is punishable.

Note that in a Praecipe quod reddat there must be two Summoners at the least,
and the Sheriff or his Officer, in the presence of those Summoners, ought to
summon the Tenant to keep his day of the Return, (naming that in certain) and
also he ought to name the demandant, and the land in demand. Hic cap. 31.

Proprietate probanda.
Upon a Repleuin (Alias, or Pluries, Repleg') directed to the Sheriff, if the
Defendant claims property in the Cattle (or goods) distreyned, etc. the
power of the Sheriff cease and determines, so as the Sheriff may not
Repleuie, or make deliverance of the^. But the Sheriff is to return, Quod def.
clamat aueria, etc. esse sua. Ideo. etc. And upon such Return the other party
may sue out his writ de Proprietate probanda.

Upon this writ de Proprietate prob' the Sheriff in his County Court, and
before the Coroners, shall impannell a Jury to enquire in praesentia partiu^
(if they will) of the property of the Cattle, (or goods) scz. to whom the
property of the same was at the time of the taking: and if it be found, that
the property was in the defendant, the Plaintiff shall be amerced by the
Sheriff in the County. But if it be found that the Defendant had nothing in
the Cattle (or goods) but that the property was in the Plaintiff, then (if
the Plaintiff shall find Pledges de Prosequendo) the Sheriff shall attach the
defendant, ad respondend tam dom. Regi de contemptu, quam querenti de dampnis,
etc.

And the Defendant shall afterward be committed to prison by the Justices,
there to remain until he has paid a fine to the king for such his false
claim; but that punishment and fine shall be inflicted and set by the Justices
in Banco.

Also upon the property found for the Plaintiff (as aforesaid) the Sheriff
shall make delivery of the Cattle, etc. to the Plaintiff.

Upon this Writ the Jury are only to enquire to or in whom the property of
the Cattle was at the time of the taking. And here the very title of the
Cattle or goods shall be given in euiuidence, and tried before the Sheriff.

And upon this trial the party may challenge the Jury. But this writ shall
not be granted but only where the Repleuin is sued by writ, (and not where it
is only by Plaint) neither shall it be granted but upon the Sherifs Return,
etc.

Note that the Bailife or servant may claim property for his Master, and one
Defendant may claim property, but an Estranger cannot claim property.

And although the Baylife or Servant shall claim property for their Lord or
Master, yet the Sheriff may make deliverance of the Cattle, notwithstanding
such claim, (and may not safely return such claim made by the servant) but
if the right owner of the goods himself claims property, then the Sheriff
may not make deliverance, but must return, Quod def. clamat aueria, etc. vt
supra.

Also before the inquiry of the property be made in the County Court, the
Sheriff is to give warning to the Defendant thereof, that he may be present
thereat if he will.

And the Sheriff also must give warning to the Plaintiff, to be there to give
in his evidence to the Jury, etc.

Mes nota que le trial del property enle County Court deu't le Vic' per cel
Brief, ne lier les parties, etc.

Return de Proclam' de Summons in Breue de Admeasurement. Proclam.


Ad Com. meum tentum apud Castrum Cantabr' in Comitat' Cantabr' infrascr' (tali
die and anno) Et ad Comitat' meum tent' apud Castrum Cantabr' in Com' C. praed
(tali die and ann') suprad, proclamari feci omnia and singula in Breui praed
specificat', prout mihi interius praecipitur.

The like return of Proclamation may be made upon the writ de Communi
Custodia, etc. but that there must be three Proclamations, etc.

Vide Return de Proclam' de Summons: Summons.

In Breife de Dower, hic cap. 56. Sur Exigent, cap. 59. In Brief de Wast, cap.
79. In Brief de Mesne, cap. 66.
Return de Pone, de Remouer Plee.
Pone.
Plegij de Prosequendo. Ioh. Do. Rich. Roo.
Infranom' I.S. attachiatus est per Plegios N.F. R.D.

Or the party may be attached by his goods, and then thus: Infranom' I.S.
attachiatus est per vnum equum pretij xx.s.

Infranom' I.S. nihil habet in balliua mea, per quod attachiari potest. Nihil.




And note that the Pone is but a Summons, scz. a command to the Sheriff to
summon or prefixe a day to the parties, Plaintiff and Defendant, that they
appear in Banco, etc.

If it be in a writ of Right, see what the Sheriff must return, hic cap. 56.

And if it be in a Repleuin, the Sheriff must return the Plaint or Plea, etc.
out of the County Court, into the Common Bank, and must return the same
under the seals of four Suitors of that Court, as follows: Virtute istius
Breuis mihi directi posui coram Iustic' Domini Regis de Banco apud
Westmonaster' Loquelam quae est in Com' meo (per breue dicti domini Regis)
inter T.W. and H. B. de auerijs ipsius T.W. capt' and unjust detentis vt
dicit', prout patet in quadam schedul. huic breui annex'.

Or thus: Virtute istius breuis in forma infrascr' posui loquelam infrascr' ad
diem and locum infracontent', prout interius mihi praecipitur. Cuius quidem
loquela record patet in schedul', etc.

Summonitor' P.T. and I.D.

Ad Comit' meum tent' apud C. (tali die and anno) T. V. Schedula Schedula.
quaeritur versus H. B. de placito Captionis and unjust detention' auerior, Et
sunt pleg' de prosequendo and retorn' habe^do si return' inde adiudicetur, viz.
I. M. and W. F. In cuius rei Testimon' I.K.B. C. D. G. and R. S. quatuor
legales homines ex illis qui Record' illo interfueru^t in plena Curia illa
eidem recordo sigilla sua alternatim apposuer' die and anno supradictis.



In a Repleuin a Pone went out, and at the next County Court the Plaintiff was
Nonsuit, or has discontinued his Suite, yet the Sheriff may execute the Pone,
(scz. may record and return the plea.) And yet for that by the Nonsuite there
rests no plea (or thing) to be removed, the Sherif may return, Quod ad
proximum Comitat' etc. the Plaintiff was Nonsuit, Et sic Null parol la, etc.

Note that the Pleynt only shall be removed, and the Auowry: But the Process,
the proceedings, and continuance thereof shall not be removed.

And wheresoever a writ comes to the Sheriff to remove the Plea, out of the
County Court, etc. the writ must be openly read in the Court, that the other
party may have notice thereof

CHAP. 71. Quare impedit.
IN a Quare Impedit, the Sheriff must summon the defendant.

And this summons of the defendant may be made in the Church; or to the person.

The Sheriff in this writ may return Quod querens non inuenit Plegios de
Prosequendo.

Also upon this writ, the Sheriff may return Tarde.

Also the Sheriff may return Nihil upon the summons, and upon the attachment,
Attachment, and upon the Distringas.

CHAP. 72. Recordare facias Loquelam in Comit'.
VIrtute istius breuis mihi directi in pleno com' meo tent' apud etc. (tali die
and Anno) Recordari feciloquelam, quae est in eodem com' inter parts
infrascr': vnde interius fit mentio; Quae quidem loquela patet in quadam, sche
dula huic breui annex. Et recordum illud habeo coram Iustic' infrascr' ad diem
and locum infracontent' sub sigillo meo, and sigillis W.H.T.R. etc. quatuor
proborum and legalium militum (or hominum) eiusdem com' ex illis qui record
illo interfuer'. Et partibus infrascr' diem and locum illum praefixi, quod tunc
sint ibi in loquela illa prout iustum fuerit prosecutur, prout interius mihi
praecipitur.

Or thus, Virtute huius breuis recordari feci loquelam quae fuit in com' meo
seue breui Domini Regis inter I. and H. infrascr' de auerijs ipsius I. capt'
and unjust detent' and partibus infrascr' etc. vt supra.

Residuum executionis istius breuis patet in quad sched huic breui annex'.

R. S. queritur versus I.S. de placito captionis and unjust detentionis
aueriorum suorum (contra vad and pleg' etc. Querela.
) Et sunt pleg'de prosequend': Necno^ de returno habendo si returna adiudicetur
D.E. In cuius rei testim', etc. vt antea in return de Pone.

This Recordare is only to remove the suit into the Kings Court, out of the
Court of Ancient Demesne, County Court, or Lords Court.

In the writ de Accedas ad curiam the Sheriff must take with him four
sufficient discreet and lawful men of the same county: But in this Recordare
fac' loquelam the Sherif needs not to take any with him; but both these writs
must be returned under the seals of the Sheriff, and of four of the Suitors.

Also the Sheriff is first to require the view or the plea, and to record the
same in full Court, etc.

Then he is to summon the parties to be before the Justices at the day of the
Return.

Or he may cause this writ to be openly read in the same Court, to the end
that the parties may have notice to appear at the day of thereturne thereof
etc.

And then he is to return the same Record (as aforesaid) together with the
Writ.

But nothing shall be removed, but only the Pleint.

Note that the Suitors are Judges in the county Court, and therefore the
return must not be Recordari feci loquelam quae est in eodem comit' coram me;
(nor ad comit' tentum coram me) but it must be coram (such and such)
Sectatoribus curiae, etc.

Also the Schedule must be, Ad comit' meum tent' (tali die and Anno) coram,
such and such, sectatoribus Curiae and not coram me.

Now in a Recordare de auerijs, the Sheriff may return, quod causa non est
vera.

In a Recordare fac' loquelam, the Sheriff may return, that the Suitors would
not deliver to him the Record, nor suffer him to have it.

Or that the Suitors would not record the plea.

Or that the Suitors answered him that there was no such plea depending in the
Court.

Note that if any four of the Suitors do deliver the Record to the Sheriff,
and he return the same, it shall be holden a good Record.

Also in a Recordare the Sheriff may return Tarde.

Upon a Recordare fac' loquelam, although the plaint or suit be determined,
yet the Sheriff is to make execution and return of the Writ, as aforesaid.

The Sherifes duty in executing this writ of Redisseisin, Redisseisin.
see hic. cap. 93.

CHAP. 73. Retorn' de Replenin, etc.
Upon a Repleuin directed to the Sheriff, it seems that he needs not (by
the Common Law) to return the writ until the Pluries Repl', but may make Repl'
upon his own authority; but if at the Pluries he does nothing, then an
attachment shall go out against the sherif, directed to the Coroners, etc.

And all these Writs, scz. the Repleuin, Alias, and the Pluries, may be sued
out all at one time, and delivered to the Sheriff, as the Plaintiff shall
think good.

Upon a Repleuin, the Sheriff may make these returns following, if the case so
require.

Plegij de prosequendo, and de returno jude habendo, si retorna inde
adiudicetur. I. D. R. R.

Virtute, etc. Replegiari feci (or deliberari feci) infranom' R. aneria
infraspec' prout interius mihi praecipitur.

1. Quod aueria and catalla infranom' R. ( quae I.S. cepit and unjust
detinuit, vt dicitur) elongata sunt (ad loca mihi incognita) per praed' I.S.
Ideo prefato R. aueria and catalla sua praed' Repleg' non possum prout interius
mihi praecipitur.

2 That the defendants has esloigned (or conveyed away) the cattle out of his
bailiwicke (or County) Ideo, etc.

3. Quod accessi ad locum, etc. Et visum habere non potui de auerijs, etc.
Ideo, etc.

4. Quod nullus venit ex part querentis ad demonstrandum mihi aueria, Ideo,
etc. And yet if the Plaintiff shows the Officer a strangers cattle, and the
Officer delivers them, he is a trespasser by some opinions.

5. That the defendant claims property in the goods, Ideo, etc.

6. That the Plaintiff has taken his cattle again.

7. That the cattle are dead.

8. That the defendant has put the cattle within the Rectory of the Church of
W. so as he can not make deliverance.

9. Also where the cattle are driven into a Fort or Castle, it seems that
the Sheriff may return, Elongata, etc.

But these returns following are not good, viz.

1. That the Cattle are in a Fort, Castle, or Park, so that he could not make
deliverance, is not good.

2. Quod aueria, etc. Elongata sunt ad loca incognita infra Comitatum meum, is
not good, for the Sheriff is to take notice of them if they be within his
County.

3. Quod visum habere non potui de auerijs, is not good without saying,
Accessiad locum, etc.

4. That the baylife or servant claims property for his master, etc. for by
some opinions, the master cannot claim property by his baylife or servant.
Quaere and vide hic cap. 70.

5. That there are no such (goods or) cattle within his bayliwicke: for in
such case the Sheriff must return, Quod elongata sunt.

6. That the defendant took the cattle for the Kings debt, etc. Or,

That the defendant delivered the cattle to another in execution by force of a
recovery, etc. these are no good returns.

Also the Sheriff (upon a Repleuin, etc.) may not return, Mandaui balliuo
libertatis, etc. Qui mihi nullum dedit responsum. Or qui non vult facere
Deliberat', for that the Sheriff (upon such return, etc. made by the baylife
of the Liberty, or upon such default of the baylife) ought himself presently
to enter into the Franchise, and to make deliverance of the cattle, etc. hic
cap. 40. and 114.

Plus hic cap. 114.

Retorn' de Repleuin sur Retorno Habendo

Plegij de prosequendo and de return' habend' si, etc. B.C. D.E.


Virtute istius breuis mihi directi deliberari (sieve Repleg') feci infranom' R.
B. aueria quae I.S. in Curia Dom' Regis adiudicat' fuer' prout interius mihi
praecipitur.

Upon the Returno habendo, the Sheriff may return, Quod aueria elongata sunt,
etc.

But if the writ de returno Hab' be awarded to the sherif after the writ of
second deliverance prayed by the Pl', the Sheriff has no power to execute the
returno habendo, but the second deliverance; for the writ of second deliverance
is a Supersedeas to the returno habendo, so as the Sheriff cannot return it,
etc.

Note by some authorities, that the Writ de returno habendo, is not returnable.

Also note that the Sheriff) before he makes deliverance of any distress)
must not only receive of the Plaintiff, Pledges de prosequendo, but also
Pledges for the return of the beasts, if return be awarded. Plus hic cap.
114. And if the Sheriff takes insufficient Pledges de returno Hab' they are as
no Pledges, and he shall answer the price of the beasts, etc,

CHAP. 75. Return de Scire facias.
VIrtute istius breuis, etc. per C. D. and E.F. probos and legales homines de
balliua mea, Scire feci infranom' I.S. quod sit coram Iustic', etc. (vel coram
Domino Rege, vel coram Baronibus domini Regis) ad diem and locum infrascr'. Ad
respondend R. H. infranom'. Or, Ostens. in forma praedict'. Or, Adostendend' si
quid pro se dicere sciat, quare, etc. Or, Ad informand' dict' Dom' Regem,
prout, etc. Or, Ad faciendu^ and recipiendum eaquae istud Breue exigit and
requirit. Or, Ad faciend' quod Breue requirit.

And note that it is not enough for the Sheriff to return, Scire feci I. S.
infranom', quod sit coram, etc. but he must also warn (or give knowledge to)
the party Defendant) that he appear in such a Court at such a day, and at
such a man's suit, there to do that which the Writ requires: and then his
Return must be, Scire feci, etc. ad essend' coram, etc. adfaciend, etc. prout
ut istud breue requirit.

Also that garnishment of the defend. must be by (or in the presence) of two
others, and must be so returned together with the names of the Garnishers to be
set down in the Return, vt supra.

Also in the return of the Garnishment by C.D. and E. F. these words, Probos
and legales homines, seem to be material, for else the Garnishers may be
attainted or outlawed, etc.

The Sheriff returns, Scire feci haeredibus and terrae tenent', without
naming their names, it is not good.

In a Scire facias, I.S. Magistro Collegij, etc. the Return was, Scire feci,
Magistro, without naming him, it is void.

In a Scire facias to execute a Judgment or Fine, the Sheriff must return the
names of the Summoners and Veyors.

In a Scire facias the Sheriff may return, Quod Breue tarde venit, etc.

In a Scire facias against two, the Sheriff returned, Scire feci the two, modo
and forma prout istud Breue exigit etc. and it was holden good, though he
returned not severally Scire feci.

In a Scire facias, it is a good return, That the party is dead.

So in a Scire facias to have return of Cattle, it is a good return, that the
Cattle are dead.

In a Scire facias against the husband and wife, it is no good Return, That
they are divorced. Hic cap. 36.

Against a Parson, it is a good return, that the Parson had resigned his
Benefice before the Writ came to him.

In a Scire facias against two, the Sheriff may not return, That one of them
was garnished, and that the other Nihil Nihil.
habet: for though he has nothing, yet the Sheriff might have garnished him
by his person.

And so note that in a Scire facias the Sheriff may garnish the party by his
person, or upon his lands, or by his goods. Quaere how? It seems by
Attachment of his goods.

And therefore in a Scire facias, where the Sheriff returns, Nihil habet in
Balliua mea per quod ei scire facere possum, He must return further, Neque est
inuentus in eadem.

Nulli sunt Executores de I.S. infranom', neque admin' bonorum and catallorum,
quae fuer' eiusdem. I. S. Nec haered neque tenent' terrarum and tenementorum
quae sua fuer' in balliua mea, quibus aliquo modo scire facere possum, this is
good.

Note when the Shsrife upon the Scire facias warns one to appear, etc. that
properly is called Garnishment.

And if the Sheriff shall return garnishment where no garnishment was made, he
is punishable.

CHAP. 76. Retorn' de secunda Superoneratione.
1 Where the first Admeasurement was made before the Justices, scz. where the
Writ was removed before them out of the County Court,) there upon this Writ de
Secunda superoneratione (directed to the Sheriff to enquire of the second
surcharge,) the Sheriff first ought to summon the parties to be before him at
the time of his Enquiry.

Then he ought to go in person to the place, etc. and to make his inquiry by a
Jury, in the presence of the parties (if they will come and appear) that so
they may show and deliver their evidence and proofs to the Jury.

And if upon this Enquiry the second surcharge be found, the Sheriff ought to
return the same Inquisition into the Court of the Common Pleas, by Indentures
under his own Seal, and the seals of the Jurors.

And here the parties may have their challenge to the Enquest, either to the
Polls, or to the Array.

2. But where the first admeasurement was made before the Sheife in his County
Court, ( scz. where the Writ was not removed,) thereupon this Writ de secunda
superoneratione, the Sheriff needs not to summon the parties, etc.

And yet here also the Sheriff must enquire by a Jury, (of the second
surcharge:) and in both cases the second surcharge being found upon this
Enquiry, the Sheriff must further enquire of the cattle so put upon the Common
above the due number, or of the value of them; and must return the same also
in his Inquisition, by indenture, etc. as aforesaid.

But here the parties shall not have their Challenge to any of the Jurors.

Note that upon this Writ de Secunda superoneratione, the Sheriff in both cases
( scz. whether the first admeasurement were made before the Justices, or before
the Sheriff in his County) is to go in person to the ground surcharged; And he
must cause the Jury to see the same ground, and to see the number of the cattle
of the defendants which are put thereupon; and then the Sheriff may make his
Inquiry elsewhere.

And the Cattle put by the Defendant upon the common above the due number,
shall be forfeit to the King in both cases.

And the Sheriff upon his account in the Exchequer, shall in both cases be
charged either with the Cattle, (as forfeit to the King) or else with the
value or price of the same cattle: and the Sheriff upon his account also shall
be examined upon his oath, how many Cattle of the Defendant were found upon
the same ground above the due number.

Note also, that if the writ were not removed, but remains in the County
court, there the Def. cannot avouch to warrantie, nor have the view, nor other
such advantages before the Sheriff.

CHAP. 77. Return Breuis Originalis in Trespass.
Plegij de Prosequendo. Ioh. Do. Rich. Roo.


And if the Defendant be sufficient, then thus: Nihil.
Infranom' I.S. attachiatus est per Plegios P.R. I.W.


Or thus: Infranom' I.S. attachiat' est per vnu^ Bouem pretij 20.s.

But if the Defendant be insufficient, then thus: Infranom' I.S. nihil habet
in balliua mea per quod attachiari (vel distringi) potest.

And in Trespass, Nihil habet, etc. is a good Return, without saying, Nec
habuit post receptionem Breuis, or die quo, etc.

Retorn' Breuis ad inquirend de dampnis in Trespass.

Executio istius breuis patet in quadam Inquisitione huic breui annex'.

A.B. Arm^g' Vic'. Inquisitio. etc. qui dicunt super Sacramentum suum, Quod W.
B. and A. vxor eius, in dicto breue nominat' sustinuerunt dampna occasion
transgress. in eodem breui specificat' (vltra misas and costagia suas, per
ipsos circa sect' suam in hac part opposit') ad xx.s. Et pro misis and costag'
illis ad 6.s. 8.d. In cuius rei testim', etc.

In this writ to enquire of damages in an action of Trespass, the Jury may
not nor cannot find that no Trespass is done; neither may the Sheriff make
such a Return.

But if the Jury will find no damages, there the Sheriff may make his return
accordingly, scz. That the Jury found or gave no damages.

CHAP. 78. Return de Venire fac' defend'.
VIrtute istius breuis, etc. Venite feci infranom' I.S. coram, etc. ad diem
infracont' prout interius mihi praecipitur.

Infranom' I.S. attach' est per Pleg', etc. I. Fen. R. Den.


Infranom' I. S. attachiatus est essend coram Iustic' infrascript' (tali die,
Alias.
etc.) ad certificand secund' formam huius breuis per Pleg' P.R. I.W.


Infranom' I.S. nihil habet in ballina mea per quod potest attachiari, vel vbi
eum Summonire possum.

For upon the Venire facias, if the Defendant be sufficient, the Sheriff may
return him summoned or attached.

Retorn' de Venire facias Iurator'.

Executio istius breuis patet in quodam panello huic breui annex'.

A.B. ar' Vic'. Nomina Iurator' inter I.C. Querent' and D.F. Def. in placito
transgres. etc. ( or Debiti, etc.)

Then write down the names of twenty four Jurors, thus: Et sic ad numemeru^
24. Panneb.

R.W. de E. Gen'. F.C. de W. Yeoman. P.R. de B. Yeoman.


Quilibet Iurat' praed per se separatim, manucaptus ( or attachiatus) est per
Pleg' I.D. R.R.


A.B. armig' vic'.

And yet it seems not needful, to return Manucaptores here.

But upon this writ the Sheriff must necessarily return twenty four.

Also the whole Jury must necessarily be of such as dwell within the Shire,
etc. See hic cap. 85.

The Sheriff must not return Venire feci, etc. but he must return, Executio
istius breuis, etc. vt supra.

Upon the Venire fac' Iurator', the Sheriff shall return no issues; but upon
the Distring', or Habeas Corpora Iurator', he must return issues. Hic cap. 90.

If any of the Jurors be misnamed either in their Christian name or Surname, it
is erroneous.

The Sheriff shall return no Iuror without some true and certain addition.
Hic cap. 85.

He shall not return the same persons which have passed in a former enquest
for the same cause.

He must return the name of the Jurors in a schedule, and not upon the back
of the Writ.

And if the parties shall admit a Visne (or such a Town to be) although there
be no such Town, yet the She-may not return that there is no such Town; but
he ought to make his Pannell de Corpore Comitatus.

Retorn' de Habeas Corpora Iurator'.

Executio istius breuis patet in quodam Pannello huic breui annex'.

A.B. Armig' Vic'.

Nomina Iurator' inter, etc. as before upon the Venire fac'.

Quilibet Iurator' praed' per se separatim Manucaptus est per I. D. R. R.


Exitus eorum cuiuslibet. x.s.

Note that here issues must be returned upon every Iuror, See how much shall be
returned upon them in issues. Hic cap. 90.

Where the old Sheriff returned a Iuror in issues, the next Sheriff may not
return him Nihil, etc. See hic cap. 44.

Also the Sheriff must return them attached; and not to return Quod habet
corpora eorum.

Upon the Habeas Corpora Iurator, if any of them be dead, the Sherif may
return them Mortuus: and if after a Distring' Iurat', or a December Tales shall
go out, the Sheriff may return that others of them are dead.

Upon the Habeas Corpora Iurat', the Sheriff may return Manucaptors (or
Pledges) upon the Jurors, as above.

But that is not required (nor best) in the first Venire fac' Iurator', nor in
the December tales, or Octo tales.

This Habeas Corpora is to bring in the Jury (or so many of them as refused to
come, or did not come, upon the Venire facias) for the trial of a cause
brought to an issue.

Retorn' de Distring' Iurator.

Executio istius breuis patet in quoda^ Pannello huic breui annex.

And then set down the names of the Jurors, vt supra.

Manucaptor' Iur' praed and eorum cuiuslibet. I. D. R.R.
Exitus little cuiuslibet. x.s. (or more according to the Statutes, which see
hic cap. 90.91.

It seems also that the Sheriff ought to return Pledges of the Manucaptors
in this manner following.

Quilib' Manucaptor' praed attach. est per Pleg'. I.S. W. A.
So that upon the Distring' Iurat', the Sheriff must return the names of the
Jurors, and the names of the Manucaptors of the Jurors; and issues upon the
Jurors; and also the names of the Pledges of the Manucaptors; and that without
all these the Process is not served.

Upon the Distring' Iurat', the Sheriff returned Nihil habet, etc. upon one of
the Jurors, this is not good.

Upon this Writ the Sheriff returned, that as to some of the Jurors he served
the Writ; and as to the rest Mandaui balliuo Libertatis, etc. but the Sheriff
was amerced, for that the Writ colud not be served by two. hic cap. 39.

Upon the Distring' Iurat', the Sheriff may return Tarde, in this manner.

Quod distringend' I. M. and alios Iurator' infrascript' essend coram Iustic'
ad diem and locum infracontent' istud breue adeo Tarde mihi liberat' fuit, quod
propter temporis breuitatem Executionem inde facere non possum ad presens. Sed
de nouo apposui December tales, vel Octo tales, vt proprium sequit' prout in isto
breui mihi praecipitur. A.C. D.E.F.G. etc.

Note that upon the Habeas Corpora Iurotor' and upon the Distring' Iurator',
the Sheriff ought to return the names of all that were in the Venire facias;
and if any of them be dead, he may return them Mortuus.

And upon the Habeas corpora Iurator', as also upon the Distring' Iurator', the
Sheriff must return reasoble issues according to the Statute in that behalf.
See hic cap. 90. 91.

CHAP. 79. Return de Summons in vasto.
PLegij de prosequendo. Ioh. Do. Rich. Roo.


Summonitores infranom' I.S. I. W. W. C.


Et vlterius ego A.B. armiger' vic' com' infrascript' Iustic' infrascript'
certifico, Quod post summonit' praedict' scz. (tali die and Anno) infrascr'
existent' die dominico immediate post diuinum seruic' in ecclesia parochiali de
B. infraspec'. Nulla praedicat' adtunc ibidem existente, apud maxim' vsuale
ostium ecclesiae parochialis illius, infra quam quidem parochiam tenementa
infrascr' iacent and existunt, Proclamari feci summonit' praedict' secundum
formam statuti in huiusmodi casu edit' and prouis.

A.B. armig' vic'.

Note that first the Summons must be made upon the land wasted; and after the
Sheriff must proclaim the Summons at the Church door of the parish where the
land or house lies; and then he must make his return of all as aforesaid,
hic cap. 102.

After the Summons etc. (if the defendant appears not) there shall go out an
Attachment, and after that a Distringas: And after the Distress, upon the
default of the defendant in not appearing, there shall go out a writ to the
Sheriff to enquire of the wast, etc.

Upon the Attachment, or Distringas, the Sheriff may return the defendant
Nihil habet etc. upon which return also a writ shall go out to enquire of the
wast.

Also in wast at the Distringas, the Sheriff returned that the defendaunt was
distrained, and returned two mainpernors, and for that the defendant appeared
not, a writ went out to enquire of the wast, which being found the plaintiff
recovered etc. And the defendant brought his writ of Disceit against the
Sheriff, for returning that he was distrained, whereas he was not.

In wast the Sheriff returned the name of the party in false Latin, Johannes
for Iohannem, yet the return allowed.

Return' de breue ad inquirend' de vasto.
Virtute istius breuis mihi directi. Ego A.B. armig' vic' com' praed' (tali die
and Anno) in propria persona mea accessi ad tenementa vastata, ( or ad locum
vastatum) in dicto breui specific'. Et apud S. (scz. the Town or one of the
Towns wherein the tenement, or place wasted lies) feci inquisitionem etc.
prout istud breue in se Exigit and requirit.

A.B. armig' vic'

Residuum executionis istius breuis patet in quadam Inquisitione huic breui
annex'.
Inquisitio etc. Qui dicunt super sacrament' suum; Quod I. S. in dicto breui
nominat' fecit vastum (vendition') and destructionem in omnibus in eodem breui
specificat' ( or in domibus and boscis praedict, or in tenementis and terris in
breui praedict' specific') viz. in permittendo vnam aulam pretij xl.s. duas
Cameras pretij 3. l. and vnum stabulum pretij xx.s. esse discoopertum pro
defectu reparationum earundum domorum, per quod grossum maeremium (inde, or)
earundum domorum per te^pestates pluviales super illas discendentes deuenerunt
putrida and corrupta, etc. contra formam prouision' in eodem breue Content'. In
cuius rei testimoniu^, etc.

Inquisitio, etc. qui dicunt, Aliter.
etc. quod I.S. in dicto breui nominat', fecit vastu and destructionem in bosco
in quo in breui praed' fit mentio. viz. in bosco praedict' succidit xx. quercos
pretij cuiuslibet, ij.s. partem inde vendend', and partem inde asportand' ad
exhaeredationem W. F. infranom', and contra formam prouisionis in eodem breui
specific'. Et vlterius iurat' praed' super Sacram' suum, praedict' dicunt, Quod
praedict' I.S. nullum maius ( or nullum aliud neque plus) vastum (vendition'
seu destruction') in bosco ( or domibus) praedict' fecit, prout eis aliquo modo
constare potest.

In cuius rei testimon', etc.

Note that in this writ to enquire of Wast, the Sheriff is made a Judge of the
cause, and therefore he must go in person to the place wasted, etc. to view
the same wast.

And though it be within a Franchise, yet he ought himself to enter the
Franchise, and to go to the place wasted, and to execute this writ, and may nor
return, Mandaui balliuo libertatis in any case.

He must make inquiry of the Wast by a Jury of twelve men.

If the places wasted lie in several towns, yet he (together with the Jury)
must go to every town and to every place wasted, and to view the same (or
at least he must cause the Jury (or some of them) to go and see the wast in
each town and place;) and then he may make his Enquiry in any one of the
towns where the wast was committed or assigned; And his inquisition taken at
one of the towns will serve for all.

And he must make his return, Quod virtute breuis, etc. Accessit ad Tenementa
(or loca) vastata, scz. to all the Towns in which the Wast was assigned, and
at A. (being one of the towns) fecit Inquisitionem, etc.

Wast committed in A.B. and C. the Sheriff must return, Quod accessiit ad
Tenementa infrascripta.

He may not return, Quod accessit ad villam, but ad locum.

Where the Sheriff shall do his Office well in one town, and not in the
other, a new writ must be awarded and and all enquired of de Nouo, for all the
Inquisition must be made at one time, and by one and the same Jury.

Also in such Inquisition the Jury must find the wast in certain, and also
the value thereof, (in every particular) scz. succidendo so many Oaks, etc. ad
valenc', etc. and yet they must find but the single value only.

He must also in his return set down the certain day when the Inquisition was
taken.

In wast against two, the Jury may find that the one of them made the Wast,
and not the other, and so the Sheriff may return it.

But in wast against two, of Tenements which they held for life of the lease of
the Auncestor of the Plaintiff, the Jury found that they held not the
Tenements for life of the Lease of the Auncestor of the Plaintiff, and the
Sheriff returned it accordingly, and was therefore amerced, scz. for taking such
a verdict without warrant.

The Jury upon the writ to enquire of wast, may find that no wast is done, and
the Sheriff may return it, if it be true: but otherwise it is if the wast be
confessed by the Defendant.

In wast against Tenant for years, the Plaintiff recovered the place wasted,
and damages, and the Sheriff returned that no body came (of the part of the
Plaintiff) to receive the seisin; and further, that the Defendant had no goods,
etc. whereupon he could levy the damages; the return is good. But yet the
Sheriff might have delivered the term to the Plaintiff, in execution for his
damages.

Upon a Writ to enquire of Wast, if the Jury (after their charge) shall depart
without giving any verdict, the Sheriff may return the same departure and
contempt of the Jury. Quaere if the Sheriff may not assesse a Fine upon them
for such their departure, and return the same.

Now when the Sheriff has made this his inquiry of the Wast, then must he
return the Inquisition before the Justices of the Common Plees, and the single
value of the Wast, and then the Justices shall tax the wast, etc.

Note that the Defendant is to answer for (and the Jury are to find and value)
as well the wast committed before the writ purchased, as the wast made after.

Upon this Inquisition taken before the Sheriff, the Defendant may come and
have his challenge to the Array, although that the Inquisition be taken by
default.

Upon a Nihil dicit in Wast, a Writ went out to the Sheriff, commanding him,
Quod in propria persona sua accedat ad terram vastatam, to enquire of the
damages; here it is not needful that the Sheriff should go thither in
person, for that is only to be done In vasto inquirendo.

What the Sheriff may do in a writ of Estrepement in Wast, See hic Cap. 58.

CHAP. 80. Retorn' de Withernam.
VIrtute istius breuis, etc. Cepi duas vaecas de auerijs infranom' I.S. ad
valenc', etc. (or duas patellas aereas de bouis infranom' I.S.) Et ea W.B.
infranom' deliberari feci in Withernam salve custodiend quousque praed I.S.
Catalla praed' W. B. deliberare voluerit, prout istud breue in se exigit and
requirit.

Virtute, etc. Cepi in Withernam duas bouiculas de auerijs infranom' I.S. Quae
aueria duci feci ad H. in Com' praed' Salve and secure ibidem custodiend secund
exigentiam istius breuis. Aliter.


Infranom' I.S. Nulla habet bona neque Catalla in balliua mea quae in Withernam
capere possum, prout, etc. Nihil.
Nee aliud habet in balliua mea per quod potest Attachiari; Nec est inuentus in
eade^. But quaere of these two last, scz. whether the Sheriff may attach the
defendant without new process, or some special clause in this Writ.

Also upon this Writ the Sheriff may return Tarde.

And note that the beasts or goods taked in Withernam, the Sheriff may either
deliver them to the Plaintiff to keep, or may keep them himself; or may
drive or send them to any place within his County to be safely kept, quousque,
etc.

The Sheriff may return that he did not deliver the cattle to the Plaintiff,
for that he was not in the Country.

Though the Repleuin be of pots or pans, etc. yet upon the Withernam the
Sheriff may take any cattle or other goods.

The Sheriff may take goods or cattle, to the double value; yea the Sheriff
may take in Withernam goods of any kind, of any number, and of any value
reasonable in his discretion; or by the estimation of neighbors.

Plus hic cap. 73. and 114.

CHAP. 81. Retornes of Writs and Commissions out of the Chancerie.
VIrtute, Adiournament
etc. Omnia breuia mihi deliberat' seu deliberand coram Iustic' infrascr' apud
Westmon. in Octab. Sa^cti Hillar' returnabil' sieve return' habeo coram Iustic'
infrascr' apud W. die, etc. vna cum omnibus Executionibus eorundum.

Et vlterius ad Comit' meum tent' apud Cantabr' (tali die and anno) public
Proclam' feci, quod parts in eisde^ breuibus nominatis, dies suos coram
Iustic' apud W. ad praefatum terminum conseruarent, prout istud breue, etc.

Virtute, etc. Indictamentum illud vnde in dicto breue fit mentio, Certiorari.
( or omnia and singula Indictament' R.B. infranominati) vnae cum omnibus idem
Indictament' tangentibus, in Cancellaria dicti Domini Regis mitto in quadam
schedula huic breui Consut'.

Retorn' de Proclam' extra Cancellar'.
Virtute, etc. public proclamari feci* infra balliuam meam quod infrano^' I.
S. sub poena legianc' suae, coram Domino Rege in Cancellar' sua ad diem
infracont' compareat, prout interius mihi praecipitur. Necnon dicto Domino Regi
certifico quod infranom' I.S. Non est inuentus in balliua mea.

* Or such Proclamations would be made in diverse several places, (and at
diverse several times) within the same sheire, and be returned accordingly.

The Return of a Dedimus potestat' to take the Oath of a Sheriff.
Virtute istius breuis nobis directi (tali die and anno, etc. infrascr')
recepimus Sacramentum infranom' A. B. vicecom' Com' C. de Officio illo been and
fideliter faciend iuxta formam cuiusdam schedulae praesentibus annexis prout
interius nobis praecipitur, Ac prout istud breue in se Exigit and requirit.

W. S. B. T.
Commis.

Retorn' Securitatis Pacis, sur, Supplicauit.
Ego A.B. ar' vic' Com' infrascr' Domino Regi in Cancellar' sua certifico quod
I.S. infranom', Nullam mihi inuenit securitatem pacis de qua interius fit
mentio, sed in prisona Domini Regis sub Custodia mea ad presens residet.

Ego, Aliter.
etc. mitto coram Domino Rege in Cancellar' suam tenorem securitatis pacis, de
qua in dicto breue fit mentio; sub sigillo meo, prout istud breue in se exigit
and requirit: Quae quidem securitas huic breui est Consut'.

Upon a Supplicauit directed to the Sheriff, and Justices of Peace of that
County, if it be delivered to the Sheriff, he only ought to execute it. scz.
he is to grant out his warrant, to bring the party before him alone, to find
Sureties for the Peace, and he is further to do in every behalf according as
the Writ directs him.

CHAP. 82. Return of Process out of the Eschequer.
Retorn' de Capias, extra Scaccarium.
Corpus.
VIrtute istius breuis mihi directi Boronib', infrascriptis certifico, Quod Cepi
corpus infranom' I. S. cuius corpus coram dictis Baronibus parat' habeo ad die^
infracontent'. See hic cap. 53. Necnon (tali die and anno infrascr') Cepi in
manus dicti Domini Regis, Terre.
nomine distriction' certas terras and Ten' infranom' I. S. iac' and existen'
in B. annui valoris C.s. prout istud breue exigit, etc.

Aliter de terra
Virtute, etc. certifico quod (tali die and anno infrascr') Caepi in manus
Domini Regis infraspec' Maneriu^ infrascr' cum pertin', prout interius mihi
praecipitur.

Et si sit cum Inquisit' pro annuali valor tunc breue praedictum returnab' est
sic.

Residuu^ Execution' istius breuis patet in quada^ Inquisit' huic breui annex.

A.B. Armig' vic'.

Inquisitio Indent' Capta apud L. in Com' praed' (tali die and anno) coram A.
B. ar' vic' Com' praed' virtut' breuis Domini Regis mihi directi and huic
Inquis. annex' per Sacram' B. C. D. E. (etc. ad numerum xij. iurator') Qui
dicunt super Sacram' suum, Quod, etc. (as the matter is.)

Retorn' de Seisur' nomine District'.

Virtute, Terre.
etc. (tali die and anno) in manus Domini Regis seisiui ( or Cepi) Maner' de B.
infrascr' cum pertin' in S. in Com' infrascr' quod quidem Maner' est clari
annui valor' in omnibus exitibus vltra repris. xx.l. de terris I.S. in schedula
huic breui annex' nominat. Ac Cepi etiam in manus eiusdem Domini Regis vnum
bouem pretij xx.s. nomine distriction', Boni.
de bonis and Catallis I. S. in schedula praed' nominat', prout istud breue in
se exigit and requirit.

Vide hic cap. 56, how the Return shall be where he is sufficient.

Nihil.
Nullum tale maner', nec vlla terra seu tenementa cognit' per nomen de E. iac'
in Com' C. vnde distringere possum, Distring'.
etc.

Aliter.
Infranom' I.S. nihil habet in manerio, terris and tenementis infrascript' per
quod ipsum distringere possum, prout, etc. Aliter.


Infranom' I.S. nihil habet in balliua mea, etc. Nec est inuentus, etc.

Aliter.
Et vlterius Baron' infrascr' certifico, Quod nulli sunt execut' vel admin',
bonorum and catallorum quae fuer' infranom' I.S. vnde ipsos aut eorum aliquem
distringere possum.

Homage.
Retorn' Breuis de respect' homage al Distringas.

Manucaptores Infranominat. I.S. Ioh. Do. Rich. Roo.


Exitus xx.s. (more or less, according to the value of the land.)

Retorn' Breuis de Quis est tenens.
Virtute, etc. certifico, Quis tenens.
Quod W.B. and M. vxor eius sunt tenentes tertiae partis Manerij infrascr' in
tres parts diuisas, and C.A. M.A. and I.A. filiae I.A. defuncti sunt tenentes
secundae partis manerij infrascript' in tres parts d^uisas. Et alia tertia
pars Manerij infrascript', remanet in custodia ( or manu) Domini Regis, ratione
minoris aetatis P.A. filij and haered praedicti I.A.

Manucaptor' praenom' W.B. and M. vxor' eius. Ioh. Do. Rich. Roo.


Retorn' quando aliquis ostendit Vic' Tallia. Tallia.

Virtute, etc. certifico, Quod I.S. infranom', post receptionem istius Breuis
mihi ostendit tallia sua, de solutione firmae suae interius specific': Ob quod
praefixi ei diem essendi coram Baron' infrascript' ad faciend' and recipiend
super tallia praedict' iuxta tenorem huius breuis. Et ideo leuatio summ'
interius specific'. Supersed prout mihi interius praecipitur.

Retorna breuis per collect' decimae and quindecimae extra Scac'.

That A. refused to be Collector of the Task, or to seal the Bond. See my
book at large.

That C. has sealed a Bond for the Collection thereof, ibidem.

Commorans in alio Comitat'.
Infranom' I.L. est Vic' Com. E. Et est commorans in dicto Comitatu E, Et non
est inuentus in Balliua mea.

De vendition' exponas.
Baron' infrascr' certifico, Quod illa centum Oues in hoc breue specific',
vendition' exponere non potui, eo quod adhuc remanet in manus infranom' E.L.
nuper Vic' Com' Cantabr': and nunquam mihi praefat' nunc Vic' adhuc per
praefatum, nuper Vic' deliber' fuer'.

A.B. Armig' Vic'. Aliter

Virtute istius breuis mihi directi de die in diem vendit' exposui illa bona
and catalla ad valenc' C.s. residuum de 8. li. quae nuper de bonis and
catallis, terris and tenement' I.S. infranom' cepi, and inde vendidi ad valenc'
40.s. Quos quidem 40.s. ad die^ and locum infracont' parat' habeo ad reddend',
etc. prout interius mihi praecipitur. Et residuum bonor' and catallor' praed'
adhuc penes me remanent inuendit' pro defectu emptorum.

CHAP. 84.
The Sherifes Return upon a precept from Justices of Peace, to Enquire of a
Riot, or Forcible entry, etc.
VIrtute istius Praecepti mihi directi venire feci coram Justice, infrascriptis,
ad diem and locum infracont. 24. probos, sufficientes, and legales homines de
balliua mea, prout interius mihi praecipitur.

Residuum executionis istius praecepti patet in quadam schedula huic warranto
annex'.

A.B. Armig' Vic'.

Cantabr.
Nomina Iurator' ad inquirend' pro Domino Rege de quibusdam ill citis
aggregationibus and riottis, Schedula.
etc. apud Abb' magna commissis, Summon' ad essend. coram Iustic' Domini Regis
apud Linton in Comit' praed', (tali die and anno) secund' exigenc' cuiusdam
warranti huic schedulae annex'.

And then underneath write down the names of the twenty four thus: Et sic de
caeteris, ad uumerum 24.
T.B. de Lynton. R.B. de eadem. I.P. de H.


Quilibet Iurator' praedict' separatim per se attachiatus est per pleg' Ioh.
Do. Rich. Roo.


Exitus eorum cuiuslibet xx.s.

A.B. Arm' Vic'.

CHAP. 85. Return of Iuries.
IVries are of two sorts, scz. for Enquiry, or Trial.

For Enquiry, For Inquiry.
the Sheriff upon the precept of the Justices, is to summon, and to return the
grand Iuries to the Assizes or Jail delivery, and to the Quarter Sessions,
etc. Hic ca. 46, 47.

He is likewise to summon and return Iuries (for Enquiry) before the Justices
of peace at their private Sessions ( hic cap. 84.) as also before other
commissioners, and before Escheators, and Coroners, and Clerks of the Markets,
upon their several Precepts directed to him for that purpose. Hic Cap. 83. and
100.

Iuries for trial For Trial.
(between party and party) the Sheriff likewise upon the Kings writ is to
summon them, and to return the pannell of their names, at the day and place in
the Writ limited, together with the Writ.

And for these Iuries for trials, the Sheriff ought to make their Pannels so,
as that the parties may have Coppies thereof before their trial. And these
coppies of Pannells shall be indented and delivered to the parties (upon demand)
before the sitting of the Justices.

Baylifes of Liberties must return (to the Sheriff,) the names of persons by
them impannelled, eight days before the Assizes, etc.

The Sheriff is to summon, (warn, or distreme) all such persons as he minds
to return upon any Jury (either for enquiry, or trial:) And if the Sheriff
shall return any Iuror not lawfully summoned, etc. the Sheriff is punishable.

So if the Sheriff shall summon, etc. any Iuror, and shall not return him, he
is punishable.

None are to be put upon any Jury, but such only as were summoned to the same
at the first. And yet Pannells returned before Justices of Jail delivery, or
before Justices of Peace (in their open Sessions) for Enquiry, may be reformed
by the Justices; And the Sheriff ought to return the Pannels so reformed. And
so of Pannels for trial, upon a Tales de Circumstantibus, granted by the
Justices, etc.

Also Jurors (as well for Enquiry, as fortriall) shall be returned by the
Sheriff without any denomination of any person whatsoever, other then the
Sherifs sworn Officers, etc.

And the High Sheriff by his oath must make the Pannels himself.

Now what manner of persons Jurors for Trials shall be.

1 First they must be Probi, and Legales homines.

Probi, scz. such as are not discredited (or disabled in their credits) in law,
by attainder, in conspiracy, in atteynt, Decies tantum, perjury, subornation
of perjury, concealment, or such like.

Legales, scz. such as are not vtlawed, abiured, condemned in a Praemunire, or
atteynted of treason or felony.

2 They must be such as are neighbors, sufficient, not suspected, nor labored.

3. They must also be Liberi, scz. Freeholders: Except where an Alien is a
party (there the one half of the Enquest shall be of Aliens, though they have
no land) or in some few other cases.

But the Sheriff ought not to return upon any Jury, any Baron of the
Parliament.

Nor any of the Clergy, though they have Lay fee.

Nor tenants in ancient Demesne; except they have other lands.

Nor Officers of the Forest.

Nor any of the Coroners of the County.

Nor any of the Officers, or servants belonging to any Sheriff, Vndersherife,
Coroner, Steward of Franchise, or Jailer.

Nor any person being above the age of lxx.

Nor any person decrepit.

Nor any persons diseased at the time of their Summons.

Nor any Enfant under the age of xxj.

Nor any person dwelling out of the County.

Nor any person having a Charter of Exemption, if he shall show the same to the
Sheriff.

Nor any Alien, except where an Alien is party to the suite.

Nor any person which is of kindred to either party, Plaintiff, or defendant.

Nor he which is a servant, or has a yearly fee of either party.

Nor he which is within the distress of eith^^ party.

Nor he which maintains either party in the same suite.

Where a Peer of the Realm is party to the action, there must be two Knights
(at the least) returned of the Jury.

Also upon trial of any issue, the Sheriff must return in every Pannell (upon
the venire fac'.) Six Hundredors, scz. Six sufficient persons of the Hundred
where the land in controversy lies, or where the fact is supposed to be done.

The Sheriff shall return no Iuror without a true Addition Addition.
of his dwelling place: or some other Addition by which he may be known.

And baylifes of Liberties shall deliver (unto the Sheriff) under their hands,
the names of all such persons within their Liberty, as are meet to be Jurors,
with the true addition of their dwelling place: and the Sheriff must return it
accordingly.

Jurors for Enquiry, ought also to be Probi, and Legales.

CHAP. 86. Jurors their number.
Upon every Venire facias, for the impannelling of a Jury, the Sheriff must
return 24. neither more nor less.

In a Writ of Attaint, the Jury (called the Grand Jury) must be 24.

And the Sheriff must return but so many. Hic cap. 51.

And in all other actions, trialls, or enquiries, the Sheriff upon any Writ or
precept directed to him for returning of a Jury, he is to impannell and
return xxiiij,

The Jury in a Writ of Right (called the Grand Assise) must be of four Knights
(or of others in default of Knights) summoned and returned by the Sheriff,
which 4. Knights, etc. are to choose a Jury of xij. unto them (and so in all
here must be xvj.) all which are to be summoned by the Sheriff, upon a writ to
him directed, and their names to be returned.

At every Jail delivery, and Sessions of the Peace, the Sherif is to return
24. Jurors for enquiry, out of every Hundred; besides 24. for the body of the
County, hic cap. 46. and 47.

Upon a Precept to the Sheriff from Justices of Peace, out of their Sessions,
to return before them a Jury to inquire of any riot, or forcible Entry, the
Sheriff must return 24.

But upon issue joined upon prescription of Common in a great wast lying in two
Counties, and a trial awarded de Vtroque Comitatu, if in each Pannell twelve
only be returned, it seeme^h to be good.

Iuries for inquiry in the Sherifes Turn, shall be of twelve at the least.

And so in all Enquiries made (or Inquisition taken) by the Sheriff, Escheator,
or other commissioner, the same ought to be by 12. Jurors at the least.

And so of Trialls in the County Court by a Iusticies, the same ought to be by
twelve men.

Note that where several Indictments are preferred against diverse several
prisoners, the Sheriff may return one and the same Jury two or three several
times, to try those prisoners, so as the evidence against all the prisoners be
delivered all at one time.

No Sheriff or other Officer, shall take any reward (or promise of reward) for
sparing, not warning, or not returning of any Iuror, for trial of any issue,
sub poena 5. li.

The Sheriff is to add and annex to his Pannell, the names of such persons as
shall be impannelled upon the Tales.

Note that there may be many Tales one after another, till the Jury be full;
as a December Tales, Octo Tales, etc. Sex Tales, etc.

But every Tales must be of a less number than the former. And every Tales
must be of fewer than the principal Pannell (except in Indictments and
Appeals that touch life.)

And every Tales must be of an even number.

And they must be others of the same sort that the principal Pannell were of.

Although the writ be Venire facias xij. liberos and legales homines, yet if
the Sheriff shall return the names of twelve only, he shall be amerced. And
if he shall return twenty three, and twelve of them shall appear, and give
their verdict, yet it is erroneous.

CHAP. 87. The sufficiency of Jurors.
BY a statute made 21. Ed. 1. and yet in force, every Iuror for trial of any
matter within the county, must have in freehold per annum -- 40. s.

Every Iuror for trial of any matter out of their County, must have in
freehold per annum at least -- v.li.

Now it is to be observed that forty s. in those days, does make at this
present, at the least six pounds of our money; and therefore for the returning
of more sufficient Jurors for trials, by later Statutes it is now enacted that
where formerly they ought to have forty shillings per annum, Now the Venire
facias, shall have this clause Quorum quilibet habeat 4. li. per annu^, ad
minus. And upon such a Venire facias the Sheriff shall return no person,
unless he may spend 4. li. per annum, of Freehold within the county, and out
of Ancient Demesne. And where that clause is left out of the Venire facias,
(scz. quorum quilibet habeat 4. li.) there the Sheriff may return such as have
any Freehold within the County where the Issue is to be tried.

But these last Statutes extends not to any Jurors to be returned in any city
or town corporate, or in Wales.

Again, no person shall pass in any Enquest touching life, nor in any plea
real or personal, whereof the debt or damages declared, amounts to forty
Marks, except such person have forty shillings in land per annum, so that
they be challenged for that cause, etc. But where any Alien is a party, one
half of the Enquest shall be Aliens, though they have not 40.s. per annum.

In writs of Attaint the Sheriff is to return upon the graund Jury more
sufficient men, scz. if it be in plea of lands, or for deeds concerning Lands
of forty shillings per annum: or in any Action personal of forty pounds or
more, every of the grand Jury must have in freehold lands per annum twenty
marks at the least. See hic cap. 51.

Every Iuror returned before Justices of Peace to enquire of any forcible
Entry, etc. must have 40.s. freehold per annum.

Every Iuror returned before Justices of Peace to enquire of any Riot, etc.
must have xx.s. freehold per annum: or in Copihold xxvj.s. viij. d. per annum.

Upon a Commission to enquire of the default of Justices of Peace and Sherifes
in not executing the Statutes made for suppressing of Riots, such Jurors only
shall be returned as have xx. pounds per annum at the least.

Every Iuror returned before Justices of Peace, to enquire of concealements of
other Enquests, must have 40.s. per annum.

Every Iuror returned before Escheators or Commissioners, to enquire of any
lands, must have 40.s. freehold per annum.

Every Iuror impannelled in the Sherifes Turn, must have xx. s. freehold per
annum: or in Copihold xxvj. s. viij.d.

For the sufficiency of Jurors in Lancashiere, Wales, London, and corporate
towns. See the Statutes.

Note that Tenant for life, yielding a rent, with a clause of Reentry for Non
payment, is no sufficient freeholder to be sworn of a Jury, his estate being
so defeasible.

A Lease is made to B. for years, the Remainder to C. in fee, here C. may
pass upon a Jury for this freehold.

B. makes a Lease for x. years, absque aliquo reddendo, here B. is a
sufficient freeholder to pass upon a Jury, for his freehold remaining.

Plus hic cap. 92.

Note that it is needful for the Sheriff to have a book containing the names
of all the Freeholders within his County, and their sufficiencies, that so he
may not only make the Pannells according to his oath; but may also know their
sufficiency to be sureties or Pledges, etc. for others.

And besides if they return any Iuror in issues which is not sufficient, the
Sheriff may be enforced to pay their issues for them.

CHAP. 89. Return of issues upon the defendant or tenant.
THe Sheriff stands bound (by his oath) to set, and to return reasonable and
due issues upon all such as be within his County ( scz. upon the tenants or
defendants) which have such lands or goods after their estate, to the end they
may the rather appear.

And the tenant or defendant making default of appearance (after the first
attachment returned) scz. upon the Distringas, shall loose and forfeit issues
to the King.

If the Sheriff shall set and return too small issues upon the tenant or
defendant, he is punishable.

When the tenant or defendant is distreined for such issues, it seems that
the Sheriff ought to deliver them to the Mainpernors or Manucaptors, and if the
party makes default at his day, the Sheriff shall answer for those issues in
the Exchequer by the Estreates thereof made; and the Mainpernors shall be
answerable therefore to the Sheriff.

Under the name of Issues are contained, The profits of the lands, Quid.
and the goods of the party.

1 The profits of the lands, scz. his rents and corn growing.

But yet for rent, the Sheriff needs not to return that for issues, except
they be then due.

And for corn growing; the Sheriff must be wary in returning them for issues,
for that they may be lost or spoiled before they be carried.

2 Goods, scz. Corn in the barn, and all moouables (except apparel,
household stuff, horses and their harness.)

And by the Stat. the Sheriff ought to return in issues upon every defendant
or tenant, Quantum.
so much as may arise of the profits of their lands within that County from the
day of the Test of the writ, until the day of the return thereof, and the
value of his goods (except vt supra.) But it seems that this Law is not now
much in use, whereby (as Master Fitzh. says) great inconvenience arises, and
besides it is a breach of the Sherifes oath.

Otherwise at this day the Sheriff need to return but reasonable issues: But
be they never so great, they be forfeit upon his default, and the party has no
remedy; and the Sherif shall be chargeable therewith being estreated. See hic
cap. 11.

Note that with these issues the land is chargeable into whose hands soever it
come after. See hic cap. 11.

CHAP. 90. What Issues the Sheriff must return upon Jurors.
BY the Common Law the Sheriff was to return^ no Issues upon a Venire fac'
Iurator': Hic cap. 78.
Neither was it used to return any great Issues upon the Habeas corpor', or
Distring' Iurator'.

But for the more expedition of Justice, and more speedy trial of issues (by
Jurors) and in some cases of Enquiry, there have been diverse statutes made as
follows.

1 Upon every first writ of Habeas corpora, or Distring. Iurat' etc. to try
any issue, the Sheriff shall return in issues upon every person impannelled
and returned x. s. at the least. And upon the second writ xx. s. And upon the
third writ xxx. s. etc. Sub poena V. li.

2 In actions of Attaint the sheriff shall return in issues upon every Iuror
at the first Distring. forty shillings at the least, at the second Distring.
five pounds. And the double upon every other Distress, Sub poena xx. li.

3 Upon every precept from Justices of peace to enquire of a forcible Entry,
or Riot, etc. the sheriff shall return upon every Iuror in issues at the first
precept (or day) twenty shillings, And at the second day forty shillings. And
in cases of a Forcible Entry or Deteiner, at the third day C. s. and at every
day after double. Sub poena xx. li.

4 Upon a Commission to enquire of the defaults of Justices of peace and
Sherifes, in not executing the Statutes made for the suppressing of Riots,
there shall be returned in issues upon every Iuror, at the first day twenty
s. at the second day forty shillings, at the third day C. s. and at every day
after, the double. Sub poena 40. li.

5 Upon an Information upon the Statute of Liueries, the sheriff shall return
in issues at the first day twenty shillings, At the second day thirty
shillings, At the third day forty shillings. and at every day after for every
time to increase them ten shillings.

What issues shall be returned upon Jurors in London, see the Statutes, 11. H.
7. 21. 4. H. 8. 3. and 5. H. 8. cap. 5.

What issues shall be returned upon Jurors in Wales, or in other Cities, or
Corporate Towns, See 27. El. ca. 6.

If the Sheriff shall return any Iuror in issues which is not sufficient, (or
has no land) the Sheriff shall pay those issues himself.

If the Sheriff shall return any issues upon any Iuror which was not lawfully
summoned or distreyned, the Sheriff shall forfeit double so much as the said
issues returned.

Plus hic cap. 11.

No Sheriff shall levy any issues, other than such as are estreated to him
under the seal of the Exchequer. See hic cap. 13. and 125.

And these Estreats shall express the cause of the loss or forfeiture, the
term, year, nature of the Writ or Action, and betwixt what parties the
Issues, fines, and amerciaments be lost, and the Sheriff in his warrants to his
Bailifes, must also express the cause of the forfeiture.

No estreat of Issues against any Iuror, shall be delivered, received, or put
in ure, without such addition as is put in the original Pannell; and no
Sheriff, etc. shall collect any issues so estreated, but of the right party,
chargeable by the Estreat.

And note that all the Kings courts, Justices, Commissioners, and others, shall
deliver into the Exchequer (at Michaelmasse yearly) their estreats of fines
and amerciaments, assessed or taxed before them, and of all issues, etc. and
from thence they shall make Process against the parties, to answer and
satisfy the same.

Note also that these issues returned upon the Tenant or Defendant, and upon
Jurors, and lost by them in respect of Non appearance, and estreated as
aforesaid, shall be levied by the Sheriff as forfeit to the King.

CHAP. 91.
ALl the lands which the Iuror had at the time of the Vinire facias, served
upon him, shall be liable to his issues, etc.

If the land which the Iuror had be recovered from him; or that he had the
same land but for another man's life who is dead; then the Sheriff must return
this special matter, Et sic nihil habet: otherwise the Sheriff cannot return
Nihil, where Issues were returned by him before, nor upon the Distringas
Iuratores, Hic cap. 78.

Plus hic cap. 11. that the Issues may be levied upon the heir, successor,
purchasor, wife, Fermour, etc.

CHAP. 92. The choosing and returning of Knights, etc. for the Parliament.
AFter the Sheriff has received the Writ for Summons of the Parliament, and
election of the Knights, etc. before the next County court, the Sheriff must
make out his Warrants to his Baylifes (of every Hundred) commanding them to
summon or warn the Freeholders within their several Bayliwickes, to be at the
next County, and there to make choice of their Knights, etc.

Or else the Sheriff (after the receipt of that writ) at some Quarter Sessions
of the Peace, or other general meeting of the country, may give public
notice thereof to the Freeholders.

Mes si le Vic' done null notice, ou Summons al Freeholders serra mischievous,
Et uncore semble null remedy done. And at the next county, and in full county,
Proclamation shall be made by the Sheriff, of the day and place of the
Parliament, and that all persons there present shall attend the election.

After the Knighs be chosen, (be they present or absent) their names shall be
written in a pair of Indentures to be made between the Sheriff of the one
part, and some of the Freeholders, being chusers, of the other part: unto
which Indentures the Sheriff and the Chusers shall interchangeably set their
Scales, and that part of the Indentures sealed by the Chusers, shall be tacked
to, and returned (by the Sheriff) with the said writ.

These Knights ought to be chosen of persons resiant within the Shire; and
must be Knights indeed, or else Gentlemen able to be Knights.

But no Sheriff or Mayor ought to be chosen.

Also persons attainted of treason or felony, ought not to be chosen knights
for the Parliament.

Nor any person that is outlawed.

Nor any person in prison upon an Execution.

Neither ought any such person to be chosen a Burgess for the Parliament.

And yet it any such person shall be chosen thereto, the Sheriff ought to
return their names.

The chusers of Knights for the Parliament ought to be only of such persons as
be dwelling within the same Shire, and such as have forty shillings freehold
lands or tenemtnts per annum, within the same Shire, the day of the date of the
same writ.

Note that by the Common Law all Freemen of England had a voice in the election
of these Knights, within the Counties where they dwelt, but now they are
restrained (by Statute) to such only as have freehold lands or Tenements to the
value of forty shillings by the year, above all charges. By which words,
Lands and Tenements, you must understand,

First, he which has no other Freehold but the Aduowson or gift of a Church,
he thereby can be no chuser, etc. He which has no other freehold than common
of Pasture, can be no chuser, etc, though that be of the value of forty
shillings per annum.

But a freehold house, or land worth thirty shillings per annum, and a common
of pasture appendant, (worth twenty shillings per annum,) belonging to the
same house, is holden to be a sufficient Freehold.

Otherwise of a house new erected, or erected within time of memory; for that
common must be by prescription, except such house be worth forty shillings per
annum, besides the Common.

A. having forty pounds per annum, lets the same to another for life,
reserving no rent, or but twenty shillings or thirty shillings rent per
annum, this seems no sufficiency of freehold to A. during the term.

But if A. lets such his estate to another for years, (though for diverse
years, reserving only twenty shillings per annum, (or absque aliquo reddendo)
yet here he may be a chuser, etc. for the freehold which is in him.

So if lands worth forty shillings per annum, be letten for years, the
remainder to A. in Fee simple or Fee tail, here A. may be a chuser, etc. for
the Freehold which is in him.

If a man has forty shillings rent per annum, or one annuitie of forty
shillings per annum, (issuing out of lands) during his life, this is
sufficiency of freehold to be a chuser, etc.

And this forty shillings per annum, must also be certain, and not by reason
of the gain of an Orchard, Garden, or other thing which is casual, and not
certain, for that is no sufficiency.

If a man has a freehold estate of lands or tenements in the right of his
wife, of the yearly value of forty shillings, it is sufficient.

If a man has free warren of conies, the which communibus annis is worth
forty shillings per annum, this is sufficient.

If a man makes forty shillings per annum of his woodsales, Cole-mines,
Tithes impropriate, or the like, being his Freehold, these are sufficiency of
Freehold.

Clergy men for their Spiritual Livings, are holden to have no voices in the
election of these Knights. Quaere.

Fellows of Colleges in the Universities, are holden to have no voices in
this election of Knights, for or by reason of their chambers or other auails in
their Colleges.

And Gentlemen of the Inns of Court or Chancerie are to have no voices therein,
by reason of their chambers there.

Note that the Sheriff may examine upon oath every such chuser, how much
Freehold he may expend per annum.

The election of these Knights must be made in the full county Court, and
between the hours of eight and 11. in the forenoone, and only by such
Freeholders as be then present in the County Court.

And the Sheriff is to return such Knights as have the greatest number of
voices, of such chusers and freeholders.

This return of the Sheriff must be made by Indentures, sealed by the Sheriff
of the one part, and by the chusers of the other part. The form of which
Indentures you may see in my Book at large, cap. 92.

If the election be made in full County, and between the hours aforesaid, the
Sherif may seal his Indentures, and make his Return afterward, and in
another place.

Also this election of Knights (as also of Burgesses) may be by voices, or
holding up of hands, etc. or by any other way whereby it may be discerned who
has the greater number.

Burgesses.
The Sheriff also upon receipt of the said Writ for summons of the Parliament,
ought presently to make out his Precepts (under the Seal of his office) to
every Mayor and Bailife, etc. of Cities and Buroughs within his County,
commanding them to choose their Citisens and Burgesses for the Parliament.

Those Majors and Baylifes, etc. must make a return of that Precept, and of
their Election, ( scz. of their names) to the Sherif by Indentures, and the
sheriff must seal one part of those Indentures, and the other part sealed by
the Mayor, etc. the Sheriff must certify, and return also with the Writ.

If any Sheriff shall be negligent in making his return of this Writ, or shall
leave out of his said return any City or Borough which ought to come to the
Parliament, he shall forfeit an hundred pounds, and have one years imprisonment.

If the Sheriff shall do any thing contrary to the Statutes, either
concerning the due election, or returning of these Knights and Burgesses, he
shall forfeit to the King an hundred pounds, and to the party not duly
returned, C. l. and have one years imprisonment.

These Citisens and Burgesses of cities and Buroughs, ought to be chosen of
persons dwelling and free in the same Cities and Buroughs, and none other in
any wise. Tamen aliter in vsu.

Also the Sheriff after he has received a Writ for the leuying of the expenses
of these Knights, at their next County Court are to make Proclamation, That
all Coroners, chief Constables, Baylifes, and others (which will,) be present
at the next County Court after, to ass sse the fees or wages of the Knights,
etc.

At this assessement the Sheriff (or Vndersherife) ought to be in person,
(with the Coroners and Constables) to assesse the wages.

And the Sheriff in the presence of them that come, in the full County, shall
assesse every Hundred to a certain sum by it self, (so that the whole sum
of all the Hundreds do not exceed the sum due, etc.) Also the Sher^fe, etc.
shall then also assesse every village, etc. to a certain sum, so that the
sum of the towns exceed not the sum assessed upon the Hundred of which
they be, sub poena thirty pounds.

Every Knight of the shire is to have thirteen shillings four pence by the
day to be paid by the County.

If any Sheriff shall levy more than shall be due, or shall not speedily leuy
so much as shall be due; or shall not deliver the same to the Knights, according
to the said Writ, he shall forfeit xxx.l. etc.

The Sheriff may distreyne for the moneys so assessed, and he may distrein the
whole Heard (of Cattle) of the Town, or the goods of any particular man of
the town, for these Moneys.

Also the sheriff my sell the distresses so taken.

Note that the Sheriff shall assesse no Village or place hereunto, but such as
anciently have been chargeable.

Also the freeholders and tena^ts of such Lords, etc. as come to the
Parliament, are not to be assessed for their lands holde^ of such Lords, except
by prescriptio^.

Also Borough towns which send Burgesses to the Parliament, shall not pay or
contribute to these wages, except it be by Prescription.

Lords, and Tenants in Ancient Demesne shall be acquitted of payments to these
expenses, for such their land, etc. Also Copiehold lands are not chargeable to
these expenses.

CHAP. 93. The Sherifes duty in executing the writ of Redisseisin.
Redisseisin.
Upon this writ, the Sheriff is first to summon the disseisor, and the
ter-tenant, to be before him at such time when he makes this his Inquisition.

But the summoning of the ter-tenant seems only to be, for him to give in
evidence.

The Sherif in this business is made a Judge, and therefore he must in person
go unto the lands or tenements whereof the plaint is made, to see them; yea
though it be within a Liberty.

He must sit and make his Enquiry, in proper person; and upon the land etc. Or
at least he must cause the Jury to go see the lands etc. And then to hold plea
of the matter.

He must have the assistance of 2. Coroners (at the least) to sit with him at
the taking of the Inquisition.

And these Coroners should join with the Sheriff, in making up of the Record;
But the Sheriff is only Judge herein.

The Sheriff at his Inquisition must also have with him certain Knights, or
other lawful men, being neighbors dwelling near unto the lands etc. And
before them, and the Coroners, the Sheriff must make his Inquisition by a Jury.

And the Enquiry must be, whether the tenant be Redisseised, or no; and not
whether he were Disseised.

This Enquiry must be made, by two of the first Jurors (at the least) and by
so many other neighbors as shall make up a full Jury.

Although all the first Jurors be living, yet the Sheriff must take two (at
the least) other new Jurors to be of this Enquiry.

Also the first Jurors which must serve upon this Enquiry, must be of such as
did pass upon the principal action, and not such as passed upon the Enquiry
for damages.

The Sheriff may not suffer the party to have his challenge to any of the
first Jurors: But he may have his challenge to the other Jurors; but not to the
Array.

The Sheriff herein has no power to try any Plea, out of the point of
Redisseisin; Nor to suffer or accept of any foreign plea: Neither shall he
suffer the disseisour to plead any feoffement or release; Nor that he has paid
a fine, etc.

If upon this Enquiry it be found that the plaintiff is redisseised (or
disseised again) then the Sheriff must presently commit such disseisor to
prison, there to remain without bail until he shall pay a fine to the King.
And further until he shall be discharged of his imprisonment, by the judgment
of the Kings court, and by a special writ reciting that he has paid his fine
to the King, etc.

The Sheriff shall receive no Attorney for either party, without the kings writ
(whether the Lord has Cognusance in an assise) etc. yet the sheriff shall enter
the Franchise, and make execution of this Writ, but the Sheriff shall there
write his precept to the baylife of the Franchise to return the Jury.

Upon the Redisseisin found by the Inquisition, the Sheriff also must make a
record thereof, and make return thereof.

And in this (Record and) Return, the Sheriff must show or return that he
has made his Inquisition, etc. in the presence of such Coroners. etc. by so
many of the first Jurors, and by others, etc.

He must also return Quod accessit ad locu^, or Tent' a infrascipt' and not
accessit ad villam: but he may return Quod apud S. (being the town where the
land lies) fecit Inquisitionem, etc.

And this Inquisition must be returned under the Seals of the Sheriff, and of
the Jurors: but the seals of the Coroners seems not to be needful.

CHAP. 94. Where the sheriff may break open an house, to execute the Kings
Writ, etc.
1. Wheresoever the King is a party, or has any interest in the business, as
for the apprehending of any person for Treason, felony, or suspicion of
felony, the Officer may break open the doors.

So where one has dangerously hurt another, and then flies into an house, but
here fresh suite must be made, quaere.

So where an affray is made in an house, and the doors shut.

So upon a warrant for the peace, or good behavior.

So upon a warrant for Justices of Peace, to reseise a house, and restore the
p^rty put out, where a forcible Entry, or deteyner, was found by Inquisition
before the said Justices.

So upon Process for the apprehending of any Popish Recusant, being
excommunicated.

See plus my Country Justice. cap. 78.

So upon a Capias vtlagatum.

So upon a Capias pro fine.

And yet the Sheriff cannot break open a door, or a gate, etc. to distreme
for the Kings rent; nor to leuy any fine, amerciament, issues, debts, or other
such duties due to the King, except he has the Kings Writ, etc.

2 Upon a Commission of rebellion out of the Chancerie, the Sheriff may break
open the doors or house to apprehend the party. But quaere, if upon an
Attachment, or upon an Iniunction, they being the suite of the party.

3 Upon an Habere facias seisinam, or possessionem, the Sheriff may break the
house, and deliver seisin, etc. yea the Sheriff ought to execute this Writ,
although that an estranger be lawfully seized of the house or land, etc.

4 In Execution of the Commission of Bankrupts, by warrant under the hands and
seals of the said Commissioners, the Sheriff may break open the houses,
chambers, shops, doors, or chests, etc. of the Bankrupt, wherein any of his
goods be, or shall be reputed to be, and to seize upon the body and goods, etc.

5 To deliver cattle impounded, etc. in a Castle, Fort, or House, etc. See hic
cap. 114.

6 Also where one being under arrest, upon an Execution (or otherwise) shall
escape into an house, upon pursuit the Officer may break open the house to
take his prisoner again.

7 So wheresoever the Officer has once lawfully entered the house (or into one
room) he may break open any other room there, upon refusal to let him go
in.

8 If the door be open, and the Officer comes to the house and shows the
Kings Process, and offers to enter to execute the same, and then the doors be
shut against the Officer, here the Officer may break open the house, etc. for
that here he had lawfully begun to execute his Process.

9 Where the Officer has once lawfully entered an house to make execution of
his Process, the door being open and then the door is shut, and so the Officer
is detained prisoner in the house, the Sheriff is to deliver his Officer may
break open the house.

B^t where the outward door is shut before the coming of the Officer, there
he cannot justify the breaking open of the house or door, to execute any
Process upon the body or goods of any person at the suit of any subject for any
debt, damages, or the like.

And yet in all cases if the outward door be open, the Officer may enter and
make execution of any Process, at the suite of any Subject: otherwise if the
door be shut, though only latched.

But note wheresoever the Sheriff may break open an house, yet first he ought
to make request to have the door opened; and withal he must signify the cause
of his coming.

Also he may not break open the house or doors, ^here he may enter otherwise.

But the Law gives no color in any case to break open a man's house by night,
except only for the apprehending of traitors or felons.

Neither shall any man's house privilege or protect any stranger, for their
body or goods (to prevent the Kings Process) Vide et Nota.

Upon a Fieri facias, the Sheriff breaks open a door, or a chest to take
goods in Execution, an action lies against him for breaking thereof.

CHAP. 95. Where the sheriff may take Posse Comitatus.
THe Sheriff and his Officers may take the power of the County, as well for the
safeguard of their persons, as to execute the Kings Process or Writ (be it a Writ
of Execution, Repleuin, Capias, etc. or any other Writ) and such as shall not
assist the Sheriff and his Officers therein, being required, shall pay a fine
to the King.

The Sheriff also may take Posse Comitatus, to execute the precept of the
Justices of peace; as in case of a forcible entry, etc. to make restitution,
etc.

Also when any of the Kings enemies shall invade the land, the Sheriff in
defense of the Realm, may take Posse Comitatus, hic cap. 1.

So when any rebellion or riot, etc. shall he, hic cap. 4.

So to apprehend traitors or felons, hic cap. 4.

So where the Sheriff finds any resistance in the execution of his Office.
Hic cap. 36.58. and 63.

Note that the Sheriff or his Officers may take the power of the County by
force of the Common Law.

And in all cases where the Sheriff, etc. may take Posse Comitatus, there he
may command the aid and attendance of all persons within his County, that are
able to travel, and be above the age of 15. years.

And in such cases it is referred to the discretion of the Sheriff, what number
he will have with him, and how and in what manner armed,

The Vndersherife, as also the Sherifes baylife, or servant (having the
Sherifes warrant) have the same authority to take Posse Comitatus in every
behalf.

The Sherifes baylife to execute a Repleuin, took with him three hundred men
armed, modo guerrino, (scz. with gunnes, etc.) and it was holden lawful.

But the Baylife in such cases must be a known baylife, and must have the
Sherifes warrant to do this.

CHAP. 96. Bailement of Prisoners.
IF the Sheriff shall detain any prisoner which is baileable, after sufficient
sureties offered, the Sheriff shall be punished.

If the Sheriff shall bail any person which is not by him baileable, he shall
be punishable to the King and party grieved: And if the prisoner were in for
felony, and the Sheriff bayleth and delivers him, this is felony in the
Sheriff, except it be by virtue of the Kings special Writ.

But Sherifes (and their Officers) ought to let to bail all manner of persons,
by any of them arrested, or being in their custody by force of any Writ, Bill,
or Warrant, in any Action personal; or upon any Indictment of Trespass, upon
sufficient sureties offered to appear at the day and place where and when the
same Writ, etc. are returnable.

And yet Sherifes may not bail any person in any of these seven cases
following, scz. such as are in their custody,

1 By condemnation upon any judgment.

2 Upon a Capias ad satisfaciendum or other Execution.

3 Upon a Capias excommunicatum.

4 Upon a Capias vtlagatum.

5 For surety of the Peace.

6 By commandment of any Justice.

7 Nor Vagabonds or idle persons refusing to serve.

Neither shall the Sheriff bail any person or prisoner taken for any manner of
treason or felony.

And yet a prisoner in the Jail for felony, may by the Sheriff be bayled,
upon the Kings special Writ of Mainprise.

Also persons committed upon an Indictment for Trespass, or other like
offense, before Justices of peace, the Sheriff may bail them, binding them to
the next Sessions, etc.

Now wheresoever the prisoner is baileable, thereafter the Arrest, the officer
ought to take sureties by obligation Obligation.
for the appearance of his prisoner.

In the forms of such obligations, these three things are to be observed,
otherwise the obligation will be void.

1 The bond must be made to the High-sherife only (or to his use) and to none
other person.

2 It must be made to him by the name of Sheriff.

3 There must nothing be put into the condition of the bond, but only that the
defendant shall appear at the day and place in the Writ specified, and to do
as the Writ requires.

A bond made to any person for the enlargement of a prisoner, save only to the
Sheriff, is void.

A bond made to the Sheriff to such purpose, without a Condition, is void.

A bond made with addition of any clause, or word, in the Condition to any of
these purposes following, scz. to save harmless, to yield his body prisoner,
to be true prisoner, to pay money charges or fees, or for meat or drink, or
for any other ^h^ng, than only for appearance of the prisoner is void.

A verbal promise or assumpsit in such cases, is void.

Also it is safe for the Sherif, that the the party bailed be bound with two
sureties, having sufficient within that County.

And for the sureties, their number, and suffficiency, and the sum wherein they
shall be bound, all these are left to the discretion of the Sheriff or Officer.

But bonds taken by the Sheriff of the defendant, being neither in prison, nor
arrested, with condition to pay the money recovered in Court, or to pay it to
the Sheriff, seems good.

The Sheriff leuieth goods upon a Fieri fac', and then sels them to the party,
and takes his bond for the money, this is good.

So if the Sheriff takes Bond for the payment of money due to the King, upon
an Estreat out of the Exchequer, it is good.

So if the Sheriff attacheth goods, and takes bonds for them.

And it seems that the Statute of 23. H. 6 does make void only Obligations
made by prisoners or persons arrested, (or made by any other) for the
enlargement of the prisoner, or person arrested.

CHAP. 97. The form of a Bond for appearance
NOuerint vniuersi per praesentes nos B.C. de, etc: E. F. de, etc. and G.H. de,
etc. teneri and firmiter obligari A.B. Armig', Vicecom' Com' praed, in xl. l.
etc. soluend eidem Vice comiti aut suocerto attornato, execut' sieve administ'
suis, ad quam quidem solutionem, etc. (as in other Bonds)

A Condition for appearance.
The Condition of this present Obligation is such, That if the above bounden
B.C. do appear coram, etc. (according to the Writ) to answer to I.D. in a
plea of Debt, (or Trespass, as the Writ is) That then, etc.

Sealed and delivered to the use of the above named Sheriff, in the presence of
A.R. and T.S.

A Condition to appear in the Star Chamber.
The Condition of this present Obligation is such, That if the within bounden
I.S. do personally appear before the Kings Majesty, and his most honorable
Council, in the Court of Star Chamber at Westminster (such a day) and so
from day to day, and not to depart without license of the said Court, That
then, etc.

A Condition for appearance at the Sessions.
Conditio, etc. Quod si infra obligatus I.S. in propria persona sua compareat
ad proxim' Session' Iustic' Pacis in Com' C. post Festum, etc. proxime futur'
tenend, ad respond Domino Regi de diuersis offensis vnde indictatus est: Quod
tunc, etc.

A Condition to appear in the Common place upon an Exigent.
Conditio, etc. Quod si I. S. de, etc. in propria persona sua compareat, coram
Iustic' Domini Regis apud Westm' a die Sancti Michaelis, in tres septimanas
proxim' futur', post datum infrascript', ad respond R.W. in placito debiti
secu^d formam, vim, and effectum cuiusda^ breuis de exigend infranom' Vicecom'
direct'. Quod tunc, etc.

CHAP. 98. Their attendance upon the Judges of Assise, etc.
1 Upon a Precept from the Judges of Assise, etc. the Sheriff is to summon the
Assizes, etc. and to return the same.

2 The High-Sherife is personally to attend upon the Judges in their Circuits,
for the executing of their Precepts and Commandments, and to take charge of
all prisoners in the Jail, and for the execution of Felons condemned to die,
(which sentence he must see executed) and for inflicting punishment upon other
offenders, according to his office.

3 He is to make and deliver (at every Assizes) to the said Judges, a Calendar
of the names of all the prisoners which are or were in their custody for
Felony, (or otherwise) with the cause of their commitment, and by whom they
were committed, and by whom any are bayled, sub poena v. l.

And withal, the Sheriff is to make and to deliver to the said Judges, a
Calendar of the names of all the Justices of peace, Coroners, Stewards, or
Baylifes of Liberties, and Baylifes of Hundreds,

Also all Baylifes, and other Ministers of any Franchise, etc. must be
attendant to the Judges of Assise, etc.

And the Judges of Assise may fine the High-Sherife, and other the said
Officers, if they fail either in their attendance, or for any other
negligence, misbehauiour, or misdemeanor in their office, before them.

The Justices assigned to hear and determine Felonies, may award their
Process to the Sherifes of any other County, where a prisoner indicted before
them of felony is dwelling, to apprehend him, and the sherif of such other
county is duly to execute the same process.

Note that the Sheriff may not stay or delay the execution of any prisoner
condemned to die, without the commandment of the Judges.

CHAP. 99. The Sheriff is to assist, etc. Justices of Peace.
1 IN some cases the Sheriff is to join with the Justices of Peace.

As first for the suppressing of Riots, Routs, and unlawful assemblies,

For the arresting and imprisoning of the Offenders.

For the Recording of the Riot.

And for enquiry thereof according to the Statutes.

2 If the truth of the Riot can not be found out upon this enquiry, then within
one month the Sheriff is to join with the Justices in a certificat of the
fact and circumstances, etc. into the Kings Bench, or, etc.

If the truth be not found by reason of any maintenance, they are to make
another certificat of the maintainers, and of their names and misdemeanors,
Plus hic cap. 4.

3 The Sheriff, also is to attend go with, and to assist the Justices of
Peace, for the arresting of such as make any forcible Entry or Deteiner of
possession; and for the remoouing of the force, and of the offenders.

4 The Sheriff must make due execution of the precepts of the Justices of
Peace, for the returning of Iuries before them, to enquire of forcible Entries,
or Riots, etc. sub poena twenty pounds.

The Sheriff also must duly execute all other precepts and lawful warrants
directed to him from the Justices of Peace for ministration of Justice.

5 Also the Sheriff (or his Vndersherife) is to attend the Justices of Peace,
at their general Sessions of the Peace, and the Justices there may fine him
for their absence.

If the Custos Rotulorum, or two Justices of the Peace, (the one being of the
Quorum) shall make their precept to the Sheriff to summon the Sessions at a
certain day and place, etc. the Sheriff ought to perform this,
notwithstanding any Command from any other Justices of Peace: yet two other
such Justices may by their precept, command the Sheriff to summon another
Sessions upon the same day, and at another place.

6 The Sheriff is to leuy the Justices wages, (upon the Justices Estreats,
etc.) and is to pay the same to the Justices. See hic cap. 125.

CHAP. 100. and 101. He is to execute the Precepts of other Commissioners.
SHerifes are to execute all such Precepts, and other commandments, as shall
come to them from any six or more Commissioners of Sewers, Sewers.
as well for returning Iuries before them, as also for the execution of all
other things contained within their Commission.

They are also to execute the Precepts of Commissioners of Bankrupts Bankrupts.
for the returning of Iuries before them, for the preising, etc. of the lands
and goods of the Bankrupts: as also for the breaking open of their houses, and
seizing of their bodies, or goods therein. hic cap. 94.

They are to return a Jury before Commissioners assigned to take an account,
Account.
etc. upon a Precept from the said Commissioners.

They are to execute the precepts of Commissioners for the Subsedy, Subsidy.
for the distreining or arresting of persons indebted, or otherwise for the
execution of that Commission.

They are to return Iuries for Inquiry, before Escheators, Escheators.
and to execute all other their lawful Commandments.

They are to return Iuries for Enquiry, before Coroners, Coroners.
upon their Precept; and must further execute all other Precepts and
commandments lawful, of Coroners, in all things pertaining to their Offices.

And it seems that all these former Commissioners and Officers may assesse a
fine upon the Sheriff for not recurning of Iuries before them.

Also Sherifes must have Counter-Rolls with the Coroners, of all things
belonging to the Office of the Coron^rs, scz. of Appeals, Enquests,
Attachments Abiurations, Vtlawries, and other things.

Plus inde hic cap. 14.

Clerk market
Sherifes are to return before the Clerk of the Market (upon his warrant)
Iuries to enquire of things belonging to the office of the Clerk of the market.

Sherifes being required, are to aid the Ordinary and Commissary for
suppressing of Heresies, called Lollardies.

Now concerning these Lollards, the Statutes made against them are not only
repealed; but the persons so called, were indeed true Christians.

But without the Kings special Writ, the Sheriff now may not cause any man to
be burned for Heresy, notwithstanding any warrant from the Bishop to him
directed for such purpose.

CHAP. 102. Proclamation to be made by the Sheriff.
EVery Sheriff ought in person 4. times in every year, within every his
Hundreds, to proclaim the statute of Winchester Winchester.
made against murders, robberies, and felonies.

They also are to cause the same Statute to be proclaimed by their baylifes in
all Fayres and market towns.

Sherifes having received the Kings Writ, etc. ought to proclaim four times
in the year, all statutes made of Purueyors. Purueyors.


They shall proclaim four times in the year in every market, the statute
made against unlawful games, and for the maintenance of Archery.

But none of these three former statutes for the Proclamations are in use now
as it seems.

The rates of wages Wages.
of servants and laborers, etc. sent to the Sheriff from the Lord Chancellor,
or Justices of Peace of the County, the Sheriff shall cause the same to be
proclaimed in every market town, and to be fixed upon some post within the
same town, etc.

Hawks Hawks.
lost and brought to the sheriff, he must proclaim the same in all good towns
within his County.

The Summons Summons.
in real actions being made upon the land, shall be after proclaimed by the
Sheriff (upon a Sunday presently after Divine service (and sermon,) and at the
most usual Church door of the Parish where the land lies) fourteen days (at
the least) before the day of the return thereof; and that proclamation so made
shall be by him returned together with the names of the Summoners.

Vtlatic.
Upon every Exigent (where a Writ of Proclamation is awarded, etc.) before the
Vtlary shall be pronounced or returned; the Sheriff (to whom any such Writ of
Proclamation shall be directed) as to make three Proclamations at three
several days, (the one in the open County Court; another at the general
quarter Sessions; the third at the Church door of the Parish where the
defendant dwells, and upon a Sunday, immediately after Divine Service (and
Sermon): and this third Proclamation is to be made one month (at the least)
before the Quinto Exactus: And these Proclamations are to be made to this
effect, scz. That the defendant yield his body to the Sheriff, so that the
Sheriff may have the body at the day of the return of the Exigent to answer to
the Plaintiff, etc.

Upon a Writ de Excom' Capiendo, Excom capie^d
if Non inuentus be returned, then a Capias shall be directed to the Sheriff,
who thereupon is to make Proclamation in his County Court (or at the the
Assizes or Sessions of the Peace) ten days at the least before the return,
that the party within six days yield his body to the Jail, etc. And such
Process, and Proclamation shall be made until the party yield himself.

Upon Indictments Indictments.
or Appeals of persons dwelling in foreign Counties, etc. upon the second
Capias directed to the Sheriff, if he cannot find the party, then he shall
make Proclamation in two County Courts, that the perty appear before the
Justices according to the said second Capias.

In cases of Riots Riots.
which cannot be found upon the Enquiry of the Justices of Peace: they and the
Sherif are to certify into the Kings Bench, etc. and if the offenders do not
appear there, then upon the second Capias, if the offenders be not found, the
Sheriff at his next County Court, is to make Proclamation that the offenders
appear within 3. weeks, etc.

Parl^ament.
The Sheriff upon the Kings Writ is to make Proclamation of the day and place of
the Parliament, etc. hic cap. 92.

He is also to make Proclamation, That all that will be present to assesse the
fees and wages of the Knights, etc. ibid.

In a Writ of Admeasurement (of Dower or Pasture) the Sheriff upon the Grand
distress Grand distres.
must make Proclamation at two County Courts, that the defendant appear at the
day, etc. to answer the Plaintiff, etc.

And so upon the Grand distress in a Writ of Ward, but here Proclamation must
be made at three County Courts.

In a Writ of Mesne, the Sheriff upon the Grand distress must make
Proclamation at two County Courts, that the Mesne appear at the day contained
in the Writ, to acquit the tenant, etc. And the Sheriff is to make return of
these Proclamations, and how often the same have been made.

CHAP. 106. The Sherifes Courts.
First, concerning the Sherifes Turn.

THis Court and power was committed to the Sheriff for the government of the
County, Turn.
scz. to enquire therein of all criminal and personal offenses, and to
reform al common Nusances, etc. done within the County.

Place.
This Court is to be holden by the Sheriff in every Hundred within his County,
and that only in the place accustomed.

Time.
It is to be holden twice a year, scz. one month next after Easter, and within
one month next after Michaelmas.

All persons of the age of xij. years, or above, Suitors.
dwelling within the Hundred, ought to come to this Court, and there must be
sworn to the Kings allegiance.

Except notwithstanding Barons, Clergymen, and women. Also except Tenants in
Ancient Demesne.

And except such as do owe suit to the Leet of any other Lord. And yet where
such Leets be neglected or seized into the Kings hands, etc. there the Resiants
may be compelled to come to the Sherifes Turn.

After appearance of the Suitors, Jury.
first twelve (or more) sufficient freeholders, dwelling within the Hundred,
shall be impanelled and sworn, to enquire of, and to present all things there
inquirable.

And then (as a second Jury) the High-Constables and pettie-Constables within
that Hundred, shall upon Oath present the defaults committed within their
several limits; which presentment they shall make or deliver to the first
Jury, or to the Steward, and then he delivers that to the Jury.

The first Jury must deliver up their verdict to the Steward: But if there be
any presentment of any Felony, that must be delivered up by it self, to the
Steward privily.

These Indictments or Presentiments shall be made by Indenture between the
Sheriff and the said Jurors, whereof one part shall remain with the Jurors,
under the hand and seal of the Sheriff, or Steward; and the other part to
remain with the Steward, and by him to be sent to the next Sessions of the
Peace, etc.

And yet such Presentiments are good, though they be neither indented nor sealed.

Those first Jurors ought to be men of good name, and to have within the same
County twenty shillings Freehold per annum, or twenty six shillings eight
pence Copyhold per annum, at the least. Stat.

CHAP. 107.
THe style of this Court must be thus: Vis. Francipleg' Domini Regis tent'
apud L. coram Vic' in Torno suo, etc.

And in this Court the Sheriff is to enquire and to take presentment of these
things following: viz. of all

Treasons at the Common Law.

Felonies by the Common Law, except the death of a man.

Escapes of Felons, or of other prisoners.

Persons abiured, or Outlawes returning without License.

Treasure-Trone, Waifes, Estrayes, and Wreckes of the Sea found and retained.

Franchises newly claimed, or not used or abused.

Purprestures and Incrochments made upon the Kings lands, Franchises, or upon
Highwayes, etc. And these may be seized into the Kings hands in some cases:
and if it be in land or buildings, after the Purprestures found by Enquest,
and the value assessed, it may be set at a yearly Rent to be answered to the
King; or it may be pulled down. See hic cap. 7.

Common Nusances made in Highways and Rivers, etc.

Common Trespasses, as Affrayes, Bloudsheds, Pound-breaches, etc.

Evil Members, as Night-walkers, Messengers for Thieves, etc.

False Measures and weights, or double Measures, etc.

Inne-holders and Hostlers, selling Man's meat or Horse meat at unreasonable
prices.

And of all other things inquirable in a Court Leet; if they be not formerly
inquired of and redressed in the Leet.

This Court is a Court of Record.

In this Court the Sheriff is Judge.

And this Court is incident to the Office of the Sheriff. And the Sheriff is to
have the profits thereof, scz. the amerciaments and fines.

CHAP. 108.
ANd yet upon Indictments or presentiments taken in this Court, the Sheriff,
etc. cannot make out any Process against the Offenders, nor attach, arrest, or
imprison any Offender, nor assesse, levy, or take any amerciament or fine of
them, without Process or Estreats from the Justices of peace, sub poena C. li.

But all such Indictments or Presentiments the Sheriff must first deliver or
send to the Justices of peace at their next Sessions, (sub poena xl. li.) and
the said Justices are to award Process against the Offenders, and to arraigne,
try, and deliver them, and to fine them for Trespasses, etc. and then to
estreat the fines and amerciaments to the use and profit of the Sheriff before
whom the Indictment was taken; which Estreat shall be delivered by Indenture to
the Sheriff or his Officer, to gather the same by.

CHAP. 109. The authority of the Sheriff (or of his Steward) in the Turn at
this day.
1 They may take the examination of Felons, Imprison.
and may commit them to the Jail.

They may take presentiments of Treasons and Felonies.

2 Affrayors in their presence they may commit to ward.

They may bind such Offenders to the Peace by Recognisance.

3 They may impose a reasonable Fine Fine
upon such as in their Court shall commit any other disturbance or contempt to
this Court.

If a Suitor to this Court being present, will not be sworn, they may fine
him, and in prison him till the fine be paid. Or they may amerce him, and
distreyne him for the amerciament.

If a Suitor makes default of appearance, he shall be amerced.

If a Suitor being sworn shall refuse to make presentment, or shall depart
without giving up their verdict, the Sheriff, etc. may set a reasonable fine
upon him.

If an Officer to this Court shall refuse or neglect to execute his Office,
they may fine him.

In this Court they may cause the High-Constables and petrie-Constables to be
chosen, and to be sworn, and being chosen and present, if they refuse to be
sworn, they may fine them.

Upon a Bloodshed presented, there the Sheriff may see an amerciament or fine,
and the offender shall make his fine there. Quaere.

Also upon a Nuisance presented, the Offenders shall be there amerced. Quaere.

If a Purpresture be there presented, the Sheriff may reform or pull it down.
But for a Purpresture, or for any Trespass there presented, the Justices of
Peace at their Sessions, are to assesse the fines upon the Offenders.

Upon presentment of the Assise of Bread, Beer, or Ale, broken by any Baker or
Brewer, they may punish the Offender by the Pillorie, Pillorie.
where the offense requires it: This is by a late statute.

Upon presentment of any Inneholder or Hostler, for not making their
Horse-bread of due Assise, or for selling their victual or prouander at
unreasonable prices, they may fine the offender, and for the second offense
they may imprison him without Bail, for one month; and for the third offense
they shall set him in the Pillorie.

Note that a presentment in this Court is not trauersable there after the day
wherein it is presented, except it touches the Freehold, etc.

Note also, that for all amerciaments assessed by the Sheriff, etc. in his
Turn, (for default of appearance, or the like) the Sheriff may distreyne for
such an amerciament in any place within his County.

CHAP. 110. The County Court.
THis Court was ordained for the Sheriff to hold Plea there, for particular or
private matters (under forty shillings) between party and party.

And this Court may be kept at any place within the County, at the pleasure of
the Sheriff, except in certain Shires.

To this Court all persons dwelling within the County do owe suit, by reason
of their resiancie.

Also a man may hold lands to do suit service to this Court.

The Suitors for default of appearance shall be amerced; scz. if they were
warned by the Baylife, and that there be not a sufficient number to pass upon
Issues there depending.

But any Suitor may do this his suit by his Attorney.

The Officer of this Court is one of the Baylifes.

And as to all Actions and suits which are there between party and party
(either by Plaint or Writ) the Freeholders or Suitors are Judges in this court,
scz. to find the party guilty or not guilty etc.

But yet all Judgments there, (as well upon Actions and Suit by plaint, as by
Writ) shall be pronounced by the Sheriff.

And if the Sheriff shall give false judgment without the assent of the
suitors, the Sheriff shall be punished, etc. And so if he shall do any other
thing without the Suitors there. Quaere.

By Plaint.
In this Court the Sheriff may hold plea off, and may examine, hear, and
determine by way of Plaint, (without any Writ of Iusticies) certain smaller
personal Actions, as of Debts due upon Contracts, Detinue of Chattells,
Assumpsit, Covenant, Nusances, taking of Cattle, and deteyning them,
Trespass, and the like, happening, made, or done within their County, if that
the debt or damages be under forty shillings, and the plea determinable by
wager of Law.

Also the Sheriff may make repleuin of cattle or goods taken and withholdden,
and may hold plea thereof in this Court without any Writ, ( Quaere, if that the
damages exceed the sum of forty shillings.) Plus postea.

But he cannot hold plea either by Plaint nor by Writ, where the offense is
laid to be vi and armis.

Neither can they hold plea here by plaint of any Debt due by Bond or Record,
nor in an Account, nor any Plea of Disceit, Maintenance, Forger of false Deeds,
Detinue of Charters concerning Freehold, nor of any real thing, nor of any
personal thing above forty shillings.

Neither may they proceed, if the freehold come in question, except it be by a
Iusticies.

This Court also is incident to the Sheriff, and cannot be granted from him;
and the entry of all Pleas and Proceedings there, are belonging to him, and he
is to appoint his Clerks in this Court, and such as he will answer for.

No plaints shall be entered in the County Court, unless the plaintiff be
present in the Court in person, or by an Attorney or Deputy known to be of
good name.

And the plaintiff must find pledges to pursue his pleint.

Also the Sheriff etc. shall enter but one pleint, for one cause, contract, or
trespass.

The plaintiff must enter his pleint, by writing, and in full Court (sedente
Curia) before the Sheriff or Steward, etc.

After the pleint entered, the plaintiff must procure the process of the Court
( scz. the Sherifes warrant to be directed to the Bailife) to warn the
defendant to appear at the next court etc. And the Sheriff must make
sufficient warrant, precept (or process) to his Bailife to attach, or warn
the defendant accordingly, Sub poena -- 40 s.

Any person (as well plaintiff as def^ndant) may make an Attorney to sue for
him in all pleas in the county court Plus cap. 112.

For the further proceedings in these pleints, the business thereof belongs
more properly to the Steward; which notwithsanding you shall find more fully in
my book at large.

If any Sheriff, or Officer, shall solicit, or procure any suits in th^s
court, they shall be grievously punished.

If the Sheriff shall make any default in not warning the defendant, or other
execution of his office, he is punishable.

Note that this County Court must be kept every month, upon a day certain,
that all writs of Exigent may be there proclaimed.

And the Coroners are to sit there with the Sheriff at every County court there
to give Judgment upon vtlawries, which Judgment shall be pronounced and
given by the Coroners in the fifth County, and then the Sheriff is to return
the vtlawrie with the Exigent.

CHAP. 111. Appeals of Robbery, and other Felonies, and of Maihem, and Rape,
may be sued in the County Court, by bill before the Sheriff and any one of the
Coroners.
But upon the Appeal sued there, there shall be first found to the Sheriff
two sureties de Prosequendo.

The proceedings in such Appeals, is as in Appeals in the Kings Bench, scz.
Capias and Exigent, etc.

And as to these matters of appeal, as also as to the Judgments given in this
Court upon Vtlawry, this County Court is as a Court of Record.

CHAP. 112.
Process.
THe Process in the County court in all personal actions (as well in a
Iusticies, as where the suit is by pleint is a Summons, Attachment, and
Distringas infinite. Except in Trespass, and there only an Attachment, and
Distring' infinite.

Also if upon the Summons a Nihil be returned, then a continual Capias where
it is by writ.

Quaere if a Precept by Paroll be not good enough where the suite is by Plaint.

Either party may be essoined, which must be at the beginning,

After the Essoines, the Plaintiff must be ready at every Court hanging the
plea, otherwise he shall be adjudged Nonsuit, and he and his Pledges shall be
amerced.

If the defendant do not appear, then (upon the baylifes return, etc.)
Process shall go out against him, vt supra.

And yet both the Plaintiff and defendant, may appear by Atturny.

Upon the attachment, Attachme^
the baylife must attach the defendant by some horse, pot, pan, or the like,
and the baylife may keep that until the next County; which goods shall be
forfeit if the defendant makes default; and then a Distring' goes out.

Or the defendant may put in two Pledges or Sureties for his appeara^ce at the
next Court (and so Repleuy his goods,) and then upon his default, he and his
sureties shall be amerced, etc.

Distring'.
Upon the Distringas, the baylife must distreine the defendant by his goods,
which he may keep, and which shall be forfeit upon his default, vt supra.

But if the defendant put in pledges, there must be 4. at the least.

And after a Distring' infinite shall go out, till the defendant appear.

Trials.
All trials in the County Court, are usually by Ley Gager, (scz by the oath of
the defendant) if the suit be by Pleynt.

Or it may be by examination of witnesses. Or by prescription it may be by a
Iuri^.

But if the suit be by force of a Iusticies, then the trial shall be by a
Jury of twelve men.

If the matter be found against the defendant, Ezecution^.
then they use to grant out a Leuari fac' to leuy the damages and costs, etc.

And yet by good opinions, the execution in this Court, is only by distress,
and impounding (or retaining) the cattle, until the party be satisfied; And
that the Sheriff cannot sell the goods, nor deliver the distress to the party:
nor any execution lies there against the body.

But to have the Judgments given in this Court, to be executed by the Sheriff
safely, the party may procure out of the Chancerie a Writ de Executione
Iudicij, to be directed to the Sheriff, etc. be the suit by a Iusticies, or by
Pleynt without Writ.

And then if the Sheriff will not make execution, an Alias and Pluries shall
go out, and after an attachment against the Sheriff.

CHAP. 113. Of the Writs of Iusticies.
PLeas in this County Court, are sometimes holden by force of the Kings Writ of
Iusticies, directed to the Sheriff; which writ gives special power to the
Sheriff to hold plea in his County Court; and is therefore called a Vicountiel
Writ.

This Writ is not returneable, but therein the matter shall be tried and
determined in the County Court before the Sheriff by a Jury according to the
course of the Common Law.

And the proceedings therein shall be as in a Writs original of the like
nature, in the Kings Courts at Westminster.

And the same Process shall be in a Iusticies, as which the suit is there by
pleint; scz. Summons, attachment, and distress; but no Capias in any case. And
the Sheriff is to make the Process, etc. to his baylife.

The Sheriff by virtue of this Writ, may in his County Court hold plea of
lands, or other pleas real, as also of pleas personal, although the debt or
damages shall be above 40. s. to any sum whatsoever.

And though the freehold shall come in question, where the suite is by a
Iusticies, yet this Court shall not surcease.

Where the Plea is by a Iusticies, it seems that the High Sheriff must or
should sit in person, to hear and determine the matter; and yet the suitors
are Judges of the cause, vt supra.

Where a Iusticies shall be sued before the Sheriff only, and What Writs be
Viscontiel, (scz. triable in the County or Sherifes Court.
1 Iusticies de Account. 2 Admeasurement de Dower. 3 Admeasurement de Pasture.
4 Annuity. 5 Assise de petite Nuisance. 6 Curia claudenda. 7 Customs and
services. 8 Debt. 9 Detinue. 10 Dower vnde nihil habet. 11 Droit Patent. 12
Droit de Guard. 13 Homine Replegiando. 14 Breue de Mesne. 15 Natiuo habendo. 16
Plegijs acquietandis. 17 Quarentine. 18 Quod permittat. 19 Rationabil' diuisis.
20 Repleuin de biens. 21 Secta ad Molendinum. 22 Trespass.
The Writ de Recaption may also be sued in the County Court, but this must be
before the Sheriff and Coroners.

But note where the Plea is holden in the County Court by a Iusticies, yet the
same may be removed into the Court of Common Pleas.

CHAP. 114. The Sherifes authority in making Repleuins.
Wheresoever any man's beasts or other goods be taken and wrongfully withholden
the owner of the goods may at his election sue a Repleuin by Writ, or by Pleynt.

And the Sheriff has power to make Repleuy, and to deliver the cattle or
goods in both cases.

The Sheriff or his Vndersherife, Per Pleint.
or any of his Deputies (in the Country) upon complaint of beasts, etc. taken
and withholden, may presently make Repleuin thereof, out of his Court (yea in
all places) and may deliver them. And the Sheriff may command his baylife
(either by writing or word) to make deliverance thereof.

But the Sheriff (or baylife, etc.) must first come to the place where the
cattle, etc. are deteyned, and to demand both the view of them, and to have
them delivered.

When the Officer has gotten the view of the cattle, he shall presently
deliver them; and shall give day to both parties to appear at the next County
Court, etc.

Yet before deliverance thereof, the Sheriff (or Officer) must take Pledges, (
scz. sufficient security) of the owner of the cattle, Tam de prosequendo, quam
de Returno habendo, etc. (hic ca. 45.) or else the Sheriff may be charged for
the price of the cattle, if return be awarded.

This security most commonly is used to be by a bond of ten pound at the least,
with condition for his appearance at the next County Court, and there to
prosecute his suit with effect against the other, for taking and withholding of
the said cattle; and to make return thereof, if return shall be so adjudged,
etc.

If the beasts were taken within a Liberty, and the baylife of the Liberty will
not deliver them upon the Sherifs precept, The Sheriff must enter, and deliver
them.

If the beasts be put into a Castle, House, Park, or Close, etc. the Sherif
(or his Officer) may take Posse Comitatus, if need be, and shall beat down the
Castle, etc. and deliver the beasts: But yet the Officer must first come to the
place where the cattle are so detained, and there demand the view of them, and
to have them delivered, vt supra, and (whether any be present or no, if they
were warned) then the Sheriff may execute the Law as aforesaid.

If any other disturbance therein be made to the Sheriff or his Officer, they
may take Posse Comitatus, to make deliverance.

The Sheriff may not break a close or hedge, to make a Repleuy, where there is
a gate, except the gate be locked up, etc.

Note where the Repleuin is by pleynt in the County Court, it shall not
proceed if any thing touching the freehold come in question.

Per Breue.
Also upon a Writ, ( scz. a Iusticies) directed and delivered to the Sheriff, to
make deliverance of a distress, the Sheriff or Officer (after sureties taken
de Prosequendo, and de Returno habendo, as aforesaid) must go to the pound or
place where the cattle be, and demand the view, etc. (vt supra) and then shall
deliver them.

And the Officer shall also attach the defendant (by his goods) to appear at
the next County Court, to answer to the Plaintiff, etc.

If the Plaintiff be No^suit, etc. then a return of the beasts shall be
awarded to the defendant: and thereupon the Officer shall deliver to the
defendant (or auowant) the first distress; and besides the defendant shall
recover costs and damages, where the Plaintiff is Nonsuit, or that the matter
be found against him.

Upon the Pluries not served by the Sheriff h^s ^ower is determined, and the
parties shall plead in Bank.

I^ a man sueth a Repleuin (by Pleynt or Writ) and the Sheriff makes his
precept to his baylife to make deliverance, and the baylife returns that he
cannot have the view of the cattle, or that they be esloined, etc.

Then the Sheriff at his next County Court, shall (ex officio) enquire thereof
by a Jury, and if it be so found, the Sheriff in the same County Court, shall
award a precept in the nature of a Capias in Withernam Withernam.
directed to his baylife to take the cattle, etc. of the defendant in
Withernam, Quousque, etc.

This precept must be made in full Court, and by writing, and must be sealed
with the Seal of the Sherifes office.

And the Officer may take in Withernam goods of any kind, number, or value
reasonable; And those goods the Sheriff may either keep or deliver them to the
Plainti^e, hic cap. 80.

Also note that the party who has his cattle delivered him, etc. either upon
Complaint, or by Writ, ought to enter his Plea before the Sheriff in his next
County Court.

Upon a Writ to the Sheriff to make deliverance, if the Officer be disturbed in
the execution of the Writ, he may take Posse Comitatus, etc. to take the
disturbers; and the Sheriff may imprison them: or the Sheriff may award an
attachment, and after a Distring' against the disturbers, until they come in,
and then they being convicted shall be fined to the King by the Sheriff,

And so it seems though it be before the Sheriff without Writ, if the baylife
returns that the party will not suffer him to make deliverance, the sheriff
may award an attachment, and after, vt supra.

Every suit depending in the County Court (be it by a Iusticies, or by Pleynt)
may be removed thence, by a Pone or Recordare; and if after the remoouing,
there shall be any proceeding in the County Court, the Sheriff, etc. shall be
punished to the King, and party grieved.

CHAP. 115. The authority of the County Court, etc.
THe Sheriff (nor his Steward there) may not arrest or imprison a man in any
suit there depending (though by a Iusticies;) nor for any contempt or offense
done in this Court.

They can impose no fine in this Court upon any offender, for that it is no
Court of Record.

And yet this Court as to some matters, is a Court of Record. See hic cap. 4.
and 111.

Also where there is a plea of debt depending in this Court (especially by a
Iusticies) there the Sherif in this court may take a Recognisance of either
party, to pay a sum of money to the other at a certain day: and in some cases
the Sheriff (upon the Kings Writ) may leuy such a debt by sale of the parties
goods; and in other cases by distress only; according to the form of the
Writ to him for that purpose, first to be specially directed.

In a Writ of Right depending in the Lords Court, the Sherif may grant a Tolt
to remove the Plea into the County Court before himself.

They may also amerce a man in this Court.

As if a man be convicted (before the Sheriff in the County) in a Writ of
Recaption.

Here he shall be amerced grievously for examples to others.

Yea the defendant shall be amerced in this Court in any suit; if it be found
against him.

So the Plaintiff shall be amerced here, if he be Nonsuit; or that the matter
be found against him.

So if the Lord shall take an excessive distress of his tenant, for his rent
due.

So if he shall drive out of the County, a distrisse taken.

So if the defendant shall not perform his Ley Gager, at the day given him.

Also Jurors su^moned, and making default, they shall be amerced, if there
appears not enough to serve upon the Jury.

But these amerciaments must be affired per pares.

And yet the Sheriff may not leuy the Shiere, amerciaments, until two Justices
of Peace have the sight of their Estreats and have allowed the same, etc.

Again if any contempt or disturbance be made to this Court before the
Sheriff, or his Steward, they may amerce the offenders; and such amerciaments
shall not be affired.

For any amerciament in this County Court, the Sheriff may distreine throughout
all the County.

And the Sheriff shall have all such amerciaments to his own use and behoof
as it seems ( hic 124.) And these amerciaments are more or greater in some
Counties, and less in other Counties, according to the use and custom of
every County: and yet the Sheriff is not to amerce offenders outragiously or
grievously, but having regard to the quantity and quality of the offense.

CHAP. 116.
1 KNights for the Parliament. Coroners for the County. Verderers for the
Forest:

The election of all these is to be by the Kings Writ (directed to the Sheriff)
and in the open and full County Court.

And these must be all chosen by the Freeholders of the County.

And they are to be published there, and after the Sheriff is to return and
certify into the Chancerie, the election (of every such Knight, Coroner, and
Verderer) and the names of those which are so chosen.

The Sheriff is there to minister to the Coroners and Verderers their several
Oaths, for the due execution of their Offices, as also the Oath of Supremacy.

The forms or effect of their oaths, see my book at large.

2 Judgments Upon Vtlawries are to be given and pronounced by the Coroners,
sitting with the Sheriff in the County Court. See hic cap. 110.

3 Proclamations also are to be made by the Sheriff in his full County Court,
in these cases following:

For summoning of the Parliament, Hic cap. 92.102.

For leuying the expenses of Knights of the Parliament, Ibidem.

In cases of Vtlawrie, Hic cap. 110. and 59. and 102.

Upon a Writ de Excem' Capiendo, Hic cap. 102.

In Cases of Ryots, Hic cap. 102.

Upon the graund Distress in Writs of Admeasurement, Hic cap. 49.102. Mesne,
Hic cap. 102. Ward, Hic cap. 192.


CHAP. 117. Concerning the Sherifes Officers.
FIrst it is meet and safe for the high Sheriff to take good security from
his vndersherife, and other his officers, etc. the which is usually done by
covenants, and bonds.

Some doubts have been concerning the validity of these bonds; but the Statute
of 23. H. 6. does make void only such bonds as are made to the Sheriff, by
prisoners, or persons arrested, or for their deliverance: And those bonds taken
by the Sheriff, of his vndersherifes, bailifes, and other officers with
condition to save the high Sheriff harmless, are good.

Some think better of meet covenants made by Indentures between the sheriff
and his vndersherife especially, with three or four good Sureties, all of them
to covenant jointly and severally for performance of the covenants; yet bonds
to perform such covenants also, will make the officers the more careful.

The forms of such covenants and bonds, see in my book at large.

All and every of the Sherifes officers before they intermeddle in their office
shall take two oaths. scz. the oath to the Kings supremacy, and the oath for
the true exercise of their office, Sub poena 40. li.

The oath of there office, see Statute 27. Eliz 12. for the form thereof.

The substance of this oath is, for the true, speedy, and indifferent
returning of Writs, and impanelling of Iuries, without taking above the fees
allowed.

If any of them shall commit or do any thing contrary to their said oaths, or
either of them, they are punishable.

And these Oaths they must take before one of the Judges of Assise, or before
the Custos Rotulorum, or two Iust^ces of Peace, (the one being of the Quorum)
of the County where they are in such Office.

None of the Sherifes Officers shall be an Attorney in any of the Kings courts
during the time their said office.

No Vnder-Sherife nor Sherifes Clerk shall abide in his Office above one
year, sub poena 200. li.

No Vnder-sherife, or Sherifes Baylife, shall be in that Office again within
three years, except in London and Bristoll, etc.

Deputies.
The Vnder-sherife is the High-Sherifes general Deputy, and uses the place in
the right of the High-Sherife.

The Sheriff also must make a Deputy of Record in every of the Kings Courts
at Westminster. Hic cap. 2.

He must also make Deputies in his County, to make Repleuins, (four at the
least, and not dwelling above twelve miles one from another) which Deputies may
in the Sherifes name make Repleuies, etc. in such manner as the Sheriff
himself may do. Ibid.

The Sheriff shall be amerced for the defaults of his Vndersherife.

CHAP. 120. Baylifes of Hundreds.
THese also are to be appointed by the High-sherife, and are chiefly to
execute writs, to summon the Assizes and Sessions, and the like.

The Sheriff must appoint such for whom he will answer.

These Baylifes would be such as do know each man's person and land in their
Hundred, and their ability to serve upon Iuries, that so they may the better
summon them to appear, etc. when they shall be appointed.

They ought to have sufficient lands in the same County.

They ought to be known men, true and credible persons.

They must be sworn in the full County, scz. to the Supremacy, and for the
due execution of their Office, sub poena 40. li.

They may not let their Office to any other.

The execution of all Writs ought to be done by them.

And yet special Baylifes are now usually allowed to serve Process, and are
not sworn as the other.

But no Distress shall be taken but by a Baylife known and sworn.

These Baylifes of Hundreds ought to attend the Judges, and the Justices of
peace, at every their Sessions: And are also to execute all Precepts and
Warrants directed to them from the said Judges or Justices, for the
administration of Justice.

Note that it is parcel of the Sherifes Oath, to take no Baylifes but such as
be true men, of sufficient estate, and such as he will answer for, and that
they take the oath for the due execution of their Office.

No e also that it is parcel of the Sherifes Oath, not to let to farm his
Sherifewicke, nor any of his Bayliwickes, etc. And therefore their granting of
their Off ce of Vnder-sherifewicke, with the Fees, profits, Courts, Perquisits,
and other Commodities to the Office belonging, seems to be both against the
Statute, and against their Oath; for such Officers as the Sheriff puts in,
ought to be but as his under Officers and servants, and ought not to do or
take any thing but as servants to the Sheriff, and in his only right. See hic
cap. 3.

CHAP. 121. Baylifes of Franchises or Liberties.
THese are such as be appointed by Lords within their Liberties, to do such
offices within the precinct of such Liberties, as the Baylifes of Hundreds do
within the County or Hundred: and a principal part of their Office consists
in the due executing of all Precepts directed to them from the Sheriff, and in
their due returning thereof to the Sheriff.

These Baylifes also (before they meddle, etc.) must take the Oaths to the
Supremacy, and for the due exercising of their Office.

These Baylifes (of Liberties which have return of Writs) cannot arrest a man
without a warrant first made to them by the Sheriff, by force of the Kings Writ
in the Sherifes hands.

These Baylifes having received the Sherifes Warrant, when that they have
executed the same, they must make their return thereof to the Sheriff (under
their hands, etc. by Indenture) and the Sheriff may not alter the same:

If a Baylife of a Franchise shall arrest one by a Warrant (upon a Capias) to
him directed from the Sheriff, yet the Obligation (taken for the appearance of
the party) must be made to the Sheriff, and taken by the Baylife in the
Sherifes name, But they may bail such persons being in their custody, as
Sherifes may; and may take the like Obligations for the appearance of the
party by them to be bayled.

No Steward, Baylife, or Minister of Lords of Franchises, which have return of
Writs, shall be an Attorney in any any Plea within the same Franchise.

Baylifes of Liberties shall take such fees, as the Statutes do allow the
Sheriff and their Officers.

These Baylifes shall be attendant upon the Judges of Assise, etc. and
Justices of Peace at every of their Sessions: And shall execute all Warrants
directed to them from the said Judges or Justices, for ministration of Justice
within their Liberty.

They must have sufficient lands within the County.

They shall be punished for insufficient returns of Writs made by them: and
yet when they have executed their Precept directed to them (from the sheriff,)
they are to make their return thereof only to the Sheriff, and not into the
Court.

The King shall have all Fines, amerciaments, Issues, and Forfeitures, lost by
any Officers of Franchises.

CHAP. 123.
BAylifes of Liberties and Gaolers, Gaolers.
must certify the names of every prisoner in their custody for felony, at
every general Jail delivery in that County, or Franchise.

The Sheriff shall have the keeping, charge and rule of the common Jail, and
of the prisoners therein: and must put in such Keepers for whom he will answer.

If the Jailer shall suffer a felon to escape voluntarily, the Sheriff or
Jailer may be indicted of felony for the the same, and if it were by negligence,
they are fineable.

If the Jailer shall suffer a prisoner to escape, which is in prison upon an
Execution, or which is committed to pris^n by Auditors, etc. the Sheriff is
chargeable for the whole deb^ etc,

He that has the keeping of the Jail, by right or wrong, shall be charged
for the escape of prisoners.

All Felons shall be imprisoned in the Common Gaoles.

Notorious Felons, and such as be of evil name openly, or be rebellious, shall
have strong and hard imprisonment.

Also Accomptants, and such as are in Execution for Debt, etc. may be put in
Irons or fetters, in reasonable manner.

If the Jailer will not receive a prisoner brought unto him, the Jailer is
fineable: and if the prisoner thereby escapes, the Jailer shall answer the
debt if ^he prisoner were taken upon an execution; and if the prisoner were
taken for felony, this escape seems to be felony in the Jailer.

Gaolers may not take any obligation for the enlargement of any of their
prisoners.

Gaolers need not to remove any prisoner upon a Writ of Habeas corpus, except
it be signed with a Judges hand.

CHAP. 124. Their Fees and allowances.
SHerifes nor their Ministers ought to take no reward or other thing for doing
gf their Office, but only of the King, or that which is appointed for them to
take by the Statutes and Laws of this land, and if they do otherwise, it is
extortion; and fineable; and a breach of their oath.

They may not take, receive, levy, or gather any amerciaments or other duties,
which are not due; or more then is due; or before it be due; if they do, it is
extortion.

If they take any thing for expedition, it is extortion.

So if they take any reward, etc. for sparing a Iuror.

So if they take any thing to omit any arrest, etc.

So if they take any thing to show favor to any person arrested.

So if they take any thing to spare any person from appearing at the Assizes,
Sessions of the Peace, or the like.

So if they take any thing to spare any suitors from appearing at their Turn,
etc.

Prisoners discharged by the Court, if any Officer shall deteine them for any
meat or other thing, except only for their due fees, it is extortion.

They shall receive felons, without taking any fee.

They shall receive servants committed for departing, or refusing to serve,
without any fee taking upon their delivery.

They shall receive all Writs, without taikng any fee.

Their fees allowed them by the Statute of 23. H. 6. are these.

Upon an arrest or Attachment. For the Sheriff. xx.d. For the baylife who
makes the arrest or attachment iiij, d. For the Jailer, if the prisoner be
committed. iiij. d. For the obligation for appearance if the prisoner be
bayled. iiij.d.


For any precept or warrant making. iiij.d,

And yet if the warrant be made to a special baylife, then they use to take
for every name ii. s. whereas there is no fee due to the Sheriff until the
arrest be made.

Also for the copy of the warrant, they use to take iiij. d.

Quaere how these two last be warrantable.

If the baylife of a Franchise shall arrest one by a Capias to him directed
from the Sheriff, the baylife of the Franchise shall have but iiij.d. the
Sheriff xx.d. and the Jailer iiij.d.

For the copy of a Pannell, that Statute allows them. iiij.d,

For the making of a Pannell, they are to take nothing. 22. H. 6.10.

And yet for the impannelling or returning of a Jury, the Statute of 27. Eliz.
Cap. 12. seems to allow them. ij.s.

The Statutes 29. Eliz. 4. allows them for serving an execution or extent,
(upon the body, lands, or goods of any person) xij. d. of and for every xx. s.
where the sum exceeds not C. li. and vj. d. for every xx s. being above the
sum of C.l. that they shall leuy, or extend and deliver in execution, or shall
take the body in execution: for the Statutes 31. Eliz. cap. 3. allows them
xij.d. for making Proclamation at the Church door, upon an Exigent.

Other Fees belonging also to Sherifes, or at least claymed and taken by them.

Their fees for Returns, scz.

Of every Cepi corpus iiij.d. Of a Nihil. iiij.d. Of a Non est inuentus iiij.d.
Of any Proclamation. xij.d. Of a Venire facias. xij.d. Of an Habeas corpus.
ijs.iiij.d. Of a Distringas. ijs.iiij.d. Of a Recordare ij.s. Of an Accedas ad
curiam. ij.s. Of a Distring' nuper vicecom'. ij. s. Of Mandaui balliuo
Libertatis. iiij d. Of an Exigent, scz. for every name returned outlawed.
iiij.d. Of Non est inuentus upon an attachment out of the Chancerie. ij.s.
And yet by the Statute of 23. H. 6. cap. 10. it seems that they are to take
nothing for the making of any Return.

Also for the allowance of a Supersedeas, if it be after the return of the
Exigent, they use to take xij.d.

And for a Repleuin by pleynt in the County. ij.s.

For executing of these Writs following, Sherifes use to take as they and the
parties can agree. scz.

For Executing, etc.
Of a Writ to enquire of damages. Of a Writ to enquire of Wast. Enquiry upon
an Elegit. And so in all cases where the Sherif makes any Inquisition by a
Jury. Also to execute a Statute. Or an Habere facias S^isinam. Or an Habere
facias visum. A Writ of Right. A Writ de partitione facienda. For remoouing the
Surcharge of Common; The Writ of forcible Entry; Or holding with force where
the party is to be restored. For Execution of a Judgment, super breue de dote.
See the Statutes 34. H. 8. cap. 26. which allows diverse fees to the Sherifes
in Wales.

All amerciaments, fines, and other profits, in the Sheriff Turn, do belong to
the Sheriff.

The Sheriff is to have diverse profits of the County, under the name of
Viscountiels.

The Sheriff is to have all amerciaments assessed or set in the County Court,
Hic cap. 115.

He is also to have for the entering of Plaints, Process, Plees, and Judgments
in the County Court, the Fees due and accustomed.

CHAP. 125.
Their Accounts.
The Time.
BY the Statute of Scaccario, made Anno 51. H. 3. Sherifes shall come to the
profer, (and make their accounts and payments) in the Exchequer, the morrow
after Saint Michael, and the morrow after the Vtas, (or the Octaues) of Easter:
And this they must do by Attorney, or may respite it by the Kings Writ. Writ.


But now in Hillarie Term next after, they are out of their Office, the
High-Sherife or Vnder-Sherife of most Shires, are sworn to yield and give a
just and true account (to the King and his Officers in the Exchequer) of the
Kings debts which they shall be charged withal by the green Wax (or Estreats
out) of the Exchequer; and of all Waifes, Estrays, and Felons goods, which
happened within the compass of their Office; and of all other profits whatsoever
due and belonging to the King, and chargeable by them to answer for by reason
of their Office; or much to this effect: but for that the forms of the
Recognisance, as also of the Oath it self, does more plainly manifest these
things, amongst others, I will here set them down as I have received them.

The form of the Recognisance is thus:
Memorandum qd' A.B. armiger nominatus vic' com' Cantabr' and Hunt' C.D. and E.
F. de etc. vener' coram Baron' de Scaccario domin' Regis apud Westm' (...) die
(...) Anno regni dom' Regis nunc Caroli tertio in proprijs personis suis and
recognouer' se debere eidem dom' Regi -- 120. li.

Sub condition quod si praedict' vic' profra sua ad hoc Scaccar' dom' Regis in
Crastin' Clausi Paschae and Sancti Mich. Archangel' prox. futur' de exit'
balliuae suae faciend. fuerit ad tantas denar' summas vel meliores quantas
aliquis predecessor' suor' nuper vic' com' p^d' ad praedict' crastin', in
aliquo anno, quatuor annor' prox' praeterit'; melius fecerit, ac eadem profera
sic faciend' infra mensem quorumlibet eorundem festor' Paschae, and Sancti
Mich. Archangel. domin' Regi nunc ad receptum huius Scaccarij, been and
fideliter soluerit. Ac etiam si idem vic' comparuerit per se, vel per
Attornatum suum sufficien', coram Baron' domin' Regis nunc in dicto Scaccario
termino Pascha prox' futur', (scilicet) ante praedictum mensem Paschae, ad
faciend' dom' regi fidelem visum compiti sui, de exit' ballmae suae: Et
huiusmodi visum ibidem ante eundem mensem Paschae, been and fideliter fecerit,
and de omni eo quod dicto domin' regi super visum compiti illius deberi
contigerit; eidem domino regi ante tres septimanas Sanctae Trinitatis tunc
prox' sequen', been and fideliter fecerit, aut seipsum inde aliter erga dictum
domin' Regem legittime exonerauerit and acquietauerit. Ac etiam si idem vic'
coram dictis Baronibus huius Scaccarij in Quind Sancti Hillar' quod erit in
anno Dom' 1628. personaliter comparuerit, ad reddend dicto domino Regi fidelem
compit' de exit' and profic' balliuae suae, ac fidelem compit' praemissorum
eidem Domino Regi fecerit and reddiderit, ac de omni eo quod eidem Domino Regi
super Compit' ill' deberi contigerit, praefato Domino Regi citra Crastin'
Ascentionis Dom' tunc prox' sequen' been and fideliter satisfacerit, aut
seipsum inde aliter legitime exonerauerit and acquietauerit: Ac etiam de
omnibus bonis and catallis, ac de exit', terr' and tenement' folonum
fugitiuorum, felon' de se, and in exigend posit' condemnat' and vtlagat';
necnon de alijs quibuscunque Domino Regi, ratione Praerogatiuae, seu Regiae
suae sieve alit' quoquo modo pertinen', quae ad manus ipsius Vic', aut eius
sub-Vic', vel Balliuor' aut alior' Officior' aut Ministrator' suorum
quorumcunque, si quae fuerint tempore, quo idem A. B. fuerit Vic' Com'
praedict', absque aliquo conceleamento infra idem tempus fecerit reddiderit. Et
de omni eo quod eidem Domino Regi super finem compiti illius deberi contigerit:
Dicto Domino Regi been and fideliter, in forma praedict' satisfacerit. Ac si
praedict' Vic', Attorn', sieve deputat' suum, habilem and sufficientem in Curia
hic eadem Curia seden' habuerit and assignauerit, qui eidem Curiae de tempore
in tempus attendet ad recipiend: and retornand' breuia and mandata eiusdem Cur'
iuxta formam Statuti inde editi and prouisi. Quod tunc praedict' Recogn' pro
nullo habeatur, alioquin in suo pleno robore permanere and effectu.

The form of the Oath of a Sheriff for the passing of his account.
You shall swear that you shall yeald unto the Kings Majesty that now is, a
true and lawful account of the issues and profits of your said Office of
Sherifealtie in his Majesty's Counties of Cambridge and Huntingdon, due unto
his Majesty from the Feast of Saint Michael the Archangell, in the second
year of his Majesty's reign, until the same Feast now last past, (which is
for one whole year) and in the same account you shall make true answer of all
Felons goods, outlawed men's goods, attainted men's goods, Waifs, Estrayes, and
all other profits whatsoever which has come to your hands, your Vnder-sherifes
hands, or any of your Baylifes, Officers, or Ministers hands, by reason of your
said Office. And in the same account you shall charge your self with all
sums of money, as you, your Vnder-sherife, or any of your bailifes or Officers
for you have levied, or lawfully might have levied to his Majesty's use. And in
the same account you shall make no petition, ask no allowance nor discharge,
but such as shall be good and true; and that you deliver a true declaration of
your Viscountiels, declaring of whom, and where you do receive, and wherefore
all such sums of money contained in the same. And well and truly behave your
self in yielding the same account, as a true accountant ought to do without
omission or concealment. So help you God.

Now by an old Statute of 1. Edw. 3. cap. 4. the account of Sherifes and other
such Ministers shall be after the points of their Oath.

And yet by some opinions the Sheriff is not accountable for goods of Felons,
Fugitives, and the like, save in a gross sum for the farm of the profits of
the County.

Neither is the Sheriff accountable for other the profits of the County,
(which run under the name of Viscountiels) save in a sum in gross for the
farm of the profits of the County.

Now what the profits of the County be, see hic cap. 3. and 9.

If any Fines or Amerciaments called Mulctae, be set or assessed in any of the
Kings Courts, upon any man; or if any arrerages or accounts called Reliqua, of
such things that is of Customs, Taxes, Subsidyes, Tenths, and Quinzimes, and
the like, be, (and be estreated out of the Exchequer to the Sheriff) the
Sheriff of the Shire is to gather up the same, and is accountable therefore in
the Exchequer. But for the ordinary rents of the Kings lands, and most
commonly for the Taxes, Subsidyes, Customs, Tenths, and Quinzimes, there be
particular Collectors and Receivers, which do gather up, and answer the same
into the Exchequer.

What other things Sherifes shall be accomptable for, appears in part here
before, Cap. 3.7.9, 10, 11, 12, 13, etc. ad cap. 20. and 76.

And wheresoever the Sheriff (upon process out of the Eschequer, or without
process) shall leuy, take, seize, or gather up any debt, or other duty, or
profit, due to the King, he is accomptable or chargeable for the same.

Yet Sherifes shall not be accomptable, but only for their own times, Quaere.

Every Sheriff (by himself, his atturny, or deputy) shall be sworn at his
day of prefixion, to bring and deliver into the Eschequer, Rolls of parchment
of all such particular sums of money, which he has, or might have leuyed,
making mention of what person, of what lands, and for what cause, any of the
said sums be.

If the Sher^fe (or his Officers) shall gather the Kings rents, or shall leuy
the Kings debts or other duties, and shall not account for the same in the
Eschequer, the Sher fe is liable both to the King and to the action of the
party grieved; besides the danger of his oath.

If the Sheriff shall seize the goods of one that is outlawed (or for any other
cause,) and shall not upon his account answer the King for the same, he is
chargeable both to the King, and party, etc. For note that the Sheriff (in an
action of trespass, etc. brought against him by the owner of those goods) must
plead that he has accounted for them.

Note also that the High Sheriff is accomptable to the King, for all things
belonging to the office of the Sheriff, and the Vndersherife is accomptable to
the High Sheriff.

The manner of the Sherifes account, see in Master Wilkinson of the office of
Sherifes, fol. 36. 37.

For the ordinary charges of the passing of their account, See ibid. fol. 38.
39. 40. and 41.

None of the Sherifes of the Counties of Surrey and Sussex, Essex and Hereford,
Sommerset and Dorset, Warwick and Leicester, Nottingham and Derby, or Oxford
and Berksh. (besometimes joined) shall pay in any Court of Record, for any
duly belonging properly to the Office of a Sheriff, any orher fees or charges,
than only the one half of the charges and fees which he should have paid if
he had been Sheriff of two of the said shires, as formerly was used: And
their charges and rewards, etc. shall be divided.

By the Statute of 5. R. 2. cap. 11. the accounts in the Eschequer shall be
more speedily heard, made, and engrossed, than they were wont, etc.

Before the Sheriff come to his account, (or Opposals before the foreign
Opposer) let him be careful, fully and truly to learn which are good debts,
and which are not, and which are within Liberties, and which are not: For with
the foreign Opposer, the Sheriff must either Tot, Nihil, or set over into
Liberties, all the debts and sums of money con^eined in the summons of the
green wax, and in the Extracts of the peace of the County where he was
sheriff; and therefore having first learned which be good debts and which not,
and which be within Liberties, and which not, he may make his book of all his
charge accordingly.

What allowances they shall have upon their Account.
All Sherifes shall have such tails of Reward, and other allowances as they
have heretofore had.

Also they shall be discharged upon their accounts (in the Eschequer) upon
oath, of such sums of money which they cannot leuy. See the Statute 2. and 3.
Ed. 6. cap. 4.

Sherifes shall have allowance by there oath, of the issues of their County.

They shall have allowance upon their accounts, by their oaths, of things
casual; but not of such things as remain in yearly farms, or yearly demands.

If an accounta^t (being Nichilled) will swear that he owes nothing to the
King, he shall be thereupon discharged. Statute 5. R. 2. cap. 13.

Sherifes upon petition, and bills brought in upon oath, shall have allowance
for their charges and expenses which they sustain by the Diet of the Justices
of Assise, and other means etc.

Sherifes also shall have allowance for their charges or wages of the Justices
of Peace at their quarter Sessions; but the Sherifes allowance herein is but
four shillings a day a piece for eight Justices.

Note that all fines, amerciaments, issues, forfeitures, and penalties
whatsoever arising before the Justices of peace at their Sessions, are to be
estreated by the Clarke of the Peace (out of the records of the Justices) and
to be indented by him, and then to be delivered one part to the Sheriff to
leuy the same thereby, and the other part to be certified to the Barons of the
Exchequer: And the Sheriff is accountable for the same in the Exchequer, upon
those estreats so certified into the Exchequer; and so in many places the
Sheriff pays them to the King, and never has them again nor any allowance,
(save only four shillings a day a piece for eight Justices vt supra) and the
surplusage is in many Counties pursed up by the Clerks of the peace, who
receives all the fines, and thereout pays (or might pay) the Justices wages
and then deliver the resident the Sheriff, and should make his estreats
accordingly.

The course of the Eschequer is said to be thus, scz. that so soon as a
sheriff has entered into his account for issues, amerciaments, or mean profits
for intrusions, and alienations without license, to mark upon his head. O, Ni,
which is as much as, Oneratur Nisi habeat sufficientem exonerationem, etc. and
presently the sheriff is thereby become the Kings debtor, and a debet set upon
his head. And so soon as the sheriff is become the Kings debtor of record vt
supra, the other parties are also presently become debtors to the sheriff; And
the sheriff in that case shall cause the debt to be levied against those
particular persons by a Constat. But where the King by Parliament shall pardon
all Issues, Amerciaments, and Intrusions, etc. if the Sheriff after such pardon
shall enter into his account, without taking advantage of the Pardon, here the
Sheriff is chargeable to the King by his own folly, and the particular
persons are at liberty, and shall have advantage of the Pardon, etc.

Amongst other things it is behoofefull for Sherifes and Vnder-Sherifes, upon
the making of their accounts, to have a special care of their Totting and
Nichilling, ( scz. What they Tott or charge, and what they Nichil or discharge)
and that they charge or discharge men orderly, honestly, and with
understanding; for what they Tott or charge, though it can never be levied, yet
it will hardly be avoided, but it must be paid; and if it be Nichilled, if it
be Issues of Jurors, though they be never so bad, and cannot be levied
between the old Sheriff which returned them, and the new Sheriff which
Nichilled them; they must be paid though it be seven years after, if there
come no pardon in the mean time.

The Sherifes discharge.
Where they shall be discharged upon their account and oath of such sums as
they can not leuy. See antea.

Sherifes having here Quietus est. they, their heirs, executors and
administrators, and their lands, tenements, goods and chattells, shall be
absolutely discharged of their accounts ( scz. of all manner of sum or sums
of money, which they shall have levied or received, and shall be pretended not
to be accounted for, etc.) unless such Sheriff shall be called in question for
the same within four years after the time of their account and Quietus est.
Stat. 21. Iacobi cap. 5.

And every Officer that shall send out any Process, or by whose default any
Process shall be sent out contrary to the said Statute, shall for every such
offense forfeit to the party grieved 40. l. and besides shall pay costs and
damages, etc. ibid.

CHAP. 126. The principal matters wherein there is any great danger to
Sherifes.
IF any Sherifes shall exercise his Office, before he has taken his oaths, (
scz. to the Supremacy, and for the due Execution of his Office) he is
punishable in the Star Chamber.

So if he shall not perform his oath concerning his Office.

He must put in sureties by Recog' in the Eschequer before he exercises his
office, sub poena, C.l.

He may not abide in his Office above one year, sub poena. 200.l.

He may not be in that Office again within three years, sub poena, 200.l.

He may not let to farm his County, etc, nor his Office in any manner, sub
poena 40.l.

He must appoint Deputies in the Courts at Westminster, before heare-turnes any
Writ, sub poena 40.l.

He must appoint Deputies (four at least) to make Repleuies in the country,
sub poena for every month, 5. pound. Escape.


Upon an escape of a felon voluntarily suffered by his Jailer, the Sheriff may
be indicted of felony. (Quaere tamen) but at least it seems the Shemay be
fined to the value of his goods.

Also for a negligent escape he may be fined.

If he shall bail a prisoner who is in for felony (except it be by special
Writ) it is felony.

If he shall conceal any felony done within his County, he shall have one
years imprisonment, and be fined at the Kings pleasure.

Upon an escape of one taken in execution for debt or damages, he is
chargeable for the whole.

If an accomptant committed to prison by Auditors, be bayled, or suffered to
go at large, without consent of the Master, the Sheriff is chargeable for the
whole debt.

If the Accomptant be brought to the Jail by the Auditors, and the Jailer will
not receive him, whereby he escapes, the Jailer or Sheriff is cha^geable for
the debt.

If a felon sent to the jail, be refused, and so escape; Quaere if it be not
a voluntary escape, so felony in the jailer at least.

If the Sheriff shall make any warrant without an Original, he shall forfeit
20. l. to the King, and 10. l. to the party, and be committed quousque.

Arrest.
Upon any arrest to be done, if they (or their Officer) take any thing to omit
the arrest, or otherwise not to do their duty, they forfeit 40.l.

So if (for any reward) they show favor to any person arrested.

So if they take any fees contrary to the statute.

So if they deteine any prisoner being bayleable, after sufficient Sureties
offered.

So if they bail any prisoner which is not bayleable; the Sheriff for every of
these shall forfeit 40.l.

They ought to array their Pannells for the Assizes, six days before, sub
poena 40. l.

They must deliver copies of such Pannells as they return for Trialls, to each
party demanding the same, sub poena 40. l.

They must return Pannells, as they shall be reformed by the Justices, sub
poena 20.l.

They must return none of their servants or Officers upon any Jury, sub poena
to pay treble damages and 40.l.

They must return sufficient Jurors to enquire of Riots, etc. sub poena 20.l.

They must return due Issues upon every Iuror, sub poena 20. li. in some
Cases, and in some Cases 40. li.

If they make a false Return upon a Capias Excom' they forfeit, 40. li.

The Sheriff has been amercied at fifty marks for his false return of an
Exigent.

The Sheriff fined at 40. l. for not returning an Habeas Corpora Iurator'.

Sherifes not returning, false returning, or misreturning of any Writ, shall pay
such fine or amerciament as shall be assessed by the Justices.

So if the Sheriff returns a Writ, without setting his name thereto.

Sherifes not making due election of Knights for the Parliament; Parliament.
or making a false return thereof, shall have one years imprisonment, and
forfeit 200.l.

If they be negligent in making return of this Writ, they shall have one
years imprisonment, and besides shall forfeit 100.l.

So if they leave out of their return of this Writ, any City, or Borough,
which ought to come to the Parliament.

They must assesse according to the statute, every hundred and town, toward
the wages of the Knights of the Parliament, sub poena 30.l.

If they shall leuy upon any town, more then is so assessed, they shall
forfeit 30.l.

So if they shall not pay and deliver the same, money, etc. they shall forfeit
30. l.

They may levy no issue without warrant, Issues.
sub poena to be fined to the King, and to pay treble damages to the party
grieved.

They may leuy no debt Debt.
for the King, without showing to the party the Estreat of the same, under the
seal of the Eschequer, sub poena to be fined, and to pay treble damages.

So if they shall leuy any duty for the King, or for any subject, without
warrant, and shall after convert it to their own use, etc.

They must execute the Writ directed to them (upon the Statute of 31. H. 6.
cap. 9.) for enforcing Women to enter bonds, sub poena 300.l.

If any Subjects Cater shall take any goods, or carriage against the will of
the owner, the Sheriff upon request, must aid the owner, sub poena 20. l.

Repleuie.
Upon making any Repleuin, they must take pledges de prosequendo, ac de Returno
habendo, or else they shall answer the price of the cattle or goods, if return
be after awarded.

Riotts.
If the Sheriff or (Vnder-Sherife shall not join with the Justices of Peace in
executing the Statute against Rioters, he shall forfeit 100.l.

They must join with the Justices in certifying the names of the maintainers,
etc. by whose means the truth of the riot cannot be found, sub poena 20.l.

They must make due execution of the Justices warrant for returning of Iuries,
to enquire of forcible Entries, or Riots, etc. sub poena 20.l.

They are to execute the Process of the Justices of Peace, granted out against
servants departing into other shieres, sub poena 20.l.

Indictments taken in their Turn, they must certify at the next Sessions of
the Peace, sub poena 40.l.

They must not arrest any person, nor take or leuy any fine or amerciament,
etc. of any person indicted in their Turn, without Process or Estreats from the
Justices of Peace, sub poena 100.l.

Sherifes also may be punished in the Star Chamber for diverse of these their
former misdoings, as for their untrue demeanings in making of Pannels, and
other untrue returns, or for taking of bribes, or undue fees, etc. 3. H. 7.
cap. 1.

Also Sherifes in diverse of these and other cases, shall not only be fined or
amerced, but also shall be liable to the action of the parties grieved for
things misdone, or not done, by them, or by their Officers, for which in part I
refer you to my book at large.

Solo Deo gloria. Minimis Deus Magnus.
FINIS.
A Table of the Contents of every Chapter.
Sherifes,
THeir Name, Antiquity, and Charge. Cap. 1 What they must first do, scz. 1
Enter Recognisances. Cap. 2. 2 Procure their Patents. Cap. 2. 3 Take their
oaths. Cap. 2. 4 Take from the old Sheriff all prisoners and Writs by
Indenture. Cap. 2. 5 In full County must read his Patents; and name his
Deputies. Cap. 2.
Must not be above one year. Cap. 3. Nor be again within three years. Cap.
3. Must be resident in their County. Cap. 3. Must not let their Office. Cap.
3. Their power out of their County. Cap. 3. Their authority absolute. Cap. 4
Their authority Ministerial. Cap. 5 Their Ministerial Office.
1 To keep the Kings Rights. scz. His Lands. Cap. 6 His Franchises. Cap. 7 His
Suits. Cap. 8 His Rents. Cap. 9
2 To gather for the King His debts. Cap. 10 His issues. Cap. 11 His
amerciaments. Cap. 12 His Fynes. Cap. 13
3 To seize for the King the lands and goods of Felons. Cap. 14 Goods wayued of
Outlawes, etc. Cap. 15 Treasure Troue, etc. Cap. 16 The profits of the lands of
Wards. Cap. 17 Escheats. Cap. 18 Idiots. Cap. 19
4 To execute all Process. Cap. 20 By himself, or his Officers. Cap. 21 Where
he is to take notice of the Law. Cap. 21 What persons may not be arrested. Cap.
21.29 The Officers duty therein. Cap. 22 Warrants upon mean Process. Cap. 23
How he shall make execution upon a Statute Merchant. Cap. 24 Execution upon a
Statute Staple. Cap. 25 What lands be extendable. Cap. 26 Execution upon a
Recogn. Cap. 27 Upon an Elegit. Cap. 28 Upon a Capias ad Satisfac'. Cap. 29
Upon a Leuari fac'. ib. Upon a Fieri fac'. Cap. 30 How he is to execute Process,
scz. Summons. Cap. 31 Attachment. Cap. 32 Capias ad respond', Cap. 33 Venire
facias. Cap. 34 Distringas. Cap. 35
5 To return all Writs and the forms thereof. Cap. 36 Punished for his
return. Cap. 37 Making no return. Cap. 38 Returns Mandaui balliuo, etc. Cap.
39.53. Where the Sheriff may enter the Franchise. Cap. 40 Return of Writs.
More, concerning the form. Cap. 41.45 Auerment against it. Cap. 42 Where, of
the force of an Indictment. Cap. 43 Concludes not the new Sheriff. Cap. 44
Where the Sheriff is a party. ibid.

Return of particular Writs, etc. Summons of the Assizes. Cap. 46 Summons of
the Sessions. Cap. 47 Accedas ad Curiam. Cap. 48 Admeasurement. Cap. 49
Annuity. Cap. 50 Assise de nouel diss. ibid. Atteynt. Cap. 51 Attachment. Cap.
52 Capias ad respond'. Cap. 53 Capias ad satisfac'. Cap. 54 Capias vtlagatum.
ibid. Capias ad valentiam. Cap. 55 Covenant. ibid. Certiorare. Cap. 81 Corpus
cum causa. Cap. 63 Debt. Cap. 56 Detinue. ibid. Distring'. Le defend' 56 Iurat'
Cap. 78 Dower. Cap. 56 Droit. ibid. Aetate probanda. Cap. 57 Eiectione firmae.
ibid. Elegendi milit' Parliamenti. Cap. 66 Elegit. Cap. 58 Estreapement. ibid.
Extent sur Recogn', etc. ibid. Exigent Cap. 59 Falso Iudicio. Cap. 60 Fieri
Facias. Cap. 61 Formedon. ibid. Garrantie de Charters. Cap. 62 Guard. ibid.
Grand Cape. ibid. Grand Distress. Cap. 35 Habeas Corpus. Cap. 63 Habere fac'
seisinam. Cap. 56. 63 Habere fac' visum. Cap. 56. 63 Homine Repleg'. Cap. 63
Inquisitions, and their form. Cap. 58. 64 Inquirend' de Dampnis. Cap. 56.77
Leuari facias. Cap. 65 Liberate. ibid. Lattitat. ibid. Mesne. Cap. 66 Milit'
Parliam. Elig' Cap. 66 Partitione. Cap. 68 Praemunire. Cap. 69 Praecipe quod
reddat. Cap. 70 Proprietate probanda. Cap. 70 Proclam' de Summons. ibid. Pone.
ibid. Quare Impedit. Cap. 71 Recordare fac' Loquel'. Cap. 72 Redisseisin. Cap.
93 Repleuin. Cap. 73 Sur Retorno habend'. ibid. Scire facias. Cap. 75 Secunda
superoneratione. Cap. 76 Trespass. Cap. 77 Venditione exponas. Cap. 82. 61
Venire facias. Cap. 78 Habeas corpus Iurat'. Cap. 78 Distring' Iurator'. ibid.
Waste. Cap. 79 Withernam. Cap. 80 Returns al Chancery. Cap. 81 Al Eschequer.
Cap. 82 Before Justices of Peace. Cap. 84 Return of Iuries. Cap. 85 Jurors
their number. Cap. 86 Their sufficiency. Cap. 87 Return of issues. Upon the
tenant or defendant. Cap. 89 Upon Jurors. Cap. 90 What lands liable thereto.
Cap. 91 Knights for the Parliament their choosing, and return. Cap. 92 Where
the Sheriff, etc. may break open an house, etc. Cap. 94 Where the Sheriff,
etc. may take Posse Comitatus. Cap. 95 Baylement of Prisoners by the Sheriff.
Cap. 96 Form of such their bond. Cap. 97 Their attendance upon the Judges of
Assise. Cap. 98 They must assist Justices of Peace. Cap. 99 They are to execute
the precepts of others. Cap. 100 Proclam' to be made by them. Cap. 102 Their
Courts, scz. Their Turn. Cap. 106 Things inquired there. Cap. 107 Their
Indictments must be delivered to the Justices. Cap. 1^ Their authority in their
Turn, at t^ day. Cap. 1^ The County Court. Cap. 11^ Appeals sued there. Cap.
11^ Their Process, and proceedings ther^ Cap. 11 Writs of Iusticies, and their
proceeding thereupon. Cap. 11^ The Sherifes authority in making Repleuies. Cap.
114 The authority of the County Court, etc Cap. 115 Knights of the Parliament,
Coroners, and Verderers to be chosen there. Cap. 116 Judgment upon Vtlawries
to be pronounced there. ibid. Proclamations to be made there. ibid. The
Sherifes Officers. Cap. 117. etc. Baylifes of Hundreds. Cap. 120 Baylifes of
Franchises. Cap. 121 Gaolers, Cap. 123 Sherifes, their fees. Cap. 124 Their
Account. Cap. 125 Their dangers. Cap. 129

FINIS.

