THE HISTORY OF QVINTVS Curcius, containing the Acts of the great Alexander
translated out of Latin into English by John Brende.

1553. Imprinted at London by Richard Tottell.

Cum Priuilegio ab imprimendum so lam.



TO THE RIGHT high and mighty Prince, Ihon Duke of Northumberlande, Earl,
marshall of England. etc. John Brende wishes continual prosperity, with
increase of honor.
Many have written, and experyence besides declares, how necessary historical
knowledge is to all kind of men, but specially to princes, and to others which
excel in dignitye or bear aucthorytye in any commune wealth: the same being
counted the most excellent kind of knowledge, the chiefest part of ciuyl
prudence, and the mirror of man's life. There is required in all magistrates
both a fayeth and fear in God, and also an outward policye in worldly
things, whereof as the one is to be learned by ye scryptures, so the other must
chiefly be gathered by readyng of histories. For in them men may see the
grounds and beginnings of common wealths, ye causes of their increase, of
their prosperous mayntenau^ce, and good preservation: and again by what means
they decreased, decayed, and came to ruin. There the virtues and vices of men
do appear, how by their good doings they flourished, and by their evil acts
they decayed. How they prospered so long as they mainteyned justice, persecutd
vice, used clemencye and mercy, were liberal, religyous, virtuous, and void
of covetousness. And contrariwise, how they fell into manifold calamityes,
miseries, and troubles, when they embraced vice and forsook virtue. In
historyes it is apparent how dangerous it is to begin alteracions in a common
wealth. How envy and hatredes often risyng upon small causes, have been the
destruction of great kingdoms. And that disobeyete of higher powers, and such
as rebellyd against magystrates, never escapyd punishment, nor came to good
end. In them there be presydentys for all cases that may happen, in following
the good, in eschuyng the evil, in auoydyng inco^uenyences, and in forseyng
mischiefs. In them may be learnyd how to temper in prosperitye, how to endure
in aduersytye, and after what manner men should use them selves both in time of
peace and war. As in all arts there be certain prynciples and rules for men
to follow, so in hystoryes there be ensamples painted out of all kind of
virtues, wherein both the dignitye of virtue, and foulenes of vice, appears
much more lyuelye then in any moral teaching: there being expressed by way of
ensample, all that Philosophy does teach by way of precepts. This is such a
kind of knowledge, as make men apt eue^ with small experye^ce either to govern
in publyke matters, or in their own pryuate affairs: For by co^paryng things
past, with things present, men may easelye gather what is to be folowyd, and
what is to be eschuyd. And he which can read the^ with such judgment, waiyng
the times with the causes and occasions of things, shall both see most
deepelye in all matters, best declare his opynion, and win most estymacio^ of
prudence and wisdom. For if aged men be estemyd for the wysest by reason of
their experye^ce. Or if Homer painted forth in ye person of Vlyxes, the image
of a perfyte wise man: imputyng the cause thereof, to the knowledge he had
gathered by traueylyng many cou^treyes, and by vewyng and markyng the customs
and manners of diverse nacyous.

Then such as be well expert in hystories and by the well applying of them, can
take the due fruit perteyning to the same: must needs obteygne profou^dnes of
judgment, with a stable and grounded wisdom. For in them men may behold as
it were before there eyes, both the whole world, and the government thereof,
with the policies and laws, the discipline customs and ma^ners of al people
from the beginning. This is such a thing, that who so ever is clearly void of
it, though he be endued with never so great a wit otherwise, with such
aptnes of nature, or other goodly virtues. Yet when he shall have to do in
weyghtye affairs, he shall find a certeigne mayme and imperfection, not only
in ciuyll government, but also in the matters perteining to the war.

For all though in an excellent captain nature must give the chiefest parts,
that is to say: hardines, stowtenes of stomach, with a natural wisdom and
understanding: by which qualities only (experience thereunto adjoined) diverse
have become famous capitaines.

Yet this is a thing that gives a greter policye, groundeth a deaper
Judgment, adds a further ornament and glory, and forms a perfitnes and an
excellency in a shorter space. The shortness of a man's liefe shortened besides
by so many casualties, is the cause that men be taken away before the can
get such an actual experience as may make the^ perfect, and commonly become
rotten, before they can attain to a rypenes in knowledge. But by this kind
of learning in youth a man is become aged, he has knowledge without
experience, he is wise before it is looked for, he is become a councelour the
first hour, and a man of war the first day. The same thing has been
verified in many, which in young age have been prudente councillors, and in
small experience politic capitaynes. Alexander hereof is an euidente
ensample, who, brought up under Aristotle in learning, and so given to this
kind of study, that he had Homer always laid under his beds head (whereby
he might be admonished of the virtues and office of an excellent Prince)
entered into his kingdom, when he was but.xx. years of age: and nevertheless
both established his own estate with such prudence, that within short space
(besides the enlargynge of his own bounds) he subdued the greatest part of
the world. And albeit he began so young, and continued so small time: yet no
man's acts be comparable to his: being counted the most excellent captain
from the beginning. But if any man will impute the greatness of his doings to
the perfyte disciplyne the Macedons used in the wars, and to the politic
Capitaynes, and expert soldiers, left to him by his father Phyllyp: it shall
appear euyde^tly by the decay of Realms when they have been governed by
imprudent Princes, and by the overthrows the Romans received when they were
conducted by evil Capitaines, that no prudence of counselors can take place,
nor any dysciplyne or experience of the soldiers can avail, if the head be
not a man of excellent virtue. There is nothing new under the Sun (as the
wise man faith) and it is impossible for any thing to chance either in the war
or in common policye, but that the like may be found to have chanced in
times past. Al which things laid up in memory, as in a place of store: me^
may always be furnished for all chances that may occur. Seeing histories be
then so good and necessary, it were much requisite for men's instruccion, that
they were translated into such tou^ges as most men might understand them: and
specially the histories of antiquitye, which both for the greatness of the acts
done in those days, and for the excellency of the writers have much majesty
and many ensamples of virtue. I therefore having always desired that we
englismen might be found as forward in that behalf as other nations, which
have brought all worthy histories into their natural language, did a few
years paste attempt the translacion of Quintus Curtius, and lately upon an
occasion performed and accomplished the same. Which auctour treating of thactes
of ye great Alexander, being figured in the Prophets, Jeremy and Danyel, and
mentioned in the first book of ye Machabies, seem to have been borne, and
brought forth into the world, not with out a most special providence and
predestinacion of god: who prospered so his procedinges that (as Iustine
writes (he never encountered with any enemies who^ he overcame not, he beseiged
no city that he wanne not, nor assailed nation that he subdued not. This so
worthy a matter I thought good to dedicate unto your grace, following their
ensample that have traueyled in the like study, which are wont to declare
their good wills, by bestowing of their labors. Thereunto I was also moved yt
rather, by considering ye qualities of your grace, which seem to have certain
affinity and resemblaunce with such as were ye very virtues in Alexander. For
Arianus writes of him yt he was of a semelie stature, bold in his
enterprises, stowte of stomach, moderate in pleasures, wise in counsel, and
provident to forsee things. That he was excellent in conductyng of an army,
most pollitique in orderyng his battles, that he could encourage his
soldiers with apt words, and when neade required take part of their peril.
What parts of this be in your grace, let them judge that have known your
acts in the wars, and your excellent service done, both in the time of the
kings majesty that now is, and also in his fathers days of most famous
memory. Although in doing hereof I have not parauenture satisfied al men's
expectacyo^s, yet my trust is, that your grace will accept the same in good
part, and consider that in a translacion a man can not always use is own
vain, but shall be compelled to tread in the aucthores steppis: Which is
harder, and a more difficulte thing to do, then to walk his own pace.

The first book of Quintus Curtius, supplied of the acts of the greet
Alexander King of Macedonie.
PHilip of Macedonie which by subduynge of Greece, Amyntas king of Macedon.
did first bring his country in reputation, was the son of Amyntas, a man
endued with wisdom, hardines, and all other virtues of a noble captain.
The Same Amyntas had by Euridice his wife three sons, Alexander, Perdicas, and
Philip, who was the father of great, Alexander: with a daughter also called
Euriones. Euridice.
The Queen Euridice being in amoures with one that had married her daughter,
conspired the death of the King her husband, to the intent to have married with
her son in law, and to make him king, which thing she had brought to
effect, had not the treason and whordom of the mother, ben opened by the
daughter in time. Alex^ the (...) A^
After the death of Amyntas Alexander the eldest son enjoyed his fathers
kingdom which in the beginning of his reign was so assailed on all sides,
that he was driven of force to purchase peace of Thillyrians with money by
giving his brother Philip in hostage. And afterward by the same pledge made a
like peace with the Thebans, which was thoccasio^ that Philip did atteine to
such excellency of knowledge and wisdom, for by reason that he was committed
to the custody of Epimanundas, Epymanundas.
being both a valiant capteyn and an excellent philosopher, he was brought up
in the trade of honest disciplines, and Princely manners, wherein he greatly
proffited under a philosopher of Pythagoras schole, whom Epymanundas keapt in
his house for thenstruccion of his son. In the mean season Alexander was
slain by the means of Euridice his mother, whose former treason king Amyntas
her husband had pardoned in respect of the children had between them, little
thinkyng that she would afterward have been their distruccion. For when
Alexander was dead, she caused in like manner her other son Perdicas to be
slain: Perdicas.
which Perdicas left behind him one son being a young babe. About the same
time Philip the youngest brother being by good hap escaped out of prison
returned into Macedon, Philip,
and not taking upon him the name of King, remained a great while no otherwise
but as Governor or tutor to his yo^g neuewe. Nevertheless afterward by
occasion of sundry myschefes growing in the state, the same being such as might
not well hang till the young king should come to his age, for that he apered to
be a man of singular actiuitie, and of no less skylle in feats of war than
in knowledge of philosophy, was compelled by the people to take upon him the
kingdom^ of Macedon, which as than stood in hard plight, and great danger of
ruin. This was done.400. year after the building of Rome and the.105.
Olympiade. In the beginning of his reign he was combred with ^^finite
troubles, for all the contries nere about (as it were by a general
conspiracy) moved war against him, and at one time sondrie nations swarmyd
together out of sondrie parts to ouerronne his kingdom. Wherefore considering
that it stood him upon to work warely (being not able to mache them all at
ones) pacyfied some with fair promyses, other with money* and the weakest he
withstode with force. whereby he both made his enemies afraid, and confirmed
the hertes of his people, which he found discouraged, and in great doubt.
These things he wrought with great slight and fynenes of wit, in such
sort that he mynysshed not any part of his honor, estate, or reputacion,
determinyng nevertheless as time should serve to deal with every one aparte.
Philips first war was with the Atheniene.
His first war was with the Atheniens whom he overcame by sleyght and
policy. And where it lay in his power to have put them all to the sword, he
let them all at liberty without ransom. By which poinct of elemencie
(though it was but conterfaite, for it was done for fear of a greater war at
hand) yet it gat him great good will and estimacion universally. After that he
subdued the Peons, Peons^ Illyrians.
and from thence turned his power against the Illyrians, of whom he slew many
thousands, and wanne the noble City of Larissa. That done he moved war
against the Tessalians, Tessalians.
not for any desire of their goods, or spoil of their Country, but of a
policy to add to his strength the force of their horsemen, which at those
days were counted the chief of the world, which his purpose he brought to
pass, for being sodeinly assailed, they were sone brought to subieccion. So
Philip joined the force of their horsemen unto his footmen, whereby he made
his power invincible. After all these things being happily brought to pass,
he took to wife Olympias one of the daughters of Neoptolenius King of the
Molossons, Olimpias Philippes wife.
which marriage was concluded by ye means of Arisba, Arisba.
who having ye government of Olympias was become king by ye marriage of her
other sister called Troada. Troada
This marriage which he thought to have made for his suertie turned afterward
to his subuercion. For thynking to have made him self strong by thaffinitie of
Philip, he was at length by him depryued of the hole kingdom, ending his life
myserably in exile: Not long after this marriage King Philip dreamed that he
saw his wives womb wonderfully swollen, Philippes dream.
and to his seming a lively Image of a lion thereuppo^, by which dream the
deuyners and dream readers, did enterprete that his wife was conceived of a
child that should be of a lions heart and courage: with which interpretacio^
he was mitch pleased. Methron.
Afterward at thassault of a city called Methron by shot of an arrowe he
lost his right eye. Whereof though the displeasure was great, yet was he
content upon their submissio^, to take them to mercy, He wanne also the city
of Pagus and annexed the same unto his kingdom: Pagus.
He invaded the land of the Triballes, Tryballes.
and at one instant conquered it with all the contreis thereaboute. Thus having
made his kingdom strong by subduing his neighbors, at his retournyng home his
wife Olympias was delivered of his son Alexander, The birth of Alexand.
the.8. day of April: Of these good fortunes the king reioysed no less than
reason was, having stablyshed his country at home, subdued his enemies abroad*
and gotten an heir to succeed in his kingdom. He could have desired no more
of God, if the mind of man could ever be satisfied, which the more it has
the more it coueteth: And as the dominion increases, so does also the desire
to have more. Which was well seen in Philip that still did compass how to
grow great, by taking from his neighbors, and lay always like a spy,
awayting time and occasion how to catch from every man, whereunto he had
occasion mynistred by the Cities of Grease, for whiles one did covet to subdue
an other, and through ambition were at strife who should be chief, by one and
one, at last he brought all to subjection, first persuadyng the smaler states
to move war against the greater, and to serve his purpose contcyued the
ways to set them all together by the ears, but at lenght when his practizes
were perceived, diverse Cities fearyng his increase, confeadered against him,
as their commen enemy, and namely the Thebans. Nevertheless in a necessity
when they were driven to wage men of war, they chose him to be there general
Captain against the Lacedaemonians, and the Phoceans, Philip chosen Captain
against the Phoceans and the Lacedemonia^s
which had spoiled the temple of Apollo. This war he honorably acheued, so
that by pounysshement of their sacryledge, he gat him self great honor in all
those places. But in the end espyeng either of those Countries to be brought
low with war, he found the means to subdue both the one and the other
compellyng as well the ouercommers, as the ouercomme to be his Tributaries and
subjects. Then made he a voyage into Cappadoce, where killyng, and taking all
the Princes there aboutes prisoners, reducede the hole province to the
subjection of Macedon. He conquered Olinthus, and within a while put his foot
in Thrace. For where the two Kings of that country were at variaunce about
the limits of there kingdoms, and choice him to be Arbitrer, he gladly took it
upon him, but at the day a^oynted for the Judgment, he came not thither like a
Judge in a Counsel, but like a warrier with an army, and to part the strife
expulsid both the parts from their kingdoms. By this time young Alexander was
of twelve years of age, The towardnes of Alexander.
and began to take great delyght in the feats of war, showing most
manifest signs ^f noble heart and Princely courage. He was very swifte of
foot, and one day at a solemn game of ronnyng called Olimpiacum, being
demanded by some of his Companions whether he would run a raze with them:
gladly (quod he) If I had kings sons to run withal. Another time when
certain Ambassadors of the Percians came into Macedon. Alexander which in
his fathers absence took upon him their entertaynement and deuisyng with them
of diverse things, and in all his communication there never passed from him one
chyldishe or vain word, but either he enquired the state of their Country,
the manners of the people, the distance of the ways, the power of their king,
or the order of his wars and such other like. So that the Ambassadors
having meruaill the rat, esteamed the prouffe of the father to be much less
the^ the towardnes of the son, and that his courage was much more then was
to be looked for in one of his years. As often as tidinges came that the king
his father had won any strong or rich Town, or obtained any notable
victory. He never seamed greatly joyful, but would say to his play fellows,
my father does so many great acts, that he will leave no occasion of any
notable thing for us to do together. Such were his words, such was his
talk: whereby it was easy to conjecture what a man he would after prove in
age, which so began in youth. His delight was not set in any kind of
pleasure, or gredines of gain, but in the only exercise of virtue, and desire
of honor. And the more authority yt he received of his father, the less he
would seame to bear. And although by the great increase of his fathers
dominion, it seemed that he should have the less occasion to use the wars yet
he did not set his delight in vain pleasure, or heapyng up of treasure, but
sought all the means he could to use mercial feats, and exercises of war,
coveting such a kingdom, wherein for his virtue and proves he might purchase
fame and immortality, which hope never deceived Alexander nor any other, when
it happens in a man of virtue and noble heart, that has will or occasion to
put the same in ure. Alexander was committed to the gouernementes of Aristotle.
The charge and governance of this young Prince was committed to sondrie
excellent Masters and Governors, but chiefly to the great Philosopher
Aristotle, whose virtue, learning, and knowledge, King Philip so much
esteemed, that he would often say: he took no greater comfort in the birth of
his son, then in that he was provided of such a Master for him as
Aristotle, under whose tuicion he remained ten years. Many things there
chaunsed besides, whereby it was coniectured that Alexander should prove a man
of great valor. The oracle at Delphos
For when his father sent to Delphos to receive answer of the gods who
should be his successor, the Oracle was given that such one should not only
succeed him, but also be Lord of the world. whom Buchephalus would suffer to
sytte upon his back. This Bucephalus was a passing fair horse, Bucephalus
fyerse and full of courage, which Philip had brought of a Tessalien for
thirtene talentes, and because of his fiersenes kept him within a brake of Iron
bars, yet for all that he remained so fell and wode that none durst come
nexe to dress him. Whereof the king was so weary that he would feign have been
rid of the horse. It fortuned that Alexander came one day with his father
unto ye stable. What a horse ( quoth he) is marred here for lack of good handling,
and with that came more nere, and without any great difficulty gat upon his
back, and used both ye spur and the rod to thuttermoste, both running and
ma^naging him up and down, which ye horse abide very well. And having ridden
his fill brought back the horse again. As he alighted the king for joy
embrased and kissed him, and with tears in his eyes said: O son seek some
other kingdom mete for thy heart. for Macedon cannot suffice. So that even
then the foreseing father did full well perceive all his possession far
insufficient for his sons heart. After this King Philip determined to make
war against all Grease. for the maintenance whereof he thought it great
advantage, Byzancium
if he might first win Byzancium a famous City on the sea coaste, wherefore
committing the charge and government of his Realm to his son being then.15.
years old, he laid siege to the Town which made him great resistaunce.
When he had consumed all his riches and treasure about the siege, he was driven
to so narrow shifte, that to furnishe him self of money, he became a Pyrat
and roued on the sea, where he took.170. ships all the spoil whereof he
departed among his soldiers. And let his hole Army should be detayned
about the wynnyng of that town he sorted out the most chosen bands of all
his Soldiers, and went into Gersonesus, where he took and put to sack many
notable Towns. Because his son Alexander was then about.18. years old and
had showed evident proof of his virtue and manhod in all his attemptes: His
father sent for him thither to thentent he might in his wars learn and
exercise all feats belongyng to a Soldier, and with him made a voyage into
Scythia, upon no other quarrel but to spoil the Country. Thus using the
practice of Merchauntes, with the gain of one war bare out the charges of an
other. After he had brought the country in subjection, The bot o^ Philip been
S^^ out o^ Scythi^.
because no riches of gold nor silver was to be gotten there, he carried
thens.20. thousand of me^, women and children, besides a great multitude of
Cattaile, with.20. thousand choice mares to make a race in Macedon. In his
return from thence he was encou^tred with the Triballes, which denied him
passage, except they might have part of his boutie, whereupon debating of the
matter, from words they fell to fyghting, Philip was wounded by the Tribals
whereat King Philip was so wounded in his thighe, that the violence of the
stroke ran through the body of his horse, whereof all men iudgyng him to be
slain, the botie was lost thereby. As Soon as he was recovered of his hurt, his
long dissembled grudge against the Athenians braste out so far fourth, that
he made open war upon them. By reason whereof the Thebanes seeing the fire so
nere at hand, The Thebans and other Cities conspired against Philip.
gave succors to their neighbors, fearing lest if the Athenia^s were
overcome, thend of the wars should turn upon them. Wherefore the Cities
that a little before were mortal ennemies one to another, confederated
togithers in one leage, and sent their Ambassadors through all Greece,
persuading it to be most mete with a common aid to withstand a common enemy.
Some considering the peril to be universal stake to the Athenians. And some
fearing Philips power encreasyng, and the other decayeng took part with him.
In this war Alexander was made Captain of one of the battailles, wherein
his noble heart and courage did well apeare, specially when it came to the
stroke of the fight, for there he acquitted him self so valiauntly yt he seemed
not inferior unto his father, nor to any man else, but by most just desert
got the honor of the victory. Albeit he was defrauded thereof by the envy and
sleight of his father, as he him self complained afterward. This battle was
fought at Cherony, The battle at Cherony.
wherein though the Atheniens were the greater nombre, yet were they overcome by
the Macedones, being the fewer, but yet expert Soldiers by reason of their
long and continual practice in wars: nevertheless the Athenians as men not
vnmyndful of their former honor spent their lives valiau^tly. That day made
an end of all the Greeks glory, as well of their large rule and governance, as
also of their most ancient fredome and liberty: which being hardly won,
and long time kept, was thus lost in a moment. For these and many other
experimentes of the valor and proves in young Alexander, although the king his
father did always bear him singular affection and favor, yet nevertheless by
certain occasions ensuyng it was unhappily broken. For Philip being married to
Olimpias mother of Alexander (as is said before) took to wife besides her, The
dissensio^ betwixt Philip and Alexander. Cleopatra.
one Cleopatra, whereupon fell great discord and unkindness between the father
and the son. The occasion was given by one Attalus uncle of Cleopatra, who
being at the new marriage, exhorted ye multitude to make prayers to the Gods
to send between the King and his nece a laufull heir to succeed in the
kingdom of Macedon. Whereat Alexander being moved: Thou naughty villain ( quoth
he) do thou count me a bastard? And with that word flange the Cup at
his head. The King hearing this, rose up, and with his sword drawn, ran at
his son, who by swaruyng with his body, avoided the stroke, so that it did no
harm. Whereupon Alexander with many stowte and dispiteful words departed from
his father, and went with his mother into Epirus. Epirus.
Nevertheless sone after, by the mean of one Demoratus a Corinthian, Demoratus
who persuaded the king that this discord was nothing for his honor,
Alexander was sent for again, and much labor and great means was made
before they could be well reconciled. Wherefore to confirm this atonement
there was a marriage made between Alexander the brother of Olympiades (whom
Philip by the expulsion of Arisba had made King of Epirus) and Cleopatra the
new Queen's daughter. The triumph of that day was notable according to the
state and magnificence of such two Princes, the one bestowing his daughter,
and the other marieng a wife. There were set forth sundry notable plays and
devises plesaunt to behold. And as King Philip between the two Alexanders, the
one his natural son, and the other his son in law, was passing through the
preasse without any guarde: The death of Philip.
One Pansanias a young man of the nobility of Macedon, when no man suspected
any such thing, suddenly slew him starck dead, making that day which was
apoincted to Joy and triumph, lamentable and dolorous by the death of such a
prince. Pansanias.
This Pansanias being a boie was enforced by Attalus to the unnatural use of
his body, which not content to do so himself, at an other open banquet caused
diverse of his familiars to abuse him likewise, Attalus.
with which shame and villainy the young man being sore grieved (as reason
would) co^playned to the king, whom although the dishonestie of the matter
moved much, yet for the love he bare to Attalus, and for the respect of his
service forbear to use any reformacion in the matter. This Attalus was very
nere unto the king and in special favor, by reason he was kynsman unto the
Queen Cleopatra who^ Philip had last married: He was also elected general
Capytayne of the Kings Army prepared to pass into Asia, as one that was
both valiant of his person, and no less politic in the feats of war
upon these respects the King endeavored by all the means he could to
pacefie Pansanias (being kyndled with most just cause of grief) as well by
gyuing him great gifts and promocions, as placing him honorably amongst
those Ientleme^ that were for the guarde of his person. But all this could not
appease the just rage of his Ire, which wrought so in him, that he determined
to be revenged, not only upon Attalus that did the villony, but also upon the
King that would not minister justice. Which determinacion he put in effect,
as is said before. Many things might be said more of the doings and sayenges
of this Philip, but one thing above an other is to be noted, that although for
the more part he was always occupied in the tourmoyle of the wars, and
other like business, yet had he ever such affeccion to the studies of humanity
and good learning, that he both did and spoke many things worthy memory,
which were both witty and plesaunt. He lived seven and forty years, and
reigned.xxv. years being the.xxiii. king of the Macedons, as they reigned in
order.

The second book of Quintus Curtius, supplied of the acts of Alexander the
great, King of Macedonie.
WHen Philip was dead, Alexander took upon him as king the.20. year of his age.
his son which for the greatness of his acts was afterward called the
great Alexander took upon him the kingdom the.4.26. year after the buylding
of Rome, being of the age of.20. years. His state stood at that time subject
to much envy, hatred, and hasard from all parts. For the nations and
provinces borderyng upon him could not well bear their present bondage, and
every one of them sought how to recover again their ancient dominion and
enheritaunce. The first thing he attempted after he was king was the grievous
execution he did upon as many as had conspiryd his fathers death which
done, he celebrated his funeralles, with great pomp. Concerning his estate he
sone establysshed it, and that much better the^ any man could have imagyned,
in one being of so yo^g and tender years, for being of some had in contempt,
and of some suspected to be cruel, toward the one he bare him self so
stoutely, that he took from them all contempt, and to the other so gentylly,
that their ymagened fear of his cruel disposition was clean taken away, he
granted unto the Macedons fredom and privilege from all exaccion and bondage,
saving from the service of war, by which act he got so great favor and love
among his people that all affirmed by one consent, how the person of their
King was changed and not his virtue, his name was altered, but not his good
government. In the beginning of his reign rebellion was made against him on
all sides, he by and by with an incredible stowtenes and co^stancy of mind
stayed all their tumultes, which thing pacified and set in order, he went to
Corinthe in Peloponese, Corinthe.
where calling a general Counsel of all the states of Greece, Alexander
elected Capitain general against the Percia^s
he was elected their general Capitain against the Percians, which before
time had afflicted Greece with many plagues, and at that present possessed the
greatest Empire in the world, his father had purposed that war before, but
the preuencio^ of death was the cause he brought not his purpose to pass.
Whiles he was in preparacion of this enterprise, he was enfourmed how the
Atheniens, the Thebanes, and Lacedaemonians were revolted from him, and
confederate with the Percians, and all by means of an Orator called
Demosthenes, Demosthenes.
which was corrupted by them with a great sum of money. For the reformacion
whereof Alexander so suddenly had prepared an Army, wherewith he came upon
them, that they could scarsely believe they saw him present, of whose coming
they had not herd before. In his way he practysed with the Tessalians, and
used to them such gentle words and apt persuasions, by puttyng them in
remembrance of his fathers benefits, and of the ancient kynrede between the^
by the descent from Hercules, that he brought them to the point, that by an
universal decre of the hole Country, he was created their Governor. So great
was the celeritie that this young man used, and his diligence so effectual in
all his doings, that he brought all such in fear of him, as before turned
from him, and regarded him little. As the Atheniens were the first that failed,
so they first of all repented, and extolled with praises Alexanders chyldhode,
which before they had despised, above the virtue of the ancient conquerours.
They also sent Ambassadors to require of him peace, whom he sore rebuked when
they came to his presence, but yet was content at length to remytte their
offense. And although Demosthenes was chosen one of the Ambassadors, yet he
came not to his Prince, but from Cythron returned again to Athens, which his
doing was either for fear that he had so often ^ayled against Philip, and
stoored the Atheniens against him, or else to take away the suspicion of him
self from the King of Percie, of whom it was said that he had received a
great sum of gold to stand against the Macedons. The same thing was laid
against him by Aesthines in an Oracion, where he says: Aesthynes
presently the Kings gold does bear his charges, but that can not last him
long, seeing no riches can suffice his prodigal living. When Alexander had
pacified those sturnes that were begone in Greece, before he would pass his
Army into Asia, he made a journey against the Peones, the Triballes, and
Thillicians, because he understood they were conspityng togethers. And for that
they bordred upon his Country: and were woute to invade the same upon every
occasion, thought to set stay among them before he would remove his power so
far of. Amphipolis
From the City of Amphipolis therefore he set forewardes against the
Tracians, which at that time were not under the rule or law of any man. And
in ten days came to the mount Hemus, Mount Hemus.
in ye top whereof he found the^ encamped with a great power to resist his
passage. In stead of tre^ches they had impaled the^ selfs with their cariages
cross ye streightes purposyng there to let his journey. And if they should be
invaded by any other way then by the strayghtes* they did determyne to roulle
the Cariages down the hill upon the Macedones, to break the array of their
battles, which devise in deed they put in execution. But the Soldiers had
received before instruccions by Alexander, that as occasion should serve, part
should open their arraye to let the Carts and Wheales pass through them,
and that other should fall flat upon the ground, and by coueryng their bodies
with their Targattes avoid the danger. They used the matter according to
their instruccions, and when the Carts were passed by, they with a courage and
cry mounted up against their enemies, and in a moment put them to flight: When
Alexander was passed the Mountain he entered into the Country of the Triballes
as far as the river of Ligens. Syrmus king of the Trybals.
When Syrmus King of that land understood of his coming he sent his wife and
his children with such of his people, as were not mere for the wars into an
Island called Pencascytuate within the River of Danubye. Penca.
Into which land the Thracians that bordered with the Triballes were fled
also. It was not long after that Syrmus him self fled thither likewise. The
rest of the Tryballes that were not with the King withdrewe into an other
Island, where they kept them selfs against Alexander. But he by polecye
found the means to draw them out of theree strength, whereby he slew of
them the nombre of three thousand, and the rest fled away, for of prisoners
there were few taken. After this battayles he marched toward the River of
Danubye, to that Island where the Tracians and the other Tryballes were fled.
They made notable resistans against him, which they might the better do, by
reason that Alexander wanted boats, and the banks of the Island were so high
and stepe, that they could not be mounted upon, but with great difficulty the
stream besides ronnyng meruelously swifte, because that the Island made yt
narowe* when Alexander perceived the impossibility to assail them, he
withdrewe to another place, where gettyng a few boats passed the river in the
night to the number of.M.ccccc. horsemen and 4000 fotemen, with which company
he set upon a people called Getes, Getes.
that stood redye in bataile on the further side, of purpose to stop the
Macedones their passage with.4000. horsemen and.x.M. foteme^. By which sodeyne
coming over, the Getes being afraid did not abide the furste onset. it seamed
to the^ a matter of wonderful adventure. for Alexander in one night without a
bridge, Danuby.
to pass his power over the brodest and depest river of al Europe. this matter
stroke such fear in the^ that they fled into the woddes and deserte places.
leuing their city desolate which was taken by Alexander and ouerthrone. Syrmus
King of the Triballes, the Germains, and the other Inhabiters of Danubie, sent
Ambassadors thither unto Alexander to enter with him in frendshyppe, and
amity. And he condiscending to their requests, enquired of the Germans what
thing it was in the world that they doubted most, thinkinge in dead that the
terror of his name had been the most fearful thing unto the^. But when they
understood his meaning they answered: that they doubted greatly the falling
of the sky with whose presumptious au^swer Alexander was nothing moved, nor
further replied, saving only that he said, the Germains were always a proud
people, and thereupon dismissed the^. Agrians.
As he was going from thence against ye Agrians and ye Pea^s. Agryans. clitus
Bardeleius Glancias King of Thala^ts Lagarus.
he was advertised that Clitus Bardeleius had rebelled, and was confederate
with Glancias ye king of the Thaulantes. he had also intelligence, that ye
people of Anteria would give him bataile in his passage wherefore he committed
to Lagarus the King of Agryans (which was well-beloved of King Philip, and no les
favored of Alexander) ye charge to go against ye Anterians, Anterians.
and promised him upon his return to give him his suster Cyna in marriage. Cina.
And Alexander him self with great celeritie went against Clytus and Glaucias,
who^ in sondrey bataylles he overcame, and put to flight. Whiles Alexander was
about these things, The Greks rebellyd.
he received aduertiseme^t, ye diverse Cities in Grease and specially the
Thebans had rebelled which thing moved him much, and was ye cause that he
returned with speed to oppress ye co^mocion. The Thebanes in this mean season
besieged ye Castle of Thebes, where in was a guarrison of Macedones, and went
about by all means to win it. To whose rescue Alexander came by great
iourneys. and encamped with his host nere to ye City. The siege of Thebes
Such as bare rule among ye Thebanes, when they saw Alexander come, contrary
to yt they looked for, and doubted whether such aid should come to the^ from
other Cities, as was promised, began to consulte how to proceed. At length by a
general consent they determined to abide thaduenture of ye war. The King in
ye mean season stood at a stay, geuyng the^ spare to be better advised, and
change purpose for he was of opinion. that not one City would ever have made
resistance, against so great a power as he had, being above.xxx. thousand,
fotmen, and three thousand horsemen, al old Souldyers, and expert in the
traueiles of war. The trust of whose manhood and valyantenes had caused him
to undertake the wars against the Percians. Truly if the Thebans had given
place too fortune, and to ye time, and would have required peace they might
easelie have obtained it his disire was so great to pass into Asia against ye
Percians. but ye Thebans yt were determined to try their force, and use no
prayers, fought against ye Macedo^es that far exceded their no^bre obstynatly
and with great manhood. But whiles the batailes were joining the guarrison of
the castle issued out upon the Thebanes back, whereby being enclosed they were
vanquyshed, their City taken, spoiled, The distraccion of Thebes
and utterly rased. Which thing Alexander did of purpose because he thought ye
rest ye Grecians afraied by their e^sample, would be ye more quiet whiles he
should be in the wars of Asia. to gratify the Phocians and Plateans that
were confederat with him, through the manifold accusations that they brought in
against the Thebanes, he slew of them Six thousand* and sold thirte
thousand as Slaves the money whereof coming amou^ted to the some of four hundred
and forty talentes yet he spared all the lineage of Pindarus ye Poet, Pindarus
the Poet.
wherbye he would wytnes unto the world, the favor he did beat unto learned
men. In this City of Thebes was a notable woman called Timoclea* Tymoclea.
whom when A capteyne of Thrace did rauishe, and would have enforced her to
confess her monye, she brought him to a well where she said all her precious
gere was hydden. And whiles he stouped down to look into the well, she thrust
him in, and threw stones after* whereby he was slain For this fact she being
committed to prysone and afterward brought before Alexander: he asked her what
she was, she au^swered with out fear, yt she was Suster to Theogenes which beind
elected general Captain against king Philip his father, ma^fully died for ye
liberty of Greece. At wose stowtnes and co^sta^cy ye King merueled so much yt
he caused her we her children to be set at liberte The Athenians had so great
pity and compassion of the estate of the Thebanes, that contrary to the
commandment of Alexander, they received into their City such of them as
escaped. Which thing Alexander took in such displeasure, that when they sent
Ambassadors the second time to demand peace, he would not grant atonement,
upon any other condition, but that such Orators and Captains which had
sturred the^ to rebellion, should be delivered unto his hands. But at length
the matter was brought to that poynet that the Orators were reserved, and the
Captains banished, which straight fled to Darius King of Percia. At such time
as Alexander assembled the Grecia^s in Isthmos for the determinacio^ of his
journey into Percia, many Orators and Philosophers came to visit him,
Diogenes.
only Diogenes that remained about Corinthe kept him self away, as one that
esteemed Alexander nothing at all. whereat he marueiled much, and went to visit
him, where he was beking of him self in the so^. He asked Diogenes if he had
need of any thing yt he might do. To who^ Diogenes nether gave reverence nor
thanks, but willed him to stand out of his son shine. With whose behauour and
words Alexander was so delited, that turning to those that were with him said:
if he were not Alexander, he would wysh to be Diogenes. When he had put in
order thaffaires of Greece, comitting the rule thereof together with the Realm
of Macedo^ to the government of Antipater, Antipater.
who^ he most trusted. in ye begi^ning of ye spring came to Hellespont with his
hole Army, Hellespont
which he transported into Asia with incredible speed and dilige^s. When they
were come to the further shore, Alexander threw a darte to thennemies land, and
as he was armed lepyd out of the ship with great chetefulnes, and their
sacrified, making peticio^ unto the gods that they would voucsafe (...) toward
his enemies, and forbad his Soldiers to make any spoil upon the country,
persuadinge the^ to spare that was there own, and that they should not destroyt
ye thing, which they came to possess. He not had in his Army above the nombre
of.xxxii.M. The number of Alexander Army.
fotemen and v.M. horsemen, and but.Clxxx. ships. wherefore yt is hard to judge
whither yt be more, wonderful, that he conquered the word, or that he dursd
attempt ye conqueste thereof, with so small a power, he chase not out to such
a dangerus enterprise the young men which were in ye first flower of there
age, but thold soldiers of whom the more part for there long contiunans in
wars, were by the custom at lyberty, whither they would go to the wars any
more or no, saving at there own pleasure. And there was none of the captains
nor of any other that bare office in the Army that was under the age of.lx.
years. So that the soldiers, for their experience seemed to be Scolemastres of
ye wars. And the captayns for there gravity apered to be Senators in some
ancient common wealth. That was the couse that in the fight none of the minded
any flieng but every one conceived the victory in his hedde, nor any put
trust in his fete, but in his hands. Alexander that every where made
sacrifice, did use most solempnitie at Troy upon Achilles Tomb, Achylles.
of whom he was descended by his mothers side. He judged him most happy of
all men that had been before, because in such glory he died young, and had his
acts set forth of such one as Homer was. Homer.
From thence he passed forewardes into the domynions of Diarus King of Perce,
which being the son of Arsanus, Darius king of Perce.
and the fourtene King after Cirus, had gotten the possession of the Monarchy
of the hole east part of the world. The chief cause that moved Alexander
too invade hi^ was to be reue^ged of ye damgs and distrucco^s, wherewith his
predecessors had afflicted ye contrei of Grease, and also for dema^ding tribut
of Philip his father for yt wiche he sent a proud and presumptious ambassad
called himself ye King of kings and Kiusma^ of ye gods, lastly he had written
to Alexander and called him his servant, and gave commission to his lieutenants
yt they should beat ye mad boy ye son of Philip with rods and afterward bring
him to his presence in kings aparaile And lasteli yt they should drown both
ship and mariners and convey al ye Souldirs yt should be left on live, beyond
ye read seas theytherfore purposi^g to execute ye kings co^ma^deme^t, Troy
Propontydes.
assembled their power at ye river of Gra^ik (which does deuid ye co^trei of
Troie from propo^tidis) they had to ye nombre of.xx.M. fotmen and as many
horsemen, with who^ they had taken ye ground on ye further sid of ye river, where
Alexander must needs pass over, whereof he being advertisid though he saw but
p^se^t peril in the^terprise to fight in ye water and ye ouse from ye lower
ground, The battal vppn the River of Grauyk.
against his enemies which had thaduantage of ye higher bank. yet upon a
singular trust of his own good fortune, and the valiantnes of his soulders,
attempted the matter. At the first he was sore resisted, and put in great
hasard of repulse, but at length he vanqueshed and otuerthrewe his enemies. In
doing whereof there neither wanted polycie in him self, nor yet singler manhood
in his men. There was slain in that battle of the percians.xx.M. fotemen
with.cc.l. horsemen. And of ye Macedones but.xxxiiii. This victory was greatly
effectual to Alexanders purpose, for thereby he wan the City of Sardes, Sardes.
being the cheyfe strength the percians had for the maistering of the seas,
Lydia, Ephelos.
unto the which City and to all the rest of the contreye of lidia he gave
liberty to live under their own laws He got also into his possessyon the
City of Epheses by reason that the fourth day after the battle yt was
abandoned of ye guarison which Darius set there. Magnesia.
In the mean season there came Anbassedours from Magnesia and from ye Trallia^s
proffering ye delyuery of their Cities. Parmenio was sent to the^ with.iii.
Meliton.
thousand fotemen and.cc. horsemen, Helicarnassus.
with which power he wan Miletum yt s^od at defense, and marching from the^s
toward helycarnassus got all the towns therabouts at ye first approach and
afterward besieged helicarnassus yt self which with great travail he wan at
length, Ada the Queen of Carya.
and rased to the ground. As Alexander entered into Caria, Orontoc^tes
Ada the Que^e of that Country, Alynda.
which had been spoiled of al her Domynion by Orontobates Darius lieutenant
(sauinge of one strong City called Alinda) met with Alexander, and adopted him
for her son and heir, He would not refuse ye name and the proffer of her
liberality, but did betake to her again, the custody of her own City. Licia.
And besides for ye memory of her beneuolens, put the hole Country of Caria
under her rule and subjection. From thence he went into Lycia and Pamphilia to
thentent that by gettyng the possession of the sea costs of those contries,
Pamphilia
should causse the sea power of Darius to stand to none effect. when he had
ones subdued the people of Pisydia, Pisydia.
he entered into Phrigia by the which country he was enforsed to pass, and
marched toward Darius, Phrigia.
with whom he had great desire to encounter, hearing say that he was coming
against him with many thousand of men of war.

The third book of Quyntus Curtius of the Act^s of the great Alexander King of
Macedon.
Geander.
ALexander in the mean season having se^te Gea^der to wage me^ of war out of
Peleponese. and established the contreis of Lycia and Pamphilia, removed his
Army to the City of Celenas. Celenas.
Marcia.
through this City their rane the same time the River of Marcia very famous
in the greake poesis whose head springing out of the tope of an high mountain,
and falling down upon a rock beneth, made much nose and toringe. It flows
from thence, and watreth the feldes all about without increase of any stream
saving his own. The collore whereof being like unto the calmeese, gave occasion
to the poets to feign how the Nymphs for the delight they took in ye River,
choice their dwelling under that roke. So long as it ronnethe within compass
of the walls yt keapeth his own name, but when it comes without, where ye
streme is more swyfte and vehemente, is then called Lycum. Lycum.
Alexander did enter into this town being foresaken of the Inhabitaunts, and
perceiving they were fled into the castle which he determined to win before
he departed sent, frist to sommo^ them by an Heraulde which declared that
except they would yield them selves, they should suffer the extremytie of the
law of Armies. They brought the herald into an high tower which was strong
both by nature and workma^ship, willing him to consider the thing, and to
declare unto Alexander yt he wayed not sufficiently ye strength of the place,
for they said they knew it to be impringable, and if ye worstshuld fall, yet
were they ready to dye in there truth and allegiance. Notwth standinge which
words. when it came to ye point, yt they saw the^ selves be sieged, and al
things wax scarce. They took truse for l^ days, with this composition, yt if
they were not reseued by Darius within ye time, they would re^dre it up into his
hands. Which they did afterward at ye dai appointed, when they saw no succors
coming. To ye place there ceme Ambassadors to him from Athens making request,
that such of there City as were taken priso^res at ye battle fought upon the
river of Granyke might be restored to the^^ To whom answer was made, that when
ye wars of percie were o^es bro^ght to an end, both there is and al other yt were
greaks should be restored to their liberty. Alexander had his present care and
Imagenaro^ always upon Darius, who^ he knew not yet to be passed the river of
Euphrates. He assembled therefore all his power togethers purposing to adventure
the hasard of the bataile. The country was called Phriga yt he passed thorugh
plentyful of villages but scarce of Cities, City of Gordyn.
yet their was one therein of great Antiquity called Gordin the royal seat
sometime of King Mydas The river Sangarius does run throught yt, and it
stands in midewaye tetwe^e the Sea^ of Ponte and Cilicia, being judged to be
the narowest part of Asia by reason of the Sees which lie on both sides
representing ye form of an Ila^d. And if it were not for a small point of
land, yt do lie betwext those ses, they should win both togithers. Alexander
having brought this City under his boeysans, entered into the temple of
Iubyter, were he saw the wagon wherein Mydas the builder of ye City was wont
to ride. The same in the furniture and outward appearance differred little
from other common wago^s, Gordies knotte.
but there was in yt a thing notable: which was a rope folded and knit with
many knots, one so wrethed within an otheir, that no man could perceive the
manner of yt nether where the knotes began, nor where they eanded Upon theys the
Contremen had a prophecy yt he should be lord of all Asia that could undo that
endless knot which matter put the king in a meruelus desire to become the
fulfiller of that prophecy. There stod a great nombre about him both of
Phrigians and Macedons ^hone part of the^ musing to what co^clusio^ this
matter would come to, and the other feacing the rash presiumpco^ of the king.
Forasmuch as they could perceive by no reason now ye knot should be vndo^e. The
King him self also doughting yt the failing of his purpose in ye matter, might
be take as a toke^ of his euel fortune to come. Wherefore after he had co^sidred
the thing: What matter makes it (quoth he) which way it be undone, and striued
nolenger how to unknit it, but out of hand cut with his sword the cords a
sondre: therbi etheir illuding or else fulfilling theffecte of the prophecye.
When this was do^e Alexander purposed to find out Darius where so ever he were.
And to the intent he would leave al things clear behind his back, made
Amphitorus captain of his name upon the cost of Helliespont, Amphitorus.
comettyng ye charge of ye me^ of war to Egilocus. Egilocus.
They two have commisso^ to deliver ye Ila^ds of Lesbos, Lesbos. Scyo. Coos.
Scyo, and Coos from ye hands of ye Percians. And for ye furniture of their
chargs appointed to the^.l. tale^ts. And sent to Antipater and such as had ye
gouernans of ye Cities of Greac threscore tale^ts. He gave order ye suchas were
his co^federats should with there own power of ships defed ye seas of Hellespo^t
according to ye leage betwixt the^. It was not yet come to his knowledge how
Meno^ was dead upon who^ he set his hole regard, Menon.
knowing if yt he moved not against hi^, noma^ should enterrupt his passage
before he came to Darius. The City of Ancire.
Alexander came to the city Ancyre where he made his musteres, and so entered
into Paphlagomya whereunto the Grecians be borderers, of whom (it is said) the
venetians be descended. Rhaphlagomya.
All this Country yealdid unto him, gave him pledgs, obteining to be free of
tribute, seeing they never paid any ^^ the percians. Calas was captain there,
who taking with him the band of Souldirs yt were lately come out of Macedon went
unto Capadocea. Calas,
But Darius hearing of the death of Menon, Capadocia
was noles moved therwyth then the case required, for then allother hope set
apert he determined to try the matter in person, co^dempnyng all things yt
had been don by his deputies, having opinion that good government wanted in many
of them, and that fortune had failed in them all. He came therefore to Babylon,
where he encamped. Assembling al his force togithers in sight, because he would
show the greater courage. And using the ensample of Xrexes in taki^g of his
musters, entrenched so much ground abut as was able to receive.x. thousand men.
within the which he lodged in the night such as had been mustred in the day.
And from thens they were bestowed abroad in ye plain country of Mesepotanya,
the number of his horsemen and foteme^ were innumerable, and yet seamed to the
sight to be more then they were. There were of the Percyans an.C. thousand of
whom.xxx. thousand were horsemen. Of the Medeans.x. thousand horsemen, and.xxx.
thousand fotemen. Of the Barcanyts two thousand horsemen, Themnubre of Darius
men of war.
with broad swords and light bucklers, and.x.M. fotme^ with like weapons. There
were of ye Arme^ians.xl. thousand fotemen and.vii. thousand horsemen The
hircanyans of great estymacio^ emongeste those nations had.vi. thousand
horsemen. The deruicens were.xl. thousand foteme^ armed with pikes, whereof part
had no hedes of Iro^, but dried ye poi^ts of the^ in ye fiere therwer also of
the same nacio^.ii.M. horsemen. There ca^e from ye Caspia^ sea viii.M. fotme^
and.cc. horsemen. And with the^ of ye rude nations of Asia.ii.M. fotemen
and.iiii.M. hosemen. To the increase af these numbres there were.xxx.M Mercenary
sauldiers yt were Greaks. Have would not suffer to call for the Bactria^s,
Sogdians, Indians, with other thinhabiters of ye red sea, nations which had na^es
scarsely known to there own king. Thus Darius wanting nothing less the^ ye
mullitud of me^ greatly reiossed to behold them. And puffed up with the vanitye
and flattery of ye great men yt were about him, turned to Charidemus of
Athe^s an expert man of war (which for ye displeasure yt Alexander did bear
him was ba^ished his country) and asked him if he thought not this company
sufficient to overthrow ye Macedons. Wheriu^to Charidemus without resptte of
the kings pride, or of his own estate answered. Charidemus words unto Drius
Peradventure six (quoth he) ye will not be content to hear ye truth and except
I tell yt now, it shall be to late hereafter. This great preparato^ and hiughe
army of yours, gathered of ye multitud of somany nations yt you have raised up
from al pies of Thorient is more fearful to theinhabiturs hereabouts, then
terrible to your enemies. your me^ shine in colors and glister in armure of
gold, exceeding so much in riches, yt they which have not seen the^ wc there eyes
cannot conceive any such thing in their minds. But contrariwise the Macedo^es
being rough soldiers, without any such excess be terrible to behold ye fro^ts
of there batailes stand close togethers alwais in strength furnished with pikes
and targets for defense. The Phalant of the Macedons
yt which they call there Phallant is an immouable square of fotemen, wherein
every one stand close to other joining weapon to weapon, every soldier
obedient toyt which is commanded him ready at his captains beck whyther it be
tofolowe his ensign, to keep his army, to stand still, to ru^ne, to fetch a
co^pas, to chang thorder of the battle, to fight on this side or that side:
every soldier can do these things as well as the captains. And because you shall
not think gold and silver to be effectual to this matier, they began and
observed this discipline poverty being Maystres. When they be werye ye ground,
is there bed, they are sattsfiedfied with such meat as they find by chance,
and they measure not their sleep by the length of the night. Think you the
horsemen of Thessaly, the Alcharnans, and Etolians which be invincible men of
war, will be repulsed with ^lynges or staves hardened in the fire. It behooves
you to have a like force to repulce the^, and to be served of the same kind of
men. Mi counsel is therefore that you se^d this gold and silver to wage
soldiers out of those countries from whence they come. Darius was a man of a
meke and tractable dysposicion, if the heighte of his estate had not altered
the goodness of his nature: which made him so vnpatyent to here the truth, that
he commanded Charydemus to be put straight ways to death: being a man that
was fled to his proteccion, and that gave him right profitable counsel. When he
was going toward his death he left not his liberty to speak, but said:
there is one at hand that shall revenge my death. For he against whom I have
given the counsel, shall punyshe the for not folowinge of the same. And thou
being thus altered with the liberty thou haste being a King, shall be an
ensample to such as shall come after that when they commit their doings to
fortune they clearly forget the^ selves. whiles Charidemus was speaking these
words, they which had the charge committed unto them put him to death. whereof
afterward the King took over late repentance, for he confessed that he had
spoken the truth. and caused him to be buried. Thymones
There was one Thymones the son of Menter a yo^g man of great actiuite, to
who^ Darius gave the charge of all the soldiers strangers, in whom he had
great confidence and willed him to receive the^ at Pharnabasus hands. And gave
to Pharnabasus yt rule ye Meno^ had before. Thus Darius being careful of the
business he had in hand, whither it were through pensiuenes of mind, or yt his
fancy did divine things to come was continually troubled with visio^s in his
sleep. D^riue dream.
He dreamed yt ye Macedo^s ca^pe was al on fire. And shortly after yt seemed to
him that Alexander was brought to his presence in such kid of appariel as he
him self did were, when he was first chosen King, and that Alexander should
there be carried on horseback through Babilo^, and so to vanishe out of sight.
Hereupon thinterpretors of dreams with the diversity of their deuininge, did
drive Darius into diverse ymaginacions. Some said his dream betokened good
fortune to him self because of ye fire that seemed to be in his enemies camp
and for that Alexander with out any vesture of a King aperid in the vulgar
apariel of ye Parcians. Other did enterprete it otherwise: that the lighteni^g
in yt Macedons camp signified glory and victory to Alexander, and also then
ioyment of ye empire of Asia. which they made a clear matter for as much as
Alexander apered in the same vestures that Darius ware when he was chosen King.
Care besides and trouble of mind (as it often chaunseth) brought things by
paste again to remembrance. It was rehearsed how Darius in ye beginning of his
reign changed ye scabard of his sword from the Percian manner into the
faschion that the Greeks used. Whereupon yt Caldees did prenosticat yt the
Kingdom of Perce should be translated to those, whose faschion he had
counterfaited. Notwithstanding through the confidence of such prophecies as
were commonly seen abroad, and of of the vision, that he seamed to have seen in
his sleep became very merry, and commanded his Army to march forwards to the
river of Euphrates. It was the ancient custom amongeste the Percia^s, at the
son risinge to raise their camp and warnyng of their setting forewardes to
be given by the blaste of a Trompet sowned at the kings paullion upon the
which there stood an Image of the son enclosed in crystal shininge so
bright, that it might be seen throught out ye camp. The order of the percians
in their merchins.
The order of their march was in this manner. The fire which they call holy and
eternal was carried before upon silver aultars, and the priests of their law
went next synginge after their country manner. There followed.ccc.lxv. young men
in scarlet robes. like in nombre unto ye days of the year. Then came the
chariots that was consecrate to Jupiter drawn with white palfreis, a great
horse folowinge which they call yt horse of yt son. Such as did ride upon the
palfreys did wear white garments, and had rods of gold in their hands,
next in order came ten chariots garnished and wrought with silver and gold. The
horsemen of twelve nations followed next in sundry sort of Armoure. The^ came a
company that the Percians call immortal the riches of whose apparel. exceded
far ye rest they had al cheines of gold, coats embrodered with gold, and
sleues set with Perle. there followed with in a small distans a band of xv.
thousand called Doriphere reputed for the King kinsmen, which were disguised in
manner like women, more notable for their gallentnes and variety of apariel
the^ for the armor they did wear. Such as were wont to receive the kings
robes at his hands did ride next before the chariot upon yt which Darius did
sit on high with great pomp and magnificens his chariot was set on both sides
with carved Images of their gods both of silver and gold. and all the former
part was adorned with perles and precious stones having two Images of gold
their standing of a cubyte length combattant on against the other and over
their heads an Egle of gold displayed. But amongeste all the rest the Kings
apparel showed marvelous sumptuouse, which was of purple empaled whit, with a
border embroidred of gold faucons fighting togithers. He was gird effemynately
with a gerdle of gold, and the sword that hung thereupon had the scabard made
of a perle. The diadeame the King were upon his head called by the Percyans
Cydarys had a ^oule about yt of white and grene. Next behind the King came.x.
thousand, horsemen, which had all their spears plated with silver and their
spears heads gilded. He was enclosed on both sides with.cc of ye blood royal,
at whose backs there followed.xxx.M fotemen, Sisigambis darius mother.
and after them.cccc. of the Kings coursers: within the distance of one
furlonge Sisigambis the mother of Darius was carried in a Wagone and his wief in
an other, yt train of their women ridinge on horsback. Next them went.xv.
wagons, wherein the kings children were carried, their nurces and Enuches, which
are greatly esteemed in ye nation. And after them followed.ccc..lx. of the Kings
concubines al aparelled like Queen's. Then came.vi.c. mules and.ccc. Camels that
carried the Kings treasure which were guarded with a band of Archers. the wives
of the Kings kinsmen and the other that were about the King came ridinge next.
and after them a great company of slaves and verlets. Last came their reward,
lightly armed, of whom every captain seueraly with his own company closed in
ye army. Such was ye order of Darius host on the other side beholding
Alexanders Army, Alexanders Army.
there was to be seen agreat dyfference, niether the men nor the horse were set
forth with such gold nor precious furnymentes glistering only with the
brightness of their harnes, but they were obedient at their captains beck,
always in redines to stay or to pass forwards, nether combred with over
great multitude. nor pestered with to much bagage. They wanted not in any
place either ground for their enca^ping or victualles for their feding whereby
their small nombre was always sufficient when they came to fight. Where as
Darius the lord of so huge a multitude. through the streightnes of the ground.
wherein he was driven to give battaille could work theffect but of a small
nombre, which he before had despised in his enemy. Alexander appointed
Abistamines the rule of Capadocia, and marching with his army toward Calicia,
came to the place that was called Cyrus Camp, because he lodged there when he
passed into Licia against king Creasus. This place was distant aboutes.50.
forlonges from the straight, whereby he must enter Cilicia. The enhabyters use
to call those streightes Pyloe, where as the natural scituacion of the place had
made a fortification as it were made with man's hands, Arsanes.
When Arsanes governor of Cilicia understood of Alexanders coming. remembryng
what opinion Menon was of in the beginning of the wars, put in execution his
wise counsel, thought it were over late, wastyng and destroyeng through out
Cilicia, all such things as he thought might stand his enemy instead,
leuyng the country waste, which he thought he was not able to defend: where
as it had been much better to have prevented his enemy in the streightes,
where from the hills lyeng over the way he might without hasard either have
let his entrey. or else have distressed him in his passing. But he leuieng a
small nombre for the defense of the straight, retired him self back to waste
the country, which his part had been to defend from destruction. Of his
departure it came to pass that those which he left behynd, thynking them
selves betrayed, would not so much as abide the fight of their enemies, when a
much less no^bre had been sufficient to have kept the passage. The
destruction o^ Cilicia.
For the scituacio^ of Cilicia is such that it is environed round about with a
continual rough and stead Mountain which rising from the sea on the one
side, and fetchyng a compass about, joins again with the sea, on the other
side. Through that part of this Mountain which lies furdest from the Sea,
being three narowe and rough passages, by one of the which they must enter that
will pass into Cilicia. This country toward the Sea is plain and full of
Rivers, among which two be notable Pyramus and Cydnus, Pyramus, Cydnus.
but Cydnus most special, not so much for his greatness, as for the clerenes
of his water, which from his first spryng ronneth plesauntly through all the
Country, and has no other River runnyng into him to disturb the pureness of
his stream. For which cause it remains always clear* and also coold by
reason of the woods that do shadow all the banckes. Time has consumed many
antiquities within that country, which be remembered of the Poeres. There may
yet be seen the foundacions of the Cities of Lyrnessus, Lyrnessus, Cebestus.
Coricius.
and Cebestus with the cave and wood of Coricius where saffron grows with
many other things whereof nothing remains saving only the same. When
Alexander entered the straytes that before be mentioned, and beheld the
scituacion of them, he never in all his life marueiled more of his own
felicity and good fortune, confessyng that it had not been possible for him to
have passed, if any had stand at defense against him. for that with stones only
he might have been destressed, and the strayte besides was so narrow, that
there could not pass above four in a front. To thencrease of which
difficulty the tops of the Mountains hong over the ways, which in many
places were broken and made hollow with the streams that ran down from the
hills. Alexander sent the Thracians that were light armed to scower and
discover the ways, for fear the enemies should lie there in busshement, and
suddenly break forth upon him: He appoyncted also a ba^d of Archers to take
the top of the hyl, which were willed so to march, that they might be
always in a redines to fight. After this manner he came with his army to the
City of Tarson, Tarson.
which was set on fire by the Percions, because that Alexander should find no
herborow there. But Parmeno was sent thither with a choice number of horsemen
to quench the fire, who understanding that the enemies were fled away through
his coming, entered into the City and by that means saved it from burning.
The River of Cydnus spoken of before, did run through this City, where the
king arrived about mydday, it being in the Summer season, what time the heat
is no where more fervent then in that country. He took such delyght in the
pleasauntnes of the water, that he would needs bathe his body, to wash away
the sweat and dust he had caught: and being in an heat entered naked into the
water in every man's sight, thynckyng it should be a contentacion to his
soldiers to se that the furneme^tes about his body was no other but such as
they commonly used to wear. Alexander by bathing in a River became in great
peril of his life.
He was not so sone entered but all the parts of his body began to shake and
tremble, his face waxed pale, and the lively heat was mortified in all parts
of his body: His servants took him up and carried him into his tent, as one
besides him self, and at the poinct of death. Then there was a great desolacion
and heuines in the camp, they wept, lamented, and bewailed, that such a
King, so noble a Captain as had not been seen in any age, should thus be
taken from them in the chief of his enterprise and brunte of all his business,
and that after such a manner, not in battle slain by his enemies, but thus
cast away bathing in a river. It grieved them that Darius now being at hand
should obtein the victory by such a chance, without seeing of his enemy, and
that they should be enforced to return back again as men vanquysshed by
those Countries, through the which they had passed before as victorers. In
which countries all things being destroyed by themselves or by their enemies,
it was of necessity for them to dye for hunger, though no man should pursue
them. It became a question among them selves who should be their Captain in
their flyeng away? or what he were that durst succeed Alexander? And though
they might saufely arrive at ye Sea of Hellespont, yet who should prepare them
passage there. And when they had disputed these questions, their argument by
and by was turned in compassion toward their Prince, lamentyng as me^ out of
their wits, that such a flower of yought such a force of courage as was in
him, that the same their king and companion in arms should after this sort be
taken from them. In the mean season Alexander began to draw his breath
somewhat better, and when he came unto himself, he lifted up his eyes and began
to know his friends that were about him, the vehemens of his sickness somewhat
assuaging, which was perceived in that he began to understand the peril he
was in. But the pensiuenes of his mind was great hinderaunce unto his health,
for tidinges came that Darius within five days would be in Cilicia, which was
the thing that made him to sorrow and lament. He could not take it but
grievously, that such a victory should be plucked out of his hands through his
infirmity. And that he should be taken as one tied in bonds, and be put to
some shameful and vile death. He called therefore to him both his friends and
Phisicio^s, and said unto them: ye see in what state of my business fortune has
taken me. The words of Alexander to his friends in his sickness
Me thyncke the noise of mine enemies do ringe in mine ears, and I which
moved first the war, am now challenged and provoked to fight. When Darius did
writ to me such proud letters, he was not ignorant of mine estate, yet
peradventure he shall be deceived if I may use mine own mind in recovery of mine
own health. My case requires no slack medicines, nor slow Phisicions. I had
rather dye sloutly at ones, then to consume long time in my recovery. Wherefore
if there be any hope or connyng in physic let it be showed. And think that
I seek not remedy so much for mine own life, as I do for the care I have to
encountre with mine enemies. When they hard him speak those words, they were
in great doubt of his sodein rashness, and therefore every one required him
apart, that he would not increase his peril through any haste, but suffer
himself to be ordered by thaduise of his Phisicio^s. For they alleged that
unproven remedies were not suspected of them without cause, seeing his enemy had
gone about to corrupt such as were about him, by promising a.M. talentes to
his killer. Which cause alleged, they thought no man would be so bold to make
any experiment of physic upon him, which for the want of trial thereof, might
in any wise give cause of suspection. There was amongst the excellent
phisicions that came with Alexander out of Macedon one Philip of Acaxnon which
was preferred to him for preseruacion of his health, Philip Alexanders
physician.
and had faithfully served him from his childhode, and therefore loved him with
entire affection. He promised to provide for the King an approved remedy, but
such one as would work sore upon him, by the drinkyng whereof he doubted not
(he said) but to expulse the force of his disease: That promise pleased no man,
but only him which in the proof thereof should abide the peril: For he could
abide all things better then delay. Darius and his power was always in his
eye, and he had assured confidence that ye victory should fall on his side, if
he might be able but to stand in the sight of his me^. The thing that only
grieved him, was that the Phisicio^ would not minister unto him before the third
day. In the mean season Parmenio, whom of all his nobility he trusted most,
had exhorted him by his letter, that he should not commit himself to the cure
of Philip, for that he was corrupted by Darius with a thousand talentes, and
the promis of his sister in marriage. Those letters brought the king in great
care and doubt, and moved him to way and pondre secretly with himself all those
things, that fear or hope could put in his hedde, of the one side or the other.
Shall I adventure (thought he) to drink this medicine? Alexanders Imaginacio^
what if it be poison? shall I not then be accou^pted the cause of mine own
death? shall I suspecte the fidelity of my Physicion? or shall I suffer mine
enemy to kill me in my bed? yet were it better to peryshe by other men's
treason, then thus to dye through mine own faint heart. His mind being thus
diuersely wrought, he would show the contents of the letter to no man, but
sealed it with his own ring, and laid it underneath his pillowe. Two days
nere passed on in these Imaginacions, and the third day the Physician came to
his beds side with the medicine ready made. When the king saw him he raised
up himself upon his elbowe, and taking the letter in his left hand, with the
other hand took the cup, and straight supped it of. When he had so done he
delivered the letter to Philip to read, and whiles he was readyng he beheld
him continually in the face supposing that if he had been faulty, some token
would have apeared in his countenance. When Philip had read the letter he
showed more tokens of displesauntnes then of fear, and there withal fell
down upon his knees, and said: Sir I se my life does depend upon your health.
But your recovery shall declare that I am falsely charged with this treason:
But when that by my means you shall get your health; I trust ye will not deny
me then my life. In the mean season lay fear aside, and suffer the medicine
to work, and to have his operacion. Keep your self quiet, and suffer not your
self to be troubled with the supersticious carefulnes of your fre^des, which
though it proceeds of good will, is yet much impediment unto your health. His
words not only satisfied the king, but made him to conceive perfect hope to be
hole, and said unto Philip: If the gods would have granted yt to devise a
mean to prove ye co^fide^ce I have in the, and the good will toward the you
could not have chosen any so good as this is: for notwithstanding ye lfe, I
dra^ke of ye medicine, believing yt to be no less careful for declaracio^ of
thine own truth, the^ for my heth, and therewith gave him his hand: yet
afterward when the medicine began to work it was such in operacio^, yt it
seemed to verefie Parmenios accuseme^t: for he faited often and had much labor
to draw his breath. Then Philip left nothing unproven or undone that might
serve for his purpose. He laid warm clothes to his body, and always as he
fainted revived him again with the savor of one thing and other. And when he
perceived him once to come to him self, he ceased not to feed him with talk,
and one while put him in remembrance of his mother and his susters, and an
other while of the great victory that was at hand. Alexanders recoueryng.
When the power of medicine was once entered into his veins, there apeared
straight in all parts of his body manifest tokens of healt. First quicknes
came to the spirits, and after the body recovered his strength a great deal
sooner then any man looked for he should. For the third day after he had been in
this case, he walked in ye sight of his soldiers, which wonderfully reioysed
to see him. And they showed no less affeccion unto Philip, whom every one
severally embraced and gave him thanks, as unto God. It cannot be expressed
besides the natural veneracio^ the Macedons use to bear unto their prince, in
what reverence they especially had Alexander, and how fervently they loved him.
They had conceived of him an opinion that he could enterprise nothing but that
it was furthered by God, and fortune was so favorable unto him that his
rashenes was always increase of his glory. His age besides scarcely ripe, and
yet sufficient for so great things, did marvelously set forth all his
doings. And things which out of the wars should be counted lightness, are
wo^t to be most acceptable to the soldiers, as thexercising of his body
among the^, his apparel not differing from the common sort, with his courage
and forwardnes in the field: which gifts given him of nature, and things
done of policy did get him both love and reverence of his people. When Darius
hard of Alexanders sickness, he marched toward the river of Euphrates with
all the haste he could make in conueying of so co^brouse an army. He made there
a bridge and in.v. days passed over his people, having great desire to get
Cilicia before his enemy. By that time Alexander had recovered his strength,
and was come to a City called Solos, Solos.
which the inhabitauntes yielded unto him, and for two hundred talentes
obtained assurance. Notwithstanding he put a garrison in the Castle, and there
celebrated plays, and triumphs which he had vowed to Aesculapius, and
Minerua for the recovery of his health: Where being given so quietly to his
pastime, showed how little he esteemed the coming of his enemies. Whiles
Alexander was busied about these things, he received plesaunt news, how his
men had won a battaille of the Percians at Halicarnassus, and that the
Myndians, and Cawnians, Myndians. Cawnians.
with diverse other nations in those parts were brought under his obedience.
This triumph ones ended he removed, and by a bridge made over the river of
Piramus, he came to the City of Malon: Malon. Castabulon.
and from thence with an other remove, came to a town called Castabulon. There
Parmenio returned to the king which had been sent to search the strayte that
lay between them and the City of Isson. He had prevented the Percians at the
passage, and so leuyng men for the defense thereof, took the City of Isson that
was left desolate: Isson.
he departed from thence and did drive the Percia^s out of the mountains, and
serched all the ways. So that having made all things clear for tharmy to
pass, he returned again both the aucthour of the act, and the reporter of the
thing done. Alexander encamped within the City, and debated there in cou^sail,
whether it were better to pass on further, or else to tarry there for a more
power which was coming to him out of Macedon: Parmenios opinion.
Parmenio was of opinion that this place was most metest to abide Darius in,
and give him battaille, where both tharmies should be of like force by reason
of ye straytes, wherein no great multitude could fight at once: He showed
reasons why they ought to eschew the plains, wherein their enemies shoud have
great auantage through their great no^bre that might enclose the^ about. Wherein
(he said) he doubted not his enemies stoutnes, but only feared that their own
men might be ouerco^me with werenes, where a multitude should fight with a
few, and fresh men succeed in the place of them that fainted. This counsel
was received for good, and Alexander determined in yt place to abide his
enemies. There was in the host of ye Macedons one Sysenes a person sent before
time from the governor of Egypt unto king Philip: Sysenes.
who being advanced with reward and promocio^s choice to live out of his own
con^trey, and so following Alexander into Asia, was esteemed among those that the
king trusted well: A soldier of Create delivered him a letter from Nabazzanes,
Darius Lieutenaunt, wherein he exhorted him to do some notable enterprise,
whereby he might win favor and reputacio^ with Darius. Sysenes innocent of
this matter was about diverse times to present the letter to the king, but seeing
him occupied with weyghty affairs of provision for the battaille, prolonged the
matter. And whiles he waited for a more convenient time he brought himself in
suspicio^ of treason, for the letter was brought to the kings hands before it
was delivered unto him: who readyng it, did seal ye same with a strong seal,
and caused it to be delivered to Sysenes, to prove thereby his fidelite, but
because he counsealed the thing many days and opened not the matter to the
king it seemed that he consented thereunto: And therefore by the kings
commandment he was put to death by the band of ye Crete^sians: The Greek
soldiers which Tymodes had received of Pharnabasus, being those that Darius
trusted most, were come unto him. The greeks ad^ise.
They persuaded much Darius to retire back into the playnes of Mesopotania,
and if he would not do so, that at the least he should divide his power, and
not commyt the hole force of his estate, to one stroke of fortune. This
counsel was not so displesaunt unto the King, as it was to such that were
about him: For they said, mercinary soldiers were always full of treason,
and were to be doubted the more for that they counsayled the Army to be
divided, which was for no other purpose but only that they might have
commodity to flee unto Alexander, when they should have any charge committed
unto them. There is nothing therefore more sure for us (quod they) then to
enclose them round about with our army and to cut them in pieces, to be an
ensample to the world that treason should never be unrevenged. But Darius
which was of a meke and good disposicion, Darius clemency.
refused to commit so cruel an act in sleyng such as had betaken themselves
to his trust: Darmes answer unto his counsel
For if we should fyle our hands (quod he) with their blood, what strange
nation would ever then commit them selves into our hands? alledgyng that
there ought no man to lose his life for geuyng folyshe counsayll. For who would
be bold to give Counsaylle, if in counsayllyng there should be any peril? For
I call you (quod he) to counsel daily, and hear the diversity of your
opinions, and yet mistruste not the^ that give me not always the best
counsel. He caused the Greeks to be answered, that he gave them thanks for
their good will. But in retourning back (he said) he should give up him his
country into his enemies hands, which were not convenient. And considering
ye force yt fame is of in the war, in going back he should appear to flee.
But to defer the fight he thought it worste of al, seeing so great an army as
he had (the winter the^ approaching) could not be victailed in a desolate
country, that had been wasted both by them selves and by their ennemies. And
for the dividing of his power, he showed that he could not do it, observing the
customs of his predecessors, which were not wont to hasard ye battaille, but
with their hole power. He declared yt Alexander before his coming seemed terrible
to the world, and through his absence was brought in a vain presumption. But
after he saw him come, became ware and well advised, hiding him in the straytes
of the mountains, like those coward beasts, that hearing the noise of co^mers
by, do hide them selves in the de^s of the woddes. He has blinded his
soldiers ( quoth he) with his cou^terfeit sickness, but now I will not suffer him
to prolo^ge the fight any longer, which if he will refuse, I will oppress him
in his lurkyng hole. These words he spoke with greater auaunte. then truth.
And sent his treasure and Iuelles with a small conuoye to Damasco in Syria,
and entered with his Army into Cilicia, bryngyng with him according to his
Country manner, both his mother, his wife, his little son, and his daughters.
It chaunsed the same night that Alexander was come to the strayte entryng into
Siria. Darius came unto ye place which they call Pylae Ama^icae. Pylae Amanicae
The Percia^s not doubti^g at al, but that the Macedo^s would have forsaken the
City of Isson, and fled away for fear, for certain of the^ that were weke
and could not follow were taken, the which Darius through instigacion of the
great men about him, raging in barbarouse cruelty, caused their hands to be
cut of, and to be lead about his camp, to the intent they might behold the
multitude of his men, whom after sufficient vow taken, he let go to show
Alexander what they had seen. Darius removed and passed the river of Piramus of
purpose to pursue after the Macedons, which he thought had been fleing away.
They which had their hands cut of, came runnyng in among the Macedons,
declaryng that Darius was coming in great haste. There was scarsely any
credens given to their words, but to be sure Alexander sent spies toward the
Sea coaste, to know whether Darius were there in person, or else had sent some
other to make a show of a power. The Spies retournyng did report that his
hole army was at hand, and straight ways the fierce might be seen, which gave
such a show (by reason they lay straglyng so far abroad to get forage) as
though the hole Country had been on fire. When Alexander was assertayned of
the truth, he encamped in the same place where the tidings came unto him,
being marvelous glad that he knew he should fight, specially in the
streyghtes which was the thing that he had always desired. But as it is
commonly seen when danger and extremity is at hand, confidens is converted
into fear. Alexanders Imaginacio^ before the battaille.
So he doubted not without great cause, that fortune might charge upon him, by
whose favor he had done so great acts, and considered her mutabilitie by such
things as she had taken from other and given to him, he saw there was no
prorogracio^ of the time, but that after one night passed the victory should be
determined. But on ye other side, he called unto remembrance how the reward
ensuing of the victory, far exceded the adventure. For as the same was
dowbtfull, so being disconfited, he was certain to dye with honor and
perpetual praise. When he had waied these things, he gave order that the
soldiers should refresshe them selves, and at the third watch to be armed
and in a redines to set forwards. He himself went up into the top of a
mou^tayn with many torches and lights about him, where he made sacrifice unto
the gods after his Country manner. And when the hour was come apoincted unto
the soldiers, at the third sound of the trompet, they ware in a redines both
to march and fight. Then exhortacion was given unto them to pass on with
bold courage, and so by the spryng of the day they were come to the streightes
wherein their purpose was to prevent Darius. By that time such as were sent
before to scowre the country, came in and reported that the Percians were
within.30. furlonges. Then the battayles were stayed and set in such order as
they should fight. Like as Alexander was enfourmed of Darius, so he was
advertised of Alexander by the pesauntes of the country, which came fearfully
runnyng unto him, declaryng that Alexander was at hand. These words were not
believed, for they could not thinck them to be coming, whom they thought before
to be fled. But when they perceived that it was so in deed, because they were
in better order to pursue their enemies then to encou^tre with them in
battle, they were stricken with a marvelous sodeine fear. Every man took him
to his armor in haste, which haste and the calling that one made upon an
other, did put a greater fear among them. Some ran up to the tops of the
hills to view the Macedons, other fell to brydling their horses. So that the
host full of diversity and not ruled by any certain government, with their
hurley burley, put all things out of order. The order that Darius gave for the
battaille.
Darius at the first had apoincted one part of his power to take the mountain.
Which setting upon his enemies backs might enclose them both behind and
before: and assigned an other company to pass along the sea side which was on
the right hand, to keep his enemies doing on every part. He gave order also
that.xx. thousand fotemen with a band of Archers should pass the river of
Pyramus, and give an unset that way. But if they found any impediment why they
might do so, then he willed them to retire among the mountains, and to
invade their enemies on their backs. But fortune which was of greater force
then any policy, determined those things that were well devised according as
she thought good. For some durst not for fear execute the thing that was
commanded them, and then the rest worked in vain, for where the members fail
the hole body is confounded. The order of the Perecians.
The order of Darius army stood thus ara^gid to fight: his power being divided
into two battailles, one marchi^g on the left hand and the other on the right.
Nabarzanes enpaled the battaille on the right hand with a great power of
horsemen, and.xxx. thousand Slingers and Archers. Thymones was also in ye
battaille with.xxx. thousand mercenary Greeks, being in very dead Darius
chiefest force, a power equal unto Phalanx of the Macedons. In the battaille
on the left hand Aristomenes was in the fore front with.xxx.M. fotemen having
planted for his succor and relief such nations as were counted most valiant.
There were about the king being also in that battle three thousand choice
horsemen that were of the ordinary guard of his person, and.xl. thousand
footmen with the horsemen of Hircany and Medya, and the horsemen of other
nations were wings on both sides. And besides these nombres there went before
this battaille in a forlorn heap.vi. thousand Slingers and casters of Darts.
All the plain ground between the streightes was filled with men of war* and
Darius battaille stood araunged from the mountain down to the Sea side. The
mother and wife of Darius with all the flocks of women were received into the
mids of the battaille. The order of the Macedons.
Alexander on the other side set his square battaille of footmen called
Phalanx (being the Macedons chiefest force) in the fore front. Mycanor the
son Parmenio was captain of the battaylle on the right hand, and with him
Cenos and Perdicas Meleager, Tolomeus, and Amyntas were joined every one with
his own band. Parmenio and Caterus had the rule of the battaille on the left
hand, which stretched toward the Sea, but Parmenio had the chief charge.
Horsemen were set in wings to both those battailles. The Macedo^ and Tessalien
horsemen being apoyncted to the rygth hand battaille, and the horsemen of
Peleponese to the battle on the other side, before which battaylle there
were also set Slingers with Archers among them, and the Cretences that were
lyghtely armed, went before the main battaille. The band of Agrians that were
lately come out of Greece, were assigned to encou^tre with those yt Darius had
sent to take ye top of ye mountain. He willed Parmenio yt as much as he
might he should stretch out his ba^d toward ye sea, to wtdrawe as far as he
could from the hills, which the enemies had taken. But such as had direction
by Darius to take the hills neither durst resist such as came against the^,
nor yet to compass those about that were passed by the^, but fled away at the
first sight of the Slingers. Which thing chaunsed well for Alexander, for it was
the thing that he doubted most, that they from the higher ground should invade
the open side of his battaille, which lay vnflancked toward them. The
Macedons marched xxxii. in a ra^ke, for the streightnes of the ground would not
suffer them to go any brother, but by little and little as the plain between
the mountaygnes began to enlarge, so they had liberty both to make their
battailles brother, and also for the horsemen to march upon the sides. When
both the battles were come within sight togethers, the Percians first gave a
terrible and rude shoute, which was again doubled of the Macedons, not with
their nombre which were far inferior unto the Percians, but with the
rebounde of the hills and the rocks, which doubled every voice of theirs.
Alexander did ride up and down before the frontes of his battailles, making a
sign to his soldiers with his hand, that they should not make ouermuche
haste to join with their enemies, for bringing themselves out of breath. And
as he passed by, The exhortacions that Alexander gave unto his soldiers.
he used to every nacio^ sundry exhortacions, as he thought mete for their
disposicions and quality. He put the Macedons in remembrance of their old
prowes and ma^hode with the no^bre of battailles that they had won in Europe,
how that they were come hither as well by their own desires as by his conducte,
to subdue Asia and the vttermoste bonds of the Orient. He showed them to be
the people that were ordained to conquer the world. and to pass the bounds
both of Hercules, and Bachus. He declared that both Bactria and Inde should be
theirs, in respect of which the countries that they had seen were but trifles,
and yet were to be gotten all with one victory, wherein he said their travail
should not be in vain, as it was in the baraine rocks of Illiria, or in the
mountains of Thrace, but that in this conquest the spoil of the hole Orient
was offered unto them. For the getting whereof they should scarsely need to
occupy their words, since the battailles of their enemies wauered so already
for fear, that with their approach only they should put the^ to flight. He
reduced his father Philip unto their memory how he conquered the Athenia^s with
the country of Boetia, where he rased to the ground the noble city of Thebes.
After that he made rehersall of the battle won at the river of the Granik,
and of all the Cities that he had taken, or that had been youlden unto him,
with the countries they had passed through and subdued. When he came unto the
Greeks, he desired them to call to mind the great wars that had been made
against their country in times past by the Percians. First by the pride of the
Xerxes and after by Darius who made destruction both by water and land in such
sort that the rivers could not serve them of drink, nor the earth of
victualles for to eat: rehersyng also how the Temples of their Gods had
been by them poluted, and put to ruen, their Cities overthrown, and the truces
and promyses by them violated and broken that were confirmed both by divine and
humanie laws. When he was passed by the Illirians and Thracians which were
accustomed always to live upon theft, and spoil: he had them behold their
enemies which glistered with gold, and bare no armor, but spoil fro them and
take. He encouraged them to go forwards like men, and pluck the pray from
those effeminat women, and to make exchange of their kraggie rocks and bare
hills always full of snow, for the plentiful grounds and rich lands of
Perce. The battal betwixt Darius and Alexander.
By the time he had made these exhortacions they were come within throw of
their darts. And Darius horsemen gave a fierce charge upon the right hand
battaille of the Macedo^s. For Darius desire was to try. ye battaille by
horsemen judging (as it was indede) that ye chiefest power of his enemies
consisted in their square battaille of foteme^. So that ye battaille where
Alexander was, was brought to the point of enclosing about, if he had not
perceived ye same in time. who commanded two tropes of his horsemen to keep
the top of the hill, and brought all the rest to the encounter of his enemies.
Then he co^ueied the Tessalians horsemen from the place where they stood to
fight, willing their captain to bring the^ about behind the battailles, and
there joining with Parmenio to do the thing manfully yt he should appoinct
the^. By this the Phalanx of the Macedo^s in manner enclosed about with their
enemies, fought notably on all parts, but they stood so thick, and so were
joined one to an other, that there wa^ted scope to welde their darts. They
were so mi^gled together, yt in casti^g one let another: very few lighted
upon ye enemies with weak dintes, and the most part fell on ye ground without
harm doing, wherefore being enforced to join hand for hand, they valiau^tly
used the sword. Then there was great effusio^ of blood, for both tharmies
closed so nere that their harnes classhed together, wepo^ against wepo^ and
foyned one at an others face with their swords. There was no place for ye
fearful or ye coward for to fle back, but each set his foot to other, and by
fighting kept still their place, til they could make their way by force, and so
always passed forwards, as they could overthrow their enemies, being weried
and travailed thus with fightyng, they were ever received with fresh enemies:
and such as were wounded might not part out of the battaille (as it has been
seen else where) their enemies assailed them so fierssy before, and their
fellows thrust on so hard behind. Alexander did that day not only such
things as pertained to a Captain, but adventured himself as far as any
private soldier, couetyng by all means to kill Darius which he esteemed the
greatest honor. Darius did ride alofte upon his chariot giving great
provocation both to his enemies to assail him, Oxatres Darius brother.
and for his own men to defend him. As Oxatres his brother apeared most
notable among them all in his furniture and personage, so in hardines and
affection toward the king he exceaded far the rest, specially in that case
of necessity. For when he saw Alexander aproche so nere, he thruste in before
Darius with the band of horsemen whereof he had the charge, where as
overthrowing diverse, he put many to flight. But the Macedones swarmed so about
the king and were in such a courage by thexhortacio^ that each made to other,
that they charged again upon that band of horsemen. Then apeared the slaughter
like an overthrow. About the Chair of Darius lay the most noble of his
Captains, all dyeng honorably before the eyes of their king, with their faces
to the ground like as they fell, received their death wou^des without turnyng
their backs: Among whom Aticies, Romythres, and Sabaces governor of Egypt,
that had the charge of great nombres of men, were overthrown and slain, and
about them there lay by heaps a huyge nombre of the vulgar sort, both of
horsemen and fotemen. Of the Macedons also some were slain of such as pressed
most foreward, among whom the right shoulder of Darius was somewhat hurt
with a sword. In this thronge the horses that drue Darius Chariot, were
thruste in with pykes, which being wood for pain of their wounds, began to
stroggle and overthrow their master Darius. He fearyng therefore to be taken a
live, leaped down and was set upon a led horse, and so fled away castyng
from his head his diadem because he would not be known. Darius overthrown.
Then all his men for fear disparkled, flyeng by such ways as were open for
them, and throw away their armoure which before they had taken for their
defense. Such a thing is fear, that refuses the thing that should be his
sauegarde. When Parmenio saw them flee, he straight commanded the horsemen to
pursue them in the chase, and put all his enemies to flight that were on that
part. But on the other hand the Percians did put the Tessaliens horsemen to a
sore stresse, for at the first shock they had broken one of their tropes: yet
for all that when the Tessalians saw their enemies pass through them, they
closed themselves together again and charged upon the Percians, who by reason
of their onsetgeuing and for that they though themselves sure of the victory,
became clean out of order, and were overthrown with great slaughter. The
Tessalians had herein a great advantage by reason that the Percia^s besides
that they be armed themselves have their horses also barbed with plates of
stele, which was the cause that they could not, either in the unset, or retire
be so quick as yt Tessalia^s were: for by their celeritie wherein the feate of
horsemen chiefly consiste, they had overthrown many of them before they could
turn their horses about. When Alexander understood that his me^ prevailed of
their enemies on that part likewise, was bold then to follow in the chase,
which he durst not do before he knew the battle to be clearly wo^ne and
thennemies repulsed on all sides. Alexander had not about him above a.M.
horsemen, with who^ he slew innumerable of his enemies. For who is he that in
an overthrow or a chase can no^bre men? Those few Macedo^s did drive the
multitude of their enemies before the^ like sheep. and the same fear that
caused the^ flee, stayed the^ likewise in their flieng. The Grecians that were
on Darius side, under their capitain Amyntas which so^time had been in great
authority with Alexander, Amyntas.
but then against him, brake out from the rest and marched away in order of
battaill. All the rest fled diverse ways, some directly toward Perce, and
some by paths, and privy ways escaped by the mountains and the woods. A few
there where that recovered their former ca^pe, which they could not defend any
time against the Macedons that were victours, but the same immediately was won
being habunda^t of all riches of gold and silver with appertaining not only to
the wars but to all voluptuousnes and excess: which riches whiles the
soldiers violently spoiled, they strowed the ways full of packes and fardels,
which they would not touch in respect of ye covetous desire they had to
things of greater value. But when they came unto the women as their tirementes
were most precious, the more violently they plucked the^ away and their bodies
were not fre from their lust and enforcement. The camp every where was full of
tumulte and lamentacio^, as chance fell to each one. The liberty of ye
victours was such, that their cruelty raged upon all ages and kind of
creatures, and no kind of mischief wa^ted among the^. There might have been
seen the variablenes of fortune, when they which had prepared Darius pauilion
with all kind of delicacie and rich furniture reserved and kept the same for
Alexand as for their old master, for the Macedons had left that vnspoiled
according to their ancient custom which are ever wo^t to receive their king
when he is victorious, into the kings pauilion that he has vanquished. Dariu^
mother his w^fe and his children taken prisoners
The mother and wife of Darius that where there taken prisoners moved all men
to cast their eyes and inward conte^placion toward the^, whereof the one
deserved to be reverenced for the manner that was in her, and for her years and
the other for thexele^cy of her beuty, which through her misaduentur was
nothing stained. She was seen embrasing her littell son in her arms not yet
of the age of.vi. years, borne as inheritour to the dominion which his father
newly had lost. There lay also two young virgins in their gra^dmothers lap,
yeuen then mariable, which languyshed and lamented not so much through their
own private sorrow, as for ye dolorousnes of thould woman. About the mother and
the wife were a great nombre of noble women that pulled their hear, and tare
their clothes without respect what apperteined to their estate. Who unmindful
of the fall Darius wife and his mother were come unto* called them by the name
of Queen's, with such other titles of honor as they did before. They all had
forgot their own misery and were dilligent to enquire ye fortune of the field,
and what success ye battle had that Darius was in. For if he were alive (they
said) they could in no wise think themselves prisoners: But he by the
changing of many horses was by that time fled far away. There were slain of
the Percians a hundred thousand footmen, and.x.M. The no^bre of the^ that were
slain
horsemen. And of Alexanders company only v.C.iiii. hurt, and.xxxii. foteme^
and.Cl. horsemen killed: So great a victory was gotten with so small a loss.
Alexander that was weried with pursuyng of Darius, when he perceived the night
to draw on. and that there was no hope to overtake him whom he followed,
returned into the Percians camp which a little before his coming was taken
by his men, that night he made a banquet to such as he accustomed to call for
the hurt of his shoulder, whereof the skin was but smaly perished, let him
not to keep company. As they sat at meat suddenly they heard a piteful cry
with a strange howling and lamentacion, that put them all in great fear:
Insomuche that the band that kept the watch about ye kings pauilion, fearing
it to be the beginning of some greater matter began to arm themselves. The
wife and mother of Darius with the other noble women that were taken prisoners,
were the cause of this sudden fear by lamenting of Darius, who^ they supposed
had been slain. Which opinion they conceived through one of the Enuches,
which standing before their tent door saw a soldier carry a parcel of Darius
diadem, which he a little before had cast from his head. When Alexander
understood their error wept (as it was said) to consider Darius mysfortune,
and the women's affection toward him. And for their comfort sent to them one
Mythrenes that betrayed Sardes who was expecte in the Percian tongue, ^ythrenes
but yet considering that the sight of him being a traitor should but increase
their sorrow. sent a noble man called Leonatus to declare to the^ how they were
deceived, Leonatus.
and that Darius was a live. He came toward the tent where the women were,
with certain men in harnes, and sent word before that he was come thither from
the king, but when such as stood at the tent door saw armed men coming,
supposing their errand had been to murder their mestresses, ran into them and
cried out that their last hour was come, for the men were at hand that were
sent to kill the^. The servants therefore yt neither durst let Leonatus in,
nor keep him out, brought him no answer, but remained quietly to se what he
would do. When Leonatus had long tarried at the door and saw none came fourth
to call him in, left ^is men without and entered among the women. Whose
^omming unto them before he was admitted, was the thing that feared the^ most
of al. The mother therefore and wife of Darius fell down at his fete, requiring
him that before they were slain, he would suffer the^ to bury Darius after his
country manner* which last obser^aunce performed they were content (they
said) gladly ^o suffer death. Leonatus assured them that both Darius was alive,
and that there was no harm toward them but should remain in the same estate
they were in before. When Siliga^bis heard those words, she was content to be
lift up from the ground, and to receive some comfort. The next day Alexander
with great diligence buried the bodies of such of his own men as could be
found and willed the same to be done to the noble me^ of the Percians. giving
license to Darius mother to bury so many as she list, after ye custume of her
country, which thing she performed to a few that were next of her kynne*
according to the ability of her present fortune, for if she should have used
the Percians po^pe therein, ye Macedons might have envied it, which being
victours used no great curiosity in the matter. When ye due was performed to
the dead, Alexander signified to ^he women prisoners that he himself would come
to visitie them and causing such as came with him to tarry without, he only
with Ephestion entered in among the^. Ephestion.
The Same Ephestion of all men was most dear unto Alexander brought up in his
company from his yougth* and most preuie with him in all things. There was
none that had such liberty to speak his mind plainlye to the king as he
had. Which he used after such sort, that he seamed to do it by no authority,
but by suffraunce. and as he was of like years unto him. so in maki^g and
personage he did somewhat excel him. Wherefore the women thinking Ephestion to be
the king, did fall down and worship him as there country manner was to do to
kings till such time as one of the Enukes that was taken prisoner showed which
of them was Alexander. Then Sisigambis fell down at his fete requiring pardon
of her ignorance, forsomuche as she did never se him before. The king took her
up by the hand, and said: mother you be not deceived, for this is Alexandar
also. Which his humility contine^cy of mind if he had continually observed to
this latter days, A disgrssion.
I would have thought him much more hapier then he was, when that he having
subdued all Asia from Hellispont to the Occia^ see, would counterfiet the
triu^phes of Bacchus. Or if that among the rest of his conqueste he would
have labored to conquer his pride and his Ire, which be vices invincible. Or
if that in his dronkenes he would have abstayned from the slaughter of his
nobility, and not to have put to death those excellent men of war without
judgment, that helped him to co^quere so many nations. At this time ye
greatness of his fortune had not yet altered his nature, but afterward he
could not bear his victories whith yt virtue, yt he did win the^. The^ he
behaved him self after such a manner that he exceded in continency and
compassion all the kings yt had been before his time. Alexanders co^^ynuance
and Cleme^cye.
Entreating ye two Queen's with those Virgins that were of excellent bewtye so
reverently as if they had been his siesters. He not only absteyned from all
violacion, of Darius wief, with in beuty excelled all the women of her time,
but also took great care and diligence yt none other should procure her to any
dishonor. And to all ye women he commanded their ornementes and apparel to
be restored. So yt they wa^ted nothing of the magnifice^ce of their former
estate, saving only that assured co^fide^ce that creatures want in myserye.
Which things considred by Sisigambis she said unto ye king. Sisigambis words
unto Alexander.
Sir your goodness toward us does deserve yt we should make yesame prayer for
you yt we did sometime for Darius, and we perceive you worthy to pass so
great a king as he was, in felicity and good fortune, that habound so in
justice and clemency. you vouchsaue to call me by the name of mother and of
Queen, but I confess my self to be your hand maid. For both I conceive the
greatness of my estate paste, and feale yt I can bear this present servitude.
It lies only in your hands how we shall be dealt with all, and whether ye will
make us notable to the world through your clemency or cruelty. The king
comforted them all he might, and willing them to be of good chere, took Darius
son in his arms. Whereat the child was nothing afraid. having never seen
him before, but took and embrased him about the neck. He was so moved with the
constancy of the child that he beheld Ephestron, and said, oh I would that
Darius had, had some part of this gontle disposiicon. When he was deperted from
thence he caused.iii. aultars to be made upon the River of Piramus, and there
did sacrifice to Jupiter. Hercules and Mynerua and so went forewardes into
Siria. Syria. Damasco.
He sent Parmenio before to Damasco, whereas Darius treasure did remain: who
understanding by the way that Darius had sent one of his nobles thither,
fearing that for the smalnes of his own nombre, the Damasce^s would keep him
out, determined to send for a greater power, Mardus.
but by chance one Mardus fell into the hands of the horsemen that he had
sent before to score the Country, which being brought before Parmenio
delivered him the letters that the Captain of Damasco had sent to Alexander,
and besides the letters added of him self, that he doubted not but all Darius
riches and his treasure should be delivered to him at his arrival. Parmenio
gave the charge to certain of his men for his sure keapyng, and then opened
the letters, wherein it was contained that Alexander in all haste should send
one of his Capitaines thither with a small power. Which thing known, he sent
Mardus back again to Damasco with certain to accompany him, but he escaped
out of their hands and came to Damasco before day light. That thing troubled
greatly Parmenio, doubting that they had laid some embushement for him, and
therefore durst not go an unknown way without a guide. yet notwithstanding
upon the confidence he had in the felicity of his prince, took pesantes of the
country to co^duite him the way, which the fourth day brought him to the City
of Damasco. The captain doubting yt crede^ce should not have been given to his
letter pretended to mistruste the strength of the town, and made countenance
as though he would fle away. And by spryng of the day he caused Darius
treasure (which the Percians call Gaza) with the rest of all his precious
things to be brought forth of the town, of purpose to betray the same into the
Macedons hands. Then there were many thousands of men and women that followed,
a piteous sight to all that saw them, saving to him to whose fidelity they
were committed. For he to win himself thancke, purposed to deliver to his
enemies a pray more precious then all the rest, which were those of the
nobility he had in keeping. With the wives and children of great men that bare
rule under Darius, and besides the Ambassadors of the Cities of Greece, whom
Darius had left in the Traitors hands as in a fortress (as he thought) of
most suertie. The Percians call those Gangabe that carry burdens upon their
shoulders, who having the carriage of things of most valor, when they could
not endure the cold for the frost and snow that suddenly fell, they put upon
them the robes of cloth of gold and purple, which they carried wrapped up together
with the money, there being no man to let the^, for the adversity of Darius
caused that base sort of men to use a licencious liberty. Those kind of men
seamed to Parmenio at the first sight to be no small army, and therefore regarded
not the matter little, but gave exhortacio^ to those that were with him, as
though they should have fought a sore battaill, and willed them to put their
spurs to their horse and give the charge: Which thing perceived by them
that bare the burdeyns fled away for fear, and so did the men of war that
were with them by such ways as they best ^newe. The Captain of Damasco
counterfeityng such fear as other feared in deed, was the cause of all this
confusion. The riches of Darius was left alone and lay sparkled abroad over all
the fields, with the money that was prepared for the wages of so infynite a
nombre of Soldiers, and also thapparell of so many great men and noble women,
vessel of gold, golding furnimentes for horses, pauilions adorned with regal
magnificens, and wagons full of infinite riches. A thing even sorrowful to
behold to the spoils if any thing could stay the couetousenes of men. Was it
not a pytefull thing to behold the riches that had been gathered together in
so great nombre of years, whiles the state of the Percians stood in that
incredyble heigthe of fortune, one part to be torn with busshes, and an other
drowned in the myer, it being so great besides that the hands of the spo^lers
could not suffice for the spoil. When the horsemen had overtaken them that
fled first they found diverse women harying of the small children among whom
there where four Virgins the daughters of Occhus that reigned next before
Darius. Occhus king before Darius.
They before that time had suffered change of fortune, when the state was
altered from their fathers line. But this aduarsitie was much more grievous unto
them. There was in this flock the wife of Occhus, the daughter of Oxatrix that
was Darius brother, and the wife of Artabasus which was of the head house of
Percia. And also his son called Ilionesus. The wife and the son of
Farnabazus were also taken, to whom Darius had committed the charge of al ye
sea costs. With the^ the three daughters of Mentor, and the wife and the Son
of the noble captain Memnon, there was scarsely any house of the nobility of
Percia that was fre of that euel adventure There were both Lacedaemonians and
Athenians. that contrary to the league between Alexander and them, took Darius
part. Among the Athenians Aristogiton, Dropides, and Leuertes were of most
notable fame, and lineage. And of the Lacedaemonians the chefest were Perisippus
and Onomastorides with Omanys and Callicratides. The so^me of the coined money
there taken was two thousand.lx. The ^omme of the treasure taken at Damasco
talentes and of massy silver.v. hundred talentes. Besides.xxx. thousand men.
and.vii. thousand beasts that carried burdeins on their backs. But the gods
did persecute with due punishment the betraier of such a treasure. For one
whom he had made privy to ye matter pitieng therein the state of his prince did
sle the traitor and brought his head to Darius a comfort not unapt for the
time to the betrayed king for thereby he was both revenged of his ennemy, and
perceived that the memory due unto his estate, was not grown ^ut of al men's
hearts.

The fourth book of Quintus Curtius of the acts of the great Alexander King of
Macedonie.
Darius which alittle before was Lord of so great an army, and that came unto
the field carried alofte upon his chariot more like to triu^phe then to fight:
fled by the places then waste and deserte which he before had filled with his
infinite nombres of men of war. There were but few that followed him, for
neither they fled all one way, nor such as followed could keep pace with him
that so often changed horses. Vnchas.
At length he came to Vnchas where he was received of.iiii. or.v. thousand
Greeks, which conducted him to the River of Euphrates, thinkyng that only to
be his, in the which he could prevent Alexander by his haste making. Parmenio
was apoincted governor of Siria, and to be the keeper of the treasure and
prisoners which he took at Damasco. The Sirians could not at the first bear
their new government, because they had not yet felt the scourge of the
wars: but as they revolted, they were straightway subdued, perfourming all
that they were apoincted to do. Strato king of Arade.
The I Will of Arade was yelde^ to Alexander, whereof Strato was king, that had in
subjection all the sea coaste with diverse of the Inland countries, which
being subdued by the Macedons, Alexander removed to the city of Marathon,
where he received letters from Darius that put him in great collar, Letters
from Darius unto Alexand
because they were so arrogantly written, the special poincte that moved
Alexander was for that Darius writing himself king, did not vouchsaue to give
him that title, but did write rather by way of commandment then of request
proffering for the ransom of his wife and children so much money as Macedon
could receive. For the superiority (he said) he put it to his choice, to try
it by the sword if he list but if he would be better advised, he willed him
to be content with his own enheritau^ce, and so he would join in amity with
him and become his friend, in which poinct he was ready to enter into treaty*
Alexanders answer to Darius letters.
Alexander did write to him again after this manner: Darius whose name thou
have usurped, did great destruction upon the Greeks inhabiting on the coast of
Hellespont and upon the Iomans which be Greek cities. and from thence did
pass the sea with a great army to make war against Greece and Macedon. And also
king zerxes the predecessor came to subdue us with infinity no^bres, which
being vanquished in a battle on the sea, left notwithstanding Mardonius behind
him in Greece, to destroy their cities, and burn their countries. It is
manifest besides that Philip my father was slain, by such as were corrupted
theru^to with your money, ye undertake always unjust wars, and occupyeng
arms, go about for all that to circumuent men with treason. As thou of late
having such no^bre of men in thine army did procure my death with the
promis of a thousand talentes. I am not therefore the beginner of the wars,
but repulce such injuries as be proffered me. In doing whereof through the help
of the Gods, which favor always the right, have brought the more part of
Asia under my subjection: and having ouerco^me the in battle by force of
arms, there is no cause that I should grant the any thing which haste not
observed toward me the law of arms. yet if thou will come and submit
thyself I promis the that I will deliver freely both thy mother wife and
children, for both I know how to get the victory and how to use such as I
overcome: but if thou fear to commit thy self to us. I will give the
saufeconduite to come freely. In the rest when thou writest unto me, remember
that thou writest, not only to a king but also unto him that is thy king. He
sent this letter by Thersippus, and went from thence into Phenicia, Phenicia.
Biblon Sydon.
where the City of Biblon was youlden unto him. And so came unto Sydon which
was a City of great nobility by reason of the antiquity and fame of the
builders. The same was under Stratos dominion, supported by the power of Darius
who yeldyng more by the constreinte of the people, then of his own good will
was thought unworthy to reign there. Alexand made a grant to Ephestion that
he should make such one king whom the Sidons thought most worthy that place.
There were diverse noble young men in that city that had familiarity with
Ephestion, of whom he purposed to have chosen one king: but they refused his
offer, affirming that none might enjoy that dignity except he were descended
of the blood royal. Ephestion wondered at the magnaminitie that was in them, in
despisyng the thing, which other sought for by sword and fire, and therefore
said: continewe you still in that virtuous mind, which be the first that
have understand how much more better it is to refuse, then to receive a
kingdom. Chouse ye therefore such one of the blood royal, that may remember
that he has received the rule at your hands. But when they saw that diverse
gaped for it, and for the gredines they had to reign, fell to flatteryng such
as were nere about Alexander, resolved that there was none more mete for that
dignity then one Abdolominus who being of the ancient blood of the kings,
Abdolominus was made king
for poverty was enforced to dwell in a small grange without the City. His
honesty was the cause of his poverty (as it is to many other) and being
occupied in his daily labor, hard no noise of the wars that troubled all
Asia. They of whom we spoke of before came into his gardein with garments to
apparel him like a king and found him weding of his ground, whom they saluted
as king, and said unto him, you must make exchange of the vileness of your
apparel with these rich robes we here persent you: wash the body yt is now
foull and filthe, take upon you the heart of a king, and in the fortune you be
worthy to have, show the same moderacion and continency you do use presently.
And when you shall sit in your regal seat, having in your hands power of the
life and death of your people, do in no wise forget the estate ye were in when
ye took the kingdom upon you nor yet for what purpose ye did receive it. The
matter seamed to Abdolominus like a dream, and asked them if they were mad
that would mock him after that manner. But when he saw the^ affirm by oaths
the thing to be in earnest, he washed himself, and received the garment which
was of purple and gold, and so went with the into the palaice. The fame (as is
wont in such a case) did notably run abroad of this matter. Some favored the
cause, and some did disdain it, but such as were rich did reprove his
poverty and base estate to such as were nere about Alexa^d, which caused the
king to send for him, and when he had long beholde^ his behauour, said: your
personage does not disagre to the fame of your lynage. But I desire much to
know with what patience you did sustain your poverty. I would to God ( quoth he)
I could bear my prosperity in like case now when I am a king. These hands
did get that I desired and having nothing I lacked nothing. His words caused
Alexander to conceive of him a marvelous opinion, so that he gave unto him not
only the riches, stuf, and furnimentes that appertained to the king before, but
also many things that were taken from the Percians, adding to his dominion all
the country nere about the city. In the mean season Amyntas with.iiii M.
Greeks that escaped with him out of the field fled to Tripolis where he
enbarcked them and sailed unto Cipres, Tripolis.
thinking the world to be such then, that every one might enjoy yt he could
get, like as it had been his own enheritau^ce. His purpose was to go into
Egypt, and so he thought to beco^me enemy both to Darius and Alexander waying
with the world, according as the time should alter. Amyntas persuasion to his
soldiers.
To bring therefore his soldiers to hope well of his enterprice, he declared how
ye governor of Egypt was slain in the battle, and that ye Percia^s left
their enguarrison were but of small no^bre, of littel force, and without any
head. He showed how the Egipcia^s used to rebel against their governors
wherefore they were sure to be received as friends. For since necessity ( quoth
he) has enforced us to prove our fortunes, which faili^g us in our first hope,
we must now thinck ye things to come shall be much better the^ our p^sent estat.
They al agreed with one voice yt he should lead the^ where he list, whereupon
thinking good not to pretermit thoccasio^ whiles ye hope was hot in their
hearts, co^ueied the^ into Egypt and entered ye haue^ at Pelusiu^ under pretense
yt he had been sent thither by Darius. Pelusium
When he had gotten Pelusiu^ he set forwards toward Me^phis, Memphis.
at ye fame of wose coming ye Egiptians being a light nation, and more apt to
make a store, then to maintain it when it is our begone, ran to him out of
al towns and villages with intent to destroy all the Percians, who
notwithstanding for all the fear they were in did, not leave the defense of
the country, but fought with the Greeks and were put to flight. After that
victory Amyntas beseged Memphis, and his men destroyed so all the country
there aboutes, that they left nothing vnspoiled. Whereupon Mareches though he
perceived his soldiers much amassed with the fear of their late overthrow.
Mazeches.
yet when he saw his enemies scatered abroad, and without order for the pride
they had conciued of their victory, at length persuaded his men to issue out of
the city and in setting upon their enemies to recover again that they had
lost. Which advise being good of it self, took by good handling most
fortunate ^esse for they s^ewe at that time both A^^intas and all his company.
This punishment he suffered for the offense committed to both princes. Being
neither faithful to Alexander whom he forsake, nor to Darius to whom he fled.
Darius capitaines which escaped from the battaille at Isson gathering together
such me^ as were scattered after ye battaille, with such power besides as they
could levy in Capaducea and Paphlagonia, did attempt to recover again the
country of Lidia. Antigonus was governor for Alexander there, who
notwithstanding that he had take many soldiers out of the guarrisones to send
unto Alexander: yet he so little esteemed his enemies, that he doubted not to
adventure the battaille. Where the Percians received the like fortune they did
in other places: Which attempting the fight in three sundry countries, were
vainguisshed in them all. At the same time the navy of the Macedons which
Alexander had sent for out of Greece met Aristomeues (whom Darius had apoincted
to make war upon the coast of Hellespont) where they did take and drown all
his ships. aristomenes
Farnabazus Darius admiral, having exacted money at Nulesium, Nulesium
and set guarison in Sio, passed into the I Will of Andros with a hundred ships.
Andros Syphuns
And from thence he went to Syphuns, puttyng men of war into all the Islands,
exacted of them money, The greatness of the war that was in hand between two
of the most puissant princes of Asia and Europe, did draw both Greece and
Crete to arms. Agys the king of Lacedenon gathered together.viii. thousand
Greeks that were come home out of Cilicia, and moved war to Antipater that
was governor of Macedonia. The Cretians following sometime one part and
sometime another received one while guarrisoners of Macedons, and an other
while of Lacedaemonians to lie among them. But those wars were of no great
importunaunce. For all men's eyes were fixed upon the wars that were in v^e
between Alexander and Darius. whereupon all the rest did depend. The Macedons
had sudbued all Siria and Phenices. The City of Tire.
Tire only except. which being the greatest and most notable city of all that
country. showed that they esteemed themselves worthy rather to join with
Alexander as friends, then to become his subjects. For when he was come nere
unto them. and encamped upon the the mayn land. which is divided from their
City with a small arm of the Sea. They sent to him by their Ambassadors a
crown of gold for a present, with great plenty besides of victuals for his
army. He received their gifts, as from his fre^des and gave gentle aunsweres
unto the Ambassadors: but he showed the^ that he desired to make sacrifice
unto Hercules (whom the Cirians specially worshipped:) for the Macedons opinion
was that they were descended of him, which to do (he said) he was admonished
by an Oracle, the Ambassadors answered: that there was a temple of Hercules
without their City in the place which they call Paleterio^, where as he might
do sacrifice at his pleasure. At those words Alexand could not refrain his
Ire, whereunto he was much subject. but fell in a rage: I perceive now ( quoth
he) because ye dwell in an Island ye trust so much in the Cituacion of your
city, that ye despise my land power. But I will shortly do you to understand
that ye dwell upon the main land, and bring you to such case as your Island
shall not help you: and therefore trust to it that if ye receive me not in, I
will enter by force. When the Ambassadors were dismissed with this answer,
such as were nere about the king persuaded them that they should not exclude
him whom all Siria and Phenises had received. But they had conceived such a
confidence, for that their City stood in the sea divided.lxxx. furlonges from
the mayn land, that they utterly determined to abide the siege. That Sea of
theirs was so much subject to the southwest wynd which made at every storm
the waves beat so high against the Shore, that it would not suffer the
Macedo^s to make any work for the ioynyng of the mayn land to the city, it
being scarsely possible to work any thing there when the wether was most
caulme. The Siege of Tire.
The first work that the Macedo^s began was by and by throwe^ down with the
vehemens of the seas that were driven by the wynd. Nor they could make no mole
so strong within ye sea. but that it was washed away and brought down by
beating of the waves. And when the wynd blewe strenth able it would bring ye
Seas clean over the work. There was an other difficulty no les then this. For
by reasone that the walls were environed about with the deapnes of ye Sea,
they could raise no engine to shote but a far of out of ships, nor there was
not any ground about the City, whereupon ladders might have been raised
against the walls, or aproche made upon the land. Alexander had no ships,
and though he had had some, and would have coueted to bring them to ye walls,
yet by reason of the water, might with shot easily have been keapt of. But
emonges the rest of other things, ye Tyrians were wonderfully encouraged by
the coming of the Embassadores that were sent from Cartage to celebrat there
yearly sacrifice, according to rhere custom. Carthage.
For the Tyrians being the builders of Cartage were since that time had in
veneracion as there parents and furste founders. Those Embassadores exorted
the^ in any wise to abide the siege, and promised them shortly and which they
alleged might eselye and sone be done, forsomuche as that time all the Seas were
full of the Cartage fletes upon this hat^ing they determined to abide
thextremitie, and placed there engynes upon the towers and the walls, deuyding
there armor emo^ges the yought of the City. The Artificers, whereof that City
had great plenty, were divided into work houses to make all such things as
were necissarye for the wars. There were devised certain instrimentes
wherewith they might pull down the works that there ennemies made, called
Harpagones, and also crows of Iron which be named corui, with all other things
that might be invented for the defense of Cities. But a strange thing is
reported, P^odigous lighted.
that when the Iron was put in the forge and blown in the fire the same was
seen to be full of drops of blood. Which wonder the Tirians did interpret
as a token of good fortune toward them selves, and as signification of
destruction toward their ennemies. A like thing was seen among the Macedons
for when a certain soldier was breakyng of his bread, drops of blood
appeared therein. Whereat Alexander being astonished. Aristander.
Aristander that was most connyng of all the deuiners of their Religon. Did
enterprete thus the matter. If the blood had apered outwardly then it had
signified il fortune to ye Macedons but in as much as it was found within, it
betokened destruction to the City they went about to win. The law of
nations bryken.
Alexander considering his navy to be far from him and that a long siege*
should be great impedyment to his other affairs. Sent officers of Arms unto
the City to persuade them unto peace, who^ the Tirians against the law of
Nacoues did drown in the sea. There unjust death stored Alexander so much,
that he then utterly determined to go forwards with the siege, but before he
could make his aproche it was of necessity for him to make a Pers or a Mole,
whereby they might pass from the main land to the City. But in the making
thereof there entered great despair into all men's hearts, considering the
deapnes of the sea which they saw not possible to be filled s^arcly by any
divine power. For they thought no stones so great, any trees so high, nor any
country to have such ple^tie as might suffice for the building of a bank in
such a place, considring the Sea was always troubled. And narowes the place
was betwe^e the City and the land, so much more greater was the rage. But
Alexander that had ye way to allure his soldiers to what effect hi^ pleased,
declared how that Hercules apered unto him in his sleep and gave him his hand
proffering to be his captain and him giude for the entrance of the City.
Thereunto he added the killing of his Ambassadors, and how that they had
violated and broken the law that all nations observed. and that there remained
but only one City which stayed his victory. Whereupon he divided the work
among his capteines. that every one might apply his own band. And so put
the worck in ure, Mount Libanus.
when he had oues sufficientlye encouraged his men. There were great plentye of
stones had of the mines of thould City where Tite stood before and for the
making of bores and Towers timber was brought from the mount Libanus. The
work did grow from the bottom of the Sea like a mountain, but not yet
brought to the high wartee mark. And the further the Pere was wrought from
the land unto the Sea ward, so much the sooner the Sea did swallowe up the
substance of things, whereof the same was made. Whiles the Macedons were thus
about their work the Tiria^s would ro^ne about them in small vessels, and
give the words of reproach and scorn as that they were now become goodly me^
of war that would be made pioners and carry burdens like beasts upon there
backs And they asked them also If they thought Alexander to be greater then
the god of the Sea. But there reproffe did not hinder but increase the
cherefulnes of the soldiers in there pain and travail. In so much the mole
in a short space surmounted above the water, increasing much in breadth,
aproched nere unto the City. Then the Tyrians saying the hugenes of the
work. whereof they before had been diseiued in there opynion. littell
thinking that it would have grown to such a pass. they in littell vessels
came rowing about the Pere. and did drive the soulders with shote from there
woreking. and because it lay in them to bring there boats sodeinly forwards,
and return sone ageine they hurt many of the Macedons without any danger to
them selves, which enforsed them to leave there worck and fall to there own
defense. For remedy whereof and to avoid there enemies shote. they were
compelled to streach out beasts skynes upon poles like sails. and set those
between the^ and their enemies. And besides at the hedde of the Peace they
raised up two Towers from whence with shote and castinge of darts they keapt
of the boats that came aboutes them. On the other side the Tirians would land
with there boats far out of the sight of the Campt and kill such as were
carrie^g of stones. The peasants besides of Arabie did set upon certain
Macedons that were s^atred abrod in the mount Libanus, where they slew and
took diverse. That was one cause whith moved Alexander to divide his army. And
lest he might seem to remain idely about the siege of one city, he appointed
Perdicas and Craterus to take the charge of the work he had in hand and went
into Arabia with such part of his power as was most apt for his porpose.
Arabia.
In the mean season the Tyrians prepared agreat ship laden with stones and
gravel behind, so that the fore patte flotid above the water, which ship
anointed over with pitche and brymstone, they brought suddenly by sailinge and
force of oers unto the pere. and there remaining the mariners set the ship on
fire, and then leaped into boats which followed after for the purpose. The ship
thus set on fire so enflamed the wood work perteining to the pere, that
before any rescue could come, the fire had taken the towers and all the rest of
the works that were made in the head thereof. When they that were leaped into
the boats saw the matter take such effect, they put betwixt the timbre and
other void places both fire brandes, and all such things as might give
noryshement and increase the fire. So that the towers and all the rest being on
a flame. many of the Macedo^s were consumed therewith and the rest forsook
their armor and throw themselves into the sea. Then the Tala^s that were more
desirous to take them on live then to kill them, with staves and stones did so
beat them on the hands, as they were swymming, that for werenes they were
glad to be taken up into their boats. The hole work was not consumed with
this fire only, for it chaunsed also the same day a terrible wind to rise,
which blowing out of the Sea, brought the waves with such violence upon the
Mole that with often beating of the Seas the joints that knitte the worck
together began to lose and leave their hold. Then the water that washed through
brake down the Mole in the mids, so that the heaps of stones which were
before sustained by the tymbre and earth cast betwixt them once broken
asonder, the hole work fell to ruyn and was carried away into the deape sea.
By that time Alexander was returned out of Arabie, and scarsely found any
remain or token that any such worck had been. In that case (as it is ever
used in things that chaunce^ll) one laid the fault upon an other* when in
deed the violence of the sea was the cause of al. Alexander began to make the
Pere again after a new sort, A new Pere made after amoyer force.
so that it ran with the fore front into the wind, and not with the open side
as before. The fore front always defending the rest of the work lieng
behind. which he made of such breadth, because the Toweres might be builded in
the mids to be the further of from the shot. Hole trees were put into the
Sea with all there branches, and after great stones thrown upon them. And over
those a new course of trees and stones again, by which device this hole work
was joined. and knit all in one. As the Macedons were busy to bring there
work forwards, so the Tyrians were as diligent to invent all such things as
might give impediment to their proceeding. Their chief practice was for a
nombre of them to go under water a far of out of the macedones sight, and so
come diuing under the water till they came unto the Pere, where with hokes they
would pull unto them the bramuches of the trees that apered out of the stones.
whereby the stones and the other substance followed after into the deep. For the
trees being discharged of there burden were esely drawn away, and then the
foundation failing, the hole work that stayed upon the trees fell to ruin.
Amongs these impedimentes Alexander stood in great perplexity of mind doutinge
whither he should continewe the siege still. or else deperte his way. When he
was in this imaginacion suddenly his navy arrived from Cipres, and Cleander
also with such soldiers as he had brought out of Grease and having to the
nombre of.c.lxxx. ships, divided them into two batailes. whereof he committed
the one unto Pitagoras ye king of Cipres, and to Craterus, Pytagor^s king of
Cipris.
and took charge of the other him self taking for his own person a Galey
called Cinque:reme, which had five oers in a bancke. The Tiria^s durst not
adventure the sea figh although they had a great navy but set al there galies
in a frou^t before the walls of there City which the king assailed and put to
distress The next day the Macedons with there ships environed the City round
about, and did beat down the walls, specially with such engynes as they call
Arietes. Arietes.
But the Tirians straight way renforced and made up there walls again with
sto^es that lay at hand and raised up an inward wale round about within the
City, which might be there defense if the other failed. But their destruction
approached on every side, the Mole was wrought with in cast of darte, and the
ships gave the approach round about the walls, so that they were over laid
both by Sea and by land. The Macedones had devised to join there gallayes two
and two together in such sort that the forepartes met close before, and the
hinderpartes lay far of one from the other. And over the spaces that remain
betwixt ruppe and puppe they made brydges with mastes and many yardes laid
betwixt Galey and galey, and fast bound together to carry soldiers upon,
when they had put there galeis in this order they set forwards toward the
City. And having rampared the prores for defense of the soldiers that were
behind They stood in the Galies and did shoot and cast darts against there
enemies without any peril or danger to themselves. It was midnight when they
had commandment to set forwards after this manner. A Tempest
As the ships were approaching on all parts, and the Tyrians stood astonished
for fear and desperacion, Suddenly the sky was overwhelmed with dimeine
clouds, and a sodeine darkness took away the light. Then the sea by litell and
litell waxed terrible and roughe, the wyend blewe and raised up the waves, and
beat the ships one against an other, the violences whereof brust a sonder
the bands and graspers wherewith ye galaies were fastened togethers. Which down
the bridges crashed and flewe asonder, and with the soldiers that stood upon
them fell into the Sea. There was great confusion, for the ships entangled
thus together could by no means be governed in such a tempest, the soldiers
disturbing the feate of the mariners, and the mariners giuinge impediment to
the office of the Soldiers. Thus as it does often happen in such a case, the
expert were obedient to the ignorant for the ship masters that were wont to
command then for fear of death were derected by other. But at length by
force of rowing, the galeis recovered the shore the more part of them being
broken and torn. It chaunsed at the same time.xxx. Embasseadores to come from
Cartage to Tire, who gave more comfort then assistance to them that were
besieged. For they showed how the Carthaginens were so assailed with war at
there own doors, that they could by no means send them succore. Saracusa^s
In somuche as the Saracusans were burning in Afrike, and had enca^ped them
selves under the very walls of Cartage. The Tirians yet were not discomfite,
for all that they were disapointed of there special trust, but delivered unto
those Ambassadors their wives and their childrien to carry unto Cartage,
thinking to endure more stowtly the siege, if the things which were most
dear unto them were removed out of Danger. There was a Tirian which in an open
assemble declared that Apollo (whom the Tyrians gretlly do worship) had
appeared to him in his sleep, semyng to him that he had forsaken the City and
trausformed the mole that the Macedons had made, into a grate wood. Hereupon
though the autter were of small credit, yet forasmuch as men in fear be apt
to believe the worste, they tied fast Apolloes Image with a golden cherie, and
they bound fast also the altar of Hercules (to whom the City was dedicate)
thinking that by deteaning of the one. to keape still the other. The Cartage^s in
times paste had brought that Image from Siracuse and had plased yt in the head
City out of the which they were descended. For their custom was to addorne
dyre with such spoils as they had taken, no les then they did Cartage. They at
ye time would also have been auctores unto the Tiryans for the renuieng of an
old sacrifice that had been omitted many years. wherein they used to offer up
to Saturn a fre borne child, Which being rather a sacrilege then a
sacrifice. of the Cartagens received of there first founders, and still
observed the same, till there city was destroyed. And but that the ancient men
by whom al things was governed had withstand yt, this wicked supersticon had
taken place, which nature and humaintie does abhor. The necessity that was
hanging over there heads being more effectual then aine art or science,
practiced not only such things as were accustomed for defenses, but also
found one that was never enuented before. For to the desturbours of the ships
that approached the wales, they devised long rafters to the which the fastened
grasples of Iron and great hokes like sithes which letten down with ropes by
an engyue, either tare the ships or destroyed the men. They invented also
Targettes of metal to be made fire hot, in the which they put burning sand,
and scalding lyme. and the^ poured the same down upon the Macedones that came
nere the walls, which was a mischief that they feared most of all other. For
when the hot sand entered between the harnes and the body, there was no
means to avoid it away: and where it touched it burned to the bones, so that
they were enforced to throw away their harnes, and tear away all things they
had upon their bodies. Whereby they became subject to be hurt by their
enemies, and were not in case to endomage them again. But specially the
grasples letten down (which be called corui) took violently away many of the
soldiers that were within the ships. Alexander seeing their obstinate defense
was weary of the matter and determined to raise up his siege, and go unto Egypt.
For considering in how short a space he had overcome Asia, it grieved him to be
detayned so long about the walls of that City, whereby he omitted the
occasion and opportunity of greater things in the mean season. But he was
as much ashamed to depart without his purpose, as to remain there and leave
other things undone: iudgyng that if he should leave Tire after that sort, as
a wytnes that he might be withsta^did, it should much impair his fame.
wherewith he had gotten more then with force. And it chaunsed at the same time a
monster of an excedyng bygnes to appear as well in the sight of the Tyrians as
the Macedons. which lyeng upon his back above the water came toward the
mole, and when he had beaten the water and lyfted up himself at the head of
the mole, diued under the water again, sometime appeatyng above and sometime
underneath, and when he came nere the walls of the City vanyshed out of
fight. The appearyng of this monster reioysed both parties. The Macedons did
enterprete the same to be sent to them as a guide to lead them away to furnishe
out the work. The Tyrians deuined that Neptune revenging the usurpation that
the Macedons had made upon the sea, would shortly destroy the work that they
had made, in like sort as he had taken away the monster, and upon their own
imagination had conceived such a gladness, and pronosticated to them selves
such good fortune, that they fell to bancqueting and drinkyng. And when they
were well charged with wine at the son rising they set garlandes of flowers
upon their heads, and mounted into their galleis, not only with hope of
victory, but with a triumph made beforehand. It chaunsed at the sametime that
Alexander had conveyed his navy to the contrary side of the City, and left
upon the shore.xxx. of the smallest vessels, of the which the Tyrians caught
two, and put the rest in great fear of distressing, until such time as the
king hearing the alarome, set forwards with his navy toward that part
where the sk^ye was heard. The first Galley of the Macedons that came nere
them was a quinquereme most swyfte among all the rest, which when the
Tirians espied, they came against her with two galleys ouerwhart upon her side:
whereof the one stroke full with her spurn, and the cinquereme graspled with
her, but the other which was loss and at liberty fell un the contrary side,
but lest betwixt them two she might have sustained some damage, there came a
tryreme of Alexanders to the rescue with such violence that the master of the
lose galley was stricken into the sea. But when the Tirians saw Alexander was
come himself and more of his ships were at hand, then with strength of oers
and great difficulty they set their galley that was entangled lose again and
at liberty, and made toward their haven with all the haste they might make.
Alexander immediately pursued, but when he came to the haue^ he could not enter,
but was beaten of with shot from the walls, but that not withstandyng the more
part of their galleis were either drowned or taken. After this adventure he
rested his soldiers two days, and then willed his ships to be brought
forwards, and the engines in them, to the intent that by assaylyng the Tirians
on all sides, he might put them in extreme fear. Alexander with a wonderful
courage not with out great parill unto his person, mounted up into the top
of a tower that was made in a ship, and there known by his apparel and
rich armor was chiefly laid at, and shot to from all parts. He wrought
wonderful feats with his own person, for both with his pike he slew
diverse that stood at defense, and afterward also fought hand to hand with
his sword and his target, and threw diverse down from their defense, for the
tower wherein he fought joined hard to the walls. By that time the Engines
called Arietes with much beatyng had stricken down the walls, the navy was
got within the haven, and certain of the Macedons had won the towers, and
driven the Tirians from them. The winning of Ti^re.
Oppressed them with the multitude of these myseries they were clean
discomfited, some fled for succor unto the temples, some did shut their doors
taking that kind of death they lyked best. And other ran upon their enemies
to sell their lives dear. But ye more part got up into ye tops of their
houses, and from thence did cast down upon their enemies, whatsoever came unto
their hands, Alexand commanded al to be slain with exception saving such as
fled into the temples. and the houses to be set on fire. Though that was
proclaimed through out the City: yet there was none bearyng armor that would
save themselves that way. For as the women and children filled the temples, so
the men kept the entrees of their houses ready to abide the cruelty of their
enemies. yet the Sydonians were the cause that many were saved who among the
Macedons seruyng in the wars, and entering the City among the rest,
Agenour.
were myndfull of their affinity with the Tirians (Agenour being builder of
both their Cities) and conveyed many into their ships which they sent
privily unto Sydone: By which means fiftene thousand escaped the cruelty of
the sword. The nombre of them that were slain may partly be coniectured, in
that there were found dead within the City syx thousand of them that bare
armor. A notable reue^ging of the breach of the law of arms.
The Kings wrath toward the City made the sight dolerous unto the victors.
For two thousand whom the furye of the slaughter had left on live, were
afterward hanged upon crosses along the sea coaste. The Ambassadors of the
Cartagens were saved, but he threatened to make war against them, from the
which he was then let by other business he had in hand. Thus Tire was taken
the.vii. month after it was besieged, a City notable to the posterity,
as well through the antiquity it was of, as also by the often change of
fortune that it had suffered. It was builded by Agenour, and many years was
master of the seas, not only nere thereabout but in all places where as their
nauies came. And if we list to credit the fame, that City was the first
which either taught or learned letters. They builded Cities and put in them
inhabiters through out the more parts of the world, both Carthago in
Afric, Thebes in boecia, and Gades in Spain upon the Occian. It is to be
thought that by reason of their fre recourse throught al seas, and by viseting
of many strange countries they had occasion to chosse out Seats to place in
there youth, whereof they then habounded Or else as some write the Inhabitores
weried to dwell their by reason of many earthequakes, were compelled of force
to seek out strange dwelling places. But after many casualties that happened
unto Tire after the destrucion newely renewed, and all things grown again
thorugh long peace, remains now under the defense of the romans Clemency.
About the same time Alexander received letters from Darius, wherein at last he
was contented to name him king. The contentee of Darius l^tters.
His request was that Alexander would receive his daughter Saptyne for his
wief with who^ he offered in dowre all the country between Hellespont and the
River of Alys, and would receive unto him self only such kingdoms, as lay
from thence toward theaste. And if peradventure he should make any doubt to
receive this offer, he willed him to consider that fortune is not wont to
continewe long in one estate, and that the greater felicity men have, the
greater envy does follow them. It was to be dow^ed (he said) less he exalted
him self through a vain and a childishe affeccion like as birds use to do
whose natural lightness convey them to the stares. For there was nothing more
difficulty in so young years, then to bear well such heigh and greatness of
fortune. He willed him also to consider that there remaynede yet mean
contreies that he had not touched, and that he should not always mete him in
streightes. Having to pass the River of Euphrates, Tygre, Araxes and Hidaspes,
which were like bulwarks unto his dominion. and when that he should come unto
the playnes, he should be ashamed of his small nombre. He put him in
remembrance to way how long it should be or he could pass Media,
Hi^cania, Baetria, and the Indians, that bordered on the Occian Sea. And
likewise the Sogdians and Aracho^ians of whom men have no other knowledge then
of their name, with other nations lieng toward the mount Caucasus, and the
River of Tanays. Though no man should let him, nor offer him battaille, yet
he should grow in age (he said) before he could pass so many lands. In the
latter end he aduysed him to call him no more forewardes. for he would come
sone enough and that to his destruction. Thef^ect of Darius a^nswere.
Alexander made answer to those letters by the messengers that brought them in
effect that Darius offered to him that was none of his own, and made a proffer
to give that he had all lost. For Lidia, Ionia, Acolides, and the cost of the
Hellespont, which he appoincted in dowre, were already become the rewards of
his victory. And as for laws and conditions those were wont to be given and
appoyncted by the victors, and received of such as were overcome. And if he
were ignorant in which of those two estates he were in, he should come of and
adventure the battaille once again. For he was not ignorant (he said) before
he passed the Sea how Lidia, and Cilicia, were over small rewards, for the
making of such a war. But his determinacion was ever to subdue and bring
under his dominion, both Percipolis the chief City of his kingdom, and also
Bactria, and Echatania, with the vttermoste bounds of the Orient. He could fle
no where but he was able to follow. and therefore counseled him that he should
leave to fear him with ryuers which had learned how to pass seas. Thus the
kings did write one to another: Rhodian^.
and in the mean season ye Rhodians yielded their city and their haven unto
Alexander, who committed the rule of Cilicia unto Socrates. and the country
about Tire unto Philotas. And Parmenio made Andromachus his deputy in Celi
Siria. Celi Siria
For from thence they had to set forwards to the rest of their journey.
Alexander gave commandment to Ephestion that he should fetch about with his
navy ye cost of Phenices, and came with his hole power to ye city of Gaza.
Ol^mpiades
About the same time there were sole^pne triumphs and plays at Isthnios,
accustomed to be celebrated with the assembly of all Greece. In that counsel,
as ye wits of ye Greeks be sudden, decreed to send xii. Ambassadors unto
Alexander to carry him a croun of gold in gratefie^g the victory he had won, and
the acts he had done for the saulfegard and liberty of Greece, but a little
before they harkened how the fame went, and were ready to bend that way that
fortune inclined. Alexander visited not in person all such countries, and
cities as refused their obedience unto him, but made conquest of them by his
deputies. For Calas took Paphlagonia, Antigonus Licaonia, and Balacrus overcame
Idarne, Darius lieutenaunt, and wan Miletum. Amphitorus and Egilochus with a
navy of hundred and.lx. ships subdued all the Islands between Asia and
Achaia. And also by the consent of the inhabiters got Tenedon which always
was a receptacle to the Percians. Tenedon.
They were at the poinct to have gotten Scio, but that Pharnabasus Darius
deputy having intelligence of the matter, did first apprehende all such as
were of the Macedons faccion, and committed the city with a small guarrison to
Appollodines and Athenagoras that were inclined to the Percians. Alexanders
captains for all this continued the siege of the city still, not so much in
trust of their own strength as they did in hope of the faccio^ they had within
the city. In which poinct they were not deceived, for through a sedicion
which did arise between Apollodines and the captains of the men of war,
occasion was ministered unto the Macedons to break into the City. When the
gate was broken up, and a band of Macedons entered, Scio taken
then the cytesens which before had devised to rebel against the Percians,
took part with Amphiterus and Egilochus, so that the guarrison of the Percians
were slain, and Pharnabasus with Apolloindes and Anathogoras were taken
prisoners. There were.xii. galies taken with their soldiers and rowers,
besides.xxx. ships and vessels of Pirates, with three thousand Greeks that
were in wages with the Percians, with the Greeks they furnyshed up their own
bands, and put the pyrotes to death bestowyng the rowers in their own galeis.
Aristonicus
It chaunsed that Aristonicus the usurper of Methina ignorant of any such
matter as was chaunsed, in the first part of the night came with certain
piraters ships to enter into the haven, whom when the watch demanded what
he was, he said: he was Aristonicus, and came to the succor of Pharnabasus,
they said he was at rest and could not then be spoken with all, but it should
be laufull for him being their friend to enter into the haue^ for that night
and speak with him when it was day. Aristonicus was the first that entered, and
the pirates followed him. But whiles they placed their ships, the watchemen
drew the chain again over the haven, and then called up such as lay there
nere about, so that none of them durst resist but were al taken prisoners, and
so delivered to Amphiterus and Egilocus. Mytelene
From thence the Macedons passed to Mytelene which was kept by Chares of
Athens with a guarison of two thousand Percia^s: but when he was not able to
endure ye siege, he yielded up the City with conposicion to have their lives
saved and to depart in sauegarde unto Imbros. Imbros.
Darius dispairing of peace, which he had procured both by his lettres and
Ambassadors, gave his mind to assemble a new power, and freshely to renew the
war. Therefore he commanded the Capitaines and rulers of his men to assemble
at Babylon. and that Bessus governor of the Bactrians, Bactrians
should come thither with all the power he could make. The Bactrians be the
most hardy people among those nations, uncivil men, and much abhorring
from the delicatnes of the Percians: for by reason yt they border upon the
Scithians which be a warlicke people, they are accustomed to live by theft,
and be conversant continually in arms. But Bessus that was suspect of treason
that he would not be content with the second place, put Darius in great doubt.
Who having an inckling that he compassed to be king feared only his treason,
having no other way to bring his purpose to pass. Alexander wrought all the
ways he could obtain to knoweledge where Darius was become, and into what
country he was gone. And yet could not get any intelligence by reason of a
custom among the Percians which are wont with a marvelous fidelity to
keep close their princes secrets: in the vtteryng whereof neither fear of
death. nor hope of reward can cause them bring forth a word. This was a
goodly discipline that the kings there had of old time used emo^ges their
subjects in ponishing with loss of lief, the lavesnes of the tongue, which is
there more greuosly chastysed then any other crime. The lauesnes of the tongue
ponyshed with the Percia^s
Nor there is not in those parts any goodness looked for at any man's hands that
has not the gift of secretnes, whereof nature has given a facilitye in man.
This was the cause that Alexander was ingnorant of all things that his enemies
did, and therefore continued his siege before Gaza. The Siege of Gaza.
Beties was Captain there who was a man of a notable fidelity toward his
prince, which with a small guarison defended the City that was of a large
compass. Wherefore Alexander perceiving the advantage of the Scituacion set
maney mines in hand. For the lightness of the ground made ye work easy
having nether rocks nor stones to give any impediment. They began their mines
on that side, where they within could not destroy them. And to avoid the
suspcion of any such worck in hand, caused an aproche to be made to the wales
with Towers that he had made of Tymbre. But the ground would not serve for
their carieng and removing, by reason of the losenes of the sand whereinto the
wheles sonk, and was cause that the joints of the towers bracke a sonder.
About the conuoyans of them many were hurt and as much truble they had in
wythdrawinge of them as in setting them forwards. When he perceived he could
not preuail by that means he retired again his me^ for that time. But the
next day he environed the City round about to give thassaulte in every part
at ones and before he removed out of his campte, made sacrifice after his
country manner, requiring the aid of the gods. It chaunsed as he was so
doing, that a Raven flieng by let fall a clodde, which she carried in her
claws upon the kings Head, where it bracke and resolved in pieces. And the
raven flewe unto the next tower, where her feathers were so entangled with Piche
that she lighted upon, that she could not flee away, but was taken of the
standers theraboutes. This was thought a matter worthy whereupon the deuyners
should consulte, for he him self was not free from the supersticon of such
things. Therefore Aristander to whom he gave most credit, did interpret the
same to be a sign of the distrucion of that City, but yet there was some
parill apearing toward the kings person. For which cause he persuaded
Alexander that he should not go about any enterprise that day. Which, though
it grieved him much that one City should be a stay and impedient unto him
for his free passage into Egypt, yet he obeyed the pronosticator and caused all
his men to return. Thennemies took courage of their departure, and thinkinge
fear to have been the cause why they came not forwards, sailed out of the
City and set upon their tail. But they were more fierce in the beginning of
the skyrmishe, then constante in maintaining of the same. For when they saw
the Macedons turn about, they stayed and pursued no further. Alexander hering
the larume and remembering nothing the parill that was prophesied unto him, at
his friends request put on his harnys which he was seldom accustmued to do,
and resorted thither where the skyrmushe was most hot. There he was known by
a certain Arabiane that was one of Darius soldiers which took upon him a
desperate entterprise of the sleainge of Alexander and therefore making his
pretencs to have been fugitive from the Percians, keapt his sword secret under
nethe his targat, and fell down on his knees before him. Who judging that he
had fled to him forsocore willed him to be received among his own men. But
tharrabian therwithall stracke at the king with his sword, which he by little
steppinge aside avoided it from his throat and cut of the Arabians hand that
missed of his strocke Alexander then judged that he had clean escaped the
peril that should have chaunsed to him that day, but (as I think) desteyn
cannot be avoided: for whiles he was egre to fight amongss the formoste he was
stricken with an arrowe which passed through his Corselet and did stick in his
shoulder. Philip his Phisicio^ did pluck it out, and great haboundaunce of
blood did follow, whereof every man was afraied, in so much as they never saw
an arrowe pass so far through any Armore before. But he never changed
countenance nor couller, but causinge the blood to be stanched and his wound to
be wrapped up continued still in the skyrmishe among the foremoste, either
suffering or dissimuling his pain and dolor but when the blood that was
stayed for the time braste out again. And the wound which for the greues
grieved him not much began to swell and ranc^e as the blood waxed could
then he began to faint and fall down and was taken up by such as were next
him, and carried into his tent. Betis that perceived this, supposyng him to be
slain returned bnto the City again with great joy and triumph. But
Alexa^ders wound being yet unhealed he caused a mount to be cast up as high
as the top of the walls, and the walls to be cast down in diverse places by
the Myners. But they within made a countermure as high as the old wall. but
that could not stretche to the heyghte of the towers made upon the Mount, so
that the inner parts of the city were subject to shot. But a mine whereby
the wa^le was ouerthrown, and a breach made whereby the Macedones did enter was
the utter loss of the town where as Alexander pressing on among the
foremoste aduenterously, The winning of Gaza.
had his leg hurt with a stone. Which notwithstanding he mounted up by help
of his weapon (his former wound yet unclosed) and fought emongs the foremost
being in a great fury that in the siege of that one City he had received two
wounds. Betis that had fought notably and received many wounds was forsaken of
his own men yet not withstanding he mainteyned still the fight, and had all
his Armor embrued with his own blood and his ennemies. But when he was
enclosed round about, the^ Alexander which was wount to wonder at the virtue of
his enemies puffed up with a joyful pride said unto him: Betis thou shall not
die as thou would thy self, but whatsoever torments may be invented,
thi^ck that thou shall suffer them. For all his words there apeared in Betis no
token of fear, but beheld the king with an arrogant countenance, and would not
answer him one word. Then Alexander said se you not how obstynat he is to
hold his peace, he would not knele; nor ones desire mercy. But I will break
his silence with groaning if nothing else can do it. Thus his fortune alteringe
his nature changed him into strange manners, and turned his wrath into wodnes.
The death of Betys
For causing cords to be put through Betys feate whiles he was a live did
draw him about the City with horses glorieng in that he did cou^terfiet
Achilles (of whom he was descendid) in afflyctyng of his enymye. There were
slain of the Percians and Arabies ten thousand, and the victory was not
vnblodye unto the Macedones. This siege was not so famous by the Nobylitie of
the City as it was by ye double daungier the king was in. Which making
haste to pass into Egypt sent Amyntas with ten Galies into Macedonia to levy
more soldiers. For though he were alwyes victorer in prosperous battayles, yet
his men were deminished, and he trusted not so much to the soldiers of those
contries he had subdued, as he did to his own nation. Egyptians be a nation
that always were offended with thencrese and good fortune of the Percians.
Egipcyans.
who in there government over them used much pride and covetousness. And
therefore sekinge all occasions to revolt, had received Amyntas which came to
them rather by way of treaty then by any force, but now specially at
Alexanders coming plucked up there sprightes and assembled a great nombre to
mete him at Pelusiu^ where they judged he would enter. Alexander entered into
Egipte.
The.vii. day he removed from Gaza and came to that place in Egipte which now
is called Alexanders camp, from whence he sent his Army unto pelluzium by the
land way and he him self with a choice band of me^ was conveyed thither upon
the River of Nile. The Percians durst not abide his coming being in doubt
that the Egiptia^s would revolt. Memphys.
And therefore when Alexander drew nere unto Memphis where Astaces Darius
lieutennant was with a power of men of war, he came over the River to mete
Alexander, and yealdinge him self delivered him.viii.C. talentes with all the
Riches belonging to the king of Perce. From Memphis he passed upon the same
River unto the inward parts of Egypt, and set a stay and order of the
government of the country in such sort that he changed nothing of their
laws and custumes. Which thing ones brought to pass, he had a great desire to
visit the Oracle of Jupiter Hammon. But it was declared unto him that the way
he had to go was not passable with any great nombre and those ought to be
light, and trimmed mete to journey without bagage or much carriage. The country
he had to trauaill through was said to be spread over all with bareyn sand,
which ones put in an heat with the Son would burn there feate in such
forte that it should be intolerable for them to journey. And had to contend
not only with the heat and want of water, but also with the rowlynge sand,
which was so deape, and would so sink under there feet that it should be great
empediment unto there travail. All which difficulties the Egiptians set forth
to be greater then they were indede. But Alexander for the desire he had to
excede man's estate was so fervently bent to visit that famous Oracle of
Jupiter, whom either he believed, or coueted that other should believe to be his
father. that nothing could stay him in performinge of that enterprise.
Therefore with such as he had appointed, The Cyrenians.
to accompany him in that iourny passed by water upon Nile til he came to the
Meare of Meotes. The Ambassadors of ye Cyrenia^s came to him thither and
brought him p^sentes, who^ he iently entertained, assuring the^ of his
friendship. And yt done went forwards in his voyage. The first and the second
days traueil seamed tolerable, not being yet come to ye barein and wild
wilderness, and yet the ground they passed on was but unfruitful and dead earth.
But when the plaens apeared that were covered over with deape sand, they then
looked and sought a far of with their eyes for the land, eue^ as men be
accustomed to do when they saill in the main Sea. For they could not judge
them selves on land. where they never saw tree nor any apearance of
habitacion or haunt of men. And water there was none to be found in that dry
and burni^g sand and such as they had brought with them in bottels upon
camelles backs was consumed and spent. Besides the son was so hot that it
dried and burned up all things. When they were afflicted after this manner,
whither yt were by the will of god or by chance the clouds suddenly ouerwelmed
the sky, and so shadowed them that it was great comfort to such as were
forweried with the heat, though they wanted water to drinck. But to supply
there lack therein there fell by and by a great shoure which every man (for the
great desire they had to drink) gaped to receive with open mouth. When they
had traueled four days in passi^g of these wild deserts and were come nere
unto the place of the Oracle, there apeared a great swarm of Crows flieng
low before the troop, and when the host merched softely they sat down upon
the ground and sometime flewe forwards, as they had been guides the show unto
tharmye the way. The destricion of Hamon.
At length they came unto the place consecrate unto Jupiter, where as it was a
wonder to se in the mides of so wyld a desert such a ground so environed on al
parts with high trees defending the heat of the son, and such a nombre of
springes ronyng every where, which cause the woods always to look greane. The
air there al seasons of the year is like unto the spring time holsom and
temperat to live in. This country does border with the Ethiops toward the
Este and upon the arabies that they call Troglodites upon the southe. Ethiops.
Whose country stretche to the Red sea upon the west it confineth with other
Ethiops that be called Symenos upon the the north by a Nacio^ called Nasamo^s,
who inhabiting upon a flat shore be acustumed to live on spoils of the sea,
and lie always in a wayt upon the cost to spoil such ships as suffer wrack,
the people which inhabit about the wood be called Ha^monios and dwell in
cotages scatered abroad. The mids of there wood closed about with a treable
wall is unto them as a Castle. In the first ward is the Palaice of there
ancient kings in the second there wives, children, and concubines were lodged
in which place the Oracle of Jupiter is also. The descricon of the Idolle.
And the last is a place appointed for the men of war There is also an other
wood which in ye mids has a spring called the fountain of the son which
at the rising is luke warm, in ye heat of the day it is coolde, in the
evening warmeth again, so that at mydnight it is scalding hot and as it
draws toward day it demynisheth his heat more and more. The same thing
that is worshipped for Iubiter has not the symilitude of other Images that
crafts men do make for gods but is very like unto the fashion of a navel
having in the mids a Emera^de and set about with perles. When any answer is
required the priests carry the same in a ship of gold that has many plates of
silver hanging on both sides. The Matrones and the virgins follow after
singinge a jude song after their country manner, whereby they believe to
obtain of Jupiter to show his Oracle manifest and true. When Alexander was
come unto the place, the eldeste of the Priests met him and called him son,
affirming that Jupiter his father had given him that name, and he forgetting
the state of his mortality, said: that he both did receive and acknowledge
the same. Then he demanded further, if thempire of the hole world were
appointed to him by destiny. The flattery of the prophettes.
Whereupon the prophet prepared before to flattery answered: that the hole
world should come under his obeysaunce. After that he demanded whether al had
suffered death that murdered his father. The priest answered that his father
could not be harmed by the treason of any man, but he said: that all Philippes
killers were put to death, and one thing he added more, yt he should be
invincible til such time as he should depart to the gods. Thereupon Alexander
made sacrifice, and both offered unto Jupiter and gave great gifts unto the
priests. He lice^sed also his friends that they might co^sult with the oracle,
for such things as they would demand, but they enquired no further, but if
it were Jupiter his will yt they should worship their king with divine honors.
To them it was answered: that if they honored their prince being victorer as a
god, A digressio^.
it should be acceptable unto Jupiter. If he had with judgment wayed the
oracle according to the verity, he should well have perceived the untruth
that was therein: but whom fortune has brought to believe in her, she make
the^ many times more desirous of glory, then able to receive it. Alexander not
only suffered, but also commanded himself to be called the son of Jupiter,
and whiles he went about to increase the fame of his acts, he did corrupt and
deface them through such vain titles. Whereby the Macedons accustomed to be
governed by kings, but yet reserui^g a greater shadow of liberty then other
nations, did withsta^de him more arogantly in affecting of his, in mortalytie
then was either expedyent for him or them but these things shall be declared in
time convenient. Now I will proceed in the rest of his doings. The building
of Alexand^a.
When Alexander was returned from hamon and come to the marisse of Marcotes
scituat nere unto the Isle of Pharos, viewed the nature of the place, and was
at the first determined to biuld a City within the Island. But afterward
considering the Isle not to be large enough chose out the ground where
Alexandria is now (called by the name of the biulder) containing all that
ground betwe^e the Mere and the sea, the which was in co^pass as the walls
went.lxxx. furlonges. When he had taken order for building of this City,
leuing such behind him as he had appointed for the performa^s thereof, departed
unto Memphis. He had a desire (not vnreaso^able if it had been in time
convenient) to have visited both the inward parts of Egypt, and also Ethiopia.
And ye affeccion he had to view antiquities and the famous palaces of Memon
and Tyron had nere drawn him beyond the bounds of the son. Memnon Tyron.
But the wars he had in hand being of much more moment the^ any such idle
peregrinacion; gave him no time to fulfill his fantasy. And therefore appointed
Aestylus a Rodyan, Aestylus Pewcestes.
and Pewcestes a Macedon the gouerna^s of Egypt. And assigning to the.iiii.
thousand soldiers for defense of ye Region gave Toloma^.xxx. galls to keape
the mouth of Nile. He made Posomus ruler of that part of Afrik which joins
unto Egypt, and Cliomenes receyuer of the Tributes in both Contreis. Clyomenes.
This new City was sone replenished with a great multitude, for commandiment
was given to all the Cities theraboutes to send inhabiters unto Alexandrey. It
is said that when the king occordinge to the Macedones custume vsede the king
according to the Macedons custom used the ceremony of steping barley at ye
making of the walls, that the birds came and fed thereupon which being taken
of many for an unlucky token: it was answered by their deuiners yt there should
be great resort of strangers to that city. and that it should give
norishement to many lands. The River of Nyle.
As the king went down ye river of Nile Hector Parmenio his son desirous to
follow him was drowned. For the vessel sonke yt carried him. being pestred with
over many me^. He striued long with the stream. but his garments gave
impediment to his swimming. so that his breath was nere gone before he could
recover the bank. The death of Hector Parmen^os son.
wherefore want of succor he died. Whose unfortunate chance Alexander took
grievously as one yt did bear him special favor, and therefore caused his body
to be honorably buried. The death of Andromachus lieutenaunt of Siria,
Andromachus burnid by the Samaritans.
who^ the Samarita^s had burned was increase of Alexa^ders sorrow for ye
reuengeme^t whereof he made all the half he might. and at his coming into
Samaria, had the auctours of the act delivered into his hands, whom he put to
death. and then placed Nemno^ in Andromachus rowme. Methinians
He delivered into ye Methinia^s hands Aristonicus, and Crisolaus, that had
usurped among them, who^ they after many grievous torments did ha^g over
their walls. That done he gave audience to the Ambassadors of the Athenians
the Rodians, and the Sciottis. The Athenians did gratefie unto him his victory
and required that such Greeks as were taken prisoners might be restored to
liberty. The Rodia^s and the Sciotes demanded assistaunce of some guarrison:
he granted to them all their requests and restoryng to the Mytelens their
pledges, increased their territory and dominion in respect of the fidelity
they showed unto him, and the money that they employed in the wars. He gave
honor also according to their deseruinges unto he kings of Cipres which
revolted from Darius unto him, and had aided him with ships at the siege of
Tire. Amphoterus his admiral had commission to drive the Percians out of the
Isle Crete, but specially that he should rid the seas of the pirates, which
troubled and spoiled all the Ila^des, whiles these two princes converted their
powers one against another. When he had given order to all these things he did
dedicate to Hercules at Tire a great standing piece and.xxx. bowls of gold.
Alexander and Darius prepared to fight another battle.
That done he set his hole mind and care upon Darius, causing it to be
proclaimed that every man should set forwards toward Euphrates. But Darius
understanding that his enemy was gone through Egypt into Afric, stood in
doubt whether he should stay about Mesopotania, or withdraw into the inward
parts of his kingdom, judging that he should be hable to work with those
far nations in bringing of them forwards to the wars, that his lieftenaunt
should not be able to do. yet when the fame had published, and he understood
by assured advertisement that Alexander was returned out of Egypt, and fully
resolved to follow him with all his power into what country soever he should
go: he then gave order that the force of all the far nations should draw
toward Babilo^, knowing the stoutnes of his enemy he had to match withal.
Thither resorted both Bactrians, Scythians, and Indians, for the power of other
countries were come thither before. And having the double nombre of men that he
had before in Cilicia, prepared much armor for them with diligence, whereof
many of them had want. Both the horsemen and the horses were armed with plates
of stele. And such as before had no weapons but darts, had swords and
bucklers given to them more. And to increase the power of his horsemen,
delivered many horses to be broken among the footmen. He had prepared
also.CC. wagons set with hokes, which in those countries were esteemed things
of great force, and judged to be a wonderful terror to the ennemie: they were
made with great long pykes styking out before, and with swords set ouerwhart
on both sides. The wheales were also full of Iron pikes right forth, and of
great hokes both upward and downward, wherewith all thing was cut a sondre
that came in their way. When his people were thus furnysshed of armor, and
had provided sufficiently for the wars, he removed from Babylon. and keeping
the river of Tygre on his right hand* Tygre. Euphrates.
and Euphrates on his left hand, ouerspredde with his army all the playnes of
Mesopotania. After that he passed Tigre, and understanding that his enemy was
coming at hand sent first Satrapaces before with a thousand chosen horsemen,
Satrapaces
and afterward appointed syx thousand to Mascens to stop Alexander the
passage of the River. Masens.
Who had also in commission to waste and burn all the country where he judged
that his enemies should come, thynking to famyshe them with want of
victualles, consyderyng that they had no other provision but such as they got
by rauyne, and by stelthe: they themselves having plenty brought them both by
land and by the river of Tigre. At length he came unto a village called
Arbella, Arbella.
which was afterward famous by reason of his overthrow. There he left the
chief furniture of his victualles and carriage, Licus.
and made a bridge over the River of Licus, and in five days conveyed over his
army as he had done before over Euphrates: passing forewardes from thence about
four store forlo^ges. He came unto an other river called Bowmello, Bowmello.
and there encamped. The country served wonderful well for the arrangyng of
his battailles in the large playnes, passable for horses every where, and
without stubbes, or short brushe, to cover the ground withal, but so free a
prospect, that the eye might decerne things a great way of. And if there
appeared any hills within the plain. Darius caused the same to be cast down,
and the ground to be made smothe. Such as by conjecture made report to
Alexander of Darius power could not be credited, for he could not think after
so many slain, there could be a greater power gathered together, that he had
before. But he that never doubted any peril, and much less the multitude of
men, after the eleue^th enca^ping came to the river of Euphrates, over the
which he made brudges and passed over his horsemen and afterward his
footmen. For Mazeus that was sent against him with six thousand horsemen to
let his passage, durst not encounter with him. When he had continued there a
few days not only to rest his soldiers but also to confirm their minds
and encourage them, he set forewardes stoutly against his enemy, fearyng that
he would have retired back into the inward parts of his country, whether he
should have been enforced to follow by waste places and deserts. Therefore the
fourth day he passed by Arbella and came unto the river of Tigre. All the
country beyond the River was on a smoke newely set on fire by Mazeus, who
burned all things where he came even as he had been an enemy. Alexander at the
first by reason of the darcknes of the smoke stayed for fear of
embushementes. But when they which were sent to scour the country reported
that all thing was clear he appointed a few horsemen to prove the passage of
the River, who found the deapnes at the first enter to come to the horse
breaste, and in the mids of the stream to the horse necks. There is no
River in all the east parts of the world that ronneth so violently, which
besides the waters of other rivers that do ro^ne into it, drives down stones
with the stream so that of his swiftnes it is called Tigre, which in the
percian tongue is so much to say as an arrowe. The footeme^ therefore divided
into two ba^des, holdi^g there armor over there heads were enclosed on both
sides with the horsemen, and so passed till they came in the deape of the
channel without any great difficultye. The king was the first among the
fotemen that passed over to the furtherside, who with his hand (saying his
voyre could not be hard) showed the shallowe places unto the soldiers. But
they had much pain to keep their footing by reason of stones whereupon they
stumbled, and of the violence of the water that took their feet away. Such as
carried burdens on their backs had the greatest trauaill which not being
able to stay them selves by reason of the troble of their carriage were borne
down by violence, of the stream. And whiles every man went about to recover
again his own, there fell greater strife among themselves, then they had with
the stream. And the heaps of fardelles that fleted every where upon the water
bare down many. The king cried to them that it was sufficyent to keape their
armor and let the rest go, promysing to recompense every man. But they
nether followed his counsel, nor did as he commanded them besides the noise,
that was emonges them, fear so fissed their ears in there, swimming and wading
through the water. Atle^gth where the stream was most shallow they came forth,
there being nothing mys carried or wantinge emonges them all, sauinge afew
fardelles. If their enemies had made but a proffer against them. they might
easily have put them to distress. But Alexanders continual good fortune
turned then his enemies away from him. With which fortune he passed the River
of Granyk, when so many thousands both of horsemen and footmen kept the
passage against him. After that sort he overcame the multitude of his enemies
in the streyghtes of Cilicia. Though his bouldnes were such, that is some time
wanted praise, yet his felicity ever delivered him out of all extreme peril.
If Mazeus had done his part and set upon them as they were passing the River,
he might easily have put them to distress, being unarmed and out of order. But
after the Macedones had Armed them selfs (being then to late) he began to
show himself with a thousand horsemen. When Alexander perceived the small
nombre that came against him he caused Ariston captain of Peonians to give a
full charge upon them. The horsemen that day notably behaved them selfs, but
in especial Ariston, Ariston.
which with his spece ran Satropaces the chief captayn through the throat, and
pursuyng him into the midst of his camp threw him from his horse and cut of
his head, which to his great commendacion he brought and threw down before
the king. Alexander tarried there two days, and against the morning caused
warning to be given by proclamacion for his setting forwards. But in the first
watch of ye (...) the moon suffered Ecclips which losing her brightness
afterward became as red as blood and therewith waxed dim and back. An
Ecclips of the Moon
The strau^genes of this matter did strike a religious fear among ye
Macedo^s, whereof proceeded such a doubt and fear, yt they fell into a murmur
and grudging that they should be brought forwards after such a manner against
the will of the gods into the uttermost bounds of the earth, where as they
were not hable to pass the Rivers, nor could enjoy the accustomed use of the
elements, finding nothing but waste grounds and wild deserts, al which was
done (they said) for the ambicion of one man. for whose vainglory the blood
of so many thousands should be shed. He despises ( quoth they) his country,
he has forsaken Philip for his father and affected heaven in his folish
imaginacion. When Alexander perceived the matter to come to a mutteri^g, he
that in all things was without fear commanded the chief rulers and capteins
of his men of war to assemble at his pauilion, and there commanded the
Astronomers of the Egiptiane (whom he judged to have most understanding of the
planettes) to declare their opinions. They understanding very well the
reuolucyons of the time, and their appointed courses knew that the moon did
ever eclipse, when that either she went underneath the earth or else when her
light was blemished by opposicio^ of the son, which reason conceived among
them selfs they accustomed not to teach the people. They affirmed also that
the greakes were under the Regyon of the Son, and the Percyans under the
moon, and therefore so often as the moon fell of her light it signified great
destruction to the nations under that co^stellacio^. And to confirm that
opynio^ of theirs they brought in old presidentes of the kings of Perce to
who^ the eclips of the moon had signified, yt the gods were against the^ in
fighting of their battailles. The force of supersticion to govern a multitude.
There is nothing more effectual then supersticion to govern a multitude,
which otherwise is without rule, fierce, and mutable. But when they have once
conceived a religion: though it be but vain, they be more obedient to their
deuynes, then to their captains which thing might be well perceived, when
these aunsweres of the Egipcians were spread abroad among the people, for
they straight ways were removed from their dulnes and despair, and slurred up
to hope and confidence. Alexander therefore that could use the time, and employe
his soldiers in their good mode: in the second watch removed his camp,
keeping Tigre on his right hand, and the mount which they call Gordeion his left
hand. By the spring of the day the scouters that he sent before to discover,
returned to him with report that Darius was coming. Then the soldiers
prepared themselves to the fight, and marched forwards in order of battaille.
But those that discovered for the Percians, were but a thousand horsemen, which
keeping the scoute a farreof, seemed to the Macedons to be a great army. The
scouters commonly have that property that when they can not find out the
truth, they imagen through fear things that be false. When Alexander
understood the certayntie he sent out toward them a small, nombre of his
own horsemen: at whose coming they fled, and were partly slain, and partly
taken prisoners. That done, he sent horsemen as well to discover further, as
also to quench the fire which the Percians had made through all the country.
For as they fled away they put fire into the ruffes of the houses and the
stackes of torn, which sone took hold above and consumed all till it came to
the ground. By extinguisshing of those fires great plenty of corn was found,
and habunda^ce of all other things ensued among the Macedons. That was a
matter which encouraged the soldiers greatly to pursue their enemies. For
doubting lest they should burn and consume all such things as might serve to
their use: pursued them with all the speade they could make, wisdom growing of
necessity. For Mazeus which before did burn the country at leisure. when he
saw himself pursued. fled away and left unto the Macedons the more part
untouched. Alexander understanding that Darius drew toward him, and was come
within an hundred and fifty furlonges, made provision of victualles, and
remained four days in the same place. Darius letters were there intercepted,
which he had written to the Greeks, in persuasion either to kill or betray
Allexander. Who doubted whether he should recite the same letters openly or no,
having no mistrust of their benevolence and affection toward him: But Parmeno
dissuaded the putting of any such promises into the soldiers heads,
considering that the committing of such an act consisted in one man's hand,
and that covetousness judged never any thing unlawful. He followed Parmenios
counsel, and so removed his camp. As they were marching one of the Enukes that
attendid upon Darius wife brought word that she fainted, and drew her breath
with great difficulty. Who in very deed was so weried with continual trauaill
of her journey, and care of mind, that she fell down in a swowne betwixt her
mother in law and her young daughter, and so died. He had not so sone told the
tale but another came with tidinges that she was dead in deed: whereat Alexander
was no les sorrowful then if his own mother had been in the same case. and such
tears falling from his eyes as Darius sh^ld have shed: repairid into the tent
where Darius mother was sitting by the dead body. There his sorrow renewed when
he saw her lie prostrat upon the ground, who by the chance that presently
fell being put in remembrance of her adversity past, enbrased in her arms
Darius.ii. daughters a comfort to he in their mutual dokir but that she was
enforced to comfort the^. Her young nephewe stood in her presence the more to
be petied, because yt for his yought he yet understood not the calamytie that
was growing toward him. A man would have judged that Alexander had wept for
his own case, which lamented and would receive no comfort but abstayned from
meat, and reserved all honor to be done to the dead corse after the country
custom of the Percians. Worthy he was hereby to receive the fruit of such
mekenes and continency. He had only seen her once before, which was the day of
her taking, and the^ came not to visit her, but as Darius mother. The
excellencye of her beutye, was no provoking to him of lust, but of glory. Of
those Enukes that were about the Queen there was one Tiriotes which during this
murning and lamentacion, escaped by a gate that was vnwarded, and fled unto the
Percians Camp, where he was by the watchmen brought to Darius presence. When
Darius saw him lamentyng and tearing of his clothes. he was in a wonderful
expectacio^ what his sorrow should be, doubting what thing he might fear
most. Thy countenance (quoth he) declares that some great mishefe is happened.
Darius to Tyrw^es.
Take heed thou confelest nothing from my miserable ears. I have learned to be
unfortunate, and it is often times a comfort of a man's calamity to know his
misshapp. Is it not the misusing of my wife and children that thou would tell
me? which is the thing I suspecte most and fear to utter and (as I believe) is
more grievous unto them then any kind of torment. Nothing les ( quoth Tiriotes)
The same honor that was given unto the^ by your subjects the like is used by
him that is victorer. But your wife is the cause of my amasement, which is even
now dedde. When that word was ones spoken there was nothing but lame^tacion and
howling out through the camp And Darius could not be otherwise persuadid but
that she was slain, because she would not consent to her misusement, and in
the vehemence of his sorrow cried out. Darius exclamacion in his sorrow
O Alexander what so great an offense have I committed against the whom of thy
kindred have I slain, that thou should require me with this cruelty? Thou
have done it without enye peruokement of my part. But be it so that thou do^^e
move and just war against me yet is it thy part therefore to keep war
with women? Tyriotes thereupon did swear by the gods immortal, that she had
received no kind of violence nor harm, but that Alexander lamented her death,
and wept no less the^ he him self would have done. Those words drive him into
further suspicion and Jealousy, co^^ec^uring that Alexa^ders behauor therein had
risen upon the familier conversation had betwixt them. Therefore he avoided all
persons from him, saving only Tyriotes, and leaving his weping, but yet nere
dead for sorrow said unto him: Thou seeste now Ciriotes that lies can take no
place. Torments straight ways shall be brought before the^ I require the^
therefore if any reverence of the Prince remain within thy heart, tell me
whithout compulcion the thing that I desire to know and am ashamed to enquire.
Is it possible being of thage that he is, and having her in his hands, that he
should notattempt her: Tiriotes offered him self to be racked in trial of the
cause, and called the gods to witness, that she was never used but chastely and
reverently. Atle^gth when he was once parsuaded that his words were true,. He
covered his head, weping long space. And afterward the tears yet distilling
down his chekes uncovered his face, and holding up his hands to heaven, said.
O you gods that I do worship I require you cheflie to stablishe this kingdom
unto my self. Darius peticion.
But if ye have determined my ruyn and decay, then my request is that none
may reign as king in my domynion, but even he that is so just an ennemy, and
so merciful a victorer. And therefore though he had twice before required
peace at Alexander his hands and prevailed not, but had converted al his mind
toward the wars: yet he was then so overcome with the continencye of his
ennemy, that he sent ten of the chiefest of his blod as Embassedors to treat
with him upon condicons of peace. Alexander calling a counsel gave them
presence. to whom the eldest spoke in this wise. That Darius has now the
third time demanded peace of you no power has compelled him, The words of
Darius Embasseadores.
but your justice and co^tinency has moved him. He should not perceive yt either
his mother, wife, or children were prisoners saving for want of their company,
you take care of their chastities which remain on live, yea even as you were
their father you give to the^ the ho^or apertaining, and suffer the^ to
co^tinewe in their former estate. Ise ye dolorousnes in your face, that I saw
in darius when I perted from hi^, and yet he does morn^ for his wif, and you
for your enemy And if the care of her burial had not been, you had now stand
in battle in redynes to fight. Is it any marvel therefore if he require
peace of such one, that is so friendly disposed toward him? What shall they
need to contend with arms, between whom there remains no hatred. In his
former treaties he offered ye River of Alys which boundeth upon Lydia to be the
confynes of your empire, but now he proffereth you in dowre with his daughter
to be delivered out of hand, al those countries that lie between Hellespo^t and
Euphrates. For the performans of which his promys: and for the observing of
peace. Occhus his son now in your possession shallbe the pledge for his
part. His request is to have his mother, and his two daughters restored unto
him, for which three you shall receive.xxx thousand Talentes. Except I knew the
moderacion that is in you I would not be so bold to say that this is a time
when you ought not only to grant peace, but also to seek for it yourself: Look
back and behold what a great thing you leave behind you, and force how much it
is that you covet before you. Over great an empire is daungerus. And it is
hard to hold that you be not able to receive. Do you not se that those ships
which be of exceeding greatness, that they cannot well be governed. Judge that to
be the cause that Darius lost so much. Because that ouermuche is the occasion
of much loss. It is more facil to get many things then to keape a few. How
much more easly do our hands catch, then hold still. The very death of
Darius wife now does show, that you have not so get at occasion to show your
compassion as you had before. The Ambassadors were removed unto an other place
and he debated in counsel his opynion. It was long before any durst utter what
they thought, because they were uncertain how the king was inclined. Parmenios
opinion concerning the raunsoming of prisoners
At length Parmenio spoke, and said: my opinion was ever that the prisoners
taken at Damaseo should have been delivered to such as would redeem the^, whereby
a great sum of money might have been made of them, which now remaining in
captivity pester the hands of many a man of service. And now I think most
necessary of all, yt you exchaunce for.xxx. talentes of gold, this old woman
and the two young damsels which be but impedime^tes and disturbaunce to you in
your iourneis. The conquest (he said) was better that was gotten by treaty,
rather the^ by force. And that there was never none before him yt was lord of
all the countries in length and breadth lieng between Ister and Euphrates: he
willed him therefore rather to have respect toward Macedonia, then to look
forewardes toward Bactria and the India^s. His words liked not the king, and
therefore so sone as Parmenio had made an end of his tale, he made this answer:
And I, if I were Parmenio, would rather desire money then glory. But now seeing
I am Alexander, I am not in any doubt of poverty, and have co^sideracion that
I am a king and no merchant. I have nothing whereof I will make say, and much
less sell my fortune. If I were in mind to deliver the prisoners it were
much better to give them freely, then to ransom the^ for money. Hereupo^ he
called in the Ambassadors and answered the^ in this sort. Alexanders answer
to the Ambassadors.
Show you to Darius that ye giving of thanks is but waste to a man's enemy, and
let him not think. that I have had any respect to his friendship, in those
things yt I have done of mine own clemency and liberality, nor let him not
impute the same in any wise toward himself, but to thinclinacio^ of mine own
nature, and that I contend not against men's calamities, but against the force
of mine enemies I use not to make wars with women and prisoners, for he must be
armed to whom I shall show my hatred. And though it were so in deed that he
me^t good faith in his peace asking, yet peradventure I would advise me before
I would consent. But seeing that at some time he has by his letters provoked my
soldiers to betray me and at other time stored up my friends with money to my
destruction: I must pursue him to thuttermost, not as a righteous enemy, but as
one that works his things by treason. If I should accept the conditions of
peace that you do bring, I should acknowledge him to be victorer, which
liberally does give me all that is behynd the river of Euphrates, not
considering in what place I speak now unto you. Have you forgotte that I am
passed the river of Euphrates. and encamped beyond the bounds ye proffer me in
dowre? drive me from hence that I may know the same to be yours, wherewith ye
would infeoffe m^. He proffereth me his daughter with no greater liberality
then he would do to one of his servants. Does he think to do me a pleasure
in preferryng me to be his son in law before Mazeus? Go and show this to
your king, that both that he has lost, and that he has yet in possession,
shall be unto me rewards of the war, which war shall discuss the bounds
of both our Empires, and by the fortune of the battaille we shall fight to
morrow, appoincted to each of us our limittes. Let him know that I came not
into Asia to receive but to give. If he would have been content to be second
person and not coueted to be equal with me. I would peradventure have
granted his request. But as two sons cannot shine on the earth at once, so
likewise two such great kingdoms cannot be at one time in the world without
the subversion thereof. Therefore let him either this day yield himself, or else
prepare himself against ye morowes fight, nor let him not persuade himself to
have other fortune, then he has proved already. The Ambassadors replied: yt
seeing he was resolved to proceed with war he did royally in that he was
plain, and did not fode the forth with hope of peace, their request was
therefore that they might be dispatched to the king to warn him to prepare
likewise for the war: When they returned they declared that Alexander was
determined out of hand to try the matter by battaille. Wherefore Darius sent
Mazeus out of hand with iii.M. horsemen to keep the passages whereby the
Macedones should pass. When Alexander had performed the funeralles of Darius
wife, leuyng with a small guarrison al such as were unprofitable for the fight,
within the strength of his camp, set forwards toward his enemies. His
footmen were divided into two battailles empaled with horsemen on both sides,
and his carriage went in the mids. Then he sent Medinas with horsemen upon the
spores to discover where Darius was: Who coming within the view of Mazeus,
durst not pass any further, but brought report that he could here nothing else
but the noise of men and neying of horses. Mazeus likewise discovered them and
returned back to Darius, declaring that his enemies were coming: Then Darius,
whose desire was to encounter his enemies in the plain and open fields, The
order of Darius battilles.
commanded his men to armor, and divided them into two parts, whereof the one
marched on the left hand, and the other on the right. In the battaille on the
left hand a.M. of the Bactrian horsemen had the first place, with the like
no^bre of Dahans and.iiii.M. Arac^osians and Susians, after which band of
horsemen there followed, Bessus.
C. hoked wagons, and behind the^ Bessus with an other band of.viii.M.
Bactrians horsemen and.ii.M. Massagetes. The footmen of diverse nations came
next in order of battaille, not mixed together, but each contreyme^ by
themselves. Ariobarzanes.
Ariobar^anes and Oribates had the government of the Percians, Mardia^s and
Sogdia^s. But their charge was divided, and Orsines that was come of the.vii.
Percia^s and of the blood of noble king Cyrus had ye rule of the whole: Other
nations followed whose names were scarsely known to their own company.
Cradates.
Cradates was the next which having also fifty hoked wagons, placed a band of
Caspians horsemen before them, and behind them the Indians and other the
inhabiters of the red sea, rather names of men then good assistau^ce. This
square was empaled with fifty wagons, unto the which the mercenary soldiers
were joined. After them followed the men of Armeny the less, then the
Babilonians, and next the Bellitans with such as inhabit the Cossean
mountains. The Gortuans came next, which sometime followed the Media^s out of
Euboia, but at those days degenerated from their country customs. The
Phrigians, Cathonians, and Parthians, enclosed the tail. This was the
battaille on the left hand. In the battaille on the right hand were the people
of the greater army, the Cadusians, Capadocia^s, Siria^s, and medians, who had
fifty hoked wagons. The some of his whole army was.xlv.M. horsemen, and.CC.
thousand footeme^. When they were placed in order of battaille, they marched
forewardes ten furlo^ges, and they were commanded to stay. Whiles the Percia^s
after that manner tarried for their enemies, the^ fell a sudden fear among the
Macedons: whereof there apeared no cause, and yet every man was amassed, and a
certain bread entered into their hertes. The lightening that fell out of the air
being in the somer season seemed like fire, and the flames suddenly appearing,
were thought to come from Darius camp. If Mezeus which was sent to observe
their coming had set upon them while^ they were in this fear, he might have
done the^ some notable damage. But he was ^lack to do his enterprice and
remained upon the top of an hille, co^tent^ that he was not assailed.
Alexander perceiving the terror that was come among his men made a sign for
them is stay, and gave order that they should warm themselves* and refreshe
their bodies: giving them to understand that there was no cause why they should
so suddenly conceive a fear, seeing their enemies were yet a good distaunce
from them. At length, when he perceived they had recovered their spirits, he
exhorted them both to receive courage and to put on their armor. But yet he
thought nothing more expedient for the case present, then to fortify his
camp in the same place. The next day Mazeus which had planted himself on a
high hill from whence he might behold his enemies camp, either for fear or
else because his commission was but only to discover, returned again unto
Darius. Upon his departure the Macedo^s by and by t^ke the hille which he had
forsaken, the same being of more strength then the plain where they remained
before, from whence he might behold their enemies camp. And though the miste
which the moiste hills did cast forth took not away clearly the use of the
prospe^: yet it let them to deserve the division of their enemies barteles,
and there order: the multitude of whom ouerspreade the fyldes, and the noise of
such a nombre filled there ears though they weep far of. Then Alexander
began to reuolue in his head, and debase with him self, one while Pe^menyos
opynion, and a another time his own. For he was come so farforth that he could
not retire except he were victoret with out the great destruccyon of his
Army. The multitude of his enemies moved him much in respect of his small
noumbre. yet on the other part he remembered what great acts he had don with
them, and how many nations he had vanquysshed. So that hope surmountynge his
fear, he thought it most danger of all to differ the battle any longer,
lest desperacion might grow amongst his men, and therefore diss^mblyng the
matter caused the Mercenarye horsemen, and the Peones to pass on before, and
divided his Phalanx as it has been said before, into two battayles, and
empaled the same with horsemen on both sides. By that time the m^ste avoided,
and began to wax clear, the order of there enemies apearing manifestly. The
Macedones then whither it were of courage, or for that they were impacient to
tarry any longer, made such a shoute as men of war use when they join in
battle the like was also made by the Percians. So that the woods and vaille is
round about, rebounded with the terryble sound. The Macedo^es then could not
abstain any longer, but would have run forwards toward there enemies.
But Alexander thought it better to fortify his camp upon that hill, and so
commanded it to be entrenched about. Which work being spedely p^rformed he
enteres in his tent from whens he might behold his (...) host. Then the hole
fashion and form of the (...) that was at hand was presented before his eyes:
does horsemen and fotemen glistred in there bright armor, and al things were
prepared with great diligence. He beheld the care of the captains in his
enemies camp how they did ride up and down to set things in order. And
diverse things which were but vain in deed: as the noise of me^, the n^yng of
horses and the glistering of their armor trouble ^he mind: that was careful in
thexpectacion of the matter, Therefore whither it were that he was not fully
resolved in his mind or else to prove the minds of such as were aboutes him,
Permenio his opinion.
called his friends to consult what was best to do* Parmenio that was the most
expert man among all the captains in the feats of war: thought (...) not
to give his ennemies plain battle, but rather to set upon them in the dead
time of the night whereby he thought they might easily be discomfited. Supposing
that they amo^gs who^ there was so great diversity of customs and alteracion
of language could never assemble well together* specially when they should be put
suddenly in fear in the night time being a sleep: whereas in the day time the
harp of the Scythians and Bactryans with their rough faces, and long hear,
besides the hugenes of their bodies should appear terrible. And argued how
soldiers were more moved with vain causes of fear and such were of no
Moment then with such as were just causes in deed he declared also how their
enemies by reason of ye great multitude should be hable to enclose there small
nombre round about: and that they should not now fight in the straites and
narow passages of Cilicia, but in an open and large plain. They all in manner
agreed to Parmenios saying: and Policarpon was of a plain opynion, that the
victory consisted in the point which he had devised. The king that before had
taunted Parmenio more bitterly then he thought good, would not check him
again. but beheld Polycarpon and said: That policy that you advise me
pertains to robbers and thieves, A^exanders answer
for it is their propertye to work by fle^ht and d^^ce it. I will no more
suffer that either Darius absence, the streytnes of the ground or the ^^elthe
in the night, shall be an hinderaunce to my glory. I am plainly determined to
have to do with him in the open day, and had rather repent me of my fortune,
than be ashamed of my victory. Besides this it is to be consideryd, that the
Percians keape good watch and stand armed always in a redines to receive us.
whereof I have advertisement: So that they cannot be deceived that way.
Therefore there does remain no more, but that you prepare your selves to the
battayll. When he had by these words put the^ in a courage, he dismisses them
from counsel, to refresshe there bodies. Darius coniecturing that his enemies
would have done the same thing yt Parmenio did persuade, caused the horses to
stand ready brideled, the hole night, and the more of his host to continue
armed and keape good watch. His ca^pe shone bright with the fires that were
made, and he him self with his capitaynes and kinsfolks went about his
batte^ls that stood in order and in arms making invocation to the Son, to
Mars, and to the everlasting fire, that they would inspire unto them a
fortitude of mind, that might answer to the ancient glory and acts of his
predecessors. And showed if the mind of man were noble to conceive any tokens
or signs of the gods fauore or assistaunce, it was no doubt but that they
were bent on there side, having already streken a sode^ fear among the
Macedones which (he said) might he seen by there ro^^ing here and there by the
^arieng and casting of there Armor. And that the gods which took care of the
Percians Impire were new determined to punish those toward: Whose captain
being of another sort then the rest was like unto these wild beasts, which
through gredines of the ^ray, that they do covet, fall into the s^ares that be
set f^^ them. The like care was emonges the Macedones, for as though the matter
should have been tried that night, they passed i^ over in doubt and fear.
Alexander himself that was never seen i^ such scare before that time called
for Aristander to meke vows and prayers, wh^ in a white garment carie^g
V^rberies in his hand, with his hedde, covered went before the king calling
upon Jupiter, Mynerua and Victoria. When he had thus performed his sacrifice
according to there religion returned into his (...) him to rest ye residue of ye
night. But he ^ulde nether rest* nor sleep, but continually debated with him
self which way he should affaile his enemies: One while he was of opinion to
give his first unset wo^ that battle of the Percians that should come on his
right hand: Some time he determined to mete his enemies in a plain front,
and an other while was in doubt whither it were better to set first on their
left batteyll, atlength his body became heavy with trauaill of the mind and
fell into a sound sleep. When the day apeared, the capteines assembled about
the kings Pauilion, to receive there charge. Where they stood amassed with
greater silence then they were accustumed. For they could not but wonder that
Alexander who was ever wount ^^ cast upon other men, and to reprove such as
were slow or neglygent, not to be then storyng when the matte^ was come to the
poincte of the extreme danger. And many were of opinion that he slept not but
shronke for fear, yet for all that none of them that were about his person
durst attempt to wake him. In the mean season the time paste away, and the
soldiers might neither put on their armor, nor go in order of battaille
without commandment of their hea^. When they had thus tarried a good while.
Parmenio gave commandment they should fall to meat. At length when the time
came, that of necessity they must set their battaylles, he entered into the
kings l^dgyng, and called upon him diverse times by his name, but when he could
not awake him with his voice he stored him with his hand: Parmenio to Alexa^d.
It is farfourth day (quod he) and your enemies come forewardes in order of
battaylle and your soldiers being yet unarmed, (...) no commandment yet
given them what they shall do^ where is* that there fulness and courage of yours
become which were wont to stir ^p other men* unto whom Alexander made
answer: Think you that I could sleep before I had rid myself of the rare
that lets me to take my rest? and thereupon caused the ^^ompettes to blow to
the battaille. But when Parmenio continued ^^ll in admiracion that he in such
a time could sleep so quietly. It is no marvel (quod Alexander) when Darius
burned the country ^^sted the vyllages, and destroyed the victualles. I could
then in no wise be quiet. But now what cause have I of fear, seeing he
prepares himself to fight? He has now fulfilled my desire, res^^te now where
your charge lie, and I will straight ^lyes come to ge^^e, order among you,
and reason this matter afterward. He use ^ seldom to take his friends a^u^e
when my (...) ^^ danger was at hand, when Parmenio was gone he armed himself,
and came forwards among the soldiers. Who seeing him look so thereful as
they had not done before (...) yued by the boldness of his countenance a
certain hope of the victory: Then he caused the trenches of he^ camp (...)
cast down, that the soldiers might have free passage forth and so did set
his battailles in order. The horsemen which they call Age^a of whom Cli^us
was Captain, were set in the wynge of his right hand battaylle: to whom he
joined Philotas and other Capitaines. The order that Alexander used at the
battaill of Arbella.
The last hand of horsemen was Me^e^gers which went next unto the square
battaylle of footmen that the Macedons name Phalanx. After the Phalanx those
footmen went that he called Argyraspides, Argiraspid^
of whom Nycanour the son of Parmenio was Captain. Cen^s with his hand was
appoincted to be a relief* Horestes and L^ta (...) next ^n order, and after
them Poly^arp^n that had the rule of the strangers Ph^lag^^ had the rule of
the Balacr^us. And this was the order of Alexanders battaylle in the right hand
whereof Ami^tas was chief. In the left battaille. Cr^terus had the charge of the
Peloperension horsemen and had with him also the bands of the Atheia^s
Locrensians, and Mole^^^sians, and the last trops were the horsemen of Lassalia
under Philip their Captain. Thus the horsemen covering the foot men made the
front of the left battaylle. And left thennemies through their multitude
should enclose the battle about, he planted a great force behind for the
relief of that matter, and set a relief also upon the wings not to front with
the rest but upon the sides. to thentent that if the enemies atempted to
compass about the battailles, that there should be ready to keep them doing.
Those that occupied the places of relief were the Agrians, of whom Attalus was
captain. and the archers of Crete joined unto them: such as stood in the
hinder parts of the battailles were ordered to turn their faces from the
frontwardes; because that being in a redines every way, the battailles in
every place should be of like force. They which stood with their faces
co^trariwyse were the Illicians and the mercinary soldiers, with the Thracia^s
that were lightly armed. These his battailles were set so aptly to be turned
every way, that such as stood in ye hinder parts could not be enclosed about,
but might toward each part make their front: So the front, the flanks, and
the hinder parts were also of like force. When he had set his men in order
after this manner, he gave commandment that if the Percia^s should put
forwards upon them their hoked wagons with a cry or noise, that the^ they
should open their battailles and receive the^ with silence, not doubting but
that they should pass through without harm doing, if no man did resist them.
But if they should come without any shout or (...), that then they themselves
should make a cry (...) fear^ the horse withal, and so with p^kes thrust them
in on every side. They which had the charge of the battailles were commanded
to extend them so much in breadth as they might, lest by standing over close
the might be environed, and yet not to stretche them so far out, to leave the
places void or thin in the mids. The carriage and the prisoners among
whom Darius mother was, were set in the top of an hill with a small guarde
about them. The charge of the left battle was committed to Parmenio as was
accustomed before time and Alexander him self was in the other. When they were
come nere together one Bion came flieng from the Percian camp in all the haste
he could make, and declared unto the king that Darius had planted Iro^
galtroppes. Where as he thought his horsemen should pass, and by a certain
sign showed him the place, because it might be avoided. Alexander wylled the
fugitive to be keapt sauffe, and assembled all his captains together, declaring
the matter and exorting them to make their soldiers privy to the danger, for
eschewyng the place poynted out to them. But all that were in so great an army
could not hear ye warning given, the noise of both armies taking away the use
of the ears. Alexanders exortacion to his men.
But Alexander riding betwixt the battles, gave exortacion to the Capitains and
to all other that were within hearing. He declared that there was but one
hasarde remayninge to them that had passed through so many countries in hope of
the vitorie which they were now ready to fight for. Thereupon he reduced to
their memory the battelles they had fought, at the River of Granike, in the
mountains of Cilicia, and with what speed they had passed over both Siria and
Egypt, the rehearsal whereof put them in great hope and pricked them forwards to
the desire of glory. He showed that the Percians being withdrawn again from
their former flieng, were now compelled to fight of nesessitie because they
could fle no further, and how that three days together amassed for fear they had
remained still in one place with their armor on their backs. Of whose despair
(he said) there could be no greater argument, then that they had set on fire
their own country, confessing all to be their ennemies, that they distroyed
not. He exhorted them not to fear the vain names of unknown nations, as a
thing nothing pertinent to the war, which were called Scythians or Cadusians.
For that they were unknown nations, was the greatest toke^ that they were me^
of no valor. For that such as be valiant me^ could never be unknown in the
world. And contrariwise dastards, when they come forth of there de^nes bring
nothing with them but names of men where as you yt be Macedons have obtained by
your virtue and manhod, that there is no Country in the world ignorant of your
arts. He willed the^ to behold ye evil order yt was in their enemies host, of
whom some had no weapon but a darte, other a slinge to cast stones, and very
few had such armor as they ought to have. So that though there were a great
nombre on the other part, yet he said they had more on their side that should
come to hand strippes. And yt for his perte he would not require any man to
adventure him self, except he were an ensample to the^ to show their
valia^tnes and courage. For he promised yt he should be seen fighting with the
foremost knowing yt so many wounds as he should get, should be so many
orname^ntes to his person. He said they them selves knew yt he would be no
pertaker of the pray, but yt ever his cus^ume was to bestow the rewards of
the victory to their behoue and commodity. His former words he showed to be
spoken to such as were me^ of courage But if there were any yt were otherwise,
he had to say unto the: that they were come to the place from whe^s they could
not fle, having lest so many countries behi^d the^ which they had passed over,
and so many rivers and mounteyns at their backs. So that now there was no way
to their houses and country, but such as they must make open with their own
hands. This was the exhortacion he gave unto the captains, and to such of ye
soldiers as stood next him. Darius that was in his left battle accompaned
with a choice band of elect horsemen, and foteme^, dispiced the small no^bre of
his ennemies their battails appearing to him shinne and void of me^, when he
saw there wings stretched so fat abroad. He stood therefore in his Chariot on
hie, and turning him self both on the right hand and the left, The oracio^ of
Daryus.
spoke in this sort to such as were abouts him. We that long ago were lords of
all the countries lieng betwixt Hellespo^t and the Occian Sea, are compelled now
to fight not for fame and glory but for our sauegard and our liberty, with
chyefly is to be esteemed. This day shall I either establishe, or make an end
of the greatest Impire that has been in any age. At ye river of Granik we
fought with a small part of our power. When we were vanquished in Cilicia, Siria
was able to receive us, and the Ryuers of Tigre and Emphrates were as bulwarks
to defend our kingdom. But now we come to that point, that we have no place
to fle to, if we be put to flight. All things behind our backs are wasted with
this long war, nether cities be inhabited nor me^ left to tylle the ground.
Both our wiefes and children do follow this army, a pray ready for our
enemies, except we put forth our bodies for the defense of such as be dear
unto us. So much as has co^cerned me. I performed preparing such an army as
this huge plain is scarsly able to receive: I distributed emonges you horse
and armor provided ye vitels should not want for such a multitude and have
chose^ out an apt place to derayn ye batailes in All the rest remains in
your hands. Do but dare, and the victory is yours, Despise you this fame
which is but a weke wepon against men of valeur. It is rashenes which hitherto
ye have feared as a virtue, whereof when the furste brunt is spent, it waxes
then dull as the bees when they have ones lost their tho^ges. This plain has
disclosed their final nombre, which ye mountains of Cilicia did hide: you se
how thin their ranks be, their wings how they be extended abroad. how
their battles be empty, and void of men. And such as be hinder most have
already turned their backs They may be overthrown with the horse fete though I
send none against them but the hoked wagons And if we win the battle we
make an end of the war for they have no place to fly unto. They be shut in
with Tigre on the one side, and with Euphrates on the other: and such things as
before made for their purpose, now be turned and make clear against them. Our
Army is light, and without much baggage, and they be laden with prays and
with booties. We shall kill them therefore as they be wrayt in our spoils. And
the same one thing shall be both our gain, and the cause of our victory. If any
of you be moved with the fame of the nation you must think that the armor and
outward show and not ye bodies of the veraie Macedons be their p^sent we have
consumed so much of their blood since ye war began. And seeing they be but
few, their loss must needs be to them the greater. For how great so ever
Alexander does seem to such as be fearful, and toward, he is but a man, and
if you trust me, both rash and without consideracion: and hitherto more
fortunat through over fear, then by his own valor. There is nothing can
continue that is not governed by reason. for though fortune seem to favor for
a while, yet at length she shall not supporte his rasshenes. Besides that the
estate of things be full of change, and no man has perpetual felicity. It
may be that the providence of the gods have so ordained it, that the Empire
of the Percians increased with such prosperous success by the space of two
hundred and thirty years, and brought to so great an height of fortune, should
now rather be shaken, then utterly overthrown: Thereby to admonyshe us of man's
fragility, which uses to forget himself overmuch in prosperous estate. It is
not long ago since of our own mocion and courage, we moved war against the
Grecians, and invaded their dominions, but now we stand at defense in our own
country. Thus we be tossed one against an other by exchange of fortune. For
one nation cannot ^eare the greatness of the Empire which we both do ^ouet. But
be it so that hope were taken from us, yet necessity ought to prick us
forwards, the matter is come to such extremity. He keapeth now as
prisoners, both my mother, my two daughters, and Occhus my son, borne to the
succession of this Empire. He keapeth captive your princes, the issue that is
descended of the blood royal, yea and your capitaines equal with kings, and
if you do not now lay to your hands I my self am like to become captive.
Deliver you therefore my bowels out of my prison, and restore to me my children,
for whose sake I do not refuse to die. Be you all sure that both my mother and
my children (for my wife is dead in prison be holding up their hands crie^g
unto the gods, and calling for your help, your co^passio^ and fidelity,
that you would deliver them from servitude, from fetters, and from the state
they are in, living at other men's will and apointment. Think you yt they can
be content to live under such as they could scarsly vouch save to have for
subjects? I see that our enemies battailles do approach, and the nere the
danger is at hand, ye less the words I have spoken do content me, I make
request to you by the gods of our country by the eternal fire that is
carried upon the aulters, by the brightness of the son that rises within the
bounds of mine Empire, by ye everlasting memory of Cyrus, which first did take
the Empire from the Medes and Lidians and gave it to the Percia^s, deliver
their name and this nation from shame and reproach. Go fourth cherefully have
you good hope, and se that you restore to your posterity, the glory you have
received of your elders. Lo you carry now in your hands your liberty, your
help, and your hope in time to come. Whosoever conte^pneth death, escaped
death, and death ouertaketh such, as do fly from death* I ride here in a
chariot, not only for that it is my country, custom* but also that I may be
seen of you al. And I desire nothing so much as ye ye will follow me, whether
I show you an ensample of proves or of cowardnes. In the mean season whiles
Alexander did covet to escue the place of parill, yt he was warned of, and
enforced himself to encounter with Darius left battaill where he was in
person, The battle ^ught or ^rbella bewixt Alexander and Darius.
was compelled to fetch a compass about. Whom when Darius perceived he turned
likewise his own battle toward him, willing bessus to apoint the Massagites
horsemen to geu a charge on Alexanders left battaill. He set before him his
hoked wago^s, which by a sign given brake out suddenly upon their enemies with
a full course to the intent that by their coming vnbewares they might do the
greater destruction. The pikes that were set before in the wagons destroyed
diverse, and many were torn a so^dre by ye houkes that were on both sides. The
Macedons gave not place to the^ by a little and little, but troubled their
array with a mayn fute. When Mazeus saw their disordre, he put the^ in more
fear, and appointed out a thousand horsemen to fetch a compass about the
Macedo^s battailles to spoil their carriage, supposing that the prisoners which
were there kept, would break their ba^des, when they should see their own
nacio^ approach. Parmenio which was in the left winge perceived this matter
well, and therefore sent by and by Polidamas unto Alexander to show him the
danger, and know his pleasure what he would have done. When he understood the
case by Polidamas: Go thy way ( quoth he) and show Parmenio, if we win the
battaill, we shall not only recover again our own, but shall have also the
spoil of our enemies. Therefore I would not that any part of our force should
be removed from the maine battle, but let him fight it out manfully, and not
regard the loss of baggage, wherein he shall observe the honor of me, and my
father Philip whose custom was to do the like. In the mean season the
Percians were entered among the cariages and had slam diverse that were left in
their defense whereupon the prisoners began to lose themselves, and taking up
whatsoever came to hand, took part with the horsemen, and sharply assailed
the Macedo^s. Diverse were so joyful that they ran to bear tidinges to
Sisigambis how Darius had won the victory, and had overthrown his enemies
to their great slaughter, and also that all their carriage was won, thynkyng
the like fortune had been every where, seeing they saw the Percians fall to
spoil. And although they exhorted Sisigambis that she should leave her heaviness
and rejoice, yet she continued in the same estate she was in before, not
speaking one word nor chau^ging color nor countenance, but sat still
immouable. She was so ouerco^e (as it was thought) with sudden joy yt she
durst not stir nor atte^pte fortune, for such as did behold her, could not
perceive which way she was inclined. In the mean season Amyntas, Amyntas.
that was master of the horse to Alexand, came with a few bands of horsemen
to sucrour the carriages, but uncertain it was whither he did it of his own
head, or by the kings apointme^t. He was not able to endure the force of the
Cadusians and Scithians, for scarsly attempting the skirmishe, he was driven
back and fled again unto Alexander, being rather a witness of the loss of the
carriage, the^ a rescuer of the same. The grief that Alexander conceived of this
matter overcame the purpose he took before, and feared (not without cause) lest
the soldiers through ye carfulnes to recover their own might leave the fight,
and resort toward their bagage: he sent therefore Aretes captein of the
speareme^ that were named Sarissopheros against the Scythes. Aretes.
By this time the hoked wagons, which had somewhat troubled the forefront, were
come within the square which the Macedons call Phalanx, yet the soldiers never
shro^k at the matter, but received the^ into the mids of their battle, where
as, joining themselves close together, they stood like a wall on both sides*
thrusting their pikes into the bowels of ye horses, and ran about ye wago^s,
throwing down such as stood in the^ at defense. The whole battaill was
enta^gled and troubled with the ruin, and killing of the horses, and such as
governed the^. They could not rule their horses when they were once gualled and
hurt, which with much leaping and struggling not only brake out of their
trace, but also ouerthrewe the wagons, drawing at their tails the me^ yt were
slain, neither being able to stand still for the fear they were in, nor yet
go forwards being so fainte of their wounds, yet a few of them passed
through the battaille, whereby such as the wagons did lite upon, were myserably
stayne, lyeng upon the ground with their members, cut in sondre, yet because
that through the grenesse of their wou^des they felt little pain, they kept
their weapons still notwithstanding they were maimed and without strength, till
such time as by continual bleadyng, they soncke down dead. Aretes in the
mean time had slain the captain of the Scythians that were spoiling of the
cariages and repulsed them back. But straight way came the Bactrians by Darius
sendyng, and turned the fortune of the field again. Many Macedo^s were slain
at the first encountrey, but more fled unto Alexander. Then the Percians made
such a showte as men are wont to do that win the victory, and fiercely
assailed their enemies thinkyng that they had in every place been put to
flight. When Alexander perceived his men shrink, he rebuked such as he saw
afraid, and encouragyng very many that he saw alone restored the battaille
that began to faint, and give ground. When he had put them in heart, he
required them to press forwards, and go on freely against their enemies. When
Alexander perceiving that the Bactrians were departed to the defeating of the
cariages, and by their going had left the right hand battaille of Darius
thin and naked, he bent his force wholly yt way, and there made a wonderful
slaughter and destruction of his enemies, which by reason of their lose array
were not able to withstand him. The Percians in the left wynge seeing this
thing, were in hope to have enclosed Alexender about, and came forwards to set
upon his back part, whereby great danger had ensued to him being environed
both before and behind. If the Agrians had not put their spurs to their
horses and given a charge to their enemies, that had nere hand environed their
king about, and so compelled the Percians to turn their faces again toward
them. The battailles thus were sore travailed on both sides. Alexander had his
enemies both before and behynd* and his enemies that came on his back were
sore oppressed by the Agrians. The Bactrians also that had spoiled the
cariages, were excluded from their own company, and could not recover their
place again. Thus the battaylles were divided in diverse parts, and fought one
against an other as their chance fell. The two kings, that joined their
battaylles hard one to an other renewed again the fight. There were most of
the Percians slain, but the nombre of the wounded were like on both sides.
Darius did ride in a chariot and Alexander upon an horse. They both had a
choice band about them which were careless of their own lives. For if their
kings should miscary, neither they could be saufe, nor yet desired to live.
Wherefore every of them thought it a noble thing to adventure them selves before
the face of their prince. And he that coueted most to defend his master* was
in most peril, for each man coueted the honor to kill the king on his
contrary part. There (whether it were an imaginacion of the eyes or a thing
done in deed) such as were about Alexander* believed that they saw an Egle
flickeryng above his head, which neither feared with classyng of the harneys,
nor by the cryeng of them that were dyeng, honge still in the ayet a little
above him. Then Arislander which ware a white garment, and carried laurel in
his hand showed this thing unto the soldiers as they were busye fyghtyng, as
a certain token of victory, which thing did cause them, which before were in
some doubt, cherefully and with great confidence, to assail their ennemies.
The fight continued after this sort until the time that he was slain which
governed the horse, that drue Darius chariot. Then neither the Percians nor
Macedons, doubted but that Darius had been slain. And the Percians upon that
imaginacion made a barbarous noise, and a sorowefull howlyng, wherewith they
sore troubled and astonished their whole host, that were yet fyghtyng with
equal victory. Darius kynsmen and the Squires for his body that were on his
left hand, left him and fled away with a mayn flight: but such as stood in
his defense dn his right hand, conuoyed him into the heart of the battaill. It
is said that Darius drue out his sword and was determined diverse times to
kill himself, rather then to sustain the shame of flyeng away. But when he
saw as he sat alofte in his chariot, that a great part of his army remained
yet fighting, he was ashamed to leave them in such sort. And whiles he thus
wauered in his opinion betwixt hope and despair, the Percians by little and
little gave ground, and shronck from their order. Alexander that had tired many
horses, did change the same he did at that time ride upon, and struck at the
faces of the^ that stood at defense. There was none then that made resistau^ce
any le^ger* but a manifest slaughter fell on the Percians, Darius ^led
and Darius turned his chariot to fly away. The Macedons pursued them hard
that fled, and the duste that flue up to the sky took away their prospect, so
that they wandered as it had been in darkness, and ever dreue together when they
hard any voice that they knew. Only the rattling and noise of the chariot was a
marcke for the Macedones to follow after. As fortune was prosperous to the
Macedons on this part. and contrarious to their ennemies: so on the other
side, where Permenio in the left winge encountered with the Percians* they had
the better, and the Macedons the worse. Mazeus.
Mazeus with his whole band gave a great charge, and put the horsemen that
stood in the wings to a sore distres. And thereupon by reason he abou^ded with
multitude began to enclose the footeme^ about. Then Parmenio sent word to
Alexander in what danger they were in which he signified to be such, that
except they had succor in time, they could not resist, but he enforced to
fly away. Alexander was gone far in the chase, when this sorrowful message
was brought him. Wherefore he commanded the horsemen to stay and chafed
wounderfullye, that the victory was thus taken out of his hands, and that
Darius had better fortune in fleing then he in his following. In the mean
season the fame of Darius overthrow was brought unto Mazeus. And therefore
though he had the upper hand yet he was stricken with such fear of his fellows
misfortune, that he made astarke pursuit upon his enemies. Parmenio was
ignorant of the cause why the fight did slake so willingly of there part,
Parmenio encouraged his soldiers
but boldly using the occacion of the victory called the Tessalien horesmen
unto him and said. Se you not how our enemies that even now gave us a feirse
onset, be suddenly afraid, and withdraw them selves. I see the fortune of our
king does give us the victoryie. All the feldes be strown with the Percians
that be slain. Why do you therefore stay? are you not good anoughe for men
that be fleing? They saw his words had an apparaunce of a truth* and
therefore by and by they took courage, and putting their spores to the horse
made a full charge upon their enemies who retired not by littell and littill,
but marched away a great pace. And they wanted nothing of flieng saving that
they had not yet directly turned their backs: yet for all that insomuch as
Permenio knew not what was become of the king, nor of his battle, stayed and
would not pursue after them. Mazeus having leisure given him to fly at his
liberty, passed the river of Tigre, not the next way, but by a further
compass about with more surety, and so recovered the City of Babylon with
the remaynes of that vanqueshed Army. In the mean season Darius with a few
that accompained him in his flieng came to the River of Licus* where passinge
over he stood in doubt, whither he should break the bridge or no, for it was
showed him that his enemies were at hand. But considering how many thousands
of his men by the breakinge thereof should be a pray to his enemies, he left the
bridge standing, and at his departure, said that he had rather open the way to
them that pursued him, then to shut it against them that fled after him. But
Darius left not his flieng til he came to Arbilla, where he arrived about
midnight. Who is able to conceive in his mind or express in words, the
discomfirture.
the manifold chasises in this disco^fiture, the slaughter that fell both upon
captains and soldiers, the chasing of them that were put to flight the
destruction in particular and in general. Fortune heaped to gether that one
day the chances of a whole world. Some took the way that came next to hand, a
another sort fled unto the woods, and sought out by paths, to escape such as
followed after them. There was a confusion of horsemen and footeme^ mixed together
without any head, the armed with the unarmed, and the whole with the hurt. At
length the compassion that one had of an other was turned into fear, and they
that could not follow, were left bewailing themselves one to another. But
thirest chiefly afflicted the wounded and weried, which lay alo^g every
where in the ways where any water was gasping after it with open mouth. And
when for gredines they had gulled in the troubled water, they began to swell,
when the mudde ones entered into their entrayles. And bienge thus not in case to
move, the enemy came and sturred them up with new wounds. Some when the
brooks nere hand, were taken up by other: sought out for springes in every
secret place. Nor their was no puddle so dry nor so far out of the way, that
could be hidden from the thirest of them that serched them out. The old men
and women were hard howling and crieng in all the villages nere the ways side,
how Darius was yet their king. Alexander as it has been said before staieng
the chase, was come to the River of Licus, where as the multitude of the fliers
was greater then could pass the bridge. So that many when their enemies
pursued them, lept into the water, and their laden with their armor, and
weried with fightyng and flienge were consumed with the stream. But within a
while neither the bridge nor the river were hable to receive the companies that
continually increased by their indiscreet flieng. For when fear was once entered
into their hearts, they doubted only that, which put them first in fear. The
Macedo^s were eger in the pursuit of their enemies* and required Alexander that
he would not suffer their enemies to escape fre away. But he to stay them
alledgid that their weapons were dull, their hands weried, their bodies faint
with long pursuit, and that the day drue toward night. But in veraie deed the
care of his other battle which he thought to be yet fighting, caused him to
return to their socour. He had not so sone turned his ensigns, but ye
certain horsemen brought him word from Permenio yt the victory was wo^ne also
on their part. He was not in so great a danger al yt day, as when he was
coming toward his ca^pe. The daungier Alexander was in at his return from
the chase
For there were but few yt followed him and those out of order, as men that
reioising of the victory, judged all their enemies either to be fled or slain
in the field: then suddenly there appeared a band of horsemen of the contrary
part coming against the^, which at the first stayed but afterward perceiving
the small nombre of the Macedo^s, gave a charge upon the^. The king rode
formoste rather disimuling* then despising the peril he was in: but his
perpetual felicity never failed him in extremities. For at the first encountre
he stracke thorough with a spear, the captain of the Percians, who in egernes
of the fight unadvisedly came against him When he through his stroke was fallen
to the ground* Alexander slew the next to him with the same weapon* and after
diverse other, wherewith his company seeing the Percians amassed, bracke upon
them, and threw many to the earth, yet they for their parts were not
unrevenged* for the whole battaill did not so ernestly fight as that small
band assembled so by chance. But at length when they saw that flyenge in
the dark should be more surety to the^ then fighting shocked away in diverse
companies. Alexander having escaped this extraordinary peril, brought his men
in saufegarde unto his camp. There were slain of the Percians, The nobre of
the dead.
which came to the knowledge of them that had the victory.xl.M. and of the
Macedons less then iii.C. which victory Alexander wan more by his own virtue,
then by any fortune: and with hardines and courage, more then through any
advantage of the ground. For he both ordered his battailles politikely, and
fought manfully. With great wisdom he contemned the loss of the bagage,
co^sideryng the weight of the whole matter to consist in the battaille it self.
Whiles the fortune of the field was yet doubtful, he used himself as assured
of the victory. And when he had put his enemies in fear, he cessed not till he
had set them flyeng, and that which scarsely can be believed in that fiersenes
of spirit, he pursued in the chase more wisely then gredely. For if he should
have followed on still, part of his power yet fighting in the field, he should
either have lost the battaylle through his own fault, or else have won the
victory through the prowes of other men. Or if after he had gotten the victory
he had showed him self afraid of the horsemen that he met, he must either
have shamefully fled, or have been miserably slain Nor his capitains were not
to be defrauded of their co^mendacion: For the wounds that they did receive,
were tokens of their manhood. Ephestions arm was wounded with a spear.
Perdicas, Cenos, and Menidas, with shot of arrows were nere slain. And if we
will give a true judgment of the Macedons that were there, we must confess
that he was a king worthy such ministers, and they men worthy of such a
master.

The fifte book of Quintus Curtius of the acts of the great Alexander King of
Macedonie.
IF I shall make mention of the matters that chaunsed in the mean season both
in Greece. Iliria, and Thracia, by the appointment and commission of Alexander
in order as they fell the matters of Asia should thereby be interrupted, which I
thought most convenient to put wholly together until the death of Darius, and
then to join them in this work as they agree with the time. Darius words to
them that were fled from the field
I will first speak of those things that ensued after the battayll at
Arbella, where Darius arrived about midnight. And as it chaunsed the more part
of his fryndes and of all other that were escaped from the field were come
thither, he called them all together and made an oracion to this effect: That
he doubted not but Alexander and his men, gaping with gredy desire for the
habou^dance of spoil that was in redines for them, would visit such cities
and co^tries, of his as were most notable and plentiful of riches: which thing
(he said) considering his estate* could not but turn at length to his auaill.
His purpose was now with a small band to repair into the deserts. And seeing
the vttermoste parts of his kingdom were yet untouched, he should from thence
easily repair his power again to renew the war, Let therefore that gredy
nation ( quoth he) take my treasure, and satisfy their great hunger with gold,
which shortly shall cause both the same and them also, to be a pray unto us.
For he had learned (he said) by experience that the haboudance and excess of
there preciouse furniture* their flocks of Concubines and Eunukes, were nothing
else but burdens and impedimentes. Which Alexander possessing and carieng about
should make him inferior unto them of whom before he was victorius. His oracion
seemed to all men to be full of desperacion. For they saw thereby that the rich
City of babylon should be given up unto the Macedo^s, and Susa shortly after
with all other ornaments of the realm that were cause of ye war. But he
procedid in persuading them, how that men in adversity ought not do things
yt should seame goodly in the speaking, but necessary in thexperie^ce. That
wars were made with iron, and not with gold, with men, and not with the
walls of Cities. For all things follow them that be armed and in strength. He
showed that his auntetors were afflicted after this manner in the beginning, and
yet recovered again quickly their former estate. After he had spoken these
words. either for yt they were thereby encouraged, or else that they rather
obeid his authority then liked his counsel, followed him into the bonds of
Media. Arbella yeldid unto Alexander
Shortly after Arbella was given up unto Alexander, which was full of the
kings riches and treasure, of precious stuf, and appariell. And besides in
that town the substance of the hole army was less. The siknes that began in
Alexanders camp, rising of the savor of the dead bodies scatered over all the
fields, was the cause that he did the sooner remove. Arabye.
The champion country of Arabia very notable with the habounda^ce of sweet
odoers there growyng lay upon the right hand as they marched. And so passed
through ye country lieng between Tigre and. Euphrates which is so fat and
plentyfull a ground. that the inhabiters be feign to drive their bestes from
feading, least they should kill them selves by eating over much. The cause of
this fertility comes of the moister that issues from both rivers, Tygre.
distilling by veins through the ground. Both these river have their
beginning in the mountains of Armenia, Euphrates.
where they be distaunt.v. thousand thousand.v.C. fuclonges and so run
forwards keaping their distance, till they come nere the bounds of Media and
Gordia. For the^ by little and little the further they go they drove more nere
together leuing les space betwixt them. They enclose of both sids the country
that is called Mesopotania, Mesopotamia.
from whence they run through the bonds of Babilo^ in the red sea. After
Alexander had changed his camp four times, Mennium.
he came to a city called Mennium where as there is a fountain within a cave:
that boyleth out great plenty of pycche so it apeareth that the Babilonians had
there cement from thence, which they employed about the making of their huge
walls. As Alexander was going from thence toward Babilo^ Mazeus which was
said before to have fled from the battle, came to mete him in most humble
manner. where committing his children into his hands, yielded him self; and
rendered up the city. His coming was very great full unto the king
considering what trauayll he should have sustained in the syege of so strong a
City, if it had been keapte against him. And besides forsomuchas Mazeus was a
man both famous and valient, and much noted for his doing in the last battle,
thought his ensamble should much provoke others do to the like. For that cause
he received both him and his children with gentil manner, and yet gave order to
his men that they should enter into the City in such array of battaill as if
they should fight. A great no^bre of the Babilonians stood upon the walls,
desirous to behold him that was there new king. But the more part went forth
to mete him. Bagistenes.
Bagistenes, that was captain of the castle, and keaper of the kings
treasour, because he would show him self to be no less affectionate toward
Alexander than Mazeus was, strowed all the ways where he should pass, with
flowers and garla^des, and set aulters of silver on both sides the way,
whereupon frankensence was burning, and all other kind of sweet odours. Next
unto him came flocks of beasts, great nombres of horses with Lions, and
Pardalies carried in cages, which he brought to give as presents unto
Alexander. And after them the Magies singing according to their country manner.
Caldees went next with their deuiners and prophets, and then musicians with
their kinds of instruments: their property was to singe the praises of
kings. And the Caldeis used to declare the mocio^s of ye planetes, The
distruccion of Babylon.
with the course and reuolucion of the time. Last in order came the Babilonian
horsemen, whose sumptuous furniture, both for them selves and their horses,
tendid more to voluptuousnes and delicacy, the^ to any magnificence. Alexander
that was enclosed about with armed men willed that the Babilonians should come
behind his footmen, and he riding alofte in his chariot entered into the city,
and afterward into the palace, where the next day he surueyed Darius
threasure and riches. The beuty and plesauntnes of that City gave just
occasion to Alexander and such as were with him to wonder much upon it.
Semiramis was the builder thereof and according to some men's opinion Belus,
Semiramis Belus.
whose palaice is to be seen their. The walls be made all of brick set with
pitche, which is called bytumen. And they be.xxxii. foot in breadth, so that
two carts may easily go upon them afront. They be in height.C. cubits, and
the towers be.x. foot higher then the rest of the walls. The compass of
the^ about is.CCClxviii. furlonges, being builded as it is left in memory in so
many days. The houses stand the bread of an acre distau^t from the walls not
builded through out the city, but only by the space of.iiii. score and.x.
forlo^ges, and those not joined nere one to another, but for some consideracion
divided a sondre. The rest of the ground is sowed and tilled, to thinte^t that
if any foreign power comes against them, they should be able to be releued by
the fruit thereof coming. The river of Euphrates does run through the mids
of the city, and is kept in on both sides with walls of a wounderfull
worckmanship, but the great caves made of brick, and in pitche in stead of
mortar wrought low within the ground to receive the violence of the stream,
do excede all the relle of ye worckes there made: for except the same were of
quantity and largenes to receive the water when the stream flows over the
banks that be made to keep it in, the violence thereof should bear down the
houses of the city. There is also over that river a stone bridge, which
joins both parts of the city togethers: counted among the marvelous
works of the Orient. For by reason that Euphrates is so full of mudde and
owse, ground can scarsely there be found to lay the foundacio^ upon, and the
stream besides casts up such heaps of sand against the bridge, that it is
an impediment for the water freely to pass, and therefore beats upon the
bridge with greater force, The Castle of Babylon.
then if it had his fre recourse. There is also a castle that is: xx forlonges
about, the towers, whereof be.xxx. foot deep within the ground, and.iiii. score
foot in height above the ground. Where also the wonders are to be seen, that
are so often mentioned in the Greek poesis. For in the same be whole groves of
trees set by wounderful art above the ground, so high as the tops of the
towers, which be marvelous beuteful and pleasant through their height and
shadow that they make. The whole weight of them is sustained and borne by huge
pillars made of stone, upon which pillars there is a flower of square stone,
that both uphold the earth that lies deape upon the same, and also ye humor
wherewith it is watered. The trees yt grow thereupon be of eight cubits about
and as fruteful as though they grew in natural earth. And though process of time
is wont by little and little not only to destroy things made with hand, but
also the very worckes of nature: yet this work, for all it is oppressed with
the roots of so many trees, and burdened with the weight of so much earth, and
of so great a wood, yet it remains vnperisshed in any point, being sustained
up with.xx. broad walls dista^t.xi. foot one from another. When these trees
be seen afar of, they feame to be a wood growing upon a mountain. It is said
yt aching of Siria reigning in Babilo^ builded this work for his wifes fansy,
who for the love she had to woods and shadow places, moved her husband in
doing thereof to counterfeit the plesauntnes of nature. Alexander tarried longer
here then in any other city, which hurted more the discipline of the Macedons
in their wars, the^ any other place. The customs of the Babilonia^s
For nothing was more corrupt the^ the manners and customs of that city, nor
any other was more haboundantly furnisshed of al things, wherewith men be
allured and sturred to excessive pleasures. The parents and husbands are
contented for gain, that their children and w^es ha^tes company with such
strangers as came among the^. The kings and nobility of Pe^^e, delight much
in banqueting pastime, but the Bablionia^s be specially given thereu^to, to
wine, and to dronkenes, where the women use such a custom, yt in the beginning
of the feast their apparel seems woma^ly and demure, but afterward by little
and little they put of the uppermost garments, and layeng a side al
shamefastnes do discover themselves naked. Which vile custom is not used by
harlottes only, but by the^ all in general which count the making of their
bodies comen, but a civility and good manner. In this voluptuousnes and
abhominacion the conqueror of Asia walowed by the space of.xxxiiii. days,
whereby he became much the weaker to have done other enterprises, if he had had
an enemy to stand against him. But to the intent the harm he took should be ye
less perceived, he increased his power with a new supply of me^. Amyntas came
to Alexander with a new supply of men.
For Amyntas the son of Andromenes brought him from Antipater syx thousand
Macedons footmen, and.v.C. horsemen, and with them.v.C. Tracian horsemen,
with.iii.M.v.C. footmen of the same nation. He had also out of
Peloponese.iiii.M. footeme^ and.iiii.C.iiii. score horsemen being Mercenary
soldiers. Amyntas also brought with him.L. young men of the nobility of
Macedonia to atte^de upon Alexa^ders person: whose office was to serve the king
at meat, to bring him his horse when he went to battle. They accustomed to be
about him when he hunted, and kept the watch by course at his chamber door:
These were they which afterward proved great capitaines, and that was the
race out of the which the rulers of their men of war did come. Agathon,
Alexander appoincted Agathon captain of the castle of Babylon, with.vii.
hundred Macedons and.iii.C. mercenary soldiers, Mynetas* Appollydorus.
and left Minetas and Apollidorus governors of the city and the country. to
whom he assigned two.M. footmen and a.M. talentes, giving them in commission
to wage more soldiers. He made Mazeus that gave the city into his hands,
lieutenaunt of the whole, and caused Bagistanes that yielded up the castle to
follow him in his wars. Armenia was given to Methrenes that betrayed the
city of Sardos, Armenia.
and to encourage his soldiers to the enterprising of other things, gave out
of the treasure of Babylon to every Macedon horsema^.v.C. deneres, to every
horseman of the strangers.v.C. and to every footeman two.C. When he had set
order in all these things, The country of Atrapene.
he came into ye country called Atrapene which being plentiful of all things
and haboundaunt of vitayle, caused the king to tarry the longer there. And lest
idleness should be any abatement of his men's courages, devised to slurre up
their spirits and keep them occupied, by appoincting judges to try out such
as had showed themselves most valiant in the wars, to whom he assigned
rewards due to their deseruinges. There were eight found out, whose doings
appeared above the rest, and every one of the^ was appointed the charge of a.M.
men, and were called Chiliarchi: that was the first time that the soldiers
were divided into such no^bres, for before they used.v.C. in a ba^d which was
not as they reputed for any preferment or reward of valiauntnes. The nombre of
soldiers was great that came to plead their right in this behalf, and that
before the judges yt gave sentence brought in testimony of their doings: So yt
it could not be known which of the^ had deserved justly such honor or not, the
first place was adiuged to old Adarchias, Adarchias.
for his valiau^tnes used in ye battle at Alicarnasson, where he chiefly did
restore again the fight, when the young soldiers had given it over, the
second place of honor was given Antigonus, and Philotas, Angeus obtained the
third, the fourth was adjudged to Amyntas. The fifte to Antigonus. Amyntas the
son of Lyncestes obtained the syxt. Theodorus the seventh, and Hellacanicus
the last. Hereupon to great purpose he altered many things that were used by
his predecessors in the discipline of war. For where as before the horsemen
of every country were in several bands by themselves, he without respect of
any nation appointed to them such capitains as he thought expedient. And where
as at the removing of his camp warning was accustomed to be given by a
trompet, the sound whereof in any noise or tumulte could not be sufficiently
hard. Therefore he caused an high pole to be always set before his pauilion,
whereupon remained a sign apparaunt to all men. The token that they observed
was fire in the night and smoke in the day time. As he was marchyng toward
Susa, Abulites that was ruler of that region, Abulites.
either by Darius commandment thynkyng by means of the spoil to deteyne
Alexander the longer there, or else of his own fre will, sent his son against
him, profferyng the delivery of the city. The young man was entreated very
gently, and by his conduccion Alexander passed forwards, till he came to the
river of Hydaspis, Hydaspis.
which is counted to be a very delicat water. Abulites there met Alexander
with princely and rich gifts, and presented him among the rest of other
things. Dromedary camels, that were wounderfull swift, with.xii. elephantes
that Darius had sent for out of India to be a terror to the Macedons, which
now were become an increase of their strength, when the riches of the
vanquisshed, Susa whei Alexander found incredible treasours.
was come into the victorers hands. He found in ye city an incredible
treasure.l.M talentes of massy silver yt was uncoined: which riches gathered
together in ye space of many years by diverse kings for their succession and
posterity, thus in a moment came into the hands of a foreign prince. Alexander
being lodged within the palaice did sit down in Darius seat which being
higher then served for his stature, by reason his fete could not reche to the
ground, one of the kings pages put a board underneath for him to tread upon. At
the doing whereof one of the Enukes yt belonged to Darius, looked heuely and
fetched great sithe: whose sadness when Alexander perceived, he enquired of him
the cause. He answered yt when he beheld the board whereupon Darius was wont to
eat, employed to so base an use, he could not behold it without great grief.
Alexander being therefore ashamed, so much to misuse ye thing that before was
had in such a reverence, caused the same to be taken away. Whereupon Philotas
required him not so to do, but rather take it as a diuinacio^ of his good luck
and fortune that the table whereupon his enemy did eat, should now become
subject under his fete. Alexander purposing from thence to pass into Percia
committed the city of Susa to Archilaus with.iii.M me^ of war, Archilaus
zenophilus.
and to zenophilus the charge of the castle, leuing such Macedons as were
aged, there in guarison. But he did betake the keeping of the treasure unto
Callicrates and restored to Abulites the government and principality of the
country of Susa, Callicrates
leuing within the city Darius mother and his children. And forasmuch as
Alexander had at the same time plenty of cloth of purple sent him out of his
country, with garments ready made after the Macedon manner for the honor he
bare to Sisigambis (whom he had in reverence as if she had been his mother)
thought good to present part of those to her, with the persons that used to
make them, and willed it should be told her if she liked them, that she should
accustom her neces to make the like, and give them for presents. At the
declaring of which message the tears ran out of her eyes, which declared the
gift not to be acceptable to her. For the Percian women take nothing in more
despite the men to put their hands to wolle. When report was made to
Alexander in what sort she had received his present, thought both the matter
meet to be excused, and her to be comforted. Alexanders excuse to Sisigambis
of the present he sent her.
Therefore he came to visit her and said: This garment which I were was both of
the gift and making of my susters: our customs brought me into error.
Therefore I require you that ye will not take mine ignorance in euel part. I
trust that otherwise I have observed sufficiently all things which I knew to
be your customs: When I understood that it was not laufull among you, for
the son to sit in the mothers presence except she does give him leave,
whenever I came unto your presence. I would never sit til you willed me so
to do: you would oftentimes have fallen down and worship me, but I would not
suffer you, but have ever honored you and given you the name due to my sweet
mother Olimpiades. When the king with these words had well pacified her, he
departed, and by four enca^pinges came unto a river yt the cou^treime^ call
Pasatigras, Pasatigras
which springing the mountains of ye Vxio^s ro^neth stepe down among ye
rocks with woody ba^kes by ye space of.30. forlo^ges: but then desce^ding into a
plain it becomes nauigable, and so ro^neth with a more quiet stream, and in a
softer ground by ye space of.vi.c. forlo^gs, til such time as it does e^ter
into the Percian sea. Alexander passing this river with nine thousand footeme^
of the Macedons, with the Agrians, the Mecenary Greeks and with.iiii. thousand
Thracia^s, The vxione
came among the Vxions. Whose country is nere unto Susis, and stretches out
into Percia leuing betwixt it and Susis a narowe straight. Madates had the rule
of that country, Madates.
who was such a man as was rare at yt time, for he determed to abide
thextremitie for his duties sake. Such as knew the country did inform
Alexander that their was a privy way through the hills, whereby men might get
to the far side of the chief city that partayned to them, and if he would
send a few that were light armed: they might be brought to a place, where they
should appear above their enemies heads. This counsel liked him so well, that
he made the councellers guydes, and committed them to Tauron, Tauron.
whom he appointed chief of that enterprise He assigned to him, a thousand.v.c.
mercenary soldiers and a thousand Agrians, with whom after the son was gone
down he entered into his journey. Alexander in the third watch removed his
camp, and by the spring of the day had passed the streightes. There he set
his me^ in hand to cut down timbre for the making of Towers and al other such
things as pretayned to the assault of a city, and so began his seige. It
was a difficult matter to make the approach, the city stood so high, and the
rocks gave such impediment, whereby the soldiers were repulced, and received
many h^rtes, contending both with thenemyes and the Scytuacion of the place.
Notwithstanding they gave it not over, by reason the king was ever among the
foremoste, asking of them if they were not ashamed being the Conquerours of so
many cities, to be so long in the winning of a small castle, that was so
obscure and unknown in the world. As he was traueling among the rest they
did shote and cast stones at him from the walls, whom the soldiers defended
with their tergettes, because they could not remove him away. At length Tauron
apered above the castle of the city at whose sight the enemies hearts faynted,
and the Macedons the more fierslye did assayll them. When they saw themself
with this extremity and perceived they were not of power to withstand the
Macedons they became of diverse disposicio^s. For some were determined to dye,
and many to fly away. But the greater part retired them selves into the
castle from whence they sent unto Alexander.xxx. Ambassadors to ask mercy.
But he gave unto them a sorrowful answer that there was no pardon to be
obtained at his hands, whereupon being in doubt of death and excluded from al
other remedies, sent unto Sisigambes by a privy way unknown to their enemies,
making their request that she would vouchsaufe to be a mean to Alexander for
the pacefieng of his rigor and wrath toward the^. In her only they put their
hope, knowing how much Alexander loved her, and that he esteemed her as if she
had been his mother. And they thought she would the rather incline to their
desire because Madates that was captain there had married her sisters daughter,
whereby he became a kyn to Darius. Sisigambis stood long in denial of their
request, sheweng that it agreed not with her fortune to become an intercessor
for others. addyng thereunto, that she feared lest she might misuse the
victorers favor, and make him we by of her, for (she said) she had more
remembrance that she was a prisoner then that she was a Queen. But at length
she was overcome with there suite, and by her letters made intercession unto
Alexander after that sort, that she first excused her self of her suite
making and after required him that he would pardon them or at the least ways
yt he would forgive her that was peticioner but for the life only of such one
as was her friend and her kinsma^, and now no longer any enemy to his majesty
but in redines to submit him self. This one matter is sufficient to declare the
Moderacion and cleme^cy that was then in Alexander. For he did not only pardon
Madates, but also left the City untouched granting to all that were within it
both liberty and fredom, with enioyment of their lands and goods, without
paieng of any tribute: more then the which she could not have obtained of
Darius being her son. When he had thus subdued the Vxions he annexed them to
the province of Susa, and purposing to pass forwards divided his army into two
parts, whereof he committed the one to Permenio to be conuaied by the^ plain
country, and reserving such a part as was pestered lest with bagage, took the
way of the mounteins, which with a contiunall ridge run out in length from
thence into Perce. In his passage he destroyed all the mou^teine country,
arriving the thirdday in the bounds of Percia The fifte day he entered into ye
streightes called Piloe, Susidoe, Ariobazzanes keapt the straight betwixt Susys
and Percia.
which were defended by Ariobazzanes with xv.M. foteme^ who keeping the tops
of the high and steep rocks yt hang over on both sides of the way, at the
first keapt them selves quiet of purpose prete^ding a fear until such time
as the army was entered into the narowest of the straight. But when they saw
the Macedons pass onforwards in their contempt, then they threw down great
stones upon them, which falling upon the tiethermoste rocks, and these
breaking in peaces rebounded among the Macedons, fell with greater violence,
and distressed hole bands at ones. And besides that did the^ great damage with
shot of arrows, and stones that they did cast out of slinges. Such as were
men of courage were not so much grieved with the death and destrucio^ that they
saw their presently, as that they should be slain after such a manner like
beasts caught in a pit, where as they could not be revenged upon their
enemies. Their wrath hereupon was turned into such a rage and woodnes, that
they ran up against the rokes. and there enforced them selves by taking hold,
and by having up one of an other to mount up unto their enemies: But when they
hade caught hold upon some outward part, and thereby labored to ascend, by
force of so many hands that fastened to it at ones, they pulled a sondre the
thing they held by, and so fell down all togithers. In this case they could
neither stand, pass forwards, nor yet defend themselves, by any devise they
could make with their targetes, seeing the stones were of such weight that were
thrown down upon the^. Alexander was in great trouble of mind not only for ye
grief he received by the destrucion of his me^, but much more for the shame yt
he had so rasheli brought his armi into such a dau^gerus straight He had been
invincible before yt day and never attempted thing in vain. He had passed yt
streightes of Cilicia with out damage and opened to himself a new way by sea into
Pa^philia. Which felicity of his seemed the^ to be stayed and plucked back, for
he could perceive no other remedy the^ to return by ye way he came, he caused
ye retreit therefore to be blown. and gave order to his soldiers to go close
together and by casti^g their targets over their heads return back again,
after they had merched.xxx. forlo^ges wtin ye streyte* When he was returned
and had planted his camp in an open ground, he co^sulted what was best to do,
and therewith such a supersticion entered into his mind, that he called for
the priests and deuiners to healpe herein by their invocation. But Aristander,
to whom he gave most confidence, could do nothing in the case, so that
Alexander condempning their sacrifices which he thought then done out of time,
called for such as knew the cou^tray: They showed him of an other way that
was plain and open enough, but he lyked it not, he was so ashamed to leave his
soldiers unburied. yt were slain. For among al other ceremonies observed in
the discipline of their wars, there was none more religiously kept then the
burieng of the dead. He caused therefore such prisoners as were lately taken
to be called before him, among whom there was one expert both of the Greek
and Percian tongue, which showed to ye king yt he labored in vain, if he
thought to conuoy his army over the tops of those mountains which (he said)
begin at mount Caufasus, The description of the streyte and the country
thereunto adjoining.
and closed in the one side of Perce by the space of.M.vi.C. furlonges in
length, and.Clx. in breadth, till such time as they come unto the sea, which
also enclosed the country from the place where the mountains ceased. The
country lyeng at the foot of the mountains, he dedescribed to be plain,
fruitful, and replenysshed with many fair cities and villages, and that the
river of Arares ronning through the same, Arates.
falls into another river called Medus, Medus.
bringing with it the wa^eds of many small streams. Which river of Medus
being much less then the same which it does receive runs from thence
toward the south Sea: No place could be more abundant of grass, for euerery
where nere unto the water, the ground was covered over with flowers. The river
was shadowed over with plantyne and pople trees, which by reason they stand
somewhat high, and the water run low in a deep channel: seem to such as be a
far, to be woods adioynning to the Mountains. He counted no country in all
Asia to be more wholesome, or to have more temperat air then this, both by
reason of shadowing mou^tein that evermore defends the heat, and also of the
sea which on the part being at hand with a certain temperature does norishe
the ground. When the prisoner had made a description of the country after this
manner, the king enquired of him whither he knew those things by hearing say,
or else had seen them with his eyes. He said, that he had been an herdman and
knew the country veraie well and all the ways thither. And that he had been
twice taken prisoner, ones by Perca^s in Licia, and now the second time by him.
Upon those words Alexander called an oracle to memory, whereby it was
signified to him that a Lician should be his guide into Perce. Wherefore
promising to him such rewards as the present necessity required, and as his
estate was mete to receive, willed him to be armed after the Macedons manner,
and with good speed to go show on the way. Which though he had declared to be
but straight and difficult, yet Alexander put no doubt to pass it with a few
me^, except any thought (he said) that Alexander would not attempt that thing
for to win glory and perpetual commendacion that the herdman had done often
times in feading of his beasts. The^ the prisoner left not to allege the
difficulties of the way, specially for such as ware armor. Then the king
said: Take me for suertie that never one of them that be appointed to the,
shall refuce to go, where thou shall pass. Craterus.
That done he left Craterus with the charge of his camp, and he him self
passed forwards with such fotemen as were accustomed to his person, with
those hands of whom Meleager had charge, Meleager.
and a thousand Archers on horsback, taking first order with Crateus that he
should keep his ca^pe in such form as it had been used before, and cause many
fires to be made of purpose, yt the enemies might yt rather think, him to be
there still present, aduising him further yt if Ariobarzanes should get knowledge
of his enterprise, and send part of his power to stop his passage, yt the^
Craterus should show al ye terror they could to cause him convert the^ self to
the defense of the danger yt was next at hand. But if he should deceive his
enemy and recover the hill upon him, that then upon the hearing of the alarome
in the Percians camp, preparing the^ selves to his resistau^ce he should not
doubt to pass that way from which they were repulced the day before, where he
judged they should find no resistaunce, the enemies being converted toward
him. In ye third watch he set forwards in great silence, without blowyng of
trompet, and passed on by such way as was showed him by the guide, Every
soldier that was light armed carieng three days vitaile. But when he was on
his way, besides the wild rocks and sharp stones, that caused them often fail
their foting, the snow also driven with the wynd, was a great impediment to
them in their journey. For they fell diverse times down into pittes, and such
as coueted to pull them out were often times drawn after. The night also with
the country unknown, and the guide of whose fidelitye they doubted, increased
much their fear, considering that if they should not deceive their enemies
watch, they should be taken like beasts, they wayed also that both the
sauegard of them, and of the king lay in the hands of one that was a prisoner.
At length they came to a mounteyne, where as the way toward Ariobarzanes lay on
the right hand. The^ he sent before by the guiding of such as they had taken
prisoners, Philotas, Cenon, Amyntas, and Policarpon with a band of the
lighteste Armed, whom he advised that forasmuch as they had both horsemen and
fotemen, and the country fertell and habound of fodder, that they should make
no haste but pass forwards fair and easily. And he with the esquiers of his
body, and the band of horsemen that they called Agema, was guided by another
bipath far of from yt place where his enemies kept their watch But the way was
so straight and so deep, yt they suffered great trouble and vexacio^ in passing
thereof. It was middaie, and they were so weried, that of necessity they must
take rest, for they had so far to go as they had travailed all ready, saving
that the way was not so difficult nor so roughe. He refreshed therefore his
men with meat and with sleep, and in the second watch, did rise up and passed
the rest of his journey without any great difficulty. Saving in ye part where
the mountain began to fall aslope toward the plain, their passage was
sodeinly stopped, by a great gull made with the violence of the streams that
ran down the mou^tains, by wearing away of ye earth. And besides the trees
standing so thick, and the bows that grew one within another appeared before
the^ as a continual hedge. When they saw themselves stayed after this manner,
such desperacio^ fell among the^ yt they could s^arsly abstain from tears.
The darkness being a great increase of their terror seeing they could not enjoy
any benefit of ye statres. For if any gave light, ye same was taken away by ye
shadow of ye trees. And ye use of the ears could not serve for one to receive
counsel and comfort at an other, the wynd whyrlid so among the leaves, and
the shaking of the bows made such a noise. But at length the day which they
so much desired, demynished with his light the terrors that the darkness of the
night did make. For by fetching of a little compass about, they passed the
holow gylle, and every man began to be aguide. Finally they got up in the top
of the hille from whence they might behold their enemies lieng in camp. The^
the macedons showed them selves stoutly in their Armor, appering sodeinly on
their backs, when they mistrusted no such thing, and there slew such as
came first to encountre with them. So that on the one part the grievous noise
of them that were slain, and the miserable showt of such as ran in for
succor among their own company, put the rest to flight without making any
resistaunce. When the alarome was once hard in the camp where Craterus lay, the
Army by and by passed forwards to go through the streightes in the which they
were repulsed the day before. Philotas also who with Policarpo^ Cenos and
Amyntas were gone the other way arrived at the same time and gave a further
terror unto their enemies. When the Percie^s saw there enemies agreing in all
parts at ons, though they were so oppressed with their sudden invasion that at
the first they were in doubt what to do, yet at length they assembled to
githers and fought notably: Necessity styring up the faintnes of their hearts.
For oftentimes despair is cause of men's good hope. They being unarmed,
closed with them that were armed, and with the weight of their bodies drew
their enemies to the earth and killed diverse with their own weapons
Arriobarzanes with forty horsemen, and five thousand footeme^, that kept about
his person, brake through the battaill of the Macedons, to the great slaughter
both of his own men and of his enemies, and by making of haste, recovered
Persepolis the chief city of the country. But when he was excluded from
thence by them that were within, he renewed again the fight with such as were
with him, and so was slain: by ye time Craterus that made all the speed he
could devise, was come unto them. Alexander fortefied his camp in the same
place where he did disconfite his enemies. For though they were all fled, and
he certain of the victory, yet because he found his way stopped in many places
with great and deape diches, he thought good to use circumspection, and not to
make over great haste, not so much for fear of his enemies force, as of the
nature of the ground which he saw apt for them to work policy against him.
As he was passing forwards, he received letters from Tyrydates the keaper of
Darius treasure, Tyrydates
sygnifieng that the inhabiters of Percepolis hearing of his coming were about
to spoil the treasure, and therefore he should make haste to prevent the
matter, for the way was ready enough, notwithstanding that the river of Araxes
was in his way. There was no virtue in Alexander more commendable then his
celeritie, which he showed in this matter, for leuyng his footmen behynd,
trauayled all night with his horsemen, and by the daylyght came to the river of
Arapos. There he found villages at hand, whereof the timber they brake down of
the houses, a bridge was made in a moment, by the help of stones which were
laid in the foundation. When Alexander was passed the river, and came nere
unto the city, a company met him so miserable, as seldom have been found in
any memory: the same were Greeks to the nombre of.iiii. thousand, whom the
Percians before time had taken prisoners, and afflicted with diverse kinds of
torments. For of them some had their feet cut of some their hands, and other
their ears, but all were marked in the flesh with hot yrons. Who^ the
Percians mayming and deforming after this manner, had kept and reserved among
them, as a memory of the despite toward the nation. But when they saw yt
they should become under the obedience of another prince, they suffered the
Greeks to mete Alexander. They appeared rather to be the Images of some
strange mo^sters, then of me^. For nothing could be decerned or known in them
but their voice. The compassion of their wretched estate caused the beholders
to let fall no fewer tears, then they did themselves. For it could not appear
which of the^ were most miserable, though their afflictions were diverse. But
when they cried out before Alexander that Jupiter the reue^ger of Greece had
opened their eyes in beholding him that should deliver the^: they judged then
all their grefes as one. Alexander wiped the tears from his eyes, and willed
them to be of good chere, for that they should both see their country and their
friends, and he encamped in the same place, where he met the^ being two
forlo^ges from Persepolis. Persepolis.
The Greeks drue themselves together to consult what was best for them to
demand of Alexander, and when some were of opinion to ask dwelling places
within Asia, and others had more mind to return unto their countries:
Entemeons oracion.
Entemeon Cimeus spoke thus unto them. We that were even now ashamed to show
our heads out of the prison and darkness we were in, to make suite for our own
aid and relief, or become of such simplicity, that we presently desire to
show unto Greece as a pleasant spectacle our infirmities and maimes, whereof we
have as much cause to be ashamed, as to be sorrowful, you must think that
such bear their miseries best, which can find the means to hide them most,
and that there is none so familier a country to me^ that be unfortunate as
solitarines and forgetfulness of their former estate. For they which make an
account of their friends pity and compassion, know not how sone their tears
will dry up, no creature can love faithfully whom they abhor. For as
calamity of his nature is querelous, so felicity is always proud, and every
one does use to consider his own fortune, when he determines of an other man's.
For except we had all been in mysery, one of us long ago had been weary of an
other. What marvel is it then though men infelicitie seek always their
equalies. My opinion is therefore that we as me^ which long ago were as dead in
this life, seek us a place wherein we may hyde our maimed members, and where
exyle may hyde our horrible scarres. For if we shall return unto our
country, being in this case, we cannot be but ungrateful to our wives, whom we
married young, shall our children, shall our brethren acknowledge us, being
prison slaves? and though all things should there succeed as we would wyshe,
yet there be but a small nombre of us able to trauayll through so many
countries? How is it possible for us that be here banysshed into the
vttermoste bonds of the Orient, aged, impotent, and maimed, to suffer those
things, which have tired men then were in force and victorious. It is to be
axed what shall become of our wives whom chance and necessity has gotten
unto us here for the only comfort of our prisonement? what shall we do with
our children we have begotten here? take them with us, or leave them behind us?
If we return with such as we have here, none of those in Greece will
acknowledge us, and shall we then be so mad to leave those comfortes we have
already, being uncertain whether we shall come to those that we seek or no?
Verily much better it were for us, to hyde our selves among them which have
been acquainted with us in our mysery. These were Eutemon words: Theatus
words.
But Theatus of Athens, reasoned to the contrary. There is no creature ( quoth he)
in whom remains any spark of goodness. that will esteem us by our outward
shape, seeing that our calamity is not come of nature, or by our own deseruyng,
but through misfortune, and our enemies cruelty, and such as be ashamed of
fortunes chaunses, are well worthy to suffer misaduenture. They give a grievous
sentence upon the estate of man's mortality, and despair much of mercy, that
deny their compassion to me^ in misery. Now therefore since the gods have
offered to you the thing which ye durst never have wisshed for: that is your
country, your wives, and your children, being the things which men esteem
more then life, and redeame oftentimes with death: why do you doubt for the
enioyme^t of the^ to break out of this imprisoneme^t? I judge yt a yet of our
own country most natural to us, where me thi^kes is an other manner of
beholding ye light, other customs, other religion, and another manner of tongue,
which for ye pleasau^tnes is coueted of the barbarous nations: what great
things therefore be those that ye would willingly leave, ye wa^te of which only
is ye cause of your misery. My opinion is plain yt we visit our country and
our home and not refuse so great a benefit as Alexander has proffered us, and
if any be so detained with the love of such wifes and children as they have
gotten here in servitude, let such be no impedement to others, that of al
things esteem most their natural country. There were but few of his
opinion, for custom that is of greater force then nature, prevailed in that
matter. They agreed to demand of Alexander that he would give unto them some
place to inhabit in, and there chosed out an hundred to be suitors unto him in
that behalf. Whom when Alexander perceived coming toward him, thynking that
they would have required the thing that he conceived in his mind. I have
appointed to you ( quoth he) beasts to carry you, and to every one a.M. denires,
and when you shall come to Greece. I will so do for you, yt excepting your
misfortune, no other shall think themselves in better case then you. But when
he saw them look still toward the ground, and that they neither lifted up
their countenau^ces, nor did speak, he enquired the cause of their heuines.
Then Eutemon rehearsed again those things in effect which he had spoken before
in counsel. The king therefore pitieng no less their demand then he did their
misfortune, commanded.iii.M. deneres to be given to every one of them, and
garments besides with sheep, cattle, and corn, whereby they might till and
sow the land that should be appointed unto them. The next day he assembled
all the captains of his army togethers, and showed the^ that there was no
city more enemy to the Greeks, then the same that was the chief seage of the
ancient kings of Perce, from whence all the great armies had been sent into
Greece, and how Darius first, and after Xerxes had come out of that place to
move their unjust war against Europe with the destruction of which city he
thought good to revenge their predecessors. Thinhabiters had abandoned the
city, The taking of Persepolis.
and fled where fear did drive the^. Whereupon the king straight ways brought
in all his footmen to the spoil thereof. He had before that time won many
cities, some by force, and some by composicion, that were full of substance,
and princes treasure. But the riches of that city, did excide all the rest, as
in the place where the Percia^s had laid their whole substance. Gold and
silver was there found in heaps, and great plenty of rich vestures and
furnimentes of houses, not only for necessity and necessary use, but for
excess and ostentacion, which was so great that it gave the victourers
occasion to fight among them selves, each taking other for enemies that had
gotten the rychest spoil. The plenty there was such, that they could not
employe to their use the riches they found, but when they saw things of
value, esteemed them rather then took them away. Till such time that every one
couetyng to have a part of every thing, tare and brake a sonder the princely
robes, and the precious vessels of curious workmanship, and the Images of gold
and silver were either beaton in gobetes or plucked in pieces, as every one
caught hold: nothing was left untouched, nor nothing carried away whole.
Cruelty bare no less rule there then covetousness, every one was so laden with
gold and silver, that they esteamed not the keeping of prisoners, but killed
such as they first spared in hope of gain. There were many therefore that
prevented their enemies hands with voluntary death, and diverse that clothyng
them selves in their most precious apparel, leaped down from the walls with
their wyfes and children. Certain there were that set their own houses on
fire, (which they judged their enemies would else have done shortly after)
because they would burn themselves amunges their own family. At length the
king did forbid any violence to be done to women, and that no man should meddle
with any thing pertaining to them. The some of money taken within this City,
was greater then any man can well credit: but either we must doubt of the
rest, or else believe that has been left in memory, how that the treasure
there found, The treasure taken at Persepolis.
amounted to a hundred and twenty thousand talentes: which treasure because
that Alexander purposed to employ in his wars, caused horse and camels to be
brought from Susis and Babylon to carry the same. The taking of the City of
Persagadis, Persagadis
wherein was found syx thousand talentes, was an increase to this some, which
City being builded by Cyrus, was yeldid up by Gobares that had the keeping
thereof. Gobares.
Alexander left in the castle of Persepolis, three thousand Macedons in
guarrison under Nycarides, Nicarydes.
captain of the same, and reserved to Tiridates that delivered him the
treasure, the same honor that he enjoyed with Darius. Leuing in this city the
greater part of his army with his cariages under the rule of Permenio and
Craterus. He with a thousand horsemen and a band of footmen without any
bagage, went to visit in the winter season, the inward parts of Perce. There
he was vexed and troubled with shoures and te^pestes yt were in manner
intolerable: but yet he let not to go forwards in his enterprise to ye
place yt he appointed. In his journey he came unto a country yt was covered
all with snow, and the same also frosen by force of the could. The wildnes and
desert manner thereof, put the soldiers that were weried of trauail insuch a
fear and terror, that they imagened to have seen the vttermoste bounds of the
world. For when they beheld all things wast, and no sign appearing of
habitacio^ of man, they were amassed, and made request to return again,
before that the light and the elements should fail them. The king would not
chastise them being in this terror but leped from his horse, and went one foot
in the snow and ice. Which thing when his fre^des saw, they could not for
shame but follow, then the captains did the like and finally the soldiers. The
king was the first that did break the ice and made him self away, whose
ensample the rest did follow. At length having passed the woods that were
without way, they found here and there some appearaunce of habitacion and
perceived flocks of sheep. When thinhabitours that dwelled in Cotages
disparcled there aboutes, saw men coming. whom they judged to be their
enemies, thinking they had been enclosed about, slew such as were not able to
follow them and fled, to the wild mountains that were full of snow. But at
length by co^municatio^ with such as they took prisoners, their wildnes was
so^what mitigated, and they yielded them selves to Alexander, who^ he hurted not
any kind of way. When he had destroyed all that part of Perce, and brought the
towns under his obedience, he came into ye country of ye warlike Mardo^s, The
Mardons.
which differed much from the rest of ye other Percians in their manner of
their living. They with their wives and children did inhabit within caves in
the mountains, and lived with the flesh of sheep, and wyld beasts. Nor ye
women according to their kind had any more appearau^te of mekenes or mildnes
the^ the men, either in their personages or dispositions. But their curled
here did hang down before upon their faces, and their garments came but to
their knee The band of their slinge was a fyllet for their forhead, which they
used both for ornament, and for defense. This nation for all their vncyuill and
rude manner, could not escape to be subdued with the same force of fortune yt
others were. So that the.xxx. day after he departed from Persepoles, he
returned thither again. Then he gave rewards to his fredes, and to all the
rest, according to their deserving, distributing in a manner al his riches
which he found within that city. But al his excellent virtues of the mind, his
princely qualities wherein he excelled al kings, both that constancy in all
dangers and perilles, yt celeritie in devising and perfourming his
enterprises. his promis keaping toward yt yelden, his cleme^cie toward
prisoners, and that te^perau^ce in lawful and accustomable pleasures: were all
defaced through the intolerable desire and delight he had in drinking. For
notwithstanding that his enemy which co^tended with him for thempire, did
chiefly then prepare for the wars, and was gathering of his power togethers,
and though the people newly conquered, had not received quiet subjection, yet
he gave him self continually to feasting and banqueting, where women were ever
present, but not such to who^ me^ had respect of honesty, but harlotes which
had there more liberty, then was beseming in the company of men of war. And
among the^ there was one Thays, Thays.
who upon a day in her dronkenes, affirmed to Alexander that he should
wonderfully win the favor of the Greakes, if he would command the palaice of
Persepoles to be set on fire. The destruction whereof (she said) they greatly
desired, for so much as the same was the chief Seat of the kings of Perce,
which in times paste had distroyed so many great Cities. When the dronken
harlot had given her sentence: their were other present who being likewise
dro^ken confirmed her words. Alexander then that had in him more enclinacion
of heat then of patience, said: whi do we not then revenge Grease, and set
this City on fire. They were al chaffed with drinking and rose immediately upon
those words to burn that city in there dronkennes, which the men of war
had spared in their fury. The king him self first, and after his gestes, his
servants and his concubines set fire in the palaice. which being builded for
the most part of cedre trees, became sodeinly in a flame. When the army that
was encamped nere unto the city saw the fire, which they thought had been
kendled by some casualty, came ronning to quench the same again. But when they
saw the king there present norishing of the fire, they powered down the water
which they brought, and healped likewise the matter forwards. The distrucion
of Persepoles.
Thus the palaice that was the hedde of the whole Orient, from whence so many
nations before had fetched their laws to live under. The seat of so many
kings yt only terror sometime of Greece. The same that has been the sender
forth of the Nauies of.x. thousand ships, and of the armies that ouerflowed
all Europe that made bridges over the Sea, and undermined mountains where the
sea has now his course: was consumed and had his eand, and never rose again
in all the age that did ensue. For the kings of Macedon used other cities
which be now in the Parthians hands. The destruction of this city was such
that the foundation thereof at this day could not be found, but that the
river of Araxes does show where it stood. Which was distant from persepolis.xx.
furlonges as the inhabita^tes rather do believe then know. The Macedons were
ashamed that so noble a City was destroyed by their king in his dro^kenes: yet
at length it was turned into an earneste matter, and were content to think it
expedient that the City should have been destroyed after that manner. But it is
certain that when Alexander had taken his rest and was, become better advised
he repented him of his doing and said: That the Percians should have done the
Greakes more harm if it had been his chance to have reigned in Xerxes sted.
The next day he gave.xxx. talentes for a reward to him that was his guide
into Perce, and from thence he took his journey into Media, Media.
where a new supply of soldiers, of whom Plato (of Athens had the conduccion)
came to him out of Cilicia, being.v.c. foteme^ and a thousand horsemen. When he
had by this means increased his power, he dettermined to pursue Darius,
Ecathana.
who was come to Ecathana the hedde city of Media, and was purposed from
thence to have passed into Bactria. But fearing to be prevented by the speed
his enemies made, altered his purpose and his journey. Alexander was not come
nere him by a.M.v.c. forlo^g but he could not think any distance sufficient to
defend him against his celeritie and therefore prepared him self rather to fight
then to fle. He had with him xxx.M. footmen, amo^gs who^ there were.iiii.M.
greeks whose fidilitie never failed in all his aduers fortu^e He had
also.iiii.M. archers and Slingers, and besides.iii. thousand.iii.c. Bactrian
horsemen, which were under Bessus charge being governor both of ye city of
Bactria and the country. Darius with his band wythdrue a litell from the high
way, and commaundyng the verlets and such as had charge of the caryng to pass
on before, Darius words.
called a counsel and spoke these words unto them. If fortune had matched me
with cowardes, and with such as esteemed any kind of life, before an honest
death. I would rather have holden my peace, then consume my words in vain.
But I have had greater experience then I would wyshe both of your valiant
courage and fidelity toward me. So that I for my part ought rather labor
to seem worthy to have such friends as you are, then to doubt whether ye yet
remain the same men toward me that ye were before. For of so many thousands
that were under mine empire, you are those that have followed and sticked by me.
When I have been twyse overthrown in the field, and twyse enforced to fly
away, your fidelity and your constancy makes me think that I remain still a
king. Traitors and fugitives reign in my cities, not for that they be thought
worthy of such honor, but that you might be provoked by their rewards to
reuolte against me. Notwithstanding, you have chosen rather to follow me in my
misfortune, then be partakers of the victorers felicity, you are worthy, whom
the Gods shall reward (if I may not) as undoubtedly they will. There can no
posterity be so silent, nor no fame so ungrateful, which shall not with due
co^mendacio^s extolle you to the sterres. Though I was determined still to have
fled, whereu^to my heart never agreed: yet now I have conceived such a trust
of your virtue and man hode, that I purpose to pass against mine enemies. How
long shall I be banisshed within mine own dominion, from a strange and a
foreign prince? and fly within the bounds of mine own kingdom, when I may by
hasarding of the battaill, either recover that I have lost, or else dye an
honest death? Except peradventure it seems better to some me^ that I should
submit myself to enemies will, and by thensample of Mazens and Mithrenes, to
receive by peticion the dominion of some one nation. Wherein I judge that
Alexander had rather follow thinclinacyon of his glory then of his wrath. No,
let the gods never grant that it may lie in any man's power, either to take
away, or give unto me, this Deadeame upon my head, nor that I lose this Impire
so long as I remain on live. For in this I am determined that my breath and
my kingdom, shall end both together. If this mind remain in you, and if this
law be graffed in your hearts, their is none of you that can want liberty,
their is non that shall be compelled to endure the vrkesomnes of your enemies,
neither their proud port, nor their stately lokes. For every man's right hand
shall give unto him self either a revenge, or an end of all these evils. Nothing
can stand long in one stay. I my self am ensample of the alteracion of
fortune, nor it is not without cause that I look for a better change. And if
the worst fall that the gods will neds be against us in our wars that be
lauful and honest, yet it cannot be taken from us but that we may always
manfully and honestly dye. I require and make intercession to you by the honor
of our predecessors that with such fame and glory possessed the kingdoms of
the hole Orient, by those me^ to who^ Macedon sometime was tributarie, by so
many nauies of ships sent into Greece, and by so many victories won, that ye
will take such courage and heart unto you, as may seem worthy your nobility
and your nation. So that with the same constancy of mind wherewith ye have
endured things paste, ye will prove and attempt what soever change send to
you hereafter. For I am resolved for my part to get my self perpetual fame
either by the victory or by the notable adventure I will give for the wynning
thereof. When Darius had spoken these words the representacion of the present
peril so amasyd them all, that they were not able either to show there advise
or to speak a word to the matter, Artabazus.
til such time as Artabazus the most ancient of his friends, which before
time had been with king Philip, began to say his fancy: We are come into the
field ( quoth he) with you that is our king, in our most precious apparel, and
richest armoure* with the intent to win the victory, and if nessessitie
require, not to refuse death. To whose words the rest with there voice seamed
to agree. Saving Nabarzanes who being present in that counsel with Bessus and
of his opynion conspired a treason so wonderful that the like has seldom ben
hard of before. Their determinacion was by force of the soldiers they had
under their charg to put there king in hold. With this purpose, that if
Alexander pursued them to deliver him then alive into his hands for to win
thereby his favor, as a thing which they thought he would esteame greatly. But
if they could escape conveniently, then they were in mind to kill Darius, and
dividing the kingdom betwixt them renew again the war against the
Macedons. They having imagened this treason long before in their mind
Nabarzanes thought this an occasion to make a preparatiue to his wicked
intent, by a persuasion which he their uttered. Nabarzanes words.
I know ( quoth he) that I shall speak the thing which in the first apparaunce
shall not be grateful unto your ears, but phesicions use to cure deseases that
be great with sharp and bitter medycines, and the shipmaisters when they fear
a shipwreck accustume to redeame such things as may be saved, with the
destruction and loss of the rest. But this matter that I mean is no
parsuasion to loss, but a device by what means ye may preserve your self and
your kingdom. We make a war wherein the gods seem manifestly to be against us
and fortune cease not obstinatly to pursue us. It is needful therefore that
we lay new fou^dacions, and seek out men which have other fortune. My opinion
is therefore that you deliver up your kingdom unto some man's hands, which
shall have the name of king, so long as your enemies remain within Asya. And
when they be once departed (which my mind gives me to be shortly) he shall
restore the same unto you again. The country of Bactria is yet untouched: the
Indians and Saeans be at your apointement, so many people, so many arms, so
many thousands of horsemen and foteme^ have their force in redines to renew
this war again. So yt a much greater force remains then yt which is
consumed. Why do we then like beasts wilfully run to a destruction that is
not necessary? It is ye property of such as be men of courage, rather to
despise death then hate the life, and oftentimes by werines of trauayll
toward are driven to take little regard of them selves. But virtue leaves
nothing unprovided. So that death being the end of all things it is
sufficient if we god not to yt like sluggardes. Therefore if we shall go unto
Bactria which is now our next refuge: let us for the times sake make Bessus
king, who is already ruler of ye country, and when ye matters be once brought
to some stay, he shall restore to you thempire again as to the righteouse
king. Although Darius perceived not ye greatness of the mischief that lay
hidden under his wicked words yet was it no meruaill though he could not
obstayne. He turned toward him, and said: thou vile slave have thou now found
out a time mete to disclose the treason that lies in thy heart, and therwyth
all pulled out his sword to have slain him if Bessus had not straight way
come and the other Bactrians about him and let his purpose they pretended to
be sorry for the matter, But mindid in very deed to bind him if he had continued
in his purpose. In the mean season Nabazzanes escaped away, and Bessus followed
after, who imedialy did separate the bands they had charge of from the rest of
the army, because they would use them apart to their purpose. When they were
departed Artabazus framed his talk according to thestate of the time then
present and began to pacify Darius with words putting him in remembrance
how his case was such, that it behooved him to bear quietly the folishnes, or
rather the error of his own men: For as much as Alexander was at hand, over
sore an enemy for the^ though there were no discord nor disobedience. But if we
shall be at variaunce ( quoth he) when he does pursue us, our matters shall stand in
very evil plight. Thereupo^ Darius enclyned some what to Artabasus advise, and
though he was determined to remove, yet because he parceiued every man to be
troubled in mind, remained still in the same place. But he him self was so
astoined with sorrow and disperacio^ that he kept him self close and came not
forth of his pauilion, Whereupon the camp being without government, the hedes
not consulting together as they did before, there rose among them great
diversity of opynions, and mocions of mind. Which thing when Patron saw that
was capetaine of the Greake soldiers he wylled his men to put on their armor,
to be in a redines to do as they should be appointed. The Percyans encampyd by
them selves, and Bessus remained among the Bactrians, practicing to carry away
the Percians into Bactria, and to leave Darius: signifieng to them, the riches
of that region yet untouched and the perell they were in, if they remained
still. But they were al in manner of one opynion, that it was over great an
offense for them to forsake their prince. In the mean season. Artabasus
executed the kings offense, and went amongs the Percians in their lodginges
admonishing and exorting them, sometime aparte, and otherwhile all togithers,
and left them not before it apeared that they would do as the king would have
them. That done with great pain and difficulte he parsuaded Darius to take his
meat, and to set his mind upon his business. But Bessus and Nabarzanes were so
gredy to get the government into their hands, that they resolved to put in
excution the thing, they had long conspired betwyxt them. For so long as
Darius was in sauegard, they could not hope to compass nor atteine so great
power and authority. The majesty of a king is had in so great veneracio^
among those nations, that at his very name they use to assemble together.
And the reuerens of Darius former fortune, caused them to bear the like
obedience to him in his adversity. The greatness and power of the countreies
whereof Bessus and Nabarzanes had the rule, not being inferior to any other
nations in that part of the world, either in armor, men or largenes of their
territory gave a great encourage unto their wicked disposicions in attempting
of this matter. Which possessing the third part of Asia were able to make as
great nombre of men, as Darius before had lost. In confidence whereof they not
only despised Darius, but Alexander purposing when they were once become lords
of that country to reenforce from thence again the power of thempire, and
maintain the wars against the Macedo^s. When they had long devised and
debated these things, they determined to take Darius by ye Bactria^ soldiers,
which were at there co^mandiment, and then to send word to Alexander that they
reserved him on live to deliver him unto his hands. And if so be that
Alexander should nor accept their doing, (which in deed they doubted) then
there purpose was to kill Darius, and with their power to fly into Bactria. But
for somuche as they saw, that Darius could not be taken openly, seeing there
were so many thousa^des ready to aid him. And fearinge also the fidelitye of
the Greakes, determined to work by sleight, the thing that they could not bring
to pass by force. Their devise was lo cou^terfeit a repentance of their former
doings in excusing unto the king the fear they were in. And in the mean
season they sent certain to practice with the Percians, and to prove their
minds. The soldiers were tossed to and fro with hope and fear. Sometime they
thought that by leaving of there king, they should commit them selves to
manifest ruin and destruction: and again they remembered what entertaynment
was promised them in Bactria that lay open for them, where they should be
received with such gifts and riches as they could not well imagien. Whiles
Bessus and Nabarzanes were beari^g of these things in their heads. Artabasus
came unto them declaring how Darius was well pacefied, and that they might of
they would, be in the same estate and degree with him that they were in before.
Thereupon they fell to weaping and purging of them selves, requiring Artabasus
that he would take upon him the defense of there cause, and carry their request
and submissio^ unto the king. The night was consumed in this kind of business.
When it was day Nabarzanes with the Bactria^ soldiers stood at the entrey of
the kings lodging, coloring his preuy treason with a solemn pretense of
doing his duty. Darius caused warnyng to be given for his remove, and so
mounted upon his chariot after his accustumed manner, Nabarzanes and the other
traytores fell upon the ground to worshipe him and shed tears in token of
repentance, notwithstanding that they determined shortly after to put him in
fetters: men's nature is so apart to dissymulacion. Darius being of a simple and
gentle nature, was enforced through their behauor not only to believe yt they
pretended, but also caused him to weape for joy: yet that could not cause the
traitors to alter there porpose. When they parceiued what kind of man, and what
manner of prince they went about to deceive. Darius doubting nothing of his
peril that was next at hand, made all the haste he could to escape Alexander,
whom he only doubted. Patron.
Patron that was captain of the Grecians commanded his soldiers to put on
their harneys, which they carried before in trusses, and to be ready and atte^t
to every thing that should be appointed the^. For he understanding the treason
that Bessus went about followed ye kings chariot seking occasion to speak with
him And Bessus doubting the same thing, would not depart from the chariot, but
followed rather as a watch, then a wayter. Patron therefore having tarried long,
and interrupted oftentimes as he was about to speak, stod in a stay betwixt
fear and fidelity, beholding the king in the face. When Darius parceiued that
he beheld him after that manner he wylled Bubace his Enuche that rode next him,
Bubace.
to enquire of Patron if he had any thing to say to him. Patron said ye, but
his matter was such as he would no man should here. Then he was wylled to
come nere, and without any interpretour. (Darius understanding somewhat of the
Greek tongue) Patron said unto him. Patrons words to Darius.
Sir of fyfty thousand Greeks that served you, there is a small nombre of us
ramaining which have continually followed you in all fortunes, bearing unto you
the same fidelity and affection that we did in your most florysshing estate.
And are determined wheresoever you be, to take that for our country, and home,
both prosperity and adversity has so coupled us together, by which
invincible fidelity that is in us. I desire and require you, that you would
vouchsaue to lodge within our camp, and suffer us to be the guarde of your
person. We have lost Greece, we have no Bactria to go unto, al our hope is in
you, and God grant that other had the like. It is not necessary I should
speak any more, nor would not demand the custody of your person being an
alien and a stranger, if I knew that others were well minded toward you.
Although Bessus was ignorant of the Greek tongue, yet his conscience pricked
him to believe that Patro^ had disclosed some such matter, and therefore carieng
away some part of his words, by a greek interpretour, became out of doubt.
Darius nothing afraid as it appeared by his cou^tenau^ce, enquired of Patro^
what moved him to give him such advise. Whereupon he thought not good to defer
it any le^ger, but said: Bessus and Nabarzanes work treason against you, so
that your life and your estate stand in extreme peril, and this day shall be the
last either to the traitors or to you: whose words if Darius had well wayed
and regarded. Patron had received great glory of the presecuacion of his
prince. But let them mock that list, which be persuaded yt thestate of man is
governed at adventure and by chance, but I believe that every man runs his
race by an immutable order, and an everlasting appointment, by a knitting
together of causes unknown appointed long before. Darius answer unto Parron.
Darius answer was: that although the fidelity of the Greek soldiers was
sufficiently known unto him, yet he was determined never to depart from his
own nation, by who^ though he might be disceyued, yet it was hard for him to
mistrust them: whatsoever should chance to him he said. he was minded rather
to suffer it among his own subjects, then to part from them. Not desiring
to live if his own soldiers desired not his sauegarde. Whereupon Patron
dispairing of the kings well doing, returned to them of whom he had the
charge, ready to adventure any thing for his sake. Bessus in the mean season
had utterly determined to slay Darius, but fearing that he could not win
Alexa^ders favor except he delivered his enemy into his hands alive, deferred
his purpose till yt night following. In the mean season he came to Darius and
gave him thanks that he had so warely and with such wisdom avoided the
treason of that false Grecian, who being corrupted by Alexander, sought nothing
but how to make a present of his head: whereat (he said) he could not maruaill
that a mercenary man should leave any thing undone for money, being without any
pledge of his honesty, without house, home, banisshed out of the world, a
doubtful enemy, tossed here and there at the back of all men, that will
corrupt him. And then he fell to purging of him self, calling the Gods of
his country to wytnes of his innocentie in the matter. Darius by his
countenance seemed to believe him, yet he doubted not of the truth of the tale
that Patron had told him, but he was come to such a point, that it was as
dangerous for him not to believe his own men, as to be deceived. There
were.xxx. thousand whose lytenes was feared to have consented to this
conspiracy: and Patron had but four thousand, to whom if he had committed his
sauegarde, and thereby condemned the fidelity of his own nation, he saw
that then they might have thereof a goodly color and a pretense to perform
the thing they went about, and therefore chose rather to be killed innocently,
then to give any occasion whereby he should seame to have deserved death. And
yet when Bessus purged himself, he answered that he knew there was no less
justice in Alexander, then manhood, and that they were deceived that looked for
any reward of treason at his hands, knowing that there was no sorer punyssher
nor revenger of the breche of fidelity. When the night drew nere, the
Percians after their accustomed manner put of their armor, and repaired to the
next villages to provide things necessary. But the Bactrians as Bessus had
commanded them stood still armed. In the mean season Darius had sent for
Artabasus and showed him what Patron had declared. Whereupon Artabasus made no
doubt, but that he should straight ways commit him self among the Greeks,
thynkyng that the Percians when the kings peril should be publyshed abroad,
would join with the Grecians. But Darius predestinat to his chance, could not
bear then any wholesome counsel nor sought for any help in that case, but
embrased Artabazus, as though he should never see him more, and being wet with
the tears that one of them let fall upon another, caused Artabazus to be
taken away that claue fast unto him, and because he would not see his sorrow
in departing from him, he covered his head and fell flat upon the ground. Then
such as were accustomed to the guarde of his person, which should have been
his defense in all perils, fled away, thynkyng themselves over weak, for
such nombre of armed men, as they supposed to be coming. Then there was great
solitarines within his lodgyng, for none remained about the king but a few
Enukes, that had no place to repair unto. Then he debated and devised with
himself alone* sometime one thing, and sometime another, and by and by waxed
weary of that solitarines, which before he took for a comfort, and called
Bubace unto him, whom he beheld, and said: Go provide your selves, which
according to your duties have been true to your prince till the last hour,
Here I do tarry for the fatal law of my destynie. peradventure ye do maruayle
that I do not end mine own life. I had rather dye thorough other men's
wickedness, then by mine own. After those words Bub^ce filled both the kings
lodging, and also the hole camp with morning and lamentacion, and diverse
brake into Darius, which tearyng their clothes, bewailed his case with a
barbarous howling out. When the cry came unto the Percia^s they were so amassed
for fear, that they durst neither put on their armor. lest they might give
occasion to ye Bactria^s to set upon the^, nor they could not remain quiet,
lest they might seem so wickedly to leave their king. There were clamours
through out the camp of diverse sorts and tunes, without any head, and without
any apointment. Such as partayned to Nabarzanes and Bessus deceived by such
lame^tacion as they hard, brought them word that the king had killed him
self. Whereupon the prepaired thither so fast as they could gallop, Darius
taken prisoner by Bessus and Nabarzanes.
and such followed after as they had chosen to be mynisters of their mischeife.
When they were entered into the kings pauilion, because the Enuches declared
that he was on live, they commanded him to be bound. Thus he which before was
carried in a chariot and honored of his men like a god, was made prisoner by
his own servants, without any foreine power, and put into a vile cart
covered over with beasts skynnes: and spoil was made of the kings stufe in
such sort, as if it had been taken in the wars. And when they had laden them
selves with the pray gotten after so foul a manner they conuaied them selves
into their countries. But Artabazus with those of whom he had the charge, and
with the Greake soldiers, took the way toward Parthina thinking to be more
sure any where, then in the fellowship of those traitors. The Percians whom
Bessus had burdened with so many fair promises, specially because they had no
other man to follow, joined them selves to the Bactrians, and the third day
ouertoke them. But to the intent Darius should not want such honor as was due
unto his estate Bessus caused him to be bound with golden fetters. such were
the despightes that his fortune made him subject unto. And for that he should
not be known by his apparel* they covered the carte with foull hides of
beasts, and caused unknown me^ to drive it forwards. And lest by enquiring
the Army he might be discovered, such as had the charge of him followed afar
of. When Alexander hard that Darius was removed to Echatane, he left the way
that he was in, and with all the speed he could make, followed after Darius yt
was said to be gone into Media. But when Alexander was come to Taba, which is
the chief City of Paratacene, Taba. Paratacene.
it was there showed him by fugitives that came out of Darius camp, that he was
fled with all speed into Bactria. And afterward understood the matter more
certainly by Bagistenes of Babilo^. who could not affirm directly that Darius
was used as a prisoner, but declared that either he was in danger of death, or
of captivity. Alexander upon those news called his capteines together, and
showed them that he had a great enterprise, but such one as the trauail was
very short. Darius (he said) was not far of, forsaken of his own men, and
either taken as a presoner or slain. In whose parson he showed their whole
victory to consiste, and the greatness of the matter, to be reward sufficient
of their haste making. They all cried with one voice that they were ready to
follow him where he would go, and that he should neither spare there labor nor
their peril. Whereupon he co^ueied his army forwards with merueilous speed,
rather in post, then after the common order of marching, neither resting day
nor night til they had passed.v.c. furlo^ges, and come to the village where
Darius was taken. There Melun, Melun.
Darius Interpreter, who by reason of his sickness could not follow the army,
was taken through Alexanders celeritie, who fayning that he fled away from
his master, declared the whole matter, but how great so ever his desire was to
overtake his enemies, it was necessary for him to give his men rest of their
travail. So that determining to leave the test of his army behind, did chose
out six thousand horsemen, and added to them.iii.c. which they call Dimichas,
that were fotemen heavy harnised, but yet did ride on horseback, and when the
matter and place required, lighted and fought on foot. When Alexander was
taking order about these things. Orsellos and Mythracenes which for the hatred
they bare to Bessus for his treason, fled from him, declared to the king that
the Percians were but.v.c. furlonges of. and proffered to guide him by a nearer
way. Their coming was grateful to the king, for by their conduccion, in the
beginning of the nigh, the took his journey with such horsemen as he had
appointed, willing his foot battle to follow after with all speed possible. He
marched forwards in a square battle, and kept such an order that the first
might join with the last, and such as came behind, releue them ye went
before. When they had passed.ccc. furlonges of their way. Broculus.
Broculus the son of Mazeus that sometime had been governor of Siria met
Alexander and declared that Bessus was within two hundred furlonges marching
with his men out of all order, as one that did cast no doubts, seming to him
that they went toward Hircania. wherefore if haste were made (he said) they
might sone be overtaken, and found disparckled here and there, out of al array.
He affirmed also that Darius was yet alive, Alexander that was hot before in
his pursuit, was with his words much more pricked forwards, so that he
caused them put spores to their horses, and passed forwards a gallop, and went
so far forth, that they might hear the noise of their enemies, made as they
marched. But the duste that did rise took away their fight, and therefore he
stayed a while, till the duste was vanished away. And then both Bessus parceyued
the Macedons, and they saw the Percians as they fled. Notwithstanding they had
not ben hable to have matched with them, if Bessus had had as great courage to
fight, as he had to betraye his master. For besides that they excedid the
Macedons in nombre and power, who being forweried and sore trauayled, should
have had to do with them that were iustie and fresh. But the name of Alexander
and his fame, which is of great moment, ever in the wars put the^ in such
fear, that they could not stay them selves. Then Bessus and other that were
parteners of the co^spiracy came to ye carte, where Darius was, and parsuaded
him to leap on horseback, and fle from his enemies that were at hand. But he
affirming that the gods were come to his reueng, and calling for the
assistaunce of Alexander, Darius wounded to death.
said that in no wise he would go with traitors: wherewith they were so
sturred to wrath, that they threw darts at him, and left him wounded in many
places of his body. They thucst in the beasts also that driew the cart, to
the intent they should not be hable to pass forwards. and slew his two
servants that did wait upon him. When they had committed this act, they
thought it expedient to disperse them selves in their flieng. And so Nabarzanes
took the way to Hircania, and Bessus to Bactria, with a few horsemen that each
of them had in their company. When their soldiers were forsaken of their
Captains, they scatered here and there, where hope and fear did lead the^.
There were only five hundred horsemen which assembled them self together, and
stood in a ma^moryng, whither it were better to resist, or to flee. Alexander
understanding the fear his enemies were in sent Nycanor before with part of
his horsemen, by keeping of them occupied, and he with the rest followed after.
Where were slain about the nombre of.iii. thousand that stood at their defense,
and they did drive before them the rest of the army like beasts, from killyng
of whom, the king gave commandment to abstain. Among all the prisoners
there was none that was able to show which was the cart that carried Darius,
for every one was so desirous to find him, that as they saw any carte they
sought Darius therein, and yet they could perceive by no means where he was
become. Alexander made such haste that scarsely three thousand horsemen followed
him, of all his nombre, but the whole army of the Percians, fell into their
lappes that followed behind. It is scarsely credible to be believed, that there
should be more prisoners taken, then there were men to take the^. But fortune
in that fear had so taken away their sense, that they could not consider their
own multitude, nor the small nombre of their enemies. In the mean season the
beasts that drew Darius wagon, having no man to govern the^, were swarued
out of the high way, and wanderyng here and there, had drawn Darius four
furlonges from the place he was wounded, into a valley, where they fainted, by
reason of their heat and their hurtes. There was a spring there at hand,
which certain that knew the country, Polistratus
had showed to Polistratus a Macedon, that was overcome for thrust. And whiles
he was drinking water out of his helmet, he spyed the beasts that were thrust
in with darres, and marueilyng that they were not rather carried away, then hurt
after that manner. He looked, and found in the foul cart the body of a man haulf
alive, and at length perceived it was Darius that lay there sore wounded, and
drawing of his breath. Then Polistratus drought to him a Percian whom he had
taken prisone^. Whom when Darius knew by his voice, to be of his country,
said: he took that for a comfort of his present fortune, that he should speak
before he died, to one that understood him, The message that Darius sent to
Alexand before his death.
and not utter his last words in vain. He required him to declare unto
Alexander, that though he had never deserved any thing at his hands, yet it
was his chance to die greatly his debtour, and had great thanks to give him,
for the favor and goodness that he had showed toward his mother, his wife,
and his children, to whom he had not only granted life, but also the
reverence of their former estate and dignity, where as he of his kinsmen and
friends to whom he had given both life and lands, was now by the^ bereaved of
al. He prayed therefore that he might always be victor, and that the Empire of
the whole world might come unto his hands requiring that he would not
neglecte to take reuengaunce of so foull an act, not only for his cause, but
for ensample and the love of other princes, which should be a thing honorable
unto him, and proffitable in time coming. When he had spoken these words, he
fainted and called for water, and after he had drunk, said to Polystratus that
presented it unto him. Whatsoever thou art, this is unto me the last mysery in
all my adverse chance, that I am not able to requite the this benefit. But
Alexander shall reward the, and the gods shall requite him for his great
humanite and clemency showed toward mine. Unto whom, in my behalf thou
shall give my hand as a pledge of a kings promise. When he had spoken these
words, and given Polistratus his hand, he died. When these things were
reported to Alexander, he repaired where the dead corse lay, and there be
wayled with tears, that it was his chance to dye, a death so unworthy for so
great an estate, and taking of his own clooke to cover the dead coorse
withal, adorned the same with all things that pertayned to a king, and sent it
to his mother Sisigambis to be buried, in such sort as the country manner was
to bury kings, and to be laid among the rest of his predecessors.

Here the first part of the syxt book does want, wherein was contained the
cause of the war betwixt the Lacedaemonians and Macedons: with the preparacion
of both nations to the battaill that was fought betwixt Antipater Alexanders
lieutenaunt in Macedonia, and Agis, king of the Lacedaemonians.

The sixte book of Quintus Curtius of the acts of the great Alexander King of
Macedonie.
HE preassed forwards where the fight was most dangerous, The batail betwyxt
Agys king of Lacedemon and Antipater laeutena^t in Macedonia
and sleyng such as made most resistaunce put the greater part of his
enemies to flight. Then such as were victorers before began to fly, till they
had drawn their enemies, gredely following them, out of the streyte into a more
plain ground. In the retire many of them were slain, but when they had once
recovered such a ground where as they might stay and fall in order, the
battles joined equally again on both sides. Among them all, the king of
the Lacedaemonians, appeared most notable in all men's eyes, not so much by the
beawty of his armor and goodly personage, as through the greatness of his
courage, wherein only he could not be overcome. He was laid to on all parts,
both nere hand, and a far of ye^ for all that he endured long in arms
against his enemies, avoiding their strokes part with his target, and part
with his body, til such time as he was thrust through both thies with a spear,
when by great effusion of blood he was not able any longer to endure the fight:
Then the esquiers for his body took him up upon his target, and carried him into
their camp, that with great pain endured the slurring of his wounds. The
Lacedemonia^s for all their kings departure, gave not over the fight, but
as soon as they could recover any ground of advantage, they cloosed them selves
in battaylle together, and received stowtly there enemies that came full upon
them. Their is not found in any memory of a battayl more vehemently fought
then that was, where the armies of two nations that were most excellent in the
wars contended togithers the victory not yet enclyning to any part. The
Lacedaemonians called to mind there aunciente manhood and prowes, and the
Macedons considred there present estymacion they had in the world. The
Lacedaemonians striued for their liberty, and the Macedons for the souereyntye.
The one party lacked a captain, and the other rowme to fight in. The
manifold adventures and causes that fell that day, increased both the hope and
fear of both parties, fortune as it were of purpose bringing such valiant men
to fight togithers, neither of them prevailing upon other. But the streytnes of
the place, wherein they fought, did not suffer them to join with there whole
force at ones: for more were beholders the fighters, and such as stood without
danger encouraged the other with their cry. Atlength the Lacedemonia^s began
to faint, and scarsly able for sweating to sustain their armor began to draw
back, to have the more liberty to fle from their enemies that preased sore
upon them. When they were ones broken and scatered abroad the victor pursued
after. And passing the place whereupon the Lacedaemonians batteyll was first
araynged, with all haste, made a sore pursuyt upon Agym, who seeing his men
flieng and his enemies approach at hand, wylled his men to set him down. Where
stretching out him self, to feel if the force of his body could answer unto
his heart. When he found him self unable to stand, remaining upon his knees,
put on his helmet, and covering his body with his target, shaked his spear and
provoked his enemies to draw nere, if any were desirous of his spoil, but
there was not one that preassed nere him, but did cast darts afar of, which
he always took and threw at his enemies again, till such time as he was
thrust into ye bare breast with a spear, Agi^ was slain.
which pulled out of the wound, he fainted and bowing down himself upon his
target, shortly after fell down dead blood and life failing both together.
There were slain of the Lacedemonia^s.v.M.iii.C.lx. and of the Macedons, not
passing.iii.C. but there was scarsely any of the^ that escaped vnwou^ded. This
victory brake the hearts not only of the Lacedemonia^s and of their
confederates, but also of all other which lay in wait loking for ye success
of that war. Antiparer was not ignorant how the cou^tenau^ces of such as did
gratefie his victory, differed much from the ententes of their hearts: but
desirous to finishe the war that was begone, perceived it necessary for him
to disse^ble, and suffer himself to be deceived. And though he reioysed much in
the fortune of the thing, yet he feared the envy that might ensue thereof, being
a greater matter then the estate of a lieutenaunt did bear. For Alexander was
of ye nature, that he desired that his enemies had won the victory, showing
manifestly that he was not contented with Antiparers good success, thinking
that what honor soever chaunsed to any other man, was a derogacion to his own
glory. Antipater therefore which knew full well his stomach, durst not use the
victory according to his own will. But assembled a counsel of Greeks to
advise, what they thought expedient. The Lacedemonia^s made no other request,
but that they might send Ambassadors unto Alexander, which upon their repair
to him and their suite made, obtained pardon to all men. saving to such as
were the authors of the rebellion. The Megapolitans whose city did abide the
sieg, Megapolitane.
were compelled to pay as a fine for there rebellion.xx. talentes to the Aheians
and the catolians. This was the end of the war, How Alexander in prosprytie
^ell to vice.
which being sodeinly begone was ended before that Alexander had overthrown
Darius at Arbella. As Soon as his mind was delivered of those present cares, as
one that could bear better the wars then quietness or rest, gave him self
al to pleasures. By the vices whereof ensewing he was overcome, whom no power of
the Percians or any other was able to subdue. He was given to banqueting out
of season, and to a fond delight of drinking and watching, in plays, and
among flocks of Concubines yt drwe him into strau^g manners and custumes.
Which he following as things better then the vsagies of his country, offended
thereby greatly both ye eyes and the hearts of his own nation, and caused many
yt loved him before entierly, to hate him then as an enemy. For the Macedo^s yt
were obstinate in keaping their own discipline, and accustumed not to be
curious, but so scarce in their diet as might suffice nature. When they saw he
went about to bring in among them ye vices of those nations which they had
subdued: co^spiracies then began to be made against him, mutyne risse among
the soldiers, and every one complaynning to an other freely vttred there
griefs, thereby he was provoked to wrath, to suspicion and sodeine fear,
diverse other inconvenience ensuing thereupon which shall be declared herafter.
Alexander being given as it has been said before to unreasonable banquetinge
wherein he consumed both day and night. When he was satisfied of eating and
drinking, passed over the time with plays and pastimes. And not contented with
such musicia^s as he brought out of Grease, caused the women yt were taken
captive tosing before him such songs as abhored the ears of the Macedons not
accustumed to such things. Emonges those women Alexander spyed one more
sadder then the rest, which with a certain shamfastnes did strive with them
that brought her fourth. She was excellent of bewty and through her
shamfastnes her bewty was augmentyd. Because she did cast her eyes toward
the earth, and covered her face so much as she might: caused him to suspect her
to come of greater nobility, then yt she ought to be showed forth amo^such
banqueting plays. And therefore being demanded what she was: she showed her
self to be the daughter of the son of Occhus yt lately reigned in Perce, and
the wief of Histaspis which was Darius kinsma^, Histaspis.
and had been his lieutennant over great armies. Their yet remaynned in the
kings heart some small sparks of his former virtue. For in respect of her
estate being come of kings blood, and the reverence he bare to such a name as
the nese of Occhus, commanded her not only to be set free, but also to be
restored to her goods and her husband, who^ he willed to be sought out. The
next day he appointed Ephestio^ to bring all the prisoners unto the court, where
enquering of the nobility of every one commanded them which were descended of
noble blood to be severed from the rest among whom they found Oxatres
brother to Darius, yt was no less noble of mind then of blood. There was made
of the last spoil.xxvi.M. talentes, whereof.xii.M. were consumed in rewards
among the men of war: and the smoe amo^ted to no less value yt was
co^uaied away by them that had the keapinge thereof. There was one Oxydates a
noble man of Perce that was put in prison by Darius, and appointed to suffer
death, Oxydates.
whom Alexander delivered and gave unto him the signorie of Medya, and received
Darius brother among the nombre of his friends, reserving to him all the
accustomed honor of his nobility. The^ they came to the country of
Parthenia, Parthenia.
then being but obscure and unknown: but now the head of all those countries
which lie upon Tigre and Euphrates, and be bou^ded with the read seas. This
country, being fruitful and haboundaunt of al things, was taken by the
Scithians, which possessing part both of Asia and Europe, be troubleous
neighbors to them both. They, which inhabit upon the Bospheron sea, Baspheron.
are ascribed to be in Asia. And such as be in Europe, possess the countries
lieng on the left side of Thracia so far as Boristhenes, Boristenes.
and from thence right forth so far as the river of Tanais, that parts
Europe and Asia. It is certain that the Sythes, of whom the Percians be
descended, came not from Bospheron, but out of Europe. There was a noble city
in those days called Atomphilos builded by the Greeks, Ato^philos
where Alexander remained with his army, conuoieng vittels thither from all
parts. A tumulte that rose upon a rumor.
Among the soldiers lieng there in idleness, there did rise suddenly a
rumor, yt enterid into their heads without any certain auctour or beginni^g.
The rumor was, how that Alexander satisfied with the acts he had done,
purposed immediately to return into Macedon. This fame was not so sone sown
abroad, but yt they ran like mad men to their lodginges, and trussed up their
baggage and their stufa: making such preparacion to depart, that every man
judged warning had been given to remove, and that the thing had been done by
appointment. The tumult that rysse in the ca^pe by lading of cariages, and the
calling that one made unto another, came unto ye kings ears. This rumor
obtained ye sooner credit, by ye dispatche of certain Greek soldiers, whom
Alexander had dismissed into their country, with the gift of.vi. thousand
deneres, to every horseman, whereupon they took occasion to think that the
war had been at an end. Alexander, whose purpose was to pass into India,
and the vttermoste bands of the orient, was no less afraied of this matter,
then the case required. And therefore called before him the capteins of his
army: And with ye tears in his eyes, made a great complaint unto them: that in
the middle course of his glory should thus be pulled back, and compelled to
return into his country, rather as a man vainquished then as a victor. Which
misfortune (he said) he could not impute to his soldiers, nor judge in the^
any cowardnes, to give impediment to his procedinges, but that it was only the
envy of ye gods, which put so sodeine a desire of their country into the
minds of valiant men, that within a while should have returned with great
glory and fame. Thereupon they al promised him to trauaill in reformation of the
matter, offeringe them selves in all things (were they never so difficult) to
do as he would have them. And they promised also, the obedience of the
soldiers, if so be that he would make some gentle and apt oracion to pacefie
them: which were never yet seen depart from him in any desperacion or
disturba^ce of mind, if they once beheld the cherfulnes of his cou^tenau^ce and
the courage that proceeded from his heart. He promised that he would so do. and
required at their hands to prepare in the multitude an aptnes to give ear
unto him. When all things were prepared which were thought expedient for the
purpose, he assembled all his army together and made this oracion unto them.
Alexanders oracion unto the soldiers.
When ye consider (my soldiers) the greatness of the acts which ye have done,
and the manifold conquestes that ye have made, it is no merueill at all,
though ye be inclined to the desyer of quietness, and fully satisfied with fame
and glory. For leuing to speak of the Illirians, and Triballes, of Boetia,
Thracia, and Sparta, of the Acheians and Peloponesians, whom I have subdued
part in person, and the rest by my apointme^t. I will not make rehearsal of ye
war we began at Hellespont, and how we delivered from the intolerable
servitude of the Barbarians nations, Jonas and Aeolides, and got unto our
possession both Caria, Lydia, Cappadocia, Phrigia, Paphlagonia, Pamphilia,
Pisides, Cilicia, Siria, Phenices, Armenia, Perce, Mede, and Parthenia. We have
gotten more countries, then other have taken cities, and yet (I am sure) the
multitude of them, have caused me to leave some of the^ vnrehersed. If I could
think that the possession of these lands that we have conquered in so short
time could remain sure unto us, the^ (my soldiers) I would, though it were
against your wills, break from you, to visit my house and my home, to see my
mother, my sisters, and my countrymen, to enjoy there the laud and glory that
I have gotten with you. Where as the joyful conversation of our wifes, our
children, and pare^tes, peace, quietness, and a sure possession of things
gotten through our valiauntnes, do tarry for us, as large rewards of our
victory. But if we will confess ye truth, this new empire which we have not
yet at commandment, but is kept as it were by way of entreaty, does require a
time, that this stiff necked people, may learn to bear our yoke, and framing
their disposicio^s to a more humanity, bring their cruel nature to a more
civil co^uersacion. Do we not see that the corn in the field axeth a time for
his riping? and though the same be without sense, yet has it his course to be
brought to perfection. Do you believe that so many nations not agreing with us
in religion, in customs, nor in use of tongue, accustomed to thempire, and
name of an other man, will be conquered and brought to subjection with the
wynning of one battle? No, trust me, they be kept under with the fear of our
power, and do not obey us of their own good wills. And they which show you
obedience when ye be here among them, when you be absent, will be your enemies*
you must think, that ye have to do with wild beasts, which, being fierce
of nature, when they be first taken, must be shut up, and tamed with time.
Hitherto I have reasoned with you as though we had conquered the hole dominion
that perteyned to Darius, which is nothing so: For Nabarzanes possesses
Hircania, and the traitor Bessus not only enjoys Bactria, but also
threateneth us. The Sogdians, Dahans, Massagetes, Sagans, and the Indians,
remain yet in their own liberty and jurisdiction, which shall not see our
backs so sone turned, but they will follow us in the tails. They all have a
certain frendshyp and amity one with an other, but we be all strangers and
foryners unto them. There is no creature but that will more gladly be obedient
to rulers of his own nation, then to foryners, be their government never so
terryble. We are driven of necessity therefore to win that we have not, or
else to lose that we have all ready gotten. As phisicions in sick bodies will
leave no humor that may hurt, so likewise we must cut away whatsoever shall
be impediment unto our Empire. Have you not seen great fires risen of small
sparks not regarded? We may not neglect any thing in our enemies, whom the
more we despise, the more strong we make them. And because you shall not think
it such an impossibility for Bessus to make him self king, where as a king
wants: you shall understand that Darius came not to his Empire by
enheritaunce, but got into the seat of Cirus by the benefit of Bagoas his
Enuche. We commit an heinous offense (my soldiers) if we made war to Darius,
and put him down for the intent to give his kingdom unto his servant, yea,
and to such one as attempted so vile an act against his master, at such a
time as he had most neade of help, and who^, we being his enemies would have
spared, he being his subject, put him in chains as a captive, and finally
slew him, because he should not be preserved by us. Shall you suffer this kind
of man to reign? no, let us make all the speed we may to see him crucified,
and so to show unto all kings and nations a justice done upon one, that so
vilely falsefied his faith. If the report should come unto you, being in your
own countries, that the same man were distroyeng of the Greek cities about
Helespont. O God how sorye would you be then, and how much would you
lamente, that Bessus should enjoy that you have gotten, and usurp the
rewards of your victory? Then would you make haste to recover your own, the^
would you bend your selves to the wars. But how much better is it now to
oppress him whiles he remains in such fear, and is uncertain what way to
take? Shall we spare to spend.iiii. score days journey to come to him, that
have ouertroden such snowes, that have passed so many ryuers, that have clymed
so many mountains? to whose journey the flowyng sea could be no impediment,
nor the streyte of Cilicia could shut up our way. Now all things are made
plain and open, and we stand in the entrey of our victory. There be but a
few fugitives, and killers of their masters that do remain. What more
notable work can you leave unto your posterity, to be reges^red by fame unto
your glory then in revenging such as were traitors to Darius? you shall thereby
show that when you were enemies unto him, yet your hatred ended with his
death, and that no wicked person could escape your hands. Which thing if you
bring to pass, how much more obedient do you think the Percia^s shall be unto
you, when they perceive that you take just wars in hand, and it was not
Bessus name wherewith ye were offended, but with his faults and evil doings?
His oracion was received of the soldiers with such gladness, that they
streightwaies desired him to carry them whether he would. And he that could use
the occasion of their good mode, passed through Parthenia, and came to the
bounds of Hircania, Hircania.
leuyng Craterus with the band whereof he had the rule, and six thousand
horsemen, of whom Amyntas had the charge, with the like nombre of archers to
defend Parthenia from the incursion of the barberous nations. He appointed
Erigonus a small power to atte^d upon his cariages, willing him to pass with
the^ through the plain country. And he himself with his fotemen, and with the
rest of his horsemen, marched forwards C. fyfty furlonges, and encamped in a
valley at the entrey of Hircania. In the same place, be great woods full of
high and thyck trees, and the botome of the valey is very fruitful, by reason
of the sprynges that come forth of the rocks. Out of the foot of the
mountains, there ryseth a river called zioberis, zioberis.
which with in three furlonges of the head, is divided by a rock, sta^dyng in
the mids of the stream, causyng the water to go two sondrie ways. Which
afterward coming again into one channel, ronneth more violently then before,
by reason of the fall of the rocks. And suddenly it sinketh into the ground,
and so ro^neth hidden by the space of.ccc. furlonges, and then comes furthe
again as it were out of a new spring, the same being then in breadth.xiii.
furlonges, and as it ronneth forewardes drawith more narow, and falls into an
other stream named Rhydago. Rhydago.
The inhabiters of the country affirmed that al things cast in, where the
streme sunk into the ground, would apeare and come out again at the next issue.
For the proving of which conclusion. Alexander caused two bulls to be cast in
where the water entered, whose bodies were found by such as were appointed for
the purpose, where the stream brake out again. In this place he refreshed his
army.iiii. days, during which time Nabarzanes which was confederat with Bessus
in killing of ye king, did write l^es to him, in effect, The effect of
Nabarzanes letters to Alexander
how that he was no enemy unto Darius, but counseiled him ever to do such
things as he judged most proffitable, and for his faithful counsel was put
in danger of his life by him, who went about against al reason to commit the
custody of his person to strangers, condemning thereby the fidelity of his
own nation, which they had kept unspotted toward their kings by the space
of.ccxxx. years. Wherefore seeing himself in that peril and danger, took
counsel of his present necessite. And alleged that it was allwaies admitted
lauful for a man to kill such one, whom he knew to imagyn his death, which was
an excuse (he said) wherewith Darius satisfied the people, when he had slain
Bagoas. He alleged yt nothing was more dear to mortal creatures then life,
for the love whereof he was driven to this extremytie, in committing an act
which necessity rather compelled him to do, then his own disposion. For in a
general calamity eueri man has his fortune. If he would command him to come
to his presence, he said he would not refuse to do it, for he could not
fear that so great a king would violat his promis, seeing one God is not wont
to deceive an other. But if he should seame unworthy to whom he would give his
assurance, there were many countries for him to fle unto. For all men having
virtue in them, count always that for their country, where they make their
dwelling place. Alexander made no stay in giving him his faith, after such
sort as the Parcians used to receive it: which was to do him no harm if he
came to him. Notwithstanding he marched in order of battle sending ever
scourers before to discover the ground. The light armed were appointed to the
voward, ye phalanx followed after, and the baggage behind. For by reason the
same was a warlik nation, and the country hard to enter upon, caused the
king to look ernestly upon the matter. The same valley stretches out to the
Caspian sea, the ba^kes thereof resembling ye horns of the moon before it
comes to the full, the sea lieng betwyxt them like a great bay, upon the
left hand the people inhabit that be called Cercetes, Cercetes,
which lie open toward the north, and upon the other part the Leucosyrians,
Leucosiria^s
Mossynes, Mossynes. Chalybes.
and Chalibes and the plains of the Amazones lie toward the weste. This sea
which some call the Caspion and some the Hyrcanian sea, The caspyo^ sea,
being more sweater then any other, brings forth Serpents of a wonderful
bigness, and fyshes differinge in color much from all the rest. Their be
diverse of opynion that the lake of Meotis should run into this sea, which
they conjecture of the water, thinkyng the same to receive his sweatnes of the
lake. Toward the north the sea grows into a fleat shore and puts forth
his waters far upon the la^d, which rising high make many meares and plashes.
And as by certain course of the planets they flow out, so at certain time by
an ebb, they return in again restoring the ground to his former estate. Some
believe those waters to be no parcel of the Caspian sea, but that they come out
of Inde and ro^ne into Hyrcania, which lies low in the forsaid vailey. The
king being removed from that place, marched forwards.xx. furlonge in a wild
desert way. Where great woods honge continually ner their heads, and brokes
of water and myer gave great impediment to there journey. But at length with out
any impediment of his enemies he passed those difficulties, and came unto a
more fair countrei, wherein besides other vittells (whereof it did habound)
grew great plenty of appulles, and the ground was very apt for vynes. There
were also plenty of a certain kind of trees, much like unto oaks, whose leaves
were covered with honey, which the inhabitors gather before ye son rising, for
else the moister would be dry up with the heat. When Alexander had passed.xxx.
furlonges more forwards. Phrataphernes met him, yeldinge both him self, and
such other as fled away after Darius death, whom he received gentely, and came
to a town called Aruas. Aruas. Phradates.
Thither came Craterus and Erigonus bringing with the^ Phradates that had the
rule of the Tapurians: Tapurians
whose friendly receiving and gentle entertainment was the cause that many
followed his ensample in committing themselves to Alexanders mercy Menape was
made their prince of Hitcania, Menape.
who, being a banished man, in the time of Occhus, came to king Philipp for
refuge and Phradates also was restored to the office he had before. When
Alexander was come to the uttermost bounds of Hi^cania, Artabasus, Artabayus
yielded to A^exander.
whom we declared to show him self faithful always to his Master, met
Alexander with Darius kinsmen and children, and with a small band of Greake
soldiers. The king at his coming proffered him his hand, because he had been
entertained before by king Philippe when he was banished by Occhus? but the
chief cause that he accepted him so well, was for the continual fidelity that
he observed toward his prince. He being thus gentlye received by Alexander,
said unto him: Sir, long may you florishe and reign in perpetual felicity. I
that rejoice in all other things, with one any chiefly greuid, that by reason
of mine old age. I shall not be hable long to rejoice your goodness. He was
iiii. score.v. years of age, and brought, with him.ix. sons borne of one
mother, who^ he presented before the king, prayeng god to continewe their
lives: so long as their service might be acceptable unto him. Alexander was
accustomed much to walk on foot, but then left he the old man might be ashamed
to ride, he goinge on foot called for horses for them both. When he was
enca^ped, he sent for the Greeks that Artabasus brought. But they made request
first that he would give assurance to the Lacedemonia^s that were among
the^, or else they would take advise among them selves what were best to do:
The same were the Embasseadours that the Lacedemonia^s had sent unto Darius.
After whose overthrow they joined them selves to the Greakes that were in his
wages. The king willed the^ to leave al assurau^ces and co^posicio^s and come to
receive such apointment as he would give them. They stood long in a stay
vareing in openions but at length they agreed so to do: Saving Democrates of
Athe^ce which chefly had ever oppugned the success of the Mace dons,
dispairing of pardon flewe him self. But the other, as they had determined,
submitted them selves to Alexa^ders will, being.x.M.vc. in nu^bre, besides.iiii
score and.x of such as were sent Embassadores unto, Darius. The more part of
the soldiers were distrubuted amongs the bands, to fill up the nombres that
wa^ted, and the rest were sent home except the Lacedaemonians, which he
commanded to be put in prison. There was a nation called Mardons bounding next
to Hircania, The Mardons
rude in their manners and vsagies, accustumed to live by theft: They neither
sent Embassadores, nor gave any significacion that they would be at
Alexanders commau^diment, he took thereat great indingnacio^ that any one people
should give impediment to his victory. And therefore leuing a guard for his
cariages, went against them with a strong power. He merched forwards in the
night, and by the time that the day appeared his enemies were in sight. But the
matter came rather to a larom then to any fight. For thennemies were sone
driven from the hills. Who flieng away left their villagies to be sacked by
the Macedons. But the army could not pass into the inward parts of the
country without great trouble and veracion, the same being compassed about with
high montains, great woods and desert rocks* and the parts which were plain
were defended with a straung kind of fortificacion, that is to say with tres
set thick of purpose, the bows whereof when they were young were wreathed one
within an other: The tops bowed down were put into the ground again, from
whence as out of an other rote there sprung new b^aunches. Which they would not
suffer to grow as nature brought forth, but did knit them so one with an
other, that when they were full of leaves they covered clean the earth. The
trees thus wreathed one with an other, enclosed in the country as it were with a
continual hedge, and were as snares to entangle such as would go about to
enter, there was no way could be devised to pass through ye same but onliby
cutting down of the wood. And therein they found a great difficulty and much
trauail, by reason that the wreathing and wrappinge together of the bows kept
them of from the bodies of the tres. And the weakness of the bows so yielded to
the strokes that they could not well be cut a sonder. The inhabiters of the
country were accus^umed to creape among the brush like wild bestes, and by
pryuie salies break out upon their enemies. Alexander therefore caused his men
after ye manner of hunters to sake out there lurki^g places and killed many of
them. But at length he environed the wood with his soldiers round about, to
the intent they might break in at every place, where they should spy any entrey,
Whereby many wandered and lost there company in places that they knew not, and
were taken prisoners: And among them Bucephalus Alexa^ders horse, Bucephalus
Alexanders horse.
whom he did not esteame as men do other beasts, for he would not suffer any
other man to come upon his back. and when the king would ride he would kneell
down upon his knees to receive him, so that he seamed to have the sense to
understand whom he carried. Alexander was more sorrowful and sturred to a
greater wrath for the loss of the horse the^ was expedient for such a cause,
for serching about to get ye horse again caused proclamacio^ to be made by an
interpreter, ye except he were restored he would not leave one of them alive.
When they hard this terrible threating, among other gifts they presented
unto Alexander his horse. yet he was not therwyth pacefied but commanded the
woods to be cut down, and earth to be brought for making of the ways smooth,
which he cut through the woods. This worck went so well forward, that the
inhabiters dispayring of ability to defend their country, yielded them selves
to the king, who receiving their pledges, committed them to the keaping of
Phradates. And from thence the fifte day returned again to his camp. There he
gave to Artabasus the double honor that Darius did unto him, and sent him home
again into his country. After that he came to that city of Hircania where
Darius Palace was Nabarzanes upon assurance, came thither bringing with him
great gifts, and among the rest presented unto Alexander Bagoas an Enuche
of singular beauty, being in the first flower of youth, whom Darius
accustomed, and after Alexander. The Amazons.
At whose intercession speicially he did pardon Nabarzanes. The nation of the
Amazo^s being nere unto Hircania (as has been said before) did inhabit the
playnes of Themiscirae about the river of Thermodoonta, Thermodoonta.
and had a queen reigning over the^ called Thalestris, which kept under her
dominion all the countries between the Mount Caucasus, and the river of Phasis:
Phasis.
who for the great affeccion she had to see Alexander, travailed out of her
own country, and being come nere where he was, she sent certain before, to
declare that a queen was come of desire to visit him, and to make her
acquayntaunce. When liberty was given her to come to his presence, she caused
all the rest of her band to stay, and the came forwards accompanied with.ccc.
women. As Soon as she parceyued Alexander, Thalestrys me^te Alexander.
she leaped from her horse carieng two Lances in her hand, The Amazons
apparel is such that it does not cover all their bodies, for their breasts be
bare on the left side, nor their garments which they use to knytte up with a
knot, come not to their knees. One breast they always reserve untouched
wherewith they noryshe their woman children, but their right breasts they use
to sear, to make them more apt to draw their bows, and cast their darts.
Thalestis beheld Alexander with a bold countenance, and considered in lokyng
upon him, that his personage answered not to the same that she had heard of
his acts. For the barbarous nations give great veneracion to the majesty of
the personage, thynking none to be sufficient for the doing of great acts,
but such as nature have endued with great personages. It was demanded of her,
if she had any request to make unto Alexander: Whereat she abashed not to
confess that she was come thither to get children with him, thynkyng her self
a personage worthy of whom he should get heirs to enherite his kingdom.
Couenanting that if it were a woman she would keep it still, and if it were a
man child, she would restore it to the father. Alexander enquired of her, if
she would go forwards with him in his wars, but therein she excused her
self, that she had left no order for the defense of her kingdom. But she
continued still in declaration of the cause of her coming, and required that
her hope therein might not be in vain. The woman's appetite, seamed to be more
vehemently given to lust then the kings was, yet she obtained of him to stay
for her cause, and consumed thirtene days in satisfieng of her desire. Here
Alexander first forsook virtue and fell to vice.
That done she departed to her own kingdom, and Alexander went to Patthinia,
which was the place where he first showed manifestly the vices that were in
him: there he turned his continency, and moderacion, being the most excellent
virtues appearing in any kind of estate, into pride and voluptuousness, not
esteamyng his country customs, nor the wholesome temperaunce that was in the
vsagies and discipline of the kings of Macedon, which judged their civil
usage and manner to be over base for his greatness, but did counterfeit the
heyghte and pomp of the Kings of Perce, representing the greatness of the
Gods. He was content to suffer men there to fall down flat upon the ground,
and worship him, and accustomed the victors of so many nations, by little and
little, to servile offices, coveting to make them equal unto his captives. He
ware upon his head a diadem of purple, interpaled with white, like as Darius
was accustomed, and fasshioned his apparel of the manner of the Percians,
without scrupulesitie of any evil token that it signified, for the victorer to
change his habit into the fasshion of him whom he had vanquisshed. And
though he aduaunted that he ware the spoils of his enemies, yet with those
spoils he put upon him their evil manners, and the insolency of the mind,
followed the pride of the apparel. Besides he sealed such letters as he sent
into Europe with his accustomed seal, but all the letters he sent abroad into
Asia, were sealed with Darius ring. So it appeared that one mind could not
bear the greatness that apperteyned to two. He apparelled also his friends, his
capitaynes, and his horsemen in Percian apparel, whereat though they grudged in
their minds, yet they durst not refuse it for fear of his displeasure. His
court was replenisshed with concubines, for he still maynteined three hundred
and.lx. that belonged to Darius, and among them were flocks of Enukes
accustomed to perform the use of women. The old soldiers of Philippe
naturally abhorryng such things manifestly withstode to be infected with
such voluptuousnes and strange customs. Whereupon there rose a general talk
and opinion throughout the ca^pe: that they had lost more by the victory, then
they had won by the war. For when they saw themselves overcome in such
excess, and foreine customs so to prevail among them, they judged it
aslender reward of their long being abroad, to return home in the habit of
prisoners. They began to be ashamed of their king that was more like to such
as were subdued, then to them that were victorious, and that of a king of
Macedon, was become a prince of Perce, and one of Darius courtiers. When he
understood that the chief of his friends, and his men of war, were grievously
offended with his doings, he went about to recover favor again with gifts
and liberality, but it is to be thought that the rewards of servitude, be
ungrateful to fre men. And therefore lest this matter might turn into a
sedicion, he thought good to break the imaginacio^s increased by idleness, with
the exercise of wars, whereof an apt occasion was given. For Bessus inuesting
him self as a king, Bessus took upon him as king.
took upon him the name of Artaxerses, drawing to his part the Scithians and
other that were the inhabiters of the River of Tanais: which things were
reported to him by Nabarzanes, whom he had received into his favor, and given
the rule of the country that he had before. When he had determined this new
expedicio^, he found his army so ouercharged and laden with spoil, and other
furnime^tes of voluptuousnes, that they could not scarsly move. Wherefore he
commanded the baggage and stuf of the whole army to be brought together in one
place, excepting only such things as were very necessary. The place was large
and plain whether the carts were brought laden, and when every one stood
waiting and musing what he would command them to do, he caused the beasts
to be removed first out of the way, and then set his own fardels on fire, and
after all the rest. Whiles these things were burning the owners were on fire,
to see those things consumed, for the saving whereof they had often quenched the
flambes in Cities of their enemies, yet no man durst lament the price of his
own blood, seeing they saw the fire consume the kings riches, as well as
their own, but the rather to pacefie them, the king did mytigate their dolor
with a brief oracion. Whereupon they that were ever apt for the wars, and
ready to do all things, began to be joyful that with the loss of their
baggage, they had saved their discipline accustomed in the wars. As they were
setting forwards toward Bactria. Nycanour.
Nycanour the son of Parmenio died suddenly, whom every man greatly
lamented, but chefely the king was so sorowefull, desiring to have stayed for
the celebracion of his burial but that want of vitayles. caused him to haste
forwards. Philotas therefore was left behind with two thousand and syx hundred
soldiers to perform the ceremonis apperteining to his brothers burial, and
he him self marched toward Bessus. In the way letters were brought to
Alexander from the lords there about, that Bessus was coming toward him
with a great army, Satribarzanes.
adding thereunto that Satribarzanes whom he had made prince of the Arians,
was newely rebelled against him. For that cause notwythstandynge he was come
nere unto Bessus, yet he thought it best first to oppress Satribarzanes, and
for that intent brought forwards his horsemen and footmen that were light
armed, to come suddenly upon his enemies. His coming was not so pryuye, but
Satribarzanes knew and fled into Bactria with two thousand horsemen. For by
reason he was not able to assemble any more in so short a time, the rest took
the next mountains for their refuge. The siege of a rock.
There was a rock which toward the west was high and steape, but toward
the east more low and easy to be clymbed, upon which part it was full of
trees. The same rock had a fountain that ran continually with great plenty of
water, and was in compass two and thirty furlonges. In the top was a grene
plain full of grass, where they placed the weaker multitude, but the rest
that were apt for defense being to the no^bre of thirtene thousand, got them
selves to the eggies of the rock, and there threw down stones and stocks of
trees against the Macedonians that came to assail them. He left Craterus to
besyege this rock, going him self to pursue Satribarzanes. And because he
understood that he was gone far on his way, returned back again to the
siege of them that were upon the rock. First he caused all things to be taken
away, that might be any impediment to them in the assault thereof. But when they
came to the bare and steape rock, ye labor seemed waste, where nature had
wrought against them. But he that was of a disposicio^ always to strive
against difficulties, considering how hard a matter it was to go forwards,
and dangerous to return back again, did cast in his head all the ways and
devises that could be Imagined, and now fantesied one thing, and then an
other, as men be wont when the ways they have found out first, do not please
them. As he stood in a stay in doubt what to do, fortune did minister unto him
a mean, which neither wit nor reason could inuente. It chaunsed that the wind
blewe sore at the southwest, what time the soldiers had felled great plenty of
wood, whereof they thought to make them selves away up against the rock, and
the heat of the son had made the same dry. When Alexander perceived the wynd
to blow after that sort, and the wood lieng in that place, conceived by and
by his purpose, and willed more trees to be cut down, and laid upon them,
putting all other things to it, that were apt to kyndle and noryshe fire: So
that trees heaped upon trees, became as it were a mountain, so high as the
top of the rock. The same being set a fire in all parts at once, the wind
carried the flambe into the face of their enemies, and the smoke covered over
the sky. The noise was then great that the fire made, which burned not only the
trees that were fired of purpose, but also the rest of the wood growing nere
there about. The enemies were so tormented with the flambe and heat of the
fire, that they were enforced to forsake their place of strength, and attempted
to escape away where the fire gave them lest impediment. But where the fire
gave place, the Macedons stood in redines to receive them, so that they were
consumed and slain, diverse kind of ways. Some threw them selves down the
rocks, some ran into the mids of ye fire, other fell into their enemies
hands, and a few, haulf consumed with fire were taken prisoners. When
Alexander had done this act, he returned to Craterus, which besieged Artacnan,
Art^cnan.
who having prepared all things in redines tarried only for the kings coming
to give him the honor of the winning of the City. When Alexander was come he
approached nere the walls with the towers of timbre that he had prepared for
the assault, at the sight whereof the inhabitaunts were so afraid that they
held up their hands from the walls requiring him to spare them, and execute
his wrath upon Sattibarzanes that was the aucthour of their rebellion.
Alexander pardoned them freely, and not only levied his siege, but also restored
to the inhabitauntes, all things that pertayned to them. As he removed from
this City, there came unto him a new supply of soldiers. zolus brought out
of Greece five hundred horsemen, and three thousand footmen, which Antipater
sent out of Iliria, and hundred and thirty Tessalian horsemen that came with
Philip, who also brought of soldiers strangers out of Lidia, two thousand
five hundred footmen with.iii. hundred horsemen. Alexander having thus
increased his power, entered into the country of the Drangans, Drangans.
which were a warlyke nation, and under the government of Nabarzanes, who
being of counsel with Bessus in the treason that he committed against his
prince, when he heard of Alexanders coming, for fear of the punishment that
he had deserved, fled into India. Thus had they lien in camp nine days,
when Alexander being without fear of any enemy, and invincible against all
foren powers was brought in peril by treason of his own people. A treason
co^spired against Alexand
It chau^sed that one Dymnus a man of mean behauour and authority with his
prince, was greatly enfla^bed in the love of a young man called Nicomachus,
with who^ he used much familier co^uersatio^ This Dimnus on a time being in a
passion, Dimnus.
as it well appeared by his countenance, allured this young man into a Temple,
where remaining alone togethers, declared that he had certain secrets to
show him, which in no wise were to be reported again. Thereby he brought
Nycomachus in great suspection, Nichomacus.
what the matter should be: For before he would tell him, he made a
protestation by the love and familiarity betwixt the^, that he would assure
him by his oath to keep ye thing secret, who supposinge the matter to be of no
such weight, that he ought with perjury and breaking of his oath to disclose
the same again, swear by the gods there present. Then Dymnus opened unto
him how there was a treason conspired against the king, which within three
days should be put in execution, whereof (he said) he him self was prittie
with diverse men of nobility and estimation. When Nicomachus did hear it to be
such a matter, constauntlye denied then that his promise exte^ded to conceil
treason, whereunto no oath nor religion could bind a man. When Dymnus heard
him say so, he became in a rage betwixt love and fear, and clasped the young
man by the hand, requiryng him with weeping eyes that he would not stycke to be
a partaker in the execution of this co^spiracye, or at the least, if his heart
would not serve him, that he would keep his counsel secret, in respect
that he had found such proof of love in him, to commit his life into his
hands without any further proof of his fidelity. But in conclusion when he
perceived that Nicomachus would in no wise agree to his purpose, but
manifestly abhorred the act, he used diverse means to bring him to his
counsel, one while entreatyng him with fair words, and an other while
threatenynge to kill him. He called him toward and traitor to his friend,
commendyng the goodlines of the enterprice, and put him in hope of great
prefermentes, in that he should be part^ener of the Kingdom they went about
to get. When he had proved all these ways, and yet found him strange, he
thruste his sword one while to Nicomachus throat, and another while to his
own, so that at length by threating and fair speaking, he brought him to
promise, both to keep his counsel secret, and also to be assistaunte to the
deed doing, yet nevertheless as one of a constau^t mind (though for the time
present he seamed to be won with the love of his friend, and become agreeable
to his requests) changed no part of his former purpose. This done,
Nicomachus required to know what the men were, that had confederated them
selves in so weighty a matter, because the persons (he said) were much
material that should take so great an enterprice in hand. Then Dimnus,
though he were in great trouble of mind that he had brought the matter so
far forth, yet when he heard him ask that question, reioysed, and thanked
him greatly, that he would freely associate him self with such manner of men,
as Demetrius of the privy chamber was, Peculaus, Nichanor, Aphobetus, Loceus,
Diosenus, Arche^^is, and Amyntas This communication once ended betwixt^ them,
Nicomachus departed, and disclosed all the ma^er which he had heard before,
to a brother of his called Ceballinus: Ceballinus^
agreyng betwixt them two, that Nicomachus should remain still secret in his
tente, least by his coming to the kings lodging, not vsyng to have access
unto the king, the conspiratours might perceive them selves bewraied.

Ceballinus repaired to the kings lodging, and tarried before the gate,
waitynge for some man nere about the king, to bring him to his prince. It
fortuned that amongst many which passed by, only Philotas the son of
Parmenio, Philotas.
demanded why he waited there. To whom Ceballinus with a bashed countenance
(well declaring the unquietness of his mind) reported all those things which
he had heard of his brother, requiryng him that he would declare the same
immediately unto the king. Philotas departed from him unto the king, with whom
that day he had much communication of other things, and yet opened no part
of the same matter which was told him by Ceballinus. At night as Philotas
came forth. Ceballinus met him at the court gate, and enquired whether he
had done his message to the king or not. He excused the matter, that he could
find him at no leisure. The next day Ceballinus met him again going to
the king, and put him in remembrance of that he had told him before, to
whom he answered that he remembered it well, but yet for all that? he disclosed
no part of the matter. Ceballinus began then to suspecte him, and intended no
longer to differ the thing, but opened the same to one Metrone master of the
Kings armorye, The treason disclosed.
who immediatlye conveyed Ciballinus into the armorye, and went straight to
the king which was bath^nge, and enfourmed him of all that he had heard
Alexandre then made no delay, but sent certain of his guarde to take Dymnus,
and after came him self into the armorye. Whom as soon as Ceballinus law, he
ran to him with great reioysynge, and said: lo, I have preserved the from
the hands of thine enemy. But Alexander examined him of all the
circumstaunces, and when he again answered to every point in order. The
king was earnest to know how long it was sense Nicomachus had given him this
information, he confessed that it was three days, whereupon the king
consideringe that he could not with truth have conceiled this matter so
long, commanded that he should be put in ward. Then cried he out, and
declared that at the same instaunt he knew of the conspiracye first, he opened
it to Philotas, of whom (he said) he might enquere the truth. Thereupon it was
demanded of him, whether he had required Philotas to be brought to the
kings presence or no. Which thing when the king by his confession perceived
to be true, and that he did stiffly abide by his first tale, he lifted up his
hands to heaven, the tears falling from his eyes, greatly complainynge that
Philotas should requite him with such untruth, whom he most assuredly
trusted. Dimnus slew him self,
Dymnus in the mean season knowing for what cause he was sent for, wounded
him self to death, but yet somewhat let by the^ that were sent to take
him, was brought before the king, whom as soon as he beheld, said unto him.
Dymnus, what have I offended the, that thou should think Philotas more
worthy to be king of Macedon then I. At which words Dymnus became
speacheles, and casting forth a great sighe, turned his face from the kings
sight, and fell down dead. The kings words to Philotas
The king called Philotas before him, and said: this man whom thou here see
should have suffered death if it could have been proved that he had conceiled
two days. the treason prepensed against me. with the which matter he
charge Philotas, to whom (as he says) he gave knowledge immediately: the
more nere thou art about me, so much more greater is thy offense, and the
fault had been more tolerable in him then in the. Howbeit thou have a
favorable judge, for if there be any thing that cannot be excused, yet at the
lest it may be pardoned. Philotas answer
To this Philotas nothing abashed (if the heart may be judged by the
countenance) made answer, that Ciballinus brought him a tale, the reporter
whereof was over light of credit to be believed, and that he feared lest by the
presentyng of such a matter which did rise upon brabling betwixt two persons
of evil disposicio^, he might have been laughed to scorn: But afterward when
he once knew that Dymnus had slain himself, he was clearly then resolved no
longer to have prolonged the thing. And so falling down before the king, be
sought him that he would rather have respect to his life paste, then to his
fault which was only a consealement and no act done. It is hard to say,
whether the king believed him, or grounded his displeasure more deapely in his
heart, nevertheless in token of pardon, gave him his hand, saying: how it
appeared that thaccusacion was rather miscredited by him, then consealed of
malice. Alexander called a counsel,
Notwithstanding he called his counsel together, among whom Philotas was not
admitted, but Nycomachus was brought in before the^, where he declared all
such matters as he before had showed to the king. There was one Craterus in
special favor with Alexander, which for thenuie he had to Philotas
advancement, bare him always grudge: Who knew very well that the king had
often been displeased with Philotas, for the ouermuche auaunting of his good
service and valeaunt acts: but yet for all that in those matters he was not
suspected of treason, but only noted of presumption and arrogancy. Craterus
thought that he could not have a better occasion to oppress his enemy, by
coloring his private hatred with a pretense of duty toward his Prince.
Would God (quod he) ye had taken our counsel in the beginning of this
matter: for if ye would needs have pardoned ye should have kept from his
knowledge how much he was in your danger, rather then to have brought him in
fear of his life, whereby ye shall make him more mindful of his own peril,
then of your goodness. For he may always imagine your death, but you shall
not be always in case to pardon him. Let it never sink in your heart, that he
which purposed so heinous a treason, would change his purpose for the
benevolence of a pardon. you know well that such as offend are often in
despair of mercy. And though he perchance either with repentance of his
fault, or remembrance of your goodness would change his mind, yet I am sure
that his father Parmenio, general captain of so great an army, and of so
grounded authority amongst your soldiers (that is with them in manner as
your self) would be evil content to be in your debt for his sons life.
There be certain benefits hateful to men, and it is shame to confess to
have deserved death. Therefore I conclude, that he had rather it should be
thought you had done him wrong, the^ that ye had given him his life. I can not
see therefore, but you shall be enforced to destroy them for your own
suertie. There be enemies enoughe remainynge yet unconquered, against whom we
be going: make your self sure from your foes at home, so shall ye have less
need to fear your enemies abroad. The opinion of the counsel.
These were Craterus words, and the residue of the counsel were of opinion
that Philotas would never have conseiled this conspiracy, except he had been
either principal or priuye thereunto. For they thought there was no true man,
or of honest heart, though he had been none of the kings familiers but one of
his mean Servants, hearing so much as Philotas heard, but would
forthwith have opened the marter, yet he being the son of Parmenio, the
master of the kings horse, and of his privy counsel, did not so much as the
stranger, which straight ways made relation of that his brother had told him.
And where as he pretended that the king was at no leisure, that they judged to
be done to thentente the accuser should not seek any other to whom he might
utter it. Where as Nicomachus albeit he was bound by his oath to the contrary,
yet would he never rest till he had discharged his conscience. But Philotas
when he consumed in manner the whole day in sport and pastime with the King,
could not find in his heart to cast forth a few words, specially in a
matter so much concerning the kings safegarde. But admit (quod they) he had
given no credit to the matter through the lightness of the reporter, why
should he have differred the accuser.ii. days, as though he had believed it.
For if he had misliked ye tale, he might have dismissed the party. It was also
alleged that every man's mind much misgeueth him, when the matter concerns
his own ieopardye. Much more ought men to be credulous when it touched the
surety of a kings person, in which ease it ought to be examined though it be
of small weight. They al therefore determined that Philotas should be enforced
to disclose ye parteners of the conspiracy. The king co^maundyng the^ to keep
the matter secret, departed, and to the entente no inglynge should appear of
this new counsel, he caused it to be proclaimed that the army should set
forwards the next day. The same night the King called Philotas to a
ba^cquete, with whom he vouchsafed not only to eat: but also familiarly to
commen, notwithstanding he had before in the counsel determined his
death, after in the second watch of the night, Ephestion, Craterus, and
Erigonus which were of the Kings counsel, came priuelye into the court
without light, and of the esquiers, there came Perdicas, and Leonatus, by whom
commandment was given, that all such as lay near the Kings lodging
should watch in harneys. By this time soldiers were appointed to all the
Passages, and horsemen were sent to keep the ways, that no man should pass
priuelye to Parmenio, which then was gouernoure of Media with a great power.
Then Attaras came into the court with.ccc. armed men, Attaras
unto whom there were appoincted ten of those that had the charge of the kings
person, every one of them accompanied with ten Esquiers, which were sorted
into diverse companies to take the other conspiratours. But Attaras with
his.ccc. was sent to Philotas lodging, where with fiftye of the hardiest brake
up his chamber door that was shut against them. The residue were commanded
to beset the house, least he might escape by some secret way. Philotas,
whether it were through the suertye of his own conscience, or through
weariness of such travail of mind, was in so profounde and dead sleep,
that Attaras brake in upon him before he wyste.

Philotas taken.
But at length when he was awaked and come to him self, perceiving them about
to bind him: he exclamed and said: O Alexandre, the malice of mine enemies
have prevailed above thy mercy. Speaking these words, they covered his face,
and brought him into the court. The next day the king gave commandment
that certain of the men of war should assemble in harneys to the number
of.vi.M. besides slaves and rascalles that filled full the court, which being
assembled together, the guarde compassed in Philotas with their band, to the
intent he should not be espied of the people, until such time as the king
might speak unto them. For by an old law of the Macedons the kings in their
own persons were wont to enquire in matters of treason, yet could not the
kings authority prevail to condempnation, except it were confirmed by the
consent of the men of war. Therefore the body of Dymnus was first brought
into the place (the most part unknowing what he had done, or by what chance
he was slain.) Then came the King forth to speak unto the multitude, which
in his countenance declared the doloure of his heart, and the sadness of such
as were nere about him, caused unto the rest great expectation of the matter*
He did cast his eyes toward thearth, and stood long astonished and in a muse,
but at length he plucked up his spirits, and spoke unto them on this wise. The
Oration of Alexandre against Philotas.


By the treason of some men I was almost taken from you, but through the mercy
and providence of the Gods, I am yet preserved, your honorable presence does
constreine me more vehemently to be moved against those traitors. Because the
only comfort and fruit of my life is, that I remain to give thanks to so
many noble men, to who^ I am so much bounden. With speaking of these words
the murmur of the multitude did interrupt his tale, and the tears did fall
from their eyes. Then the king began again his tale. How much more will you
be moved when I shall show you the authors of so horrible a treason, the
rehearsal of whom I yet refrain, as one very loath to discover their names. But I
must overcome the memory of my former favor and utter the conspiracy of my
unnatural people, for how is it possible for me to hide so great a treason.
Parmenio a man of that age so depely in my debt, through the most ample
benefits both of me and my father, and whom I most esteemed of all my
friends, is the captain and contriuer of all this mischief. His minister
Philotas has procured Lencolaus, Demetrius, and this Dymnus (whose body here
you se) with other parteners of their fury to my destruction. When he came to
that point there rose throughout ye multitude a great cherme of a murmur and
complaint, such as is wont to be among a nombre, and specially of men of
war, when they are moved either with affection, or displeasure. With that
Nichomacus, Metro^, and Ciballinus were brought forth, every one of the^ giving
in evidence that they had spoken before. Yet appeared it not by any ma^s tale
that Philotas was privy to that conspiracy. But at the last when the noise was
cessed, and the witnesses had said all they could, the king proceeded in this
wise. Of what manner mind think you was this man which hearing the whole
report, could find in his heart to co^seale ye matter the truth whereof is well
declared by the death of Dimnus. Ceballinus that reported an uncertain tale,
for ye trial thereof was afraid of no torments, and never delaied the lest
moment of time, until he had discharged him self, insomuche that he brake into
the place where I was bathing, but Philotas only feared nothing, he believed
nothing. O how great a heart had this man which having knowledge of the
danger of his king, did never change countenance, neither take so much pain
as to hear out the tale of thaccuser: but in this silence and consealement
there is treason hidden, and the gredy desire he had to reign, did drive him
hedlo^g to attempt extreme mischief. His father is governor of Media, and
hears such a stroke among the capitaines and men of war through mine
authority, that he hops for a great deal more then he has. And because I
am without children he estemeth me not. But Philotas is deceived. I have
children, friends, and kinsfolk among you. So long as you be in sauegard, I
shall not reckon my self without heirs. Then did he resite a letter that was
taken, which Parmenio had written to his sons Nicanour, and Philotas,
wherein there appeared no great proof of any great treason intended. A letter.
Theffect was this: First take good head to your selves, and then to those that
long to you, so shall we bring to pass that we have purposed. Which letter
the king enforced, saying: it was written after such a manner, that if it came
to his sons hands it might be perceived of them that knew the matter. And
if it were caught by the way, it should deceive them that knew it not. Then
proceeded he: now will Philotas perhaps say that when Dymnus named all that
were partakers of his conspiracy, he named not him: as for that it is no prouf
of his innocence, but a token of his power and authority, because he was
spared of them that might best bewray him, that confessing of them selves,
durst not yet speak of him. But what manner man he has been, his life does
show. He was fellow and companion to Aniyntas my kynsman, which conspired
high treason against my person in Macedon. He gave his suster in marriage, to
Attalus, then whom I had never greater enemy. When by reason of old
friendship and familiarity I wrote to him of the title given to me by the
oracle of Jupiter Hammon, he did not stick to answer: that he was very glad
that I was admitted into the nombre of Gods, howbeit very sorry for those that
should live under such o^e^ as would ox^^de the state of a man. These were
plain tokens that his heart was turned from me and that he ^pitedony glory.
Which I kept close in my heart so long as I might. For I thought my bowels
pulled from me, if I should make a little store of them, for whom, I had done
so much. But, now it is not their words that must be punished for the
rashenes of their tongues is turned to swords, which (if ye believe me)
Philotas has wh^tted to my destruction. Whom if I should suffer to escape,
alas my soldiers whether should I go? to whom should I commit my person? He
was the man that I made general of my horsemen of the greatest part of mine
army and of all the noble young gentlemen. To his troth and fidelity have I
committed my saueguarde, my trust, and victory. His father did I preserve unto
the same estate, whereunto you advanced me. Media then which there is not a
richer country, with many thousands of your friends and fellows I have put
under his governance, and authority. Where I trusted of most surty, there
found I most peril. How much more happy had I been to have died in battle,
and rather slain of mine enemies, then thus betrayed of my subjects. For now
being saved from the dangers that I most feared, I have fallen into those
that I ought to have doubted lest. You have been wont often times to warn me
that I should regard my surtie. It is you that may make me sure of that that
you cou^seil me. To your hands and to your succor I fle. I would not live
though I might against your wills, and though you would yet can I not, except I
be delivered from these my enemies. Hereupon Philotas was brought forth in an
old garment, his hands bound behind his back. It well appeared how much this
miserable sight moved the^ which late before envied him. The day before they
saw him general of the horsemen, they knew that he was at supper with the
king, and suddenly they saw him both prisoner, bound like a thief, and also
condemned to dye. So did it pity their hearts to consider how Parmenio so
noble a man, so great a captain, which late having lost two of his sons,
Hector, and Nicanor, should be put to answer absent, with the third son, who^
evil fortune had left him. The multitude being thus inclined to pitye. Amyntas
one of the kings officers, Amyntas tale.
with a cruel tale set them all against the prisoner, we be all ( quoth he)
betrayed to the barbarous nations, none of us shall return home to his
country, wife nor fre^des, but as a maimed body without an head without
honor, without fame, in a strange country, shall be a mocking stock to our
enemies. His tale was nothing pleasant to ye king, because he put the
soldiers in remembrance of their wifes and country, whereby he thought they
would be the less willing to go forwards in his wars. There was one Cenus
which though he had married the suster of Philotas, Cenus.
yet did he more extremely ^^uay against him then any other, calling him
traitor against his king, to his country and to the whole army. And thereupon
took up a stone that by chance lay at his feet, to have cast at Philotas;
which he did (as some thought) to the end he might rid him from racking. But the
king kept back his hand, and said yt the prisoner should have liberty to
speak for him self, and would not suffer him to be condemned otherwise. Then
Philotas being admitted to speak, were it through ye conscience of his offense,
or through the greatness of his peril, as a man astonished, and besides him self,
durst neither look up nor speak, but burste out into tears. Whereupon his
heart fainted, and he swowned down upon those that led him But afterward
when he had wiped his eyes, and by little and little recovered his heart, and
tongue, he made countenance to speak. What time the king beheld him and said.
The Macedons shall be thy judges. I would know therefore whither thou will
speak unto them in thy country language or not, to whom Philotas answered?
There be diverse nations here besides the Macedons, which as I trust shall
perceive my words the better. If I use the same language that you did, because
the more might understand your tale. Then said the king mark how this man
has his own Country tongue in hatred, for there is none but he that will
dysdaine to speak it: but let him say what he will so long as you remember,
that he not only disdayneth our custumes but also our language. And with yt
word the king departed from thassemble. Then said Philotas. The answer of
Philotas.
It is easy for an innosent to find words to speak, but it is very hard for a
man in misery to keape a temperaunce in his tale. Thus standing betwixt a
clear conscience and most unhappy fortune. I know not in what wise I shall
satisfy my self, and the time both together. For he yt might best have judged
my cause is gone, what ye cause is he would not here me, I cannot well imagen,
since upon the matter heard, it lies only in his hands both to discharge, and
condemn me. For the matter not heard, he can not acquit me being absent,
since he co^de^pned me when he was here present. But not withstanding that the
defense of a prisoner is not only superfluous, but also hateful, which seems
not to inform, but to reprove the judge. Yet will I not forsake my self, nor so
do, that I shall seem condemned by mine own defaulte. I se not of what treason
I should be gilty, among the co^spiratours no man named me. Nichomacus said
nothing of me. Ceballinus could not tell more of me then he heard. And yet does
the king believe that I should be head of this conspiracye. Was it possible that
Dymnus should forget to name him that was chief? or is it likely that he would
have ouerslipped me, when the names of the conspirators were demanded of him?
he would rather have named me falsely to alure the young man the sooner to his
opinion, yet when he told ye matter privily to Nichomacas, which he believed
verilye would have kept it secrede, namyng him self and all the rest, of me
only he made no mention: wherein it can not be gathered: that he omitted me, for
because he would have spared me. I ^raye you my fellows if no man had come to
me, no^ge^^en me knowledge of the matter, should I this day have been put to
answer, when no man could have accused me? But beit that Dimnus were alive and
would spare me, what think you by the other? would they confess of themselves,
and forbear me adversity as subject to many miseries. An offender when he
is punished him self, uses not to keep silence to spare another man. Comonlye
he that goes to death will spare no man nor no man will spare him yt is ready to
dye, and yet so many as be giltye and put to torments, will there none confess
the truth? But now I must answer to the point yt was offense, if there were
any. Why did I co^ceile treason? why did I hear it with so small regard? this
fault, if it were a fault, thou have pardoned me O Alexander whersoeuer thou
a^t, by giving me thy hand, and bidding me to thy banc^uet in token of
atonement. If thou did believe me, I am clear. If thou forgauest me, I am
quitte. Stand at the least to thine own judgment. Alas what have I done si^ce
this last night* I went from thy bourde? What new report has changed
thy mind?

I rested in a sound sleep, when mine enemies by their bindyng waked me that
was sleapyng in mine, own misfortune? Offe^ders when they can not sleep
through their unquiet conscience are wont to be vexed with rages, not only when
their mischief is intended, but also when it is ended. But this ^uietnes came
to me first through mine own innocencye, and then by the kings pardon. I
feared not that others cruel^y, should take more place then his mercy. But
least he should forthinke that he believed me, ye shall understand that the
matter was first showed me by a light fellow, who could not bring any witness or
wara^t of his tale, which if I had disclosed, should have put many men to
trouble. O unhappy man. I thought mine ears had been seduced, with the
brabbleme^tes of two boggerers, and I suspected the troth of the party,
because he did not utter the matter him self, but procured his brother to do
it. I was in fear that the one should have denied that ever he showed any
such matter to the other, and then should I have seamed to procure much
trouble to many of the Kings friends.

So that where I offended none, I have found some more desirous to procure my
death then to save my lief What hatred suppose ye should I have gotten if I had
accused innocents? But Dymnus slew him self? could I therefore deuyne before
that he would so do? no surely Thus his death being the thing that only tried
thaccusatyon true, could not move me to utter it being prevented by an other.
And if I had been co^spiratour with Dymnus of so great a treason: It is not
like that I would have dyssimuled by the space of two days after it was
discovered? As for Ceballinus it had been small mastery to have dispatched him
out of ye way. After the thing dysclosed wherefore should I have delayed the
matter? I entered into the kings chamber alone having weapon about me, why
deferred I my purpose? durst I not attempt it with out Dymnus? no parchaunce ye
will say, because he was the chief conspirator how then stands it to
gither, that I should be his underling, which did covet to be king of Macedon?
which of you al has been corrupt of me with bribes, what captain, what
officer have I made of above other? It is laid to my charge that I abhor the
speakinge of my country language, and that I disdain the manners of the
Macedons. What? do I so despise the kingdom that I covet? Ye know well that
our natural tongue through the conversation of straung nations is gonne out of
ure, as well we that be victorers as they that be subdued must learn a new
language. But suerly these things make no more against me the^ did the treason
that Amyntas the son of Pardycas intended against the King. With whom I had
frendshyp I will not deny, except ye will make it a thing unlawful to love
the kings brother. But ^ythens it was our duty to honor a man called to ye
degree of fortune I beseech you am I gilty because I could not guess before that
he would offend. Is the law so yt the friends of offenders must suffer being
innocents? If that be reason why live I so long? if it be no reason why am I
condemned to die? But then I wrote that I had piety of those that should live
under such a one as believed him self the Son of Jupiter. O faithful
fendship and dangerous liberty of true counsel, that deceived me, that
compelled me not to hide yt I thought I confess that I wrote so to the king
but not of the king. I did it not for spite, but for my duities sake. Me
thought it more meter for Alexander to have knowledged the kindred of Jupiter
with silence, then to have made auannt thereof with vain bosting. But
forbicause the truth of gods Oracle is certain, let god be witness in my
cause. Retain me in prison till ye may know Jupiters answer concerning this
co^spirasie. And in the mean season he that has vouchsaued our king to be
his son, will suffer none of them that have co^spired against his offspring
to be unknown If you suppose torments more certain then Oracles I will not
desire to be saved from them in trial of the truth. There is an old usage
that such as be put to answer upon life and death are wont to bring there
parents and kinsfolks before you. Two brothers of late have I lost, my father
neither I can bring forth, nor dare call for, because he is accused of this
treason likewise. Is it a small thing for him that was the father of many
children, and having but one son lest him in whom to take pleasure, not only
to lose him, but also to lease his own life with him? Therefore my most dear
father shall thou dye for me, and with me it is I that take thy liefe from the.
It is I that end thine old days. Why did thou beget me unhappy wretch in
hatred of the gods? to take such fruit by me, as is prepared for the. I am in
doubt whether my youth be more unhappy or thy age. For I in the very flower of
mine years am wedded up* and there cutioner shall bereue the thy life. Which
if fortune would have suffered to continue, yet nature would have asked or it
had been long. The remembrance of my father does put me in mind, how loath and
timorous that I ought to have been in reporting of tales. For when my father
was enfourmed that Philip the phisicio^ had prepared poison for ye king, he
wrote a letter to warn the king, that he should not receive the medicine, that
his physician had prepared: was my father believed? was his letter of any
authority? I my self when I have reported such things as I hard, how often
have I been shaken of with a check for my light belefe, so that when we tell
things we are hated, and when we hold our peace, we are suspected: what would
you have us do? Then one of the company that stood by, cried out, yt none ought
to be traitors to them that put them in trust. Thou say well ( quoth Philotas)
whosoever thou art. And therefore if I have done treason. I require no respect
of my pain. And here will I make an end of speaking, because my last words
seem tedious to your ears.

And as he was speaking so, his keapers led him away. There was among the
captains one Belon, Belons evidence,
a hardy man, but very rude of al honest manner and civility, who being an old
soldier, was promoted from low estate to the rowme of a captain. This Belon
presuming upon a folishe audacitie (when all others had done) began to tell
the^: that when diverse had taken up their lodginges in the camp, how they were
thurst out by the servants of Philotas, which would lay their baggage, where
other me^ were placed before. And how all the streates were full of his wagons,
lade^ with gold and silver. He added further that Philotas would suffer none to
lodge nere him, but always appointed certain to wait whiles he stepped, which
should void al men alowf to thinte^t he should not be disquieted with any
noise, not so much for wakening of him. as for his diseasing. And how he was
so hault that he despised the plain men of Phrigia, and Paphlagonia, and being
a Macedo^ borne, would not be ashamed to here men of his own nation by an
interpreter. And where as Philotas had before moved to have the oracle of
Jupiter enquired of, he said it was meant thereby to make God a lier, for
knowledging Alexander, to be his son, as though any man should envy the king
for that title which the gods had given him. But why ( quoth he) did he not
ask counsel of Jupiter before he did offend, For now he would have us send for
an oracle, that in the mean season his father which rules in Media might
raise a power up, and with the money yt he has in custody might assemble
disperat persons to the fellowship of his mischief. Nevertheless we shall ( quoth
he) send to Jupiter, not to enquire of any thing towching the matter, but to
give him thanks, and do him sacrifice, for the preseruacion of so good a king.
Then all the company was moved, and among the kings household there began a
cry that the traitor should be rent in peaces. Which thing Philotas (who
feared more grievous punyshement) was content to hear. The king returnyng into
the prease, deferred the counsel till the next day, to thinte^t to commit
Philotas either to prison there to be racked, or else in the mean season to get
further knowledge of things. And albeit, it drue toward night yet commanded
he his counsel to be called together. Some of them thought it best Philotas
should be stoned to death after the Macedo^s laws. Ephestio^ Craterus, and
Cenus determined to have the troth tried by torments, and then they which
counseled the contrary turned to their opynion. Therefore when the counsel was
broken up. Ephestion, with craterus and Cenus arose to take Philotas
thexaminacion. The king called Craterus unto him, and commauding the rest to
avoid, had secret co^muinicacion with him in the innermoste part of his
lodging, theffect whereof came not to any man's knowledge. And their tarried till
the night was far passed, Philotas. ^acked
to here thend of thexaminacio^ The executyoners set forth al sorts of cruel
torments in the sight of Philotas who of his own mind said unto them. Why
defer you to kill such one as has confessed him self the kings enemy and a
traitor? what needs more examinacion? It was mine intent, It was my will.
Craterus mind was that whatsoever was confessed before, should be confessed by
Philotas again upon the rack. Which whiles he was taken up. his eyes bounden,
and spoiled of his clothes, cried out upon the law of nature, and the gods of
the country. But al was in vain to their death ears. Finally as a condemned
man, he was torn with most extreme torments by his enemies, that wrong him
sore for the kings pleasure. And notwithstanding that at the first fire on the
one side, and scourges on the other were ministered unto him, more to pain him
then for any examinacion sake, yet he had power of him self to refrain both
from speaking and groaning. But after that his body began to be bolne with
stripes, and that he could not abide the scourges that persed unto the bare
bones Then he promised if they would torment him no more, he would confess
whatsoever they should require to know. But first he would have them swear by
the life of Alexander, that they should cesse their torments, and set the
rack aside. The which thing obtained, he said to Craterus: Tell me what will
ye have me to confess? Thereat Craterus was displeased, thinkinge by those
words yt he had mocked him, The confession or Philotas.
and caused his torments to be renewed. Then Philotas besought him to have a
time of respite, whiles he might take his breath, and then he would utter all
that ever he knew. In the mean season, the chief of the men at arms, and
especially such as were nere to Parmenio in any degree of kindred, after that the
fame had bruted that Philotas was tormented, fearing the Macedo^s law, wherein
it was ordained that the kins^olke of such as had done treason against the
king, should be put to death with the traitors: Some slew them selves, some fled
into wild mountains, and waist wildernesses, and great dread and fear fell
through all the host, until such time as the king having knowledge of that
uproar, made proclamation yt he would pardon the rigor of the law to the
kinsfolk of the traitors. But in conclusion Philotas made this confession,
whether it were to deliver him self out of pain, by accusyng him self falsely
or not it is doubted. Seeing it is co^munely seen, that both such as truly
confess, and falsely deny, come all to one end. You are not ignorant (quod
he) how familier my father was with Egilocus. I mean the same that was slain in
the field: he was the cause of all our mischief: For when the king took upon
him the title of Jupiters son, he disdained thereat. Shall we knowledge him
(quod he) to be our king yt takes scorn that Phillip was his father? We are
al undone if we can suffer this. He does not only despise men, but ye Gods
also, which will be reputed a God. We have lost Alexander, we have lost our
king. We are fallen to presumption, nether tolerable to the Gods with whom he
co^pareth, neither to men whom he despises. Have we with our blood made him a
god, which despises us which disdayneth to be in the number of men? Trust me
yt we also if we be men shall be adopted likewise of the Gods. Who has
reue^ged the deaths of Alexa^dre his great grandfather, or of Archilaus or
Perdicas? But this man (quod he) has forgeuen the^ that slew his father.
These were the words yt Egilocus spoke about supper time, and on the morrow
early my father sent for me, who was heavy and saw me sad, for we both had
heard that, which made us out of quiet. Therefore to prove whether he babled
those words through excess of wine, or of an advised purpose conceived
before, we thought good to send for him, and sekyng occasion of the same
co^municatio^ he of his own mind said further: that if we durst undertake the
adventure, he would not shrynke from us, or if our hearts served not he would
keep our counsel. Yet so long as Darius was living my father thought all the
matter out of time because the death of Alexander should be to the avail of
our enemies, and not of our selves. But Darius once rid out of the way, then
he that could destroy the king should obtain the empire of Asia, and all the
orient for his reward, which counsel being approved, faieth and troth was
given thereupon. But concerning Dimnus I know nothing. When he had confessed all
this matter, I perceive (quod he) that it does not avail me that I am
utterly gilties of this treason. Then they renewed his torments again, and so
beat his face and his eyes with the troncheons of their spears, until they
enforced him, not only to confess of him self, but also to show the
circumstaunces of the whole treason prepe^ced. The second confession of
Philotas.
Because (quod he) it seemed yt the king would soiourne long among the
Bactria^s, I was afraid least my father that had so great a power in his
hands, and the keeping of so much treasure, (being.lxx. year of age) should
hap to die in the mean season, and the^ being disarmed of so great a
strength, should not get opportunity to slay the king. Wherefore I hasted the
matter, while the pray was in hand. Thus discovered he the conspiracye, whereof
if they believed his father to be aucthour, he said for his trial he refused
not to be tormented again, though it were to grievous for him to endure. The
officers then whisperyng together thought the examination to be sufficient,
returned therwithall to the King, which on the morrow caused all the confession
there to be openly recited before Philotas, who^ he caused to be led into the
place, because he was not able to go, where he confessed all the matter again.
Then Demetrius was brought forth, Demetrius
which was counted the greatest doer in this conspiracye next to Philotas. But
he with great protestation and incredible sloutenes both of heart and
countenance, denied that he ever intended any evil against ye king, and for
his trial desiered to be tormented. Then Philotas castyng his eyes about, Calis
spied one Calis standing by, and made a sign to him to draw nere. Who being
abashed, and refusing to come forwards. Will thou (quod he) suffer Demetrius to
lie, and me to be strayned again. With those words Calis became speachles, and
changed color. The^ the Macedo^s began to suspect yt he would accuse innocent,
because ye same Calis was nether named by Nichomacus, nor by Philotas him self
in his torments. But finallye Philotas before the kings officers standing
therabout, confessed that all the treason was conspired by him self and
Demetrius. Wherefore as many as were appeached by Nichomacus, upon a toke^
given, Philotas put to death
were stoned to death according to the Macedons law. Thus was Alexander
delivered from great peril not only of his life, but also of his surety. For
Parmenio and Philotas, being of such power* if they had not openly been found
culpable, could not have been condemned without the great grudge of the
army. So long therefore as Philotas as denied the thing, the matter seemed
doubtful, and many men thought him cruellye handled. But after he had
confessed the circumstaunces, no man, not so much as his near friends took
any pitye of him.

The seventh book of Quintus Curtius of the acts of the great Alexander King
of Macedon.
LIke as the men of war thought Philotas justly put to death, his offense
being fresh in memory, even so after he was gone, who^ they before hated,
their envy was turned to pity. The noblenes of the young man moved them
much, so did the remembrance of the old years and desolatio^ of his father.
He was the first that made the way open for Alexander into Asia, always
partaker of his perils, as he which in the wars was ever captain of his
vowarde, chief a counsel with the king his father, and so trusty to
Alexander him self, that in oppressing of Attalus his enemy, he would use no
other man's service. The remembrance of these things was ripe among all the
soldiers, and sedicious words came to the kings ears, who being little
moved therewith, did wisely with travail avoid the euel occasions coming of
idleness. Wherefore he made it so be proclaimed that all men should be in redines
before the court gate, where they being once assembled, he came for^h to speak
unto the^. And as it was before devised, required the band of the Agrians to
bring forth one Alexander Lincestes, which long before Philotas. Alexander
Lincestes
had co^spired the kings death. This man being accused of two witnesses (as
before is said) had remained in prison.iii. years together. It was also proved
yt he was of counsel with Pa^sanias in the killing of king Phillip. But
because he saluted first Alexander by the name of king, his punishment was
deferred, rather then his offense forgiven. For at the intercession of
Antipater his father in law, the king had respected his just indignation for
the time. But the old festred sore brake out again, and the consideration of
his peril present, renewed the remembrance of that yt was passed. Therefore
when he was brought forth of prison, and commanded to say for him self,
albeit he had.iii. years leisure to devise his answer, yet stammeryng and
tremblinge could bring forth but little of that which he purposed to say,
and finally both his memory and his heart failed him. Wherefore there was none
that doubted, but that his fearfulnes was a token of a gilty conscience, and no
default of memory, so that whiles he was staggering and hacking in his tale,
they that stood next thrust him through with their pikes, whose body conveyed
out of the place the king commanded Amyntas and Simmannas to be brought
forth, Amyntas and Simmannas brought to judgment.
for Palemon their youngest brother after he had knowledge of Philotas torment
fled away. Of al Philotas fre^des, these.ii. were most dear unto him, and
through his commendation, advanced to high and honorable offices. The king
reme^bryng with what earnestnes and labor Philotas had brought the^ into his
favor, doubted not but they were privy to this last co^spiracy. And thereupon he
declared to the multitude, Alexa^ders accusation against them
that he had occasion of suspectio^ against those me^ long ago by his mothers
letters, whereby he had warning to beware of the^, and yt now fearing the sequel
of worser inco^ueniences, had made the^ sure, whereunto he was enforced by
apparau^t presu^ptions. First he said yt day before Philotas treason came to
light, it was well known yt they had much conference with him in secret, and
also their brother which fled away when Philotas was on yt rack, had declared
by the abse^ting of him self the cause of his fliyng. He showed also that of
late, contrary to their accustomed manner of waiting, without any cause moving
the^ thereunto, but only by pretense of diligence preased next about the king of
all other, whereat marueilyng that they would furnish a room whereunto they were
not appointed, became so in doubt of their clustering together, that he
returned into the train of the ge^tlemen yt followed him. He declared besides
that when Antiphanes clarke of the stable, Antiphanes
the day before Philotas treason came to light, according to his accustomable
manner, gave knowledge to Amyntas yt he should deliver of his horse to such as
had lost their own: He proudly answered again, that except he would content
him self, he should know shortly what manner of man he was. Which violence of
tongue, and rashness of words bulked out (quod he) was nothing else but a
declaration and token of his traitorous heart. These things being true (he
said) they had no less deserved the^ Philotas, and if they were otherwise, he
desired they might answer unto the points. Thereupon Antiphanes was brought
in to give evidence of the horse not delivered and of his proud answer given
with threatening. When Amyntas had gotten liberty to speak, he desired of the
king, yt whiles they answered for the^ selves, their ba^des might be losed,
which thing obtained, he made suite to have his garment cast upon him. Thanswer
of Amyntas
Which Alexander not only granted, but willed also such a spear to be deliuerd
to his hands as other esquires used. When he had received the same, he eschued
a little the place where the corpse of Lincestes lay, and said in this wise.
Whatsoever shall become of us (sir king) we must think if our chance be
good, ye same to proceed of your favor and if it be yil, we must judge ye
fault to be in our fortune saying you suffer us to plead our cause without
prejudice, setting our minds free, and our bodies at large, with ye same
apparel restored us, wherein we were wo^te to follow you. Our cause is such that
we ca^ not doubt of it, and we are passed the fear of fortune. Therefore with
your favor I will answer first those points wherewith you charged us last.
We know most assuredly that we be innocent of any kind of words spoken to the
derogation of your majesty. And durst affirm that you had overcome all envy
of men, but that peradventure you would think that I went about with fair
words to excuse things that have been maliciously spoken. Though it were so
that words sometime did escape us, either when we were fainte, or weried in
marchyng, hasardyng our selves in fighting, or else when we were sick, or
dressyng of our wou^des, our honest doings otherwise do deserve, yt ye should
rather impute the same to the time, then to any evil disposition in us. For it
is commenly seen where any thing chau^ceth amiss, al me^ in manner become gilty
of this fault. We do violence sometime to our own bodies which we hate not.
Yea, the coming of the fathers unto the children sometime is both
ungrateful, and also hateful. But on the other side, when we receive rewards
or gifts, or when we come lade^ home with spoil, who can the stay us? who ca^
restrain our chearefulnes? or who ca^ resist our courage in fighting? The
nature of man is nether to keep measure in displeasure, nor in gladness. Thus
are we driven by the violence of affection, sometime with pity, and sometime
with fury, as our present desire does govern us. One while we are in mind to
pass through India as far as the Occea^ sea, and by and by the memory of our
wives, children, and country, call us back again, and does alter our
purpose. But as soon as the trumpet blows, straight al these imaginations do
pass away, and every man then runs into his array, and revenge upon their
enemies, the displeasures they have conceived within their lodgings. I would
Philotas had offended but only in words, but passing over that, I will
return to the other point whereof we be accused. The friendship yt was betwixt
Philotas and us. I will not only not deny, but also confess that we did
covet the same, and received thereby great co^moditye. Do you marvel that we
did honor and esteem the Son of Parmenio, whom you did chose to be next
about your person, and did auaunce above all other your fre^des? you your self
(if it please you to hear the truth) are the cause of this our peril. What
other thing moved us to covet Philotas frendshyppe, then that we desired to
please you. By his preferment we were aduau^ced to that degree of your favor.
He stood in such case with you, that it behooved us as well to sue for his
benevolence, as to fear to get his displeasure. Have not we sworn that we
should repute your enemies our enemies? and honor your friends as our own?
Should we have been found disobedient in this bond of our duty? and specially
toward him, whom ye did prefer above al me^. If this be a fault, ye have
few innocents, or surely none at all. All men desired to be Philotas friends,
but all that did covet could not be accepted. So if ye will make no difference
between the parteners of his treason, and such as were his friends, then so
many be offenders as would have been his friends. What presu^ption have you now
that we should offend? I think because yesterday Philotas talked with us
familiarly alone. Thereof I ca^ not excuse my self, if yesterday I changed any
thing of mine accustomed manner and living, but if so be we used every day to do
the like, then custom must needs make it to be none offense. But it may be
said the horses were not delivered to Antiphanes? and the day before Philotas
was detected, this matter was between Antiphanes and me, for which cause if he
would make me to be suspected because I delivered him not my horses that day.
There shall rise a doubtful plee between the denier and the demau^der, saving
that his cause is better that keeps still his own, the^ his that requires
another man's. I had ten horses, of ye which Antiphanes had distributed.viii to
such as had lost their own, so there remained behind only two, which when
he would proudly, and wrongfully have taken away. I was enforced to keep the^
still, except I would have served on foot. I can not deny but this
co^municatio^ was had between a man of a fre stomach, and a person of a vile
nature, which could do no manner service, but take away men's horses, and give
the^ to other. What mischef is this, yt at one time I must purge my self both
to Alexander and to Antiphanes. But to the other point that your mother did
write to you of us, as of your enemies. I would god she had more wisely been
careful of her sons safegarde, the^ doubtfully imagined such fained figures.
Why does she not also express ye cause of her fear? Besides she shows not
her aucthour, nor yet signifies one word whereby she was moved to write to you
such letters of fear. O wretched estate of mine, which stands in less
hasarde to how my peace, the^ to speak. Yet howsoever the matter shall pass.
I had rather mine excuse should displease you, then my cause. If you remember
when ye sent me to fetch new soldiers out of Macedon, ye showed me that in
your mothers house there lurked many lusty young ge^tlemen, wherefore ye
commanded me that in executing your co^missio^ I should spare none, but bring
with me perforce all such as refused the wars. Which thing I did, and
fulfilled your will therein more largelye then was expedient for me. For I
brought unto you Gorgeas, Herateus, and Gorgata, which now minister unto you
right acceptable service. What creature therefore is more wretched the^ I? which
if I had not fulfilled your will, should rightfully have suffered, and now
peryshe because I obeyed you. For truly there was none other cause that moved
your Mother to persecute us, then that we preferred your utility before a
woman's favor. I brought unto you of Macedons.vi.M. footmen. and.viii.
hundred horsemen, of the which, the more part would not have followed me. If I
had released such as would not have come. It is reason therefore, that in
as much as your mother is displeased with us for your cause, that ye mitigate
her, in whose displeasure ye have put us. Whiles Amyntas was thus pleadynge his
cause, they yt had pursued his brother Palemon (of who^ we spoke before) came
leadyng him bound into the place. Palemon.
Then the rage of the people could scaresly be pacified, but as the manner was
in such causes, they would have stoned Palemon to death. Yet he boldelye spoke
to them and said. I desire no favor for my self, so that my fliynge be not
hurteful to the innocence of my brethren, whom if ye can not think clear, let
the fault be laid to me. For their matter appears the better, because I
which fled away am suspected.

As Soon as he had spoken these words, the whole assemble were inclined in his
favor. and resolved to tears, being so suddenly contrary turned, that now
they were al converted on his part, which a little before were al against him.
He was in the prime stoure of his youth, and through other men's fear, fled
away amongst those horsemen, which were amassed at Philotas torments. His
company had left him behind, and whiles he was in doubt whether he might
turn again, or fle further forwards, was taken by them which pursued after
him. He the^ began to weep, and beat him self about the face, not so much
lamentyng his own chance, as ye case of his brethren being in danger for his
cause, with which his behauour he moved the king, and all the company there
present. Only his brother Amyntas could not be pacified, but beheld him with
a fierce countenance, and said: O mad creature, then ought thou to have
wept, when thou did put thy spores to thy horse, as a traitor to thy
brethren, and a companion of traitors. Thou wretch, whether and from whence
did thou fly? Thou have now brought to pass yt both I am thought worthy
of death, and also must become an accuser of other. Palemon thereupon confessed
him self to have offended in that point, but more grievously against his
brethren, then toward him self. The^ the multitude could not abstain from
weaping and showting, being tokens whereby men in an assemble are wont to
declare their affections, and with one consent they cried all to the king with
one voice, yt he would spare innocents, and men of service, his friends also
upon that occasion did rise, and with weeping eyes required the king of mercy.

Amyntas pardoned.
Then he comman^ded silence, and said: By mine own judgment I do pardon
both you Amyntas, and your brethren, desirous that ye should be more myndfull
of my benefit, then of your own ieopardy. Come in favor again with me with
that fidelity I am reconsiled unto you, except those things which were
brought in evidence had been debated and tried to the vttermoste, my
dissimulacion might have been suspected in this matter, better it is therefore
to be clered, then to remain in Ielousy, and think that no man can be
acquitted except he be first detected. Thou Amyntas pardon thy brother, and let
that be a toke^ of thy heart reco^siled unto me. This done, the king dismissed
the assemble, and sent for Poledamas, Poledamas
who^ of all me^ Parmenio loved best, accustomed always to stand next him in
battayll, and though the clerenes of his conscience did assure him to come
boldly, yet after he was commanded to bring forth his brethren being but young
and unknown to the king. his confidence was turned into fear, and began to
doubt, imagening in his mind rather such things as might hurt him, then by
what means he was thus circu^uented. In the mean season the guarde which had
commandment thereunto, brought forth his brethren. When the king saw
Poledamas pale for fear, he called him nere, and commanding al men aparte,
said unto him. Through Parmenios treason, Alexanders words to Poledamas
we were all in danger, but chiefly I and thou, whom under color of
friendship, he disceiued most: In the pursuyng and punishment of whom, see
how much I trust thy fidelity, for I am determined to use the as a minister
therein, and whiles thou go about it, thy brethren shall be thy pledges. Thou
shall go into Media and bear my letters to my officers, written with mine own
hand. It is necessary haste be made, that the swiftnes of the fame may be
prevented. I will that ye come thither in the night, and that the tenor of my
writing be executed the day after, ye shall carry letters likewise to Parmenio,
one from me, and an other written in the name of Philotas, I have his signet in
my custody. So that when Parmenio shall see both the, and the letter sealed
with his sons ringe, he will be without any suspicion. Polydamas being thus
delivered of his fear, promised his diligence a great deal more ernestly then
he was required. When Alexander saw his promptnes in the matter, both
commended his good will, and rewarded him accordingly. And Polidamas changed
his own apparel, and took other after the Araby fashion with two men of the
same country, to be his guide, for whose truth their wifes and children were
pledges in the mean season. And so they passed on Camels through such places
as were desert for lack of moisture, and within.xi. days came to their
iourneys end, before any knew of their coming. Polydamas then took again
his Macedons apparel, and in the dead of the night, Cleander.
came into Cleanders lodging, which had the chief authority there, next unto
Parmenio. When Cleander by his letters understood ye kings pleasure, Polydamas
having more letters to deliver likewise to others, agreed by the spryng of the
day to go al togethers unto Parmenio. As they were going, tidi^ges came to
Parmenio of Polydamas arriual, who rejoicing both for the coming of his fre^d,
and for the desire he had to know of the kings estate (the rather because he
had received no letter from him a long space) commanded Polydamas to be sought
out. The houses of that country have large backsydes, and pleasant orchardes,
full of trees being the chief delight of princes, and great lords there. The
capitaines which had received commandment by the kings letters to kill him,
came to Parmenio, walkyng under the shadow of the trees, being agreed among
them selves to execute the thing, when he should begin to read his letters.
So sone as Parmenio had spied Polydamas coming a far of, with a semblaunt of
joy (as it appeared by his cou^tenau^ce) ran to embrace him, and after
salutacion given each to other, delivered the kings letter. As he was
vnclosing it, he demanded of Polidamas what the king intended to do: you shall
know that (quod he) by the content of your letters. Which when he had read.
I perceive (quod Parmenio) that the king purposes a voyage against the
Arochosians, surely he is a painful prince, and never in rest. But now after
so much glory won, it were time for him to take his ease, and have
consideracion of his health and sauegarde. And then he read the other letter
written in the name of Philotas, whereat he was joyful as appeared by his
countenance. Parmenio slain.
With that Cleander stabbed him with his sword into the side, and after
striking him over the throat the residue thurst him in as he lay dye^g. But
Parmenios men which stood nere at hand, and saw the murder, whereof they knew
not the cause, ran into the ca^pe, and with their troublous tydinges, set all
those soldiers in a rore. Which straight ran al to harneis, and clustring
together about the place where the murder was done, made an exclamacion, that
except Polydamas and the other doers of that deed, were delivered to their
hands, they would overthrow the wall and make sacrifice to their dead
captain, with their blood. Cleander willed the chief of the^ to be let in,
and recited the kings letters, wherein was contained the treason of Parmenio
intended against him, with a request to them to see it revenged. Then
immediately upon the kings pleasure known the sedicion was appeased, but the
grudge was not rid out of their hearts. The most part departed, saving a few
which required instantly that at the lest they might be suffered to bury the
body. It was denied the^ long by reason of Cleander, who dreaded the kings
displeasure, but because they began to wax more earnest, intending to avoid
matter of sedicion, he cut of the head which he sent to the king, and left
them the body to bury. This was the end of Parmenio, a noble man both in war
and peace, many things had he done valiau^tly without the king, but the king
with out him did ever any thing worthy praise. He served and satisfied in all
affairs, a king most happy and fortunate, and being.lxx. years of age,
executed thoffice of a captain, as lively as though he had been young in
years, and pretermitted not oftentimes the parts of a common soldier. He was
quick in counsel, doubtie of dead, well-beloved of all princes, but most dear
to the common sort of soldiers. yet whether those things did move him to
cover to be king, or else caused him to be suspected thereof, it is yet doubted.
For whether the words that Philotas spoke, when he was overcome with the
pains in his last torments were true or false, or else that he sought and end
of his pain, by accusing him self falsely, it was much doubtful, seeing there
was nothing proved at such time as the matter was most fresh in memory. Such
as Alexander perceived to grudge at the death of Philotas, were separated from
the rest of the army, and put into one Cohort under Leonidas their Captain,
Leonidas.
which in times past was of nere familiarity with Parmenio, the king bare
privy displeasure against them, and therefore willing to prove the disposicio^
of every man, gave warnyng throughout the army, that all such as would write
into Macedonia, and have their letters surely conveyed, should bring them to be
carried with such as he would send. Whereupon every man did write fra^kely to
their friends, such things as were in their hearts. Some showed the^ selves to
be offended with the long wa^res, and some seemed to be well pleased. But all
their letters were intercepted as well of such as commended the king, as of
those that grudged at his doings. Wherefore he willed such as by their letters
disclosed them selves to be weary of the trauaill of the wars, for their
reproach to be put in a band apart from the rest. Whereby he both gave them
occasion to show their hardines, and besides removed the liberty of their
tongues, from the credulous ears of the rest. Which rash devise, as all
other things, turned to the setting forth of the kings felicity. For in all
extremities they showed themselves the rediest and the most forward, and
whiles they coueted to redeame their reproach, their valiant doings could not
be hidden in so small a nombre separate by them selves. These things being
ordered after this manner, he appointed a ruler over the Arians, Arians,
and proclaimed his journey against the Ariaspians, which by changing of
their name, were called Euergitans, Euergitans
since the time that they releued Cyrus army with lodging and vitel, being
afflicted with cold and penury. It was the fifth day before he entered into
their country, where he understood that Satibarzanes which took Bessus part
was with a power of horsemen entered again among the Arians. He sent against
him Caranus and Erigius, and in their aid Artabasus, and Andromacus, with syx
thousand Greek footmen, and six hundred horsemen. Alexander continued.lx.
days in setting order among the Euergitans, upon whom he bestowed a great
sum of money, for the notable fidelity they showed toward Cirus, and
leuing Amydines to be their governor, Amydines Arachossia^s
(who was Darius secretary) He went to subdue the Arachosia^s, which border
upon the sea of Ponte. The men of war that were under Parmenios rule, came
then to Alexander, being six thousand Macedons, with two hundred of the
nobility, v.M. Greek footmen, and two hundred horsemen, which were the
chiefest portion of all his power. To these Arachosians, Mennon.
Mennon was appointed lieutena^t with.iiii. thousand footmen, and.vi.C.
horsemen. Alexander from thence entered with his army into a country not known
to such as borderd upon it. For thinhabitau^tes would not have co^uersacio^
with any other people. They were called Paramisadans, Paramisadans.
being a rustical kind of men, and most rude amongst all the barbarous
nations. The hardness of the country had so indurated their disposicions. They
lie most toward the coold north pole, joining with the Bactrians upon the
west, and bend toward the Indian sea upon the south. They use to build their
houses of brick, and because the land is full of bareyne mountains and void
of timbre, they make their whole houses of the same. Which beginning broad
beneth, growing evermore narrow toward the top ends like the keele of a
ship, whereas a hole is made above to receive light. Such of their vynes and
trees that bring forth fruit, as they will preserve from the violence of the
cold, they cover the^ with earth during the winter season, and when the snow
is vanished away, they restore them again to the air and to the son. The
earth was there covered with such snow frosen so hard, that there remained no
sign of any bird or best within the country. The air besides was so darck
that little light appeared, but the earth covered as it were with a dymme
shadow, men could scarsly deserve things very nere at hand. The army brought
into this country destitute of all cultiuacion of man, suffered all the
discomodities and miseries that might be endured, both of hungre, cold,
werynes, and despair. There were many of them that died for cold, and the
snow destroyed their feet, but specially it perysshed many men's sight. When
they were weried and not able to traueyll any further, they laid themselves
down upon the frosen snow. Which having once left the mocion of their
bodies, which stored in the^ their natural heat. They were straight ways so
nummed for coolde, that they could not rise again till they were lift up by
their companions. And remedy was there none in this matter but to compel them
to go forwards, for then by storyng of them selves their natural heat was
revived, and they recovered again some strength. Such as recovered the
Cotagies wherein the cou^treymen dwelled, were very well refresshed. But the
darkness was so great, that the houses could not be otherwise deserned then by
the smoke. The inhabiters that had never seen strangers before among them,
when they beheld the armed men come suddenly upon them, were amassed for fear,
and brought forth what soever they had, to save their bodies from violence,
Alexander went on his fete among his men, raising such as were lieng, and
releuing such as he saw afflicted with the cold, with his own clothes. He was
seen, one while in the forward, another while in the mids, and some time in
the rereward to the great trauaill of his body. At length they came to places
better manured, where he refresshed his army with plenty of vittels, and there
remained in camp till such time as all that were left behind, came unto their
fellows. Then he went forwards with his army to the mount Caucasus which
deuideth all Asia into two parts. Caucasus.
For on the one side it stretches toward the sea of Cilicia, and on the
other side, to the Caspian sea, to the river of Araxes, and the deserts of
Scythia. To this mount Caucasus, there joins another mountain, called
Taurus, Taurus.
next unto it in bigness, which rises from Capadochia and passing by Cilicia,
closes with the mountains of Armeny. Out of these mountains joining thus
together as it were in one continual rydge, all the ryuers of Asia do
discende. Some of them ronning into the red sea, some into the Caspian and
Hircanian sea, and other into the Sea of Ponte. In.xvii. days Alexander with
his army passed the mount Caucasus, wherein a rock that is.x. furlonges in
compass, and four in height, Prometheus.
the antiquity feigned that Prometheus lay bound. At the foot of this
mountain Alexander chase out a place to build a city, wherein he placed.vii.
thousand of the most ancient Macedons, and such other besides, whose service
he would not use any more in the wars, and called the same Alexandria.
Alexandria
But Bessus that was put in fear with Alexanders celecyte, made sacrifice unto
the Gods of his country, and according to the custom of those nations,
consulted with his friends and his capitaines, for the mayntenaunce of the
wars being at meat. And when they were well charged with wine, they extolled
greatly their own power, and despisyng the rashenes of their enemies, and
their small number. But chiefelye Bessus was most arrogant in his words, who
puffed up with pride by reason of the kingdom he had newely gotten by treason,
Bessus words.
and not master of his wits began to declare how that Darius by his folly
had increased his enemies fame, who would needs fight with them in the
straightes of Celicia, when by retirynge back he might have drawn them
(before they should have been ware) into desert places, and there have put
rivers and mountains between his enemies and him, and among the saine so
enclosed them, that they could by no possibilitye have fled away, and much
less make any resistaunce. Wherefore (he said) he was become of opinion to go
back among the Sogdians, whereas the river of Oxus should be as a wall
betwixt him and his enemies, till such time as he might assemble a strong
power of the nations therabout: knowing very well that the Chorasmyons, the
Dahans, and Sacans, the Indians, and Scythyans inhabitynge beyond the river of
Tanais, would come to his assistaunce, of who^ there was none so little, that
any Macedon with the top of his head could reach to his shoulders. They al
in their dronke^nes asse^ted to him, affirming that only to be the wisest
way. Whereupon Bessus caused the wine to be carried about plentifully to
co^quere Alexander upon drink. There was at that feast one Cobares a Median,
which in the Art Magic, (if it be an Art, and not rather a disceyte of some
vain manne) was more notable by his profession then by his knoweledge, but
otherwise a moderate and an honest man. He making a preamble before his tale:
Cobarus words.
said. He was not ignorant how much more better it was to be obedient to
others counsel then to be a counsel geuer. For such as be folowers of other
men's devises, are sure to have no worse fortune then the rest, but such as
be authors and persuaders of any matter, commonly prepare their own peril,
and therewith delivered the cup he had in his hand, and proceeded thus: The
nature of man in this respect may be called peruers and evil, because every
one can se better in other men's matters, then in their own. Their counsels
must needs be always full of perturbacion, which take their own advise. For
fear is impediment to some, desire unto other and to many, the self love of
the thing that they have devised, I will not speak of pride nor impute it unto
you. Ye have seen experience how every man does exteme that thing only to be
best, which he him self has invented. The diadem of a king that you were
upon your head is a great burden, which if it be not borne moderatly, the
weight thereof will oppress the berer: It is not furye can avail in this case,
but wise and prudent counsel. When he had spoken those words, he rehearsed a
proverb commonly used among the Bactrians which is, that the fearful dog
does barcke more then he does byte, and that the depest ryuers does run with
lest noise. Which things I have rehearsed, because such prudence may appear,
as remained among the Barbarous. As he talked after this manner such as hand
him, wondered to what end his tale would come to. Then he began to show his
advise, which was more proffitable to bessus then grateful. Alexanders
celerity ( quoth he) is such that he is come in manner to the entrey of your
court. He can remove his army before you can remove this table. You say that
you will draw your assistaunce from the river of Tanais, and that you will put
ryuers betwixt you and your enemies. I would know if he be not able to follow,
whersoeuer you shall flee. If the way be indifferent, it must needs be most
easy and assured to the victorer. And though you think fear will make much
speed, yet hope is more swifter. It were therefore me thinks expedient to
procure the favor of him that is the mightiest, and yield your self unto the
stronger. How soever he shall accept it, your fortune is more like to be better
that way, then to remain still an enemy. Consider that you possess another
man's kingdom, and therefore ye may the better depart therwithall. For ye
cannot be a just king, till you receive the kingdom of him that is able to
give it, and took it away. This is a faithful counsel, wherefore it is not
necessary to delay the execution thereof. The horse that of noble courage is
governed with the shadow of a rod. But the dulle beast is not pricked
forward with the spoores. Bessus that was fierce of nature and well set
forwards with drynking, became in such a fury with his words that he could
scarsely be holden by his friends, from the sleing of Cobares, for he pulled
out his sword to have done the deed, and departed out of the feast in a great
rage. But Cobares in this store escaped away and came unto Alexander. Bessus
had.viii.M Bactria^s armed attending upon him. Which so long as they judged ye
by reason of the inte^peratnes of the air in those parts yt Macedons would
rather have gone into Inde then into Bactria, were very obediente at his
commandment. But when they understood that Alexander was coming toward
them, every one shronke away, and forsook Bessus. Then he with a band of his
family which were yet faiethfull unto him, passed the river of Oxus, Oxus
burning such bo^^es as carried him over, because that the same should not
serve his enemy in following him, and assembled a new power among the
Sogdians. Alexander as it has been said before passed the mount Caucasus, but
for lack of corn his army was brought in manner to the extremity of ho^ger.
Instead of oil they were feign to anoint them selves with iuse which they
wringe out of Sesema, but every measure thereof called Amphora, was sold
for.ccxl. deners, every like measure of honye for cccxc. and of wine for.ccc.
and yet of the same was very little to be gotten. They have in that country
certain vessels called Syri, which thinhabitau^tes use to hide so privily that
they can not be found, except they be dug for within the earth. The country
men bury their corn after that manner, for want whereof the soldiers were
feign to live with herbs, and such fish as they caught in the Rivers. But
that kind of fode wantinge also, they were enforced to slay their beasts that
carried their baggage, and with the flesh of them lived till they came into
Bactria. The description of Bactria.
The nature of the soil of which country is diverse and of sundry kinds.
Some place is plentiful of wood and vines, and aboundaunte of pleasant
f^uite, the ground fat, well watered, and full of springes. Those parts
which be most temperate are sowed with corn, and the rest be reserved for
fedyng of beasts. But ye greater part of that country is covered over with
baraine sands, and withered up for want of moisture, nourishing niether man,
nor bringinge forth fruit. But with certain winds that come from the sea of
Ponte, the sa^d in the plains is blown together in heaps, which seem a
far of like great hills, whereby the accustomed ways be damned, so that no
sign of them can appear. Therefore such as do pass those plains, use to
observe the stars in the night, as they do that sail the seas, and by the
course of the^ direct their journey. The nights for the more part be brighter
then the days, wherefore in the day time the country is wild and impassable,
when they can nether find any tracte nor way to go in, nor mark or sign
whereby to pass, the stars being hidden by the miste. If the same wind
chance to come during the time that me^ be passing, it ouerwhelmeth them with
sand. Where the country is temperate, it brings forth great plenty both of
men and horse So that the Bactrians may make.xxx.M. horsemen. Bactria which is
the head city of that region, stands under a mountain called Parapanisus,
Parapanysus. Bactras.
the river called Bactras runs by the walls, whereof both the city and the
country take their names. Alexander liyng there in camp, received
aduertiseme^t out of Greece, how the Lacedaemonians, and the whole country of
Peliponese had rebelled against him. For they had not lost the battle at such
time as the messe^gers were dispatched that brought the news of their revolt.
In the neck of this evil tidinges, there came another present terroure:
which was that the Scythians inhabitynge beyond the river of Tanays were
coming to aid Bessus. And at the same time tidings was brought him of the
battle that Caranus and Erigius had fought among the Arians, Caranus,
Erigius.
where Satybarzanes that was newlye revolted being chief of the country,
seeing the battle to stand equal on both sides rid into the fore front,
and plucked of his helmet, forbiddyng any of his side either to cast darte or
strike any stroke, and there make a challenge to fight hand to hand, if any
man durst come forth and prove his strength. Erigius captain to the
Macedons was a man stricken in years. But yet not inferior to any young man,
either in stowtnes of stomach, or strength of body, who could not bear the
proud arrogance of Satibarzanes, but stepped forwards, and pluckyng of his
helmet likewise, showed his hoar here. The day is come (quod he) that I will
show either by the victory or by my honest death what kind of men Alexandre
has to his friends and his soldiers, and without more words made toward
his enemy. It could not be judged but that both armies had stayed their
hands by appoyntme^t. For they gave back immediately on both sides to let the^
have fre scope each party standing in expectation what should become of ye
chalengers, for they could not but think them selves partakers of their
adventure. Satibarzanes first charged his staff, which Erigius avoided by
bendynge his head aside but he in the mids of his race, struck ^he other
with his spear through the throat, so that it came forth again at his neck.
Satibarzanes upon that stroke fell from his horse, Satibarzanes slain
but yet made resistaunce, till such time as Erigius plucked the spear out
of the wound, and thruste it again into his mouth who to rydde him self out
pain, furthered his enemies stroke. Then the Arians seeing their captain
slain whom they had followed rather of necessitye then of their own free
wylles, called to remembrance Alexanders benefits and yielded them selves to
Erigius. Alexander reioysed much of the good success of this matter,
doubting greatelye the Lacedaemonians, but he bare out the rebellion stoutelye,
saiynge: that they durst never disclose their meaning, till they knew he was
come to the confines of India. Alexander having removed his Camp, and going
forwards in the pursuit of Bessus. Erigius met him, presentynge the spoil
of his Enemy, as a memory of his victory. Whereupon he committed the rule of
Bactria to Artabasus. Where with a guarison he left his carriage, and with a
power that was light to journey, entered into the deserts of the Sufitanes,
The Susirans,
conueiynge his army by night. In the want of water (that has been declared
before) desperation moved them to thiest before they had desire to drink. For
by the space of.iiii.C. furlonges, they found no water at all. The vapoure of
the Sun being in the summer season did so burn the sand, that when it
began to wax hot it starched all things as it had been with a continual
fire. And then the light somewhat obscured by a mist that rose out of thearth
by the immoderate heat, caused the playnes to have appearaunce of a maine Sea.
Their journey in the night seamed tolerable, because their bodies were
somewhat refreshed with the dew and the coolde of the morning.

But when the day came and the heat rose, then ye drought driyng up al ye
natural humors both their mouths and their bowels were enflamed for heat.
Then their hearts failed, and their bodies fainted, being in case that they
could neither stand still, nor pass forwards. A few that were taught by such
as knew the country, had gotten water which refreshed them somewhat, but as
the heat increased, so their desire grew again to drink. Then was there no
remedy but to give among the soldiers all the wine and oil that remained
in store. For drink was so sweet unto them, that it took away the fear of any
thirst to come. But such as had gulled in gredely the water that they got,
became so heavy, that they were neither able to bear their armoure, nor go
forwards, so that they seemed then most happy that had gotten no water at all,
for such as had taken of it inordinately, were enforced by vomit to put up the
same again. As Alexander careful in this calamity stood with his friends
that were persuading of him to have respect to him self, for that he only, and
the greatness of his heart, should be relief of this adversity. There came two
soldiers, which going before with such as had taken up the camp, had
found water, and were cariynge of it in bottelles unto their sons which
were sore afflicted for want of drink behind in the army. When they saw
the king, one of them opened his bottell, and fillynge a cup that he had,
presented water to the king, who receiving it at his hand, demanded to whom
they carried that water: they said to their sons. Then he restored to him the
cup again full as it was given him, and said: I will not drink alone, for so
little can not be divided among us all. Make you haste therefore to carye to
your Sons that you have gotten with your travail.

But he trauayled so long that before night he came to the river of Oxus, the
more part of the army, not able to follow, for feebleness were left far
behind: to the intent therefore that such as followed after, might know where the
camp was become. He caused a fire to be made in the top of an hille, and
gave order that when the voward had refresshed them selves with meat and
drink they should fill their bottels, with water and go back with the same to
releaue their fellows. The breath of such as drunk intemperatly closed up,
and they died immediately, the nombre of whom was greater, then ever Alexander
lost in any battayll. But he would neither put of harneys, refreshe him self
with meat or drink, nor ease his body: but stood in the way where his army
passed, not departing till the last man was come into the Camp. He watched all
that night, and passed it over in great trouble of mind. And the day that
ensued, brought no release of his care. For there were neither boots to pass
the river with all, nor he could make any bridge seeing there was no wood
growing nere at hand. But at length he found out a devise whereunto only
necessity did drive him, they took beasts skynnes and stuffed the^ full of
straw, whereupon they laid them selves, and some swomme over the water. And
such as first recovered the further side, stood in order of battaill till the
rest were passed: by which means in six days he conuoyed over his hole
army. Having thus passed over the river of Oxus, his purpose was to pass
forwards in the pursuit of Bessus, till he understood such things as had
chau^sed among the Susians. Spytanicnes conspyred against Bessus.
There was one Spitamenes, whom Bessus chiefly honored of al his fre^des. But
there be no benefits that can stay a man given to perfidie and falshode,
which in him was the more tolerable because he judged no mischief to great
for him that has slain his prince. For the reueng of Darius was a fair
color to his offense, but it is to be thought that his present fortune was
more envied, then his doings by past, hated. When it was known that Alexander
had passed the river of Oxus, Spitamenes did associate with him in counsel of
his enterprise Dataphernes. Dataphernes. Cathenes.
and Catenes, whom Bessus specially trusted. They agreed to the matter more
redely then he would desire them, and taking to them.viii. young men that were
strong of personage, used this kind of polecy. Spitamenes repaired to Bessus,
and getting him alone, informed him that he had found out how Dataphernes, and
Catenes, had conspired to deliver him alive into Alexanders hands, whereas (he
said) he had prevented the^, whiles they were about their purpose, having taken
them both, and put them fast in prison. Bessus then thinking himself much
bound to him for so great a good turn, gave him many thanks. And for the
desire he had to be reue^ged of his enemies, willed Spitamenes to bring the^ to
his presence. He caused their hands to be bound behind their backs and to be
brought by such as were privy to their counsel, when they came in Bessus
presence, he beheld the^ with a fell countenance and rose up to have stricken
at them. But the^ they left their cou^terfeiting and straight ways enclosing
Bessus about, bound him fast which strugled in vain and pulled the diadem
from his head, tearing his garment from his back, which was part of the
spoil of his prince, whom he had slain. When he saw him self thus used, he
confessed that the gods had ryghtfully revenged his treason, and perceived by
the plague they sent him, that both they favored Darius, and were friends to
Alexander, whose enemies evermore preferred his victory. It is uncertain
whether the multitude would have assisted Bessus or no, but that spitamenes had
devised the thing to be done by Alexanders appointment, whereby he put them in
fear being yet doubtful of mind, and set Bessus upon an horse whereupon he
brought him unto Alexander. He in the mean season had chosen out nine hundred
such as for their age, were not mete any more for the wars, and gave to
every one of them b^yng horsemen two talentes, and to every footeman three
thousand deneres: whom he dispatched home, and gave thanks unto the rest,
because they promised to continewe with him till he had brought his wars to
an end. Bessus was presented unto him at a little town whereof the inhabiters
be called Branchidans, Bra^chida^s,
which in times paste by the commandment of Xerxes when he came out of
Greece, were brought from Miletum and placed there, because that in his favor
they had violated a temple that was called Dydyma. They had not all together
forgotten their country customs, but had myxed their tongue that by little
and little they were fallen from their own language, and yet had not attained
the country speech. They received the king with great joy, yealdyng them
selves and their city unto his will. Whereupon he called unto him the
Mylesians that served him in his wars, Milesians
(who bare an ancient hatred against the generation of the Branchidans) and
put it in their hands to determine where they would save the^ for ye country
sake, or else destroy the^ for the injury they had do it in times past. But when
the Milesians could not agree in opinion, he said he would order the matter him
self. The next day when the Branchidans came to mete him, he returned them all
again into the city, and commanding his footmen to enclose the city about,
entered with such as he appointed for the purpose, and by a token given put
all to the sword, and spoiled the city as a receptacle of traitors. They
which were without armor and unprovided were slain in every place. For
neither the affinity of their tongue, nor any prayer or intercession could
mitigate their enemies cruelty. Which after the destruction of the town, did
cast down the walls to the foundacio^, so that no memory thereof should
remain. That done they did not only cut down the woods wherein they used
their sacrifice, but also plucked up the trees by the roots, that the ground
might be left barayn as a desert. If the same things had been done against
the very offenders, the revenge might have been thought rightuous, but to lay
the fault of the predecessors upon the posterity it might be thought a cruel
act, seeing there was not any of them that had ever seen Myletum or done to
Xexes any kind of pleasure. As Alexander removed from thence toward the river
of Tanays, Bessus was brought before him, Bessus presented unto Alexander.
not only bound as a captive, but also spoiled of all his garments, who^
Spitamenes led in a theme put about his neck: a plesaunt sight to behold as
well to the Barbarous, as to the Macedons. When Spitamenes was come with him in
Alexanders presence, he said: I have brought here unto you the kyller of his
own master, after the same manner that he him self gave then sample, wherein I
have both revenged Darius that was my king, and you also that now have got the
souereignty. Let Darius open his eyes, and rise from death to behold this
sight, that was unworthy of such an end, and worthy to receive such a comfort
as this is. After that Alexander had given Spitamenes thanks, Alexander to
Bessus.
he turned him self unto Bessus and said: what beastly woodnes was in thy mind,
that durst first take thine own prince prisoner, and afterward kill him,
that had so well deserved of yt, of which thy doings thou have received
sufficient reward, by the cou^terfeit name of a king which thou did
usurp. He had no heart to make answer, nor excuse his offense: saving that he
said he took upon him to be king, because he might deliver him possession of
the country. Which thing if he had omitted, some other would have taken in
hand. Then Alexander called for Oxatres Darius brother, whom he had placed
about his person, and committed Bessus to his keaping, to the intent he should
cut of his ears and his nose, and hang him upon a cross, causing his own
men to shote him through with arrows, so preserving his body that birds
should not touch it. Oxatres promised to perform all the rest, saving the
keapyng away of the birds, which for the desire he had to set forth Cathenes
conning, affirmed that none could so well keape them away as he, who did shote
so assuredly, that he could strike the birds flyeng in the air. And though it
was a conning not so much to be marueiled at, in a nation so expert in
shooting, yet was it greatly wondered at of such as did behold him, and was
great honor unto the doer. He gave rewards to all such as were the bryngers
of Bessus, but he differred his punishment because he minded to put him to
death in the same place where he slew Darius. The Macedons in the mean season
going a forraging, without order were overthrown by their enemies, that came
ronnidg down from the next mountains they took mo then they did kille, and
driving their prisoners before them returned again into the mountains. There
were of them to the nombre of.xx.M. which accustomed to live by theft, used
slinges and bows in their fight, whom whiles Alexander did besiege, and in a
skirmish pressed forth with the foremoste, he was stroiken with an arrowe in
the mids of his leg, where the head did stike still. The Macedons that were
sorrowful and amassed for their kings hurt, carried him into his camp, of whose
departure out of the field his enemies were not ignorant, for they might
behold all things from the mountain, Whereupon the next day they sent
Ambassadors unto Alexander, whom he admitted to his presence, and unfolding
his wou^d, whereby he thought to dissimule the greatness thereof, showed his leg
unto them. When they were commanded to sit down, they said: that he ring of
his hurt, they were as sorrowful for it as his own subjects which should
welbe known, for if they could find out the person, that did the deed, he
should be delivered unto his hands. Seeing they could not judge them but
sacrileges that would fight with gods, of whose virtue they supposed him to
be, and therefore were determined to yield the^ selves. Thereupon he gave them
assurance and received again his men that were taken prisoners, and admitted
them as his subjects. That done he removed his camp and was carried in a foot
litter, for the bearing whereof the horsemen and footmen co^tended together.
The horsemen alleged it to be their office, because the king accustomed to
fight among them. And the footmen argued for their part, that in as much as
they used to carry the hurt soldiers, that thought no reason their office
should be taken from them, chiefly when the king should be carried. Alexander
therefore in so great a contention of both parts, thought it a difficult matter
to give sentence, because the judgment should be grievous to them that should
be put from the office, and therefore ordered that they should carry him by
course. From thence ye fourth day he came unto a city called Maracanda the
walls whereof were.lxx. furlo^ges about, Maracanda
but the castle was without any wall, he set a guarrison in the city and then
burned and destroyed the country thereaboutes. Ambassadors came unto him, The
Scythians
there from the Scythes called Auians, which had been fre since the time that
Cyrus was among them, but yet they showed them selves then ready to be at his
commandment. They were known to be the most rightuous people of all the
barbarous nacio^ (...) that never used to make war but when they ^e provoked,
whose moderacio^ and temperau^ce in using of their liberty, made the
inferriours equal unto the supperiours. Alexander received them gently, and
sent Penidas a friend of his to those Scithes that inhabited within Europe,
Penydas.
to forbid the^ to pass the river of Tanais without his appointment. Who had
also a secret commission to view the scituacio^ of the country, and to visit
those Scithia^s that inhabited about Bosphorus, he willed him besides to choice
out a place upon the brinke of Tanais where as he might build a city, to
remain as a fortres for ye subduing of those people yt he intended to visit.
The rebellion of the Sogdians
But this devise was delayed by the rebellion of ye Sogdia^s who had also
drawn ye Bactria^s to their part. There were of the^.vii. in horsemen, whose
authority ye rest followed, for the daunting of whom Alexander caused
Spytamenes and Catenes (the betrayers of Bessus) to be sent for, thinking by
their means to bring the country again to his obedience and to subdue such
as had made this stir. But they which were judged mete to stay the
rebellion, and were sent for to that intent, were the chief authors of all the
revolt, which caused it to be noysed abroad, that Alexander had sent for the
Bactrian horsemen of purpose to kill them all. Which commission (they said)
being appointed to them, they would not execute because they thought it over
foull an act to commit against their countrymen. And for that cause could as
il bear then Alexanders cruelty, as in times past Bessus treason. By this
means when fear of death was put into their heads, they were easily sturred
to arms which before were sufficiently enclyned of their own minds. When
Alexander was advertised of their doings, he willed Craterus to besiege
Cyropolis. Ciropolis.
And he him self warm an other city of that country by an assault which he
gave to it on all parts at once, and by a sign given, caused all the children
to be put to death, making the rest a pray for the soldiers. This done the
city was rased to the ground, to the intent that others by their ensample might
be kept in obedience. There was a valiant people called Memacenans, Memacenans.
who were determined to abide the siege, not only for their honesties sake, but
also for that they thought it most for their suertie. For the mitigating of
whose wilfulnes the king sent to them fifty horsemen to declare his clemency
toward such as submitted them selves, and how inexorable he was to such as
he wan by force. Their answer was to them, that they neither doubted of the
kings promis, nor of his power, but after their answer given, they lodged
them without their walls, where as enterteining the^ with great there till it
was the deep of the night, they set upon them, and slew them all. Alexander
was no less moved with this matter, then the case required, but made an
assault unto the city on all parts at once, which he found furnisshed in
such wise, that he could not take it at the first attempt. Wherefore he
appointed Meleager and Perdicas to the siege thereof, which first were at the
siege of Ciropolis, mynding to spare the same, because it was builded by Cyrus.
For he had not so great admiracion of any king that had reigned in those parts
as of him, and Semyramis, whose magnaminitie of mind and fame of their acts,
seemed to him to excede all the rest. But the obstinate wilfulnes of the
inhabitauntes, sturred up his wrath. For when he had taken the city, he willed
the Macedons to spoil it, which had great cause to be moved against them, and
so returned again to Meleager and Perdicas. There was not one city that did
more valiauntly abide the siege then the same did, for both the hardiest of the
soldiers were slain, and the king was brought in great danger, being stricken
in the neck with a stone, so that he lost his sight, and was felled to the
earth so that he lost his sense. The army lamented, thinking he had been dead:
but he was invincible against those things which put other men most in fear.
For without tarieng he dressed his wound, and returned to the fight, and after
anger had sturred up, the egernes he had of nature, he renewed the assault
again more fiercely then before. At length a great peace of the wall was
overthrown by a mine at the which he brake in, and put the whole city to
sack and to ruin. Menedemus
He sent from thence Menedemus with.iii.M. footmen and.viii.C. horsemen to the
city of Maracanda, which Spitamenes had newly taken and put out from thence
the guarrison of the Macedons. Yet the cytesens were not of his opinion, but
when they saw they could not let him it was of necessity for them to agree to
his will. Alexander builded a new city upon Tanais
Alexander in the mean season came to the river of Tanais, where he enclosed
about with a wall so much ground as his Camp did contain, extending in
compass.lx. furlonges, and named the same city Alexandria. This thing was
done with such expedicio^ that within.xvii. days after the walls were v^,
the houses also were builded. And the whole was performed in a very small
season, through the contencion among the soldiers who should perform his
work first, when the same was divided into parts among them. The prisoners
they had taken, whose raunsomes Alexander paid to their takers, were appointed
to inhabit this city. Whose posterity after so long time, be not yet worn
out, such favor has been showed to the^, in the memory of Alexander. The king
of Scythia whose Empire was the^ beyond the river of Tanais, judging yt the
fortifie^g upon the ryuers side should be as a yoke to his neck, sent his
brother Carcasis with a great power of horsemen to defeat the fortification,
Carcasis.
and to remove away the Macedons from the waters side. Which is the river that
deuideth the Bactria^s from the Scithia^s of Europe, and is the limite which
parts Asia and Europe a sondre. But the countries that ye Scithes inhabit
begin not far from Tracia, and lie betwixt the north and thest, joining
with Sarmacia, and possessing part of it. the country also that lies beyond
the river of Ister is inhabited by the^, Ister.
and their vttermoste bounds stretche to Bactria, and to the further bounds
of Asia northwardes, whereas be wonderful great woods and wild deserts. But
such of the^ as bounded nere unto Tanais and Bactria lack not much the
civility of other nations. This being the first time that Alexander had to do
with these people, when he saw that then he had to enter into a war, for the
which he was not provided, his enemies riding up and down in his sight, and he
diseased of his wound, specially not having thuse of his speech, which failed
much by reason of this long abstinence, Alexanders words to his friends
and the pain in his neck, called his friends to counsel, and declare unto
the^: that he was not troubled with any fear of his ennemies but with the
iniquitye of the time, the Bactrians rebelling, and the Scithians prouokyng
him, when neither he was able to stand upon the ground, or strong enough to
ride on horsbacke, or in case to give advise or exhortacion to his men. In
consideracion therefore of the doubtful danger he saw him self wrapped in he
accused the gods, complaining that he was then enforsed to lie still as a
stock, whose swiftnes before time, none was hable to escape. Adversity makes
men religious.
The matters grue so great that his own men believed he had counterfeited his
sickness for fear. And therefore he which since the overthrow of Darius had
left consultacion with the deuiners and prophets turned himself again to the
vanity and supersticion of man, willinge Aristander (to who^ he was addicted
in belief) that he should try out by Sacrifice what his success should be.
The custom of them which were called Auruspices was to consider the intrayles
of the beasts without the king, Auruspices
and to make report to him of there significacion. In ye mean season whiles
they were serching secrets that kind of way he willed Ephestio^, Craterus,
Erigius and other his friends to draw nere about him, lest by streyning of his
voice he might break out his wou^d again, and said thus unto them: Alexanders
words.
The danger I am in, has caused the time to serve better for mine enemies,
then for me, necessity I see chiefly in the wars to go before reason. For it
is seldom given to men, to choice their own time. The Bactrians be revolted,
upon whose shoulders yet we stand, purposing to try what courage we be of, by
our behauour toward the Scithians. If we leave of with doubtful fortune, and
meddle not with the^, which of their own minds have provoked us, we shall at
our return be had in contempt of them whom we entend to visit. But if we
shall pass the river of Tanais, and by the destruction of the Scythians and
shedding of their blood, show our selves invincible every where. Who will then
doubt but that Europe will lie open and give obedience to us being victorers?
he is deceived that does measure by any distaunce the bounds of our glory that
we entende to pass. There is but one river that lets us now for bringing
of our power over into Europe, which if we shall bring to pass what an
estimacio^ shall it be for us: whiles we be subduing of Asia, to set up the
monumentes of our victories as it we^e in a new world, joining so sone
together with one victory, the thing that nature seem to have divided with so
great distau^ce? but if we shall stay never so little and give ground, the
Scythians will then come after us, and pursue us in tail. Be there no more but
we yt have passed rivers? there be many inuencio^s yet remaining among our
selves, whereby we have gotten victories. But fortune of the war does teach
policy to such as be ouercomme, we have showed a president of late, how to
swymme over ryuers upon bottels. Which thing if the Scythians can not do, the
Bactrians shall teach them. It is but the power of one nation, that now come
against you, all the other yet stand in a stay to understand of our doings.
So that by eschewing battle we shall norysh war, and be compelled to receive
those blows, which it lies in us to give to other. The reason of my advise
is manifest. But whether the Macedons will suffer me to use mine own
disposicion, I doubt, because that since I received this wound, I have not
ridden on horseback, nor gone on foot. If you will follow me my fre^des I am
whole. I have then strength enough to endure these things, if the end of my
life be at hand wherein can I spend it better. These words that he spoke were
uttered with a broken and weak voice, so that they could scarsely be hard of
such as were next him. But when his meaning was perceived all that were present
went about to fray him from so rash an enterprice. Erigius.
But Erigius wrought chiefly in the matter, which perceiving that his
authority could not prevail against the kings obstinat mind, attempted to
work him by religion, which was of greater force. For he declared to him
that the Gods were against his determinacion, which had signified great
peril to ensue, if he passed the river. (He said) he had understand that
thing by Aristaunder, who told him at his coming into the pauilion what he had
perceived in the beasts intrailes. Alexander upon his words was wonderfully
troubled both with anger and shame, when he saw the secrets of the religion
brought to light, which he thought to have kept secret to him self: and
therefore caused Erigius to go aside, and Aristander to be called in unto him.
Who^ he beheld in the face, and said: I seem to the rather a private man then a
king. Seeing I commanded the to make sacrifice, and thou have declared the
signification thereof to other and not to me. For Erigius by thy report knows
the priuities pertaining to me. But sure I judge that through his own fear he
devised an interpretacion of himself. Therefore let me hear of thine own mouth
what you have found in the intrailes, to the intent thou shall not deny that thou
have spoken. Arista^der thereupon was amassed, and looked pale not able to answer
one word for fear. But at length the same fear that made him hold his peace,
pricked him forwards to speak, lest the prolonging of the kings expectacion
might provoke him to further wrath, answered: I said ( quoth he) there was in the
enterprise great danger and difficulty, but yet yt your attempt should not be
in vain. There is nothing that I have perceived by my science trouble me so
much, as the love I bear toward you, for I both consider your infirmity,
and what a moment consists in your own person, fearing you should not be
able to endure the things, that fortune is disposed to give unto you. When
Alexander hard him speak after that manner, he willed him to have confidence in
his felicity to whom fortune had granted glory in greater things, and
thereupon dismissed him. Afterward as the king was debating with such as he
co^sulted with before, by what means he should pass the river. Arista^der came
among them, affirming that he had found the intrailes contrary to yt he did
before, with as likely signs of good success as any yt ever he saw, shewi^g
the^ as great causes to rejoice, as he did before to fear. But immediately
hereupon he received news yt much appaired the continual felicity he was
wont to have, in all his procedinges. Menedemus being sent (as it has been
said before) to besiege Spitamenes, the auctour of the Bactrians rebellion.
When he understood of his enemies coming both in auoidi^g to be enclosed
within walls, and trusting besides to take some aduau^tage of the Macedo^s,
laid an imbusheme^t to entrappe them. There was a wood through the which they
should pass very apt for ye purpose, where he laid the Daha^s, whose custom
was to carry two armed men upon one horse, from whence they used to leap down
by course. And by reason the swiftnes of the footmen was little inferior unto
the horsemen, they troubled greatly the order of the horsemans fight.
Spitamenes gave order to the^ that when their enemies should enter into the wood
they should enuirone them about on all sides, which when they performed
according to their appointment, Menedemus seeing him self enclosed on al parts,
and not equal in nombre unto his enemies, resisted a great while, crieng out
to the soldiers, that there remained no hope to them being intrapt after that
manner, but by making slaughter upon their enemies, receive the comfort of an
honest death. Menedemus rid upon a strong horse charging often times upon his
enemies, whereby he brake their order, and made great slaughter, till such time,
that he being laid at on all parts, Hispydes.
received many wounds, and fainted for want of blood. Then he exhorted
Hispides that was one of his friends to leap upon his horse, and escape away,
and with that word he swounded and fell to the ground from his horse. Hispides
might have got away, but after he had lost his fre^d determined there to die,
taking no other care but how to spend his life, with the loss of his enemies.
Wherefore he put his spoores to the horse, and ran in among them, where he
fought notably, and at length was slain. When the rest saw this overthrow,
and loss of their captain, they recovered an hill, where Spitamenes did
besiege them, thinking to subdue them for want of vitaill. There were slain in
that battaill two.M. footmen, and.iii. hundred horsemen. Which misadue^ture
Alexander with great policy kept secret, commanding them that parted from the
field, under pain of death not publyshe this matter abroad. But when he could
not bear out any longer a countenance contrary to his heart, he went alone
unto his pauilion which he had set of purpose upon the rivers side. There he
waked all the night devising with him self, what was best to do. And diverse
times he lifted up his tent to behold the fires in his enemies camp, thereby to
conjecture their nombre, when the day apeared he put on a corselet and came
forth among the soldiers, being the first time they had seen him since he
received his hurt. They bare such a veneracion unto their king that with his
presence only, they put away the remembrance of the fear which caused them
before to shrink, and reioysed so heartily, that when they saluted him, the
tears distilled from their eyes, and earnestly required the fight, which
before they had refused. He took order there among them that the horsemen,
and such as were of the square battaill of footmen should be carried over in
boats, and that the light armed should swim upon bottels. Neither the matter
required any more to be spoken, nor the king could not say any more by reason
of his infirmity. For the soldiers went about the matter with such good will
and cherefulnes of mind that within three days they had finished.xii.M. boats.
When al things were prepared in redines for their passage there came xx.
ambassadors of ye Scithia^s ridi^g by ye ca^pe, which required that it might
be declared unto the king that they had matter in commission to declare unto
him. When they were received into his pauilion, and commanded to sit down,
they fixed their look continually upon the kings countenance, whereby it was
thought, that waiynge the greatenes of his courage by his personage that they
saw present, it appeared to them but small in respect of the same they
heard of him. The wits of the Scythians be not rude and without knowledge as
other barbarous people be. For it is said that many of the^ atteine to such
learning as is possible for a nation being always in exercise of the wars.
Whose words spoken unto Alexander be left in memory, which though they
differ from the manner of us that have happened in more civil times, and framed
our selves to a more humanity. Yet the fidelity of the matter is not to be
despised, though the phrase of their speech be not allowed. And therefore I
shall declare vncorruptlye the sayings which the eldeste of those
Ambassadors did speak after this manner.

If the Gods had given the a body according to the insatiable desire of thy
mind, The oracion of the Scithians unto Alexander.
the world should not be able to receive the, but should touch the Orient
with ye one hand, and the occide^t with the other, which once obtained, thy
desire should be to know where ^o place thy Personage, haboundinge with such
excellencye. Thus thou do covet the thing thou art not able to compass.
From Europe thou go into Asia, and from Asia pass into Europe. It must
come to pass that if thou overcome all mankind, thou must keep war with
woods and snowes, with rivers and wild beasts. What? art thou ignorant that
trees do grow till they be great, and the^ be plucked up from the rote in a
momente? He is a fool that does covet the fruit, and considers not the
height of the tree whereon it growith. Take head lest whiles thou do labor to
attain unto the top, thou falleste with the boous which thou do embrace.
The Lion has been some time the food of small byrds, and the ruste does
consume the Iron. There is nothing so sure, that is not in daungier of his
inferior. What have we to do with the? we never touched thy country. Is it not
lawful for us that live in the wast woods, to be ignorant what thou art,
and from whence thou come? we can neither be subject to any man, nor desire
to rule over any creature. And because ye shall not be ignorant of thestate of
our nation we have certain gifts in proper unto us, the yoke of Oxen, the
plough, the spear, the bow, and the bowl: which be the things that we use
both with our friends and against our enemies. We do give unto our friends of
the fruits gotten with labor. With the bowl we sacrefice wine unto the gods.
With our bow we strike our enemies afar of, and with the spear nere at
hand. After that sort we in times past overcame the king of Scythia, and
afterward the king of Perce and Media making the way open to us into Egypt.
But thou which do gloryfie, that art come to be a parsecuter of thieves, art
a robber of all nations, that thou comeste among. Thou haste taken Lydia,
possessed Siria enjoyed Perce, and haste the Bactrians under thy power. Thou
do visit the Indies, and now streachest forth thy rauenowes hands unto our
cattle. Why do thou covet that riches that cause the to be pore. Thou art the
first of al men which with haboundance have prepared thy self honger and that
with the more thou haste the more gredely thou doste covet ye things thou haste
not. Do thou not remember how long thou have stiked about Bactria. And
whiles thou go about to subdue them, how the Sogdians begin to rebel. Thus
war does grow unto the of thy victory. For be thou never so great, and of
force above any other yet there be none that can endure to be governed by
strangers. Pass now Tanais, thou shall parceyue what breadth it bears, and
yet thou shall never overtake the Scithia^s whose poverty is swyfter, then thy
army, which cariing ye spoil of so many nations can attain to. For when thou
shall think us to be far of, thou shall see us within thy Camp. with like
swiftnes, we follow, and fle away. I hear that our deserts beskorned by the
Greake proverbs, we covet rather the deserts and places uninhabited, then
cities and plentiful countres. Therefore hold thou thy fortune fast for, she is
slipper and cannot be kept against her will. Follow thou the counsel yt is
good, and specially whilles the time does serve. Put a bridle to thy felicitye,
and thou shall govern it the better. We say that fortune is without feet,
and that she has only hands, and wings and when she puts forth her hand,
she will not suffer her wings to be touched. If thou be a god then give
benefits unto mortal men, and take not away the commodities they have already.
If thou be a man considre always thine own estate. It is folishe to remember
those things, which cause the to forget thy self. Such as by war: thou
make thy enemies, by peace thou may make them thy very friends. The most
firm friendship is amongst them that be equal, and they seem equal which have
not yet made any trial of there force Take heed thou take them not for thy
friends, whom thou do subdue and bring to subjection. There is no friendship
between the Lord and the slave, and in peace the law of Arms is observed.
Think not that the Scythians do confirm their frendeshippe with any oath.
For they think they swear in keeping of their faieth. The custom of the
Greeks is to iustifye their doings by calling their Gods to witness. But we
acknowledge Religion to consiste in the faieth it self. They which do not
their due reverence to men, deceive the Gods. Think not those friends to be
necessary unto the, of whose good will thou shall need to doubt. Thou may use
us as kepers both of Europe and Asia. For we should join with Bactria, but
that Tanais does divide us, and beyond Tanais out dominion stretche so far
as Tracia, and the fame is that Tracia co^fineth with Macedon. Consider therefore
whether it be necessary for the or no to have us as fre^des or foes to both
thine empires.

These were the Scythians words, to whom the king made answer: that he
would both use his own fortune and their counsel which advised him well.
He would follow his fortune because he had great confidence in it, and other
men's counsel, because he would do nothing rashelye nor upon a sudden.
Thereupon he dismissed the Ambassadors and enbarked his army in the boats he
had prepared. Alexander passed the river of Thanais against the Scithians.
In the fore parts of the boats he set such as had targettes, willing them
to knele upon their knees for their more safegarde against the shote of
arrows. And they were placed behind them that had the charge of the
Engines, who before, and on both sides were enclosed with armed men. The rest
which stood beyond the engines being armed them selves, defended with
targattes such as rowed the same order was also observed in those boats that
carried over the horsemen. The more part drue their horses after the^ by the
reins swimming at the boats tails, and such as were carried upon trusses
filled with straw, were defended by the boats that rowed betwixt them and
their enemies. Alexander with such men as he had chosen to be about his
person, first lanched from the land, and directed his course toward the
further side. The Scythians came against them with their horsemen in order of
battaill, standing upon the brinck of the further shore to let their landing:
whose show being a terror to the Macedo^s, they had also an other cause of
fear in their passing over, for the boatemaisters were not able to keape their
course against the force of the stream. And the soldiers swaying to and fro,
for the doubt they had to fall in the water, troubled the mariners in doing of
their office. By reason where of the Macedons could not have scoope to cast
their darts with any force, taking more care how to place them selves out of
peril, then for to avoid their enemies. Their ingyns stood them in great
stead, which seldom did shote in vain against their enemies that stood
thick before them, proffering to resist their la^ding. When the Scithians
saw them nere the shore, they did shote an infinite nombre of arrows into the
boats, so that there was not in manner any target that had not many heads
sticking in it. At length the boats arrived at the land, then the target men
did rise upon their feet, and having more scope and sure footing, threw their
darts more certainly and with greater force: whereby when they perceived their
enemies to shrink, and reane back their horses, they then leaped cherefully
unto the land, one exhorting and encourging an other, and freely pursued the
Scythians who^ they saw fall out of array. By that time Alexanders horsemen
which had assembled them selves in tropes, brake upon their ennemies, and put
them to great dysordre. In the mean season the rest being defended by them
that were fighting landed and prepared them selves to the battle. Nor
Alexander let not with stowtnes of courage to supplye the impotency of his
body. His voice could not be hard when he spoke and exhorted his men (the
scarre of his wound not yet closed) but all men might se him fighting.
Wherefore every one used the office of a captain in giving exhortacion unto
his fellows, and ran upon their ennemies without respect of their own lives.
Then the Scythians could not endure any longer the countenance, the force, nor
the cry of there enemies, but being all on horsback fled away upon the spoores.
Whom the king pursued.iiii. score furlonges, notwithstanding that with great
pain he endured his informitye. When his heart faynted he commanded his men
that they should follow still in the chase so long as the day lasted, and not
having strength to sustain any further travail returned into his camp to rest
him self. The Macedons in their pursuit passed the bounds of Bacchus. In
mounment of whom their were great stones set up by equal distaunce, and high
trees, whose stocks were covered over with I vye. But no bounds could be a
stay to the Macedo^s* being carried forwards in there fury for it was midde
night before they returned again to their camp who having killed many, and
taken great nombre of prisoners. did drive before them.M.viii.c. horses There
were slain of the Macedons.lx. horsemen, of the fotemen to the point of one
hundred, and a thousand of them were hurt. This enterprise with the fame of the
victory falling in so good a season, kept the more part of Asia in obedience,
which was of the point to have rebelled. For they believed that the Scythians
were invincible. Who being veinqueshed they judged no nacio^ hable to withstand
ye power of the Macedons. Sacans.
The Sacans therefore after this victory, sent there Ambassadors unto Alexander
offering them selves to come under his obedience. To ye doing whereof they were
not so greatly moved with fear of his force, as they were with report of ye
clemency he used toward ye Scythans after he had disco^fited them. For he
delivered home all their prisoners without ransom to witness to the world that
he made war with those first nations, to show his power, and his virtue, and
not for any malice, nor to show his wrath upon them. That was the cause that
he so ge^tly received the Ambassadors of ye Saca^s causing Excipinus to
accompany them, Excipinus.
who being a beutiful young man in the first flower of his youth, was in that
respect in great favor, and familarity with Alexander. In parsonage he was
like to Ephestion, but inferior to him in pleasau^tnes of speech. After this
Alexander giving order to Craterus to follow him by small journeys, with the
greater part of his army, he him self came to the city of Maraca^da from
whence Spitamenes that hard of his coming, was fled into Bactria. The king
therefore making great iourneyes four days continuially, came into the place,
where as under the conduct of Megedemus he had lost two.M. fotemen and.iii.C.
horsemen. Whose bo^es he caused to be gathered togithers and buried,
celebrating their funerals after his country manner. By yt time Craterus with the
phalaux was come unto ye king, and to thinte^t he might pu^ishe with the sword al
such as had rebelled, he divided his power into diverse parts co^man^ding
them to burn in every place where they went and to kyl all the children. The
country of the Sogdia^s is for the more part wast, by reason of the great
deserts that be there, whereof some be iiii. score, furlonges in breadth. The
river called Bolytimetum passes in manner throught the length of the country,
which ronneth violently in a narowe chanel, and then is received into an hole
of the earth from whence it goes underneath the ground whose course is manifest
by the noise of the water that may be hard. And yet in all ground under the
which such a river does run, there do not apeare any moisture put forth. Of
the captives that were taken amo^gs the Sagdians, there were.xxx. of the most
noblest brought unto Alexander. Which understanding by an interpreter, that by
the kings commandment they should be put to execution. They began as men
in mirth to sing and dance, and by a certain lasiuious mocion of there bodies
expressed a great ioyfulnes of the mind Alexander merueling that they took
their death with such s^owtnes and magnanmitye of heart, called them unto him,
enquering why they showed so great a gladness, when they had death before
therface. They aunswerrd that if they had been put to death by any, savinge by
such one as he was, that they should have taken their death sorofully. But now
seeing they should be restored to their predecessors by a king that was a
conqerour of all nations, they reioysed in their honest death, as the thing
that all men should wyshe and desire. The king then meruayling at there
magnauymitye: I enquere of you ( quoth he) if you can be content to live, and
become friends to him, by whose benifite you shall receive your life. They said
that as they never were his enemies, but as they were provoked by occasion to
the wars, even so if he would make an experiment of them rather by a benefit
then an injury. They would labor not to be overcome in good will, nor in doing
the thing that pertained to their duty. They were axed what pledge they would
lay of their promise. They said their lives they had received, should be their
pledge ready to be yielded again, when it were required, wherein they brake no
promise, for such of them as were returned home into their country kept the
people in good obedience, and four of them that were appointed to be of the
kings guard, gave place to none of the Macedons in love or affection toward
their prince. When he had ordered all things among the Sogdians, he left
Pencolaus there with.iii.M. men of war, Pencolaus.
and removed into Bactria. From whence he commanded Bessus to be carried to
Echatan, there to suffer death for the killing of Darius. About the same time
Ptololomeus and Menidas brought.iii.M. footmen and a thousand horsemen of
mercenary soldiers, and one Alexander came to him out of Licia with.iii.M.
foot men and.v.C. horsemen. Asclexeodorus had levied the like nombre out of
Siria, and Antipater sent.viii.M. Greeks emonges whom there were.v.C.
horsemen. When he had thus increased his army with the supply of his new
power, he went about in every place to quiet those slures that been raised up
by the rebellion. And having slain them that were the authors and beginners
thereof, the fourth day came to the river of Oxus, which being a water unwholesome
to be dronke, because it is ever troubled and full of mudde. The Macedons fell
to digging of wells, and when by digging deape they could find no water, there
was a spring sodeinly found under the kings tent, which because it was not
found at the first, they fained that it came by miracle. Wherewith the king was
pleased, and content, men should believe that the same was sent by the gift of
god. When he passed the river of Ochus and Oxus, they came unto a city called
Marginia, Marginia.
nere unto yt which he chose out places for the buildyng of six towns: whereof
he planted two toward the south, and four toward the east. Every one
dista^t a small space from an other, to the intent, that their mutual
assistaunce in time of need should not be far to seek. They were all situate
upon high hills, as bridels to keape under those wild nations. But now they
have forgotten their original, A rock kept against Alexander by Arimazes.
and be subject to those they were wont to rule. The king having subdued all
the rest, one rock only remained which Arimazes a Sogdian had taken with
xxx.M. armed men, and furnyshed the same of vitels for two years. The Same rock
was, xxx. furlo^ges in height and, Cl, about, being in all parts steape and
broken, having one straight path only to pass up unto it. In the midde way to
the top it had a cave which was narowe and darck in the entrey, but by
littell and litell it waxed wyder, and had large lodginges within for a great
multitude, and was besides so full of springes, that when they met together they
ran down the rock like a great river. Alexander beholding the strength of
this place, and the difficulty to win it: Determined to depart from thence.
But there entered suddenly into his heart a desire to weary nature, and work
against her power. Yet be fore that he would attempt the fortune of any siege,
he sent Cophes the son of Artabasus, Cophes.
to persuade them to give it over, Arimazes upon trust of the strength of the
place answered in all things arrogauntly, but specially in that he axed
whether Alexander could fly. Which words reported to the king, did put in
such an heat, that streightwayes he called for such as he used to consult
with all, declaryng the pride and presumption of Arymazes, and after what manner
he had skorned him. But shortly (he said) he would devise such way, that he
would make him think the Macedons had wings. He required them therefore that
out of the whole army, they would chyse out and bring to him three hundred of
the most lightest young men, which had been accustomed to drive beasts
among the rocks and straight paths of the mountains. Whereupon they
brought such to the king, as both for lyghtnes of body, and hardines of heart
were most mete for such a purpose. Unto whom he said: The exhortacion that
Alexander made to the^ whom he had appointed to clime the rock.
my fellows that be of mine own age, with you I have won Cities that were
counted inexpugnable, and have passed the tops of mountains, covered
continually with snow. With you I have gone through the streyghtes of Cylicia,
and have without werynes sustained the violence of the cold, whereby I have
experience of you, and you of me. The rock which you see have but one entrey,
which our enemies do observe, the rest they neglect. They keape no watch but
toward our camp. If you diligently search, you shall find some way to
bring you to the top. Nature has made nothing so high, but that it may be
attained to, by the industry of man. In puttyng things in proof, whereof other
have dispayred, we have gotten Asia into our possession.

Devise you the means to get up into the top, which when you have taken, you
shall give a toke^ to me by setting up of some white cloth, you shall se me then
come forwards with my power, and turn the enemies from you toward me. He
shall have ten talentes for a reward that does recover the top first, and he
that gets up next, shall have one less, and the like order shall be observed
with ten of the first. I am assured that you regard not so much my liberality
as my favor. When they had heard the king speak after that manner, they
imagined the thing won, and departing out of his presence, prepared strong
ropes and iron hokes, which they might asten to the rocks, and so clyme up.
The king brought them about the rock, where as it seemed lest stepe and most
plain to mount upon, and in the second watch willed them to pass forwards
with good speade. They being furnisshed with two days vitell, and arm only
with swords and spears, at the first went forwards without any great
difficulty. But when they came to the steapnes of the rock, some took hold of
the broken cragges to lift up themselves, and some fastening their hokes on ye
rocks, clame up by the ropes. They were compelled to rest and stay diverse
times, and so consumed the day in trauaill and in fear. When they had passed
many difficult places, further difficulties always appeared, the height of the
rock seming to to grow more and more. When they failed either of their hold or
of their footing, it was a miserable thing to see how they fell down hedlong,
showing to the other by their misfortune, an ensample what was likely to beco^e
of the^. Notwithstanding at length through al these difficulties they got up
into the top, where they al weried with the trauail of their continual labor,
and some with ye hurtes and maines they had received, slept there all yt night,
among the wild and rough rocks, unmindful of the peril they were in. When
it was day they wakened out of their deape sleep, and beholding the valeis
underneath them, were ignorant in what part of the rock so great a multitude
of their enemies should lie, but at length they perceived by the smoke in what
place they were. Then upon the points of two spears they set up the sign
that was appointed them, and found that in their coming up, they had lost of
their nombre two and thirty. The king being careful not so much for the
desire he had to win the rock, as for to save those whom he had sent to so
manifest a danger, stood all day beholding the top of the mountain. And
when darckenes of the night took away the prospecte of the eyes, he departed to
refreshe his body. The next day before it was full light, he perceived the white
cloth set up in the top of the rock, but the variety of the air, and the
son beginning to apeare and yet hidden, caused him to doubt a while whether
his sight had failed him or no. But when it was full and open day, it
appeared manifestly, and all doubt was taken away. Then he called Cophes, by
whom he had attempted their minds before, willing him ones again to exhort
them to be better advised. And if so be that in trust of their strength, they
would not submit them selves, that then he should show to the^ the men that
had taken the rock over their heads. When Cophes came thither, he began to
persuade Arimazes to give up his strength, thereby to win the kings favor,
and not enforce him to stay in the siege of a rock, having so many weighty
affairs in hand: But he found him more obstinat and proud then he did before,
and willed Cophes to depart and move him no more in the matter. Then he took
Arimazes by the hand, and required him to go with him out of the cave. When
they were come where as they might look about, he showed him those that were
gotten to the top of the cragge, and skorning the^ his pride: axed of him
whether Alexa^ders soldiers had gotten wings or no? but yt time the
tro^pettes were blown in the Macedons camp, and they might here the alarome
that was made in the army. Which matter as many and vain and trifling
things are wont in the wars to grow to great effect, so that was the cause
why they yielded them selves. For fear so troubled them, that they could not
consider the small nombre that were over their heads, but called Cophen
again in great have, who was departed away, and sent with him Alexander.xxx.
of the chief men, authorized to yield up the rock with composition for to
depart in sauegard. But Alexander not withstanding that he doubted, lest his
enemies discovering the fewnes of his men, might put them to distress: yet
trusting in the felicity of his own fortune, and offended with the pride of
Arimazes, would agree to no condition, but that they should yield simply.
Arimazes thereupon dispayring more of his estate, then he had cause. Descended
down to the camp with the chiefest of the nation, that were of kin to him.
All the which Alexander caused to be scourged with rods, and be crucified at
the foot of the rock. The multitude that yielded with the money that there was
taken, were given in gift to thinhabiters of the new cities. And the rule of
the said rock was committed to Artabasus, with the charge of the country
there about.

The eigth book of Quintus Curtius of the acts of the great Alexander King of
Macedon.
ALexander having won this rock, with greater fame then glory, because his
enemies remained in no place certain, it was necessary for him to separate his
power, and so divided his army in three parts. He gave the charge of the one
part to Ephestion, to Cenon the other, and took the third part unto him self.
His enemies were not all of one opinion, for some of them seeing their defense
could not auaill, yielded them selves before the fight, to whom he gave the
cities and the lands of those that continued still his enemies. Messagetes
Atynas.
But the outlawes of Bactria with.viii.C. horsemen wasted the villages of the
Messagetes. For the redress whereof, Attynas governor of that country, went
against them with.iii.C. horsemen, not knowing that his enemies lay in wait
for him, which had laid their imbushement in a wood joining to a great plain,
whereas they had appointed a certain to drive cattle, thereby to draw their
enemies with the gredines of the pray, within danger of the bushemen. When
Attinas men saw the driuers of the cattle, they pursued them without order,
and when they were passed the wood where thimbushement lay, their enemies brake
out upon them casting no such perils, and slew them every one. The fame of
this overthrow, came immediately unto Craterus, which drue thither with the
horsemen. But the Massagetes being fled before his coming, he slew.M. Dahans.
of the Dahans that took their part, whereby the whole rebellion of the whole
country cessed. Thus Alexander having subdued the Sogdians, returned to
Maracanda. Whether (Berdes whom he had sent to the Scythians inhabiting about
Bosphrous) came to him with Ambassadors of that country. Phrataphernes.
Phrataphernes also that had the chief rule of the Masagetes and Dahans,
(which nations were joined by affinity togethers) sent certain messengers to
Alexander offering to be at his commandment. The Scythian Ambassadors made
request that Alexander would mary their kings daughter, and if the affinity
pleased him, that he would suffer the princes of the Macedons to enter in
marriage likewise, with the noble men's daughters of their country: promising
that the king should come in person to visit him. He hard gently both the
Embassades, and still continued in that place, till Ephestion and Artabasus
came unto him, and then joining his power again together, came into the
country that is called Basaria. Basaria.
There is nothing more esteemed in that nation, then to have great herdes of
wild beasts enclosed in parkes, which be very plesaunt, and full of springes.
Those parkes be enclosed with walls, and towers builded within them to be
lodges for the hunters. There was one park in that country that had remained
vnhunted, during the time of four men's ages. Wherinto Alexander entered with
his whole army, chasing the wild beasts in every quarter. Among the rest
there was a lio^ of a rare bigness that came ro^ning toward Alexander.
Lysimachus.
Which thing when Lysimachus (that afterward was king, perceived standing by
chance then next to Alexander) perceived, he stepped before him, to receive
the lion with his hu^ting spear. But Alexander plucked him back, and willed
him to avoid, saye^g: that he was able to kill a lion so well as Lysimachus.
This Lysimacus on a time hu^ting in Siria killed by himself alone an huge lion.
But he was torn to ye bones under his left shoulder, and put in great danger
of his life. Which being ye matter that Alexander meant, he performed with that
word, no less then he promised for he did not only receive ye lion, but
killed him with one stroke. Whereupon the fable rise how Alexander should have
cast Lysimachus to a lion. But though Alexanders chance was good herein, yet
the Macedo^s knew that by the custom of his country, he should not have
hunted on foot without the chiefest of his nobility and friends about him. He
killed within that park.iiii.M. wild beasts, and there did banquet his army,
returning afterward to Macicanda. Actabasus excusing himself there by his
age, that he was unapt for the rule of that country, Alexander committed the
same to Clitus, Clytus.
which was he that defended him with his target when he was fighting
bareheaded at the river of Granick, and there cut of with his sword Rosaceris
hand, that was in a redines to stryke the king. He was an old soldier of
Philippes his father, and notable in many feats of war that he had done.
Hellanice his suster was Alexanders nurse, Hellanice.
whom he loved no less then his own mother. For these causes he committed
the strongest part of his Empire to his fidelititie. The king that purposed to
set forward in his journey the next day, Alexander offended his fre^des with
ouermuche aduaunting of himself.
made that night a solemn banquet, wherein (being ouergreat an aduaunter of him
self) when he was chafed with drinking, began to set forth the acts that he
had done, in such sort that his words offended the ears of such as knew
them to be true. The ancient men kept silence till such time as he began to
deface the doings of Philippe his father, aduauntynge the notable victory at
Cheronese to be his deed. The glory whereof (he said) was taken from him by
the malice and envy of his father. For he alleged how in the mutine which
rose between the Macedons and the Greek soldiers, when Philippe lay hurt of a
wound which he received at that fraye. thought him self sure no otherwise
then to counterfaite to be dead: When he defended his body with his buckeler,
and slew them with his own hand that ran upon Philip to have killed him.
Which act (he said) his father would never gladly confess, nor never could
abide to acknowledge his safeguard to come by his son. He also declared how
after the journey he made by him self into Illiria, in writing unto his father
he ascribed the victory unto him self, which overthrew his enemies and put
them to flight, when Philip was away. He said that in his opinion it deserved
but small commendation to make a journey into Samothracia, when Asia ought to
have been spoiled and burnt. Nor he thought no man worthy praise in deed but
such as do so great acts, that they excede all men's credit. The young men
that were present were glad to hear these words and such other like, but they
were ungrateful unto the auncientes specially for Philips cause, under who^
they had long served. Then Clitus which in like case was not very sober, turned
to such as sat beneth him, rehearsinge verses of Euripides, whereof the king
might rather hear the sound then the words. The effect of the^ was, that the
Greeks did evil, which in the monume^tes of their victories, did subscribe only
the names of their kings, which usurped ye glory to the^ selfs ye other men
did win by sheding of there blood. Alexander therefore which judged his words
to been worse then they were, enquered of such as sat next him what Clitus
said. But when they keapt silence: Clitus with a louder voice rehearsed philips
doings, and wars he made in Grease one after an other, prefarring them
before any acts done since that time. Whereupon there did rise a contencion
between the young men and the old. But the king enforcing a paciens in him self,
when he hard Clitus deface his praise, conceived a wonderful wrath in his
mind. Yet it seemed yt he would have bridled his affection, if Clitus would have
made ane and of his presumptuous talk. But when he would not cease, he gave
occasion to Alexander to be further moved. Then Clitus did proceed so
fareforth, that he durst defend Parmenio case and prefarred the victory that
Philip wa^ne of the Athenyens, before the distruccion of Thebes, and going
further and further, not only through dronkenship but even of a forwardnes of a
contencious mind, at length said: If we must dye through the, Clitus words.
Clitus is the first. For they receive greatest rewards of thy victory that can
most shamefully deface thy fathers memory. The country of Sogdia^ is given
unto me, that has so often rebelled, and now not only unsubdued, but such one
as by no means can be brought to subjection I am placed amo^gs those wild
beasts, that be of such an uncivil disposicion. But I could pass over things
parteyning to my self: if the soldiers of Philip were not despised, forgetting
yt if ye old Atharias had not turned again ye young men* that gave over ye
fight, we had yet styked about Alycarnasus. How is it then that Asia is
conquered with these young me^? But I se it is true yt your uncle said in Italy he
chaunsed upon men and you upon women. There was nothing that Clitus speak or did
in his rashness, yt moved more ye king, then ye honorable mention made of
Parmenio yet for all yt he kept in his grief and was contented to command him
only to depart out of ye festnor speak any evil words against Clitus, Saving
that he said: if he should talk a little longer he would brayde me with the
saving of his life: whereof in very deed he would oftentimes proudly aduau^ce him
self. But notwithstanding that the king had willed him to depart, yet he
tarried still and would not rise. And therefore such as sat next him took him by
the arms to lead him away blaming and giving him exhortacion, for his better
usage. When Clitus saw him self drawn forth against his will. Ire was added
to his dronknes, and declared then alowde: how that he with his breast
defended the kings back, but now when the good turn was past, the very
memory of his benefit was hated. And therwyth laid to his charge the death of
Attalus, and finally mocked the Oracle of Jupiter whom Alexander claymed to be
his father and said, that he told him better truth, then his father did. At
those words the king was sturred to such wrath, as he could scarsly have
borne being sobre. But having then his senses overcome with drink leped
sodeinly from the table. His friends were amassed with throwing down the cups
for have, risse to wayt the end of the thing, they saw him go about in such a
fury. He took a spear out of a squires hand and would have stricken Clitus that
was yet raging with thintemperaunce of his tongue. But he was stopped by
Ptolomeus and Perdicas who took him in their arms and stayed him for all his
striving. And Lysimachus and Leonatus took away the spear. Then he called to
his soldiers for aid, crying out that he was taken by his next fre^des as
Darius was of late, and willed the trumpet to be blown, that ye armed men
might assemble unto the court. Then Perdicas and Ptolomeus fell down upon
their knees, requiring him that he would not persevere in his wrath, which he
so sodaynely had conceived, but rather respite his displeasure, seeing that he
might the next day much more better order the matter But his wrath prevailed so
much, that his ears were shut up, and he ran in a fury among the
watchmen, pluckyng a spear from one of them, which once gotten, he stood in
the entrye, through the which they that supped with him must needs pass.
When all the the rest were come forth, Clitus came last without light And
because Alexander could not discern him, he asked what he was, but that was
done so terribly, that the cruelty of the act he went about apeared in his
voice. But Clitus which seeing the king in a fury, had no respect how much he
had offended him before, answered that he was Clitus, which was coming from
the kings banquet. With ye word he struck him through the body so that he
fell down stark dead, and was al besprinckeled with his blood. Go now (quod he)
to Philip, Parmenio, and Attalus. Herein it may be seen that nature provided
evil in the disposition of man, which for the more part can not consider so
well things to come as those that be past. For after that Alexanders ire was
assuaged, and his dronkennes past, weying aduisedlye the foulenes of the act
he had done: considered then that though Clitus had used overmuch liberty
in his talk, that yet he ought not to have slain so noble a man of war:
yea, and the sauer of his own life, though he were ashamed to confess it. He
saw that he being a king had used the detestable office of an hangman, in
reuengyng with wicked slaughter the liberty of words, which might have been
imputed to wine. When he beheld the blood of him which a little before he had
bydden to his banquet run over all the entrey, and that the watchemen were so
astonished and amassed that they stood a far of, and durst not come nere, his
solitarines caused his repentance to be the greater. Then he plucked the
spear out of the dead corse, and would have thruste it through his own body,
if the watchemen had not come runnynge, and with great striuynge wrong the
same out of his hands. That done they took him up, and carried him into his
lodging. Whereas he fell down flat upon the ground, fillyng full all the
court with the miserable noise of his howlynge and lamentation. He tare his
face with his nails, and required such as stood about him, that they would
not suffer him to live in such a shame and dishonor. In these requests he
consumed the whole night, and caused diligente search to be made whether it
were the ire of the Gods or no, that had caused him to commit so heinous an
act. At length it was found yt the yerelye sacrifice due unto Bacchus was not
done in due time. And therefore it appeared manifestlye that it should be the
wrath of the Gods, that had moved him to commit murder upon eating and
drynckyng. But the greateste thing that increased his sorrow, was the amasement
of his friends, when he saw the^ shrink from him, and that none of them after
that deed done, would gladly use such familiar communication as they did
before. Then he parceyued that he should live as a wild beast in a desert both
fearing others, and also afraid him self. The next morning he commanded the
body blody as it was, to be brought into his chamber, which when he saw lyeng
before him fell in weping and said Shall I after this sort requit my norse
whose.ii. Alexanders lamentacyo^ for the deal of Clitus.
sons slain for my glory at milatun. I have now killed her brother that was
her only Joy at mine own bourd? What refuge shall that wretched woman have. I
was all the comfort that did remain to her, and now she shall never be glad to
be hold me. Shall I the wicked killer of my preseruers, return into my
country, when I shall not be able to present my hand unto my nurse without the
remembrance of her misery? When he could put no end to these kind of
bewailinges and complayntes, ye body was taken away by the apoyntme^t of his
fre^des. After he had laien three days shut up in his chamber, sorowing after
this manner, the squiers and such as had the keaping of his person seeing him
given obstinatly to death, brake all into his lodging, and with great pain
brought him (though he long withstode their prayers) at lenght to take some
relief and sustenaunce And to the intent he should be the less ashamed of
Clitus death the Macedones decreed that he was lawfully killed and would not
suffer him to be buried, but that the king commanded it. Having consumed ten
days at Maracanda specially to confyrme the shame he had conceived of Clitus
death, sent Ephestion with part of his army into bactria to provide vitells
against winter. And committed the same prouience unto Amyntas which before he
had given to Clytus.

zenippa.
From thence he went into a country called zenyppa that confyneth with the
Scythians: which being well inhabited and full of villages, does with the
plentyfulnes thereof not only detayne theinhabiters to dwell their still but
also inuit strangers to come among them. The same was a refuge to the
outlaws of Bactria that still rebelled, but after Alexanders coming was known
they were driven forth by the countreye men and two.M. and two hundred of them
assembled to gither which were horsemen accustumed to live by theft and spoil
in time of peace. And then not only the war but also dyspayre of forgeuenes,
had made there cruel and wild disposicions worse. They gave an onset suddenly
upon Amyntas, Amyntas.
that was Darius lieutenant. The battle was long doubtful betwixt them. But
finally they lost.vii.C. of there nombre whereof iii.c. were taken presoners,
and turned there backs to the victorers not without a reueng for they slew of
them.iiii. score besides.iii.C.L. that they wounded. And yet notwithstanding
after this second rebellion they obtained pardon. When Alexander had brought
them to obedience, He came with his hole Army into a country called Naura the
lord whereof was called Sysymithers, Naura.
Sysymythres.
who had gotten two sons by his own mother, it being lawful there for the
parents to use there children. The same Sysimythres with two thousand armed
men fortefyed and kept the straight at the entreye of the countreye where as
it was most narawe. The passage was defended both with a river and with a rock,
through yt which rock the way was made by force of hand. The light is received
in at the entrey but further inward there is non, but such as me^ bring with
them. From this rock there goes a vawte (...)

From this rock there goes a vaure underneath the ground that has issues
into the playnes, which be not known but to such as be of the same country.
Though this straight was naturally strong, and defended besides by a strong
power, that let not Alexander to attempt it, but brought engynes which they
call Arietes, to beat down such fortificatio^ as was made with hand, and
with slinges and shote of arrows, did beat his enemies from the places of
their defense. When he had driven them away, he passed through the
fortificatio^s he had won, and made approach unto the rock. But the stream
that grew of the assemble of waters falling from the mountain was an
impedimente to him therein. And it seemed a wonderful work to fill the chanel of
the river, yet he caused trees and stones to be brought to the place, and set
the thing in hand. When his enemies that never had seen any such work
before, saw the work rise sodaynlye like a mountain, were put in a
marvelous fear, whereby the king supposyng they might have been brought to
render it up: sent one Oxatres of the same nation to persuade Sisymythres to
render up the rock. And in the mean season to put them in the more terror,
he caused towers of wood to be brought forwards, and did shote with engynes
so out of the same, that the enemies forsakynge all other strengthes, retired
into the top of the rock. Oxatres finding Sisymythres in this fear,
persuaded him rather to prove Alexanders benevolence then his force, seeing
that all creatures submitted them selves unto him, and that he only should
not be his let, going with his victorious army into India, whereby he should
turn other men's plage upon his own neck. Sisymythres would have been
contented to follow his advise, but that she which was both his mother and his
wife affyrmed how she would rather dye then commit her self into any man's
hands. And therefore being ashamed that the love of liberty should remain
more in a womanne then in him, altered his purpose, taking that way which was
more honest then sure, and dismissed him that was the mean for peace,
determinyng utterly to abide the extremity of the siege. Yet when he had
weighed well his enemies power and his own togethers, began again to repent
him of his wives counsel, which was more rash then necessary, and made suit
that Oxatres would return, proferinge then to commit him self to the kings
will, only requirynge of Oxatres that he would not utter his wives mind and
opinion, for fear least she should not obtain her Pardon.

He sent therefore Oxatres before, and he came after with his wife his
children, and all his kynsfolke without tariynge for any assurance promised to
him by Oxatres. Alexander hearing of their coming, sent his horsemen before
to cause them to stay and tarry for his coming. And when he was come to the
place where they were, he offered Sacrifice to Minerua and Victoria, restorynge
to Sysymythres his former rule and authority, and put him in hope of a
greater country, if he would faithfully continue his friendship, and took his
two sons presented to him by the father, to serve in his wars. Alexander
left his fotemenne to subdue such as were yet vnyelden, and went forwards
with his horsemen into other parts. The way was craggye and difficulte, which
at the first they endured indifferentlye, but afterward when their horse
houes were torn asunder, and they utterly forweried, many were not able to
follow, but rydde disperkled, and out of order, the werines of their travail
so much overcame shame. The king notwithstanding changed often horse, and
pursued without ceassyng his enemies that fled before him. By reason whereof
all the noble young men that were wont to accompanye him were left behind,
saving only Philippe Lysimachus brother, Philip
who then being in the flower of his youth, and of great likelihode to become
an excellent manne, followed on foot the king that did ride on horseback by
the space of fifty furlo^ges, Lisymachus diverse times profring to him his
horse. But in no wise he would depart from the king, notwithstanding that he
had on his corselet and all his armoure. When the king passed through a wood
where his enemies lay in embushement, he fought notablye, and rescued the
king fighting with his enemies. But after they were ^ite to flight and driven
out of the woods, the greatness of his courage which had sustained him in the
heat of the fight, faynted with his body, and being all on a swette, leaned
him self to a tree, which did not so stay him, but that he fell to the earth,
and being taken up again by the Kings hands, shronke down from him and
dyed. The king being sorrowful for his death, received an other tidings, no
less to be lamented. For before he came to his camp, he was advertised of the
death of Erigius, one of his most notable Capitaynes, whose funerals were
both celebrated with great pomp and ceremonies of honor.

From thence he determined to goo unto the Dahans, where he understood that
Spitamenes was. But Fortune that never ceased to favor him, finished ye
journey of his, spitamenes.
as she did many other. Spytamenes was enflamed with the ouermuche love of his
wife, whom he carried with him in all his hasardes and adventures. But she that
could not well endure fliynge, nor to change places like an outlawe, became
so weary of trauayl, that by flattery and fair means, she entised her husband
to leave his fliyng, and go about (seeing he saw no way to escape) to procure
Alexanders favor, of whose clemencye (she said) he had seen so great
experience. And to move him the more in the matter, she brought before him
their children begotten betwixt them, making request, that at the least ways
he would take pity on the^, wherein she thought her prayer would be the more
effectual because Alexander was so nere at hand. But Spitamenes judging her not
to do this by way of cou^sail, but of purpose to betray him, and yt she
desiered to submit her self unto Alexander in confidence of her beuty, drew
out his sword to have strike^ her, if he had not been let by his brethren.
When they would not suffer him otherwise to hurt her, he commanded her to
avoid his sight, threatenynge to kill her, if she proffered to come again to
his presence. And to mitigate his love toward her, he spente the night
among his concubynes. But his love that was so deapelye grounded thereby
ceased not, but rather kyndeled the more toward his wife. Wherefore he
reconciled him self again unto her, making his continual request, that she
would not counsayl nor move him any more in the matter, but be content with
such chances as Fortune would send him, for he esteemed, death lyghter then
to yield him self. She purged her self of her former persuasion, which appeared
to her she said to have been good, and though it were after a woman's manner,
yet it proceaded of a faithful meaning. But from thence forth she was
contented to do as it should please him. Spitamenes overcome with her
counterfeit affection, made a great feast, and after much eating and drinkyng
became drowsy, and was carried into his chamber. When his wife perceived him to
be in a deep sleep, she pulled out a sword which she had kept secretly for
that purpose, and cut of his head, deliueryng the same being sprinkeled with
blood unto her servant that was priuye to the fact, and with him only as
she was enbrued with blood came unto the Macedons camp, willing it to be
signified to Alexander that there was one come, that had to speak with him.
He by and by gave commandment that she should enter, but when he perceived
her defiled with blood, thinking that she had come to lament some injury
done unto her, willed her to declare what she would have. She desiered that
her servant might come in, from underneath whose garmente she took Spitamenes
head, and presented it unto Alexander. The palenes of the face wantynge blood
had taken away the knowledge whose it was. But when the king perceived it to
be a man's head he departed forth of the tente, and by enquery understood the
matter. The case brought him in great perplexity, and was driven by diverse
imaginations into sundry opinions. He judged the killing of such one being
a fugityue and a rebel to be great benefit unto him, which living might
have been a great let and impediment to his proceadynges.

But one the other side, considering the horriblenes of the deed, that she
should kill him by treason deed, that she should kill him by treason which
loved her so entirely, and by whom she had had children, the violences of the
acts, overcame the thank of her benefit. and she was commanded to depart
the Camp, lest the ensample of such lycencyousnes might corrupt the manners
and civil dysposion of the Greakes. When the Dahans understood of Spitamenes
death they brought Dataphernes bound that was partener with him in his
conspiracy, Dahans.
and yielded them selves unto Alexander. Who being delivered from the greateste
part of his precent care, determined to revenge the injuries of them which had
been mysused by the pride and covetousness of his deputyes and officers.
Therefore he committed Hircania with the Mardons and Tapirious to Phrataphernes,
to whom he gave in commission to send Phradates his predeeessour to him as a
prisoner. Stasamer.
Stasamer was substituted ruler of Caria in ye place of Arsamus. Arsaces was
sent into Media to thinte^t yt Oxidates should remove from thence. Arsaces.
Babylon upon the death of Maseus was committed to diditamenes. Dydytmens
When he had ordained these things the third month, he drue his Army out of
there winter lodgines to go unto a Country that was called Gabasa. Gabasa.
The first days journey was quiet, and the next not very tempestuous, but yet
darker then had been accustumed, and not without some signyfycatyon of there
calamites that were coming. The third day the element was full of lightning
and when the lightning cessed, A tempaste.
it was very dark. The beholding whereof amassed ye soldiers and put them in
great fear. It thu^dred in manner continually, and the lightning fell in strau^g
symile^udes, So that the Army stood astonyed, and durst neither go forwards
nor remain still in a place

Then there came sodaynely a shower of hayle dryuynge like a stream, which at
the first they defended by couerture of their harneys. But shortelye after
their hands were so cold and wette, that they could not hold their weapons,
nor yet devise which way to turn them selves, finding always where they
turned their faces, more violence of the tempeste then before. Every manne
therefore brake his array, wandering about the woods, and many that were
weried, by fear rather then by travail, lay down upon the ground,
notwithstanding that the force of the cold had converted the shower into a
froste. The trees against which they leaned, was a great refuge and help to
many. And yet they were not ignoraunte when they rested, that they chose them
selves a place of death, for when they left to move their bodies, the natural
heat left them. But ease was so pleasant to such as were weried that they
refused not to dye in resting of them selves. Their affliction was not only
vehement for the time, but also continued very long to the increase whereof
the light which is a natural dilectation unto men, through the darkness of
the shower, and the shadow of the wood was so taken away, that it appeared
as it had been night. The King only was able to endure this mischief,
which ceased not to go about the army, drawing the souldioures together
when they were disperkled, liftynge them up that lay on the ground, and to
encourage them, he showed them the smoke that rose afar of from the
Cotages, whether he exhorted them to draw for succor. There was not any
thing more effectual to their saufeguarde, then that whiles they were ashamed
to leave their Prince, whom they saw* endure this mischief, they chafed
them selves with their labor and travail. But necessity which in aduers
fortune is of more force then any reason, found out a remedy for this cold.
They fell to cuttynge down the wood making every where heaps and stackes
thereof, and set them on fire. Then a man would have judged that the whole wood
had been on a flambe. For there was scarcely space left betwixt the fires for
men to stand. Then their nummed members began to be moved with the heat, and
their sprites which were oppressed by force of the cold, began to have their
free recours. Some recovered the cotagies which necessity caused them to seek
out in the furthermost part of the wood, and the cest recovered the camp,
which was plonted in a moist ground. But by that time ye shower was ceased.
The same tempest consumed a thousand soldiers, veriets and slaves. It is
said that diverse were found frosen to death leaning against trees, and yet
seemed as though they had been living and speaking together. It chaunsed that
a common soldier of the Macedons which had much pain to go and carye his
armor, came at the last into the camp where the king was, who notwithstanding
that he was chafyng of his own body against he fire, yet he did rise out of
his chyre, and pullyng of the nummed soldiers armoure that was paste his
remembrance, set him down therein. He a great while knew not where he
sat, or who had received him. But at length when his natural heat came to
him, and perceived it to be his kings seat, and the king to be there
present, was afraid, and starte up again.

But Alexander beheld him in the face, and said: Perceiuest thou not now my
soldier with how much better condition thou live then the Percians do under
their king? For it is death for the^ to sit in ye kings seat, and the same
has been the saueguarde of thy life. The next day he called his friends, and
the captains of the army togethers promysing to restore to them whatsoever
they had lost. Wherein he performed his promis. For Sysimithres bringing unto
him many beasts of burden with two.M. Camels and great nombre of sheep and
oxen, he distributed all among the soldiers, wherein he both restored to
them their loss, and also delivered them of their honger. The king gave great
thanks unto Sysimithres, and commanded his soldiers to carry syx days vitels
ready dressed, went to the Sacans, Sacans.
where he destroyed all their country, and of the botie there taken gave.xxx.
thousand sheep in gift to Sysimythres. From thence he came unto a country
belonging to a noble prince called Cohortanus, Cohortanus
which submitted him self unto the king. And he again restored his country
unto him, exacting nothing of his, but that of his three sons, he should send
two with him to serve in his wars. But Cohortanus offered to him all three and
made a feast unto Alexander with all such sumptuousnes as belonged to the
manner of the country. Wherein all the pleasures being showed that could be
devised, thyrty virgins of the noble men's children were brought in before
Alexander, among whom, there was Cohortanus daughter called Roxane, Roxane.
which in beuty, excellens of personage, and in comlynes of apparel (rare
among those nations) excelled all the rest. And notwithstanding that they
were all elect with whom she was accompanied, yet she drew all men's eyes
toward her and specially the kings, that could not well now govern his
affections in such prosperity of fortune, which is the thing that the
fraylenes of man seldom can avoid. So that he which beheld the wife of
Darius and her two daughters (to whom Roxane was nothing comparable) with no
other intent then he might have done his mother, was then so far overcome
with the love of a young virgin, being but of a base stock, if she should be
compared to kings blood, that he affirmed it to be a thing necessary for the
establyshement of the Empire, for the Percians and Macedons to mary togethers:
by which only means shame might be taken from the vanquyshed, and pride from
the victorers. He also for his purpose alleged a president how Achilles (of
whom he was descended) joined him self with a captive. And lest his doings
should be thought injury, he would couple him self by way of marriage.

The father joyful of these news that he looked not for, gladly confirmed the
kings words. Who in the heat of his desire, A ceremony of marriage among
the Macedons.
caused bread to be brought forth according to the custom of his country, the
same being the most religious ceremony of marriage among the Macedons. Which
bread was cut a sonder with a sword, and each of them made of it a sacrifice.
It is to be thought that such as establyshed the customs of that nation,
coueted by a moderate and a scarce diet, to show to them that were the
gatherers of great riches with how small a thing they ought to content them
selves. Thus he that was both king of Asia and Europe, joined him self in
marriage with a maid brought in at a mask, to beget upon a captive, that
should reign over the victorious Macedons. His friends were ashamed that he
should chose upon drink a father in law, of them that he had lately subdued.
But after the death of Clitus all liberty and franckenes of speech being
taken away, they seemed to agree with their countenaunces, the most apt
instrument to declare the consent of the mind. After this was done, he
prepared his journey toward India, purposing to visit the Occian Sea. And
because he would leave nothing behind his back that might be impediment to
his expedition: took order for thyrty thousand young men to be levied out of
all the provinces, and to be brought unto him armed, myndyng to use them both
as pledges and soldiers. He sent Craterus, to pursue Haustenes, and Cathenes,
of whom the one was taken and the other slain. Polycarpon also subdued the
country that was called Bubacen. Bubacen.
And so having set all his things in order, he set his whole imagination
upon the war of Inde, which was counted to be a very rich country, and to
habound both with gold, perles, and precious stones, things more appertenent
to voluptuousnes, then to magnificence, and it was said that the Soldiers
there had their targettes made of Iuery, and of gold. And therefore lest he
which thought him self to excel the rest, should be passed in any point,
caused his soldiers to set their targettes with plates of silver, the horsemen
to make their brydels of gold, and their corseletes to be bewtefied, some with
gold, and some with silver. There a were hundred and.xx. thousand armed men
that followed Alexander to that war. When all things were in redines, for the
purpose he long before conceived in his evil disposed mind, Alexander coueteth
to be honored as a god.
thought it time to compass how he might usurp the name and honor of a god,
and so willed him self not only to be called, but also beleaued to be the
son of Iuppiter: asthough his power had been as well to restranie men's
thoughts as their tongues. His intent was that the Macedons should fall
grouelinges upon the ground and worship him after the like manner the Parcians
did their kings. And to such his desire, there wanted not Parnicious
flatterye: the parpetuall poison of princes* whose estat has had more often
ouerthroues by flattery, then by any force of enemies. The Macedo^s were not in
blame of this, for non of them suffered gladly there country custumes to be
subverted. But it was the fault of the Greakes, which with there naughty
conditions, corrupted the profession of honest sciences. Hagys. Chyrillus.
Cleo.
There was one Hagys of Argiue as evil a poet as was since Chirillus days and
another called Cleo a Cicilia^ given to flattery both of nature and by the
cus^u^e of his country. They with other the dredge and refuse of their
countries (who^ Alexander reputed more then any of his captains or his
kinsemen) would have made it apere to the world, that heaven had layen open for
Alexander, and stiked not openly to pronownce that both Herculus, and Bacchus
Chaster, and Pos^ux should all give place to his new godhed. For the bringing
of this thing to pass the king commanded upon a lolempne day a feast to be
prepared with great pomp, inuiting there unto all the great lords, and gentlemen
bosh of the Macedons and the Greakes with whom when he had sitten and eating a
while he departed from them out of the feast. Then Cleo (as was before
determined) set forth his talk with great praise and wonder of the kings virtues
rehersing his exceeding benefits toward them al which to requite (he said)
there was but one way, and that was: if they would acknowleg him a god who^
they knew to be one. For it is a small thing (quoth he) to recompense such great
benefits toward you al with the cost of alitel fra^kinsence. He showed the
Percians custume to be both religious and wise in worshipping there kings as
gods, thinking there defense and saueguard to consiste in ye majesty of there
prince. He said, yt Hercules and bacchus were defied when they had once overcome
the envy of such as lived ^ there time. And me^ yt come after do easily believe
such things, as have been confyrmed by there predecessors. And if any of you
(quoth he) will stick at this matter, ye shall se me the first that at the kings
coming in, shall fall down gr^ueling on the earth and worship him. Which
president others ought to follow, and spicially men of most wisdom, that
should always be ensample to others in doing their duities toward their
Prince. His tale tended direcly against Calistenes whose grauitye and prompte
liberty of speaking was hateful unto the King, for he thoutht him the man.
which only had stayed the Macedones, that else would redely have done to him
that honor. Herupon every manes eyes were inurned toward Calistenes, The
word of Calis^enes.
which ^^ter silence made, said in this wise: If the king were present, Cleo,
to hear these thy words, yt should not be nedeful then to au^swer the, for he
him self would make request that he might not thus swerve out of his kind, into
the custumes of straungiers. Nor he would not suffer yt thou should deface
and bring in the obloquie and envy of men, with such thy parnicious flattery,
his noble acts brought to pass with such f^^icety^ and good fortune. But
because he is away, I for him will thus answer the. There is no fruit sone
ripe that will continue long. This I mean by the divine honors, which whiles
thou go about to give unto the king, thou take his honor from him. There
is a time required that men should believe him to be a god, for that gift has
always been given to great me^. When they are once dead, by such as came
after the^. I wyshe unto the king immortality after his death, and that his
life may be long and his estate continual. But sanctifieng is a thing that
sometime does follow ^ man, but it does never accompany him. Thou did
rehearse ensamples of the defyeng of Hercules, and Bacchus. Think thou that
they were mad gods upon drink, and by the decre of one dynner? the nature
of Alexanders manhood must be removed from our mortal eyes, before the fame
can bring him into heaven. Are not they goodly gods (Cleo) that thou and I
can make? Would the king (trowest thou) be content to receive of us the
authority of his godhedde. I have great desire to prove thy power. If thou
can make a good, first make a king. It is much more easy to give a worldly
kingdom, then the possession of heaven. Think thou (Cleo) that the
immortal gods will hear the without disdain, or suffer these thy wicked
devises to take effect? they would we shou^^ hold us content with the
customs of our fore fathers and for my part I am not ashamed of my country,
nor I requi^e not to learn after what manner I should honor my prince. For in
mine opinion, we acknowledge him sufficiently to be king and victorer, of whom
we receive laws to live under. Calistenes was favorably hard of all men, as
the person whom they counted the recouerer of their universal liberty. He
did not only in his tale paynte out such flatterers, but also lively expressed
the opinion of the Macedons, specially of such as were ancient men, to whom
the exchange of their old vsages were grievous. The king was nothing ignorant
of the words that had passed betwyxt them, for he stood behind a particion of
the hall and heard all the matter. He sent word therefore to Hages, and Cleo,
that at his coming in, they should move the strangers only to fall down and
worship him after their country custom. And after a while the king as though
he had been about some matters of importance, returned again into the feast,
then the Percians fell down and worshypped him after such sort as was
devised. But Policarpon that sat above the king at the bo^de, Polycarpon.
asked one in skorne that touched the ground with his chyrine, why he kyssed
no harder. With which words he moved Alexander to ire, whereof he was ever
impatient. So that, he said unto Polycarpon: It is thou that disdaynest to
honor me? shall I be mocked of the alone? He answered that it was not seamely
that a king should be skorned, nor yet a subject be dispysed. With which
word the king plucked him from the table, and threw him down, to whom he
said, failyng grouelynges upon the earth: Loo have thou not done thy self, that
before thou did skorne in an other man, and thereupon he commanded him
toward, and so brake up the feast. Polycarpon being thus punished, was
afterward pardoned. But Calistenes whose contempt and stobburnes the king had
long grudged at, grounded his displeasure then more deaper, upon whom, there
chaunsed shortly after an apt occasion, to be revenged. It was a custom (as it
has been said before) among the noble men of Macedon to put their sons
when they were past their childhode in service to the king, as pages to do
necessary business about his person. Their usage was to watch nightly by
course at the chamber door where the king lay. The concubines were brought in
by them, by an other way then where the guarde watched. They likewise received
the horses of the gromes of the stable, and brought them to the king when he
leped on. They always were about the king both in hunting and in battle, and
were brought up in the study of liberal sciences. The chiefest honor was
given unto them, because they might sit and eat with the king, none had
power to correct the^ with stripes but only the king himself. This company was
like a mass or store, from whence all the capitaines and governors of the
Macedons did come. From thence came their latter kings whose lynage the power
of the Romans long after did extinct. A treason conspired against Alexander.
Harmalaus one of that nombre, because he had stricken a hoar whom the king had
thought to have stricken him self, was by his commandment beaten, and scourged
with rods, which rebuke he took grievously, and co^playned to Sostrates his
friend that was one of the same company. Sostrates.
Which seeing the body torn, whereunto he had so great affeccion, and
peradventure offended also with the king before for some other cause. Stirred
so Harmolaus (which was provoked sufficiently already) yt each gave faith to
other to find a way to destroy the king. Which they executed not with any
chyldishe proceeding, but wisely agreed to bring Nycostratus, Antipater,
Asclepiodorus, and Philotas, into the fellowship of their co^spiracie. And
afteawards they joined unto them more Anticles, Elaptonius and Phimanes. But ye
mean how to perform this purpose seemed very difficult. It behooved all the to
watch togethers, the usage being, ye according to their course some watched
one night, and some another. For if any should happen among the^ that were
not privy to the matter, might be a let to ye whole enterprise. Therefore about
changing the course of their watch, and in other preparacio^ for thexecutio^
of their purpose; there passed xxxii. days. At length the night came when ye
whole no^bre of the co^piratours should watch togethers, who re^ioysed greatly
among the^ selves, that each had kept faith to other, whereof so many days
silence had given good proof, during which time neither fear, nor hope, had
altered any of their minds: so great was the displeasure they had conceived
against the king or else the fidelity they bare each to other. They were
standing at the door where the king did eat, to the intent that at his rising
from the banquet, they might bring him to his chamber. But Alexanders fortune,
and the plesau^tnes of such as were in his company, moved him to drink
largely, whereby and with other pastimes and devises, ye time was so prolo^ged,
yt the co^spiratours stood in a marvelous perplexity, one while glad because
they trusted to find him drunk when they should go about their enterprise, and
an other while in great agony lest he should sit til daylight for then the
custom was to releue ye watch. and other to succeed in their places, and
since their course should not come again till the.vii. night after, they could
not be assured that every one of the^ would keape the thing secret during
the same time. But when the day began to appear, and Alexander was risen from
the banquet they were so glad to execute their malice, that they were joyful
to receive the king. There was a woman accustomed to haunt the court (which
being extraught of her mind and seming by some inspiracio^ to show things to
come) met Alexander, and would in no wise suffer him to pass, but persuaded
him by all means she could devise to return and sit down again. He said to
her in sport that the gods gave him good advise, and thereupon called back
again his familiers and sat drinkyng till it was two owres after day light.
By which time an other company had releued the watch, and were standing before
the kings chamber door: notwithstanding whose coming the conspiratoures
remained still after the time of their watch exspired. So vehement is the hope
which men's minds conceive, when they be drowned in the desire of great
things. The king spoke more gently to them then he was accustomed, and willed
the^ to go to their rest, forsomuche as they had watched all the night before,
and gave unto every one of the^ in reward.50. sestercies, with co^mendacion of
their diligence that they continued their watch longer then their time. Being
thus deceived of the great hope they were in, they departed to their lodginges,
in expectacio^ of the night when their course should come again. Ephimanes
disclosed the conspiracy.
But Ephimanes which either by the genlenes the king showed him among the
rest, or else that he thought the providence of God had withstand their
purpose, suddenly chan^ged his mind, and opened the matter they had gone about
to his brother Eurilochus, Eurilochus
that was not privy to the matter before. The punishment of Philotas was so
fresh in every man's memory, yt Eurilochus laid straightways hands upon his
brother, and broughth him into the court. He called to the watch and showed
them, that he brought ^ewes pertaining to the kings saueguarde. Which thing
well apeared, al (...) by their coming at such a time as also by their
sadness, which was a testimony of their rebubled minds. The watch men called up
Ptolomens and Leonatus that lay within the kings chamber, which streightway
brought them into the king, and wakened him which by reason of his much
drinking lay in a dead sleep. It was long or he awoke, but by little and little
he came to himself, and asked what the matter was. Then said Eurilothus,
thanked be the gods y^ have not utterly determined the ruin of our ^amely.
For though my brother purposed an heinous act, yet is he come to repe^tau^ce,
and by him the matter is brought to light. This same very hight treason was
co^spired against you, the authors thereof be such as you would scarsely
think. And thereupon Ephimanes declared al things in order, with the names of
the conspiratours. Calistenes.
It is certain that Calestines was not named as one privy to that treason out
it was confessed that he gladly gave care to others take, when they blamed and
spoke evil of the kings procedinges. Some do add thereunto, that when
Harmoleus did compain to Calis^enes how the king had beaten him, he had him
remember how he was a man. But whether he spoke it to cause him to take the
thing in patience, or else to stir him to further malice, it remains in
doubt. When the king was fully awaked, and called to his memory ye peril he
was in, gave Eurilochus fifty talentes, with the forfeit of a rich ma^s goods
called Tyridates, and forgave his brother before his pardon was required. He
co^mauded the principal of this treason to be kept bound, and among them
Calistenes which being taken and brought into the court, the king slept all
that day and the night ensuyng he was so (...) with drin^^ng and watchyng. The
next day he called a great counsel, whereat the fathers and kinsfolks of the
conspiratours were present, not very well assured of their own sauegarde,
because that by the law of the Macedons all ought to dye, that were any thing
a kynne to traitors. All the conspiratours except Calisiynes by the kings
commandment were brought forth. Who immediately confessed the whole treason
they had devised. Then every man present reviled them, and the king enquired
what he had done to them, why they should conspire his death. When all the
other stood still and held their peace, The words of Harmolaus to the king.
Harmolaus answered thus. Thou do demand this thing of us as though thou
know not the matter. We went about to kill the, because thou began to
reign over us, as slaves and not free borne. As he was speaking those words
his father Persepolys first of all called him traitor and murderer of his
parents, stoppyng his mouth with his hand, that he should speak no further.
Then the king plucked his father back, and wylled Harmolaus to speak, such
things as he had learned of his master Calistenes. Then Harmolaus proceeded: I
will use thy benefit, and declare those things which I have learned to the
great myschief of us all. How small is the nombre of the Macedons remaining,
that have escaped thy crueltye? Attalus, Philotas, Parmenio, Lyncestes
Alexander, and Clytus, be now dead, but to our enemies behoue alive. They
stood in the fight, and defended the with their swords, receiving wounds for
thy glory and victory, whom thou haste very well rewarded. The one be
sprynckled thy table with his blood, and the other could not be suffered to dye
a simple death. Thus the capitaines of thy people be tormented and put to
death: a plesaunt spectacle to the Percians, of whom they were victorers,
Parmenio by whom thou did sie thine enemy Attalus, was put to death
without judgment. Thus thou use thy hands of us wretches, as instruments
one to kill another, and whom thou did make thy tormentours, alitle before,
straightwayes thou commaundest them to be tormented of others. At those words
the multitude began to shout against Harmolaus, and his father drew his sword
of purpose to have slain him, if he had not been let by the king, which
commanded Harmolaus to speak, and required the rest to hear him patiently,
which (he said) enforced the cause of his own punisheme^t. At length with
great labor they held their peace, and then Harmolaus began again: how
liberal is he to suffer rude children to speak? When the voice of Calistenes
is shut up in prison, because he alone is able to tell his tale, and why?
because thou fear the frespeche of an innocent, and because thou can not
endure to behold his face, and yet I will justify he is not privy to this
matter. But other there be here that purposed with me a noble enterprise, of
whom there is not any that can accuse Calistenes of consent, and yet thou that
art our pacient and rightuous king have determined here his death. These be the
rewards of the Macedons, whose blood thou do misuse as vile and of no
valeur. Thou have.xxx.M. mules carieng spoil and treasure, and yet the poor
soldiers carry nothing with them but unrewarded wounds and skarres. All which
things we did easily suffer before thou did betray us to the barbarous,
and after a new trade, of victourers make us slaves. Thou allowest the
apparel and disciplyne of the Percians, and despysest the manners of thine own
country. And therefore we determined to kill the, not king of Macedo^ but king
of Perce, and as a fugitive we persecuted the by the law of arms. Thou
would have the Macedo^s knele to the and worship the as a god. Thou do
refuse Philip for thy father, and if any God had been before Jupiter, thou
would have refused him likewise. Do thou maruaille if free men can not
bear this thy pride? what can we hope for at thy hands? seeing we must either
dye as innocents, or else that is worse then death, live and remain in
boundage as slaves. Thou art greatly in my debte, if by this thou could
amend, for thou haste begun to learn of me, the thing that free hearts
cannot endure. Spare them whose age shall be sufficiently tormented with the
loss of their children, but upon us cause execution to be done, to the intent we
may obtain by our own death the thing we sought for by thine. When
Harmolaus had spoken these words, the king then answered after this manner:
The oracio^ of Alexander


How false these things be which he has learned of his instructour, my
patience does declare.For notwithstanding he before confessed this treason. Yet
my mind was ye should hear what he could say. Knowing very well that when I
gave liberty to this thief to speak, that he would use the same rage and fury
in his talk, which before moved him to have killed me, whom he ought to have
loved as his father. Of late when that in huntyng he used a great presumption.
I commanded him to be chastised after the custom of our country used by the
kings of Macedon. Which chastisement we must grant needful to be done, like
as the people be accustomed of their tutors, the wyfes of their husbands, and
servants of their masters.

This was all the cruelty I used toward him, which he would have revenged
with murder and treason. But how gentle I am to all persons, that suffer me
to use mine own disposicion, since you your self do know, it were
superfluous for me to rehearse. I can not maruayll at all, though the
punyshement of traitors be displesaunt to Harmelaus, since he him self is in
the same case, for when he commends Parmenio and Philotas, it makes for his
own purpose. I pardoned Lyncestes Alexandre, which was accused by two
witnesses, that he twice co^spired treason against me. And again convicted,
yet deferred I his punishment two years, till you your selves required he
might have his deserving. Towching Attalus ye remember very well how he
wrought treason against me before I was king. And for Clytus I would God he
had not moved me to ire, whose rash tongue speaking rebuke and shame both of
me and you, I suffered longer then he would have done me, speaking the like. The
clemency of kings and rulers, consists not only in their own disposicions,
but in there is, that be under their subjection. For the rigor of such as be
rulers, is mitigated with humility. But when men's minds be void of reverence,
and high and low be confounded as a like, the^ force is necessary to repulce
violence. But why marvel I, yt he did lay cruelty against me, yt durst object
toward me covetousness. I will not call you to witness one by one, lest I should
braide you with liberality, by making declaracio^ what I have bestowed upon you.
Behold ye whole multitude, which a little while ago, had nothing else but their
bare armor, do they not lie in silver beds? be not their tables charged
with plate, and possess they not whole flocks of slaves? They are not able to
sustain the spoils of their enemies. But it is said the Percians be honored
of me whom we have conquered. Truly they be so, and yet, what greater proufcan
there be of my moderacio^, ^
the^ that I do not reign proudely over such as I have subdued. I came into
Asia not utterly to subvert the nations, nor to make the one half of the world
desert, but to give the conquered cause, not to repent them of our victory.
This is the occasion they gladly fight for you, and for your kingdom they
spend their blood: which if they were proudly used, would straight rebel
against you. The possession is not durable which is possessed by violence, but
the thanks of gentleness received, endures everlastingly. If we purpose to
enjoy Asia, and not to make a progress through it, we must make them
partakers of our clemency and then their fidelity shall make our empire stable
and perpetual. And truly we have now more then we can well wyshe or desire.
Covetousness is an insatiable thing, specially when men desire to fill the
vessel that ronneth over. But ye will say that I myxe and bring their
customs among ours: It is so, and why? because I see in diverse nations
right many things which we need not be ashamed to follow. And so great an
Empire as we have gotten, cannot otherwise be aptly governed, except we deliver
some things to the^, and receive likewise some again. One thing is to be
laughed at, that I should refuse Jupiter for my father, being so acknowledged by
his oracle, as who says, the answer of the gods were in my power, he
proffered ye name of his son unto me which was not unmeet for ye things we
purposed. I would wish yt the Indians believed me to be a god, for ye success
in war stand much by fame, and that which is faulsely believed sometime works
theffect of things true. Do you me give too excess and prodigalyte, because I
garnished your armor with gold and silver, my purpose was to show to men
accustumed with it, nothing to be more vile then such kind of mettell, and to
declare that the Macedo^s invincible in other things could not be overcome
with gold it self. After this manner I shall blind the eyes of the barbarous,
which are wont at the first sight to wonder at things be they never so base and
wile. And in that we show to make no estimacion of it. We shall declare to
every one that we are not com for desire of gold nor silver but to subdue the
hole world. From which glory, thou traitor, would have bereued me, and
betrayed the Macedons (I being slain) to the barbarous nations Thou do
exhort me, to spare your Parents, It is needful I should make him privy
what I have determined upon them? no and to that intent he might die with the
greater dolor, if he has any care or memory of them. It is long ago sins I
did fordo the custume of putting thinnocent parents and kinsfolks of
traitors to death with them. And I now profess to pardon, and have them al in
the same estymacion I had before. I know why thou would have thy Master
Calistenes brought forth which only estemeth the being of his sort because
thou desire to he re pronounced of his mouth, those railing words, which
even now thou did spyt out against me. If he had been a Macedon borne I
had brought him in with the a worthy master for such a desiple. But being
borne in another country, he is subject to an other law.

When he had spoken these words, he dismissed the counsel, and commanded all
such as were condemned, to be delivered to the souldioures of their own
bands, who because they would declare by some crueltye, the love they bare
toward their prince, flew them all by torments. Calistenes also died upon
the rack, innocent of the conspiracye against the kings person, but a man not
pliable to the custom of the court, and abhorring from the disposition of
flatterers. There was never thing that brought the Greeks in greater
indignation against Alexander, then that he not only killed, but caused to
be tormented to death, and that without judgment, a man endued with Godly
manners and good sciences, by whom he was persuaded to live, when he purposed to
have died for sorrow that he had slain Clitus with his cruelty, repentance
followed that came to late. But least he might nourishe idleness, apt for
sowynge of sedicious rumors, he marched toward India, always more glorious
in war then after his victory. The discriptio^ of India
The whole country of India lies chiefly toward the East, containing more
in length, then it does in breadth. The North parts be full of mountains and
hills, but all the rest of the land is plain, having many fair rivers,
which runninge out of mount Caucasus, do pass pleasauntlye through the
country. Indus
Indus is more cold the^ any of the other rivers, whose water is not unlike
the coler of ye sea. But of all the rivers in the orient Ganges is most
excellent, Ganges.
which running from the south passes directly through many great mountains,
until that by the encountering of rocks, his course is turned toward the east,
where it is received into the red sea, the violence of ye stream breaks
down his bakes, swalowing in trees, and much of the ground. In many places
the streme is kept in with rocks, whereupon it beats. But where the ground is
more soft, there the river becomes more larger, and makes many Islands. The
greatness of Ganges is much increased by Acesines, Acesynes.
whereunto Acesines does enter into ye sea, where these two rivers mete, the
water is violently troubled, whiles the one resists the others enter, neither
of them seem to give place? Diardenes is a river of the less fame, Diardenes.
because it runs in ye uttermost bonds of India, but yet it brings forth
Crocadiles as Nylus does, and also Dolphines, with other monsters unknown to
other nations. Erima^thus
Crooked Erymanthus with his many turnynges and reflexio^s is consumed by the
inhabitours with wateryng their ground which is the cause that when it draws
nere the sea, it becomes very little, and bears no na^me There be many
other rivers that do divide the country but none of them be so famous as
these, because they do not run so far. The north wind does blast and
harm most those parts that be next unto the sea. But those wyndes be so
broken with the tops of the mountains, that they can not endomage the
inward parts of the country, wherefore fruits be very plentiful there and
perfect. But that region does differ so much for thordinary course of time in
other parts of the world, yt when other countries be burned most with the sun,
India is covered over with snow. And when other places be frose^, the heat is
there most intolerable, and yet there appear not any natural cause why it
should be so.

The color of the Indian sea not differing much from the water of other seas,
did take his name of king Erithrus, whereof the ignoraunte took opinion yt the
water of those Seas was read. The land is very habou^dant of flax whereof the
more part of their garments be made. The twigs of the trees be so tender,
that they receive the prynt of letrs like wax. The birds by teaching
counterfeit men's voice. There be many beasts that are not bred, among other
nations. Rinocerities, be there brought forth, but not bredde. The Elyphantes
of that country be stronger then those yt be made tame in Affrike, and three
bigness do answer unto there strenght The water of the Rivers do carry down
gold, and run mildly without any great fall. The Sea does cast upon the Shore
both parles and precious stones: Whereof proceeded the cause of there great
riches after there Merchandise was once known to other nations? the purgings of
the seas being then esteemed as man's fansy would make the price. The
dissposysio^s of the men (as in all other places) be according to the
scytuacion of the countries they dwell in. They make there garments of lynnyn
cloth which cover their bodies down to there fete. They bind souls under
there fete of beasts skynnes, and wrappe roules of linnine about there
heads. Such as be in any degree either of nobility, or riches, have precious
stones hanging at there ears, and cover all there arms with braslettes and
ornaments of gould. They use great curiositye in kymminge of there heads,
which they round very sildome. They shave without any form of gravity, all
parts of there face sauinge their chinne. The voluptuousnes and excess in the
kings of India.
But thexcesse in voluptuousnes (which they call magnificence) used by the
kings there do excede the vices of all nations. When there will is to be seen
abroad there seruamite carry about them parfuming pannes of silver, and fill all the ways where they go^^ fine are sauoures, and they them selves be borne in
litters of golds hanging full of pearls, and the garments they were be of
gold and purple enpaled together. The armed men follow their litter, and such
as be of their guard, among who^ there be birds borne upon boughs, which
they have taught always to sing, when they be occupied in earnest matters.

In the kings palayce there be pillars of gold carved about with Vynes of
gold, wherein the images of those birds they delight most in, be
artificiallye wrought. The court is open to all comers, when the Kings do
kembe and dress their heads, then they use to gave answer to the
imbassadoures, and to do justice unto their people. When their soles be taken
of their fete be anointed with sweet odours. The greatest travail they take,
is when they hunt wild beasts enclosed in Parkes, which they stryke whiles
their concubynes be singing and daliynge with them. The arrows that they
shote be of two cubits long, which do not the effect of the force they be
shot wythall, by reason of there weight, which is an impedimente to their
swiftenes, wherein the propertye of the arowe chiefly consists. In small
iourneys they use to ride on horseback, but when they have to travail
further, they be carried upon Elephantes, the huge bodies be covered all over
with gold. And because no vice should want among their corrupt manners,
great rowtes of concubines do follow them in golden litters. The Queen's have
their bands separate by the^ selves, which in all excess of voluptuousnes be
nothing inferior unto ye kings. It belongs to the women there to dress
meat, and they also serve men of wine, whereof there is great plentye among
the Indians. When the king has largelye drunk, and is fallen in a sleep, his
concubynnes use to carye him into his chamber, calling upon their Gods, with
a song after their country manner. Who would think that among all these
vices, there were any regard had of virtue. The wise men of India.
There is among them a rude and an uncivil kind of people, whom they call
wise men, which count it the most glorious thing to prevent their own
deaths, and they use to burn them selfs whiles they be a live. It is imputed
for a great shanie to such as either can not well stere for age, or have not
their perfect health if they prolong their life till their natural death
approach. Nor there is no honor given to those bodies that dye for age. They
think the Fires be defiled if the bodies be not alive that be burned in them.
Such as live in cities after a civil manner, attain to the most apt knowledge
of the stars mo^yng, and to the propheciyng of things to come. Nor they can
not think that any man does shorten his life, that looks for death without
fear. They esteem those for Gods that they begin once to worship, and
specially trees, the violatyng of the which, they forbid under pain of
death. They count after fiftye days to the month, and notwithstanding
limitte their years as they do in other places. They note not their times by
such course of the moune as is co^munely used, that is from the full mou^e, but
from the first quarter when she begins first horned, and by cou^tynge of
the^ after the same manner, make the^ ye shorter. There be many other things
reported of the^, with the which I thought not necessary to interrupt ye order of
this story. As Alexander entered into India, the Princes of the country came
unto him submitting the^ selves, declaring that he was the third man that ever
came among them being begotten of Jupiter. They said that Hercules and
Bacchus was not known to them, but only by fame, but they reioysed that they
might behold him presentlye with their eyes. Alexander received the^ with all
gentleness he could devise, and willed them to accompany him, because he would
use them as guides in his journey. But when he saw that the whole number came
not, he sent Ephestion and Perdicas with part of his army before, to subdue
such as would not submit them seluee, and willed them to go forwards till
they came to the river of Indus, and there to make boats, whereby he might
transport his army. And because they had to pass many rivers the boats were
so devised that they might be taken a sunder to be carried in carts, and
afterward joined again together. He appointed Craterus to follow him with the
phalanx, and he with such horsemen and fotemen that were lightarmed went
before, and being encountered in his way, fought a small battle, and did
drive his enemies into the next ^itye. When Craterus was come, to the intent he
might strike terror among those people that had not yet proved the Macedons
force, commanded that when they wanne the city, they should kill both man,
woman, and child, and burn the same to the hard ground. But whiles he rid
about the walls, he was stricken with an arowe. Notwithstanding the city was
won, and al put to the swerd: the very houses not escaping the victorers
cruelty. After this he subdued an obscure nation and came to a city called
Nysa. The city of Nisa.
It chaunsed ye whiles there encamped in a wood before the city, there fell a
cold in the night yt more afflicted the Macedons then ever it had done before
in any other place. Against the which they prepared the remedy that was next
at hand, and cut down the wood to make the^ great fires. The flame whereof
caught the sepulchers belonging to the city, which by reason they were made of
Cedre, were sone set on fire, and never left burning till they were all
consumed. That fire made both a^arum to the City, and to the camp: for thereby
the citizens judged that their enemies would make some attempt against them,
and the Macedo^s perceived by the barkyng of the dogs and noise of men, that
the Indians would salye out upon them. Wherefore Alexander issuyng out of his
camp in order of battle, slew such of them as attempted the fight.

Whereupon they within the City became of diverse opinions, some were minded to
yield, and other thought good to adventure the extremity. When Alexander
understood of their diuison, he caused his men to abstain from slaughter, and
only to maintain the siege. At length they were so weried with the
discommodities of the war, that they yielded them selves. They affirmed their
original to come of Bacchus, who in deed builded their city at the foot of a
mountain called Meroe. The mou^te Meroe.
The quality of which mountain being reported to Alexander by thinhabiters
he sent vittels before, and passed thither with his whole army, ascendyng up
to the top. The mountain grew full of vynes and Iuie, aboundyng with sprynges
yt flowed out in every place. The same was also ple^tiful of many kinds of
Apples of most pleasant taste, the ground also brought forth corn without
any cultiuation. There grew also plenty of Laurel trees, with many kind of wild
fruit. I ca^ not impute it to any m^cion of religion, but rather to plenty and
wantonness, yt caused the^ to repair thither, whereof the Iuye and the vine
leaves they made them selfs garlandes and ran up and down after a dissolute
manner, all the holowes and valeyes there about rebounding with ye voice of so
many thousands, calling upon Bacchus, to whom that place was dedicate. Which
license and liberty begone a few, was spredde sosodeinly through out the
hole army, that the soldiers scatered abroad without order, lay hear and
there reposing them selves upon the grass and leaves they had gathered
together, as it had been in a time of quiet and most assured peace. Which
lycensiousnes of the soldiers rising by chance, Alexander did not withstand,
but ten days together made feasts to Bacchus during which time he plentyfully
banketed his hole army. Who can therefore deny but that greatness of fame and
glory, is oftentimes a benefit rather of fortune then of virtue? for there
enemies had no heart to set upon them whiles they were drowned in this excess
of banketting, dronkenship, and drowsenes but were as much afraid of there
dronken noise, as if they had hard there cry encountering with them in battle
which felicity preserving them here, did afterward defend them after the
same manner in the mids of their enemies retorning as it were in triumph from
the Ocean Sea, when they were given all to festing, and to dronkenes. When
Alexander descended from the mountain he went to a country called Dedala
which thinhabiters forsook and fled to the woods and the wyld mountains,
Dedala.
and therefore passed from thence into Achadera, Achadera.
which he found both burned and habandoned likewise of thinhabiters, whereby of
necessitye he was compelled to use the war after an other manner. For he
divided his army into diverse parts and showed his power in many places at
ones. By which means he oppressed them before they could provide, and subdued
them to their utter ruin. Ptolomeus took most Cities but Alexander wanne the
greateste, and afterward joined again his army together, which he had thus
divided. Coaspe.
That done he went forwards and passed a river called Coaspe where he left
Cenon to besiege a rich City called Bezira, Bezira.
Amazaga.
and he him self went to Amazaga where Assacanns being dead had left the
dominion both of the country and the City to his mother Cleophes. Queen
Cleophes.
There were.xxx. thousand fotemen to defend that City which both was well
fortified and strong of scituacion* being enclosed upon the este with a swift
river that has s^epe banks defendyng the city* that it cannot be approached
on that side, upon the South and the weste parts nature as it were for the
nonce, had planted high rocks betwyxt the which there lay deep holowes and
pittes made of old antyquitie, whereas the rocks cessed, there began a dike of a
wou^derfull depth and widenes. The wall wherewith the city was enclosed
was.xxxv. furlonges in compass, whereof the nether parts were builded of
stonne, and the upper parts of Claye. Yet stones were mixed with the clay, to
the intent that the fraille substance clinging to the hardre, the one should
bynd the other. And left the earth washed upon with the rain might fall
altogether, there were stanchinges of Tymbre put betwixt to stay the holle
worck: Which covered over with bordes was a way for men to go upon.

Alexander beholding this kind of fortificacion was uncertain what to do, For
he saw he could not approach to the walls but by fylling of those dikes and
holowe places. And that he could not otherwise fill the^, then by making of a
mount, which was the only way he had to bring his engines to the walls. But
whiles he was viewing the town after that manner, he was stricken from the wall
with an arrowe in the thieghe. Which he pulled out and without wrappinge of his
wound called for his horse, and let not for his hurt to give order for such
things as he though expedient But at length when by hanging of his leg, the
blod drue from the wound and waxed cold, whereby his hurt began to pain
him, he then said: That he was called the Son of Iuppiter but he felt in him
self the passions of a deseased body. Yet notwithstanding he would not return
into the camp before he had viewed all things that were necessary, and
appointed all things he would have done. After that the soldiers had received
there apointment, by plu^kyng down of houses without the town, they got
great plenty of stuf to make the mount withal. And by casting stocks of trees
on heaps into the dykes and holowe places, the mount within nine days was
raised up to the top of the wales, and the towers were planted upon the same:
such was the labor and dilygence the soldiers used in the matier.

The king before his wound was closed up went to see how the works went
forward and, when he parceyued them in such case, commended the soldiers for
there dilygence, and caused thyngynes to be brought to the walls out of the
which they that defended the walls were sore afflicted with shot. And by
reason they had not seen any such kind of work, were wonderfully amassed,
spesially when they beheld the towers of such bigness come forwards, and yet
could not perceive b^ what means they were moved judged those things to be
done by ye power of ye Gods. And besides they could not think it a mateir of
man's inuencion that so great darts and spears as came among them, should be
shot by engynes, disperyng therefore of the defense of there City, they
retired into the Castle. And because they could not be satisfied any manner of
way til they had yealded the^ selfs* they sent Embasseadors to the king to
ask pardon. Which thing obtained at his hands, the Queen with a great train of
noble women came forth bearing in there hands cups of gold full of wine. Who
presenting her little son before the kings feet, not only obtained
pardonne but also restorement of her former dignytie. Wherefore some thought
that her beuty procured her more fauore, then his mercy. But this is certain
that the child which afterward she brought forth, who soever did beget it.
was called Alexander. From this place Polycarpon was sent with a power unto a
City called Ora, Ora.
where he ouerthrewe in battle thinhabiters that encountered with him, whereby
he got the City into his possession. There were many other Cities obscure of
fame, that came into Alexanders hands by thaba^doning of thinhabiters, which
assembled them selfs together in arms and kept a rock called Aorun. The rock
called Aorun.
The fame was that Hercules had besieged the same before time in vain, and by
reason of an earthquake enforced to depart.

When Alexander viewed this rock, and saw how stepe it was and impassable,
became void of counsel till such time as an old man that knew well the place
came to him with his two sons, offering for a reward to guide his men away up
to top.

Alexander promised them.iiii. score talentes, and keapinge one of his sons
as pledge, sent him to parfourme that he had promised. Mulinus the kings
Secretary was appointed with certain soldiers light armed to follow the
guide, whose purpose was to receive the Indians by fetching a compass about
the rock. But the same rock was not as the more part be, which lieng aslope
has ways up unto the top by degrees. For it stood bolte upright after the
fashion of a but, broad benethe and ever as it grows upward less and less,
till it becomes sharp in the ^oppe. And it is enclosed on yt on side with the
River of Indus that has high and stepe banckes and upon the otheirwith deep
dikes and holowe places, full of water and mudde. Wherefore there could be
devised no way to win it except those dikes were first filled. There was a
wood at hand which the king commanded to be cut down, and causyng the bows
to be shred of for the carriage, filled the holowes with the bare stocks.
Alexander bare the first tree, and all the soldiers followed after with a
courageous showt, for there was no man that would refuce to do that they saw
the king begin: So that within.vii. days the dikes and hollow places were
filled up. Then the king appointed ye Agrians and the archers to go to the
assault of the rock, and did chose.xxx. young men of such as he judged most
apt for ye purpose out of his own band, Charus and Alexander.
to leading of who^ he appointed Charus and Alexander whom he put in
remembrance of his name that was in comen to them both. At the first because
the hasard was so manifest, the king was not determined to adventure his own
parson. But when the trompet blewe to thassault, he was of such a ready courag
that he could not obstaine, but making a sign to his guard that they should
follow him, was the first that set foot upon the rock. Then there were few of
the Macedons that would gladly have tarried behind, but many left their array
where as they stood in order of battle, and followed the king. The cause of
many was miserable whom the river that ran by swalowed in, when they fell down
from the rock. Which sight was sorrowful to such as were out of daungeir being
admonished by the perel of other, what they ought to fear them selfs So that
their cumpassion being turned into fear, lamented as well them selves, as those
whom they saw slain after that manner. At length they went so far ^urth,
that without the getting of the rock they could not return back again
without there great destruction. For there enemies rolled down great stones
upon them wherewith they were easily beaten down, the rock having so slippar
and unstable standing. Yet for all that Charus and Alexander which were
appointed the leading of the.xxx. chosen soldiers, had gotten to ye top, and
began to fight hand to hand. But there were so many darts cast at them from
afar, that they received mo wou^des then they could give. Wherefore Alexander
both myndfull of his name, and of his promise, whiles he fought more egerly
then warely, was enclosed about and slain. Whom when Charus saw dead, he
ran upon his enemies, and vnmyndefull of all things saving of reueng, slew
many with his pike and diverse with his sword. But being laid at by so many
at onse, he fell down dead upon the body of his friend. The death of these
two so hardy young men* and of the rest moved Alexander greatly, yet
parceyuing no remedy in ye matter, caused the retracte to be sowned. It was
greatly for their salfgard* that they retired by lettle and little without
aperaunce of any fear and the Indians contented to have repulsed their
enemies, pursued not after them. Alexander herupon was determined to leave of
his purpoce, seeing he saw no hope how to win the rock, yet he made a
countenance as though he meant to co^tinewe the sieg still. For both he caused
the ways to be closed up. And made an approach with towers of wood, always
putting fresh men in place of them that were weried. When the Indians
parceiued Alexanders abstinacy, two days and two night they banketed
contiunially, and played upon timbrels after there manner, to cause there
enemies think that they had no doubt in the siege, but trusted suerly to
preuaill. The third night the noise of there ^imbreles ceased, and many
torches were seen burning, which the Indians had lighted to se which way they
might escape down the rock in the dark night. Alexander sent Balacrus to
descouer the matter, Balacrus.
who found that the Indians were fled, and that the rock was habandoned. Then
asigne was given that the holle Army should give a showte at once, wherbye
they did strycke such fear amongys their enemies that fled without order.
That many of them thinking their enemies had been at there backs, leaped
down the rocks and slew them selves, and some mayned in there falling were
left behind by there fellows that fled away, Thus the king being victorer of
the place, rathere then of the man testyfied natwithsta^ding with solemn
sacrifyces unto the gods a greatness of victory, and set up aulters upon the
rock to Minarua and Victoria. And though ye guides that he appointed to his
light armed men, parfourmed not so much as they promised, yet there reward was
truly given them. And the rule of the rock with the country thereaboutes was
committed to Sysocostus. S^socostus.
And he him self went forwards with his army from thence to Echolyma. Echolyma.
But understanding that certain streightes through the which he should pass
were kept by one Erix with, Erix.
xx. thousand armed men. He committed that part of his army that were heuie
armed to Cenon to be brought on by soft iorneyes, and going before in parson
with the slyngers and Archers, put his enemies to flight, making the way clear
for his army to pass that followed after. The Indians whither it were for the
hatred they bare unto their captain, or else for to get ye favor of the
victorer, killed Eryx as he fled away, and brought his head, and his armor
unto Alexander. Who considering the fowlenes of the act would not honor the
doers, for then sample sake, nor punish them because they served his purpose.
From thence by.xvi. remouinges he came to that part of the River of Indus,
where Ephestion had prepared al things in such sort as he had commission. One
Omphis was king of that country, Omphis on of the kings of Judah
which before had persuaded his father to submyt him self unto Alexander. Who
in meadiatly upon his fathers death sent Ambassadors unto him to know his
pleasure, whither he should take upon him as a king before his coming or else
live privately in the mean season? And although it was permitted him to
govern as a king, yet he would not use the authority that was granted him.
He had caused Ephestion to be received in the beast sort he could devise, but
notwythstandyng had not visited him, by cause he would not commit his parsone
to any man's fidelity but to the kings. But when he under stood of Alexanders
coming, he went against him with his holle power. whose Eliphantes by small
distau^ce myxed in battle among his fotemen, showed afar of, like
castelles. At the first Alexander did not take him as a friend, but as an
enemy, and therefore set his men in order of battle, and his horsemen in
wings in redynes for to fight. When Omphis understood the error of the
Macedons, he commanded his men to stay, and puttinge his spores to his horse
rid forwards alone. Alexander did the like making no doubt whither he were
afrend or an enemy but thought him self sure, either through his own
manhood, or the others fidelity. Their me^ing as it apered by their
cou^tenaunces was very frendely, but for want, of an interpretor they could not
speak togithers. Therefore after they had called one unto them: the Indian
king declared unto Alexander, that the cause he met him with an army. was to put
in mediatly his hole power into his hands, nor that he had not tarried to
treat for any assurance by messengers, but upon trust only had committed both
his parson and his kingdom to him whom he knew to make war for the wynning
of of glory and fame, and therefore could not fear in him any parfidye.
Alexander reioysed to se his simplicity, and prouffred him his righthand as
pledge of his promise, and restoring to him again his kingdom, he presented
unto Alexander.lvi. Elephantes with many other beasts of exceeding greatness
and.iii, thousand bulls, which is a cattle of great value in those
countries, and much esteemed of kings. Alexander enquited of him whither he had
under his dominion more soldiers or tyllers of the ground. He answered that
he was driven of necessity to have more soldiers because he was at war with
two kings whose kingdoms lay beyond the river of Hidaspis. There names were
Abyassares and Porus, but the authority remained in Porus. And said that he
was prepared and resolved to adventure the hasard of the battle with such of
them as should invade him first. Hereupon Alexander granted unto Omphis both
to take upon him the Diadeame and the name of his father that was called
Taxiles: the custom of the country being such that the name ever followed the
kingdom whosoever enjoyed it. When he had received Alexander honorablye in
hospitality three days, the fourth day declaring how much corn he had
delivered to Ephestion and to his army, presented to the king and to all his
friends Crowns af gold, and besides of coined silver.lxxx. talentes. Alexander
reioysed so much in his good will that he both returned again to him his
gifts, and gave him besides a thousands talentes of the pray he brought with
him, with much plate of gold and silver, many garments after the Parcian manner,
and.xxx. of his own horses with the same furnymentes they war, when he did
ride upon them. Which lyberalytie as it bound Omphis, so it greatly offended
the mynds of the Macedones. For Meleager at supper when he had well dronk:
said he was very glad that Alexander had yet found one in India whom he
judged worthy to receive the gift of a thousand talentes The king bearing in
mind, how much he had repented the s^eaing of Clitus for the rashenes of his
tongue, refrayned his anger but yet ^old him: That inuious men, were ever
tormenters to themselfes. The next day the Imbasseadours of king Abyasares
came, King Abyasares.
unto Alexander, who according to there commission offered all things unto his
will. Whereupon promise and assurance being confirmed, King Porus.
they returned again to their Master. Alexander therefore thinking that through
the greatness of his name Porus might be brought to do ye like, sent Cleochares
to him for to demand tribute, and to somone him to come and make his homage,
when he should enter the bounds of his kingdom. Porus made answer that of
those two requests he would parforme on, which was to mete him at ye entrey of
his kingdom, but yt should be in arms and with a power. Alexander therefore
being determined to pass the river of Hidaspes. Barzentes.
Barzentes that had been author of the rebellion among the Arachosias was
taken and brought to him bound with.xxx. Elephantes which was an apt assistance
against the India^s, yt were wont to put more trust in those beasts then in
the force of there own nation. Gamaxus.
Gamaxus king of a small portion of India, which had co^federat with Barzentes,
was brought likewise bound unto him. Wherefore committing the^ both to prison,
and the Elepha^tes to Omphs, came unto the river of Hidaspes. But Porus lay in
camp on the further side to let his passag having.iiii. score, v. Elepha^tes of
huge strength of body, CCC. wago^s of war, and.xxx.M. fotemen, among who^
there were many archers whose shaftes (as has been said before) were more
heuie then they could well weld. Porus him self did ride upon an Elepha^t
greater then all the rest, who also being of a big stature, apeared notable in
his armor that was garnyshed with gold and silver, having also a courage
equal to the strength of his body, and so great a wisdom as was possible to
be found among such rude nations.

The Macedons were not so much afraid with the sight of there enemies. The
River of Hyda^^is
as they were with the greatness of the river that they had to pass, which
being.iiii. thousand furlonges in breadth and so deep that no ford could be
found, apeared to them like a great Sea. And yet the largenes thereof mitigated
nothing the violence of the stream, but ran with no less furye then if it
had been narowe, apering by the reparcussio^ of the water in many places to be
full of great stones in in the bottom. This river being sufficient to fear
them of it self, ye sight of the further banck full of horse and men was an
increase of there terror. Where the Elephantes that had bodies of unreasonable
greatenes stood in there sight being provoked to bray of purpose, to the intent
that with their terrible noise, they should fill their ears full of fear.
Though the Macedons were courageous and had there hearts full of good hope, as
they which often times had had expeyience of there own acts. Yet there
enemies and the River both together made them wonderfully amassed For they
could not think how to keape a steadfast course to the further shore, in so
weak, and tottring boats. nor when they were there, could see how to arrive
with surety. There were many Islands in the mids of the River, into the which
both the Indians and the Macedons did swyme holding there weapons above there
heddes. And there skyrmished together in the sight of both the kings, which by
experymente of such small things, made trial of the success of the holle.
Symachus Nycanor.
But among all the Macedones there were two noble young me^ called Symachus and
Nycanor excelling in bouldnes and in desperate attemptes and through there
continual good fortune had gotten a courage to despice all peril. Other young
men of the most hardiest took them for there captains, and without any other
armor saving there pikes swome over into an Island that was full of their
enemies, where through bouldnes only they slew many of them, and so might have
returned with glory, if rashness where it finds prosperous success could ever
be content with measure. But whiles with skorne and pride they tarried for there
enemies, they were sodeinly enclosed of such as pryuely swome over the river
and were killed with darts which they cast at them from afar. Such as in
this case escaped there enemies, were either drowned with the violence, or the
Eddyes of the stream. This fight put Porus in great courage, that saw all
their doings from the further shore. And though Alexander was long uncertain
what way to take, yet at length he deceived his enemy by this policy. The
policy Alexander used in passing of Hydaspys.
There was an Island in the river greater then ye rest, and apt to hide his
devise, by reason it was full of wood, and had a great rampire cast upon that
banck that was toward his enemies. Where both his fotemen and horsemen might
stand covered from the sight of the Indians. And the rather to turn there eyes
a another way from the spying out of ye oportunitye, he caused Ptolomeus with a
great nombre of his horsemen, to show them selves against there enemies far
of from the Island and to put the Indians in fear of there cry, making ever a
show as though they would swyme over the river. Which thing Ptolomens did many
days continially together, to the intent that Porus should be enforced to
remove his power to that part to withstand him, and by that means brought them
out of the sight of the Island. Alexander also caused his own Pauilyon to be
set upon the rivers side over against his enemies, and all the pomp that
partayned to the state of a king, to be set forth within there view, with the
same band standing in sight, which was wont to remain about his parson.
Furthermore Attalus that was equal with Alexander in years, and like to him
of face and parsonage, stood there openly aparayled like a king that it might
appear to Porus, that Alexander was still remaining there, and went not about
to pass the river. Thexecucion of this devise was first let by a tempeste,
whereby afterward it was furthered, and brought to good effect: fortune ever
used to turn her dyscommodities into good success toward him. For when the
enemies were thus attent to observe Ptolomeus, that lay beneth upon the river
against them, and Alexander with the rest of tharmye busy about the passing of
his men into the Island before mentioned. There fell sodeinly a great storm
scarsely tolerable to such as lay within there cabbens, which so much
afflicted the soldiers abroad, that they forsook the boats and fled again to
land. And yet for all this there clamor and there noise was not hard of their
enemies through the vehemence of ye shower. As this tempast began suddenly,
so it sodeinly cessed. But the clouds remained dark, that there appeared not
so much light, as the soldiers might know one an other by the face when they
spoke togethers.

Which darkness might have feared some other man, considering they had to row
in a River that they knew not, their enemies paraduenture waiting for them at
there landynge, whither they went as blind men, that for glory, sought for
parill.

But Alexander used that thing that put other men in teror to serve for his
purpose and willed that every man upon a sign given should enter into there
boats wi^h silence. His boat was the first that launched from the shore
toward the further side that was void of his enemies, Porus only keeping his
wache against Ptolomeus. There was but one boat yt sticked by the way upon a
rock, and all the other recovered the land. Alexander then commanded the
soldiers to prepare there armor, The batteil betwixt Porus and Alexander.
and fall into array and whiles he was deuidyng his men to put them in order of
battayll* and marching toward his enemies, it was reported to Porus, that a
great nombre of men of war were come over the river and landed, which would
straight ways give him the battle. But he at the first according to the
fault that is in man's nature, through the overmuch confidence he had in him
self, believed not the matter, but thought that Abyasares which was confederat
with him, had come in his assistaunce. But when the day appeared, and the
matter was manifest, Porus then put forth.C. armed wagons and four thousand
horsemen under the leading of Hages his brother, to keape Alexander doing.
Hages Poras brother
They counted those wagons there pryncypall force, for every one of them
carried.vi. men, two archers, two with targets, and two that ruled the horses,
which were not unarmed, but when it came to the fight, they let there reaynes
loose, and bestowed there darts among there enemies.

But the use of those wagons served that day to small purpose, for the shoure
that had fallen more violently then was accustumed, had made the feldes so wete
and slabbye, that the wagons could not stir but sticked in the mire and
beca^e immouable.

Whereas Alexander being without baggage or any other thing that might be
impediment unto him firesely invaded his enemies. The Scythians and the Dahans
were the first that gave the onset and Pardicas was appointed with the horsemen
to charge upon the right hand battle of the Indians. Then the battles
beginning to join in all parts, they that had the charge of the wagons
counting them the last refuge slacked there raynes, and rushed forwards into
the mids of the fight. The coming of these wagons apeared to be a matter
dangerous, and doubtful to both parties. For at the first brunt both the
Macedo^s were borne over, and over thrown by them, and when the wagons came in
any roughe or myrye places, the Indians were thrown out of them. For when the
horses that drew were ones galled, and put in fear, they carried ye wagons
without government, and tombled part in the mire, and part in the river. A
few trauarsed ye felds and fled for succor unto Porus: who saying his wagons
scatered over all the feldes. and wa^der about without there rulers distributed
ye charge of his Elephantes among his friends and placed his fotemen and
archers behind them.

He had many ye soundyd upon Timbrells, being instruments that ye Indians use
instead of tro^pettes wherewith there ears were so filled that the noise of
there enemies little moved them. They bare also the Image of Hercules in the
frunt of there foot battle, which was done for an encouragement for them to
fight well, and for a note of a reprouf and offense to them that should flee
from that there standard. For it was loss of life to them that left it in the
feld. So that So that the fear which they conceived of Hercules that sometime
had been their enemy, was then turned into a veneration and a religion. The
sight both of the Elephantes and Porus him self, astonished the Macedons, and
caused them a while to stay. For the beasts being set in order among armed
men, showed a far of, like high towers, and Porus him self exceadynge in
manner the stature of man: the Elephant whereupon he did ride, was a setting
forth unto his bygnes, which excelled so much all the other Elephantes as he
him self excelled the rest of men. So that Alexander beholdynge both Porus
and his power, said that at length he had found a perell equal unto his
heart. For we have to do ((...) he) both with terrible beasts, and with
notable men of war. And thereupon looked toward Ceno^, and said unto him:
When I with Ptolomeus, Perditas, and Ephestion, shall set upon the left battle
of our enemies, and shall see us in the heat of the fight, do you then set
forwards my right battle, and freshlye assail them, when you see them
begin to fall out of order. Antigonus, Leonatus, and Tauron, do you bend
against their maine battle, and set upon their front. Our pikes be long and
strong, and can not serve to any better use, then against the Elephantes and
such as they carry overthrow them, and thrust the beasts through. The
Elephantes be but an uncertain force, which use to do most harm to their
own part.

For as they use to goo against their Enemies so long as they be at
commandment: so when they be once put in fear, they turn against their
own side, and show most rage toward them. He had not so sone spoken
those words but he put spores to his horse, passing against his enemies, and
when according to his appointment he had given the charge, Cenus with a
great force brake upon the left battle. And the Phalanx at the same instant
brake in among the mids of their enemies. When Porus saw the horsemen give
ye charge, he put forwards his Elephantes to encounter the^. But they being
slow beasts and not apt suddenly to move, were prevented by the swiftnes of
the horses, and their bows were not to them of any great effect.

For by reason their arowes were so long and heavy that they could not nock
the^ within their bows, except they stayed first their bows upon the ground,
and the ground being so slippery that they could have no perfect foting: The
confusion that ^ell among Porus men.
whiles they were preparing the^ selves to shote, their enemies were come
among them. Then every man fell from thorder that Porus had given, as it
chau^seth oftentimes among troubled minds, where fear bears more rule the^
the capitaines appointment. For in so many parts as their army was divided, so
many generals there became among the^, Some would join all their battles in
one, other would have them divided. Some willed to stay, and other to go
forwards, and enclose their enemies about. There was no general consultation
among them. Porus notwithstanding accompanied with a few, with whom shame
prevailed more the^ fear, assembled such together as were disperkled abroad,
and went forwards against his enemies, settinge his Elephantes in the front
of the battle. They put the Macedo^s in terror, troublyng with their
unwonted cry not only the horse; that naturally do fear them, but also
amassed the men, and disturbed their order. In so much that they which a
little before thought them selves victorers, looked about which way to flee,
and save them selves. Which thing when Alexander perceived, he sent against
the Elephantes, ^he Agrians, and Tharians that were men light armed, and apter
to skyrmish a far of, then to fight hand to hand. They gave the Elephantes
and their governors much a do, and sore afflicted them with the multitude of
their darts and arrows, that they bestowed among them. And the Phalanx came
constantly forwards against them that were in fear. But such as pressed
over forward in fighting with the Elephantes, procured their manifest
destruction, who being trampeled to death with their fete, were an example to
other, not to be over hastye in aduenturynge them selves. The most terrible
sight was when the Elephantes with their long trunkes, (which they called
probostides) took men in their armoure from the ground, and delivered them
up to their governors. The battle was prolonged doubtfully till the day was
far spente. The Soldiers sometime fliyng from the Elephantes, and sometime
pursuing after them, until that with a certain kind of weapons called Copida
(which crooked like sithes, and prepared for the purpose) they cut the
Elephantes upon the legs. Those the Macedons had right aptly devised, for not
only the fear of death, but also the fear of a new kind of torment in
death, caused them to leave nothing unproven. Finally the Elephantes weried
with Wounds, with their violente struglynge did raste their gouernoures to the
Earth, and tare them in pieces, for they were put in such fear, that they were
no more hurtful to their enemies but driven out of the battle like sheep.

Porus being forsaken of the more part of his men, ceased not to cast
Darts (whereof he had plentye prepared upon his Elephant) among them that
flocked about him, whereby he woundyng many, by reason he lay open to every
man's blow, was laid at on all parts, till he had received nine wounds
behind and before, through the which he bledde so much, that he had no
power to cast any more, but for feebleness they fell out of his hands.

The Elephante also which he did ride upon, pricked forwards with furye,
made a great disturbaunce among the Macedons, until that his gouernoure
seeing the King so faynte, that he let fall his Darts, and to be almost past
his remembrance, sturred the beast to flee away, whom Alexander followed in
all that he might, but his horse that was thrust in with many wounds, fell
down dead under him. Wherefore whiles he was about to change and take an
other, was cast far behind. In the mean season Taxiles brother, that was
sent by Alexander unto Porus, began to exhort him that he should not be so
abstinate to prove the extremity, but rather yield him self unto the
victorer. But he notwithstanding that his strength was nere past, and his
blood failed, yet sturred up at a known voice, said* that he knew him to be
the brother of Taxiles, A traytoure to his king and his country, and with that
word took a dart which by chance was not fallen away, and threw it so at
Taxyles brother, that it passed through the mids of his breast unto his
back. And having showed this last proof of his manhood, he fled again more
faster then before.

But when the Elephant through many wounds that he had received fainted in
like sort, then he stayed and turned his fotemen toward his enemies that
followed. By that time alexander was come nere him, who understanding the
wilfulnes of Porus, willed none to be spared that made resistaunce. Whereupon
every man threw darts against Porus, and such fotemen as stood in his
defense, wherewith at length he was so oppressed that he began to fall from his
Elephant. Then the Indian wyiche was his gouernoure thinkyng that Porus
desiered to have lighted, caused the beast after his accustomed manner to bend
toward the earth, which submittynge him self, all the rest as they were
taught bowed down their bodies likewise, which was ye cause of Porus taking
and of the rest. When Alexander saw Porus body upon the ground, caused him
to be spoiled, thinkyhg he had been dead, and diverse ran about him to pull of
his harnays and his vesture, which thing when the Elephant saw, He began to
defend his master, runnyng upon his spoylers and went about to lift him again
upon his back. Whereupon they all setting upon the Elephant, slew him, and
laid Porus in a carte. Whom when Alexander did behold lyftyng up his eyes,
moved with no hatred but with compassion, said unto him. What mischief and
madness was in thy mind, hearing of the fame of my acts, Alexanders words to
Porus.
to hasard the battle with me and my power, seeing Tapyles was so near an
example of the clemency that I use to such as submit them selves? To whom he
made answer. For So Much (quod he) as I am demanded a question: I will answer
as freely as I am spoken unto, knowing mine own strength, Porus answer.
and not having yet proved thine, thought no man of greater power the^ mi self
But now the success of this battle has declared the to be mightier. And yet
therein I do impute to my self not a little felicity, that I have gotten the
second place and am next unto the.

He was asked more over his opinion, after what manner he thought good the
victory should be used. Use it (quod he) after such sort, as this days
fortune shall put in thy mind, wherein there has been sufficient proof showed you,
how tra^sitory ye felicity of man is. This admonishment aduailed him more, then
if he had submitted him self or made any suit. For when Alexander saw the
greatness of his courage, and his heart so void of fear that it could not be
broken with any aduersitye, was moved not only to give him his life, but also
honorablye to entertayne him. For so long as he lay diseased of his wounds,
took no less care of his curing the^ if he had fought in his quarrel. And when
he was once healed contrary to that which all men looked for he received him
among the number of his friends, and enlarged his kingdom greater the^
before. There was nothing in Alexa^ders nature more perfect or more co^stante,
then that he would ever have virtue in admiration when it was such, that it
deserved true praise and glory. And specially when he saw the same in his
enemy. For when it chaunsed in any of his own men, it was somewhat terrible
unto him, thinking that their fame might be a destruction to his own greatness,
which he ever thought to grow more greater, as they were of greatness that he
subdued.

The ninth book of Quintus Curtius of the acts of the great Alexander King of
Macedon.
ALexander reioysinge in so notable a victory, whereby he saw the confines of
ye Orient opened unto him, offered up sacrifice unto the Sun, and to cause his
soldiers to be more willing to goo forwards in finishynge the rest of the
wars, assembled the^ togethers, and after he had commended their doings:
declared how in that latter battle, they had defeated and broken the force
of all the Indians, and should find from thenceforthe nothing but a
plentiful pray. For (he said) that in the country whereunto he was going,
the riches chiefelye remained, that was so much spoken of throughout the whole
world. In respect whereof, the spoils of the Percians were but vile and
baggage, and that occasion now was given them, not only to fill their own
houses, but also all Macedonia and Grease with pearls. with precious stones,
with gold, and with Iuorye. The Soldiers being desierous both of riches and
of glory, because they had never fownde his words vain, promised him to do
whatsoever he would have them. Whereupon he dismissed them full of good hope,
and set them about the making of ships, to the intent that having
ouerrunne all Asia* he might visit the Occean Sea, that was in the end of the
world.

The Mountains next at hand were plentiful of Timber, to make Ships
withal, in cuttynge down whereof the Macedons found Serpents of such bigness,
as they had not seen before, and also Rhynocerites, Rinocerites
beasts that be seldom found in any other place, which name was given to
them by the Greeks, for in the Indian language they be otherwise called.
Alexander builded a City upon either side of the River of Hidaspys, which
once performed, he gave to every one of his capitaynes a crown of gold, and
a thousand pieces of gold besides, preferryng and rewardynge every other
according to their quality, degree, and deseruyng. Abyazares which had sent
Ambassadors unto Alexdnder before the battle fought with Porus, sent then
Ambassadors to him again, offering to do all things that he would appoint,
so that he keep his body at liberty. For he desiered not to live, except he
might remain a king, and he thought him self unmeet to raygne after he had
been once a captive. He signified by them to Abyazares, that if his coming
should be grievous, he would not stycke to visit him in parson. Having thus
vainquished Porus, and passed the river of Hidaspis, he went forwards into
the inward parts of India, which was a country full of great woods, and
high trees, the air very wholesome and temperate, the shadow of the trees
mitigatynge the heat of the sun, and the plentye of sprynges keeping the
ground moist. There were also many Serpents seen, whose scales glistered
like gold. There was nothing more dangerous then the poison that proceaded
from them, for immediatlye upon the stingynge, Death followed, till such time
as the inhabitours of the Country showed a remedy. From thence through
Deserts they came unto the great River of Hyraotys, Hyraotys.
whereunto there joined a great wood. Which having such trees as are not wont
to be seen in other places, was also full of wild pecokes. Alexander removing
his camp from thence wan a town by assault, and taking pledges, appointed
them to pay tribute. After that he came to a great city (after the manner of
that country) which was both well walled, and also enuyroned about with a
marisse. The inhabitaunce came forth against Alexander, and joining their
carts together in a fro^t (wherein their custom was to fight) they proffered
him the battaill. Some occupied darts, some spears, and other axes, and with
great agilitie leaped to and fro their carts, when either they would relieve
their fellows that were weary of fighting, or else succor or rescue such as
were in distress. This unwonted kind of fighting put the Macedons at the first
in fear, specially being hurt a far of by their enemies, and not able to
come to hand stripes with the^. But after they had considered their disordred
manner, they esteamed not their force, but enclosed their enemies about and
thurst the^ in with pikes, and the sooner to defeat them they cut the bands
wherewith the carts were tied to separate them asonder. When they had after
that manner lost eight hundred of their men, they fled again into the city,
which the next day the Macedons did win by assault: Certain there were that
saved them selves by flieng, which seeing the city lost, swomme over the
water, and filled all the towns thereabout with fear. They declared of what
invincible force their enemies were of, judging them in respect of their power
rather gods then men. When Alexander had gotten that city, he sent Perdicas
with a part of his army to destroy the country, and committing another part
to Emnenes for the subduing of such as would not become obedient, Emnenes.
he with the rest of his power came unto a strong city which was the refuge
of all the country thereabout. Notwithstanding that the inhabitau^tes sent to
Alexander for peace, yet they prepared nevertheless for the war, by reason of
a sedicion which rose among them, that made them to be of diverse opinions.
Some would rather have endured any extremity then to yield, and other thought
they were not able to make resistaunce, and whiles they differred so in
opinions, and made no commen consultacion among them. Such as held opinion
to yield up the city* opened the gates, and received in their enemies. And
notwithstanding that Alexander had just cause of displeasure against the
country faccion, yet he pardoned them all, and receiving their pledges,
removed toward the next city. When the Indians that stood upon the walls,
saw the pledges that were brought before the army, whom they perceived to be
of the same nation, desired communicacion with the^, who declaring both the
kings clemencye, and his force did move them to render up their city: whose
ensample the rest of the city did follow. Sophytes.
From thence he came into the city of Sophites which is a nation (as the
Indians think) most excellyng in wisdom, best governed, and that have the
best customs among them. The children that be there gotten, are not
norysshed and brought up, according to the will of their parents, but by the
order of such as have the charge committed unto them to view the state of the
infantes. If they perceive any not apt to be come active, or else wantyng any of
their lymmes, they cause them straight ways to be killed. They use to mary
without any respect of the kyndred they come of, or the greatness of pa^entage,
making no chose, but in the shape of the body, which is the shyng that is only
esteemed among them. The king him self was within ye chief city of the
country, against the which Alexander brought his power. The gates were shut,
and no man appeared in arms upon the walls to make any defense, wherefore he
stood in doubt a great while, whether the city was abandoned, or else that the
inhabiters had kept them selves secret for some policy. Whiles he remained in
that expectacion, suddenly ye gate was opened, and the king (which in good
lines of personage excelled all the rest) came forth with his two sons, he
ware a garment of gold and purple enpaled, that covered the caulf of his leg,
and the soles he ware on his feet were set with pricious stones. All his arms
were garnyshed with pearls, and had hangyng at his ears two precious stones
which were excellent, both for bigness, and brightness, and there he had a
scepter of gold set with precious stones called Berillis, which he after his
salutacion made, with humble submission delivered unto Alexander: yelding both
him self his children, and his kingdom into his hands. There were in that
country very notable dogs for the huntyng of wild beasts, which specially
were given to be egre upon the lion. The king therefore to show their force and
property unto Alexander, put four of them unto a great lion, which steight
ways caught him fast. Then one which was accustomed to that office, took one
of those dogs by the leg to pluck him of the lion, and because he would
not loose his hold cut of his leg wi^h a sword. But when the dog sticked
never thelesse unto his game, he was cut a sondre in peace meal, till such
time as he died: having his teath still fastened in the lions flesh. Such a
feruentnes nature had wrought in those beasts, as we understood by the
report. Some time I am enforced to write things that I can scarsely believe.
For I neither dare affirm the things whereof I doubt, nor counceale such
things as I have received for truth. Alexander leuing this king within his
own kingdom, came unto the river of Hipasis, Hyspasis. king Phegelas.
and there joined with Ephestion, which had subdued the country thereabout.
One Phegelas was king of the next nation, which commanding his subjects to
continue in tilling of the ground as they were wont to do, met Alexander with
rich presents, refusing nothing that was commanded him. When he had tarried
with him two days, and was determined the third day to have passed the river,
he found therein great difficulty by reason that the stream was so large, and
full of great stones. He stayed therefore a while, to be more fully advertised
of ye estate of those countries, and of all such things as were necessary for
him to know. He understood by Phegelas how beyond that river the^e lay a
desert of ten days journey, and next to that desert, the river of Ganges,
which was the greatest river in all the Orient. He showed that beionde Ganges
there inhabited two nations called Gangaridans, Gangaridans. Pharrasia^s
Agramenes
and Pharrasians, whose king was called Agramenes, which used to come to the
field with.xx. thousand horsemen, and.CC. thousand footmen, two thousand armed
wagons, and three.M. Elephantes, which were counted the greatest terror. Those
things seemed incredible unto Alexander, and therefore enquired of Porus, if the
things were true that had been told him. He confirmed Phegelas report
concerning the force of the nation* But he said their king was come of no
noble blood, but of the basest sort of men, whose father being a Harbor and
with great pain getting his daily living, came in favor with the queen, by
reason of his personage, who brought him to have all the doings about the king
her husband, which was afterward s^ayn by their treason, and under color to
be come tutor unto the children, usurped the kingdom to him self, and puttyng
the children to death, did beget him that was now king, which was in hatred
and disgrace of the people following more the manners of his fathers former
estate, the^ such as did beseme ye dignity he was come to. when Alexander
hard Porus affirm this matter he became in great trouble of mind, not that
he regarded the multitude of his enemies, nor the force of their Elephantes.
But he feared the greatness of the rivers and the scituacion of the country, so
difficult, to enter upon. He thought it a hard enterprise to seek out nations
so far inhabityng in the vttermoste bounds of the world. Yet on the other
side the gredines of glory, and the insatiable desire of fame, made no place to
some to far, nor no adventure to be ouerharde. He doubted also that the
Macedons which had passed so many countries, and were waxed daged with wars,
would not be content to follow him over so many ryuers and against so many
difficulties of nature lyeng in their way. For he judged, that since they
habounded, and were so laden with spoil, they would rather seek to enjoy
such things as they had gotten then to trauaill any further in getting of
more. He could not think ye same appetite to be in his soldiers that was in
himself. For he compassed in his mind how to get the Empire of the hole
world, into which matter he had but made his enter: where as they weried with
trauail and thinking to have past all peril, looked now to enjoy with speed, ye
fruit of all their labor: yet for all that, his assertion overcame reason. For
he assembled his army together and spoke unto them after this manner. Alexanders
Oracion to his soldiers.


I am not ignorant (my soldiers) how yt there be now many rumores sowed
among you by the Indians, of purpose to put you in fear. But the vanity of
their lieng is not so new a thing, that it is able now to decei^e you. The
Percia^s after that manner would have made both the streytes of Cili^ia, and the
plains of Mesopotamy terrible unto you, yea and put you in fear of the ryuers
of Tigre and Euphrates, and yet we wadyd over the one of the^, and passed the
other by a bridge. The fame never report things truly, but makes al things
greater the^ they be in deed. Even our glory, though it be grown to certain
perfection, yet it is more in fame, then in effect. Which of you of late did
think, that you should have been able to endure the Elepha^tes, showing afar
of like castles. Who thought I could have passed the river of Hydaspis, when I
hard it reported to be much greather then it was? We should long ago (my
soldiers) have fled out of Asia, if tales could have caused us to turn our
backs. Think you that the no^bre of the Elephantes be greater, then you have
seen herdes of beasts in other places? seeing they be so rare in ye world and
being hard to be taken, are much harder to be tamed. The Same vanity that has
reported them to you to be of such nombre, have nombred also their horsemen
and their footmen. Concerning the ryuers, the more brother they be, the more
gently they must run. For such as be narowe and of small bread, run
always with most vehement streme. Where as contrariwise the broad river pass
their course more mildly. But you will peradventure say that all the peril is
at the shore, where your enemies shall wait for your arrival. Whatsoever the
river be the hasard is all one at the landing. But ymagen that al those things
were true. Whether is it the greatness of the beasts, or the multitude of the
men that put you in fear? As concerning the Elephantes we have had experience
of them of late, how much more vigorously the rage against their own party
then against us. What should we esteem the^, but only abate the greatness of
their bodies, with such weapons as we have prepared for the purpose. What
matter is it whether they be of the like no^bre that Porus had, or whether they
be.iii.M. seeing that we perceive, that when two or three be once wounded, the
rest bend them selves to ^le away? And forasmuch as they cannot well be
governed when they be but few, when there be so many thousands together they
must then needs be an impediment one to another, and bread a confusion among
them selves, they be so unwieldy by reason of their huge bodies, that they be
neither apt to pass forwards, nor yet to fle. I have always so little esteemed
the^, that when I have had plenty of yt kind, I would never use the^: knowing
very well yt they be more dangerous to such as occupy the^, the^ they be to
their enemies. But peradventure it is ye multitude of their horsemen and
foteme^ that do move you? have you been accustomed to fight, against small
nombres, or is it the first time that you have encountered with disordred
multitudes? The ryuers of Granick is a witness how invincible the power of the
Macedons is against any multitude. And so is Cilicia ye flowed with the
Percians blood, and Arbella whose playnes be strewed with their bones. It is
over late to count the nombre of your enemies, after that with your victory ye
have made Asia desert. When ye passed over Hellespont, you should then have
considered your small nombre. Now the Scythians do follow us, we have aid at
hand from the Bactrians, and we supply our power with the Sogdians. Yet for
all that it is not in them I put my confidence. I have a regard unto your
force, I reserve your manhood about me, as a pledge and assurance of my acts
and doings. So long as I may stand in the field among you, I will neither
way my self nor mine enemies. Do you but show an apparaunce that there is
hope in you and cherefulnes. We are not now newly entered into our travails,
but have passed all our labors, being come to the rising of the son, and to
the Occean sea, except our own slougthe be our impediment. From thence having
subdued the world, we shall return as victorers into our country. Do not
you as these negligent husbandmen, that lose their fruit after it is once ripe.
The rewards of our journey be greater then our peril. The country that we go
unto, is rich and of no force, thither I purpose to bring you both to win
glory, and to get you spoil, for worthy you are to carry such riches in to your
country, which be so plentiful there, that the sea does cast them up against
the shore. You be men of that virtue, that ye ought to leave not ^yng unproven,
nor nothing undone for fear. I desire and pray you by the glory ye have
gotten in which ye excede the state of men, and by all that I have deserved of
you, and you of me, wherewith ye remain as invincible: that ye will not forsake
me, purposing to visit the end of the world, me I say, that have been brought
up as a child among you, I will make no mencio^ how I am your king: In the
rest of things I have commanded you, let me now entreat you in this one
point. It is I that make this request unto you, which never commanded you any
thing, but I put my self foremost in thaduenture and danger, and the which
often times in mine own person, have been the formoste in defense of the
battaill, take not the victory out of my hands, with the which (if envy be
not the let) I shall become equal in glory, both to Hercules and Bacchus. Give
your assent to mine intercession, and at length break your obstinate silence.
Where is your showting become that was wont to be a declaration of your
cherefulnes? Where be the countenaunces of my country men? I know you not my
soldiers, and it seems that I am not known of you? Me thinks I cry to your
defe ears in vain, and go about in waste to stir up your unwilling and
immovable minds. Notwithstanding all these words, they hong down their
heads toward the earth, and perseuered still in silence. Then he proceeded: I
know not (quod he) wherein I have unwitting offended you, that you will not once
vouchesaue to look me in the face. I seem to be solitary and in a desert. Is
there none of you that I speak unto will answer me? Is there none at the
lest ways will deny my request? What is the thing that I require? even your
own glory, and your own greatness. Where be they now, whom I saw not long
ago contending, who should first take their king when he was wounded, and now
ye leave me alone* ye forsake me, ye betraye me to mine enemies. But I will not
leave mine enterprise though I go alone. Put me forwards to those ryuers, to
those beasts, and to those nations, the very names of whom ye fear so much.
The Scythians and Bactrians shall go with me, which of late were mine enemies,
and now be my soldiers. I had rather dye then be a king, to be ruled, and at
other men's appointment. Depart you home, go I say, and triumph of the
habandoninge of your king. For I will either obtain here the victory, whereof
you have dispayred, or else dye a death that shall be honorable. Notwithstanding
all that he had said, there was not one soldier that would open his mouth to
speak, but stood waiting that some of the princes, and great capitaynes,
should declare unto the king their estates, and how that there remained not
in them any obstinat refusal of the wars, but that they were so exhausted
with wounds, and weried with continual trauaill that they were not able to
endure any longer.

As they stood thus astonished and afraid, keeping silence and lookyng upon the
ground, there began first a whisperyng and a rumor, and afterward a
lamentacion among them, and by little and little they began more manifestly
to show their dolor, the tears falling from their eyes. The kings anger was
then so turned into compassion, that he was not able to keape him self from
weapyng. At length the whole assemble brast out into an excessive weeping. And
when all the rest were at a stay to speak Cenus took upon him to press
forward toward the judgment seat where Alexander stood, signifieng that
he had somewhat to say. When the soldiers saw he pulled his helmet from his
head (for so it was the custom to speak unto the king) they began to require
him that he would utter the cause of the whole army. Then Cenus began in
this wise* Cenus words in the name of the whole army*
The Gods defend our minds from all wicked thoughts (as I doubt not but
they will) there is none of your soldiers but be of the same mind toward
you that they have been in times past. Whether it be your pleasure to command
them to go forwards, to fight, to hasarde them selves, or with their blood
commend your name unto the posterity. And if you will needs persevere in your
opinion, though we be unarmed, naked, and without blood, we will either come
after you, or go before, as you shall think expedient. But if you will be
content to hear the griefs and complayntes of your soldiers that be not
feigned, but expressed by force of very necessity, I humbly beseech you then
that ye would vouchesaue favorably to hear them, that constantly have
followed your authority and fortune, and are yet ready to follow wheresoever you
will appoynte. O Alexander with the greatness of your acts, ye have not overcome
only your enemies, but also your own soldiers. Whatsoever man's mortality is
able to fulfill, that is performed by us, having passed over so many Seas,
and countries, better known to us then to the very inhabiters, now remaining
in manner in the vttermoste end of the world. And yet for all this, your
purpose is to pass into an other world and seek out an Inde unknown to the
Indians. Ye covet to pluck out the wild beasts, and serpents out of their
dens and lurking places, minding to search further with your victory, then
the son has visited with her beams, which truly is an imaginacio^ mete for
your heart, but far exceeding our capacity and power. Your manhood and
courage is always an increase, but our force grows in declinacion. Behold
our bodies destitute of blood perced with so many wounds, and rotted with so
many scarres. Our weapons now be dulled, and our armor is wasted and
consumed, we wear our apparel after the Percia^s manner, because our country
garments do faill us. We are degenerate out of our own fasshion, and grown
into a strange habit. What is he that has his corselet, or horse particular
to himself? Cause it to be enquired how many servants, do follow their
masters, and what remains to every man of the spoil. Being the victorers of
al me^, of all men we are the poorest. It is not hadoundaunce or excess that
trouble us, but the very war it self. Our municion is consumed, and yet your
will put forth this goodly army of yours naked unto those beasts. The
multitude of whom though the Indians purposely do increase, yet of their lieng
we may perceive the nombre to be great. But if ye be utterly determined to
pass yet further into Inde, the country that lies southward is not so
desert, which being subdued you may pass to that Sea, which nature has
appointed to bound in the world. Why do you seek that glory afar of, which
remains to you ready at your hand? Here the Occean sea does mete us, and
except your mind be to wonder, we are come to a place whether your fortune
has brought us.

I had rather speak these things before you, then behind your back, for I
seek not to win favor among the men of war that stand here about me,
but desire you should rather hear their minds expressed in plain words,
then to hear their grief and their grudge, uttered in muttering and in
murmour. When Cenus had made an end of his tale, the^ rose a cry, and a
lamentacion, which with confused voices every where called Alexandre their
king, their father, and their lord. Then the other captains and specially
thelders, which by reason of their age had the more honest excuse, and greater
authority, made the like request. So that the king was not able to chastise
them being in that obstinacy, nor mitigate them being so moved. Therefore
uncertain what to do, he lept from the judgment place, and commanding his
lodging to be shut in, admitted no man but such as were accustomed about his
person. Two days he consumed in his anger, and the third he came forth
among his men, causing.xii. aulters of square stone there to be set up as a
monument of his expedicion, and willed the trenches of his camp to be made
greater, and the places of men's lieng, to be enlarged bigger, then served for
their bodies. For he thought by the encreasyng, of the form and shape of
things to leave a disceitful wo^dre unto his posterity. From thence he
returned again by the way he had passed before, and encamped upon the river of
Acesines. Cenus chaunsed there to die, whose death the king lamented, but yet
he said: that for a few days he had made a long oracion, as though he alone
should have returned into Macedon. By that time the navy of ships which he had
apoi^ted to be made, stood in redines aflote. Memno^ in ye mean season brought
him out of Thrace a supply of.vi.M. horsemen, Wemnon.
and besides from Harpalas.vii.M. fotemen, with.xxv.M. armours that were
wrought with silver and gold, which he distributed among his men, and
commanded the old to be burned, purposing to pass unto ye Occea^ sea with.M.
ships. But before his departure he reconciled together by affinity Porus and
Taxiles, betwixt who^ there was a new discord risen, upon the old hatreds that
had been betwixt the^. He had of the^ great aid both in ye making and
furnishing of his navy. During the time he was about that business, he builded
there two cities whereof he called the one Nycea, Nycea. Bucephalo^.
and the other Buchephalon, dedicating the latter by the name of his horse yt
was dead. He gave order that his Elephantes and carriage should pass by land,
and he sailed down the river, procedyng every day about.xl. furlonges, so
that he might ever land his power in such places as he thought convenient. At
length he came into a country where as the river of Hidaspis and Acesynes do
join togethers and run from thence into the bounds of a nation called
Sobyons. The Sobians.
They declared that their predecessors came of Hercules army, which being
left there sick, did inhabit the country. They were clothed in beasts
skins, vsyng clubbes for their weapons, and though they had left the customs
of the Greeks, yet there appeared many things among them, that declared from
whence they were descended. Here the king landed and merched.CCx. furlonges
within the country, which he wasted, and took the chiefest city in the same.
There were.xl.M. men that stood in defense against him upon a river side, but
he passed the water, puttyng them to flight, and after they fled into the
city, he wanne it by force. The children were slain, and the rest sold as
slaves. He assaulted an other city where he was repulced, with the great force
of the defendauntes, and lost many of his men. But when the inhabitauntes saw,
that he continued still the siege, dispayring of their saulfeguarde, they set
fire on their houses, and burned them selves, their wifes and their children.
Which fire when the Macedons quenched, they kyndled again, it seamed a
strange contencion. The Cytesins destroyed their own city, their enemies
labored to save it: the wars so contrariously changed the laws wrought in
man by nature. The castle was saved, wherein a guarrison was left. Alexander
went about this castle by water which was environed with three of the greatest
ryuers in all India, Ganges except. Indus passing upon the north side, and
Acesynes ronnyng into Hidaspis upon the south. Where these ryuers met, the
waves rose, like as they do in the sea. They be full of mudde and ^oes, which
by the course of the water driven unto the sides, for all that the ryuers he
broad, yet the chanelles be but narowe the ships must pass in. The waves
did rise so high and thick breaking sometime upon the puppes of the ships,
and sometime upon the sides, that the shipmen began to vale their sails. But
they were so troubled through fear, and the violent swiftnes of the stream,
that they could not order their tackling, so that two of their greatest ships
were drowned within sight. And the smaller vessels which they were as unable to
govern, were driven upon the shore without any harm. The king chaunsed upon
the place where the waves went highest, wherewith his ship was so tossed and
trauersed, that the helm could not direct his course. Wherefore the king
doubtyng of drownyng, pulled of his garment ready to cast him self into the
water, and his friends did swymme nere there about ready to receive him. It
appeari^g to him doubtful, which peril was greatest, either to swim, or to
co^tinew still aborde. But ye mariners labored wonderfully with their ^ers,
adding all ye force that lay in man's power, to cut through the waves. By whose
importunate trauaill, the water seemed to divide a sondre, and to give place. So
that at length they haled out of the surges, and yet not able to bring the ship
to the shore, dashed upon the next flat, it appearyng that the ships, and the
stream had fought a battaill togethers. Alexander having escaped this peril,
set up to every river an altar, whereupon he offered due sacrifice, and that
done, past forwards thirty furlonges. From thence he came into the country of
the Sudrychans and Mallians, ^^dricha^e ^allians.
which accustomed to be at war among them selves, then for their own
defense joined in society. They assembled in arms to the nombre of.ix.
thousand footeme^.x.M. horsemen, and.ix.C. armed wagons. Whereof when the
Macedons were advertised, which believed that they had passed all perils, seeing
a fresh war arise, with a new fierce nation, were amassed with a sudden
fear, and began again with sedicious words to reprove their king. The ^uty
^^s words of the soldiers.
They alleged that he would lately have compelled them to pass the river of
Ganges, for to make war upon those nations lyeng beyond the same. Which
enterprise though it were left, they had not for all yt ended the war never
the more, but rather made an exchange of a new labor, being put furthe
among these wild nations, to make the Occean sea open to him with their
blood and to be drawn beyond the son and sterres. They were compelled (they
said) to vysite those places which nature coueted to remove from man's
knowledge. They grudged that to their new armor, th^^ were now enemies
raised up, whom if they should van^^ishe and put to flight, they could not see
what benefit they should receive thereby, but only darkness and obscurity of
the air, which always covered the deep sea, which sea was replenished with
multitude of monsters, wallowynge in those immovable waters, where as Nature
decayinge, failed of her force. The king little moved in his own respect,
was greatly troubled with those passions of his soldiers. Alexander persuaded
his soldiers.
Wherefore he assembled them altogether, declaring of how feable a force those
nations were, whom they feared so much, which only remained, and were
impediment unto them (having passed over so many countries) to atteine both to
the end of their travail, and to the end of the world. He showed how that
in respect of their former fear, he had left his enterprice over Ganges, with
the conquest of the Nations, inhabitynge beyond the same, and had directed his
journey this way, where as their glory should be as great, and their peril
much less, and wherein they had not far to travail, seeing the Occean was
in manner within sight, the air whereof he felt blowyng in his face. He
required them therefore that they would not envy the glory that he sought, by
passing the bounds of Hercules, and Bacchus, seeing that with so little pain
they might give unto their king perpetual fame and immortalitye. In doing
whereof they should depart out of India as victorers, where as otherwise they
should seem to fly from thence. It is the propertye of every multitude, and
specially of men of war, to be drawn with every little mocion, among whom,
as sedition does sone rise, so it is sone pacefied. There was never a more
cherefull cry made of any army before, the^ the Soldiers then made unto
Alexander, which willed him to lead them whether soever he would, and make
him self equal in glory to them, whose acts he did counterfeite. Alexander
reioysinge in the willyngnes that appeared in them, removed straightwayes
toward his enemies that were the stowtest people of all the Indians. They
prepared them selves boldly for the wars, and chose for their captain one
of the Oxidracans that was of an approved manhood, who encamped at the foot of
a mountain, made fires all abroad, to cause his number appear the greater,
and went about in vain to fear the Macedons when they were at rest, by
making of ala^oms, with their cries and manner of howlynge. When the day
appeared, Alexander having an assured trust to win the victory, commanded
the Soldiers to put on their armoure, and cherefully to fall in order of
battle. But the Indians whether it were for fear, or by reason of some
sedition risen among them, sodainelye fled into the deserte mountains,
whom Alexander followed in vain, and not able to overtake them, took their
carriage. After this he came unto a city of the Oxidracans whereunto great
number were fled, The Oxidracans.
as well in trust of the strength of the place, as of their own power. As
Alexander was about to make the approach, Demophon his deuiner admonished him,
Demophon.
yt he should eiher defer the matter, or else not meddle with it at all, for
yt there appeared signs that his life should be in peril. When Alexander had
heard his words, he beheld him and said. If any man should interrupt the,
when thou art busy about thy science, or considering of the intrailes, should
not he seem unto the troublous, and his coming ungrateful? Yes truly quod
he. So art thou now unto me (quod Alexander.) For having so great matters in
hand, which pass the intrailes of Beasts, I find no greater impedimente,
then a supersticious diuiner.

And as soon as he had spoken the word, he caused them to rere, up ladders,
and whiles other men sticked and stayed at the matter, he mounted up the
wall. The same was very narrow in the top, not divided with lopes (as is
communely used,) but enclosed with one whole and continual battilment round
about, which caused it to be the more hard to scale.

Alexander therefore having no convenient rowme to stand at his defense, stayed
upon the wall, receyuyng upon his target the darts which were cast at him
from all parts. His soldiers could not get unto him, they were so beaten
from the walls by castyng of Darts, and multitude of shot that came from
above. Yet at length when by their stayinge they saw their king given up into
their enemies hands, shame overcame their immaculate danger. But their
ouermuche haste was over great a let, and the cause why they could not come
to the rescue of their king. For whiles every manne coueted up the ladders,
they were so sore laden that they brake asunder, and such as were mounted upon
them fell down again, deceyuynge Alexander of his only hope. So that in
the sight of all the army, he stood destitute as in a deserte without any
aid or succoure, and had weried his left arm (with the which he held his
Target) in receiuynge the blows. His friends cried unto him that he should
leap down unto them, who stood in readiness to receive him. But he geuynge no
ear unto them, undertook an incredible enterprice, and such one as has not
been heard of before, deseruynge rather fame of rashenes, then of any
commendation that might sound to his glory. For with a full leap he did cast
him self into the city that was full of his enemies, whereas he could
s^arselye have any hope to fight for his life, or in diynge to be revenged
upon his enemies. For before he could recover his fete again, it was likelye
either he should have been slain, or taken alive. But he by chance so
conveyed his body, that he fell upon his fete, and standinge, encountered with
such as came against him, Fortune so prouidyng yt he could not be enclosed
about by reason of an old tree, which (as it had been of purpose) stood near
unto the wall, whose broad boughs full of leaves covered him from above, and
the greatness of the stock kept his enemies from coming on his back, and upon
the fore front he received the darts yt were cast against him with his target.
For though there were never so many that contented with him a far of, yet
durst there no man come near unto him, and the boughs kept of the arrows and
the darts so well as his target did. In this extremity the greatness of
Alexanders fame chiefly fought for him, and next desperatio^, a great
encouragement for a man to dye honestlye. At length through the multitude of
his enemies that continually flocked about him, both his target was laden with
shot, his helmet was broken with stones, and his legs fainted and failed
under him, by reason of his continual travail. Which thing when his enemies
perceived, they took less regard to them selves, and drue more near him, of
whom he received two with his sword in such sort, that they fell down dead
at his fete. And from that time forwards none was so bold to approach again
so near him, but threw darts and shot arowes at him a far of. He lay
open to every man's blow, and yet though it were with great pain defended him
self upon his knees, until such time as an Indian shot an arowe at him that
was two cubits long, which a little above his right thighe passed through
his corselet. By reason of that wound he shed so much blood, that he let
his sword fall, as one at the point of death, and therewith so faynte, that he
had not strength to pluck out the arrowe. Then the Indian which had
hurt him, came with great joy to spoil his body. But when Alexander felt
his enemies hand upon him (moved as it is to be thought) with despite, to
receive an infamy to that extremity, called again his sprites that were
passing away, and with his sword thrust his enemy (being unarmed) through
the body. When he had thus slain two of his enemies which lay dead before
him, all the rest stood amassed a far of. Then Alexander desieryng before his
last breathe should fail him, to be killed fightyng, began to raise up his
body upon his target, but his strength would not serve him thereunto, and
therefore reiched at a bough that honge over his head, coveting thereby to have
raised up him self, but his strength not suffisynge thereunto, he fell down
again upon his knees, and by a sign made with his hand, challenged his
enemies, if any of them durst come and match with him. At the last Pencestes
repulcinge his enemies upon an other part of the city, got into the town,
Pencestes
and coastyng along the walls, came unto the place where the king was. When
Alexander espied him, though he had no hope to live, yet he took his coming
for a comfort to his death, and for all his feablenes began to rear up him
self. Timeus. Leonatus. Aristonus.
Then came Timeus, and within a while Leonatus* and after them Aristanus. When
it was once published among the Indians, that Alexander was entered within the
walls, they left their defense in other places, and came flockynge thither,
where as they fiercely assailed such as stood in defense of the Kings person.
Tymeus after that he had fought notablye, and received many wounds, was
there slain. Pencestes also notwithstanding that he was stricken and wounded
with their Darts, yet with his Target he defended the kings person, without
any reguarde of him self. And Leonatus whiles he resisted the Indians, that
egerlye pressed upon Alexander, received so sore a stripe upon the neck, that
he fell down in a swowne at the kings fete. By that time Pencestes became so
feable of his wounds, that he was not able to defend him any more. The last
hope and refuge remained in Aristonus, who also was so greuouslye wounded, that
he could not endure any longer the force of the Indians.

In the mean season the fame was spredde among the Macedons, that their
king was slain, which being a matter that should have put others in
fear, sturred up their ha^res, and made them the hardier. For from that time
forwards, there was none that had respect of his own peril, but adventured
to the wall, and breaking down the same with pikeaxes, entered at the breach
making slaughter of their enemies, of whom few stood at defense, but fled
away. There was never man nor woman spared, old nor young. For they met
none but they judged him to be the person that had hurt their king, and so
at length with the murder of the multitude, their just ire was satisfied.
Clitarchus Timagenes
Clitarchus and Tymagenes do write that Ptolomeus which afterward became
king of Egipte was present in this encountre. But he him self that used not
to deny any thing that stood with his own glory, did put in memory how
that he was then absent, and sent about an other enterprice. Such a negligence
was in them that did write the antiquities of things, or else an ouermuche
credulity, which is a fault, no less then the other. When Alexander was
brought into his lodgyng, the Surgians cut of the stale of that shaft in such
wise, that they moved not the head that was within the flesh. And when they
saw the wound bare, they perceived hokes to be within the arrowe head, so
that without the destruction of his body it could not be pulled out, except
by incision they made the wound greater. And yet in that point they feared,
least abundance of blood should be impediment unto them. For the head was
very great, and it seamed to be entered far within his body.

There was one Critobolus that was very cunning and most excellent among
all the Physicians and surgions, Crytobol^.
and yet in so dangerous a matter as this, he was fearful and in doubt to set
to his hands, least if any thing should chance to the king otherwise then
well, whiles he remained in his cure, the blame might light upon his head.
Therefore when Alexander perceived by his weping the fea^ he was in, and that
through trouble of mind he looked pale in the face, said unto him: What is it
that thou lokest for, or why do thou stay in riddyng me quickelye out of
this pain, at the least ways by death, if thou can not otherwise bring it
to pass? For saying my wound is incurable, why do thou fear that any
thing should be laid unto thy charge. When Critobolus heard his words, he
either ceased, or dissimuled his fear, and exhorted Alexander that he would
suffer him self to be holden whiles they pulled out the arrows head that was
within his flesh, for the least mocion (he said) might be hurtefull unto him.
The king would not be holden, but held his body at a stay without mouyng
in such sort as they appointed him. When they had cut the wound wider, and
pulled out the head, there issued such abundance of blood, that the king
fell in a sownde, and dimnes came over his sight, he stretching out him self
as one in the point of death. Then they wrought all the means they could to
staunche the bloulde, but when they perceived it would not avail, his friends
began to cry out and lamente, thinkyng verily that there had been no way but
death. Notwithstanding at length he ceased his bleadynge, and recovering again
his spirits, began to know them that stood about him. All that day and the
night ensuynge, the men of war stood in arms about the kings lodging,
confessing that al their lives depended upon his breath and would not remove
from thence, before they understood that he took some rest. But when they knew
that he was fallen a sleep, they returned into the camp, bringynge unto the
rest more certain hope of his recouerye. Alexander about the curing of his
wound, remained there seven days, and understanding that a constante fame of
his death was spread abroad among the Indians, he caused two Ships to be
fastened together, and a lodging to be made for him in the mids. So that
remayninge upon the water, he might be seen from both sides of the land, of
them that thought he had been dead. When the country men by the view of
him, perceived he was on live they took away the hope that some had
conceived upon the false report. From thence he passed down the stream,
leaving a distaunce between his ship, and the rest of the nauye, to the
entente that with the beatynge of the oores, they should not disturb him of
his rest, which was necessary for his weak body. The fourth day after his
enbarkynge, he came into a country habandoned of the inhabitours, but yet
plentiful both of corn and cattle, in which place he thought expediente
both to rest him self and his soldiers. It was a custom among the
Macedons, that when their King was diseased, the chief Princes, and the
great men, watched about his lodging. Which manner being then observed,
they entered all together into the chamber where Alexander lay, at whose
sodoine coming he was some what amassed, specially because they came all
together. He thought they had brought him some strange tidinges and enquered
of them if they understood of any new assemble of his enemies. Then Craterus
which was appointed to speak in the behalf of them all, said to him after
this manner.

Do you think that the coming of any enemies could make us so careful,
Craterus words to Alexander.
though they were entered within your camp, as we be of your health and
saufeguarde, for all that it is a thing which you reguarde least. Though all
nations conspire: against us with their power, though the whole world were
filled full of men of war, the Seas ouerspreade with ships and never so
many strange beasts brought against us, it confisteth in the moment of your
person to make us victorers. But how can any God promise that you which be
light and star of Macedon, can be of any continuance* seeing that you be so
desierous to put your person in such manifest peryls, not remembrynge that
with your death you draw with you into ruin, the lives of so many of your
countrymen? What is he that either can or does desire to live after you? We
are come so far forth following your fortune and aucthoritye, that without
you, none of us is able toreturne home again.

If ye were yet contendynge with Darius for the kingdom of Perce, though we
all would wish that you would not adventure your person so per^louslye yet
in that case we could not maruayle so much of your prompt audaritie. For
where the danger and the benefit that ensues thereof is equal, then the
fruit is the greater when the matter succeadeth well, and the comfort is the
more, when the thing chaunseth evil. There is no man, not only of us that
be your soldiers, but even of such as were your enemies, having any
understanding of your greatness, that can suffer so base a town and of so
little fame, be bought with the price of your life, my heart shrinkes at the
remembrance of the thing, which we but late did see with our eyes. I am
amassed to rehearse how those vile hands were in readiness to have carried the
spoils of your invincible person, if Fortune of her mercy had not preserved
and delivered you from their crueltye. So many of us as were notable to follow
you, were all traitors and forsakers of our Prince, and though it were a
matter that lay not in our power, yet if it please you to note us all with
reproach, there is none that will refuse any punishment in the purgation of
the matter. Notwithstanding we would require that you would space us for some
other purpose* We will gladly go whether soever ye will have us, we require
war be it never so obscure, and covet the battle, though our fighting
shall want fame. So that you will reserve your self to those hasardes which
be mete for the greatness of your estate. How sone does glory vanishe away,
and become of no praise, among such enemies as be of no reputation? And what
thing is there more unworthy, then to consume the glory ye have gotten else
where among them, where as your glory can not appear. When Craterus had
told his tale, Ptolome and the other spoke to him in like effect. And
required him all at once with weapynge eyes, that he would not from thence
forth be any more so thirsty to win praise, but seeing he had got
sufficient all ready, he should content him self therwithall, and regard
his health and safegarde whereupon their universal estate did depend. The
king took so gratefullye their loving affection, that he familiarlye embraced
every one of them, and after he had wylled them to sit, repetynge more
depelye their former communicasion, he said thus unto them.

My faiethfull louinge friends and countrymen, Alexander unto his friends.
I give and render to you my hartye thanks, not only for that ye prefer my
safeguard before your own, but also for that sense the beginning of ye wars,
ye have not pretermitted any thing, wherein your love and benevolence might be
showed toward me. So yt I must confess that my life was never so ^eare as it
is now, because I desire long to enjoy you. You be desierous to offer your
selves to death in my quarrel, because you judge that I have deserved that
beneuole^ce at your hands. But your imagination and mine is not after one
sort. You peradventure do ^oue^ continuallye to enjoy me, and to take of me
continual fruit. And I measure not my self by the co^tinuau^ce of my time,
but by the greatness of my glory. I might have been content with the riches my
father left me, and with rest of my body have looked for with the bounds of
Macedon, an age obscure and without any fame. And yet I can not see that they
which live in slougth and idleness can assure them self of their own
destenye. For even such as esteem felicity in long life, be oftentimes
prevented with bitter death. But I which number not my years but my victories,
have lived long, if I will weye the gifts of Fortune. For beginnynge mine
Empire in Macedonia, I have Grease in mine own hands, I have subdued Thrace
and the Illirians, I reign over the Triballes and the Medeans, possessynge an
Asia that lie betwixt Hellespont and the red Sea, and now am not far from
the end of the world, the which I determined to visit, and to make open to
men a new nature, and a new world. I passed out of Asia into Europe in the
moment of an hour, and being but.xxviii. years old, and having reigned but
nine, am become victorer of both regions.

Do you think it then mete yt I should now cease from winning of that
glory, whereunto I have only addict my self? No I will never cease, but
whersoeuer I shall have occasion to fight, I shall think my self to be in the
Theater, where the whole world does behold me. I will give nobilitye and
fame to places that be obscure. And will lay open to all Nations those
countries, that nature has removed furdest from them. In doing whereof it
shall be grateful for me to end my life, if Fortune will have it so. I am
come of that stock that I ought to desire many things before long life. I
pray you to remember that we be come into those countries where the name of a
woman is much celebrated for her virtues. What cities did Semiramis build?
what nations did she subdue? and what great works did she accomplish? We are
not yet become equal to a woman in glory, and yet you would have me to be
satisfied of laud.. The Gods be favorable unto our purpose, for there remain
for us yet greater things to do. And it is the next way to make those
countries we have not yet touched to become ours, if we esteem nothing to be of
small valor, where as there is any occasion to win glory. Let it be your
care only to preserve me from civil conspiracy and treason of mine own
people, and then there be no adventures of the war shall put me in fear,
Philippe was more sure in the front of the battle abroad, then in quiet
tarians at home. He oftentimes avoided the force of his enemies, but he could
not eschew the violence of his own subjects. And if you consider the end of
other Kings, you shall count more that have been slain by their own men,
then by any forayne power. But because there is an occasion now offered me to
utter the thing I have long conceived in my mind. It shall be the greatest
fruit I can receive of my acts, and of my trauayles, if my travails, if my
Mother Olympiades when she departs this life, might be consecrated to
immortality. If she depart in my time, I will do the thing my self. But if I
shall be prevented by Death, remember you to perform that I have determined.
And thereupon he dismissed his friends from him, and continued many days in
the same place. Whiles these things were a doing in India, the Greake
soldiers that had land and habitacion appointed them at Catabactra,
through a sedicion that chaunsed among them, A rebellion of the Greeks
which Alexander had planted at Catabact^s.
rebelled against Alexander. Notsomuche for any hatred they bare him, as for
fear of punishemente. For they killed diverse of their chief rulers, and
assemblynge in force togethers, took the castle of Bactria, that was
negligentlye kept, and procured the Bactrians to rebel with them.

Athenod^rus.
Athenodorus was the chief among them, who took upon him the name of a
king, not so much for the desire of the kingdom, as by aucthoritye to make
him self of power to conueye him self and others home into his country.
Bycon.
But one Bycon of his own nation became his enemy, and conspirynge against
him, did bid him to a banquet, where he was slain by one Boxus Macerianus.
The next day following Bicon assembled the Greakes together, perswadinge
them that he slew Athenodorus but in his own defense, whose purpose was to
have destroyed him. But there were some that perceived his policye, and
suspicion was spread among the rest. So that the Greakes fell to arms of
purpose to slay Bycon. But such as were chief mitigated the wrath of the
multitude, and contrary to his expectation was delivered from that present
peril. Yet he could not be so contented, but within a while after, conspired
against them that saved his life. whose falsehode known, they took both him
and Boxus, determinynge that Boxus should be put to death out of hand, and
that Bycon should end his life by torments. As they were tormentinge of him,
the Greake soldiers sodainelye in a furye (for what cause it is uncertain)
ran to Arms, the noise of whom being heard with them that had the charge
of Bycon, did let him at liberty, fearing that the rumoure had been made
for his deliuerye. He as he was naked came runninge among the Greeks, where
as they were assembled, whose miserable estate so sodainelye changed their
minds, yt they willed him immediately to be set at liberty.

By this means Bicon being twice delivered from death, returned into his
country with the Greeks, leaving the Colonye whereunto he was appointed by
Alexander. These things were done in the co^fynes of Bactria and Scythia. In
the mean season the king of the two nations which we spoke of before, sent
an hundred Ambassadors unto Alexander, which being men of goodly personages,
rid in wagons semely appaireled, having garments of linen clothe embroydred
with gold, and empaled with purple. They declared that the cause of their
coming was to yield them selves, their city, their country, and their
liberty, which they had kept inuiolatelye by so many ages to his will and
appointment. Of which their submission the Gods (they said) were aucthours, and
not any fear, for they were co^te^ted to yield the^ selves, before they had
proved their power with him.

The king called a counsel, and received the^ under his protection,
appointing to the^ to pay such tribute as they before paid to the Arachosia^s.
And besides to se^d two thousand five hundred horsemen to serve him in his
wars, all which things they performed obedientlye. This done he made a
great feast, whereunto he invited those Ambassadors and his Lords. He used
therein sumptuous preparation, ordeinynge.C. beds of gold to eat upon, which
being set a small distaunce one from another, were drawn about with curteynes
garnished with gold and purple. In that feast there was showed and set
forth all the excess and voluptuousnes, which either by long custom was used
among the Percia^s, or by corruption of their old vsages taken up among the
Macedons, the vices of both those nations being there mingled and myxed
togethers. Dioxippus,
There was at that feast one Dioxippus of Athens, a notable champion, by reason
of his excellent force well known unto the King, whom certain enuiousse and
malicious Persons betwyxte earnest and pastyme did reprove that he was given
to far his body as an unprofitable beast. And when other went to the
battle, he would anoint his body with oil, and prepare him self to eat.
Emonges other that used words of despyte against him, there was at the same
feast, ^^rratus.
one Horratus a Macedon who in his dronkennes challenged Dio^ippus, that if he
were a man he should fight the camp with him the next day upon llife and
death, A combat.
where as the king should judge either him to be to rash, or the other to
much a dastar^. Dioxippus then laughyng to scorn the pride and arrogancy of
the soldier, accepted his profer. The next day they were more earnest to go
to the combat, then they were before in making of the challenge, therefore when
the king saw them so bente, and that they would not leave their purpose, he
consented to their will. There were great nombre of men assembled at the
combat, among whom there were many Grecians which favored Dioxippus part.
The Macedon came into the Lystes armed at all peaces, holdyng in his left hand
an iron buckler and a spear, and in his right hand a casting lance, having
his sword besides girte to his side, was furnysshed as though he should have
fought with many men at once. Dioxippus came forth anointed with oil, with a
garlande upon his head, and having a read cloak wrapped about his left arm, held
in his right hand a great knottiye cudgel. The diversity of their
furnishement brought every man in a wonderful expectacio^. For they could not
think it only a rashenes but a madness, for Dioxippus that was naked, to match
with the other that was armed: The Macedon thinking to kill his adversary before
they should come to hand strippes, threw at him his lance, which Dioxippus
avoided with be^ding of his body, and before that he could charge his pike, he
leaped to him and with his cudgel brake the same asondre. When the Macedon had
lost both his weapons, he began to draw his sword, but Dioxippus prevented
him wit a close, and taking both his feet from under him* threw him to the
earth and there plucking his sword from him, set his foot upon his neck, and
held up his cudgel to have stricken out his brains, if the king had not caused
him to stay his hand. This triumph ended with displeasure both unto the
Macedons, and unto unto Alexander himself, specially because this thing was
done in the Indians presence. he feared lest the valiauntnes of the Macedo^s
famed so much in the world, might thereby come into contempt. Hereupon
Alexander grudging at Dioxippus bare his ears open to the accusacion of the
enuyous. They within a few days after had caused a golden cup to be
purposely conveyed out of the way, which the ministers having imbesealed them
selves, made complaynt unto Alexander of the loss thereof. Oftymes men show
less constauncy, then in the offense it self. For in their complaynt
Dioxippus perceived by their lokes that they noted him as the thief, which he
could not endure, but partyng out of the feast after he had written a letter
to the king, he killed himself. Alexander was very sorry for his death which
he took for no token of repentance, but rather of indignacion. For
afterward it appeared through the ouermuche rejoicing of his enemies, that he
had been falsely accused. The Ambassadors of the Indians that were dismissed
home, within a few days after returned again, presenting unto Alexander
three.C. horses.M. and.xxx. wagons every one drawn with four horses, certain
vestures of linen cloth.M. Indian targetes, and an hundred talentes of white
Iren, both lions of a rare bygnes, and Tigres that were made ^ame, the skins
of great Lyzardes, and the shelles of certain fisshes. The king then commanded
Craterus to conduct his army along the river whereupon he sailed, and he
enbarking such as were wont to accompany him, with the stream passed into the
bounds of the Mallians, and from thence came unto the Sabracans, Sabracans.
which was a nation of great power, not ruled by kings, but by a government
of the people. They had gathered together.vi.M. footmen and.vi.M. horsemen,
and.v.C. armed wagons, and had chosen three capitaines that were approved men of
war. But when such as inhabited next unto the river (the banks being full
of villages) saw all the river so far as they could view strowed with
ships, and the armor glistering of so many men of war, they were amassed
with the straungenes of the sight, and thought that some army of the Gods, or
else Bacchus (whose name was famous among those nations) had become among
them. The cry of the men of war with the classing of the oers, and the
strange noise of the mariners exhortyng one another, filled full their
fearful ears. They ran therefore among their country men which had
assembled their force, declaring their madness if they would contend with
Gods. For they said the ships could not be nombred, that carried those
inuicible people. With which words they put such fear among the men of
war of their own nation, that they sent immediately Ambassadors to yield
them selves. When he had received assurance of them, he came the fourth day
into an other nation, which durst no more withstand then the rest did, and
there he builded a city which he named Alexandria, and from thence entered
into a country the inhabiters whereof be called Musycans. Musycans.
Caracanusidans.
There he understood by the accusacion of the Caramisidans that Destirioldes
(whom Alexander had appointed lieutenant among them) had ruled in excessive
pride and covetousness, and therefore commanded him to be put to death. And
Oxarres lieutenau^t of the Bactrians being also accused, was not only acquitted,
but also had a greater rule committed unto him. When he had subdued ye utter
parts of the Musica^s he put a guarrison in their city, Porticanus king of
the Prestyans.
and went from thence to another nation of the Indians called Prestians of
whom Porticanus was king which with a great power got him self into a strong
city which Alexander wanne the third day after he began his siege. Upon
the taking of the town Porticanus fled into the castle and sent Ambassadors
to treat of peace. But before they were come to Alexanders presence, two
towers of the Castle fell with a great crashe, by the ruynes whereof the
Macedons got into the castle, where Porticanus which with a few standing at
defense, was slain. The castle being rased and all that were with in sold as
slaves, Alexander came into the bounds of Saba, Python.
where besides many cities that yielded unto him, he took the strongest city of
that country by force of a mine. It seemed a monstrous thing unto the Indians,
being ignorant of such policies of war, for armed men to come furthe of the
ground in the mids of their city, there appearyng before, no sign of any
way under the earth. Clitar^us does write that there were four score thousand
Indians slain in that country, besides many prisoners sold as slaves. The
Musicanes in the mean time rebelled, Saba.
for the oppression of whom Python was sent thither, who took the prince of
the nation prisoner, and brought him to Alexander, whom he caused to be hanged
on a cross as the aucthour of the revolt, and that done returned again to the
river where as he had willed his navy to tarry for him. The fourth day after
passing down the streme, he came to a town at the entrey of the kingdom of
Samus. Samus
The king whereof had newely yielded himself, but the cytezens did shut
their gates, and would not be at commandment. Whose small nombre Alexander
regarded so little that he sent five hundred Agrians unto their gates to
proffer them the skirmyshe, to the intent by retiryng little and little they
might draw them out of their strength, which were thought would follow in the
chase, when they should see their enemies flyeng. The Agrians did as it was
appointed them, for when they had once provoked their enemies, they turned
their backs, and the Indians followed them, till they came to the embushement
where the king lay. Then the Agrians turned and the fight was renewed again, so
that of three thousand Indians there were five hundred slain and a thousand
taken, the rest recovered again the city. But the end of the victory was not
so pleasant as it appeared in the beginning, for the Indians had so inuenemed
their swords, that such as were hurt dyed of their wounds. And the
Phisicio^s could not deuyse the cause of so strange a death, for even the very
light hurtes were incurable. The Indians trusted that Alexander through his
rashenes might have come within that danger, which by chaunse fyghting
among the thyckest, escaped unhurt. Ptolomeus
Ptolomeus was fyghtly wounded upon his left shoulder, who being in greater
danger, then the greatness of his wound showed, caused the king to be
careful of him. For he was nere of his kynne, and as some thought Philippe was
his father. But it is certain that his mother was Philippes concubyne, he was
one that had the charge of the kings person, a valiant man of war, and yet
more famous in the faculties of peace. He was moderate both in his apparel and
living, lyberall, easy to be spoken to, and without any such height of mind,
as is wont to be in men descended of blood royal, by reason of which
qualities it is uncertain whether he was better beloved with the king, or with
the rest of men. That was the first occasion he had to prove how the minds of
men were affectionat toward him, for even in that danger he was in, the
Macedons began to deuyne of his fortune, whereunto afterward he ascended.
They had no less care of Ptolomeus, then of the king him self, who used him
so familierly that when he was weried either with trauayll, or care of mind,
would sit for his solace with Ptolomeus, and at that time caused his bed to
be brought into his own chamber. When Ptolomeus was laid there, he fell
sodeinly into a profounde sleep, in the which it appeared unto him that a
dragonne offered to him a herb out of his mouth of the healing of his wound,
and taking away of the venyme. When he awaked he declared his dream and showed
both the color and fashion of the herb, affirmyng that he could know it, if
any man could find it out. The same was sought by so many, that at length it
was found, and being put upon the wound, the pain straight ways cessed, and
the skarre within short space was closed. When the Indians were disappointed of
the hope they had conceived that way, they yielded them selves and their City.
From thence Alexander went into the next country called Pathalia, Meres king
of Pathalia
the king whereof called Meres left the City and fled into the Mountains,
so that Alexander took the same and destroyed all the country, fyndyng both a
wonderful pray of Sheape, of Cattle, and of Corn.

There he took Pilotes that knew that River, and came unto an Island which
stood in the mids of the stream, he was compelled to remain there the
longer, because the Pilotes being negligentlye keapt were escaped away* ^e
sent therefore to seek out other, but when he could find none, there entered a
vehement desire into his head to visit the Occean Sea, and the end of the
world without any guide, and so committed his own life, and the lives of so
many thousands, to a river that none of them did know. They sailed as men
ignorant of all the places they came unto, either how far the Sea was
distaunt from what nations did inhabit the countries there aboutes, whether
the mouth of the river were nauigable for Galeis or no.

In all these things they were led by a blind and doubtful imaginacion,
having no comfort in their rasshe enterprise, but only their continual
felicity. When they had gone forwards four hundred furlonges, the
shyppemaisters told the king that they felt the air of the Sea, whereby they
knew that the Occean was at hand. Thereat he reioysed greatly and exhorted
the mariners, that they would in all that they might make way with the ^ers
to bring him to the sight of the end of the world, which he had so long
desired. Now (quod he) our glory is perfect, when our manhood is such that
nothing can give impediment unto us, now the world is come into our hands
without any further hasard of war, or sheding of blood. Now since the
b^undes that nature has wrought be so nere at hand, we shall shortly se
things unknown saving to the immortal gods. Yet notwithstanding he set
certain a land to take four of the country men, by whom he trusted to have
known more certainty of the truth. When they serched out their cotagies at
length found out some that were hydden. Which being demanded how far the
sea was from them, they made answer that they never hard it named, but they
said that within three days saylyng they should come unto a place, where as a
brakishe water did corrupt the fresh. By which words the mariners understood
that they meant the Sea, of the nature whereof the people were ignorant. Then
the mariners rowed cherefully, their desire growing ever the greater as they
approached nere unto the place, which they hoped to be the end of their
trauaill. The third day they came where the sea and the river joined together,
mixing with a small flood, their waters that were of a contrary nature. Then
because the tide was somewhat against them, they haled toward an other Island
standing in the mids of the river, which being an easy place to land at,
the Macedons, ran about to seek vit^lles, in surety (as they thought) being
ignorant of the chance that came upon them. The third hour according to the
ordinary course the flood came from the Sea, and with his force, did drive the
stream backward, which at the first being but stayed, was afterward so
vehemently repulced, that it caused the water to return backwarde with greater
fury then any swifte stream is wont to run. The commen sort that knew not
the nature of the Occea^, The nature of the occea^ was unknown to the Macedons.
thought the s^^me to be a wonderful matter and that it had been a token sent
to them of the gods wrath, and whiles they were in that imaginacion, the Sea
swellyng more and more, ouerflowed the land which they saw before dry, and
as the water rosse the ships mounted, and all the navy was disperkled here and
there. Such as were upon land were amassed with the sodeinnes of the thing and
ran from al parts in great fear unto their ships. But in a tumulte haste does
hurt, and give the impediment. Some there were that went about to set there
shipes forwards, other forbad rowyng and removed not at all. Other whiles they
made haste away, and would not tarry to take in there company, moved unaptly,
and could make no way. Some when they saw them press a shipbord in such
thronges, for fear of taking into many, would receive none at all. So that
both multitude and small number, was a let unto ye have they made. The cry that
some made in bidding men tarry, and the noise that other made willing them to go
forwards, and there voyses that differed, and agred not in one effect, took
away the use both of their sight and hearing. The mariners could not help the
matter, whose words in the tumult could not be hard, nor their
commandments observed among men in fear and out of order. The ships
therefore dashed one against an other, the Ores crasshed a sonder, and every
ship either thurst forwards, or put back an other. No man would have judged
it to be one nauye but rather two sondrey fighting a battle together upon the
Sea. The poores did strycke against the puppes, such as went before troubled
them that came after, and the words of men in their wrath, came unto strypes.

By that time the fludde had over flowne all the playnes there about, so that
nothing appeared above the water sauinge the hills which seamed like little
Islands, whereunto many did swyme and left there ships for fear. Whiles the
nauye thus disperkled abroad, partlye stood a flote when they happened in any
valey, and pacte stycked upon the ground if they did hit upon the flattes,
according as the ground was that the water covered: sodeinly there came an
other terror greatter then the first. For when then the Sea began to ebb, the
water fell back again into his wonted course with so great violence as it
came forwards, and restored and sight of the land, which before was drowned
as in a deep Sea.

The ships then forsaken of the water fell upon their sides, and the feldes
were strowen with broken bordes and with pears of Ores. The soldiers durst
not go forth to land, and yet were in fear to tarry a shipbord lokynge ever
for some greater mischief to come, then that they saw present or paste.

They could scarsly believe that they saw and suffered, which was shipwarck upon
the land, and the Sea within a river. And they thought no eand could come of
his myschiefe. For they knew not that the fludde should shortly return again
and set their ships aflote. And therefore they Imagyned to them selfs famyne
and all extremities. The monsters also of the Sea that after the water was
paste were left on dry land put them in great fear.

The night approached, and despair brought the king into a great agonye.

Yet no care could overcome his heart that was invincible, but that he watched
all night, and sent horsemen to the mouth of the river, to bring him word when
the tide came. He caused the ships that were broken to be amended, and such
as were overwhelmed to be hoised up again, warning al men to lay awayte and
be in redines against the water should rise. When he had consumed all that
night in watchinge and gyuing exhortacion to his men, streightwaies the
horsemen returned amayne gallop, and the fludde followed them, which mildly
increasing begane to raise again their ships, and when it had ones
overflowed the banks the holle nauye began to move. Then all the coost
rebounded with the unmeasurable reio^sing that the soldiers and mariners made
for there saulfgarde whereof they were before in despair. When they saw the
daungier pas^e they enquered with wonder one of an other, by what reason ye sea
could so sone after that manner go and come, and debated the nature of that
element, which one while disagred, and an otherwhile was obedient and subject
to the time. The king coniecturing by the signs he had seen before, that after
ye son risyng the tide would serve his purpose, to prevent the matier, at
midnight with a few ships he fleted down the stream, and passing out at
the mouth of the river, entered four hundred furlongs into the sea where
attayning the thing that he desired, made sacrifice to the gods of the Sea
which were worshipped in those countries, and returned again into his nauye.

From thence the next day he returned backwardes against the stream, and
arrived at a salt lake, the nature whereof being unknown disceyued many that
rashely entered into the water, for there bodies by and by became full of
scabbes, which discease taken by some, the contagyon thereof infected many
other. But they found that oil was a remedy for the same. Alexander lyeng
still with his army waiting for the spring time of ye year, sent Leonatus
before by ye land which way he thought to pass, for to dig wells because
the country was very dry and destitute of water. In the mean season he
builded many Cytyes, and commanded Nearchus and Onesicritus, Nearchus.
Onesicritus
that were most expert of naual things, with his strongest ships to pass
into the Occeane and to go so far forwards as they might with suretye for to
understand the nature of the sea, and willed them at their return to land
either with that river, or else within Euphrates. When the winter was well
passed, he burned those ships which he occupied not, and conveyed his army
by land. After ix. encampinges he came into the country of ye Arabitans,
Arabytans. Gedrosians.
and from thence in nine days came among the Gedrosians, which being a fre
nation by a general counseill had among them, yealded them selfs, of whom
their was not any thing demanded sauinge only vittelles.

Arabon.
The fifth day he came unto a river which the country men call Arabon beyond the
which there lay a barein country greatly destitute of water through the which
he passed, and entered among the Horitans. Horitans.
There he betoke the greater part of his army to Emphestion and parted his
soldiers that were light armed with Ptolomeus and Leonatus and so wasted the
country with three armies at once and took great prays Ptolomeus burned toward
the Sea, Leonatus upon the other hand, and Alexander him self in the mides. In
that country he builded also a city, and brought men out of Arrachosia to
enhabite the same. From thence he came among the Indians, which lieng upon
the Sea coost do inhabit a great country, that is wast and desert. They use
no traffic, enter course* nor co^uersacio^ with any of their neighbors, but
ye desertnes of their country have made them savage, being wild of there own
nature. They ware long nails that be never cut, and long here that is never
clipped. They make there howses of the Shelles of fisshes, and of other things
that the Sea cast up. And being clad with the skynnes of wild beasts, eat
fish dried with the Son, and feade upon such monsters as the Sea cast up on
the land. The famine that fell among the Macedons.
Hear the Macedons consumed there vitelles and first endured scarscitie, and
afterward extreme honger, serching out in every place the roots of palms
which is the only tree that grows in that country. But when that kind of
norishemente sailed them, they killed there carriage beasts, and abstained not
from there horses: whereby lacked beasts to bear there bagage, they were
enforced to consume with fire, the spoils of there enemies, which had caused
them to trauayll into the vttermoste bounds of the Orient. After their famine
followed a pestilence, for the vnaccustumed norishmente of the unwholesome meats
they did eat with the travail of there Journey and the care of mind, spread
diseases among them, in such sort that they could neither continue in a place
nor yet go forwards without great destruction.

Honger oppressed them when they tarried, and the pestilence was more vehement
ever as they went forwards. The fildes therefore were strowen full of me^ that
were half dead, and half alive. And such as were but smally sick, where not
hable to follow tharmye, it marched with such speade. For every man thought to
further so much his own saufguard, as by making have he could get before his
fellows. Such as fainted and could not follow, desired both such as they knew
and knew not, to help them forwards. But they had no beasts whereupon to set
them, and the soldiers could scarsly bare their own armor, which had the
imminent myschiefe that fell upon other men, represented before there own eyes.
Wherefore when they were often called upon, they would not vouchsaue ones to
look back, fear had so taken away all compassion from them.

Then they which were left behind, cried upon the gods, and their king for
help, alledgyng their relygion that was in comen to them, with such as had
forsaken them. But when they had cried long in vain unto their deaf ears
through desperation they began to rage, and wisshed the like eand to there
friends and companions, that they the^ selfs had. The king troubled both with
sorrow and with shame, did write to Phratap hernes ruler of the Parthinyans to
send to him upon Camelles, vittelles in redines to be eaten, and certifyed the
princes of the countres therabout of his necessitye, which did not slack the
time, but made provision according to his will. Thus his army delivered only
from famyne was brought within the bounds of the Godrosyans. Godorsyans
And forasmuch as ye same was a country fertyl of all things, he thought good
to stay there awhyle, with rest to recover again his feeble soldiers.

There he received letteres from Leonatus how he had won the victory of the
Horitans, which encountered him with.viii. thousand fotemen and.v..C. horsemen,
Ozynes. Zariaspes.
and was advertised also from Craterus how he had taken and put in hold Ozynes
and zariaspes noble men of Per^e that went about to rebel. Alexander also
understanding that Memnon was dead, gave the charge of the country whereof he
had the rule unto Sibur^ius and afterward went into Carmania. Syburcius.
Carmania. Astaspes.
Astaspes was governor of that nation, who being suspected of innouacion
whiles Alexander was in India, met^ him on his way, who dissimulynge his Ire
enterteined him gently, and did to him his accustumed honor, till such time as
he had better proof of the matter that was laid against him.

When the princes of India had according to his apointment, sent out of al
countries under his Impire great plentye of horse and other beasts, both of
carriage and of draught, he gave carriage again to all men that wanted, and
restored there armor to the former beutyfulnes, and excellency.

For they were come into a country joining upon Perce, which both was
haboundant of all things, and also brought quietly under his subieccion. He
thought it then a time to counterfeit Bacchus in his glory and fame, which the
got among those nations. Whither it were a trumphe yt Bacchus first
instituted, or a pastyme of him used in dronkennes, Alexander was determined to
counterfeit it, having his mind puffed up above man's estate.

He commanded therefore all the villagies, The Tryumphe that Alexander made in
his retor^e o^t of Inde.
through the which he should pass to be strowne with flowers and garlandes,
and cups with other great vessels to be set full of wine at the entreye of
every house.

He caused Wagons also to be made of such la^genes, that they might be hable
to carry manisouldiers, atons and decking the same with precious furnim^ees

The king went first in order with his friends, and next to them the kings
guard, wearyng upon there heddes garla^des of flowers, some plaing upon flutes
and some upon harpes. Every one generally through tharmy decked his Chariot
according to his habilitye and substance, where as they given to bankettynge,
did hang there rich armor about them. Alexander with such as he called to his
company, was carried in a Chariot laden with Cups of gold and other golden
vessel. He with his dronken army, marched after this manner.vii. days
together in ostentacion of the pray they had gotten. Wherein they showed such
dissolutenes, that if one thousand of the subdued people, durst duringe the
space of those.vii. days have given them the onset, they might have taken them
prisoners and led them away in triumph. But fortune which has appointed both
fame and estymacion to things, turned all this disordre of war unto his
glory. For both the age that was then, and the posterity that came after,
meruailed and took it for a wonder* that he durst go so dissolutely among
those nations, not yet establisshed under his Impire, the harberous people
reputing his rashenes, for an assured confidnce. But sheding of blood ensued
after this tryumphe. For prince Aspastes (that has been spoken of before) was
commanded to be put to death so that his excess in voluptuousnes was no let
unto his crueltye, nor o^ueltye impediment to his voluptuousnes.

The tenth book of Quintus Curtius of the acts of Alexander the great King of
Macedon.
ABout the same time, Cleandre, Scytalces, Agathon, and Eracion which by the
kings apoyntment had put Parmenio to death returned to him, brynging with
them.v. thousand fotemen, and a thousand horsemen. There were many accusers
that followed them out of the province whereof they had the governance. Whose
behauor there was such, that the acceptable service they had done to Alexander
in killing of Parmento, could be no satisfaccion for the multitude of the
offense they had committed. They used such an universal spoil not abstayning
from the Temples, nor from sacred things. The virgins also and great Ladies of
the country, whom they had ravished complained of the^ lamentyng the shame
they had sustained. They used so there covetousness and inordinat lust in there
authority, that it caused the name of the Macedons to be hated among those
nations. And yet among all the rest Cleanders offense was most horrible,
which rauishing a virgyn of noble blood, gave her to his slave to use as his
Concubine. The more part of Alexanders friends were not so much offended with
there crueltye and foul acts whereof they were accused, as with the
remembrance of Parmenios death, which they kept in silence lest the
rehersall thereof might have procured them favor with the King rejoicing that
the kings wrath was fallen upon the minysters of his Ire, and that no power
nor auctorytye gotten by evil means, could have any long contynuans.
Alexander hearing the cause, said that thatcusers ouerslipt ye geatest offense,
which was ye despair of his saueguard. For if they had either hoped or
beleaued, that he should ever have returned out of India, A notable Justice.
they durst never have committed any such offenses. He commanded therefore
them to prison, and put.vi..C. soldiers to death, that had been the mynisters
of there crueltye, and they also were executed the same day which Craterus had
brought for auctors of the rebellion out of Perci. Within a while after
Nearchus and Onesiccitus which had been commanded by the king to search the
Occean Sea, returned unto him declaring some things by report. They showed of
an Island not far from the mouth of Indus which habounded with gold, and
had no breed of horses among them, wherefore the inhabytors would give a
tale^t of gold for every horse brought from the main land. They also told of
great monsterous fysshes (whereof those Seas were full) which carried down with
the tide, would show there bodies above the water, as big as a great ship,
and follow there nauye with a terrible noise. And when they diued underneath the
water, they troubled the Seas as it had been in a shypw^ack. These were things
they had seen, the rest they had received by report of thinhabiters: as how
that the red Sea took his name of king Erithrus, and not of the color of
the water. They showed also of an other Island, not fare from the main land
growing full of palm trees Where was a great wood, in the mids whereof stood
a pillar where as king Erithrus was buried, with inscripcio^ of such lettres as
be used in ye country. They added besides yt such mariners as carried ye
marchantes and the durdges of tharmie, through covetousness of the gold which
had been reported unto them, la^ded in yt Island and were never seen after. There
words moved Alexander much, and put in him a great desire, to get more
certain knowledge of those parties and therefore he commanded them again to
tha Sea, willing yt they should cost the land, till they come wtin ye river of
Euphrates, and from thence to come up to Babilo^ against the stream. The
things were infinite yt he compassed in his head. The enterprises that
Alexander determined.
For he determined after he had brought the Sea coost of ye Orient under his
subieccion to go out of Siria into Afric, for ye euytie he bare to the
Carthagens. His purpose was from thence to pass over the deserts of Numidia
toward Gades, where he understood by the fame that Hercules had planted his
pillars, and so directing his journey through Spain (the which ye Greakes of
the river Iberus call Iberia) to go over ye Alps and so into Italy till he
should come to that part thereof were the next passage was into Epyrus. For this
intent he gave commandment to his officers in Mesopotamia that they should
cut down timber in the mount Lybanus, Tapsagas.
and convey the same to Tapsagas a City in Syria. And there to make galeis of
such greatness, that every one of them might be hable to carye.vi. Ores upon
abanke, and from thence he wylled them to be conuayed unto Babylone. He sent
commandment to the kings of Cipres, to furnishe them of Iren, hemp, and
sails. Whiles these things were in doing he received letteres from Porus and
Taxiles, signifieng that Abyasares was dead of a disease, and that Phelix his
lieutenaunt in those parties was slain, and they put to death that were the
doers thereof. Alexandr therefore in the place of Phelix appointed Endemon that
was captain of the Thracians, Eudemon.
and gave Abyasares kingdom unto his son. Pasargadas
From thence he came to Pasargadas being a country of the Percians, the Prince
whereof was called Orsines which both in nobilytie and riches, Orsynes.
exceded all other men in those parties, and conveyed his pedigre from Cirus
that sometime was king of Perce. The riches his predecessors left him was
great, and he by a long continuau^ce in his enheritaunce and auctorytie, had
much increased the same. He met Alexander coming thitherwardes and presented
both him and his friends with gifts of sondery fortes: which were a
multitude of horses redye to be ridden upon, Charyotes wrought with gold and
silver, precious stuf, excellent pearls, and precious stones, weighti vessel
of gold, robes of purple, and four thousand talents of coined silver. But that
his liberality was occasion of his death. For when he had presented all the
kings friends with gifts above there desire, he honored not with any gifts
at all Bagoas the Enuke, Bagone there Enuke.
whom Alexander specially favored of ye usage he had of him. There were
therefore that gave him admonition how much Alexander esteemed Bagoas. But he
aunsewred them: that his custume was to honor the kings friends, and no
harlottes. Nor that it was not the Percians manner to have any in estimacion,
which did effeminate them selfs with so shameful an abuse.

When his words were reported to the Enuke he used the power which he had
gotten with dishoneste means, to the destruction of that noble and innocent
man. For he did subornat certain lewd parsones of Orcynes country, to bring
in false accusacons against him, which he willed them to present at such
time as he should apoynt unto them. In the mean season whenever Bagoas got
the king alone, he would fill his credulous ears with tales against Orcynes
ever dessimulinge the cause of his displeasure, lest thereby he might lose the
credit of his false report. The king had not Orcynes yet in suspect of such
matter as afterward was laid against him, but began to grow with him out of
estimacion. His accusacion was ever so secret, that he could never get
knowledge of ye peril that was preuily wrought against him. That importunat
harlot in his vile conversation had with the king, was myndfull ever of the
malice he bare to Oreynes, whom he would not cease to bring in suspicion of
covetousness or of rebellion so often as he saw Alexander bent to use him
familierly. By that time the false accusacions were in redynes, which he had
prepared to the distruccion of the innocent, whose fatal destynie yt did
approach, could not be avoided. Cyrus Tomb was opened by Alexander.
It chau^sed yt Alexander caused Cyrus tomb wherein his body was buried to be
opened, prete^ding to use certain ^eremonies for ye dead. But thinking in very
deed yt his tomb had been full of gold and silver, whereof there was a constant
fame among the Percians.

But when it was vyewed there was not thyng^ found but a ^otten target, two
Scythian bows and asword. Alexander therefore caused the Coffyn wherein Cyrus
body was laid, to be covered with the garment he was accustomed to wear, and
set thereupon a crown of gold, meruailinge that there was no more sumptuousnes
used in buryall of such a king, endued with so great riches, that lay there,
What an occacion Bagoas took to accuse Orsynes.
but after the commen sort of men. When this thing was done Bagoas stood next
unto Alexander, who behyld him in the face and said: what maruail is it though
the sepulchers of kings be empty, when lords houses be not hable to receive
the goulde they have taken out from thence. For my part I never saw this
tomb before, but I have hard Darius report, that there were.iii.M. talentes
buried with Eirus. (Thereof (quoth he) proceeded Orcynes liberality, in wynning
your favor by ye gift of the things, which he knew he could not keape. When
he had thus sturred up Alexanders wrath against Orcynes, he presented them
who^ he had suborned to accuse him. By whose report and by Bagoas surmised
tales, Alexander was so encensed against Orcynes, that he was put in prison,
before he could suspect that he was accused. The Enuke was not contented with
the destruction of this Innocent man, but at his death, laid violent hands
upon him. Unto who^ Orcines said: I have hard that women in times past have
reigned, and borne great rule in Asia, but it is now a more straung thing, ye
agelding should have thimpire in his hands. This was the end of the most
noble man among the Percians, who was not only an innocent in the matter,
but such one as bare singular affection unto Alexander, and had showed great
liberality to him and his. At the same time Phradrates which was suspected to
have gone about to make him self king, Alexander began to be inclined to the
shedyng of blood.
was put to death. Alexander began then to be much enclyned to the sheding of
blood, and to be credulous in hearing of evil report. Prosperity is of such a
force to change a man's nature. Wherein few men have consederacion of virtue.
Thus he which a little before would not condemn Lincestes Alexander when he
was accused by two witnesses, that suffered diverse of more mean estate to be
acquitted, though it grudged his mind, because they seamed not gilty to other
men. And he which bestowed kingdoms upon his ennemies, whom he had subdued:
was in the end so much altered from his former enclinacion that against his
own appetite, at the will of an harlot he would give kyngedomes to some, and
take away the lives from other. About the same time he received letters of
things done in Europe, whereby he understood that whiles he was in India,
zophirus his Lieutenaunte in Thrace, had made journey against the Getes, The
Getes.
where by storms and tempests that sodeinly risse upon him, he was destroyed
and all his army. Senthes.
When Senthes understood the defeat of that army he procured the Odrisians
that were his country me^ to revolt. So that al Thrace was in manner lost
thereby and Grease stood in no great sure^ye.

The writers of the acts of great Alexander make mencio^ in this place of
Calanus an Indian that was very famour in philosophye, Calanus.
which by the persuasion of king Taxiles followed Alexander, and ended his life
after a strange sort. When he had lived.lxxiii. years without any disease, at
his coming into Percia he felt a pain in his belly, wherefore co^iecturynge
that the end of his life was come, lest such a perpe^uall felicity as he
had lived in* should be spotted with any long disease, or tormented with the
multitude of medicines that phisicions use to minister, required Alexander that
he might cause a fire to be made, and to burn him self in the same. The king
began to dissuade him from his purpose, thinkyng to have brought him from the
doing of so horrible an act, but when he perceived with what stedfastnes and
co^stancy he stood in his intent, and that there was no way to keape him any
longer in life. He suffered a fire to be made according to his will, where into
Calanus did ride on horsback, making first his prayer to the gods of his
country, and taking the Macedons by the hands, required them that they would
spend that day pleasantly in banketting with their king, whom within a while,
he should see at Babylon. When he had spoken those words he went merely into
the fire, where as plieng his body comely, kept still the same gesture and
cou^tenau^ce at his death, which he was wont to use. When the fire flamed the
trumpettes blewe, the men of war making such a shout as they accustomed going
to the battaill, which rebounded up to the sky, and the Elepha^tes also made
a terrible noise. These be the things that sage writers do testify of
Calanus, which was a notable ensample of an invincible mind, constantly bent
to suffer any adversity. From thence Alexander went unto Susa, Alexander
married Satyra Darius daughter.
whereas he took to wife and laufully married Satyra Darius eldest daughter.
Whose younger suster called Dripetis he gave to wife unto Ephestion. And
bestowed to the no^bre of.ixxx. virgins of the noblest of all the nations he
had conquered, Drypetis.
to the principal Macedons and to the chiefest of his fre^des, because he would
not seem alone to begin so strange a custom. These marriages were celebrate
after the Percian manner, and a princely feast prepared at the espowsels. Whereat
there were.ix.M. gestes, to every one of whom, Alexander gave a cup of gold
to sacrifice with al. At the same time the rulers of cities which Alexander had
subdued and builded, sent unto him.xxx.M. young soldiers yt were all of one
age, and furnisshed with fair armor, apt to do any enterprise of the war
which he called Epigoni: that is to say his successors. The Macedo^s at their
coming seemed to be somewhat apalled, which weried with long war, used often
in assembles to murmur and speak mutinous words against the king. For ye
cause he had prepared these soldiers to restrain ye arroga^cy of other, and
gave to them great benefits. Harpalus.
Harpalus to whom the king had committed the charge of the treasure and
revenues at Babylon, hearing of the acts that Alexander had done in subduing
the more part of ye kings of India, and his success to be so prosperous yt
nothing could withstand him. Knowing the insaciable desire yt was in Alexander
to visit far countries, and to increase his glory, though it should be a hard
matter for him to returned to Babilo^ again. wherefore he gave him self to
delight and to lust, misusing many that were noble and f^e women, wallowing in all kind of voluptuousnes. Insomuch that he sent unto Athe^s for a famous harlot
called Patonice, Patonice
to whom he both gave many great and princely gifts while she was alive, and
also after her death spent.xxx. talentes upon her tomb. Having in these and
such other like voluptuous vanities consumed a great part of the treasure.
When he understood Alexander to be come out of India, and to use extreme
justice upon his officers that misused them of who^ they had rule, by reason he
was privy to his own foul conscience feared the like might tome to himself.
And therefore gathering together.v.M. talentes and.vi.M. mercenary soldiers,
took ye way toward Athens no man willing to receive him by the way. Tenaron.
When he came to Tena^on (where as a great nombre of the mercenary Greeks which
had been discharged out of Asia were assembled) he left his soldiers there and
went to Athens with his money: when he was come thither no^bre of the citezens
flocked about him, more for love of his money then for his own sake, but
specially the orators, and such as used to make their gain by oracio^s and
persuading of the people, who^ by small rewards he easily corrupted to defend
his cause with the people. But afterward at a general assemble upon the
matter, he was commanded to depart the city, and so returned again among
the Greek soldiers by who^ he was slain.

Sunium.
Therefore with.xxx. ships they passed over to Suniu^ which is a point of the
land in the territory of Athe^s, from whence they determined to have entered
into Athens haven. These things being known, Alexander that was sore moved
as well against the Athenians as against Harpalus, prepared a navy to make
war in person immediately against the^. And as he was busied about ye matter,
he understood by secret letters both ye Harpalus had been in Athens, and
corrupted with money the chief of the city: And also that afterward by a
counsel of the people, he was commanded to depart from thence, and as he
returned among the Greek soldiers he was slain by one of the^ by treason.
The death of Harpalus.
These news greatly reioysed Alexander, whereby he had occasion to leave of his
journey into Europe, but he sent commandment to all the cities of Greece, that
they should receive again all their banisshed men, except such only as had
committed any murder upon their own country men. Although the Greeks knew
the same to be the breach of their liberties and their laws, and the
beginni^g of their bondage, yet as men that durst not disobey his will, they
called home their banished men, and restored to the^ such of their goods as
did remain. Only the Athenians, which ever defended obstinatly ye liberties of
their come^ wealth, and which had not been accustomed to live under ye
obedience of any king, but under ye laws and customs of their country, would
not agree, yt such dredge of men should live among them, but did drive the^ out
of their bounds, ready to suffer any thing, rather the^ to receive such again
as sometime were the rascal of al their city, and then the refuse of all the
outlawes. The time was come that Alexander minded to dismiss his old
soldiers, and send them into their country, but he willed first.xiii.M.
foteme^ and.ii.M. horsemen to be chosen out to remain still in Asia, which he
judged might be kept with a small army, because he thought the guarrisons he
had planted in many places, and the cities which he had newly builded and
filled with inhabiters, should be able to stay such as would attempt any
rebellion. Alexander paid al his soldiers debtes.
But before he would make any division of such as should depart, and remain.
He caused a proclamacio^ to be made yt all soldiers should declare their
debtes, wherewith he perceived many of them sore burdened, and though their
debte did rise through their own disordre and excess, yet he was determined to
discharge every man. But the soldiers thinking it had been but a devise, to
find out the prodigal from the rest delaied the time and brought not in their
declaracions. The king perceived shame to be the let thereof and no
disobedience, or self will. And therefore caused tables to be set up throughout
his ca^pe, and.x.M talentes to be brought fu^th. Of all which treasure when
their debtes were paid according to the just declaracion, there remained no
more but.Cxxx. tale^tes. Whereby it appeared that they which were the
conquerours of so many rich nations, A mutine among the soldiers.
brought out of Asia more glory then spoil. But after it was once known that
some should be dispached, and some remain still, they thought the king would
have establyshed his kingdom perpetually in Asia. Wherefore like mad men, and
unmindful of all disciplyne of war, filled the camp full of sedicious
words, and came to the king more arrogantly, and with greater rygour then ever
they did before, al with one voice requiring to be discharged, showing forth
the hortnes of their heete, and their faces disformed with scarres, and herein
they could not be stayed eith^^ by chastisement of their officers or by any
r^uerence of their king, but when he would have spoken unto them, they would
not suffer him to be heard, but disturbed his tale with their tumultuous cry,
and violent thronge: protesting openly that they would never move one foot
forwards to any place, except it were toward their own country. After a
great space because they thought that Alexander would enclyne to their purpose,
they kept silence, and stood in expectacion what he would do. Alexanders words
unto his soldiers.
Then Alexander spoke unto them: what means this sudden trouble of mind,
this so malypart and unlawful liberty? I am afraied to speak unto you, you
have so manifestly broken your obedience toward me, I am now become a king at
the appointment of my people, you have neither left me the liberty, to know
you, to exhort you, nor to behold you. Being determined to send some into
their country before, and to bring the rest with me, shortly after, I see
them as well that shall go, crying and mutining, as those that I appoint to come
with me. What a matter is this? Their cry is al a like, notwithstanding that
their cause is diverse. I would feign know whether they complain that
depart, or they that tarry still? When he had spoken those words, they cried
all as it had been with one mouth, that they complained every man. Then he
said: truly it cannot be so, nor I cannot be persuaded, that you should all be
grieved for the cause ye declare seeing the case towcheth not the most part of
you, for I have appointed more to depart, then to remain still. There must
needs be some greater mischief then apeareth, that should turn you al from me.
When was it ever seen that an whole army has forsaken their king. The slaves
run not from their masters all at once, but there is always a shame in some
to leave the^ who^ the rest forsakes. But why do I forget that you be mad in
your minds? or why go I about to cure you that be incurable? I condemn from
hencefurth all the good hope that ever I conceived of you, and am determined to
work no more with you as with my soldiers, seeing ye will not be mine, but with
men ungrateful and unmindful of my goodness. The cause of this your madness, is
eue^ the habou^daunce of your prosperity, whereby you forget your old estate,
from the which ye be delivered through my benefit. You are men worthy to have
spent your lives in your former beggerie, seeing you ca^ better bear
adversity, then prosperous fortune behold you, which a while ago were
tributaries to the Illicians, and the Percians, do now disdain Asia, and the
spoils of so many nations. You which under Philip went haulf naked, now
co^tepne robes of purple. Your eyes cannot endure any longer to behold the
sight of gold and silver. You desire again your wodden disshes, your targettes
made of wikers, and your swords covered with rust. I received you in this
simple estate, with.v.C. talentes in debte, when all my furnyme^tes exceded not
in valor.lx. talentes. This was the fou^dacio^ of my acts, wherewith (without
envy be it spoken) I have subdued the greatest part of the world. Are you weary
of Asia, which have ministered unto you occasion of such glory, that by the
greatness of your acts ye be made equal unto ye gods? do you al make such haste
into Europe, to forsake me yt am your king? the more part of you should have
lacked money to bear your charges there, if I of my beneuolens had not paid
your debtes? Are you not ashamed that have robbed all Asia, to bear the
spoils of so many nations within your belies, and now to return home to your
wyfes and children, unto whom there be but few of you that are able to show
any rewards of your victory. For many of you shall be compelled to gage your
armor, if ye forsake this good hope, ye might receive at my hands. These be
the good men of war that I shall want, which of all their riches have nothing
left them but only their co^cubines. The way lies open for your departure,
get you hence quickly out of my sight. I with the Percians shall defend your
backs when ye be gone. I will hold none of you, deliver mine eyes ye
ungrateful countreme^, of the sight I see of you. Shall your pare^tes and
children receive you with joy, when they shall see you return without your
king? Shall they covet to mete such as be fugitives, and forsakers of there
prince? I truly shall triu^phe upon your departure, and whersoeuer you shall be,
I shall desire to be reue^ged, honoring always and preferring before you.
those which ye have left here with me. Now you shall know of what force an
army is, that lacks a king, and what moment does consiste in me alone. When
he had spoken those words he leped in a fury from the judgment seat, and
ran into the throng of the armed men, whereas he took with his own hands
such as had mutined most against him. Of whom there were none that durst
make resistaunce, delivered xiii. to his guarde for to be saufly kept. Who
would think that an assembly which a little before had spoken unto their
prince with such fiersenes and rigor, could have been so suddenly appalled for
fear? Which seeing there companions led to execution, durst not move, nor
make any attempt.

But the inordinate liberty they used before, and their sedicious violence was
then so stayed, that never one of them durst resist, the king ronning among
them, but were al astonished for fear, and stood like men amassed, with doubtful
imaginacio^s loking what he would determine of the offenders.

Whether it were the reverence they bare to his name, because the nations that
live under kings, are wo^t to honor the^ as gods; or were it the majesty of
his person, or else his own assured co^stancy executing his authority with
such violence, that put them in fear: they showed a notable ensample of
patience. For they remained not only without slurre or mocio^ at the executing
of their companions, who^ they knew to be put to death in the night time, but
also were more diligent in doing their duties then ever they were before,
pretermitting nothing pertaining to obedience, and natural affeccion toward
their prince. For the next day when they came to the court, and were not
suffered to enter, but all shot out saving the soldiers of Asia, they made a
sorrowful cry and lamentacion which spread over all the camp, protesting that
they would not live, if the king continued still in his wrath. But he that was
obstinat in all things that he had once conceived in his head, commanded all
the Macedons to keape still their ca^pe, and assembled the soldiers strangers
together, to whom by an Interpretour he made this Oracion. Alexanders Oracion
to the strange soldiers.
At such time as I came first out of Europe into Asia, my trust was to
bring under mine Empire many noble Nations, and great power of men, wherein I
was not deceived. For besides that the fame reported you to be men of value, I
have found in you one thing more, which is an incomperable obedience,
fidelity, and affection toward your prince. I thought voluptuousnes had
overflowed all virtue among you, and yt through your great filicitie, ye had
been drowned in pleasures. But I find it otherwise, and perceive that none
observe the discipline and order of the wars better then you do, nor execute
the same with more actiuitie nor stoutenes. And being manfull and valeaunt
men, ye embrace fidelity, no less then you do the rest. This thing I do
but now acknowledge, but I knew it long ago. Which was the cause that I
chose you out of the youth of your nations to be my soldiers, and did
incorporate you among mine own people, causinge you to use the same habit,
and the same armoure. But your obedience and patience toward the authority,
appears much better in you then in them. Therefore I have joined to my self
in marriage the daughter of Oxatres that is a Percian, not disdayninge to beget
children upon a captive. And afterward desiringe more aboundauntlye to
increase the issue of my body, I took to wife the daughter of Darius, and was
the aucthour that my near friends, likewise should beget children upon
captives: mindynge by this holy couena^te to exclude the difference between
the victorers, and the vainquished. Wherefore you must now think that you be
not soldiers unto me adopted but more natural. And that Asia and Europe is
one kingdom without any difference. I have given unto you armoure after the
manner of the Macedons. I have brought all straungnes and novelty into a
custom, and now ye be both my countrymen and my soldiers, all things take
upon them one form and fashion. I have not thought it unseemly for the
Persians to shadow the customs of the Macedons, nor for the Macedons to
counterfeit ye Percians, seeing they ought to be under one law and custom
that should live under one king.

When he had made this oration, he committed the custody of his person unto the
Persians, he made them of his guarde and his officers of justice, by whom when
the Macedons which had given occasion of this sedicion were led bound unto
execution, one of them that was more ancient and of greater estimacion the^
the rest, spoke after this manner.

How long will you thus give place unto your will, in executynge us after the
strangers manner? Your soldiers and countrymen be drawn to execusion by
their own prisoners before their cause be heard. If you have judged us
worthy of death, at leastwayes chaung the ministers of your wrath. This was a
good admonishmente, if he had been pacient to hear the truth. But his wrath
was growe^ into a woodnes, so that when he saw them which had the charge
of the prisoners stay a little at the matter, he caused the prisoners to be
tumbled into the river, and there drowned. Notwithstanding the crueltye of
this punishment, the soldiers were not s^urred to any sedition, but repaired
by rowtes unto their capitaines, and unto such as were near about the king,
requirynge that if there yet remained any infected with the same offense, that
he should command them to be put to death, proferynge their bodies to be
punished and executed at his own will.

After it was known that Liuetenaunteships were given unto the Percia^s, and
that they were distributed into diverse orders, and such names given unto them
as were unto the Macedons, and that they were rejected with reproach, they
could not then any longer contain them selves, nor suffer the doloure they
had conceived in their hertes, but with a great throng pressed to the court,
wearyng only their nethermost garments, and leaving their weapons without
the gate in token of repentance. There with weapynge and all tokens of
humility, they made request to be admitted to the kings presence, and that he
would vouchsafe to pardon their offense, pacifiynge his wrath with the death
of so many of them as he should think good, rather the^ to suffer them to
live in such reproach: which except he would release, Alexander was
reconsiled to his soldiers.
they protested they would never depart out of the place. When those things
were declared unto Alexander, he caused the court gates to be opened, and came
forth among them. Whereas beholdynge their lamentation and repentance, their
miserable behauour and affliction, he could not abstain to weape long time
with them, and in consideration of their modesty, forgave the^ their former
offenses. And after he had temperately told the^ their faults, and again
comforted them with gentle words, he discharged many from ye service of the
wars, and sent the^ home liberally rewarded: writing to Antipater his
liuetenant in Macedon, yt he should assign the^ the chief places in the
Threatres, at triumphs, and open plays, whereas they should sit with
garla^des on their heads, and he willed that their children after their
deaths should enjoy their fathers wages.

He appointed Craterus to be their ruler, to who^ in the place of Antipater he
had committed the government of Macedon, Tessalie, and Thrace, sendynge for
Antipater to repair unto him with a supply of young soldiers. Alexander had
received letters before both from him, and Olympias his mother, Olymyias
Alexa^ders mother.
whereby dissension appeared to be betwixt them. For his mother acused Antipater
that he went about to make him self king. And Antipater did write how
Olympias did many things otherwise then it did become her. Antipater did take
his calling away so greuouslye in his heart, that he conspired thereupon to
poison Alexander, who having accomplished the matters that before be
me^cioned, went to Echatan that stands in Media, to set order in the
necessary affairs of his Empire, and there ordained solemn triumphs and
feasting. It chaunsed Ephestion whom the king specially loved, The death of
Ephestio^
and used in place of a brother, about the same time to dye of a fever. Whose
death Alexander took more sorowfullye then can well be credited, committynge in
his doloure many things that were vnseaminge for the majesty of a Prince. He
commanded Ephestions physician to be hanged, as though he had died through his
negligence. He lay embracing of the dead body and could hardlye be taken
away by his friends, but continued his sorrow night and day. There be many
other things written in that behalf, which be scarsely credible. But it is
certain that he commanded sacrifice to be made unto him as unto a God, and
consumed in his burial and making of his tomb above.xii.M. talentes. As he
was returninge to Babylon, the Caldian Prophets met him on the way,
exhorting him that he should not enter into the city. For that it was
signified, that if he went thither at that time, he should be in great peril
of his life. Notwithstanding he regarded not their admonishmentes, but went
forwards in his journey according as he had appointed. For he understood
that Ambassadors were come thither from all Regions tariynge for his coming.
The terror of his name was so spredde through the world, that all nations
showed an obsequiousnes toward him, as though he had been appointed to be
their king. That caused him to make haste toward Babylon, to keep there as
it were a Parliamente of the whole world. When he was come thither, he
received the Ambassadors gentlye, and afterward dispatched them home again.
There was about the same time a banquet prepared at one Tessalus Medius house.
Thessalus Medius
whereunto the king being bidden, came thither with such as were appointed to
keep him company. But he had not so sone drunk of Hercules cup, Alexander
was poisoned
but that he gave a grunte as though he had been stricken to the heart. And
being carried out of the feast half dead, was so tormented with pain that he
required a sword to have killed him self. His friends did publyshe abroad
dronkennes to be the cause of his disease, but in very deed it was prepensed
treason the infamye whereof the power of his successors did oppress. The
poison prepared long before was delivered by Antipater unto Cassander his
son, which with his brethren Phillippe, and Iolla, were wont to serve the
king at meat. He was warned that he should not commit the same poison to
any person, except it were to Thessalus or to his brethren. Philippe therefore
and Iollas, which were wont to take the say of the king cups, having the
poison ready in cold water, mixed it with the wine, after they had tasted it.
When the fourth day was come the soldiers partly for that they suspected he
had been dead, and partlye because they could not endure to want long his
sight, came sorowfullye unto the court, desirynge to see the king, which by
his commandment were admitted unto his presence, by such as had the charge of
his person.

When they beheld him liynge in that case, they made great sorrow and
lamentacion, for he seemed not to them to be the same their king, whom they
were wont to see, but rather a dead corse. If their grief were great, the
sorrow of them that stood next to the bed appeared much more, whom when
Alexander beheld lamentyng after that sort, he said unto the^. When I shall
depart, you shall find a king worthy for such men as you be. It is a
thing incredible how that he during the time, the soldiers of his whole
army came to viset him, he never altered countenance nor gesture, but
continued in that kind of presence he gave unto the first, unto the last man.
When he had dismissed the multitude, as though he had been discharged of all the debt of life, he lay down again to rest his weak body, and his voice
beginning to fail him, commanded his friends to come near about him, and
then taking his ring from his finger, delivered it to Perdicas, and gave
therewith a commandment that his body should be conveyed to Hammon. They
demanded to whom he would leave his kingdom. He said: to the worthiest. By
which words it appeared that he forsawe the contention that was like to ensue
upon his death. Perdicas more over demanded of him when he would have divine
honors done unto him. At such time (quod he) as you shall find your selfs in
felicity. These were the last words Alexander spoke, and shortelye after he
died. Immediatlye after his death, the court was full of howlynge, The sorrow
that was made upon Alexa^ders death.
lamenting, and sorrow making, and by and by as it had been in a deserte,
or a place solitary, all things were whiste, and a sorrowful silence was
spredde over all, every man being converted into imagination, what should
become of the matter. The young men of the nobilitye that were accustomed
about Alexanders person, could not bear the greatness of their doloure, nor
keep them selfs within compass of the court, but ran about as men out
of their wits, whereby the city was filled with heaviness and complainte, and
no kind of lamentation pretermitted, that sorrow is wont to minister in such a
case Such therefore as were without the court, understanding this matter, as
well Macedones as other came runnynge thither, whereas the Conquerours from the
conquered, nor the Victorers from the vainquished could not be discerned, the
sorrow was so indifferent to the^ al. The Percians called upon their just and
merciful Lord, and the Macedons made invocation to him, that was so valeaunte
and gracious a king, and thus there was a certain contencion of sorrow among
the^. Men did not use their only words of grief and heaviness, but also of
grudge and indignation, that so young a prince being in the flower of his age,
and of his fortunate success, should by the envy of the Gods, be so taken
out of this world. They called to remembrance what a cherefulnes they had
always seen in his countenance, either when he led them to the battle, when he
besieged, or assaulted any city, or when he would give any commendacion to the
worthy in any assemble. Then the Macedons repented that ever they had
denied him divine honors, confessyng them selves both wicked and ungrateful
for depriuynge him of any name whereof he was worthy. And when they had
continued long in the veneration and desire of him that was dead, then they
began to pitye their own case, which coming out of Macedon were passed the
river of Euphrates, among the mids of their enemies, yt vnwillinglye
received their new government. They saw them selves left destitute, and the
Empire without any certain heir, for want of who^, every one would go about to
draw the power of the state unto his private behofe. And the^ they began to
conceive and forsee in their minds, the civil wars that did ensue, and that
they should be enforced to shede their blood again, not for the conquest of
Asia, but for the title of some such one yt would go about to make him self
king: whereby their old scarres should break out again into new wou^des, and
that such as by reason of their age had been discharged from the wars by
their noble and righteous king, should now be enforced to spend their lives in
ye quarrel of some such one as was but his soldier. Whiles they were in these
imaginacio^s, the night came on, and increased their terroure. The men of war
watched in harnayes and the Babilonians looked over ye walls; pepyng out from
the tops of their houses to spy some certaintye how the matter went. There
was none yt durst kyndle any light. And because ye use of ye eye did fail, they
laid their ears to hear the rumors and words that were spoken. And many
times they were afraied when no cause was, and when they met together in the
narow streets or dark lanes, they would be amassed, and suspect each other as
enemies The Percians after their accustumed manner clipped there hear and with
there wives and children lamented the death of Alexander in mourning garments,
with unfeigned affeccion, not as a conqueror and one that lately had been there
enemy; but as there rightwise and natural king. For they being accustumed to
live under a king, could think no man more worthy then he, to rule over them.
This sorrow was not only contained within the walls of the city, but
streightwayes spread over all the country there aboutes. And the fame of so
great a mischief flyenge through out Asia, brought some tydinges thereof unto
Darius mother. She at the first report tare a sonder the garment she ware and
put on morning appareill, she pulled her hear, and fell down groueling upon
the earth One of her neces sat by her morning the death of Ephestion whom she
had married, and in an universal heuines, bewailed the cause of her own
sorrow. But Sysigambis alone sustained all there miseries, The behauour of
Darius mother upon the death of Alexander.
and bewailed both her own case and her nefes, her fresh sorrow causing her
to call to mind things paste. A man would have judged by her behauour that
Darius had been newly slain, and that she had celebrated the funeralles of
both her sons together. She did not only lament the dead, but sorowed also
for the living. Who shall now (quoth she) take care of this young woman? or who
can be like unto Alexander now we be taken prisoners again, now we be newly
fallen from our dignity and estate.

After Darius death we found one to defend us. But now since Alexander is
gone, who will have respect of us? Amongs she called to mind, how Occhus the
cruel king had slain her father and four score of her brethren on one day,
and that of seven children borne of her body, there was but one of them left
alive. She saw that fortune had advanced Darius and caused him to floryshe
for a time, to the entente he might end his life by greater crueltye. Finallye
she was so overcome with sorrow, that she covered her head, turning her self
from her nese and nephew that sat at her fete, and abstayninge both from meat
and from beholdynge of the light, ended her life the fifth day after she was
determined to dye. This her death was a great argument of the clemencye
Alexander had showed toward her, and of the justice toward all the
captyues, seeing that after Darius death she could abide to live, but after
Alexanders departure, she was ashamed to continue any longer.

Considering Alexander rightwiselye, A discourse of Alexanders vices and his
virtues.
we must impute all his virtues to his own nature, and his vices either to his
youth, or to the greatness of his fortune. There was in him an incredible force
of courage, and an exceadynge sufferaunce of travail. He was endued with
manhood excellinge, not only among kings, but also among such as had
neither virtue nor qualitye. He was of that liberalitye that oftentimes he gave
greater things then the reciuers could have asked of God. The multitude of
kingdoms that he gave in gift, and restored to such from whom he had taken
them by force, was a token of his clemencye toward them that he subdued. He
showed a perpetual contempt of death, the fear whereof does amase other men.
And as there was in him a greater desire of glory and worldely praise then
reason would bear: so was it intolerable in so young a man enterprisynge so
great acts. The reverence and affection he bare toward his parents,
appeared in that he purposed to consecrate his mother Olimpias to immortality,
and that he so sore revenged Philips death. How gentle and familiar was he
toward his fre^des, and how beniuolence toward his soldiers. He had a
wisdom equal to the greatness of his heart, and such a policy and forecast,
as so young years were scarsely able to receive. A measure in immoderate
plesures. And the use of his lust less then nature desiered, using no pleasure
but that was lawefull: these were wonderful great gifts and virtues.

But in that he compared him self to the Gods, coueted divine honors, and
believed the Oracles that persuaded such things, that he was offended with the^
that would not worship him, and given more vehementlye to wrath then was
expedient. That he altered his habit and apparel into the fashion of
strangers, and cou^terfaited the custom of them he had subdued, and despised
before his victory: were vices to be attributed to the greatness of fortune. As
the heat of youth stirred him to anger, and to the desire of drinkyng: so age
might have mitigated again those faults. Notwithstanding it must needs be
confessed, that though he prevailed much by his virtue, yet ought he to impute
more unto his fortune, which only of al mortal men, he had in his own power.
How often did she deliver him from the point of death? How often did she
defend him with perpetual felicity, when he had rashelye brought him self
in peril? And when she poynted an end to his glory, she even then was
content to finyshe his life, stayinge his fatal destenye till he had subdued
the Orient, visited the Occean Sea, and fulfilled all that man's mortality was
able to perform.

To this so great a king and noble conqueroure, a successor was looked for:
But the matter was of overmuch importau^ce for any one man to take upon him.
Alexanders name and renown was so great among all Nations, and they were
counted most noble that might be partakers of his prosperous fortune, though
the portion was never so small. But to return again to Babylon from whence
this digression has been made: The assemble after the death of Alexander.
They which had the guarde and custody of Alexanders person* called into the
court such as had been his chief friends and captains of the men of
war, after whom there followed a great multitude of Souldioures, desierynge to
know who should be successoure unto Alexander. The thronge of the soldiers
was such, that many of the capitaynes were excluded, and could not enter
into the court. A Proclamation therefore was made whereby all men were forbidden
to enter, except such as were called by name. But because their commandment
seemed to want authority, it was little regarded, and the multitude at the
first began to make a grievous sorrow and lamentation. But straightwaies the
desire they had to understand the success of the matter, stopped their
lame^tatio^, and made silence. The^ Perditas brought forth in sight of all the
people ye kings chair of estate, wherein Alexanders Diadem, his vestures
regal, and his armor was laid. Emo^ges yt which orname^tes, Perdicas also
laid down ye kings signet, delivered to him the day before, at the sight
whereof they began to weep, and to renew again their sorrow.

Then said Perdicas: Perdicas words.
Lo here is the ring wherewith he was wo^t to seal such things as perteined
to the force of his Empire, and as he delivered the same to me, I so do restore
it again to you. And although no aduersitye can be devised by the Gods (were
they never so much offended) comperable to this. Yet considering ye greatness
of the acts which he has done, we must think that the Gods sent such a
man as he was to reign in the world, whose time being expired that was
appointed, they have called him again to the place from whence he came.
Forsomuche therefore as none other thing remain of him among us, but only
that which is always wont to be removed from immortality: let us perform
the due pertayninge both to his body, and to his name, remembringe in what
city we be, among what kind of people, and what a king, and what manner of
gouernoure we have lost. We must debate and devise how to maintain our
conquest among them of whom it is gotten. For the doing whereof, it is
needful for us to have an head. But whether the same shall be one, or many,
that consists in you. You are not ignorant that a multitude of men of war
without an head, is a body without any life. Six months be now passed sense
Roxane was conceived with child, we desire of God that she may bring forth
a male, which may enjoy this kingdom, when he comes to age. In the mean
season appoynte you, of whom ye will be governed. Nearchus words.
When Perdicas had spoken these words, Nearchus risse up and said: There is
no man can deny but that it were mete for Alexanders succession to continue in
the blood royal, but to look for a king that is not yet borne and to pass
over one that is in his being already, is nether expedient for such men as the
Macedons be, nor yet does serve the necessity of the time.

Barsynes
There is a son which Alexander begot by Barsines, what should let why ye
diadem may not be set on his head? Nearchus tale was acceptable to no man.
therefore the soldiers according to their custom classhed the spears against
the targets, and continued making of a noise. And when he would not forsake
his opinion, but obstinately maintened the same, the matter had almost bredde a
sedition, which thing perceived by Ptolomeus, he spoke after this manner.

Neither the son of Roxane nor Barsines, Ptolomeus words
is an issue mete to reign over the Macedons, whose names we should be ashamed
to rehearse within Europe, their mothers being captive. Have we subdued the
Percians to that end to become subject to such as be descended of them? That
was the thing which Darius and zerxes being Kings of Perce wrought for in
vain, with so mani mileons of men of war, and with so many nauies. This
therefore is my opinion, that Alexanders chair of estate be set in the mids
of the court, and that all such as were wont to be of counsel with him, shall
assemble together, so often as any matter require to be co^sulted upon. And
that the captains and rulers of the army shall be obedient to that order,
whereunto the greater number do assent. There were some agreed with Ptolomeus,
but few with Perdicas. Then Aristonus spoke in this wise. Aristonus words.
When Alexander was consulted withal, to whom he would leave his kingdom, he
willed the worthiest to be chose^. Who^ judged he worthiest but Perdicas, to
whom he delivered his ring?. This was not done at such time as Alexander was
alone, but when al his friends were present, he did cast his eyes among
them, and at length chose out one to whom he delivered it. Wherefore I think it
right that the kingdom be committed unto Perdicas.

There were many that agreed to his opinion, so that the assemble cried to
Perdicas that he should come forth among them, and take up the kings
signet. But he stayed between ambition and shamefastnes, thinking that the
more modestye he used in getting the thing which he coueted, they would be
so much the more earnest to profer it him. When he had stand a good while at
a stay, doubtyng what to do, at length he drew back, and stood behind them
which sat next unto him.

Weleagers words.
When Meleager that was one of the capitaynes, saw the stay that Perdicas
made, took courage thereupon, and said: Neither the Gods will permit, nor men
will suffer, that Alexanders estate, and the weight of so great an empire should
rest upon his shoulders. I will not rehearse how there be many men more noble
the^ he is, and of greater worthiness, against whose will no such thing may be
suffered to be done. There is no difference whether ye make Perdicas king, or
the son of Roxane, whensoever he shall be borne. Seeing Pedicas goes about to
make him self King, under pretense to be gouernoure to the other. That is the
cause why no king can please him, but such one as is not yet borne. And in
such an haste as all we make to have a king, which haste is both mete and
necessary for the preservation of our estate. He only does wait for the
expirynge of times, and months, imagining that she should bring forth a man child, which I think ye doubt not but he is ready to counterfayte
and exchange, if need be. If it were so in very deed that Alexander had
appointed him to be our king, I am of opinion that the same thing only of all
the things he has commanded, ought not to be performed and kept. Why do
not you run therefore to spoil the treasure? seeing that this kind of riches,
the people ought to enherite. When he had spoken those words, he brake
through the prease of the armed men, and they which gave him way, followed him
to the spoil, whereof he had made mention. The gredines of the treasure caused
a great band of armed men to flock about Meleager, and the assemble began to
fall to discord and sedicion, which had grown to greater inconvenience, if a
mean soldier who^ very few did know, had not stepped forth, The words of
a soldier in the assemble.
and spoken to the multitude. What need we (quod he) to fall to force or civil
war seeing we have a king alredye which you seek to find. The same is
Aridens Philips son, Aridens
brother to Alexander that latelye was our king, borne and brought up in the
same religion, and ceremonies that we do use, who being the only heir, I
maruayle by what deseruynge of his he is ouerslipped or what he has done, why
he should not enjoy his right, descended unto him by the universal law of
the world. If you seek one to be comparable to Alexander, you shall never
find him. If you will have such one as shall approach next unto him, this is
only he. When these words were heard among the multitude, they kept
silence at the first, as if they had been commanded so to do, but afterward
they cried with one voice, that Aridens should be called, and that they were
worthy death which made any assemble without him. Pythons words.
Then Python all besprinkeled with tears, began to speak. Now I perceive
(quod he) Alexanders case to be most miserable, seeing he is defrauded of ye
fruit with such as were his soldiers and subjects should bringforth at such a
time as this is For you having respect only to the name and memory of your
king, ye be utterly blind in the rest of things. His words tended directlye
to the reprofe of Aridens that was elected king, but the tale procured more
hatred to the speaker, then contempt to him against whom they were mente. For
the compassion they had of Aridens, caused them the more to favor his cause,
and therefore declarred by an obstinate cry, that they would not suffer any to
reign over them, but him only which was borne to that possibility, and still
called for Aridens to come forth among them. Whereupon Meleager for the
malice and envy he bare unto Perdicas, took an occasion boldlye to bring him
into the assemble, who^ the multitude saluted as king, and called him
Philippe. This was the voice of the people, Aridens was chosen king.
but the nobility was of an other mind, of who^ Pithon took upon him to put
Perdicas devise in execution, and appointed Perdicas and Leonatus (which were
descended of the blood royal) to be governors of the son which should be
borne of Roxane: addinge moreover that Craterus and Antipater should have the
rule within Europe. And upon this they swear men to be obedient to Alexanders
issue, Meleager then doubting notwithout cause, that some evil might come to
him, departed with such as were of his faction, but he returned immediately
again, and brought Philip with him into the court, criyng out to the multitude
for the assistyng of the common wealth, in aydynge of the new King, which a
little before they had elected: and wylled them to make an experimente of his
actiuitie, persuadinge that he was the metest to rule over the^, that was ye
issue of Philip, that had both a king to his father, and a king to his brother.

There is no profou^d sea, so stormy nor te^pestuous, The inconstancy of a
multitude.
that raises up so many sourges and waves, as a multitude does mocions and
alteracions, when they have gotten the bridle of a new liberty, not likely
long to continue. There wanted not some that gave their consent to Perdicas,
but more agreed to make Philip king. They could neither agree nor disagre, to
any thing long time together. One while repenting them of that they had
determined, and streightwaies forthought the^ of that repentance. Yet finally
they were enclyned to prefer the kings blood. Aridens was put in such fear
with the authority of the nobilite, that he departed out of the assemble,
after whose departure, the favor of the soldiers was rather silent, then
cessed toward him. So that at length he was called again, and put upon him
his brothers vesture regal, which lay in the chair. And Meleager put on his
armor following as a guarde to the person of the new king. The soldiers of
the Phalanx classhed their spears to their targettes, threatening to shed
their blood, which coueted the kingdom that pertained not to them. They
reioysed that the force of the Empire should still continue in the same
family, the right of whose enheritaunce coming of the blood royal they
showed themselves ready always to defend. For by reason they were accustomed
to honor the name of their king, and to have it in veneracion: they thought no
man worthy for it, but such one as came thereunto by descent of blood. Perdicas
therefore was afraied, and with.vi. hundred men that were of an approved
manhood, kept the lodging whereas the body of Alexander lay. Ptolomeus joined
him self unto him, and the band of the young men that were about the kings
person. But so many thousand of armed men as were upon the other side, did
easily break in upon them. Among whom the king was present, with a great
band for the guard about his person, whereof Meleager was chief. Perdicas
therefore in a great furye, called them to his part which would defend
Alexa^ders body, but they which brake in upon the^ shrew darts at him afar
of, whereby many were hurt. At the last the ancient men plucked of their head
pieces the better to be known, and desired them which were with perdicas to
abstain from civil war, and give place to the king and to the greater
part. Whereupon Perdicas was the first that laid down his weapon, and the
rest did in like manner. Meleager then persuaded the^ that they should not
depart, but remain still about the dead corse, but he judging that to be a
deceit and a mean to entrap him, fled to the further side of Euphrates lieng
over against the court. Then the horsemen which consisted chiefly of the
nobility, flocked about Perdicas, and Leonatus, which thought good to depart
out of the city, and take the fields, but because Perdicas was not without
hope, that the footmen would have taken his part, remained still within the
city, lest he might seem to be the cause that the horsemen should divide them
selves from the rest of the army. Meleager ceased not to beat in the kings
head, that he could not establyshe himself surely in his estate, but by the
death of Perdicas, whose ambicious mind desirous of innovation, was (he said)
to be prevented in time. Willing the king to remember what Perdicas had
deserved at his hands, and that no man could be faithful to him, whom he
feared. The king suffering the thing, rather then giving his consent to the
matter, Meleager took his silence for a commandment, and sent for Perdicas in
the kings name, and they which were sent had commission to kill him, if he
made any sticking to come with them. Perdicas hearing of their coming,
accompanied only with.xvi. young men that were of Alexanders guarde, met them
at the entrey of the house, and calling them Meleagers slaves, rebuked them
with such a constancy both of mind and countenance, that they returned back
again as men amassed. Perdicas wylled such as were in his company to leap on
horseback, and so with a few of his friends came unto Leonatus, mynding if
any violence were moved against him, to repulce it with a greater force. The
next day the Macedons grudged and thought it a matter unworthy, that Perdicas
after this manner should be brought in danger of death, and therefore determined
with force to revenge the rashenes of Meleagers doings.

But he understanding the mutyne that was among the soldiers gave place, and
they repaired unto the king demaundyng of him if he had commanded Perdicas to
be taken. He confessed he had so done, but that was by Meleagers mocion, which
was no cause (he said) for them to make any storre, seeing that Perdicas was
alive. The assemble hereupon brake up and Meleager became greatly afraid,
specially by the parting of the horsemen, so yt he wiste not what to do, for he
saw the mischief which he a little before had wrought against his enemy, like
to light upon him self, and whiles he devised this and that, three days were
consumed. The wonted form and fa^^on of the court did remain in the mean
season.

For the Ambassadors of diverse nations made repair unto the king, the
captains of the army did assemble about him, and the guard waited in armor as
they were accustomed. But the great sadness that was there without any apparent
cause, signified some extreme despair. There was such a suspicion among
them selves, that men durst not company togethers, nor speak one to another,
but stood imagening secretly with them selves, and by comparing the time
present with the time past, and the new king with the old, they began to
desire him that was gone. Then one enquired of another where he was become,
whose fortune and authority they had followed? Then they found themselves
abandoned, among so many wyld nations which were desirous upon any occasion
that might fall, to be revenged of the iniuryes they had received. Whiles they
were troubled in these imaginacions, word was brought that the horsemen which
were under Perdicas, kept the fields about Babylon, and stayed the vitels,
that was coming to the city. Whereupon first began a scarsitie, and
afterward a famyne. Therefore such as were within the city thought good
either to make a reconciliacion with Perdicas, or else to fight out the matter.
It chaunsed that they which dwelled abroad in the country fearyng the spoil
of the villages, repaired into the city. And they within the city for lack
of vitelles, departed into the country. So that every one thought them selves
surer any where, then in their own habitacions. Then the Macedons doubting
some great inconvenience that might come of this fear, ^mbassadours were sent
about a reconciliacion.
assembled together in the court, and showed forth their opinions. It was
agreed among them that Ambassadors should be sent to the horsemen, for the
successing of all strife, and division. Pasus a Tessalion, Amissas a
Megapolitan and Perelaus were sent from the king. Which declaring their
commission, received answer, that the horsemen would not fever their power,
till the auctours of the sedicio^ were delivered into their hands. When they
were returned and their answer known, the soldiers without any appointment
put on their armor, and made such a tumult, that the king was enforced to
come forth of the court, and said unto them: If we shall be at strife among
our selves, The kings words unto the soldiers.
our enemies that be quiet, shall enjoy the fruit of our contencion. Remember
you that the quarrel is with your own cou^treymen, with whom if ye rashly
break the hope of reconcileme^t, ye shall be the beginners of a civil war. Let
us prove if the matter may be mitigated by an other Embassade. I am of opinion,
that forasmuch as Alexa^ders body remain yet unburied, they will gladly come
together, to perform the due unto the dead. And for my part, I had rather
surrendre up again this dignity, then any blood should be shed among my
country men. For if no other hope of concord do remain I desire and pray you
to choice this, as the better of both. And with that word he wept, and pulled
the diadem from his head, holding the same forth with his hand, ready to have
delivered it to any man, that would have claymed to be more worthy then he. The
moderacion that he used both in his words, and his behauour, caused them all
to conceive a great good hope of his noble nature, which til that time was
obscured with the greatness of his brothers fame. They therefore required and
encouraged him to go forwards in the matter as he had devised. Whereupon he
sent again the same for Ambassadors that went before, which had commission
to require, that Meleager might be the third captain. Which matter was not
much sticked at. For Perdicas was desirous to remove Meleager from the king,
and thought that he alone should not be able to match with Leonatus and him.
Upon this Meleager marched out of the city with the fotemen: and Perdicas met
him in the fields, ryding before the bands of the horsemen. Where both
battailles saluting one an other, concord, peace and amity, was confirmed
betwixt the^, for ever as it was thought. But it was decreed by destiny that
civil wars should rise among the Macedons. For government is impatient of
parteners, and the kingdom was covered by many. Which as it first grew in
force, so afterward it was dispersed again. And when the body was burdened
more then it could bear, the other members began to faill. A degressio^ to
the praise of the emperor that was in the auctours time.
So thempire of the Macedons which under one head might well have stand, when
it was divided into parts, fell to ruin. For which cause the people of Rome
justly must confess them selves bound unto their prince, for the felicity
they have found. Which as a star in the night appeared unto them, that were
nere lost. And as the sun gave light to the world being in darkness, when
without such a head, the members that were at variaunce, must needs have
quayled. How many fire brandes did he quench? how many swords ready drawn
did he put up again? How great a tempest did he pacifye with the sudden
caulme of his presence? The Empire now therefore does wax grene and floryshe:
Let me desire without envy, that his house may continewe many ages, and his
posterity remain for evermore. But to return again to the order of history,
from whence I was brought through the contemplacion of our universal felicity.
Perdicas devised the death of Meleager.
Perdicas judged the only hope of his own sauegarde, to consiste in the death
of Meleager, thinking it necessary to prevent him which was a man both
variable, unfaithful, given to innouacion, and besides his mortal enemy. But
with deape dissimulacio^ he kept his purpose secret to the intent that with ye
less difficulty, he might oppress him vnbewares. He did subornate therefore
privily certain of the bands that were under his rule, to complain openly (as
though it were without his knowledge) that Meleager should be made equal with
him, which words of the soldiers, when they were reported unto Meleager, be
came in a great rage, and declared their sayenges to Perdicas. Who seemed to
wonder at the matter, blaming their doing, as though he had been sorry for the
thing, and finally they agreed that the auctours of such sedicious words
should be taken. When Meleager perceived Perdicas so confirmable, he embraced
him and gave him thanks for his fidelity and benevolence. Thereby a
consultacion had betwixt them both, they devised how to destroy them that
wrought this deuisio^ betwixt them. For the bringing of that to pass they
agreed, that tharmy should be purged according to their country custom. For
the doing whereof, they seemed to have a sufficient occasion, by reason of the
late discord that was among the^. A ceremony that was used in the purifiyng
of tharmy after any offense made.
The kings of Macedon in purifiyng of their soldiers, were wont to use a
kind of ceremony, in dividing the bowelles of a dog in two parts, and cast
the same in the vttermoste bounds of the field, whereon they purposed to bring
forth the army. Betwixt which space the men of war, accustomed to stand
armed, the horsemen, the mercenary soldiers and the phalanx every one aparte.
The same day that this ceremony was put in execution, the king stood with the
horsemen and the Elephantes against the footmen of whom Meleager had the
rule. When the battle of horsemen began to move, the footeme^ were stricken
suddenly with fear, and by reason of the late discord, conceived a suspicion
that the horsemen meant them no good. Wherefore they stood a while in a doubt,
whether they should retire into the city or no, by reason that the fields
served best for the horsemen. But left without cause they might condemn the
fidelity of their companions, they stood still with a determinate mind to
fight, if any would proffer them violence. When the battailles were almost
met together, and only a small distaunce left betwixt them, whereby the one
part was divided from the other, the king by the provocation of Perdicas with
one band of horsemen did ride along the footmen, requiring the delivery of
those to be executed, which were the aucthors of the discord (whom in very
deed he ought to have defended) which if they refused to deliver, he
threatened to bring against them, both the horsemen and the Elephantes. The
footmen were amassed with the sodeines of the mischief which they looked not
for, and there was no more counsel nor courage in Meleager then in the rest,
but they all judged it most expedient for them, rather to abide the adventure
of that matter, then further to hasard fortune. When Perdicas saw them
astonished and in fear, he severed out to the nombre of three hundred of such as
followed Meleager, when he brake out of the assemble, that was first made, after
Alexanders death, which in the sight of all the army were cast to the
Elephantes and there trampled to death with their feet. Of which matter
Philippe was neither the author, nor the forbidder, but thought to claim that
for his own doing, which should appear best in the end. This was a
signification and a beginning, unto the Macedons of civil war that ensued.
Meleager understanding ouerl^te the sleyght of that devise, because there was
no violence offered to his person, stood at the first quietly within the
square: but shortly after, when he saw his enemies abusing the name of him,
whom he had made king to his destruction, he dispaired of his own saueguarde,
and fled into a temple. But the religion of the place could not defend him, but
that he was there slain. The deuisio^ of The^pire.
Perdicas hereupon brought again the army into the city, and called counsel
of all the principal personages, wherein it was agreed so to divide thempire,
that the king should remain as chief of the whole. Ptolomeus to be lieutenaunt
in Egypt and Affricke, and to have the rule of the nations there, that were
under the Macedons dominion. Siria and Phenices were appointed to Laomedon.
Cylicia to Philotas. Licia with Pamphilia, and the greater Phrigia, were
assigned to Antigonus. Cassander was sent into Caria, and Menander into Lydia.
The lesser Phrigia that joined unto Hellespont, was Leonatus province. Emmenes
had Cappadotia and Paphlagonia, who was commanded to defend that country so
far as Trapezunt, and make war to Arbates which only remained enemy to the
Empire. Arbates.
Media was appointed to Python, and Thrace to Lysmachus with other nations there
about borderyng upon the sea of Ponte. It was ordained also that such as
should be presidentes among the Indians, Bactrians, Sogdians, and other
nations lieng upon the Occean, and read seas, should in matters of justice use
regal jurisdiction. It was decceed that Perdicas should remain with the king,
and have the governance of the men of war that followed him. Some believe that
these provinces were distributed, by Alexa^ders testament, but we have found
that same to be false, though some authors do witness the same. The Empire being
divided into parts, every one might well have defended his portion, if any
bounds could contain men's immoderate desires. Or if they which being but
ministers unto a king, when under the color of the administracion of an others
dominion had encroched into great kingdoms, could have avoided the occasions
of war, seeing they were all of one nation, and had their countries by
limittes. But it was hard for them to be contented with that they had in
possession, when occasion was proffered them of more. For the first things
always appear of no valor, when men be in hope of greater things to come.
So that every one of them thought it an easier matter to increase his kingdom,
then it was to come by it at the first. Alexanders body had layen seven days
unburied, for whiles every man had care upon the establyshing of the state,
their minds were drawn from doing of that solemn office.

There is no country that have more fervent heat then Mesopotamia. For the
son there burns so hot that it kills the beasts that be without covert,
and burn up all things, as it were with the fire. And to the increase thereof
there be few springes of water, and the inhabiters use such policy in hiding
of those they have, that strangers can have no use of the^. This
notwithstanding, when Alexanders friends had gotten leisure to take care of
the dead corse, and came to visit the same, they found it without infeccion,
corruption, or change of color, the same cherefulnes which consists of
the spirit, not being yet departed out of his countenance. Then the
Egipcians and the Caldeis were commanded to dress his body after their
manner, who at the first (as though he had been alive) durst not put their
hands to him. But afterward making their prayers that it might be lawful
for mortal men to touch him, they purged his body, and filled it with sweet
odours. And afterward laid him upon a hearse of gold, and set a diadem
upon his head.

Many thought that he dyed of poison, and that Iolla Antipaters son being one
of his ministers, had given him the same. Alexander oftentimes would say,
that Antipater coueted the estate of a king, affecting more greatness, then
parteined to a Liuetenau^t, and through glory of the victory he had gotten of
the Lacedaemonians, was become so proud, that he claymed al things committed
unto him as his own. It is thought also that Craterus was sent to kill him
with those old soldiers that were dismissed. It is certain that there is a
poison in Macedon found in a water called Stiges, Stiges.
of such force, that it consumes iron, and will not be contained in any
thing, saving in the houe of an horse or mule, which poison was brought by
Cassander, and delivered to his brother Iolle, which presented it in the
drink that the king last drunk. Howsoever these things be reported, the
power of them of who^ the rumor went, shortly after oppressed ye infamy.

For Antipater betame King both of Macedon and of Grease, and his children
after him, that did cut to death all such as were any thing near of kin
unto Alexander. Ptolomeus which had the rule of Egipte conveyed Alexanders
body to Memphis, which within few years after was removed to Alexandria,
where as all honor is given to the memory of him, and to his name.

Finis.
IMPRYNTED at London by Richard Tottell, dwelling in Fletestrete at the sign
of the hand and star, within Temple bar. Anno domini. 1553.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum. per septennium.


