A SERMON OF S. CYPRIAN made on the Lords prayer, that is to wit, the Pater
noster.

AN. M. D. XXXIX.

TO THE RIGHT VVORshypfull master Antony Deny esquier, Thomas Paynel sends
gretynge.
THIS Sermon by me translated out of latin into englysh I dedicate unto you,
not so much for instruction as for a token of the good mind I bear you. For
wha^ I consider your sincere affection to god and his holy word, your great
fidelytie and dilygence toward our most gracyous sovereign lord the king,
your pure honest and lowly behavior to all men in word and deed, your
faithful, wise, and friendly councels, your continual exhortations and
perswasyons to virtue, your lyberall and most gentylle nature, I can not chose
but vehemently love you, and therefore I often think what I have, or how I a
poor man might do you any pleasure. Wherefore such thing as I may give,
with my entier hearts love I send you. And as this my book goes on prayer,
so pray I, God send you abundaunce of all welthe and good Fortune this new
year.

The Sermon of saint Cyprian made on the Pater noster.
THE Precepts of the Gospel most loving brethren, are none other thing,
than divine techinges, the foundacions of edifyenge hope, the sure grounds of
fortifyenge faith, the nourysshmentes to cheryshe the heart, the stere to
direct our journey, and the firm defenses to opteyne salvation, which
precepts while they instruct in earth the apt minds of the beleuers, they
bring them to the kingdom of heaven. Goddis will was, that many things should be
both spoken and hard by the prophets his servants: but how far greatter
are those things, that the son speaks, which the word of god, that was in
the prophets, witnesses with his own voice? not now commanding, that the
way be made ready for him coming: but coming him self, and opening and
showing to us the way, that we, that first were blind and wandryng in the
darkness of death, being illumyned with the grace of his light, Psalm. 5.
and he being our leder and gide, may hold on our journey to life: which
among other his helthful monitio^s and divine precepts, with which he
allureth his people to salvation, he also gave a form of prayer, he monyshed
and instructed what we should pray. He that made us to live, taught us also to
pray, this did he of his benignity, whereby he vouchesaued to give and
confer other things, that while we in prayer and oryson, that the son taught
us, speak to the father, we may be the sooner hard. He than told us before, the
hour comes, when the true worshyppers, should worship the father in spirit
and truth, and has fulfilled that he before promised, that we, which of his
sancctification have received spyrite and truth, of his tradition also shall
truly and spiritually pray. For what prayer can be more spiritual than that,
that is given us of Christ, from whom also the holy ghost is sent to us?
What prayer may do more with the father, than that, that the son, which is
the verity spoke with his own mouth? in so much that to pray otherwise
than he has taught, is not only ignorance, but also offense, Matthew. 15.
saying he has set forth, and said, Ye cast aside the commandment of god,
to the end you would stablysshe your own tradition. Therefore dear brethern,
let us pray, as god our master has taught us. It is a friendly and familyar
oryson, to pray god of his own, the prayer of Christ to ascend to his ears,
the father will acknowledge the words of his son. When we make our prayer,
let him that dwells within the breaste be in the voice. And seeing that we
have him as an advocate to the father for our sins, when we sinners pray for
our offenses, let us bring forth the wordis of our advocate. For sith he says:
Joan. 1
What so ever ye will desire of the father in my name, he shall give it you:
than how much more effectually shall we obteyn that we axe in Christis name,
if we crave it with his own prayer? But such as woll pray, let their wordis
and prayer be lowly quiet and honest. Let us think, that we stand in the
sight of god. The divine eyes must be pleased both with the behauyour of the
body, and manner of speech. For as it is an imprudent point, to make a clamorous
noise, so co^trarywise it is convenient, shamefastely to pray with sober and
temperate prayers. Furthermore the lord commands us secretly to pray in
privy, secret, or out places, ye in our bed chaumbers, which thing does
greatly agree with our faith, to the end that we should know God to be present
every where, to here and see us all, and with the fullness of his majesty,
also to perse and enter into secret and hid places, as it is written, I am god
drawyng nere, Hier. 23.
and not god afar of. If a man were hid in privy and secret places, ergo
shall not I see him? Do not I fyl both heaven and earth? Pro. 15.
And ageyn, The eyes of god do behold in every place both the good and bad.
When we com together with our brethern, and do celebrate divine sacrifyces with
goddis mynister, the priest, we must be myndefull of shamefastness and
dyscipline, not to blaste abroad our prayers, with unordered voices, nor our
petition, soberly to be commended to god, we should cast out with tumustuouse
jangling, for god hereth the heart, and not the voice. Nor we should cry out
to him, which sees our thoughts, the lord prouokyng and saying, Luc. 5.
what think you wickedness in your hartis? and in an other place. Hier. 17.
And let all congregations know, that I am the sercher of the rainis and
heart. Which thing Anna in the first book of kings, bearing the figure of the
church, obseruid and kept, which not with a clamorous peticion, but still and
softly within the pryuye parts of her breast, prayed unto the lord. She spoke
with a hyd prayer, but with an open faith: she spoke not with voice, but with
heart, for so she knew god herd, and she obtained effectuallye that she
desired, because she axed faithfully. Holy scripture declares what she said:
She spoke in her heart, 1. Reg. 1.
and her lips moved, and her voice was not hard, and god herd her. Also we
read in the psalms: Psalm. 4.
Speak in your hearts, and in your beds, and remember your selfis. By Ieremye
also, the same things the holy ghooste does persuade and teach, saying:
Hier. 29.
It behooves the to pray to god inwardelye. But yet well beloved brethern, he
that does pray, should not forget, after what manner in the temple the publycane
prayed with the pharisee, his eyes not unseemly lifted up to heaven, nor his
hands insolently stratched out, knocking his breast, and acknowlegynge his
secret and hydden sins, lamentably desired succor of goddis meecy. But
saying the Pharisee stood in his own conceit, this man deserved more to be
sanctified, which so prayed, that he had no hope of salvation in his innocency,
sithe no man is innocente, but confessing his sins, he humbly prayde, and he
that forgyueth the humble, hard his prayer: The which things the lord in his
gospel puts and says: Luc. 18.
Two men went up into the temple to pray, the one a pharisee, and the other a
Publycane: The pharisee stood, and prayed by him self after this manner: God I
tha^k the, because I am not as other me^ unjust, robbers, adulterers, as this
publycane. I fast twyse in the weke, I give the tithes of al what so ever I
possess. But the publycane stood afar of, and would not lift up his eyes
to heaven, but knockid his breast, saying God be merciful unto me a sinner. I
tell you this manne went down moore iustyfyed into his house, the^ he the
pharisee. ^^th. 23.
For who so ever exalts him self, shall be humbled, and who so ever wolle
humble him self, shall be exalted. Which things dear brethren, we lerning of
the divine lesson, after that we know how we ought to proceed to prayer, we
must know alsoo, the lord instructynge us, what we should pray, thus says
he, pray ye.

Our father, which art in heaven, hallowed be thy name.
Thy kyngedome come.
Thy will be done in earth, as it is in heaven.
Give us this day our daily bread.
And forgive us our trespaces, as we forgive them that trespass against us.
And let us not be led into temptation.
But deliver us from evil. Amen.
Above all things, the teacher of peace, and master of unity, will not
singular and private prayer to be made, that wha^ any prays yt he should not
only pray for him self, We say not, My father, which art in heaven, nor Give
me my daily bread. Nor there is no man that desires to have his sins
forgyuen him aloone, or prays for him self alone, that he should not be led
into temptation, and delivered from evil. Our prayer is publyke and common, and
when we pray, we pray not for one, but for all the people, for we all be but
one. The lord of peace and master of concord, which taught unity, would
oone to pray so for all, as he him self bare al in one. This rule of prayer,
the three childern enclosed in the forneis of fire observed, agreing and
according in prayer and consent of spirit. Which thing the truth of
divine scripture declares, and when it teaches how they prayed, it gives
example, which in our prayers, we ought to follow, that we may be such as
they were. Daniel. 5.
Than (says, the scripture) they three as out of one mouth, sang an himne, and
blessed the lord. They spoke as out of oone mouth, and yet Christ had not
tought them to pray, and therefore to them prayinge, their words were
effectual and took place, for their peasyble, simple, and spiritual prayer,
deserved to be accepted of god. And so we find, that the apostels with the
disciples prayid after thascention of the lord. Act. 1.
They were all, says the scripture, of one mind, and continuynge in prayer,
with the women, and Mary the mother of Jesus, and with his brethren. They being
of one mind perseuered in prayer, declaryng both the instance and concord of
their prayer. For god which makes the inhabitants of one mind in the house,
Psalm. 67.
admits none into the divine and eternal house, but such as are of one
mind in prayer. But what be the mysteries of the lordis prayer, most dear
brethern, how many, how great, how brefely gathered together, but in virtue
spiritual, how copious and abundant? that there is nothing omittid, that is
not in our prayers and orysons, comprysed in this compendiouse heavenly
doctrine. Thus says he, pray ye, Matthew. 6.
Our father which art in heaven, The man that is renewed and borne ageyn, and
restored to god by his grace, says in the first place, Father, because he
begins now to be his son. He came (says the scripture) into his own,
Joan. 1.
and his own received him not, But as many as received him, to them gave he
power to be the chylderne of god, which believe in his name. Therefore he that
believes in his name, and is made the child of god, must forth withal begin
both to give thanks, and acknowledge him self to be the child of god, when he
names his father to be in heaven, god. He woll also among the first words of
his birth declare him self, to have forsaken his erthely and carnal father,
and to begin to have him his only father, that is in heaven, as it is written:
They that say to the father and mother, I know the not, and they acknowleged
not their children, they have kept thy precepts, and have observed thy
testament. Matt. 23.
Also the lord in his gospel commands, that we should call no man father in
earth, because we have one father which is in heaven. And to the disciple, that
shewid, that his father was dead, he said: Matthew. 8.
Suffer the dead to burye the dead. For he said, that his father was deed:
sythen they that believe, have a living father. Nor we ought not dear
brethren, to mark and consider this only, that we should call him father that
is in heaven, but we join therewith, and say, Our father, that is of them that
believe of the^ that by him bd sauctifyed, and with the natiuite of spiritual
grace restored, began to be the children of god. Which voice also doothe
wrynge and sharply touch the Jews, which not only unfaithfully despised
Christ, forshewed to them by the prophets, and to them first sent, but also
cruelly slew him. The which Jews can not now call god father, sythen the
lord confounds and reproves them, saying: Joan. 8.
You are of the father the dyuelle: and after the lusts of your father will ye
do, for he was a murderer from the beginning, and abode not in the truth:
because the truth is not in him. And by Esaie Esaias. 1.
the prophet god disdaynyng cries out: I have begotten children, and exalted
them, but they have despised me. The ox knowith is lord, and the ass his
masters stable, but Israel knows not, and my people has not understand, out
upon ye sinful nation, people full of sins, wicked seed, ungracious
childerne. you have forsaken the lord, and have provoked him the holy one of
Israel to indignation.

To whose rebuke and shaame, when we Christians pray, we say, Our father.
because he has begone to be ours, and has left to be the Jews father, which
forsook him. Nor a synfulle people can not be his child, but they, whose
sins are forgyuen, be called chylderne, and to them everlasting joy is
promised, our lord him self saying: Joan. 8.
Who so ever does sin, is the servant, of sin, as for the servant, abides
not in the house forever, but the son abides for ever. But how great is
the gentylnesse of the lord? how plentiful is his favor and goodness toward
us? That so would have us celebrate our prayer in goddis sight, that we should
call god, fader and that as Christ is the son of god, so we also should be
cleped the children of god. Which name none of us durst ones touch in prayer,
but if he had permitted us so to pray. Therefore dear brethren, we ought to
remember and know, that when we call god, father, we ought to behave us as
children of god, that as we take a pleasure to have god our father, so he may
be pleased to have us his children: we should behave us as the temples of god,
that it might appear, that god dwells in us. Ne our deeds should not vary
from the spirit, that we that have begun to be heavenly and spiritual, should
think nor do but heavenly and spiritualle things. For god him self says:
1. Reg. 2.
I will glorify them, that glorify me, and he that despises me, shall be
despised. 1. Cor. 6.
Also the blessed apostel in his epistell says: ye are not your own, for ye
be bought with a great price: glorify and bear god in your body.

After this we say, Hallowed be thy name, not that we desire of god that his
name should be hallowed by our prayers, but we ask of him, that his name may
be hallowed in us. For of whom is god sanctified, which him self sanctifies
other? but because he says Be ye holy, Leuit. 20.
for I am holy, therefore we desire and pray, that we, that are sanctified in
baptysme, may perseruer and abide in that we have begun: and this daily we
pray for.

For truly we had need to be daily sanctified, that we, which sin daily,
might pourge our sins with continual fanctifycation.

But what this sanctification is, that god vouchsafes to give us, the
apostelle declares, 2 Cor. 6.
sayienge: Another fornicatours, nor Idol worshippers, nor brekers of wedlock,
nor weakelynges, nor abusers of them selfs with ma^kynd, nor thieves, nor the
covetous, nor drunkardes, nor sclanderers, nor cursed speakers, nor
extorcioners shall inheryte the kyngedome of god. And such have you ben, but
ye be washed, ye ar made rightuous, ye are sanctified in the name of our lord
Jesus Christ, and in the spirit of our god. He says, we be sanctified in the
name of our lord Jesus Christ, and in the spirit of our god. That this
sanctification should remain in us, we pray: and because god our judge
menasseth the healed and the relyued of him, to sin no more now lest he
should be worse handled, we make this continual prayer, this we crave both
day and night, that the sanctification and viuificatio^, that is gotten by the
grace of god, might be kept by his protection.

There follows in this prayer, Thy kingdom come. We desire also, that his
kyngedome be represented unto us, likewise as we ask that his name may be
hallowed in us. For when does not god reign? or when begins his reign,
which always was, and ever shall be? We desire our kingdom to come, of god to us
promised, and with the bloudde and passion of Christ gotten, that we, which
before served in the world, may afterward reign with Christ rulyng, like as he
promyseth and says: Mat. 25.
Come ye blessed of my father, take and receive the kyngedome, which is
prepared for you from the beginning of the world. Truly it may be, dear
brethren, that Christ him self is the kingdom of god, which daily we desire
to come: whose coming we couete soon to se. For seeing that he is our
resurrection, and that we rise again in him: so likewise he may be understand
the kingdom of god. For in him we shall reign. Heavenly and erthly kingdom.
And we do well, to desire the kingdom of god, that is, the kingdom of heaven.
For there is also an erthely kingdom. But he that now forsakes the world, is
greatter than the honors and kyngedome thereof: and therefore he that dedicateth
him self to god and Christ, desires not the erthly, but the heavenly
kingdom. We had need to pray continually, lest we fall from the heavenly
kyngedome, as the Jews did, to whom it was first promised, as our lord him
self manyfestely proves: Matthew. 8.
Many (says he) shall come from the east and west, and shall rest with
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, in the kyngedome of heaven. But the chylderne of the
kyngedome shall be cast out into utter darkness, there shall be wailynge and
gnashynge of tethe. He shows this, because the Jews were before chylderne of
the kingdom, as long as they continued to be the children of god. But after
the name of the father ceased among them, their kyngedome ceased withal.
And therefore we christians, which in our prayer have begone to call god,
father: do also pray, that the kyngedom of god may come to us.

We add thereto and say, Thy will be done in earth, as it is in heaven, not
that god should do that he wol, but that we may do that god wol. For who
withstandeth god, but that he may do what he wol? But because the dyuelle
withstandeth us, that our minds in all things, and in every act obeys not
god, we pray and desire that the will of god may be done in us, which to
the end it may be done in us, we have need of Gods will, that is, of goddis
help and protection: for no man is strong of him self: but is sure and safe
by the indulgence and mercy of god. For god declaryng the infirmity of man,
which he bare himself, says: Matt. 26
Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from me. And gyuynge an
exaumple to his disciples, that they should not do their own, but goddis
will, he added thereto saying: Nevertheless, not as I will, but as thou
will. And in an another place he says: Joan. 6.
I descended not from heaven to do mine own will, but his that sent me. If that
the son was obedient to do the fathers will: How much more ought the
servant to be obedient to do goddis will; 1. Joan. 2
Saint Iohu^ alsoo likewise in his epistle exhortethe and instructs us to do
the will of god, saying: Se that ye love not the world, neither the things
that are in the world. If any man love the world, the love of the father is not
in him. For all that is in the world, is the lust of the flesh, the lust of
the eyes, and the pride of life, which is not of the father, but of the
concupiscence of the world, and the world passes away, and the lust thereof.
But he that does the will of god, abides for ever, like as god abides for
ever. We that woll abide for ever, must fulfill the will of god, which is
eternalle. The will of god is, which Christ both taught and fulfilled:
humility in conversation, stablenesse in feyth, myldnes in words,
ryghtousenesse in deeds, mercy in works, discipline in manners, not to know to
do injury, and to suffer wrong done, to live quietly among brethern, to love
god with all the heart, to love him because he is the father to fear him
because he is god, to esteem nothing above Christ, for he esteemed nothing
above us, to cleave to his charity inseparably, and to stick to his cross
strongly and faythefullye, when for his name and honor there is any strife:
to show constancy in words, that we confess him with: and sure trust in
question, wherewith we assail other: patience in death, whereto we contend,
this is to will to be heir with Christ, this is to do goddis commandment,
this is to fulfill the will of the father. We desire the will of god to be
done in earth as it is in heaven: both which apperteyne to the consummation of
our will and salvation. For sythen we possess a body of the earth, and a ghost
of heaven, we be earth and heaven, and in both, that is, body and gooste, we
pray, that the will of god be done. Trewely there is a wrastlyng between the
flesh and the spirit, and stryuinge oone ageynste the other, they daily
contend together, that we can not do the things that we would: while the
spirit seeks for heavenly and divine things, the flesh coueiteth erthly and
worldly things. And therefore we ernestly desire, that between these two, by
the aid and help of god, agreement may be made, that when the will of god is
fulfilled both of the spirit and the flesh, the soul which by him is borne
again, may be saved. Which thing the apostel Paul plain and openly
declares with his own voice: The flesh (says he) lusts against the
spirit, and the spirit against the flesh. These two are so contrary one to
the other, that you can not do what things that ye would. Galat. 5.
The deeds of the flesh be manyfeste, which are, adulteries, fornications,
uncleanness, fylthy wantonness, idolatry, witchcraft, murder, hatred,
contention, spite, wrath, provocation, debate, heresye, envy, dronkennes,
glottony, and such like, which I tell you before, as I have told you, that
they which do such things, shall not possess the kyngedome of god. But the
fruit of the spirit is Charity, joy, peace, long sufferynge, feythe,
meekness, continence, chastity. And therefore daily yea continually we pray,
that the will of god be done concerning us, both in heaven and in earth, For
this is the will of god, that erthely things should give place to heavenly, and
that spiritual and divine things, should prevail. It may also be thus
understand dear brethren: that because god commands, ye and monyssheth us
to love our ennemies, and also to pray for them that persecute us, we should
pray for them that be as yet erthy, and have not yet begun to be heavenly, that
touching them the will of god may be done, which Christ fully did, in
co^seruynge and renewynge man. For sythen he called his disciples not erthy,
Matthew. 5.
but the salt of the earth, 1. Cor. 15.
and the apostell calls the first man of slyme of the earth, erthy, the
second of heaven, heavenly: with good cause we, which ought to be like god
the father, that makes his son to rise upon the good and bad, Matthew. 5.
and sends rain upon the just and unjust, should so pray and desire (god
admonishynge) that we might make prayer for the health of all men. That like
as in heaven, that is, in us by our faith, the will of god is done, that as we
should be of heaven, so eue^ in earth, that is in them beleuynge, the will of god
may be done, that they, which as yet of their first birth, be erthye, borne
of water and the holy ghost may begin to be heavenly.

Procedyng forth in our prayer we ask and say: Give us this day our daily
bread, which saying may be understand spiritually and simply: for both the
understandings with divine utility, profytte unto salvation. For the bread
of life is Christ, and this is not every man's breadde, but it is ours. And
like as we say, our Father by cause it must be understand, he is father of
them that believe: so we call him our bread. Luc. 14.
For Christ, whose body we touch, is our bread. This bread we ask daily to
be given us, lest we, that be in Christ, and receive daily his precious body,
by some greuouser offense chaunsynge, while we be accursed out of the church,
and not communicating, Matthew. 6.
should be prohybited from that heavenly breadde, and should be separated from
the body of Christ, him self before showing and monysshynge: Johan. 6.
I am the bread of life that descended from heaven. he that woll eat of this
bread, shall live for ever. The bread that I woll give for the life of the
world, is my flesh. Therefore when he says, Eodem.
he that woll eat of this bread, shall live for ever, it is than manifest,
they live, which touch his body, and receive it by the right of communion:
so contrarywyse it is to be feared and prayed for, lest while one accursed
out of the church, is separated from the body of Christ he remain far from
salvation, him self thretnynge and saying, Except ye eat the flesh of the
son of man, Eodem.
and drink his blood, ye shall have no life in you. And therefore we ask daily
our bread, that is, Christ to be given to us, that we, that abide and live in
Christ, should not depart from his sanctification and body.

It may also be thus understand, that we, which have forsaken the would, and
by grace of spiritual feythe, have cast away the riches and pomp thereof,
woll desire only our meat and food, saying Christ woll vouchsafe to
instruct us and say: Luc. 14.
He that woll not forsake all that he has, can not be my disiple. He that
has begu^ne to be Christis disciple, forsakynge all that he has, after the
words of his master, ought to ask his daily food: ne we may not extend the
desires of our petition to any long time. Matthew. 6.
For Christ ageyn prescribes and says: Be not ye careful for the morrow: for
the morrow shall care for it self. Every day has enough of his own travail.
Therefore Chrystis dysciple skylfully asks his daily food: which is
prohibited to be careful for the morrow. For it is both contrary and
repugnant in it self, that we should desire to live long in this world,
which prayer, that the kingedome of god may quickly come. And so the blessed
apostel monisheth, forinynge and strengththyng the stedfastnes of our hope and
faith: 1. Timo. 6
Nothing (says he) we brought into the world, and truly we can carye
nothing out. Therefore having food and raiment, let us be content therwih. For
they that woll be rich, fall into the temptation and snares of the dyuell,
and into many noysom lusts, which drown a man into destruction and damnation.
For covetousness is the root of all yuels: which, some much desiring, have
rounne to wrecke from the faith, and tangled them selfs with many sorrows.
He teaches not only, that riches should be despised, but also that they be
peryllous, and that in them is the rote of blandysshinge yuelles, the blyndnes
of man's mind, begyling with privy deceyt. Wherefore Christ reprouynge the
foolysshe rich man, that had set his mind on his worldly substance, and
rejoiced in him self for the great abundance of his fruits, says in the
gospel: Luce. 12.
Thou fool, this night shall they require thy soul from the, than whose
shall those things be that thou haste prepared? The fool that should dye the
same night, reioysed in his fruits, and he, whose life now failed, was
careful for abundance of food. But Christ teaches a contrary lesson,
Matthew. 19
that he that wol be perfect, must selle a way all that he has, and deal it
among poor men, and make him a tresure in heaven. This man (says Christ)
follows him, and the glory of his passion, which is expedite and light
apparayled, not wrapped and loded with householde stuff, but leuse and at
liberty, his goods and substance sent before to god, he also follows after.
To the which that each of us may p^pare him self, he lerneth us to pray, and
to know after what manner our prayer ought to be. For no ryghtous man can lack
his daily food, Prou. 10.
sithe it is written: The lord kylleth not the soul of a just man with
hunger. Psalm. 38.
And again: I have been younger, and now am old: and have not seen the just
man forsaken, nor his sede seek their breadde. Matthew. 6.
Also the lord promyseth and says: Be not ye careful, saying: what shall we
eat, or what shall we drink, or wherewith shall we be clothed? For those
things the hethen people seek. But your heavenly father knowethe, that ye have
need of those things. Seek ye first the kyngedome of god, and the
righteousness thereof, and all these things shall be ministered unto you. To them
that seek the kingdom and righteousness of god, al those things he promyseth
to be ministered. For sythen all things be gods, he that has god, lacks
nothing, if he him self be not wantyng to god. Deute. 14
So for Daniel, by the kings commandment enclosed in the lions den, a
dinner from heaven was prepared, and he the man of god did eat among the
hungry wyld beasts, that hurt him not. 3. Reg. 17
So Helyas in his flight was fed, and in wilderness by ravens and birds
ministrynge and bringing to him meat, he was norished in persecution. O
detestable cruelty of man's malice, the wild beasts forbear to do hurt,
the birds bring fode to nourishe, men practice wyles, and cruellye demean
them selfs.

After all this we pray for our sins, saying: And forgive us our trespaces,
as we forgive them that trespass against us. After help of fode, forgyuenesse
of sin is desired, that he that is fed of god, may live in god, having
respect not only to this present and temporal, but to the eternal life, to the
which he may come, if his sins be forgyuen, which the lord callith dettes,
like as in his gospelle he says: Matthew. 18
I have forgyuen the all thy debt, because thou praydest me. But how
nedefully, how prouidently, and how holsomly be we admonyshed, that we be
sinners, which be compelled to pray for our sins, that while forgiveness is
craved of god, the mind may remember his conscience. For to the end no man
should stand in his own conceyte, as though he were an innocent, and
extollynge him self, should peryshe the more he is instructed and taught, that
he synneth daily, sythen he is commanded daily to pray for his sins. And
thus fynallye John^ in his epistell admonyssheth us, 1. Johan. 1
saying: If we say that we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth
is not in us. But if we woll confess our sins, the lord is faithful and
just, which wol forgive us our sins. Both these he has comprised in his
epistell: that we ought to pray for our sins, and that we shall opteyne
forgyuenes when we pray. And therefore he says, god is faith full to forgive
sins, holding the faith of his promise. For why he that taught us to pray
for our sins, has promised, that fatherly mercy and forgyuenes should
follow. He has joined and added thereto a law, constraynynge us with a certain
condition and promise, that we should so desire our sins to be forgiven us
even as we forgive them that trespass ageynste us: Knowing well, that it can
not be obtained, that we ask for our sins, rxcept we wol do the like to
them that trespass against us. And therefore in an other place he says: Matthew 7
With what measure ye met, with the same shall it be mesured to you again.
And he the servant, which after his lord had forgyuen him all his duty,
would not forgive his fellow, was trowen into prison. Because he would not
gentilly forgive his fellow, he look that that his lord had courteisly given
him. Which things Christ in his precepts more strongly, and with more
vigor of his sharp judgment, fortolde us: Matt. 11.
And when ye stand to pray (says he) forgive, if ye have ought against any
man, that your father also which is in heaven, may forgive you your trespasses:
but if you wol not forgive, no more woll your father that is in heaven forgive
your offenses. There is no excuse for the, at the day of judgment, when thou
shall be judged after thine own sentence: and that thou have done, that shall
thou suffer. For god commands, that such as love peace, concord, and to live
in unity, should dwell in his house: and such as he made us in our second
nativity, such he woll us being borne again, to persevere: that we which
have begun to be the children of god, should remain in the peace of god, and
we that have one spicitie, should be of one mind and intent: for so god
receives our sacrifice. He commaundethe the stryuer, retournyng from the
altar, fyst to reconcile him to his brother, that with prayers coming from
an heart, that loves peace, god may be pacified. Our peace and brotherly
concord, and the people knytte together in the unity of the father and of the
son, and of the holy ghost, is a sacrifice hyghly acceptable unto god. For
god regarded not the gifts and offerynges that Abill and Cayne the first,
Genes. 4.
offered up in sacrifice, but he beheld their hearts, that he should pleace him
with his gift, that pleased him in his heart. The peasible and just Abell
innocently offrynge up his sacrifyce unto god, taught all other, when they
offer their gift at the altar, so to come with the dread of god, with a simple
heart, with the law of justice, with the peace of concord. He that was such
in the sacrifice of god, was afterward worthily made a sacrifyce to god: that
he first showing a proof of martyrdom, with the glory of his blood tasted the
lords passion, the which had in him both justice and peace. Such the lord
crowns, such at the day of judgment shall with the lord be revenged. But he
that is at debate and strife, and lives not in peace with his brethren (like
as the blessed apostle and holy scripure witness) though he should be slain
for the name of Christ, yet could he not escape the crime of dyssention. For as
it is written: 1. Johan. 3
who so ever hates his brother, is a mankyller: and a man sleer comes not
to the kyngedome of heaven, that he may live with god. For he can not be with
Christ, that had rather be the follower of Judas than of Christ. What manner
sin is it, that can not with the baptism of bloudde be washed away? What
fault or offense is it, that can not be purged with martyrdom?

This also our lord necessarily werneth us, that in our prayer we should say:
And let us not be led into temptation. In the which part it is shows, that
our aduersarye can nothing do against us, without god before permytte him: to
the end that all our fear and devotion, and observation, should be converted
to God. For in our temptations the fend has no power, without it be given
him of god, as holy scripture proves, which says: 4. Reg. 24.
Nabuchodonosor, the king of Babylon camme to Jerusalem, and co^querid it,
and god gave it into his hand. Power is given to the dyuell against us, after
as our sins be, as it is written: Esaias. 42.
Who gave Jacob and Israel to them to be trode^ under foot and spolyed? Did
not god, against whom they sinned, and would not walk in his ways, nor here
his laws, therefore has he brought on them the wrath of his displeasure? And
again, of Solomon synnynge and leauyng the commandementes and ways of the
lord, thus it is written: 3. Reg. 12.
The lord raised an aduersarye unto Solomon.

Power is given against us two manner of ways: either for our punishment, when
we offend, or else for our glory, when we be proved: like as we see done on
Job, Job. 1.
god declarynge and saying, Behold, all thyuges, what so ever he has, I give
into thy hands, but beware thou touch him not. And Christ in the time of his
passion, Johan. 19
says in the gospel: Thou should have no power on me, if it were not given
the from above Wha^ we pray, that we fall not into temptation, we be admonished
of our infirmity and weakness, while we so pray, to thend no man should extolle
him self, that no man should proudely and arrogantly take any thing upon him,
that no man should repute it his own glory, either of confession, or of
passion, sithen our lord him felf teaching humility, Marc. 14
says: Watch and pray, that ye fall not into temptation, The spirit is
willing, but the flesh is weke: so that when an humble and lowly confession
goth before, and al together ascriued unto the lord: what so ever in lowly
wise, with fear and honor of god is asked, of his mercy he woll grant us.

After all these things, in the fynyshynge of our prayer comes this clause in
a brief collection, concludyng all our petitions, and prayers. For in the
last place we say: But deliver us from evil, comprehendynge all adversities,
that our enemy endeavors to do against us in this world: from the which
a trustye and sure defense may be, if god woll deliver us, if we humblye
prayenge and tenderly besechynge him, he woll vouchesafe to help us. When we
say: Deliver us from evil, there remaynethe nothing now that ought to be
farther asked, when we shall have oones desired the Protection of god against
yuell: which being opteyned against all things, that the dyuell and the
world works, we may stand sure and safe. For wat dreede of the world is to
him, to whom in the world god is the defendour? What meruail is it, dear
brethern if the prayer be such, which god taught, which as a master most
worthy, has abreuiate all our peace with his helthefull word? Now this
thing was before told by the prophet Esaye, when he being replenyshed with
the holy gooste, Esaye. 10.
spoke of the majesty and pity of god: A word consumyng (says he) and
breuiatynge in justice: for god shall make short his word in all the
roundnesse of the earth. For when the word of god, our lord Jesus Christ,
came to all men, gatherynge together both the learned and unlearned, to every
kind and aege, he gave precepts of salvation: he made a compendyous work of
his precepts, because the memory of the lerners should not be grieved in the
heavenly discipline but should quickly learn that that should be necessary to the
pure and simple faith. So when he taught what everlasting life is, in a great
and divine briefenes, he comprehended the mystery of life, Johan. 17
saying: This is the life everlasting, that they know the, to be the only true
god, and whom thou have sent. Jesus Christ. Also when he gatherid out of the law
and prophets, the first and chiefest precepts: Deuter. 6
Hark (he said) Israel, thy lord god, is one lord only. And thou shalt
love thy lord god with all thy heart, with all thy soul, and with all thy
might and power. This is the first, and the second is like to this: Thou shall
love the neighbor as thy self. In these two commandments hang all the law
and the prophets. And again he says: What so ever you would that men should
do to you, even so do ye to them. Math. 7.
This is the law and the prophets. And the lord has not taught us with
only words to pray, but also with deeds: he him self often prayenge, and
with the wyttenesse of his own exaumple showing us, what we ought to do,
like as it is written: Luc. 9.
He was going into wyldernes and prayinge. And again: Mat. 14.
He went into a mountay ne to pray, Marc. 6.
and was all night in his prayers. Now if he prayed, that was without sin,
how much more ought sinners to pray? And if he watchynge all the night
long prayed continually, how much more ought we to watch in the night and
busily pray? The lord prayed and made petition, not for him self: for what
should an innocent pray for him self? but for our offenses, like as he him
self declares, where he says to Peter: Behold, Satan has desired, Luc.
22.
that he might syfte you even as wheat: but I have prayed for the, that thy
feyth fail not. And afterward he prayed the father for all saying: Johan. 17
I pray not for these only, but also for those, which through their word
shall believe on me, that they all may be one, like as thou father art in me,
and I in the, that they also may be one in us. Great is the benignity and
mercy of the lord for our salvation, that was not contented to redeem us with
his blood, but more over would vouchesafe to pray for us. But se what he
desired in his prayer, That like as the father and the son be one, so we
also should remain in that Unity, whereby we may well perceive, how greatly he
offends, that breaks that unity and peace, saying the lord prayed for it,
willing to have his people knytte to gether in one: knowing full well, that
Discord comes not to the kingdom of god. But when we stand to pray, dear
brethren we must watch, and with all the hole heart apply our self to
prayers. All worldely and carnal care must be laid apparte, ne the mind should
run on no other thing than that that is prayed for. And therefore the priest
before he prays, with a preface prepares the minds of his brethren,
saying, Sursum corda, up the hearts: that when the people answers. Habemus ad
dominum, we have to the lord: he is admonyshed, that he should think on none
other thing than on the lord. Let the breaste be shut against the adversary,
and open to god only: ne he should not suffer the enemy of god to approach
nere him in the time of prayer: For often times he comes privily, and enters
in, and subtly deceyuynge, draws our prayers from god: to thend we should
have one thing in our hearts, and an other in our words. when the mind and
sense, and not the sound of the voice, must pray to the lord with a sincere
intention. For what a sluggysshe slothfulness is it, to be withdrawn and
caught with pyuysshe and profane thoughts, when thou should pray to the
lord, as though there were any other thing, that thou should more think
upon, than that thou speak with god? How desyrest thou to be herd of god,
when thou can not here thy self? would thou have god myndefull of the in
thy prayer, when thou remembrest not thy self? that is, not to be beware
utterly of thine ennemie, that is, wha^ thou prayst the lord, to offend the
majesty of god with thy negligent prayer: that is, to watch with the eyes,
and flepe with the heart: where as a christen man ought to watch with the
heart, when he slepeth with the eyes. Like as it is written in the name of
the Church in the Canticles: Cant. 1.
I sleep, and mine heart waketh. Wherefore the apostel carefully and warely
warns us saying: Coloss. 4.
Continue in prayer, watchynge in the same, teaching and showing us, that they
may optein that that they ask of god, whom god sees watchefulle in prayer.
But prayenge, we ought not to comme unto god with vnfruytefull and naked
prayers. The petition is of none affecte, when bareyn prayer is offered unto
god. Matthew. 3.
For sithen that every tree, that brings forth no fruit, shall be hewn
down, and cast into the fire, even so the prayer having no fruit, which is
not fertile in operation, can not merit with god. And therefore the divine
scripture instructethe us, saying: Prayer is good with fasting and alms deed.
^obi. 12.
For he that at the day of Judgment shall reward us for our works and alms
deeds, wolle also daily here that prayer benygnely, which comes to him with
good warkes, So Cornelius the Centurian, when he prayed, deserved to be herd:
he did greatte alms deeds among the people, and was always in prayer to god,
before whom prayinge about. ix. of the clock, stood an angel, yeldyng
witness of his work, and saying: Actuu^. 10.
Cornelius, thy prayers and alms deeds have ascended up to the remembrance
before god. The prayers do soon ascend up to god, which the merits of our
work do bring unto god. So the aungelle Raphaell was always to Tobie praying
and workynge a continual witness, saying: To reuele and aknowlege the warkes
of god is much honorable. For when thou and Sara prayedst, I offered up the
memory of your prayer before the sight of the clerenes of god. And when thou
symplye buriedst the dead, and because thou taryedst not to rise, and to leave
thy dynar and wentest and buriedst the dead, and I was sent to tempte the, and
again god sent me, to heal the, and Sara thy daughter in law. For I am
Raphael one of the. vii ryghtous angels, which stand and ar conversant
before the clerenes of god. Esaias. 58.
Also the lord, by Esai admonysheth and teaches like things, saying: Unknyt
every knotte of unrighteousness: unloose the stranglynges of wicked bargaynes:
Let the oppressed go free, and disparple al vnrightous thought. Deal thy
bredde to the hungrye, and bring the poor fatherles home into thy house. If
thou see oone naked, clothe him and despise not the household servants of thy
sede. Than shall thy light break forth in time, and thy garments shall soon
arise, and ryghtousnes shall goo before the, and the clerenes of god shall
compass the about. Than thou shalt cry out, and god shall here the, while
thou art speaking he shall say: Lo, I am here. He promyseth to be present, and
to here, and to defend those, which vnknytte the knottes of unright tousnes
of the heart, and do alms deeds among the household servants of god,
according to his p^ceptes, while they here that god commands to be done,
they also merit to be hard of god. The blessed apostle Paul, Phil. 4.
being help of the brethren in the need of tribulation, calls the works
that were done to him, the sacrifices of god: I was (says he) even filled,
receiuyng of Epaphroditus those things, which were sent from you, an odor
of swetenes, a sacrifice acceptable and pleasant to god. For when a man takes
pity on the poor, he plays the vserer with god: and he that gives to the
pore and nedy, gives to god, spiritually he does sacrifice to god an odor of
sweetness. In celebratynge prayers we find, that the three chyldern with
Daniel, being strong in feith, and victours in captivity, obseruyd the
third, the syxte, and nynthe hour, as a sacrament of the Trinite, which
should be opened in the last days. For the first hour coming into the
third, shewethe the perfect number of the Trinite. Also from the fourth,
procedyng to the syxte hour, declares an other Trinite. And when from the
vii. the. ix. hour is accomplished, by third hours the perfect tryuitie is
numbered: which spacys of hours, the true worshyppers of god, did long sense
spiritually determine, that they seruid to prayer at certain lauful and
appointed times, and afterward, the thing was manifest, to be some time a
sacrament, that just men before did so pray. For the third hour, the holy
ghost came down upon the disciples, which fulfyllid the grace of the lordis
promise. Also Peter, at the. vi. hour ascendynge up into the house above, was
instructed both with sign and voice of God, monysshynge him, that he should
admyt al men to the grace of salvation, when he before doubted, whether he
should admyt and cleanse the gentyles or no. And the lord being crucified at the
hour of. vi. at. ix. of the clock, with his blood did wash away our sins:
and to the end he might redeem and reuyue us, he than with his passion
accomplysshed his vyctorie. But to us, dear brethren, beside the hours of
praying, of old time observed, both the times and sacraments have increasid.
For now we must pray in the morning, that the lords resurrection may be
celebrate with the morning prayer: which thing the holy ghost did notify
long ago in the psalms, saying: Psalm. 5.
My king and my god, yarly in the morning to the lord woll I pray, and thou
shalt here my voice, Betime in the morning I woll get me to the, and wolle
intentiuely behold the. And again by the Prophet, the lord says: Yarly
before the son risyng, they shall watch to me, saying: Let us go and
return to the lord our god.

Also when the son gothe down, and the day fails, it is necessary that
we pray again. For, because Christ is the very son and the very day, the
son and the day of this world departing, when we pray and desire, that
light may come over us again, we crave the coming again of Christ, the
grace of eternal light, to be given us. That Christ is called the day, the
holy ghooste declares in the psalms, saying: Psalm. 117.
The same stone, which the buylders refused, is made the head stone of the
corner: this is the lordis doing, and it is meruaylous in our eyes. This is
the day, which the lord has made, let us walk, and be joyful in it.

Also that he is callid the Son, the prophet Malachie does witness, saying:
Malach. 3.
But unto you, that fear the Lords name, shall the son of rightousnes
arise, and in his wings is health. How if Christ in holy scripture be the
very son and the very day, there is no hour exceptid to christian me^, but
that god ought to be often and always adored: that we, which be in Christ,
that is, in the very son, and in the very day, should still pray, and bring
the day to an end with prayers: and when the day is gone, and the night by
alteration and course is come, it is no damage to them, that woll pray in
the dark season of the night. For with the chyldern of light, the day is in
the night. For when is he without light, in whose heart is light? Or how
does the son and the day fail him, with whom the son and the day
Christ, is? We that be always in Christ, that is, in the light, should not in
the night cesse from prayer. So Anna the wydowe, without intermission praying
always and watchynge, perseuered in meritynge with god, like as it is written
in the gospel: Luc. 2.
She departed not (says he) from the temple, night and day serving god in
fasting and prayeng. Let the gentiles, yt are not yet illumined: or the Jews,
which leauyng the light, have remained in darkness, Ioke up and se. We dear
brethern, which be always in the light of the lord, which remember and
understand, what we have begun to be sens we received grace, should reckon the
night for day. Let us believe, to walk always in ye light, we can not be
hyndered with the darkness, which we have escaped: let no hour escape us from
prayer in the night, let no prayer be lost, through sloth and sluggyshnes. We,
that by the mercy and goodness of god, are spiritually new made and borne
again, should follow that that we shall have in the kingdom of heaven,
oonely day without any night. So in the night as in the light, let us always
watch and pray, and give thanks to god. Also let us not here cease to pray
and thank him.

FINIS.
Londini in aedibus Thomae Bertheleti typis impress. Cum priuilegio ad
imprimendum solum.

ANNO. M. D. XXXIX.


