A SVVETE AND DEVOVTE SERMON OF HOLY saint Ciprian of mortality of man. The
rules of a Christian life made by Picus earl of Mirandula, both translated
into english by sir Thomas Elyot knight.

LONDINI IN AEDIBVS. THO. BERTHELETI.

Preface. To my right worshypfull suster dame Suzan Kyngestone.
THe circumspecte person, which is accustomed one time in the year, to be
vexed with fever, Catarre, or like sykenes, preuenteth that time by expulsynge
the matter, which moughte be occasion of such desseases, and studyeth to
reduce the body into such temperaunce, and so to preserve hit, as the said
matter shall not be augmented, whereby moughte ensue any detriment: Like
industry, or rather much more, ought to be used, good Suster, of every
raysonable creature, as well against the most certain sikenes and fynall
dyssolution of nature called corporal death, as also against all worldly
vexations and troubles, called the toys of fortune, or the crankes of the
world: consyderyng that of any of them neither the time can be known, when
they shall happen, nor assured remedy may be founden for to repelle them, only
a pure and constante faith, having thereto joined wisdom and patience, may
sustain their assaults, and stronglye resyste them. As it is excellently
declared and taught by the holy doctor and martyr sayncte Cyprian^ in a
sermon which he made to the people of Africa, where he was Bushop, in the time
when ^here was continual persecution of paynyms, and also mortality by
general pestilence. which sermon when I had ones per used in redynge, I
liked so well, that I desired that all other persons might understand it.
Remembrynge that many there be (which I doubt not) are as neglygente as I in
consyderyng those sundry calamities, not withstanding that they have beholden
men and women of every astate, which have dyed either before that they looked
for death, or in some other wise than they vouched saulfe, or else forsaken of
fortune have lived in pouertye. Wherefore as well for their instructyon as
mine, how we may be always prepared against those natural and worldly
afflictions, I have traunslated this little book: not supersticiouselye
following the letter, which is verily elegante, and therefore the harder to
translate into our langage, but keeping the sentence and intent of the Autour I
have attemted (not with little study) to reduce into english the right phrase
or form of speaking, used in this treatise, which I have dedycate and sent
unto you for a token: that ye shall perceive, that I do not forgeat you: and
that I do unfeignedly love you, not only for our allyaunce, but also much
more for your perseverance in virtue and warkes of true faith, praieng you to
communicate it with our two susters religiouse Dorothe and Alianour, and to
join in your prayers to god for me, that I may be constante in his service,
and perform well such other warkes as ben in my hands only to his honor and
glory.

I have added hereto a litel tretise, but wonderful frutful, made by the
virtuous and noble prince John^ Picus Earl of Mirandula, who in abundance of
lerning and grace incomparablye excelled all other in his time and sens. whose
picture I would to god were in all noble men's Chambers, and his grace and
virtues in their souls and manners. Hartyly fare ye well. At london the first
day of July, the year of our lord god 1534.

The sermon of holy sayncte Ciprian, of mortalytie of man.
RIGHT well beloved friends, all be it that many of you, have your minds
intier and perfect, the faith stable, and the soul devout: not being meued
with the hugeness of this present mortalytie, but like to a puissant and
steadfast rock rather do break the troublous assaults of this world, and
the violente floodes of this present time, the soul her self not being
broken ne overcome with any temptations, but only proved. Nethelesse for as
much as I do consider to be in the multitude diverse which either by waykenes
of courage, or by smalnes of faith, or by sweetness of the life of this
world, or by the delicatenes of their kind, or (that which is a more heuye
thing) being deceived in the opinion of truth, do not stand fast ne set
forth the divine and invincible might of their stomakes. I moughte no lengre
dissemble that matter, ne retain it in silence, but that as far forth as the
meanness of my learning or wit moughte extend I would declare the doctrine of
Christ by a sermon conceived and lyfely expressed, to the intent that the
slouthe and dullness of delycate minds moughe be reformed. And also that he,
which has all redye professed to be the sernaunte of Christ, may hereafter
be demed worthy of Christ, and thereto accepted. Uerely good friends, he that
fyghteth for god, and being in the celestial ca^pe does hope on thing is that
be godly, ought to know well him self, to the intent that in the tempests
and storms of this world, there be in us no dred or fearfulness, sense
almyghtye god has before warned, that such things should happen. Instructynge
and teaching us by his own mouth with a prouidente exhortation, and therewith
preparynge and comfortynge the people of his church to the paciente
sufferaunce of things to come, wherein he prophesied and declared unto us, that
bataile, famine, erthquakes, and pestilence should arise in sondrye contrayes
and places. And to the intent that no sudden dread, or fear of strange
things anoyenge us, should in any wise oppress or a bashe us, he told us
before, that toward the end of the world, adversities and troubles should
more and more be increased. Now behold, all that which he spoke of has
happened, and is come among us. And since that is now happened, which was
before spoken of, there shall also now ensue all that which was promised, our
lord him self promysyng and saying: Luc. 21.
What time ye shall see all these things come to pass, than be you sure that
the kyngedome of heaven is at hand. The kyngedome of heaven good friends
begins now to approach. The reward of life, and the comfort of health
everlasting, parpetuall gladness, and the possession of Paradyse, which
before we had lost, now the world passing away, become and at hand: even
now after things erthlye do succeed that which is heuenlye, after small
things, great things and precious: after things transytory, things
eternal or everlasting. What time is it now to be sad? Or who among these
troubles will be timorus or sorrowful: but only he in whom lacks booth faith
and hope? for he only fears death, which will not go unto Christ, and he
which will not go unto Christ, is he which does not believe, that he now
begins to raygne with Christ. It is written, The just man lives by faith:
To. 1.
If thou be a just man, thou lyuest by faith. If thou beleuest trewely in god,
coming to Christ, and being sure of his promise, why doeste not thou run
and embrace Christ now thou art called? Why do not thou thank god and
rejoice, that thou art out of the diuilles danger.

The just man Symeon, who verelye was a good and a just man, and kept the
commandments of god fulle of faith, when answer was made unto him from
almighty god, that he should not dye until he had seen Christ: when Christ
being ababe came with his mother into the Temple, he in spirit knew, that
Christ was now borne, of whose coming he was before warned. And when he
beheld him, he knew that he him self should shortly after depart from this
world: wherefore being joyful of death that approchid, and being sure of his
soon sendinge for, he took the blessed babe in his arms, and with praises and
thanks unto god, he said with a loud voice. Luc. 2.
Now good lord thou will license thy seruance to depart from this mortal
life in peace according to the word that thou sendest me. For now mine eyes
have behold thy provision of remedy that thou haste prepared in the syghte of
all people. As who says proving and witnessynge also, that then peace was
comne to the servants of god: and that then was a pesible quietness. When we
being drawn out of the storms of this world desire to come to the haven of
parpetuall suretye, and also when death being from us excluded, we atteine to
immortalite or life everlasting. That is our peace, that is our sure
tranquillite, that is our steadfast, our fyrme, and perpetual surety.
Furthermore what else do we in this world: but fight against the devil daily
in battle, and against his waypon and ordinance make resistance with
contynuall conflictes? Enmies of man^
we strive daily with avarice, with lechery, with wrath, with Ambicion, we
have a busy and payneful wrastlynge, with carnal vices and worldly
delectacions. The mind of man is besyged and all about compassed and
assaulted with sin, and hardly is matched on al parts, and may uneath resist
and defend him from all. For if he overthrow Avarice, than sterteth up
lecherye: If lechery be oppressed, ambicion comes in her place: and although
ambition be neglected, yet wrath will exasperate, pride inflatith, drunkenness
allureth, envy breketh concord, and by the same is frendshyp dissolved. Thou
art constrained to curse, which the law of god doothe prohibit: Thou art
compelled to swear, which is unlawful. These persecutions thy mind daily
does suffer, with these many perils thy stomach is vexed: And yet doeste thou
delight to tarry long here among the swords of people malycious, when rather
thou should couayte and desire (death setting the forward) to haste the
toward Christ, Joan. 16.
he saying to us in his doctrine: Joan. 16.
I tell you verily, ye shall boothe weep and wayle, but the world shall
rejoice and be merry: ye sha^ be heavy and sorowefulle, but your heaviness shall be
turned into myrthe. Now who will not make haste to come where he shall be
merry? who will not wyshe to lack always heaviness? But at what time our sorrow
shall be turned to mirth, our lord him self declares, saying: I shall se you
again, I^^^. 16.
and your hearts shall rejoice, and that gladness shall no man take from you.
Wherefore since to see Christ is perfect reioysyng: and our gladness may not be
without beholdinge of him, what blyndenes of mind yea what madness were hit
to love the vexacions, pains, and continual sorrows of this present world:
And not rather to make all spedy deligence to come to the joys, which may
never be taken from the? This does happen dear friends by cause that faith
lacks: for no man does believe that such things shall come, which almighty
god, who ever is true, has all ready promised, whose word is eternal, and to
them that believe, always sure and constant.

If an honorable man and of great gravity did promise the any thing, thou
would trust him, and would not think to be deceived of him, whom thou
knew to be as well in word as in deed substanciall and steadfast. But now
all mighty god talkith with the in his scripture, and thou as false and
disloyal doste flitter in a mind mistrustefull and wauerynge. God has
promised to the when thou shall depart from this world, immortality and life
everlasting. And yet not withstanding thou doubtest: that is as much to say,
as thou knoweste not god. And also thou wyllynglye offendest Christ the
master of all them that believe, with the sin of incredulity or lack of
believe, and that thou being constitute and admitted in to the church of god
haste not faith in the house of faith. How much the departing from this
world shall be to thy profit Christ him self master of our profit and
health does declare, where he says to his disciples, which sorowed by cause
he told them that he would depart. If ye loved me, ye would rejoice, Io. 14
for as much as I goo to my father. Thereby teachinge and declaringe unto us,
that when they whom we do most favor or love, do depart out of this
world, we should rather be glad than sorye. Which thing the blessed
appostole remembrynge says in his Epistole: Phil. 1
My living is Christ, and death is to me gain and advantage. Accomptinge the
gretteste gain not to be tangled in the snares of this world, not to be
subject to sin or carnal vices: And being delivered from troublous
vexacions, and from the venemouse teeth of the devil, to depart (Christ
calling us) to the joy of health everlasting.

But there be some men, which be grieved for as much as this trouble vexes us,
equallye as much as the infydels. As it were that a christen man believes, to
that intent only, that he would be free from the touch of al grefe and
disease, and enjoy this world prosperousely. Some be offended for as much as
mortalite is to us with other in commune. What thing, I pray you, have not we
with other in commune, as long as this commune carnalytie remains according
to the ordinance of our first nativity? As long as we be here in this
world, we be joined together with all man kind in equalyty of fleshely
substance: but in spirit we be separate. Therefore until this corruptible
matter be with incorrupcion induyd, and this mortal substance do receive
immortalite, and this spirit do bring us unto god our father, what so ever
incommodities do belong to this carnal body, they be to us with mankind in
commune. For like as when with cold blastes (which do the cause barennesse)
the earth is (as it were) fasting and without food, hungre doethe except no
man. And when a city is won with enemies, by captivity all thing is
wasted. And when fair wether restraynethe showers, hit is but one drowth unto
all men. And when a ship is all to rent on a rock, the wrecke is common to
al them, which be in it: Also the pain of the eyes, violence of fevers, and
disseasis of all other members be to us with all other in commune, as long as
this commune body is borne about in the world. More over a christen man
beleuinge by any law or condition, let him know and remember that he must
travail more in this world than any other, for as much as it partayneth to
him to wrestle with the diuyl, with greatter resystence. And that to do he is
warned and taught by holy scripture, saying: Eccl. 2,
My son which ghost to the service of god, stand fast in justice and
dread, and prepare thy soul to receive temptation. And in an other place.
Suffer both in grefe and in fear, and have patience in thine humilyte, for as
well gold as silver be tried with fire. In this wise Job, Job. 1.
after the loss of his goods, and death of his children, being tormented
with paynefull sores and bytynge of worms, was not vanquished, but only
proved: who in his pains and afflictions, declarynge the patience of his
devout mind, said as follows: Job. 1.
Naked I came from the womb of my mother, and naked I shall return to the
earth, our lord gave it to me, and our lord has taken it from me, as to our
lord it best semith, so is hit happened: blessed be the name of our lord. And
when his wife would have persuaded him, that as if he were by the violence of
pain out of patience, he should with a grudginge and disdaynouse voice speak
some thing against almighty god, he answered unto her and said: Thou
spekiste like one of the lewd or foolish women. Job. 2.
If we have received goods of the hands of our lord, why shall not we than
suffer euilles patiently? In all those things which happed to Job, he never
offended with his lips in ye sight of our lord. And therefore our lord does
witness thus of him saying to Satan: Haste thou taken good heed of my
servant Job? there is none in the world like to him: A man without
grutchynge, the very true worssyppar of god almighty.

Also Toby after his honorable warkes, and the manyfolde and famous
commendacions of his deeds of mercy, he was stricken with blyndnesse, and
notwithstanding he dreadyng and blessing almighty god in all adversities,
finally by that bodilye detriment he increaced to parpetuall praise: not
withstandinge that his wife, willinge to abuse him, tempted him, in this wise
saying: where ben thy warkes of marcie become? Tob 2.
Lo now what thou suffrest. But Thobias being constante and steadfast, and
also armed with true faith, whereby he suffered vexations and grefes, yielded not
to the temptation of his frail wife, but much rather with greatter patience
deserved the favor of god. And therefore he was afterward of Raphael the
aungel commended, who said to him these words. To publysshe and confess the
warkes of almyghtye god hit is honorable. For when thou and Sara thy sons
wife prayed, I offered the remembrance of your prayer in the presence of the
clerenesse of almightye god, sens thou haste buried them, which died openly,
and have not forborne to rise and leave thy dynar, and gone thy way and buried
the deed: I am sent to prove the. And in an other place the same angel says:
God has sent me to heal the and Sara thy sons wife, I am Raphaell one of
the seven angels, which be present and conuersaunte before the cleernesse of
god almightye.

This manner of sufferaunce is always in good men. This lesson the holy
apostoles kept according to gods commaundment, not to murmoure in
adversity, but what so ever hapnith in this world, to take it patiently,
considering that the Jews offended by murmourynge often times against god,
as our lord him self witnesses in the book named Numeri, saying: Nu. 20^
Let them leave their murmourynge, and they shall not dye. Trewely dear
brethren we ought not to murmour or grudge in adversities, but to suffer
strongly and patiently all that shall happen unto us, sens it is written: Psalm.
50^
The spirit that is troubled is a sacrifice to god. For the heart which is
contrite and made humble, god never despisith. Also the holy ghost by Moses in
the book of Deutromy warnith the saying: Deuteronomy. 8.
Thy lord god shall vex the, and send to the scar^cite: And than it shall be
known in thy heart, if thou shalt keep well his commandmentes or no. And
again, your lord god tempts you, that he may know if ye do love your lord
god with all your heart and with all your soul. For so was god pleased with
Abraham, Genesis 22.
who to plese god neither fered to lose his son, nor yet refused to sle him.
But thou what so ever thou art, that maiste not suffer the loss of thy son
taken from the, either by the law, or by chance of mortality: what woldeste
thou do, if thou were commanded to sle him? The fear of god and faith should
make the redye to sustain all thing. Admit that thou haste loss of thy
goods, or that thou be cruelly vexed with syknesse of thy members
contynuallye: or that thou be despoiled by the death of thy wife, thy children,
or thy most dear friends and companions. Let not these be to the any
displeasures, but rather battle against worldly affections, ne let them not
break or make wayker the faith of Christ, but rather let them declare in
that debate thy virtue or puisance: sens al violence of yuelles, which be
present are to be had in contempt upon trust of good things, which shall
happen hereafter. For except war go before, there may be no victory. But
when after battle joined there ensuethe victory, than to the vaynquishours is
given the garlande. Semblablye in a tempest a good master is known, and the
soudiour in bataile is proved. Bosting out of peril is pleasant, but
resystence in adversity is the trial of truth. The tree which with a deep
root stands fast in the ground, is not meued with every puff of wind
that blows. Also the ship which is well couched to gether with a strong
frame, though she be often hitte with the wawes, yet is she not bouged. And
when the corn is thresshed in the barn, the sound and strong grain
continues the wyndes, while the chafe is blown about with every light
blaste. So the Apostole Paul after his wrecke on the se, after his whippings,
after sundry and greuouse torments sustained in his body, he does not say,
that he was vexed or troubled, but that by those adversities he was amended: as
he would say, that the more grievously that he was troubled, the more surely was
he than proved. 2. Cor. 12.
There is given to me (says he) a prick in my flesh, a messenger of the
devil, which continually stryketh me to the intent that I shall not be
extolled in mind. Wherefore thrice I desired god, that I moughte be thereof
delivered. And he answered me: Content the with my grace. For in infirmity
virtue is tried.

Therefore when we be vexed either with infirmity, feblenesse, or any
aduersite, than is our virtue proved: than our faith, if it abide and be
constant, is crowned, according as it is written: Eccl. 27.
The fornaise tries the pottars vessel, and temptacion of trouble tries men
that be good. Between us christen men and other, ^he only diversity is, that
they in adversity do grutche and complain, And us Christen people adversity
may not call a way from the truth of virtue and faith: but does corroborat
or strength us in the grefe, that we suffer. That the bealy resolved with
fluxes expulsethe by the bowels bodylye strength: or that the superfluos heat
engendered in the marowe of our bones, inflameth out by blysters in our chekes:
that our bowelles be shaken with continual vomyttes: that with abundaunce of
bloudde our eyes do burn in our heedes: that some men's fete and other
members putrified be cut of or rotted: that by loss of members or other
harm taken by siknes either our goinge is febled, or our heringe is stoppid,
or our syghte is peryshed: all this profits to the doctrine of faith. And to
resyste with the powars of an immouable mind against so many assaults of
dystruction and death. what valyantenesse of currage is hit, ye and what honor
to stand bolte vpprighte among the ruynes of man kind, and not to lie
prostrat with them, which hope not in god? We therefore must rather rejoice,
and take in good worth the reward of the time: that while we do constantly
declare our faith, and by sustaynynge of labor do approach unto Christ: by
Christ's strait^ passage, we may receive by his judgment the reward of life,
which faith does require. Let him hardyly fear, that not being regenerate
by water and the holy ghost, is committed to the terrible fires of hell: Let him
fear that is rekened no partener of the cross and passion of Christ: Let him
also fere which from this carnal death, shall pass to the second death: and let
him fear, whom ones departed out of this world, everlasting fire shall torment
with pains continual: Finally let him be a ferd, unto whom by long tarieng
here this one thing avails, that his torments and wailinges be in the mean
time put of or differred. Many of our number do die in this mortalytie, that
is as who says, many of our number be out of this world delivered. Forsothe
this mortality like wise as to the Jews and paynims hit is a pestilence: so
to the servants of god hit is a wholesome departing. What if good men without
any dyuersitie do dye with the yuell men: there is no cause, that ye should
therefore think that death is commune to good men with them that be ill. For
good men be called to joy: the yuell men be drawn into pain, so suertie to
them that believe well, and pain to miscreauntis the sooner doothe happen.
Uerily good brethern we be vncurtaise and negligent having regard to gods
benefits: ne we do recognize what is offered unto us. Behold how virgins be
departid saulfe and in peace, with their glory and praise, not fearinge the
thretninges, corruptions, nor bordel houses of Antichrist, who is now coming.
Children are eskape^ the peril of their slypper aege, and have attained
happily to the reward of innocence and pure continence. The delicate matrone
now fearith no torments, sense with spedy death she has prevented the fear
of persecucion, and the hands and torments of cruel tyrants. More over by
fear of mortality and troubles of this time, they which were late cold in
faith, be now chaufed and warm: they which were remysse or louse, be knytte
together and made substancial: they that were cowardes, be quickened in courage.
The forsakers of their faith be compelled to return: The paynems constrained
to believe: The old faithful people be called to quiet: And a fresh and
greatte ^oste of them, which becamme soldiers of Christ in the time of
mortality, is assembled with a more puisance to fight without dread, when the
battle is joined. what a thing is this good friends, how conueniente and
necessary is this pestilence and moraine, which semyng to be monstruouse and
horrible, tries out the goodness of diverse men, and examineth the minds of
all men? that is to say whether the hole men do aid them that be sick: If
kynsmen be kind one to an other: If the masters do pity their frail and
weak servants: If phisicions do not abandon their pacientes: If they which be
cruel will withdraw their violence. If the oppressors and robbers (at the
lest for fear of death) will assuage the insaciable appetite of furiouse
auaryce: If proud men will stoop, or unthriftiness auale their lewed courage?
If they that be rich and shall dye without heirs of their bodies, will any
thing distrybute among their nedy neighbors. And surely although this
mortalytye were to nothing else profitable, yet in this it has benne advantage
to christen men, and them which be gods servants, that in learning not to
fear death, we the more wyllyngely desire martyrdom. This to us is no death,
but an exercise, which brings to the mind renoume of valyante courage, and
by dispisynge of death prepares to receive the garlande of vyctory. But
parchaunce some man will reply and say: yet not withstanding this griueth me
in this present mortality, that where I had prepared my self to confess my
faith, and had disposed me with all my hole heart and full power to the
sufferaunce of passion, now prevented by death I am dissapoynted of
martyrdom.

First to be a martyr it is not in thine own power, but in gods will and
election. Ne thou may not say, that thou haste lost that thing, which
thou know not, whether thou were ever worthy to have it. More over, god the
sercher of hearts, and beholder and judge of secrte thoughts, does see the,
and does commend and allow the. And he which perceyueth to be in the,
virtue prepared, for thy^ (...) shall yield unto the a (...) ^ewarde. Supposest
thou, had Cayne slain his brother Abell, at what time he off^id the
sacryfice unto almighty god? well and yet god being ware of his purpose
condemned the murder conceived in the mind, which Cayne did afterward
execute: So like as in Cayne a malicious thought and a mischeuous imagination
was before seen by gods providence, like wise in the servants of god, which
confessing faith in their thoughts, and in their intentes conceyuyng
martyrdom, their souls being given to that good purpose, be crowned of god
their judge, which knows all thing. It is not one thing to lack a will to
be martired, and to lack martyrdom to a good will. Such as god fyndeth the
to be when he calls the, so doethe he judge the, according as he him self
witnesses saying: Apoc. 2.
And all congregations shall know that I am the serchour of man's heart and his
reins. Nor god looks for your blood, but for your faith. For neither Abraham
nor Isaac nor Jacob were slain. And yet not withstanding they deserved to be
honored for their faith and Justice: and to be the chief of all patriarchs:
unto whose feast is called every man that is found faithful, just, and
commendable. we must remember to do not as we our self will, but according
to goddis^ will. And so god commands us every day to pray. How
ouerthwarte and perverse a thing is it that where we desire that the will of god
be done when he calls and sendethe for us out of this world, we do not
forth with obey his commandment and pleasure, but against that we murmoure
and strive, and be brought like froward servants with heuye and sower
countenance to our masters presence: departing hense with the bond of
necessity, not with a willing obedyence: and yet will we be honored with
heavenly rewards of him, unto whom we come not wyllingly, but by constraynte
only. wherefore than do we ask and desire, that the kyngedome of heaven may
come unto us, if worldly captivity so much does delight us? Wherefore do we
ask and desire in our prayers so often rehearsed, that the time of the reygne,
which is promised should come spedyly, if our desires and wishes to serve the
dyuell are more to be set by then to raygne with our Savior?

More over for the playner declaration of gods providence, and that our
lord, which before sees all things to come, will give to us counsel
concerning our very health, it happened late, that one of our company and a
preeste, being atteynted with sickness, and lokynge for death, which
approached, desired leave to depart: as he was prayenge and in point of
death, there stood hard by him a goodly yonge^ man of an honorable port and
majesty, high of stature and fair, whom the sight of man might uneath
behold with carnal eyes saving that he which was departing out of the
world with eyes more spiritual might look on such one, and the same person
so apperyng, not without indignation, as well in countenance as speech,
grudchinglye spoke in this wise: ye fear to suffer, and ye will not go forth,
what shall I do to you? which was the speaking of one that blamed and also
exhorted: who allowed not them, which for the time present were careful of
persecution, and yet sure of their departing, but gave counsel for the time
coming. Our said brother herd, when he was dyenge, what he should tell unto
other. For he herd when he should dye, that which he should report unto
other, and he herd not for him self but for us. For what should he learn,
which was than in departing: In deed he learned for us, which remained, to the
intent that in herynge the preeste of god blamed, which asked his ryghtes, we
should know what was to al men expedyente.

More over to us of al other most simple, how often has it benne showed by
revelation? how sundry times have I ben playnelye commanded of the goodness of
god, that I should always affirm and openly preach, that our brethren
delivered from this world by the calling of god, should not be bewailed and
sorowed for, sens I knew well that they were not lost but sent only before
us, and so departing preceded: And therefore as men being in iournay or vyage
to be desired, but in no wise lamented. Ne we should put on us black gowns
for them, which now have received and put on white garments: Ne we oughe to
give occasion to infidels to reprove us lefully and with good reason, for as
much as we do mourn for them, as they were deed and looste for ever, which
we say do live ever with god, and so with the witness of our own hearts and
stomakes reprove the faith, which in word and sentence we have confessed.
Surely we be the deceyuours of our own faith and hope, ^if that, that we say
apere to be false and dyssembled. It profits no thing to show in words
virtue, and in deeds to distroye verytie. The apostolle Paul rebukes, These. 4.
chydeth, and blames such as be heavy or sorrowful for the death of their
friends: We will not (says he) good brethren, that ye should be ignorante in
that which concerns them that do sleep in natural death, to the intent ye
should not be sorrowful, like as they be, which are without hope. If we believe
that Jesus Christ dyed and roose again afterward: In like wise god almighty
shall finally bring with him those that slepte in Christ. Also he says,
that they which do lack hope, be heavy when their friends do depart. But we,
wh^che live in hope, and believe in god, and do verily trust that Christ suffered
for us, and did eftsoon rise. We I say, which dwell^ in Christ, and do arise
by him and in him, why refuse we to depart hense? or wayle^ and lament for
them that be goone? Christ him self our god warns us, saying: Joan. 11.
I am the resurrection and life, he that believes in me, although that he
dyethe, he shall live: and all that lives, and believes in me, shall never die.
If we believe Christ, let us have faith in his words and promises, and we
shall never dye. Let us come therefore with asure gladness unto Christ, with
whom we shall live and raygne ever. For by that, that we dye, we pass from
death to immortalytye: in as much as life everlasting may not succeed, without
departing from hense. All be it, it is no clear departing, but rather a
passage, and change of this life for the life eternal, the temporal iournay
performed. who will not hye him from the warse to the better? Who will not
couayte to be reformed and changed to the figure of Christ? or will not desire
to come shortly to the dygnitie of celestial grace? Paul the apostell
preaching: Phil. ^.
our abiding (says he) is in heaven, from whens we abide the coming of
Christ Jesus, who shall transform our simple body in semblable figure to the
body of his clerenes. And Christ our lord promised, that we shall be such
when he prayed to his father, that we might be with him, and live with him in
eternal places, and be joyful and merry in the kyngedome of heaven, saying:
Joan. 17.
Father I will that such as thou have given to me, that they be with me where
so ever I be, and that they se the clerenesse that thou gaueste to me before
that the world was create. wherefore he that intends to come to the place,
where Christ is, to the bryghtnes of the Realms celestyalle, ought not wayle
or lament, but according to the hope, which he has in the promise of god,
and trust that he has in truth, be joyful and glad in his departing or
translation from hence: For as much as we read, that Enoch was translated or
taken out of this world, by cause he pleased god, as holy scripture
witnesses in the book of Genesis, in this wise: Genesis ^
Enoch pleased god, and was not afterward founden, for god translated him from
hense. That thing wherewith he pleased in the syghte of god, was that he
deserved to be taken from the perils of this present world. Moreover the
holy gooste teaches by Solomon, Sap. 4^
that they, with whom god is pleasid, be the sooner taken a way and delivered
from hense, lest if they should abide longer, they should be polluted with
worldly infections. Therefore Enoch was rapte and taken a way suddenly, lest
sensualle appetite should corrupt his understanding. For his soul was unto
god pleasynge, and therefore he hastened to bring him out of the mids of
iniquity. Psalm. 85^
Semblably in the psalms the devout soul hastes spedelye toward her god,
with a syngular faith, as it is written: O thou god of virtues and puissance,
how wonderful delectable be thine habitations, my soul desyrith and hastith
to come to thy palayces? Uerely he only should have will to abide in this
world, whom the world deliteth, whom flateringe and deceptfull time inuiteth
with vain delectations of worldly pleasures. Now sens the world hatith a
true christen man, why doeste thou love that thing, whereof thou art hated: and
folowest not rather Christ, who has redeemed the and also loves the.

1. Io. 2.
Sayncte John^ in his Epistole speaks and cries unto us, exhorting us not to
love this world in following our appetites: Love not the world (says he) ne
the things which be in it. For who so ever loves the world, the charity of
the father of heaven is not in him: sens all that is in the world is inordinate
appetite of the flesh, inordinate appetite of the eyes, and desire of worldly
honor, which do not proceed of our father, but of worldly appetite. And yet
the world and his vain appetite shall vanishe away, but he which shall
fulfill the pleasure of god, shall abide everlasting, like as god is ever
eternal. Therefore good friends let us allway be bound and ready to parforme
all thing that god wills with a parfecte mind, a faith stable and
constante, with virtue puissante and strong, all fear of death utterly
excluded, and only thynkinge on the immortality, which immediatelye
folowethe. Let us declare, that to be the thing that we do believe in: and not
lament the departing of them, whom we do favor. And when the day of our
sending for shall approach, let us willynglye and without any stickynge, come
unto god when he calls, which sens it ought to be done of them, which be
the servants of god, much rather now the world decayenge, and in point to
fall, and also compassed with tempests of euilles contynually assaultinge it.
Also we parceyue that great myshiefe is all redye begone, and we know that
much gretter is coming: Let us reken the grettest advantage to depart
shortelye from hense, which shall be for our special commodity. If the walls
in thy house should shake for age, and the roufe should trymble, and all the
hole house werye of rockynge of the beams and rafters, should thrette to fall
shortly in ruin, would thou not depart thense in all the haste possible? If
when thou art on the sea, the wawes being driven up with a sturdye wind, a
troublous and stormy tempeste would warn the that thy ship were in danger of
losinge: woldeste thou not make haste to come to some haven? Lo behold the
world rockith, and is now in falling: and declarith his imminent ruin not
for age or feebleness of things, but only for that his end now approaches:
and yet thou thankest (...) god, nor doeste not rejoice in thy self, that
being taken away with a more redye, and (as I might say) a more riper
departing, thou may escape the ruynes, wreckes, and plages, which now
thou seeste coming. we must consider good friends, and often times think,
that we have renouncid this world, and that we dwell here but as pylgrimys and
gestes. Therefore let us embrace joyfully the day which does appoynte every
man to his habitation, and delyuerynge us hence, escaped from the snares of
this world, restores us unto Paradise, and the kyngedome of heaven. who being
I pray you, in a far iornaye, will not make haaste to return home to his
countraye? who being on the sea sailing homeward, would not desire to have a
prosperouse wind, that he may the sooner salute and embrace his good friends?
Let us account Paradise to be our very countray. For there have we the
blessed Patriarchs our very Auncetours. Why make we not haste, ye why do
not we run a pase to see our countray, that we may salute our good
Auncetours? There doothe abide and look for us a great number of our dear
friends, our Auncetours, our fathers and mothers, our brethren and children. A
plentuouse and great multitude, which now be sure of their immortalytie, and
yet do care for our surety, do desire to have us in their company. To come to
behold and embrace them, lord god what a joy and comfort shall it be both
to them and to us? what an uncomparable dilectation of the he^^^lye Regious,
without fear to dye, and with assured eternity to live ever: O with how
perfect and eternal felycytie? There is the most gloryouse quiere of the
blessed apostoles: There is the college of the glad prophettes: There is
people innumerable of holy martyrs adourned with crowns of victory for their
vexatio^s and sundry passions: there be the tender and pure virgyns
triumphynge, which with contynence of soul and body did subdue the puisaunce
of carnal appetites: There be they which being mercifulle in giuynge
sustynaunce to the nedy persons, did thereby fulfill the warkes of Justice:
There also be they, which observing dilygentelye the commandments of god,
did transpose worldly possessions unto the heavenly treasure. To those let us
hye us a peace good friends that we may shortly be with them, let us desire
fervently to come unto Christ. That thought let god almighty see in us: That
intent of our mind and faith, let our lord Christ perceive and behold,
sens unto the them which toward him have most affection, his goodness will
give his rewards most abundante and pleantuouse.

Amen.
The rules of a Christian life made by John^ Picus the elder Earl of Mirandula.
FIrst if to man or woman the way of virtue does seem hard or paynefull,
because we must needs fight against the flesh, the devil, and the world,
let him or her call to remembrance, that what so ever life they will chose
according to the world, many adversities incommodities, much heaviness and
labor are to be suffered.

More over let them have in remembrance, that in wealth and worldly
possessions is much and long contention, laboriouse also, and there with
vnfrutefulle, wherein travail is the conclusyon or end of labor, and finally
pain everlasting, if those things be not well ordered and charitably
disposed.

Remember also, that it is very folishnes to think to come unto heaven by any
other mean than by the said battle, considering that our head and master
Christ did not ascend unto heaven but by his passion: Luc. 24.
And the servant ought not to be in better astate or condition than his
master or sovereign. Joan. 13.


Furthermore consider, that this bataile ought not to be grudged at, but to be
desired and wished for, all though thereof no price or reward might ensue or
happen, but only that thereby we might be conformed or joined to Christ our
god and master. Wherefore as often as in resistinge any temptacion thou dooest
withstand any of thy senses or wits, think unto what part of Christ's
passion thou may apply thy self or make thy self like: As resistinge
glotony, whil^s thou do punyshe thy taste (...) appetite: remember that
Christ received in his drink, Mat. 27. Marc. 15. Luc. 23. Io. 19.
ayselle myxte with the gall of a beast, a drink most unsavory and
lothesome. When thou withdraweste thy hand from unlawful taking or kepinge of
any thing, which likes thine appetite: remember Christ's handis as they were
fast nailed unto the tree of the cross. And resisting of pride, think on him,
Phil. 2.
who being very god almighty, for thy sake received the form of a subject,
and humbled him self unto the most vile and reprochefull death of the
cross. And when thou art tempted with wrath: Mat. 27. Mar. 14. Luc. 22. Joan.
18.
Remember that he which was god, and of all men the most just or rightwyse,
when he beheld him self mocked, spit on, scourged, and punished withalle
dispites and rebukes, and set on the cross among errant thieves, as if he
him self were a false harlot, he not withstandyng showed never token of
indignacion or that he were grieved, but suffering al things with wonderful
patience, answered al men most gentilly. In this wise if thou peruse al
things one after an other, thou may find, that there is no passion or
trouble, that shall not make the in some part conformable or like unto Christ.

Also put not thy trust in man's help, but in the only virtue of Christ
Jesus, which said: Joan. 16^
Trust well, for I have vaynquishid the world. And in an other place he
say^he: Joan. 13.
The prince of this world is cast out thereof. wherefore let us trust by his
only virtue, to vaynquishe the world, and to subdue the devil. And therefore
ought we to ask his help by the prayers of us and of his saints.

Remember also, that as soon as thou have vanquished one temtation, always an
other is to be looked for: 1. Pet. 5.
The devil goes always about the seeks for him whom he would devour.
Wherefore we ought to serve dylygently and be ever in fear, and to say with
the prophet: I will stand always at my defense.

Take heed more over, that not only thou be not vaynquished of the dyuel,
that temptith the, but also that thou vanquishe and over come him. And that is
not only when thou doeste no syn, but also when of that thing wherein he
tempted the, thou take occasion for to do good. As if he offrith to the some
good act to be done to the intent that thereby thou may fall in to vain
glory: forth with thou thinkinge it, not to be thy deed or warke, but the
benefitte or reward of god, humble thou thy self, and judge the to be unkind
unto god in respect of his manyfolde benefytes.

As often as thou do fight, fight as in hope to vanquishe, and to have at
the last perpetualle peace. For that parauenture god of his abundante grace
shall give unto the, and the devil being confusid of thy victory, shall
return no more again. But yet when thou haste vaynquishid, bear thy self so
as if thou sholdest fight again shortly. Thus always in battle thou must
think on victory: and after victory thou must prepare the to bataile
immediately.

All though thou felest thy self will armed and ready, yet flee, not
wethstandynge all occasyons to sin. Eccl ^.
For as the wise man says: who louethe peril, shall therein peryshe.

In all temptations resyste the beginning, and beat the Children of Babylon
again the stone, which stone is Christ, and the children be yuell thoughts
and imaginations. For in long contynuinge of sin, seldom warketh any
medycyne or remedy.

Remember, that although in the said conflicte of temptation the battle
seems to be very daungerouse: yet consider how much sweter it is to
vanquishe temptation, than to follow sin, whereto she inclyneth the, whereof
the end is repentance. And here in many be foul deceived, which compare not
the swetnesse of victory to the swetnesse of sin, but only compares
battle to pleasure. Not withstanding a man or woman, which has a
thousand times known what it is to give place to temptation, should ones
assaye, what it is to vanquishe temptation.

If thou be tempted, think thou not therefore that god has forsaken the, or
that he sets but little by the, or th^^ thou art not in the sight of god^
(...) or perfect: but rememb^^^ that after sayncte Paul had seen god,
(...) ^etull for any man to speak or reherce, he for all that suffered
temptation of the flesh, wherewith god suffered him to be tempted, lest he
should be assaulted with pride. wherein a man ought to consider, that saint
Paul, which was the pure vessel of election, 1. Co^. 2.
and rapte in to the third heaven, was not withstanding in peril to be
proud of his virtues, as he says of him self. Wherefore above al temptations
manne or woman ought to arm them most stronglye against the temptation of
pride, sens pride is the rote of all myschyfe, against the which the only
remedy is to think always that god humbled him self for us unto the cross.
Eccl. 10.
(...) or no, that our bodies shall be the meat of worms lothesome and
venymouse.

FINIS.
Thomas Berthelet regius impressor excudebat. An. 1534. CVM PRIVILEGIO.

PASQVYLL THE PLAIN

ANNO. M. D. XL.

PASQVILL. THOMAS ELIOT KNIGHT, TO THE GENtile reders.
SENS playnnes in speaking is of wise men commended, and diverse do abhor
long prohemes of rhetoryke: I have set out this merry treatise, wherein
playnnes, and flatery do come in trial, in such wise as none honest manne
will be therewith offended^ The personages, that do reasone, be of ^^nal
reputation: For Pasquillus, that speaks most, is an image of stone, sitting
in the city of Rome openly: on whom ones in the year, it is l^ful to every
man, to set in verse or prose any taunte that he will, against whom he list,
how great an astate so ever he be. Not withstanding in this book he vsithe
such a temperaunce, that he notes not any partycular person or Country.
Gnatho was brought in by writers of Comedies for such a seruante, as always
affyrmed, what so ever was spoken of his master: but he was a Greek borne, and
therefore he sauorith some what of retorike. Pasquille is an old Roman, but
by long sittinge in the street, and herynge market men chat, he is become rude
and homely. Harpocrates was the prelate of the temple of Isis and Serapis,
which were honorid for goddis in Aegipt, whose image is made, holdinge his
finger at his mouth, betokenynge silence. These three communed to gether, as it
folowethe, but where, I had forgoten to ask. All be it because the matter is
meryly brought in, and therewith sauoreth somewhat of wisdom: I thought it not
inconvenient to particypate it with you that will not interpret it, but
according to the best meaning. And in the reding of this litil tretise
distinctli, will consider diligently the state and condition of the person that
speaks, with the order and conclusion of his hole reason. And if it seem to
you, that Pasquill says true, in declarynge how much ye do favor truth,
defend him against venomous tunges and overthwart wittis, which does more
mischief, than Pasquyllus babbling. Fare ye well.

PASQVILL. PASQVILL US. GNATO. HARPOCRATES. PASQVILL.
IT is a wonder to se the world: Now adays, the more strange, the better
lyked, therefore uneath a man may know an honest man from a false harlotte.
But peace, who is this gentilman, that stands here harkening? what I say mine
old fellow ^^a^h^, I pray the come forth, ye steal not so away. Perdye I
know your old fascion, though ye be now thus strau^gely disguised.


GNATO. who speaks to me^ Pasquill? Saw thou not Harpocrates late? I seek
for him, he must come to my master.


PASQVILL. I wot not whether thine eye sought for Harpocrates, but sure I am,
that thine ear sought for Pasquillus. But I pray the turn about: thou
haste the str^ngest apparaile that ever I looked on: what have we here? A cappe
full of aglettes and bottons, this long estrige fether does wonderly well, the
tirfe of the cappe turned down before like a pentise has a maruailous good
grace: but this long gown with strayte sleues, is a non sequitur, and it
shall let you to flee, and than your feathers shall stand you in no stead,
and so moughte ye happen to be combred, if ye should come in to astoure, where
ye would shyft for your self. God a vow wharte doste thou with this long
typpete? If it were white as it is black, I would have said, thou came to
challenge men at wrastlyng, but I wene ye have walked late in the street, and
pulled it from some worshypfull doctor. What a gods name, have ye a book in
your hand? A good feloweshyp whereof is it? Let me se. No^um stestamentum?
What, thou deceiuest me, I had w^nde thou could have skylled of nothing,
but only of flaterye. But what is this in your bosom? An other book, or else a
pair of cards of valery ^alsehed? Did I not say at the first, that it is a
wonder to se this world? Lo some will be in the bowelles of divinity or they
know what belongethe to good humanytie. Let se, what is here? Troylus?
Chreseid? Lord what discord is between these two books? yet a great deal more
is there in thine aparayl. And yet most of al between the book in thy hand, and
thy condiciones. As god help me, as much as between troth and leasinge,


GNA. well Pasquillus, thou wylt never leave thyn old custom in raylynge. Yet
haste thou wit enough to perceive what damage and hyndraunce thou haste thereby
sustained: and more art thou likely and with greater peril, if thou have not
good awayte, what, and to whom, and where thou spekest. I herd the words
that thou spakeste while ere, whereof if I would be a reporter, it might turn
the to no littell displeasure: but I know that thou art a good fellow, and
woldeste that al thing were well, though thy words be all crabbed. Wherefore
not withstanding that thou speak rebukefully to me, I take it in iape, ^e
will carry hense with me the presumtuous words that thou spakeste. But by mine
advise seue now at the last thin indiscreet liberty in speech, wherein thou use
unprofitable tau^tes and rebukes, I may well call them unprofitable, whereby
nothing that thou blamist, is of one jot amended, and thou loseste thereby
preferment, which thine excellent wit^e does require: and that wors is,
trauaylest in study of mind to augmente then own detriment, and therein losist
much time, that might be better employed.

I remember, that ones I asked a man, that was wise and very well learned, how
I might soneste come to promotion: he said: using Aeschylus counsaylle,
which was a writar of tragedies: and I demanded, what it was? And he answered,
holding thy tongue where it behooves the. And speaking in time that which is
convenient. And the same lesson Pasquillus, if thou woldeste observe, I doubt
not, but that thou should find therein no litel commodity.


PAS. Mary Gnato, I will no more wonder at thy side gown: for thou art much
wyser than I supposed: I had wend all this while, that by nature only thou
had ben instructed to flatter, but by saint Ione I se now, that thou
ioynest also thereto a shrewde wit, and preparest to the helpinge thereof, as it
were a craft gathered of learning and scripture. Not withstandinge a good
feloweshyp, if thy taryeng shall not be greuouse or hurtefull unto the (for I
know how expedient it is that thou be not long out of the sight of thy
master, if thou wylt be Gnatho alone) tell me how thou understand the said
sentence of Aeschylus tragedy: for I fear we two do understand him dyuersely,
and than thy counsel in respect to thy purpose shall little profit me.


GNATO. Supposeste thou so? In good faith, and to me it seems so plain, that
it nedethe none expositor, but to the intent that my counsayll to the may take
some effect, in the little time that I may now tarry, I will as compendiously
as I can, show my conceyte, in declaryng what I think, that Aeschilus mente
by the said sentence.

It behooves a man to hold his tongue, when he aforeseethe by any experyence,
that the thing, which he would purpose or speak of to his superioure, shall
neither be pleasantly herd, nor thankefully taken. And in words opportunity
and time always do depend on the affection and appetite of him that herethe
them. How say thou Pasquill, is it not so?


PAS. So? No so mote I go. But one thing here me, I will not flatter the
Gnatho. If thou understand no better the new testament (which thou cariest
as solemnly with the, as thou shuldeste read a privy lesson, hem, I had
almost told where openly) than thou do Aeschilus sentence, which as if
thou had been learned, thou toldest to me for a counsaylle, thy brethe will
be so hot shortly, that thou wylt make men aferde to come within twenty foot
of the. And hark in thine ear. By my troth, I wene it be neither better nor
warse.


GNA. Will ye not leave your overthwart facion. I can no more. I se it is wayne
to counsel a mad man to look to his profit. Fare well, I have somewhat else to
do, than to attend to thy pratynge.


PAS. What be you angry for this? Look on the book in your hand: perdy it
agrees not with your profession to be out of charity. But gentle Gnatho tarry
so long as I may show the how I understand the said sentence of Aeschilus.


GNATO. Say on.


PASQVIL. Where two hosts be assembled, and in point to fight: if thou be
among them, though thou be a great astronomer, it behouethe the to hold thy
tunge, and not to talk of conjunctions, and of the tryne or quartil aspectes,
but to prepare the to bataylle. Where a good fellowship is set at dyce or at
cards, though thou be learned in geometry: hold thy tunge, and speak not of
proporcions or figures. Where men be set at a good soupper, and be busily
occupied in eating and drinking, though thou be depely seen in philosophy,
hold thy tongue, and dispute not of temperaunce, or moderate diete. Where thou
art among a great company, at bankettynges or other recreations: though thou
be well learned in holy scripture, hold thy tongue, interpret not Paul's
epistels, for therein is no daliaunce.

When thou art sitting in counsel about matters of weyghty importance:
talk not than of passetyme or dalyaunce, but omyttinge affection or dreede,
speak than to the purpose.

Where thou seeste thy friend in a great presence honored of al men, though
thou knoweste in him notable vices, yet there hold thy tongue, and reproach him
not of them. Where thou ^eest thy lord or master in the presence of many,
resolved in to fury or wantonness, though thou have all rody aduertisementes,
how he shall refrain it: yet hold thy tongue than, for troublyng that presen^e.

On the other part. If before battle joined, thou beholdest thy side the
weiker and thine adversaries more puissaunt and stronger: speak than of
policy, whereby thou hopeste to obtain the vyctory.

Before that thy friend syttethe down to dyce, if thou do perceive, that he
shall be ouermatched: discorage him be time, or he repent him in poverty.

When thy friends be set down to souper, before the cups be twyse filled:
reherce the peril and also dishonesty that hapeneth by glotony.

Wha^ young men and women have appointed a banquet, than er the ouens be hete, and
tables al covered, reherce hardely the sentences of saint Paul or of saint
Hierom, if thou be learned.

If thou be called to counsel, after ^hou have either herd one rayson before
the, or at the least weye, in the balaunce of thine own rayson ponderid the
question: spare not to show thine advise, and to speak truly, remembringe that
god is not so far of, but that he can here the.

If thou know a vice in thy friend, which is of a few men suspected, er it
be talked of at the tavern, or of his enemy reproched, warn him of the damage
that may happen, if it be not amended.

When thou perceyuest thy Master to be resolved in to wrath or affections
dishonest: Before wrath be increased in to furye, and affection in to
voluptuous appetyte. As opportunity serves the, reverently and with tokens of
love toward him speak such words as shall be convenient.

Opportunity consists in place or time; where and when the said affections
or passion of wrath be some dele mytygate and out of extremity. And words be
called conueniente, which have respect to the nature and state of the
person, unto whom they be spoken, and also to the detrymente, which might
ensue by the vice or lack that thou haste espied, and it ought not to be as
thou haste supposed. For o^portunity and time for a counsayllour to speak, do
not depend of the affection and appetyte of him that is counsayled: mar^ than
counsaylle were but a vain worde^ and every man would do as him list. For if
he listed not to here any counsel, he should never be warned of his own
error but by saciety and tediousness of his own vice, or by grace (if he were
worthy to have it.


GNA. Now by the faith I owe to god, I would not have thought, that thou
had been so well raysoned. For men have always reputed the, but for a
babbler and rayler.


PAS. Ye what men? By god those, which ought most to have thanked me. I say
hark in thine ear: Popes, emperoures, kings, and cardinals. Thou hereste
what I say. When they, by such as thou and Harpocrates be, were with flatterye
and dyssymulation brought in to the hate of god and the people, ones in a year,
I gave them warning, neither for menaces, nor yet for beatinges I never cessed.
Thou art remembered wha^ pope Leo swear, that he would throw me in to the river
of Tyber. And that year I went to saynct James on pilgremage, which I auowed,
if I escaped drowning. But in a unlucky hour was I a pilgreme: for sens there
have comen both to saint James at Compostella, and to saint Peter at Rome
every year ten thousand pilgremes fewer, tha^ there did a thousand years
before that time. And men say, that in other contreys diverse monasteryes be
like to break hospitalyty, because their offringes be not the third part so
much as they were accustomed. For in deed now adays men's devotion waxes
even as could, as the mounkes be in the quier at midnyght, that commoditye had
Rome by mine absence. And yet after my pilgremage done, I had for my troth and
plainness as much pardone of god, as if I had bylded one cloister in Rome,
and an other in Parise, and put in to eueryche of them an hundred friars
conuentuals. And yet were that a blessed deed, if the law were not against
incresinge of valiant beggars. But to my purpose. If these men that we speak
of, had wisely and coldely expended and tried my words, that they called
rayllynge, many things might have been prevented, that were after lamented.
Germany should not have kicked against her mother: Emperors and princis should
not have been in perpetual discord, and often times in peril: prelattes have
been laughed at, as dissardes: saynctes blasphemed, and miracles reproved for
iugglinges, laws and statutes contemned, and officers littell regarded. What
must needs follow, sens my breath fail the me? I leave that to the Gnatho to
coniect, for thou art wise inoughe to consider.


GNA. I know what thou meaneste, but a felyshyp leave thy bourdinge and
currishe philosophy, sens it is neither profitable, pleasant, nor thankful.
Who would be so mad to drive about a myll, and is sure, that all the meal,
that he gryndeth, shall fall on the floor: sauinge a little mylduste, that
shall fly in to his eien, and put him to pain, and perchance make him
blind? And thou studiest to speak many good words, which be lost in the
rushes: and if any ill meaning may be pycked out, it is cast in thy nose to
put the in danger. L^se no more labor Pasquil, but follow my counsel: and
if within two years thou be not new painted and gylt, and have mo men
wonderynge at the, than at any other image in Rome, by my truth I will stand
in the rain and son as long as thou haste done, and yet it were an
unreasonable wager.


PAS. Go to let se, what is thy counsel?


GNA. Mary I will tell the. Thou haste a very sharp wit and aredy:
wherefore thou art mete for the world. And pity it were, that such a jewel
should be neglected.


PAS. And pity i^ were, that such a flatterar as thou art, should long be
vnhanged. But pass on a goddis name.


GNA. I wiste well, that in such a froward piece of tymbre, I should lose
much labor: yet will I prove, if good counsel may warke any thing in the.
Now here Pasquill what I say. By thy long railing, thy wit is well known.
Now turn the lefe. And when thou hereste any thing purposed by them, whom
thou haste offended, what so ever it be, affirm it to be well, and therewith
auaunce the wit and intent of the person, that spoke it, which thou may
do excellently well. For he that can despise spitfully, can if he list, praise
and commend also incomparably. And if thou can not refrain from rebukinge and
tauntynge: practyse thy natural fury and woodnesse again them that repugne
again the said purpose. And where thou dyddest wonder to see me have in my
hand the New testament, if thou woldist do the same, and now in thine age,
lay aparte the lesson of gentyles, called humanity, sens thou may have
good leysour, being not yet called to counsel, pick out here and there
sentences out of holy scripture, to fournyshe thy reason with authority. I
make god auow, thou shall be within three months able to confound the
greattest divine in all Italy. And when thy conversation and good opinion is
known, than shalt thou be called for. But than always remember how so ever
the tenoure bell ringeth he ringethe always in tune, and though he jar
somewhat, yet thou canste not here it, his son is so great, and thine ears be
so little. And if other men find it, say that it is no fault, but a quauer
in music, and became the bell, if they had the wit to perceive it. I teach
the in parables, for this craft would not be opened to every man: for it
should not be for my profit: but thy subtle wit comprehends all that I mean,
thou art so acquainted with all our experience.


PAS. Now on my feyth well said, I could not have founden a craftier knave to
learn of between this and Jerusalem. But who comethe here? He semethe a
reverend personage, he is none of thy sort I trow?


GNA. By god we be right cosens, I by the mother side, and he by the father.
And that caused me to speak so much as I do, and him so little, and yet is
there small diversity between our conditions.


PAS. What meaneste thou thereby?


GNA. For we both have one master. And when he spekethe, or doethe any thing
for his pleasure: I study with words to commend it. If my couseyn stand by,
he speaks littell or nothing, but forminge his visage in to a gravity with
silence, lokethe as if he affirmed all thing, that is spoken.


PAS. what is his name?


GNA. Harpocrates.


PAS. That is a hard name by Jesus. But why holdethe he his finger at his
mouth.


GNA. For he has espied me talking, and because he ^enethe that I speak to
much, he makethe a sign, that I should cesse: but I am glad, that I have
met with him. Cousin Harpocrates, I have sought for you this two hours.


PAS. why speaks he not?


GNA. O that is his gravity to pause a while or he speak, he learned it when he
was student at Bonony.


HAR. What is the matter Gnato?


GN. My master when he has dined, will sit in counsel about weighty
causes.


HAR. And when I have din^d, I will give attendaunce.


PAS. Lo is it not as I said, a wonder to se this world? In old time men used
to occupy the morning in deep and subtle studies, and in counsels
concerning the common weal, and other matters of great importance. In like
wise than to here controversies, and give judgments. And if they had any
causes of their own, than to treat of them, and that did they not without a
great consyderation, procedynge both of natural rayson, and also counsel
of ph^yke. And after diner they refreshed their wits, either with
instruments of musyke, or with redinge or heringe some pleasant story, or
beholdinge some thing delectable and hones^e. And after their diner was
digested, than either they exercysed them selfs in rydinge, runnynge on foot,
shotynge, or other like pastyme, or went with their hawks to se a f^ight at
the river, or would se their grehoundes course the hare for the dear: which
they did as well to recreate their wits, as also to get them good
appetite. But lo, now all this is turned in to a new fascion, god help us,
the world is almost at an end: For after noone is turned to fore noone^
virtue into vice, vice into virtue, devotion into hypocresie, and in some places
men say, faith is turned to herisye. Did I not now say well at the
beginning. That it is a wonder to see this world?


HAR. Him Pasquillus.


PAS. well, ye think as much as I speak, for all your poynting and wynkyng.


HAR. But in silence is surety.


PA. Per^haunce nay. If I perceived one at thy back with a sword drawn,
ready to strike the, would thou that I should hold my peace, or else tell the?


HA. Nay, silence were than out of season.


PAS. Now well fare you for your bald reason, a man may see, what wisdom
there is in your compendiouse speaking, ye will season silence. Mary I wene my
lord should have a better cook of you than a counsayllour. Not withstanding
for your silence ye might be a confessor. But yet I doubt me: for I remember
Gnato what thou say deste while ere, that when ye were present both with your
master, if thou commendest his sayenges or doings, this man would, approve it
with silence and countenance, which might do more harm, than all thy
flatery, than what mischief might follow of his damnable silence, if in
secret time of confession, wherein confessors have above al men most largest
lyberte to blame and reprove, he should either dissemble the vices that he
knows in him, whom he has in confession, or else forbear to declare to him
the enormity of such capytall sins as he has confessed.


GNA. By my truth thou art a busy fellow, do thou remember, what thou
saydeste, when thou dydest epsy, that I had a book of the New Testament.


PAS. what said I?


GNA. Mary this thou saydeste, that some would be in the bowels of divinity or
they know what belongethe to good humanite. Now thou take thy self by the
nose: for without having regard to whom thou spekest, thou presumest to teache
this worshipful man, what he shall do in confession.


PAS. It is well raysoned of you by sweet saint Ronion: ye define teaching, as
well as he did season his silence. Dydest thou here me teach him, what he
should do? Nay and if thou haste so much wit to remember, upon the words that
thou thy self speak, I declare what inconvenience inought happen by the
flaterynge silence of ^ confessor: wenest thou that I was never confessed? Yes
I have told a tale to a friar or this time with a grote in my hand, and have been assoyled forthwith without any further rehersall: where if a poor man had
told half somoch, he should have been made equal to the devil, and have been
so chid, that when he had gone from confession, he should have hanged down
the eres, as if he had been lerning of prick song. All be it, it is the
custom of some of you, that be courtiars, when ye can not defend your matter
with raison, to embraied him that speaks, with presumption, treson,
misprision, or such other like pratye morselles, to stop him of talking.
But between two men full of words, truth shall never or late be espied:
wherefore I will no more Gnatho meddell with the, but from hens forth I will
speak to Harpocrates for if he can persuade me, that his silence is better
than my babbling, I will follow his doctrine rather than thine, for I have
professed from my chyldehode never to speak in erneste to my master or friend,
contrary to that, that I think.


GNA. Ergo thou haste professed to stand still in the rain, and ones perchance
to be thrown in to Cyber, or broken in pieces.


PAS. And perchance if god never lied, I may be in the palaice merry, when thou
shalt sit without on a ladder, and make all thy friends sorye. Herdest thou
never, that the world is round, and therefore it is ever tourninge, now the
wrongeside upward, an other time the right, but let this pass. I pray the
Harpocrates teach me how thou do season thy silence, do thou it with
salt or with spyces?


HAR. Nay with sugar, for I use little salt.


PAS. And that makes your counsayl more sweet than sau^ry.


HAR. Ye speak like a potticary.


PAS. And I have known a wise poticary done much more good, if he were
trusted, than a folyshe physician. But now to thy silence, that thou so much
praysest Harpocrates. Thou saydest that in silence was suertie. And I asked, If
I perceived one at thy back with a sword drawn ready to strike the, whether
should I speak or keep silence? And thou answerest, that silence was tha^ out
of season.


HAR. So said I.


PAS. I can the thank, thou abidest by thy word: although at this day, that
be acomted no polyce. But why saydest thou, that silence were than out of
seson?


HAR. For I might be sore hurt, or perchance killed, if I were not than
warned, mine enmy being so nygh me.


PAS. Ye: I wiste well, that ye would not be slain, nor yet wounded, if ye
might have rome enough to run, or your long clothes did not let you. But I
put case I knew, that your enmye were at your chamber door, or let it be
further, at Poytiers in France, who had auowed to slay you, and were in his
journey toward you, but when or where he would strike you, I know not: should
I forth with warn you, or else keep silence until I saw his sword over
your head^ ready to kyl you, that I might keep silence all way in ^eason?


HAR. ^o that were no frendshype but rather traison, to know me to be in such
peril, and to (...) it from me, that there were no mean (...) ^^cape, but only
by fortune.


PAS. What (...) less than trayson? Peace ye are yet no pope, and because ye
be a priest ye be exempted from being emperor or king.


HA. Haste thou any other term more propre, where a man consents to the
destruction of his friend, which specially trusts him?


PA. By my troth nay, if I shall not ly^ but now I am glad, that I have found
you, yet will I a litel better assaie you. If I saw your cosen Gnatho put
poison in to a cup of wine secretly, and bring it unto you, should I hold
my peace, or else tell you?


GNA. Mary I defye the, thou know no^ me to be of such disposition.


PAS. what? ye be of a very coler^ke complexion: what art thou the warse, that
I name the herein for an example? If by the way of argument, and to make the
offense the more horrible, I would put for the case, that Pope Adriane were
poisoned by one of his cardinals, because he would have minisshed their
majesty, and have brought them to humblenes: Perdy this were no blasphemy.


GNA. There is in thy raylynge none harmony.


PA. No, for therein is no flatery. But Harpocrates that with thy sober silence
mockest us both, what sayeste thou to my question?


HA. Now on my faith thou art a merry companyon.


PAS. Ye good enough, when ye have nothing left to save with your honest,
than ye bring forth that merry conclusyon: but say on, would thou than,
that I should keep silence or no? Admit the ca^e to be true, though Gnatho be
angry.


HAR. Keep silence than quoda, nay by the faith of my body.


PAS. So I thought, except ye be weary of worldly worship, and be now contented
to die, and let other men step in to your rowmes, and take peynes for you:
but ye say, that silence were than out of seson?


HAR. By saint John ye.


PAS. And for what cause tell me your rayson.


HAR. Mary for if thou diddist not warn me, I might be deceived by him, that
I trusted, and drink poison in the stead of wine: where of I should either be
dead, or fall in to such sickness and brekynge out, that al men should abhor
me.


PAS. I would to god, that thou would affirm always truth to thy master, as
thou doeste now to me. But Harpocrates thou would not die, nor yet live to
be abhorred of all men: therein I can praise the. Now sens thou art a good
man (as I suppose and also learned, woldeste thou that any werse thing should
happen to thy master, that trusts the, than thou would to thy self?


HAR. No truly.


PAS. And if thou kneweste any danger toward him, as I have rehearsed, thou
ought as well to warn him of it, as I ought the.


HAR. I can not deny that.


PAS. And also thou would.


HAR. Why, wherefore should I not?


PAS. For perauenture if your master mistrustethe him not, that has auowed
to kill him, and accomted your tale for a fantasy, or if he fauourethe him
much that ye know would poison him: he will suppose, that ye tell it him of
some suspicion or malice, and will lean a defe^are toward you. And than he,
on whom ye complained, being advertised, shall omit that, which he purposed,
to prove you a liar. And than should ye both lose your thank of your master,
and be called a detractour: and also have him, whom ye accused and al his
bend, vigilant espialles to bring you in danger, is it not thus?


HAR. Ye sir by Jesus.


PAS. What if another man, which louethe your master no less than ye do,
gave him such warning, and ye knew it to be true: but ye perceive, that
your master lists not to here of such matter, or perchance commendethe
him, which is complained on: would ye also preyse him, to support the trust
that your master has in him, or commend your master therein, for his
constance and li^tell mistrus^inge?


HAR. Nay than were I worthy a hot mischiuing if I would help to bring so my
master unto his confusyon.


PAS. What, would you hold your tunge, and say nothing?


HAR. No but I would forbere for a time, and awayte dylygentely, to see if the
peril would cesse, or might be by some occasion prevented, or by my master
other wise spied: but when it were imminente, thanne would I give warninge.


PAS. Imminent, what call ye that?


HAR. When his ennemie is at his back with his sword drawn, ready to strike
him.


PAS. And what for poysonynge?


HAR. When I saw my friend have the cup in his hand, and were ready to
drink.


PAS. How gate ye all this wit with so litell learning? It is not for
naught, that ye be a counsaillour, sens ye have such a praty feate in
seasonyng. Of likelihood ye be well seen in constellations, and do know
perfectly the subtle distinctions of times and momentes, ye would forbere to
warn your master at the beginning of daungier, and when he is at the point
to fall in to it, perchance or ye shall not be present, or else not able^ or of
powar to resist it: but teach me I pray you, what ye call imminent, for it
is a word taken out of latyne, and not commenly used.


HAR. Marie the thing that (...) imminente, is when it apperethe to be in the
instante to be done or to happen: and after some men's exposition, as it
thretened to come.


PAS. It is well expounded and clerkly. Than if ye will divide the time into
instantes, because perchance ye be a good Dunse man: ye must remember that the
instante when it appears, that your friend shall be slain, and the instant
when he is in sleing, be not one, but those instantes be diverse. Nor the act
is not in one point, when it is thretned, and when it is in doing. Wherefore
when there is a sword drawn at your masters back, ready to kill him, or your
master has a cup with poison in his hand, and is ready to d^ynke: the perell
is not now imminent, that is to say, to be done, or to happen: but it is in
the instant of doing or happenynge. Neither it threteth, but is at the very
point of executing. Wherefore there is repugnancie in your own reasoninge, if
this word, Imminent, be truly expounded.


HAR. Yes that may not be denied, it has been so long by noble authors
approved.


PAS. Than resort to your first assertion Wha^ the peril were imminent, than
would ye give warning: and it follows, that than silence where out of season.


HAR. Ye truly.


PAS. Ergo speech were than in good season: is not this your conclusyon^


HAR. Thou hittest it justly in mine opinion.


PAS. What before and after this instant?


HAR. Speech is unprofitable: before, to him that speaks as I have rehearsed:
after, to him, which is spoken unto. For where may be no longer defense, or
resistance, spech nothing avails.


PAS. Ye thought all this while, that in maynteyning your silence ye had
reproved my liberty of speech, which ye call babblyng. And that ye had
appointed a time for silence and speking, which ye thought that I lacked. Now
behold Harpocrates, how in the time to speak ye and I have all this while
agreed. And in the two inslantes, wherewith ye season your silence, if we two
disagree: se that it is because ye err so much from natural reason.


HER. How prove ye that.


PAS. Even by your own conclusion.


HAR. Nay, ye can not bring that to pass for all your subtylle invention.


PAS. Well, I will do what I can. And I trow, ye will not deny me, if ye be not
of the condition of some men, which by no reason will be removed from their
own opinion. But now to the matter. Thou saydest at the first, that if thine
ennemy stood at thy back with his sword drawn to slay the, thou woldeste
than be warned, lest thou moughtest be sore hurt, or perchance killed, which
all though it were folishely spoken of so great a learned man (as who says
thine enemy could not slay the, except he stood at thy back, and had his
sword drawn) yet in speking we two have accorded. But to your own saienge ye
have repugned: where ye said that in silence was suertie. But to excuse that,
ye did season your silence: that is to say, putting to time: which undoubtedly
is an wholesome herb and a ^au^ry: and than ye were content to warn your
friend, when the perell were imminent. And that term ye expounded thus: when
the thing appeared to be in the instante to be done or to happen: and as it is
were thretned to come. And hereupon ye grounded your conclusyon, that spech
were than in good season. Which argument I will not deny, for I have been always
of the same opinion. But now remember your grammar, and consider that the said
definition is in the future time, that is to say, the thing, which is
imminente, is to be done hereafter, and not in doing, which is the present
time. Than whyther your masters enemy be at his back, or at Poyters in
France, as I said at the first, if ye know, that he purposes to slay him:
than it appears to you, that the killinge of your master is in the instant to
be done, and is thretned to happen, ergo the perille is imminent, and ye are
bound to give your friend warning.


HAR. Perchance I may know a thing, and yet it appears not to me, and than
your argument avails not an herringe. As I may know by other men's
telling, or by conjecture of a light suspicion.


PAS. Nay than shall we have much a do with you, if ye will compel me of every
word that I speak, to make definition. Though I have not so much lerninge as
you, I use always my words in their propre sygnification, and to serve to the
matter that I reason unto. I know a thing, which by a cause I consider
euidentely. And that which is only reported, I do hear, but I know not: but
conjecture is by signs, resemblaunce, or likely hoode, which may be false:
and yet is it not to be neglected, as it shall appear afterward. But now retourn
we to knowledge, which being certain, as I have defyned it, as soon as thou
know that one will kylle or poison thy master, the peril is imminent: than
by thine own reason, thou ought to warn hyme: if not, thou art by thine own
sentence condemned of treason.


HAR. Thou say soore to me Pasquill. Not with standing yet me semethe: I
should not warn him so soon, for the dangers, which thou rehersyddest,
moughte happen unto me, if I lacked a thankful and secret herer, or else the
purpose were changed: but it were better to tary^ until it came to such
preparatyon, that it might not be denied.


PASQVIL. So might it be, if ye were partner of the conspiracy, for than
might ye happen to be made privy to the time, when, and the place, where that
your master should stand in such ieopardy: but else ye might know of such a
thing purposed, and ye be not suer of the time, when it should be executed.
Than if ye forbere to warn your master until the peril might be more
evident, and as ye say, moughte not be denied: before that time it might be
more than imminent, and in the second instant, that is to say in the self
doing, or to speak it more clenly, in execucion.


HARPO. But than were I out of danger.


PAS. Ye that is all that ye care for: yet moughte ye happen to be deceived,
and your silence instead of suertie turn you to trouble. For seldom is the
master in ieopardie, and the servants at liberty, specially they which be
next about him: Or if ye happen to escape ennemies, if it may be perceived that
ye knew of the perile, and would not discover it, ye should perchance escape
hardly the halter, though ye had shaken of al your long robes, and were but
in a ierkynne. Ye^ if ye warned your master at the be^ynninge, though he
took it not thankfully, yet did you your duty, and can not lack reward of
god, who louethe truth, for your fydellite. And though he, whom ye
disapoynted, or his affynitie, shall seek how to be avenged on you: either god
will defend you, or if there fall to you, thereby any aduersytie, finally
falsehode long kept in, will braste out at the last, and than shall
repentan^e cause your simplicite to be had in renome and perpetual memory:
which part of honor to every honest man, passes all other reward, that may
be given in this life that is transitory. But because we speak while ere of
conjecture. If by signs and liklihodes, d^pely considered without malice or
other vicious affection, ye do coniect, that your master is in peril.
Although ye be not so much bounden to tell him, as if ye knew it: yet if ye
tell it him with your conjecture ye fulfill more the parts of a good servant
than he that has the same conjecture and spekethe nothing. For if that thing
happen not, that ye mistrusted, the cause is to be referred to god: but the
signs and lykelyhoodes ought not for all that to be an other time despised:
and your care and love toward your master are to be highly commended. If it do
happen, than your dilygence and study are to be extolled.


HA. By the faith of my body thou have raisoned cunnyngly.


PAS. That cunning I never learned in scoles, but by long obseruacion and
markynge of other men's folly.


HAR. But Pasquil, though in perils concerning man's life, speech may be
preferred sometime before silence. It concludes not, that it shall be so in all
other things.


PAS. To bring the to this point have I made all this long babbling. Estemest
thou life more than good renome, or the welthe of thy countraye? For the which
so many puissant and noble princis, so many wise and excellent philosophers
have left their lives willingely? Who gladly will leave a better thing ^or a
warse? Except for wanto^nesse, or for the new facion. Is any death so much to
be drad as perpetual infamye, the subuercyon of the common weal, universal
destruction of all the hole country? Which to escape or resist, many valyante
knights, honorable matrones^ and chaste damoyselles have offered them selfs to
the does. And who refusethe the less peyn to cast him self in to the gra^tter
tourment? Or doste thou esteem the death of the soul to be of less importance
than the death of the body? What sayeste thou? that judgment belongethe to
thy faculty.


HARPOCRATES. In deed there ye touch me.


PASQVILL. Like wise, a knock on the heed, though it be to the scul, is not
so dangerous to be healed, as an yuell affection thrast in to thy masters
brains by false opinion. Nor a wipe over his face with a sword shall not
blemmishe so much his visage, as vice shall deforme his soul and deface his
renome, whereby he is further known than by his phisonomy. Is there any poison
can make him to be so abhorred of man, as avarice, tyranny, or bestly living
shall cause him be hated of god and of man universally?


HAR. No in good faith, I think thou say truly.


PAS. Than confer all this together, with that which we before raysoned, and
se where in any thing that thy master speakethe or does, if there be any of
the perilles imminent, which I late rehearsed: whether it were better to speak
or keep silence, and in which of them were most surety. And consider also,
that between these two perils, that I have rehearsed, is no lyttel diuersyte,
besides that the one is much more than the other. For in the bodily peril, in
the time of the stroke perchance your master would here you, and thereby
escape, or ye might defend him, but the other peril of soul or mind, the
longer that he contynueth therein, the more gladly he receives the stroke, and
the more he will disdain to be warned by you: and than ye put your self in
more danger of that, which we spoke of before: but for all that neither in time
of danger thou ought to leave thy master vnwarned, which thou have all
ready granted: nor yet when thy master is stricken or poisoned, speech is
unprofitable as thou have supposed.


HARPOCRA. How prove you that? For if ye be a surgeon, ye know it must be
your deeds and not your wordis, that must help him.


PASQVILL. Now it is well remembered, ye shall have gods blessinge. I never
herd a more fool by my holydome, does a surgeon all his cure with plasters
and instruments? sometime he spekethe also, or if he be domme, one speakethe
for him, and tells his pacient, what metes and drynkes be unwholesome, which
be leuitiues and helps his medicine. Also when he perceyueth him to be faynte
or discomforted, than with sweet words and fair promisys he reuiueth his
courage. If he be disobedient or riottouse, he rebukes him, and do aggrauate
the danger to make the syckenes more grievous. The same is the office of a good
confessor, where he perceives man's soul to be wounded with viciouse
affections, sins that a conffessour serves for none other purpose, but to
cure man's soul of deadly sins, which be her mortal diseases: but can he
do that without speaking? Also ye said where might be no longer resiste^ce,
speech nothing auaylled: I wene ye said truer than ye were ware. For when
Gnatho with his flatery, and ye with your silence have ones rootid in your
masters heart false opinions and vicious affecti^, which is the poison, that
we so much speak of, though ye perceue the danger, and than sore repent
you, yet shall it perchance be impossible with speech to remove those opinions,
and cure those affectis, except ye lou^d so well your master, that for his
health ye would confess your own errors.


GN. Nay gods body, so might we get for our self a pair of tariars.


PAS. Well it were better tarry, than run to the dyuel with your master, or
that good re^o^me should run away from him. But tell me Harpocrates as thou
think, were not speech now expedient? or how might thy master be
otherwise curid? with silence trowist thou?


HAR. It semethe that silence should nothing profit, nor speech should any
thing auaylle, if the opinions and affectes be so impressed, that they can not
be removed.


PAS. Yet again, if ye speak no wyseliar to your master, than ye do to me,
he has of you a worshypfull counsayloure, I demand of you remedy to cure
wrong opinions and vycious affectes: and ye answer me, that neither speech
nor silence is profitable. Like as if I had asked counsayl of a phisytion what
thing would heal me, of my syckenes, and he would say, that gyuinge to me
medicine or gyuinge me none, should not avail me.


HAR. Spoke I not well, where I find no remedy?


PAS. No, and ye look wisely. For and if ye remember, I did not affirm
expressly, that it should be impossible to remove false oppinions or vicious
affectes, where they were impressed: but I joined thereto peradventure, and also
an exception, if ye that induced them, confessed not your own error. Than if
your confession might cure them, speech were than not unprofitable. And if
your own confession auailid not, sens I affyrmed not expressly, that the
said diseases were incurable: if neither silence, nor speech should be
profitable, what should than be the remedy?


HAR. I make god a vow. I can not tell, except it were grace.


PAS. I herd the never speak so wisely. But yet supposest thou, that grace
will so lyghtely enter, where false opinion and viciouse affectes be so depely
imprinted, except they be first some what removed by good perswasyon? onles
thou think, that every man shall be called of god, as saint Paul was, who was
elected. And yet now I remember me, at his conuersyon Christ spoke unto him,
and told him that it was hard to spurn again the prycke: where if Christ had
hold his peace, Saul which was tha^ beaten down to the ground, moughte have
happened never to have been called saint Paul: but if he had escaped, he would
by lykelihod have continued still in his error.


HAR. It is not for us Pasquill to inserche the impenetrable iugementes of god:
but the grace of god has happened far above men's expectation: and where
al other remedy lacked. For tha^ the puissaunce of all mighty god is specially
proved.


PAS. But trusting only therein, to leave our own endeavor, I think it
presumption. And what endeavor may be in silence? Wherefore speech is not only
profitable but also of necessity must be used in healinge the dyseases, both
of the soul and also the body.


HAR. I can not deny that, if I say truly.


PAS. Than when is your silence in season?


HAR I can not shortly tell, I am so abashed at thy froward reason.


PAS. Than will I help you to know your own virtue, wherein ye have such
delectation. I trow ye herd not how I did expound the sentence of A^schylus,
which Gnatho rehearsed to me for a counsel?


HAR. Yes, that I did, for I stood all that while at the ^wyndowe herkenynge of
the.


PAS. Se how full the world is of such false images, that do here all, when
they seem to here nothing: as I trust to be saved, with such fellows it is
perilous dealyng. But yet that shall not cause Pasquill to leave his bablyng.
Now Harpocrates, bear away the said sentence with mine exposition, and use
it.


HAR. So I will, as much as pertains to sylens.


PASQVIL. Ye god a vow and also to spekyng, or else all the counsel is not
worth three halspens. Think ye to be a counsailour, and speak not? What where
the Emperor the better, if instead of counsailours he had set in his chamber
the images of Cato, Mettellus, Lelius, Cicero, and such other persons, who
lyuinge, far excelled in wit, experyence, and learning, them, which be now
about him? be men that sytte and speak nothing, any better than they? No, but
rather much warse: for they serve for nothing, yet the images do that, wherefore
they be ordained, that is to say b^ynge to men's remembrance the wysedom and
virtue of them, whom they represented. But doumme counsaylours do not their
office, wherefore they be called to counsel, but by their silence they cause
many things to be brought to an unlucky conclusion.


HAR. And thou that art not called to counsel, art full of babbling.


PAS. But ones in a year: and wo^ist thou why that is?


HAR. Nay, tell me I pray the.


PAS. Mary if they that be called, would always play the partis of good
Counsailoures: And both spirytuall and temporal governors would banysh the
and Gnatho out of their Courts, except ye amend your conditions. I would
speak never a word, but sit as still as a stone, like as ye se me: But for as
much as it happens all contrary, and that things be so far out of frame, that
stones do grouche at it (remembrest thou not what a clatteryng they made at
the last wars in Italy?) and yet counsaylours be spechelesse: I that am set
in the city of Rome, which is the head of the world, ones in the year shall
here of the state of all princis and regions. And because in the month of May
men be all set in pleasure, and than they take merrily such words as be
spoken again them: than boldly I put forth my verdict^, and that openly.


HAR. There thou do folysshely: for thou should do more good, if thou
spakest privily.


PAS. Tushe man, my playnnesse is so well known, that I shall never come unto
privy chamber or galery.


HAR. Sens thou profytest so little, why art thou so busy?


PAS. To the intent that men shall perceive, that their vices, which they think
to be wonderful secret, be known to al me^. And that I hope always, that by
much clamor, and open repentance, when they see the thing not succeed to
their purpose, they will be ashamed.


HA. Yet may thou happen to be deceived.


PAS. But they much more, when they know not who loves them truly.


GNA. Harpocrates, it is time that we repair to the court, lest we be blamed.
And let us leave Pasquyll with his praterye.


PAS. And I will leave you both with your flattery. Yet I trust in god to see
the day, that I will not set by the best of you both a butterflye. As great
a wonder have I seneer this time,


HAR. Farewell Pasquyl, and think on silence.


PAS. Farewell Harpocrates, and think on thy conscience, I wene I might bie
as much of the costard monger for two pence. Now when these two fellows comme
to their master, they will tell all that they have hard of me, it makes no
matter. For I have said nothing, but by the way of advertisement, without
reprochyng of any one person, wherewith no good man has cause to take any
displesure. And he that does, by that which is spoken, he is soon spied, to
what part he leans, Judge what men list, my thought shall be free. And god,
who shall judge all men, knows, that I desire all things to be in good
point, on the condition, that I might ever be specheles, as it is my very
nature to be. Adieu gentle herers, and say well by Pasquyll, when he is from
you.


FINIS.
Londini in aedibus Thomae Bertheleti typis impress. Cum priuilegio ad
imprimendum solum. ANNO. M. D. XL.




