Pasquine in a Trance A Christian and learned Dialogue (containing wonderful
and most strange news out of Heaven, Purgatory, and Hell) Wherein besides
Christ's truth plainly set forth, ye shall also find a number of pleasant
hystories, discovering all the crafty conueyaunces of Antechrist.

Whereunto are added certain Questions then put forth by Pasquine, to have been
disputed in the Council of Trent.

Turned but lately out of the Italian into this tongue, by W. P.

Seen allowed according to the order appointed in the Queens Majesty's
Injunctions.

Luke. 19. Uerily I tell you, that if these should hold their peace, the
stones would cry. Imprinted at London by VVylliam Seres dwelling at the Weast
end of Paul's at the sign of the Hedgehogge.

To the Reader.
SVCHE HAS been the misery of these latter days (good Reader) every where,
and yet is in some places (the more is the pitye) where iniquity has gotten
the upper hand, that the truth finds few friends, and can evil be heard,
especially the truth of Gods holy Word, but so odious it is to men's eyes and
ears, (such is the nature thereof) as any other thing else, (be it never so
vain, wicked, or abominable) might be much sooner allowed and heard, than the
truth of Religion, and the more that such wickedness te^ded to deface, or
overthrow, the truth of Gods holy word, the better was the same welcome and
the more ioyously received, and embraced. So as the truth receiving this open
injury (and though not suppressed by all, yet oppressed by the most) was driven
therefore to lie close, and secretly to walk with Nichodemus by night for
fear of Jewish Christians, and in caves, dens, and other unknown places
(like as in the time of former tirranny) to have her conversation and abiding,
declaring still as she might, her natural operation to many, and waiting in
the mean season, the appointed time of her delyueraunce. And if it so chanced
her to be seen or heard abroad (for the candell whelued under the Busshell will
burn a hole through, and show it self) then straight way must she so be
scaled, ordered, and prompted, by Policy who must be her Tutour, as she must
not therefore seem so roughe as to rippe up matters that are raked long since
in the ashes, but must talk a far off, and either cloth her self with the
misty clouds, of dark and doubtful speech, which few shall understand, and
must offend no man, or else must appear altogether to be so plyaunt, and in
such glaring garments as least may become clawing and well pleasing talk, and
nothing else, and such as shall curry all men, and cut no one.

For the which cause, the author hereof called Celius Secundus Curio an
Italian, a man surely zealous, and godly learned, lamenting this great and
malicious kind of blindness, as a thing most dangerous both for body and
soul, thought good and his bounden duty, (to relieve thereby the minds, and
consciences, of such, as not wilfully but for want of due knowledge, went
groping in by paths at none days, and to confirm such other in the right
path way of heavenly truth, as had tasted some little fruit of Gods holy
spirit) to write therefore this little work, which about XXV. years since,
(or there upon) he took in hand and set forth, what time Paul the third of
that name (a man of great worldely wisdom and admiration with christen
Princes, and a Religious professor of that diuellishe knowledge of
Necromancie) sat and occupied Caiphas (I should say) Peter Chair. And so the
author following in some part, the politic council of Saint Paul the
Apostle, (who says, So that Christ be preached, any manner ways, whether it
be under pretense Phil. 1.
or sincerely, he rejoices therein) has published the same his labor unto
the world, under the pleasant name of Pasquine that ancient Roman, as a fit
instrument to advance Gods truth, who for his same being acquaynted with all
Princes estates and affairs, and for his wonted mirth and strange news,
could the better spredde abroad the same, and cause it to be more ioyefully
received and read, than if many great Potentates and Princes had commended it
to the world, with their privilege and authority. As to Pasquine, and to tell
thee what he is, shall not now be necessary, for I will not hold thee with
so long a discourse: if thou can not other wise learn of him, I shall refer
thee to the book it self, where thou shall find him fully described.

But now me thinks I hear some nose wise papist, make a very unnecessary
objection: what says he is Pasquine of Rome now become a preacher, that was
wont so to be talking always, against our holy Father and his college of
Cardinals: to whom, it may right well be answered in this sort, as in that he
is come from Rome hither to preach, is to fulfill the saying of Christ, Luke 4.
that no Prophet is accepted in his own country, and therefore cannot be heard
(no more was Christ among his own country men the Jews) which is strange,
that C^ristes messanger, coming to Christ's Vicaire (if there be any such on
earth,) should be refused of audience, bringing a true message, but much more
is it, that for declaring the same, (for their soul health and salvation) he
should be in danger. But to be banished his dominion for saying as he is
commanded, passes all law of God and men, yea and ius gentium also. And in
that some will account him, such one as will be always talking at his
pleasure, I will turn such over to the Poet Horace who says, Ridentem
dicere verum, quid vetat? Why should not a Iester or a merry fellow tell truth.
And if that will not serve to stop their blasphemous mouths, I will bring forth
Saint Paul, who says, Gal. 1.
If he himself or an Angel preach any otherwise, than the Gospel which he
preached, let him be accursed, whereby he infers, that the message should
not be the better welcome or heard, for the messangers sake, but the messanger
for the truth, and worthiness of the message he brings, (yea, if he were a
Devil) ought to be believed. To the matter it self, I shall refer to thy
direct judgment (so thou spoil thy self in the reading thereof, of all malice
and affection) wherein thou shall see, under the witty and pleasant
invention of Pasquines going to heaven, purgatory, and hell, the whole pack
of the Popes pedlary wares, is opened and not set to sale, because men should
buy thereof, but rather to the show and brought to the touchestone of Gods
word to be thereby tried and seen what manner stuff it is: So as all men may
see, how the Romish Apoticaries have so conserved, confected, and colored,
with the drugges and other the fine devises of their subtle Sophistry, all
their whole pelf and trumperie, as meritorious Masses, feigned miracles,
superstitious obseruances, hypocritical fastings, painted holiness, and
Sodomiticall chastity, and that with their chauntings, pypings, gaye
glistering shows and sightes, sweet smelles and odours, (all devised to feed
and occupy the outward senses of man, and to stuff his head and
understanding with the vain gazing, and admiration of their counterfeit
Religion) so as many that took themselves to be very nycenosed, and could
as they thought judge colors, were overtaken in their folly, and took quid pro
quo, and Mercurium sublimatum, for good and wholesome Sugar. And how this
brood of smoth smiered shauelings have the inventions, and dreams, of their
own idle and drousie brains, set up to themselves a mortal God, that
mitred Monarche of Rome, who with power and tirannie, should maynetayne them
in a perpetual, and flourishing kingdom, and they for their part, even from
the seliest hedge priest, or other most simple in degree under them (being
greased with the Popes Oil) even to the proudest, and most princely Prelate,
every one in his kind to labor, and apply themselves, with tongue and pen, or
rather with tooth and nail (if they do not besides, use any other more
violent weapons) to devise, study, search and use all the fetches possibly how
they may keep all things upright, and cloute up with stable straw, and such
paltry, the ruynes, breaches, and decays, of this their Chaos, or confused
common wealth. Thou shall also see, as it were by an Antithesis or comparison,
the sacred Scriptures, set against their vain and fantastical toys and
inventions, and the same Scriptures so aptely applied, and truly alleged, as
can not be desired to be better or more effectually done, to the purpose. And
between the serious and fruitful allegation of the scriptures, and the
necessary detection of their chaste life and holiness, thou shall find some
things (and I believe not few in number) that though the same be no mere nor
malicious inuentio^s, yet can they not be judged to be Fables, but rather
matters of truth, because the world else has in their several places, had
the trial and experience of the same. And histories have also in some part
set them forth to the great commendation of the doers thereof. But one thing
(gentle Reader) thou will not a little marvel at, that their spiritual
weapons, wherewith they defend their Romish kingdom* (I mean their own
councels, and constitutions herein alleged) are so brought against them
selves, and so returned home to their own confusion, and overthrow, that
there remains now, no more spiritual defense, or resistance, but that they
lay hand on the Temporal sword, and use the violent arguments offyre,
sword, and halter, which how much they have done, in this Realm of late
days, that very Rome it self has abhorred. I leave to thy judgment, for the
unborn children in the mothers womb, and the loving dogs with their masters
have witnessed the same. Thou may chance to find this book (beside that it
is written in the Italian tongue) in the Latin also, which seems to have
been done, by the author him self, what time he saw his labor so well to
be lyked and allowed, as he wrote the same in the latin tongue also, for the
better edifying and calling home of the sheep that went a straye, and the more
assured confirmation of them in the truth of Gods word. Yet because this
Italian copy is the larger, whereunto is added the voyage to Hell (which the
Latin book has not) I have therefore chosen, and followed the same, and
turned it into our tongue as now thou see.

There follow in the end thereof, certain questions put forth by Pasquine, to
be disputed (but not as P^^adoxes) in the Council holden in that holy fathers
days, Paul the third, at Trent, wherein he scorneth privily, the great and
manifold abuses of the Churchmen, as well of the proud Prelates, as the single
soled sir John's, the fat bellyed monks, and lying Friars, their false
allegations of the Scriptures, their idleness, their pride, their
voluptuousness, tyranny, hypocrisy, wyuelesse but not womanlesse chastity,
and other their endless, and abominable doings, the which articles may, (as
it were in a brief) comprehend the whole discourse of the book before going,
and show forth the spiritual fruits that spring of that Religion. So as to
conclude, gentle Reader, you may see, and find, that there is no matter of
controversy, wherein the papists differ from the true Church of Christ, (and
the heavenly doctrine taught before and since by the Patriarchs, Prophets,
and Apostles) as in their purgatory, their justifying works, their corporal
presence of Christ in the Sacrament, their transubstantiacion, adoration, and
all the rest of their new found learning, but that the same all, and every of
them are quite defaced, and overthrown by the manifest word of God. Thou
can therefore desire no more to the certifying, and confirmation of thy
conscience in the truth, or otherwise to satisfy thy mind, with the detection
of popery, and the merry and pleasant disposing of the matter: so as whether
thy profit, or pleasure shall be most, I know not, and therefore will not take
upon me to judge. This shall I one-desire thee, to read with judgment, and
lay aside all affection and malice, (both which are partial Judges,) and so to
walk directly through the whole work, whereby thou may discern between
the truth and falshode, to thy edifying and comfort, so shall I think my labor
and travail thus to translate it for thee, well bestowed, and shall send thee
to the book to hear what he says himself, from the which I thought good
with no longer Preface to withholde thee.

Farewell.
B. G. To the Reader.
IF he that wrights a work at first, does merit fame:
I deem him worthy of no less, that does translate ye same.
For as the first (by toil) does utter things unknown:
The second does from foreign speech declare them in his (own.
The sequel shows a proof, of skillful Author plain,
And of Translatour skillful that to wright it took such pain.
If pleasure thou possess, or profit thereby take:
They have the sum of their desire that pende it for thy sake.
But though thou seem to want of that thou wish at furst:
Read once again with good advise before thou judge the wurst.
Lay love and hate aside, affection put to flight:
So shall thou judge as Justice wills, so shall thy dome be right.
Remember Midas ears were framed like an ass,
Because he said that Pan in skill Apollo far did pass.
So if thou shall prefer some trifle more than truth:
Thou shall deserve (as Midas did) the Ass his ears forsouth.
For learned was the man, that first the book did frame:
And learned he (I promise thee) that did translate the same.
And learned is their work, and honest too their fact,
And honest men will honestly allow each honest act.
But those that needs will storm, and wot not well wherefore,
Must needs have part of that reward which is rehearst before:
Which if thou will avoid, as I would wish to shun.
Do judge with good advised skill, and thus my tale is done.
Ber. Gar.

Faults escaped.
Leaf. Side. Line. Faults. Correction. 20 1 4 practice praise ibide^ 6 honor,
humor, 22 2 14 friars frieries 26 1 32 Porzolo, Pozzolo, 28 1 21 22 Putanies
Putaines 30 1 16 then, that, 36 1 16 is does 39 1 17 none woune 41 2 7 his this
ibide^ 1 26 was without was not without 46 2 16 did take did not take 47 1 7
his the 51 1 14 Hostiences, Hostiensis, ibide^ 19 Cardinal carnal 54 1 4
faction. function. 56 2 19 breaching breeching 58 1 23 Sandanapalus.
Sardanapalus. 62 1 20 he in here in 67 1 5 Bosarie, Rosarie, 71 1 22 vessels,
Uassalles, 87 2 5 word world 89 2 23 beggars beggeries ibide^ 29 all a 92 1 28
which with ibide^ ruinesse revenues 97 1 32 Swythians Scythians, 111 1 21
head heard 112 1 31 Whether the Whether if the ibide^ 2 9 dust, they dust, if
they

Pasquine in a Trance
Marforius. GOD save you Master Pasquine my most pleasant companion.


Pasquine. What Marforius? and wherabout go you?


Marforius. Thou did so much delight me the last year with thy
communication, that I am now come, purposely to tarry with thee ^ while, that
thou may once again tell me of thy vision, whereof this other year thou
toldest me, which pleased me so much, as it would not grieve me to hear it a
thousand times, much less twice.


Pasquine. And I will tell thee it again with good will, adding thereunto other
things, which then I had no time, nor remembered me to tell thee: ask on hardly,
and I will fully satisfy thee.


Marforius. Tell me first of all, Heavy things go downward, and not upward.
how it is possible that thou that art of stone should get up into
heaven?


Pasquine. Is it not a greater marvel, that some of these lubberlye greasy
Friars, Parsons, Bishops, Abbots and other foul gorbellied fathers, should
get up thither, which are so heavy that Elephantes are scarce able to carye
them?


Marforius. What? these are men, but much more do I marvel, when I think,
what the Gods should have to do with stones.


Pasquine. And I pray thee what have the Gods to do with Lions, Bulls, and
Bears, which are perilous Beasts? Yea and flying fowls too, and yet for all
that, in our days are they carried about in company of the Gods.


Marforius. What, we talk of the Gods of the Christians, let us now leave
Lucians fables. The Gods of stone and wood, are the Gods of the Papists, and
not of Christians.



Pasquine. I am content that thou speak of the Gods of the Christians, do
thou not see, that they are for the most part made of stone?


Marforius. I take the^ for no Gods.


Pasquine. I know not how you take them: but well I wot, that the common
people now a days takes the^ so.


Marforius. And who I pray thee is so folish, as to worship Gods of stone?


Pasquine. I can not tell thee whether this be folishenesse or no, No simall
number, nor that think them selves no small fools.
but as far as I fee, this is of all men accoumpted godliness, and if we
look well, we shall find by their garments and furniture, that they are
worshipped, and this folly has been always in men's minds, as we see that
among those of old time, was the God Terminus, The God Terminus.
of whom a man may read so many foolish tales, that it would make him weary.


Marforius. By my truth thou say truly, I well remember that I have read of
that God Terminus, in what estimation the people of those days had him, and
yet for all that, me thinks, that men of our time should not worship these
stones, as they did.


Pasquine. Yea but let us a while leave this a part, and stand thou still and
hear me.


Marforius. I hear thee well, say on.


Pasquine. Thou know Marforius, P^squines labor and good meaning.
y^ since I was first acquainted with the world, I have always sought with my
whole study, to bring men from evil to well doing, and most chieflye Princes,
Flatterrers always about Princes.
and great men, who have now a days their ears so full of flatterers talk,
and of those flies that Diogenes speaks of, Diogenes flies.
that no voice except it be of stone, can any more enter into them. For which
cause so often and so loud have I cried, that I have enforced my self to
enter into their ears.


Marforius. But what a presumption is this of thee, that will do this without
the Popes license.


Pasquine. God defend that I should be presumptuous, but thou know, that it
has been always necessary to say and set forth the truth, the which sith it
lies (as) buried, and that there is none to declare it, it follows of
necessity by the saying of the gospel, Stones shall cry.
that we stones must cry out.


Marforius. I knew not that till now. But I will therefore from henceforth so
work that I will be no longer dumb. But follow thou thy talk. Luc. 19.



Pasquine. And so, seeing that I cast away and in manner lost all my labor, I
began somewhat to doubt, in what sort the things of the world were governed,
and I doubted of the providence of God, and of his justice, Pasquine doubts
of Gods providence.
seeing the affliction of the just, and the prosperity of the wicked, and
within my self I said, what may he be, that has the governance of things
among men, and I thought, it should be some other thing far different from
that which governs the things of nature.


Marforius. This is even the right way to become an Epicure. The high way to
Epicures opinion.
But what? did thou doubt, whether there were one only, that governs al?


Pasquine. Yea that I doubted.


Marforius. And how came that doubt in thy brain.


Pasquine. I saw that God in nature is a thing most orderlye beyond all
marvel, The beholdi^g of nature.
I saw all things in their times conceive, bring forth, flourishe, and give
fruit, rendering as it were last of al, thanks to nature after this sort, The
earth mother of all things.
and afterward again to corrupt, and return to their mother and first
original. I saw the Heaven and the Stars not a whitte to change from their
wonted course, neither rather or later to rise or go down, I saw the earth,
the sea, and the other Elements to be very well divided, and their chaunges
from one to another for the generation and corruption of things, to be
ex^eadinglye well ordered, and if I did but behold the workmanship of man, yea
or of a fly, or of an Empt: The great wisdom of God in forming his creatures.
I was astonished at y^ proporcionate, comelye, wonderful and unspeakable
cunning of the Creator, most of all seeing all things done with so great
reason, that nothing in the composition of the nature of things, could either
be put to, or taken away without marring the whole work, so that being drowned
in the consideration hereof, Psalm. 145.
I cried. Great art thou Lord and marvelous worthy to be praised, there is
no end of thy greatness. Afterward if I considered the life of men, and their
company keeping, their states and conditions, so without order and often times
euillye disposed, Man only keeps not order.
I could not but needs believe, that some blind Devil had had the governance
hereof, and that did Christ cause me so to think, who being king of al
together, says notwithstanding, that he is not king of this world, saying:
Gods kingdom is hea^enly.
My kingdom is not of this world, and if it were of this world, my
ministers vvoulde surely fight. And in manys other places the same says,
Joan. 18.
calling Sathanas king and Prince of this world, Satan Prince of this world.
and of this darkness, saying: Joan. 12.
Now shall the Prince of this world be cast out. And in the desert, Satan
promised him all the kingdoms of the world, Math. 4.
if he would fall down and worship him.


Marforius. I pray thee Pasquine enter not into this heresy, Marc. 1.
that Christ is not Lord over the world, Luc. 4.
have thou not read, that in the name of Jesus al knees should bow, Phillip.
2.
of things in heaven, of things in earth, and things under the earth?


Pasquine. Thou know not yet, what this word world means in the
scripture.


Marforius. And what means it else, but this unmeasurable frame or engine.


Pasquine. Yes Marforius an other thing, What the world is after the Scripture
the Scripture calls the world, the ambition, the covetousness, the lechery,
and all those other things that savor of nothing else but the flesh, 1. Ioa^.
2. and. 5.
so that, the flesh, the world, and the devil, are those three furies that
with their firebrandes and their Serpents, make an entermingling and confusion
of all things.


Marforius. Why then these fat Friars, that say they forsake the world,
^arye it with them into the Monastaries.


Pasquine. Monasteries are the world it self.
Yea out of doubt, it is not possible to see the world better, than in the
Monasteries: where a man shall see nothing else, but affections and passions of
mind, with the which they seek to advance them selves, or to drive the one
the other out of the doors. Some fruits of monastical life.



Marforius. Thou say truth, but follow on a little.


Pasquine. Because I could not therefore know the nature of this God, that
seems to govern worldly things so blonderingly, I sought to know him by
his officers, and servants, for that it seemed to me, that he governs al
things by means of certain demigods.


Marforius. Whom call thou demigods?


Pasquine. Those that the gross people call Saints. Saints are Demigods.



Marforius. Beware I pray thee, that thou speak nothing against the saints,
but well, for thou know in how great estimation they be with the world.


Pasquine. God keep me from speaking evil of his friends, Saints in great
estimation with the world.
I go not about to tell thee other than the truth, neither shall I at any time
be charged, to have spoken any thing that is evil, or wicked, except it be by
such as would call the truth wickedness.


Marforius. Let it not seem strange to thee, that there be now a days
such men, as do labor so to call it.


Pasquine. For such kind of cruelty, Truth will be truth how so ever it be
called.
I care not, I know that the truth can not be but truth.


Marforius. Return a little to thy purpose, for me thought thou was framing an
argument, a minori ad mains, or to be better understood, a delegato ad
ordinarium.


Pasquine. Thou speak like a right Canonist. Marforius a Cano^ lawier
And to satisfy thy desire, I say, that finding no mean, to clear my self
of this doubt, with my self I said, what the Devil of holiness, goodness,
or equity find I in these saints, that now a days are so worshipped of the
world, and that have taken in hand the government of worldly things? Saints
are not as they are named.
Who if they now be, or do, that which sometime they were, or that is said
they were or did, I shall sone consider, what is the order of this government,
if not, yet have I cause to doubt. And forthwith it came in my mind to make a
comparison of the lines of Saints, A very good way to try Saints.
and of their state, while they were living, with their present ^^ate now,
hoping by this means to see, if the Saints that lived sometime, be the self
same, that they say reign now in heaven, and together with Christ do govern
al, or else whether those be different, and have there above, other nature, and
other conditions. True Saints are Gods friends.



Marforius. And what an arrogancy is this of thee? will thou be a judge over
Saints?


Pasquine. No no friend Marforius, let it never please God, Who be true Saints.
that I should be a judge over his friends, who can not sin any more,
neither be spotted with any worldly affection: Some be but Saints in ^ame.
but I would seek only (as I said) if those be they, that govern so, or else
if there be other under their name, that have none other thing of the saint,
but the bare name.


Marforius. What is that thou say? what a presumptuous boldness should
this be? think thou that there be any that usurp the names of saints, and
under that godly name deceive the world?


Pasquine. As though the thing were to be doubted. The devil never becomes
an angel but when he means most mischief.
Know thou not, that the Devil under the form of an Angel of light,
works all his deceytes? for if he should show him self plainly as he is,
none would believe him. Know thou not that Superstition and Hypocrisy are
the Diuelles Retorique, with the which, 2. Cor. 11.
he makes the world believe, all that he lists, The diuelles retorique.
Behold the Friars, I pray thee, think thou, that they would ever have
been able, to make the world believe so many manifest falshoodes, Friars the
devils scholars.
and foolish ^oyes, if they had not learned this art of the Devil?


Marforius. Why then, their coats, hoodes, and sundry colors, are they
devised by the Devil?


Pasquine. Yea out of doubt: The diuel^ d^uise.
for if they were the same that they would be counted, what need should there
be of such disguised garments? the which say they, do signify that which
they ought to be. This is a clear case, that while there is shadow and
signification of the thing, Mark well.
there is not the thing it self. If they were in deed, what should they need
to seek so to appear? All is not gold that glistereth.



Marforius. I have heard in dode, that outwardly they be one thing, and
inwardly an other.


Pasquine. Thou may be sure of y^, if thou believe the Gospel, which says.
That there shall come wolves to devour us, clad in sheep skins, by cause
they will not be known: for right well thou know, y^ one sheep eats
not another,


Marforius. Thou tellest me Pasquine great matters, and such as I never heard
before, and yet have I studied many years the Canon law, and in the subtle
points of John Brokenshinne, John Brokenshinne a writer upon the Canon law.
and yet did I never read these things, which have in them somewhat more,
than every man understands. Tell me now, how thou made this comparison, for
I remember I read in Plato, that it is a goodlye way to find out the truth, A
good way to find out the truth.
to separate the things that are like, from those that are different. And I
think this same be it, that our Logitians speak of, that contraries being
laid together, are the better discerned.


Pasquine. Thou say well, but to come to the point. Take thou which thou
wilt^, among all the Saints, yea if thou would take the Uirgin Marye, who
has the chiefest place, and then consider well, after what sort she was in
times past, while she lived, and in what sort she is now, after she became to
be Diefied: And thou shall find, that I doubt not without cause, No more like
than fire and water.
whether she that is set upon the Aultars, be the self same that was mother of
the Lord.


Marforius. Make thou Pasquine this comparison, for herein thou have a better
judgment than I, Comparisons odious.
beside that, by us Canonistes comparisons are counted odious.


Pasquine. So I will, since it pleases thee, but answer me a little, to that I
will ask thee, for so the matter shall be the clearer: what deest thou think,
that the mother of the Lord was in times past?


Marforius. If we will believe the scriptures, The praise of the Virgin Mary.
she was a Uirgin most chaste, most modest in behavior, most holy, most
humble above all other creatures.


Pasquine. And also very well learned in holy scripture, The price of the dog
what it means, look in Deuteronomy. 23.
full of charity toward the poor, without any jot of covetousness, without
desire of gain, or riches, not devouring the price of the Dog, not esteeming
Beads nor costly garments Is it not so Marforius.


Marforius. Yea truly, but what call thou the price of the Dog.


Pasquine. That which by vow, Great odds between Mary Christ's mother, and
Mary on the Altar.
for wicked requests if they come to pass, is given to her.


Marforius. I understand thee well.


Pasquine. Thou see therefore, what she was once, now tell me what thou think
by this, y^ with so much wax, with so much gold and silver, with so many
chains and brouches, and with so many perfumes, the world does at this day
honor.


Marforius. I can not tell what to say of her.


Pasquin. I marvel of thee, Great hurt comes of false religion once received
y^ thou say y^ can not tell what to say of her, in so clear a matter.


Marforius. Marvel not at all thereat. For this Religion wherein I have so
long time lived, has in such sort blinded me, y^ albeit I would, I can not,
nor dare not, Ianichers for the most part are christians borne, and denying
that faith, become Turks, and are the guard of the Turk. Which is to cause a
man to confess by induction, that which he would not, and so overthrow him
self.
give this judgment. Thou know what a great matter it is to be borne and
bred up in any Religion: and many times it is of greater force to be bred up in
it, than to be born in it: as we se of the Ianichers. Beside that I doubt, that
if I should say any thing against her, she would forthwith be revenged upon me.


Pasquine. If thou would continue in thy false Religion, approving it to be
good by this mea^es: the Turks and Moors will continue in their own, and yet
shalt thou not be able to say, that theirs is false. But yet for all this
thine opinion, do thou not grant me, that she is not the very same?


Marforius. Thou talkest with me after the manner of Socrates in his
disputatio^s, understanding not the end where about thou go.


Pasquine. Harke^ therefore Marforius. Of force thou must grant me this, that
all Saints ought to follow the eternal father, Christ the example of saints.
and his son Jesus Christ.


Marforius. This can I never deny.


Pasquine. The father is not desirons of revenge as thou see, for he makes
his son to rise, Math. 5.
upon the bad and the good.


Marforius. Oh what great g^^dnesse is that.


Pasquine. Beside that, christ dyed for sinners, 1. Cor. 15.
of whom, he should rather have been revenged, Luc. 23.
and prayed for them that put him to death. Moreover thou have his merciful
promise confirmed with an oath, which says: I will not the death of a sinner,
Ezech. 18.
but rather that he repent and live.


Marforius. Oh true benignity and humbleness of heart.


Pasquine. Thou say well, Math. 11.
thou will grant me also, Christ commanded his Saints to be meke and
humble. The Pope commands h^s to be cruel and seek revenge.
that Christ commanded those that be his, that they should learn of him, to
be meek and humble of heart.


Marforius. It is true.


Pasquine. Wherefore then art thou afraid, y^ the Saints, as cruel Tirans
desirous of revenge, would do thee harm?


Marforius. Because I see, that in many places, they have done strange and
cruel miracles.


Pasquine. Do thou think, that if they had been alive, they would so have
done?


Marforius. No not I, for if their Historyes be true, a man may see, that they
were most wonderfully pacient, even unto the death.


Pasquine. How can thou then believe, that these Saints that I speak of, and
those I spoke of before, are due self thing?


Marforius. Their miracles make me to believe it.


Pasquine. What? know not thou, Antichrist must work miracles.
that Antichrist with his monstrous miracles, must put the world in confusion?


Marforius. I have heard say so: but this is yet looked for, Dan. 7.
to come with the Messiah of the Jews.


Pasquine. And if he were here now, Apoc. 13.
would thou any whit the better consider these miracles? Math. 24.



Marforius. And how can I know, that he is here now?


Pasquine. By the signs that Christ has taught us, Signs to know Antichrist
by.
among the which there is one most manifest, where he says: when you shall
see the abomination of desolation standing in the holy place. Math. 24.



Marforius. And what means that?


Pasquine. It means, Antichrists temple disscribed.
that when we shall see in the place where God only ought to be honored, that
other Gods are worshipped: That is the temple of Antichrist, and the
abomination. For what thing can be more against Christ, than to drive Christ
out of his temple, Nothing more against Christ than Antichrist.
and to put other in his place, to whom it is attributed to work miracles,
and many other notable feats? And why do these miracles so much move thee?
know thou not, that where they are ryfest, Miracles are tokens for the
unbelievers.
there is the less sign of faith, and commonly those signs are foretokens of
the destruction of common wealths, and decay of Cities. For these Gods seeing
the most high god angry for their naughty Religion, and that he will altogether
overthrow this worldly common wealth, to the end the people should not wax
wyser, An old practice of the prelates.
and so espy their doings, they keep them entangled with these miracles, to
the which they run like sheep for their last refuge in their troubles: And
even so was it by Baal in the old Testament, that the more the Lord was by
that kind of worshipping honored by the prophets, so much the more did the
miracles increase, and it was seen, y^ Baals miracles had the^ greater force,
than the word of the Lord, Iniquity shall have the upper hand.
so that until the captivity of Babylon, for fear and for the Religion of
miracles, the Jews could not rid them selves of the worshipping of Baal, nay,
Superstition and Idolatry are vehement persuasions to the ignorant.
they said sometime, that because they had left of worshipping of him, that was
cause of all their miseryes, as may be seen in Jeremy, where he says: Since we
left of to do sacrifice to the Queen of heaven, we have had scarsitie of all
things. And to the end thou know it, Hier. 44.
these Gods hurt none but such as believe in them, but to those that despise
them, they can do no hurt at all, Gods of small power, that would hurt and can
not.
for if they could they would long since have destroyed all Almaine, and all
the towns of the Svvychers, who have destroyed these Gods, and changed the
prices of them into a better use.


Marforius. Since thou say that Antichrist reigns now: could thou show
me what he is?


Pasquine. I can right well show thee him, if thou can and will abide the
hearing of it.


Marforius. That I can, for I am ready to dye for very lust to hear it.


Pasquine. Antichrist is so called by this effect, Antichrist what he is.
because he is against Christ. But the name of this kingdom 1. Io. 2. and. 4.
(with the which) as happy and fatherly he covers the unhappy name of
Antichrist, that he may the more safely devour, and slay Christ's sheep, this
name I say is called the number of man, by the Prophet in the new Testament.


Marforius. I understand thee now less than I did before.


Pasquine. ^ast thou not read in the Apocalips, Ap. 13. et. 16.
of the mark, and of the name of the beast, and of the number of man?


Marforius. I have some time heard men strive upon that place, and upon that
whore clothed in Scarlet, Apoc. 17.
and droncke with the blood of Saints, The great whore.
whom they called the great whore, and they said she had in her hand, a Cup
of gold full of abominations, and her filthy lusts, and if I remember me
well, they called her also Babylon, Babylon.
the mother of the fornications of the earth. But by cause I heard not the
beginning of the disputation: I could not understand what that whore was.


Pasquin. All this that thou have said, belongs to Antichrist, and to his
kingdom, which things thou shall clearlie understand, by that time I shall
have declared unto thee, the name, with the which that wicked person does
nothing else, but sell him self to the world. But hearken to this.


Marforius. I am here al ready thereto.


Pasquine. The letter of his name is. The beasts name discribed.
P A the number is. P P A A. and the name is made by putting each of those
letters amids his two fellows. For as Pythagoras Disciples say, the number of
man is double or two fould, the which does clearly appear, since there are in
the name contained but two letters only, as thou haste seen in the number.
And albeit every of those letters is twice formed, they are not for all that
any more than two figures of letters, and two sillables. Understa^dest thou it
yet or no?


Marforius. I understand it very well, for this name and these letters come
often in my way in the Canon law. But beware Pasquine that thou seek not to
know to much, Ignorance breadeth devotion the P^pistes say.
thou should do better to believe simply as I do, having been so taught by
a cunning Friar.


Pasquine. What call thou to believe simply?


Marforius. This, not to labor to much in holy scripture, The doctrine of
Monks and Friars.
and to leave those things to the Divines.


Pasquine. That is to believe ignorantly, and not simply, know thou not that
place of the Gospel, Joan. 5.
which says? Search the Scriptures? if thou believe so Marforius, thou
deceiuest thy self fowlly, for this is not simplicity, but rather a folishe
and careless credulity.


Marforius. I will tell thee true, I did believe, that simplicity and ignorance
were both one thing.


Pasquine. Thou deceyuest thy self I say, for there is a greater difference
between them. Simplieitie Simplicity what it is.
is not ignorance, but a certain clearenesse and singleness of mind, whose
contrary is doubleness: if thou know therefore what it is to be of a double
mind, thou shall also understand what it is to be of a single mind.


Marforius. I know well what it is to be of a double mind, for this often
times happens unto me, Canonistes co^mmonly are not acquain^ted with
simplicity.
but such manner of simplicity as thou speak of, I know not.


Pasquine. I believe i^ well, for you Canonistes, can not be both subtle and
simple together, but would to God that your craftiness might be turned into
simplicity, Canonistes subtle but not simple.
for then should there not be among you so many disceytes, ways to entangle
men in, and such devises and delays, and there should be no manner disputing.
De Iure stricto and largo, but only that which is just and good should reign
in you.


Marforius. What is simplicity then?


Pasquine. Simplicity is a virtue, Who is a simple man.
the which who so ever has, shows with the effects what he is, he is no
hipocrite, but in every thing, and in every act, is seen a great clearness
and singleness, and he is such that in him thou may trust any thing that
thou have, for being sincere, he does sincerely behave him self. Moreover
concerning the knowledge of things and their experience, he will have a sincere
and sure judgment, without any color or disguising of Hypocrisy.


Marforius. If the matter be so, it must needs be, that the simple man be
replenished, not only with great goodness, What he must be that will
understand the scriptures.
but also with great learning and judgment together, for these things are
requisite to him that will diligently search, and understand the Scriptures.


Pasquine. Thou say truth. Luc. 12. and 21.



Marforius. Then are there in these days many simple without simplicity.


Pasquine. It is true, Mar. 13.
in these days, and there is little godliness amongst Christen men, they were
in old time simple, those true Saints, who * lacked not what to answer to
the Judges, because they believed simply, Simplicity and constancy are
companions.
and this believing simplye, can not be without a very great steadfastness: for
this simplicity has always ways in company, cie are companions.
a certain most firm constnancie of mind, and about it a wall of brass, and
such as these be, put on no visours, nor strange garments, but will be known
of every man for y^ they be. But this masking and disguising, is never without
some suspicien of deceit. And what think thou this saying means, be ye
simple as Doves? but that ye have that singleness of mind, that belongs to a
Christian, Math. 10.
and show the same in your countenance, What is meant by the simpliciti^ of
Doves.
in your manners, in your apparel, and in your works, as Doves do, the which
feign not one thing, and do an other, as do the Foxes, but openly show their
natural whiteness, and mildness in all their life.


Marforius. Is there not then one Friar that is simple? Friars be foxes, and
(...) Doves, for all they seem so simple.



Pasquine. As thou think of the^, they are al so, but as I think, there is
not one so.


Marforius. In very deed I did ever believe till now^, that we must be simple,
that is to say, ignorant, doltish, and very Asses.


Pasquine. Such opinion have they had, whom the sheepish foolishness of our
time has nouseled up, but I say to thee, that the Christian should be very
well learned, The Christian ought not to be ignorant.
and well exercised in his own law: for so shall he not be able to be moved by
any manner argument, being well grounded upon that sure stone, whereas he that
shall be ignorant, shall be ready to fall into alher^sies, Psala.
and to al disceites: for ignorance, agreing with all things, Ignorance cause
of many e^rours.
and lacking of judgment, at one instant takes hold of truth, and of
falshoode, without making at any time any distinction at all. And hereof are
risen so may heresies, and sects among the christians. For being ignorant, The
color of religion has deceived many.
they have been deceived by crafty creepers, most of all under the color of
Religion. And therefore some following the rule of that man, and some of this
man, those other of an other man, and not one there is, that follows the rule
of Christ, the which without superstitions and falsehoods, Math. 22.
commands unto us, the love of God, and of our neighbor: Mar. 12.
it is therefore no marvel, that the Jews and Turks become not Christians,
Why the Jews and Tur^ become not Christians.
seeing the Christians divided into so many sects, with the which also, they
dare take upon them, to call them selves spiritual, being altogether carnal.
Paul in the first to the Corinthians, cries out against these sects, saying:
If any of you say I hold of P^ule, i. Cor. 1.
an other, I hold of Appollo, an other I hold of Cephas, the fourth I hold
of Christ, are ye not carnal, is Christ divided?


Marforius. I know these errors very well, Meaning he should expound to him
the scripture, as they do the law to other. A drianns for Atrianus
I will that from henceforth thou be my Grat^an, and my Panormitan, but thou
should preach this about the streates.


Pasquine. I would gladly do it, but I fear the decree of that flemish Pope.


Marforius. Peradventure thou meanest Adrian. Thou can not speak Dutch well.


Pasquine. Atrian thou must say, for so a man may see in his Epitaph.


Marforius. Thou nedest not doubt any more of him, for he is dead.


Pasquine. So would God, Pasquine wissheth the over throw of the Pope, and his
kingdom.
that this that now is, and all that shall come after, were with all their
train and trash that belong unto them: but yet for all this, there want no
priute watchers. I have heard say, y^ Chietti has spoken the Devil and all
against me, in that theeuishe consistory. Pasquine evil spoken of, by Card.
Chietti, because he called him by his right name.



Marforius. And why?


Pasquine. Because I told him his true, proper and natural name, that is to
say h^pocrite, but let him do and say what he will, for I set not a turde by
him, since I am made immortal, and become a God, as well as he is besp^rited and
become a Devil.


Marforius. But now return a little, and tell me the cause of thy going to
heaven.


Pasquine. It was this that I have told thee, The cause why Pasquin went to
heaven
for that I saw these Saints to be so far different from that they were
sometime, I would needs go to heaven purposely to see, whether they have there
above the self same nature. For me thought it a thing vnlikelye, that this
Saint Mary here below, The Image of Mary compared for her gay attire, to the
heathen Goddesses.
that has the painting on her face, that has crowns full of Jewels on her
head, that has Chains about her neck, that has Ringes on her fingers,
that has so costly and so many sorts of garments upon her, like one of those
young Girls of old time, me thought it not I say, that this was al one, with
that most humble mother of the Lord, and so much the more I confirmed my self
in this opinion, because I saw this Lady to be most covetous, A covetous and
cruel mother that suff^reth her son to beg and she has so much.
most desirous to heap up treasure, and most nigardly in spending it, and
if she let any thing of her own go out of her hands, she dealt it most
wickedly, so that I said often to my self, if this be the Lords mother, why
has she not compassion upon her son, whom she sees every day in ye church
where she is, The poor rep^esent christ.
go about asking alms.


Marforius. What say thou? has Christ need then?


Pasquine. Yea, in the poor that represe^t his person, for he says. Math.
25. Loretto is with them, as Walsingham was with us, a place to which much
gain was brought, and and no goodness carried thence.
In as much as you have done it, to one of the least of these my brethren, ye
have done it unto me. Yet notwithstanding, if this her some ask her but one
Dotkin, she does not give it him, but stands upon her gravity, and looks
big, without once changing her countenance, nor showing any manner sign of
compassion. But when the holy Father goes to Loretto, when those most reverend
Cardinals, when the spiritual fathers go unto her, she gives to these
generations all that she has, to spend upon whores, dogs, horses, and
Ganimedes, which I should have said first, the which things I am right well
assured, were al far wide (without all comparion) from that true and most
pure virgin the Lords mother, y^ which above all other things hated this filthy
kind of men, beside that I was right well assured, y^ those that be the very
saints in deed, being with God, who is most rich, have no need of our goods,
The true saints s^ke n^yther good^s, nor glo^ious Churches. The treasures of
the papists are a pray for the Turks.
nor of our offeringes, nor that they be so greedy of glory, nor sake not for
such goodly Churches, nor so rich Aultars and other ornaments, which are in
danger to be one day robbed by the Turks, since such as be the great men
in the world, take not the same them selves. These things are rather for the
satis^ying of vain and witl^sse men, than of Saints, who never called them
selves Kings nor Queens of heaven, Math. 6.
but the servants and handemaydes of God, The treasures of true s^intes laid
up in heaven.
and would have their dwellinges and treasures in heaven, (where there is no
danger of Turks, for they go not up thither) which treasures are not gold
and silver, but justice, peace and joy, in the holy ghost. And perceiving new
by all these ways aforesaid, that these be no Saints, and seeing that the
world would enforce me to believe, that they be Saints, Deady sin to speak
evil of these false Saints.
and that it were deadly sin to speak evil of them, I determined to go to
heaven, to clear me of this double.


Marforius. I marvel that none has sought this before thee.


Pasquine. All have left of, for a certain foolish, and light belief, and
because they had holy things in small estimation, being content with a false
and wicked Religion, Covetousness and cruel^y a hinderance to the truth.
the which hitherto (I know not by what means) has holden the world sore
bewitched. And if there were found any one, that had begone to discern the
truth, by and by have they had their eyes closed, that they should see no
further, nor wade deeper for knowledge therein.


Marforius. Thou have told me y^ cause of this thy voyage, tell me now how
thou wentest up, and by what way, and then what thou saw there above. For
there must needs be things far diverse from ours, and from all that we can
imagine or thinkeof.


Pasquine. I will tell thee the whole, so that thou hearken well unto me.


Marforius. I hearken to thee, say on.


Pasquine. Seeking the way to go to heaven, I could not find it, albeit I had
red many things of Protheus, Icarus, and Menippus, who (men say) went up
thither, but they tell not by what way. Whereupon I determined to ask one of
these Angels of it, which all day go up and down, and they told me, that
there was none other way but by death: that way I liked not, because life is
dear to every man, but by chance I found an other way.


Marforius. And what way was that?


Pasquine. That being in a trance, Pasquines way to heaven.
all these things should by revelation be showed unto me.


Marforius. Who taught thee that way, some Negromancer?


Pasquine. Hold thy peace, for this practice was devised by holy fathers,
haste not thou read in the lives of holy fathers, that Hilarious the Abbot,
Hilarious an advocate at the general Judgment.
standing on his feet in his chamber, found him self to be before the
judgment seat of God, and there answered Pro and contra?


Marforius. I never read it.


Pasquine. Have thou not also read that book entitled: Memorare nouissima
tua. etc.


Marforius. This title is in none of all my books, but tell me, who has
taught thee this thing.


Pasquine. This other day I was called to the monastery of the Charter house
Friars, by a certain Friar there, that began to understand the matter, and
(as it often happens) seeking not for it, Pasquine found that which he sought
not then for.
I found this thing.


Marforius. And what matter had thou to do with that Friar?


Pasquine. He prayed me that in certain works that I then had in hand, I
would somewhat nippe the Prior of his house.


Marforius. What had he done, that thou should so nippe him?


Pasquine. I can not almost tell thee, but he alleged certain Sophistical
foolish tryfles, which I did not very well understand.


Marforius. Do^st thou not remember them?


Pasquine. He complained that his father Prior commended much more that part
of Aristotle called posteriora, The old Friar means some mystery thereby.
than the other called priora, and that being in this prepost^rous opinion, he
never used demonstrations, but only induction.


Marforius. What meant he by that f^ndenesse?


Pasquine. I know not why he left the demonstrations, except it were, because
they are taken from the principles of nature.


Marforius. I understand what thou mea^est, follow on. A busteling among the
Friars in the Cloister.



Pasquine. while I was with this Friar, I heard in the Cloister a great
busteling, for thou know well that they make their Celles one hard by an
other, like Waspes and Harnettes.


Marforius. What do thou tell me? I thought these Friars had been of the
kind of the Frogs of Seriphia, because they make a conscience to salute any
that comes in to them, so much (men say) they esteem silence, but thou
say they brawlled?


Pasquine. They did not only brawle, Friars together by the ears.
but were together by the ears, and if I had not come, they would have laid
hands on their staves.


Marforius. Whereupon brawled they?


Pasquine. They disputed of these Traunces, and of their vain visions, and of
the manner how they saw them.


Marforius. Did they strive upon a thing that they account so certain?


Pasquine. Yea for when a certain young Friar said, that these were the
dreams of old sick men, and that they have in them no manner of truth, and
that he himself had been already three years in the Monastery, and there
never happened any such thing to him, an other old Friar told him that he
never could skill of that practice, and the young Friar laughing at that,
because he called speculation, practice, the other excused him self saying,
that he called not the vision practice, but the preparation, and the things
that go before the vision: the young Friar then being desirous to hear
thereof, began to demand of this practice. Then began I also to hearken, How
Pasqui^^ learned the practice of these visions.
to the end I might also learn this pretty conceyt, and so I understood all the
mean, how a man should prepare him self to these visions.


Marforius. Is it lawful to know so great a practice? may it be done without
the blood of a black sheep?


Pasquine. It ought not to be opened, yet will I tell it thee, that thou may
do the same, if by chance studying a little better, thou should
peradventure marvel how it comes to pass, that the Cannons of the Apostles,
The Cannons of the apostles, far different from the Popes Canons.
that are so godly, are so far different from the Cannons of the Romish
Bishops that came long afterward, and that are so wicked. And for all this a
man must believe, that they are all in one self heaven.


Marforius. This is good to be noted, and therefore I pray thee tell me the whole
story, The beginni^g of the votage.
point by point.


Pasquine. He would that first of all, the Friar should keep a most
abstinent fast, eight days together.


Marforius. This is but a lean beginning, chieflye for Friars that are so well
provided for the Kitchen, and I hear say that these pale faced father Friars,
will eat like Cormerants.


Pasquine. Then that he should be confessed. The way to clymbe up to the Popes
heaven.



Marforius. That is a very denout thing.


Pasquine. Then that he should not meddle with any flesh of male or female
kind.


Marforius. What is this? A privy nip.
why then do these maiden Friars that make this vow of chastitye, use such
matters.


Pasquine. And many of them use the matter worse, who knows not that? but why
do thou put me out of my tale.


Marforius. Proceed therefore.


Pasquine. Then must he hear seven Masses of the holy ghost: and being thus
prepared, at midnight on the Friday, Monkish astrologye.
when the Moon is in the last degree of Cancer, he must lay him self down upon
a Matte, upon which, some other Friar (that has been in a trance) has slept
before.


Marforius. This they account as true as the Oracle of Appollo.


Pasquine. Just, even so. Then must he have on his head an other Friars hoode
that has been before in the like trance, and a stoale about his neck, folded
upon his breast in form of a cross, and Saint John's Gospel IN PRINCIPIO ERAT
VFRBVM. hanging at his neck, written in read letters, and he must perfume the
place with holy perfume, and keep there by him a Lamp burning with holys oil,
that done, he must draw a circle about the Mat, of red earth and white, and the
circle must be double, leaving a little space between the outter line and the
inner line of the circle, and between these two lines, must be written these
words. A Coniuration.
Pater Filius Spiritus Sanctus Nox visions Nox reuelationis Nox veritatis. And
thus being prepared, after he has said a certain charm, he falls on sleep.


Marforius. What charm is that.


Pasquine. A charm that con^ureth all spirits, that are appointed for
revelations and must be thereat, to declare the truth.


Marforius. By what names calls he them.


Pasquine. By Hebrew names, Ignorant spirits that understand but one tongue.
for they say these kind of spirits understand none other tongue.


Marforius. These spirits therefore are very ignorant.


Pasquine. I know not what they be, it suffised me that I knew that they are
good for this purpose.


Marforius. And haste thou also Pasquine learned this practice?


Pasquine. And why not. I have used it, and have tried the whole matter.


Marforius. He that had seen thee in that attire, might well have made a
Pasquine upon Pasquine.


Pasquine. Peace Marforius, Meaning tho^ a man might have made a least on
Pasquine.
thou make a jesting thou know not whereat, when thou shall have heard the
whole case, thou will be of an other mind, and to see such manner things, thou
would desire not only to be hooded, but also to be of the third order of
Saint Frances, and also of the straytest order of all called the Scapuchines.


Marforius. Tell me I pray thee before I forget it, if these Friars have so
many visions, what means it, that they are drowned in so many superstitions
and falshodes^ What is the cause that they understand not true godliness?


Pasquine. Because they desire not to have the truth of sacred things to be
opened unto them, but other tryfling toys, that are rather contrary to
godliness: and herein they offend, that they bind good spirits to do vile
services.


Marforius. I pray thee tell me some one of these tryfling toys.


Pasquine. Some one desires that he be showed unto him, y^ has stolen his
money: for this purpose is appointed the Angel Colamiachel, The A^gell for
lost money.
who shows him self in the form of him that has stolen it: albeit they say
that Saint Anthony of Padoa, has begone to take charge him self of these
things, The Saint for thief stolen goods.
whereof his Friars receive great gain.


Marforius. Oh cursed sort of rascalles, that dare be so bold to constrayne a
good Angel, to take upon him the shape of a thief.


Pasquine. Beside that they desire to know whether the wife love her husband,
or the sweet heart her lover, or the Ganimedes his holy father. To all which
things, there is no Angel appointed but Saint Helene mother of Constantine,
who if the love be like and equal, The Saint for ^oue matters.
shows her self with certain fair Damsels, and at a table plenteouslye
furnished, eats with the Friar that is fasting: but if the love be fa^ned,
and naught worth, she fears the Friar with weapons, with fires, and with
chau^ging her self into dy^ers shapes, as into a wild Boar, into a Lion,
into an Ass, who evil fauouredly crying, seems to say, that this love is not
to be trusted unto.


Marforius. Oh poor saint Helene, is this thy reward for finding the Cross,
that thou should be driven to search for the loves, and for such foolish toys
of men? Those examples be now sufficient for me, I understand the evil use
of things. Tell me now the rest of our first talk.


Pasquine. With a good will Having therefore marked all these things well,
Pasquine goes about his business. Coliseo.
I settled my self to do all that hereunto was needful. Here nere unto the
Coliseo is in the old ruins, a certain hole underground, which I think no
man else knows of, fair wrought with printed fygures of earth, cast in
mouldes, and with marvelous trim printings that yet remain, thither I
resorted, and brought with me my Matte, the Hoode, the holy Oil, the Stoale,
the Chaulke, the Bole Armoniacke, the perfume of Storax Benjamin, and setting
my things in order, and after the coniuration once read, I laid me down to
sleep, Pasquinc salleth into a trance.
and forthwith was I drowned in a most sound sleep, like unto that which they
have, which be troubled with the Lethargi. Then me thought the heaven and earth
came together, and that every thing returned to the old Chaos, and so I lost
my memory, that me thought I was no more that Pasquine that I was wont to be,
me thought that I had drunk the juice of Poppy. The beginning of the Popes
Apocalips
While my brains went thus whirling about, I saw come flying from far of, a
great fire, sore flaming and sparckeling. It was of the fashion of the
manifold impressions of fire, whereof Aristotle speaks in his Meteora, The
description of Pasquines guide.
but the stirring of it was like the Rockets and Squibbes, and whirling wild
fires of Castle Angelo, what time they celebrate the dismoll day of the Popes
creation. After it was come nere me, it shed it self all about me,
stretching out his beams in such sort as the Sun is painted, amids the
which there was a man in a white garment, who demanded of me what I would
have, I being thus moved, partly for the strangeness of the thing, and partly
for fear, coming afterward by little and little to my self, thus with much
a do, I answered, who art thou Lord, The Angel for true and holy visions.
he said that he was Hierusatanael appointed for true and holy visions: and if
I would have any thing, that I should ask him. Then did I in the best manner I
could, show unto him the occasion of this my coming unto him, demanding of
him pardon for my presumption, Pasquines request to the Angel.
for that I a mortal man, was so bold to command one that is immortal,
affirming further that it should do much good to the world, if Pasquine who
is counted a narrow searcher out of things, might enter to see heaven. My talk
pleased him well, and hereupon I begone to take a little heart of grace, and the
more for that he forthwith showed him self to me with a countenance altogether
pleasant, he asked me into which heaven I would go, affirming that there were
two heavens, Two heavens.
into one of the which Christ ascended, when he departed from the world, from
the which he shall also discende accompanied with his Angels, Mark. 16.
to judge the world. The other Math. 16.
was since builded by the hands of Popes and mortal men, who had small
skill in building. When I heard that, I was exceeding glad, seeing I had found
the mean to be out of doubt of the truth. And I prayed the Aungel if it were
possible, that he would cause me to see them both, and he promised me I should.
Then did the flame that compassed me about, turn it self into the fashion of
a Charet, Pasquine goes to heaven in a fiery Charret.
like unto that which did carry away Helias, upon the which, the Angel sat down,
and then made me sit down beside him. As we were mounted, the Charet carried us
away through the air, unto the Sp^re of the Element of the fire, there
chau^ging our Charet, we followed our v^yage, and drawing already nere to the
Spear of the Moon, the Angel said he would pass no higher, and turned the
raynes toward the North, going much further from the Sun, I said unto him
whither go we Lord? he answered me, The situation of both the heavens.
to the Popes heaven, which is on this side, for the Lords heaven is toward
the Southeast, which is the highest part of the heaven, The Lords heaven and
the Pop^s dyrect contrary.
as this is the lowest, and this stands right over against the other, as the
Antipodes are unto your Citte, so that they be directly contrary. And thus
talking, I saw a far off a City so great, The desc^iption of the Popes heaven.
that it seemed that Venice, Constantinople, Rome, Cairo, and Paris, had been
al joined together, the form thereof was as it had been a Maze. And the same
so mounting up like a winding snaile, made new deuisions, new market places,
and new streates, and in the top it had a great Castle, so that standing
without the City, it was seen every whitte within, There be many within the
Popes heaven but none can be seen without.
and all the streates of it might be casely counted: but there could not one
body be seen in it, and that was, because all the streates, and all the Market
places were environed with high walls that stopped the sight, but the walls
of the City were full of Towers, and every Tower had his gate, made with such
wonderful craft, that there is no Maze in all the world that may be compared
unto them. I saw go in and out through these gates many spirits, who only
can skill what subtle devises the same be that are in them.


Marforius. Thou paintest me out rather a Do^ecoote than a heaven friend
Pasquine, but what business have those spirits to do?


Pasquine, When they went in, they went laden, some with Supplications, some
with Rosaries, some with Beads, some with Wax, some with Oil, some with
Incense, some with Gold, some with Silver, some with Chains, some with
precious Stones, Chopping and changing in the Popes heaven.
but when they came out, they came lode^, some with peace, some with wars,
some with rain, some with hail, some with winds, and such other like
things, desired to be had, or not to be had, The covetousness of the Popes
heaven.
by foolish men.


Marforius. Did they never bring forth no money?


Pasquine. No that I saw.


Marforius. Oh covetous heaven. But I thought that this heaven had had but one
gate only, and that Peter had kept it.


Pasquine. Because thou may the better understand the matter, besides the
gates of the Towers, made in such form as thou have heard, there was an other
great one, through the which the men only entered, The false donation of
Constantine.
the which is but botcherly made, and in the same is graven the false donatio^
of Co^sta^tine, and those first signs of victory of the Popes, and how by
little and little, they have brought kings and Emperors, to be under them, and
have used them to kiss their feet. Among other things, I saw a Pope set his
foot on an Emperors throat. There were also many other things, the which I
understoode not very well. As we were now come to this gate, after we had a
while beheld the caruings thereof: the Angel knocked, by and by, an old
hoarse Carle asked who we were, the Angel answered, that there was a Citizen
of Rome that desired to see those holy places, the old man would needs know
his name, and when he had heard the name of Pasquine, with a churlishe
countenance he said, and art thou he, that does so great hurt unto this our
kingdom with thy writings, pulling men back from our Religion, and from
offering unto us? get thee packing, for here within will we have no such
raylers nor scoffers, and so saying shut upon us a little piece of a window
that was in the gate, Pasquines judgment of the Popes heaven.
then laughed I at it, saying with my self, here must needs be within, many
things to be laughed at, and to be scorned: since they will have none to enter
in that may mark them. Yet was I sorry that I could not see them, and I asked
of the Angel what was to be done, doubting I had lost both my time and my
labor. Luther and Zwinglius dug a Mine to over throw the Popes heaven.
The Angel stood a while studying with him self, and then said that he
knew a certain Mine, known to very few, which Luther and Zvvinglius, had
made to overthrow this heaven, which Mine was afterward made bigger by many
other.


Marforius. Oh that angel was an honest fellow.


Pasquin. Yea truly and (for as much as I saw) he was no great friend to this
heaven, he went therefore to the Mine, the which had the mouth thereof very
little and straight, and covered with thorns and boughs in such sort, as no
man would think that there is any such thing as there is in deed. We entered
in, and there came against us a Pioner, clothed after the Dutch fashion, that
had upon the sleues of his garment these letters, V. D. M. I. AE. that is to
say. Verbum domini manet in aeternum, which in our tongue as thou know, is
as much to say, as the word of the Lord endures for ever. Esaias. 40.
And there hard by, were two little banners, in one of the which was written
in letters of gold. IN QVIETNES AND CONFIDENCE Esaias. 30.
SHALL BE YOUR STRENGTH. and in the other. COME UNTO ME ALL YE THAT LABOR AND
ARE LADEN Math. 11.
AND I WILL REFRESH YOU. This man asked us who we were, I told him I was
Master Pasquine the Roman, my Christen name pleased him better than my
Surname. Then said he, y^ this way enters no man, that makes not the same
confession of faith that he him self confessed, Pasquine examined of his
belief.
and his fellows also. The^ I asked him what confession I must make, he
demanded of me, which of these two things I believed, whether Christ were y^
head of the Church or the chief Bishop. Whereat I laughed and said, both, he
maruel^ed much at such a manner of answer, and said, how can that be? has the
Church then two heads, like the Eagle in the Emperors arms? I ieasted with
him and said, if thou grant me, Hebr. 6.
that Christ is the chief Bishop, Ephe. 5.
thou must needs grant that the head of the Church is Christ, and the chief
Bishop of the same, but if thou would that I should have answered thee
otherwise, thou should have asked me, whether I believed that Christ is the
head of the Church, or the Pope? he then perceiving my ieasting, said to me,
it can not be denied, but that thou art the same pleasant Pasquine that I have
heard so many times commended, but tell me in good sadness, what thou
confessest upon this matter: speaking then in good earnest, The confession of
Pasquine.
I confessed that I believed that Christ only and solely is the head of the
Church, and that to have so many heads, and so many bodies, is a thing meet
for Cerberus, Briarius, and the devil and such like, and not for heavenly
bodies: for as much as the Church, has only one head, Ephe. 5. 1.
one only spouse Jesus Christ, and that al other are members of the Church.
Cor. 3
He hearing this, Psalm. 45.
made so much of me, that he constrained me exceedingly to love him, and most
of all, when I heard him call me brother in Christ. Then led he me into a
place like a Dorter, into the which the further I entered, the more the same
became larger and larger, and it was a great building, and all the walls
thereof were undermined so beneath, that all the whole work might easily have
been overthrown.


Marforius. Who dwelled there? The inhabitants of the Popes heaven.



Pasquine. In the first entering in, we heard a wonderful noise, of Sheep,
Kine, Goats, Asses, Hearts, and such like beasts, and entering in further, we
saw them in such number as can not be told, but among them, was there not one
Woulfe, Lion, Bear, nor other like.


Marforius. What is that I hear thee say? wherefore were these Beasts there?


Pasquine. Because they had eaten herbs in the Lent, and other evil things,
and never had eaten any flesh.


Marforius. Why were there no Wolves nor Lions there?


Pasquine. For two causes, the one for that they had eaten flesh on Friday and
Saturday, and in the Lent, the other because in their places were the Friars,
who dwelled there even hard by.


Marforius. What are not the Friars aware of that dangerous building, they
were wont to be in all things vengeable subtle and crafty. Friars craftye
hipocrites.



Pasquine. Even so they be, but now they song merely, that saying of the
Psalm. That we should be saved from our enemies, and from the hands of all
that hate us. Luc. 1.



Marforius. Did thou know none of those Pioners.


Pasquine. I saw many wyly fellows, and a great part of them spoke Dutch, yet
were there very many Italyans and French men. Of those that I knew, one was
Frederick Duke of Saxon, Pioners that labor to overthrow the Popes heaven.
who seeing the Gospel come abroad, set open his gates unto it, there was
Zvvinglius, Oecolampadius, Luther, Odoricus Cogellus, Fabritius, Capito,
Lambert, Iacobus Faber, Jerome Galateus a Venetian, y^ for the Gospel sake, was
pined in a most cruel prison ten years long, and a Spaniard called John
Valdesse, being one of Cesars knights, now became Christ's knight, and many
other, all which, with much strength were digging away the foundation. This
heaven is in great danger of falling.



Marforius This heaven then stands in great danger of falling.


Pasquine. I think surely that it will shortly come to naught, because it
has the fou^dations of it very weak, and made with little skill for so great
a building.


Marforius. Did thou see I pray thee of what stuff those foundations were
made.


Pasquine. What I saw enough of it, for those that dug showed me of it for a
miracle, wondering how it should be possible, that so great a City should
stand so long upright.


Marforius. Tell me I pray thee a little, what stuff was it, whereof the
foundations were made? The ^^uffe whereof the foundation of the Popes heaven is
made.



Pasquine. There were Hoodes, Beads, sluttishe and filthy Garments, knotted
Coardes for girdels, shaven Cr^wnes, Nonnes vales, and a thousand sundry sorts
of garments, as many of shoes, as many of Cappes, a thousand sundry colors:
there were also, rotten fish, al sorts of herbs, al kinds of grain for
potage, Bishops Myters, triple Crowns, Hattes read and green, Pardons,
Candels, diverse books, and such other things, all which were tempered
together with a soft kind of stone, and with Lime, and this was the base or
foot of all their foundations, the which because it should not come out
below, for that it is a very soft kind of stuff, was therefore holden up with
four ranks of walls, the first of which walls, The four walls that hold
up the Popes kingdom.
was called Superstition, the second Pride, the third Ignorance, the fourth
Hypocrisy, and between the one and the other of these walls, was it full of
that stuff whereof the foundations are. It is not therefore to be doubted but
that this building must needs come to ruin, for there is a wonderful
disconuenience between the sleightnesse of the stuff wherewith it is builded,
and the greatness of the weight of the whole building: and besides that,
because there reigns an exceeding covetousness among them, and they bestow no
more money in building: but all heap together great sums of money, The Popes
Marchantes are afeard of a fall.
like such as are sone ready to forsake their own Country, and to go dwell
else where. To return now unto my first purpose, since thou have now
understood the whole matter concerning the Mines, and of the buildings of this
place. This Pioner led us to a certain Cave, through the which a man might
behold all the City, and it was so crooked, that it would not make any man
suspect, that matter which before I told thee. Being come thither, I began to
say to my self, what if the old Carle espy that thou art entered in at this
cave, since he would not let thee come in at his gate, how will thou then do?
and thinking thus I bit my nails, the Angel perceived it, and after he had
both demanded and understood the cause of my standing so in a study, he bid
me, that I should be of good cheer, affirming, that here men must be past
shame, Courtiers reproved of unshamefastness
as courtiers are, who run without shame to the Table, and without any
reverence, even so must he do, that will go and behold these places. His
counsel lyked me, and so taking courage, I came out of the Cave.


Marforius. I am glad thou foundst so commodious an entering, but tell me, are
they all Saints that be there?


Pasquine. In name they are all Saints that be there, but by their look and
by their manners, they be very unlike Saints. Devils in form of saints.



Marforius. What is the cause?


Pasquine. I know not, but by that the Aungel told me, they are Diuelles, in
form of Saints, that under this couerture deceive the world. And if we will
consider well the place, it seemed rather to be a Market, or a Court, than a
heaven: for there were diverse broad places, where Fayres and Martes were kept,
as a man may see in this Town, in Milaine, in Venice, and in great Cities.


Marforius. Paint me out I pray thee, the City, and the occupations of those
that dwell in it.


Pasquine. The order of Monks and Eremites.
Being now entered through the Mines, we found that in the first streate
dwelled Monks and Eremites, as in the lowest part of the City.


Marforius. Oh thou must needs have seen there many worshipful fathers.


Pasquine. Thou may be sure of that. Friars names and Surnames.
There were all the Manducantes or Mendicantes, the Augustians or Augustinians,
Carnalitanes or Carmelitanes, Demonicanes or Dominicanes, Fraudiscanes or
Franciscanes, and the Cerui or Serui, the Benebibenes or Benedictines,
Caprusianes or Cartusianes, and an infinite sort of such.


Marforius. But did thou see Saint Fraunces?


Pasquine. I saw him not, Saint Fraunces become a fisher.
one told me that he was gone to fish for souls out of purgatory, angling
for them with his girdle of Cord, and an other told me that he was called to
the counscll, where there was talking of a Monastery that was erecting in the
honor of him.


Marforius. Who made him that Monastery?


Pasquine. A certain Gentlewoman of Pulia, A pleasant storye.
who having her husband in great hatred, went and made her self of the third
rule of saint Fraunces, that she might be the more at large from her husband:
and by the order of the same rule, she took for her Son by adoption, a
certain young lusty Friar, who handled her in such sort, as both her heart
failed her, and her pursse shronke, when the Monastery was half way onward.


Marforius. The self same thing happened when I studied at Bononie, that a
son adopted in this sort, consumed al his mothers substance.


Pasquine. Was he not punished therefore by the justice?


Marforius. I can not tell thee, Bentiuoli sometime Lords of Bononie.
but this I know well, that the gentlewoma^ caused him to appear before the
Bentiuoli, who were then Lords of Bononie, there was good laughing at it, but
what afterward came to pass, I know not


Pasquine. Oh, that a man might with honesty, tell that which those Nuns
do; I could then tell many gay things, but it is not possible honestlye to
speak of that which they so vnhonestlye do.


Marforius. I shall be very glad to hear it at some other time. But now let
us speak of this matter, saw thou Saint Dominicke, Saint Bernard, Saint
Thomas of Aquine, Saint Bennet, Saint Albert the great?


Pasquine. I saw some of them and some not. I saw Saint Dominicke was in his
shop, Saint Dominicke keeps a Turners shop.
working at Turners craft, and made new Beads for our Lady. Saint Bernard (as
far as I understood) was very busy about his Hills and his Ualleys, for
when I asked for him, Saint Barnard busy about his hills and valleys.
one said he was in Clear Ualley, an other said in the golden Ualley, other
said he was gone to his hill, and other, y^ he was climbde up to the rock, to
have some of our Ladies milk.


Marforius. What do thou tell me? has he so many businesses?


Pasquine. So it was told me, but that which kept him most occupied, Among
the Swichers is a mou^tain called by his name, where as foles prate, saint
Bernard tied the devil.
was that he doubted sore, least the Svvychers, Saint Bennet.
being now become Gospellers, would let lose the Devil that he tied up, Si non
cast tamen caute, Aurelius Augustine.
who would afterward go, and all to beshite all his Ualleys.


Marforius. By my faith, it is much to be doubted.


Pasquine. I saw afterward Saint Bennet, who cursed his Friars, for that if
they could not live chastely, they wrought not closely.


Marforius. Saw thou in that place Aurelius Augustine? who (men say) did in
his Sermons institute Eremites and Monks, and that for this cause, his Monks
are called Eremitanes.


Pasquine. They lie falsely, those Asses that say that those Sermons be Saint
Augustines, which every one that is learned, confesses y^ they be rather of
some ignorant Doltes making, and those Eremitanes also lie falsely, in that
they say they be his Friars. For Augustine (more than many other) lived in the
fellowship of men, and was full of true faith, true holiness, and true
doctrine. And God grant, that those that say they be his Disciples, would
follow him herein, then would they not care for these vanities of tytles.


Marforius. Saw thou Jerome of Stridonia, Saint Jerome.
who (men say) lived in the Wilderness of Seria?


Pasquine. This Jerome in deed was a Monk, Saint Jerome a monk by will and
not by vow.
that is to say, one that of his own free choice lived solitarily a certain
time, and not for any vow sake, as these Cloysterers do, he was bound to the
vow only of Christen religion, and to none other. None of them must therefore
seek to defend his sect with the Authority of this holy man, who was a most
bitter enemy to all sects, and ambition.


Marforius. I perceive that thou say true, for that I have seen in. Can.
12. quest. 1. Cap. Necess. that Monasteries in old time were nothing else,
What monasteries were in the old time.
but Colleges for learning, and scooles for to bring up youth, albeit that
since that time, Superstition and covetousness has corrupted all things, and
brought liberty, into bondage and prison. But thou have not yet made me
answer whether thou saw them or no.


Pasquine. I saw them not.


Marforius. Saw thou then Amadio Duke of Sauoy?


Pasquine. What he that living an Ermites life in Sauoy hard by the lake of
Geneua, Amadio first a Duke, then a Pope, and last a Puppy.
stood gaping on the snow?


Marforius. Of him I ask.


Pasquine. I heard that he was banished, I know not whither, because he
suffered himself to be made Pope, and did not obey Eugenius the fourth, and so
was he put both from his Popedom, and his Dukedom.


Marforius. Then might he return to gaze upon the Snow at his pleasure.


Pasquine. Yea, as he that having lost all his goods said, now shall I have
more commodity to give my self to contemplation.


Marforius. What other good thing can thou tell me concerning these Eremites.


Pasquine. I heard say, that they were in law with the towns men of Lucca.


Marforius. And what have they to do with those of Lucca? are they become
Merchants those Eremites?


Pasquine. Yea, not of Ueluet, The story of an holy Eremite of Lucca
but of women, for about five years ago, an Eremite in Lucca, a notorious
false knave, desirous to get money, under color of Religion, enticed away one
Camilla a wydow, one of the chiefest of the town, and carried her away with him.


Marforius. And whither?


Pasquine. To Montalciue where these swine as thou know have their stye.


Marforius. I know it well.


Pasquine. The woman remained a wydow with a great dower, and therefore this
Eremite sought to have her, that both the woman and her dower might lead an
Eremites life.


Marforius. Thou meanest he would not have the sheep without the woll.


Pasquine. The woman's brothers said, that the dower ought to remain to the
house, but they will give her the interest and increase thereof while she
lives. The matter came to Rome, there was openly proved the manifest deceyt
and knavery of the Eremite, and yet for all that, was the sentence given
against them of Lucca, and they were interdicted unless they give forth the
whole dower. All cast in one mowlde.



Marforius. As these smered shauelinges be al false knaves, so must they of
force favor such false fetches. This matter was brought to my hands, but
seeing the untowardness of the Cardinals, to whom it was committed, I would not
meddle with it.


Pasquine. Thou did wisely, for what manner of men they be, Pasquine
refuses to be a Judge.
by one thou shall know them all, and if we should speak of them all, we had
need to have the voice of a Lion, and the tongues of a thousand Advocates, to
speak but of one of them (their naughtiness I say understand me soundly)
might make a book greater than the Digestes, and the books of the Chauncery.
Think thou therefore whether to speak of them all, there should be somewhat
to do.


Marforius. Let us now therefore leave these particulars, for the talk should
be to long, and tell me somewhat of them altogether. What did those holy
fathers, when thou were there?


Pasquine. Every one of them labored sore, The studies of the holy fathers.
that his own order might be holden for the most holiest: knowing this to be
the best way, to gather great riches together, and to cause this to be the
better understood, each one trauayled to seek out some new toy, to draw
therewith the common people unto him, who are full of wondering. I saw that
they prepared new fashioned hoodes, strange and horrible ceremonies, not seen
in the world past, but reserved to fight therewith against the Gospel, for
they know, that faith can not with any other thing more easily or sooner be
overthrown, Superstition overthrows faith.
than with superstitition, covered with the cloak of true holiness.


Marforius. And can this opinion of holiness do so much?


Pasquine. Thou see y^ examples thereof every where. Know thou not, that at
what time y^ order of saint Fraunces began, those that were the first setters
forth thereof, so inveigled the world with this opinion of holiness, that
they that had not a Monastery of saint Fraunces, in their town or nere there
about, thought them selves unhappy? Nay, so grew in the minds of the siely
simple souls, Remedy against the quartane Ague.
this wicked opinion of these mo^struous marked Friars, that to wear their
wede, or to go clothed in that color, was good against the quartane Ague, and
other diseases, and (that worse is) that to be buried in that Habit, was the
very right way to go to heaven. And therefore that conning man Longolius,
Longolius buried in a Friars weed.
leaving the name of a Citizen of Rome, (in whose practice he had so long
labored) would be laid in his grave a Fraunciscane, rather than a Roman.
This self same honor, had the Lord Albert of Carpi.
Albert of Carpi in his head, Rodolphus Agricola, Agricol^.
and other innumerable. But what need so many words? These Friars are come to
that point, with that opinion of holiness, that they have rid them selves
out of all other men's hands and authority, and have brought all other men
under their feet. Who knows not, that in old times past, when learning and
good studies were laid to sleep, Holy horesons that were taken for Gods
kinsemen.
that al men held them for God almightyes kinsemen? and esteemed more their
commandments than the commandments of God. And they knew not Christ,
whom the Gospel does plainly set forth unto us, which they keep in prison.
The Gospel has been long in prison.
And since they only had the handling of the book of peace, and liberty, the
common people thought that they had taken all things out of that book, and
they with cursed and abominable lies, took out here a piece and there a
piece, and with strange and fearful miracles, and with feigned dreams of
purgatory, How Superstition first began.
kept the poor people in so great fear and wonder, that they were
constrained to believe their wicked devises, and lies. If thou do consider their
laws, and the waightes and heavy burdens, that they have laid on men's
shoulders, thou will swear that the Jews law is an hundredth times more
pleasant and easy than theirs.


Marforius. What have we therefore to do herein?


Pasquine. The counsel of Pasquine.
To have recourse to the Gospel, and not suffer our selves to be led by the
nose: for the Gospel having been hitherto through these men's councels dead,
and now rising again, it behooves them to run to the same their old remedies.
And (therefore as I said not long since) do they devise strange fashions of
Masking garments, that they may the better under color of them, keep the
Doltes and Asses of the world still deceived, and subject to their devilish
and stinking Religion.


Marforius. Do they then seek other ways to bring such as believe them into
destruction?


Pasquine. So I heard say there above, nor it can not be otherwise believed, The
Gospel must cut the enemies throtes.
for that they see their enemy Christ already come abroad, with his simple and
plain Gospel, which is the sword that must cut all their throtes.


Marforius. Ah tell me I pray thee my god Pasquine, Ephe. 6.
(sith we are entered into this talk) how Christ being now come abroad,
Hebr. 4.
has made these men so much to suspect the^ selves. Apoca. 19.



Pasquine. What? know thou not then?


Marforius. No.


Pasquine. Have thou ever read the Gospel.


Marforius. Never, for I gave my self wholly to the study of the Clementines,
the decrees of Popes Ilface, the decretals and extrauagantes of Popes.


Pasquine. Thou haste good cause therefore to be ignorant. Now will I tell
thee, because thou may understand the whole matter, that good Jesus Christ
teaching a certain Pharisie the way to eternal life, The doctrine of Christ.
taught it him, to do it all in two points, in the which two, the whole way,
that is to say, all the law and the Prophets are contained. Which two points
who so ever does observe, does all that the law and the Prophets command:
Deuteronomy. 6.
and the two points are these. Math. 22.
Love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, Mar. 12.
with all thy mind, with all thy soul, and with all thy strength, Luc. 10.
and thy neighbor as thy self. To love God therefore and thy neighbor, is
the way that brings thee to heaven, The true wa^ to heaven.
the which way, Christ only knew, that came down from heaven, and then
again went up thither. And because every man desires to know it, some have
sought it, and having found it out, have minded to follow this only,
accomting all other for false and evil ways, and so have they begone to
forsake their whorish pilgrimags, to scorn their scrupulous fastings, and to
hate all their abominable superstitions, and have reformed all their whole
life, in the love of God, and in love toward their neighbor.


Marforius. Then Christ has not commanded their order of Friars? What Christ
requires to be in us.



Pasquine. I have told thee already that Christ requires sincerity and
purity in those y^ be his, and to leave counterfeyting and outward shows to
the wolves, and to y^ mo^struous beasts y^ have need to disguise them selves,
if they will not with their true countenance vncou^terfeyted, make those afeard
whom they seek to devour? What we ought to desire.



Marforius. If the thing be so, what thing is there in the world more to be
desired, than the Christian life? the which (forsaking al vanities, that have
no respect unto godliness) studieth only to have the love of God, and of his
neighbor. If the true bishops and preachers, did preach as they ought to do,
this should be the very health of common wealths, and the conservation of the
fellowship of men, and the true life of our souls. For what thing could be
more dear to mankind, than that man should be a God to man? Homo homin^ deus.



Pasquine. Thou say well Marforius, but thou see that the simplicity of
Christ is an offense to men in these days, even as it was to the Jews, while
they were in the desert. To whom God meant not to give any other than these two
commau^dements, nor to burden them with outward things, as he had done with
them in Egypt, The occasion of Moses law.
and before, in the time of y^ Patriarks, who without any Ceremonies, without
any Churches of stone, and without any other manner of Superstition, did highly
please God. But they began to rebel, and would needs be laden with Ceremonies,
as they had seen the Egiptians, and forthwith they fashioned a Calfe, and
began to honor it, and to make unto it the it bankettes, and their pastimes
with their Ceremonies, seeking to follow the Egiptians, which the Lord God when
he saw, determined to burden them with so great a number and weight of
Ceremonies, that neither they nor their fathers were never able to bear: The
burden of the law. Act. 15.
as Saint Peter says in the Acts of the Apostles. Even so just is it come to
pass at this present, that forthwith when man's folly would not be content with
Christ only, with those two plain precepts, the divine judgment let man's
folly fall into so deep a sea of Ceremonies and Superstitions, that if y^
infinite goodness of Jesus Christ had not succored us, we should all have
been drowned therein.


Marforius. O wretched, O unhappy men, nay dull beasts, that when they may be
the servants of Christ, will rather become slaves to so evident follyes as
these, which are not of any manner profit, nay rather of such hurt as can not
be imagined. And (for as much as I see) Christ does not stir us to any other
thing than this.


Pasquine. Truly he does not stir us unto any other thing, nor seeks any
other thing at our hands, for when he shall come to give judgment, he will not
say to us, have ye been at Mass? have you observed the third rule of Saint
Fraunces? are ye Uirgines? nor such other things, but he will ask us,
whether we have observed that which with so great diligence he left us written
in his Testament, What acc^ptes we must make.
while he said. Peace I leave with you, my peace I give to you, John. 14.
unto the end that you love one another. And this shall be known, whether it
have been observed of us, Math. 25.
when he shall say unto us. I was hungry, and ye gave me no meat, I was
thirsty, and ye gave me no drink, and such things like unto these, the
which who so ever has done, shall go with him to heaven: who has not done
them, shall go to hell: although he had heard all the Masses of the world,
and though he were more than a virgin, and though he had done all those other
Ceremonies and Superstitions. For he shall say. I have not fought these things
at your hand.


Marforius. As far as I can perceive, they that do the commandments of men,
The differen^^ between men's commaundeme^ts and gods commandments.
seek their own profit, but they that do the commandments of Christ, are
bound to seek the profit of their neighbor.


Pasquine. Even so it is, this is the beginning of all the mischief, for each
man seeks his own profit and advancement, from hence it is come, that
there were devised so many sects, so great diuersitye of garments, so great
diversities of Ceremonies, and so many devises to show them selves different
one from an other. But if we follow the rule of Christ, we are all Math. 23.
brethren and Gala. 4. Tit. 3.
heirs a like, we Mat. 22.
go all in one self garment, which is love: we are all of one self nature,
that is to say, mild and humble of heart: we are all most obedient to
Princes of the world. In matters of the spirit we are all a like, nor there
is among us no contention who should be highest, or who lowest, as was among
the Apostles, when they imagined that they had a Iewishe Messiah.


Marforius. Thou have satisfied me very much, but yet of this I much marvel,
that since they have lost that opinion of holiness, that thou did speak of
before, they will yet use their old practices, that are already so well known
to al men. All ways to the wood are sought to ^atch money with.



Pasquine. Who so ever seeks narrowly any thing, uses every way to the wood
that he can: even so, these men go now to one thing, now to another, agreeing
to the times and humors of men.


Marforius. Have they then other instruments yet to work their feat withal?


Pasquine. As though they had lacked any time, wherewith to catch men ere they
be ware. Have thou never considered the great number of miracles that have been
wrought by Ledger demaine? so many Friars? so many open Markets of merits and
good works?


Pasquine. Oh what abominable wickedness is this, and what good works can
they sell, where when they do the best they can, they shote ever short, and
never neither over nor home?


Pasquine. They say that they read their canonical hours, they keep their
saints eeuens, say their Masses for the dead, and that they fast as some Dutch
men do, that eat for two men, and drink for three.


Marforius. To hear thee thus among their other foolish toys, reckon up
Saints eeuens, and Masses for the dead, Masses for the dead.
puts me in a great doubt. And it seems to me a thing very strange to
see, that thou esteemest not for good, these holy Sacrifices for the souls of
the dead. But because I see that thou speak with so good ground, and
show by proof, that thou can discern very well between truth and
falsehoode: I would that thou should clear me of this doubt.


Pasquine. I will with all my heart. Here begins the doubt, that it is not
yet known, whether those that be dead, are saved through these Masses or no,
and therefore their Masses are endless. Lo even I, (to give thee an example
thereof) before I was changed into this stone, The ^^ory of Pasquine and his
transformation.
was a barber, and had this self same name that I now have, and made likewise
verses and many other works: albeit I then used the art of flattery the which
I forthwith forgot, as soon as I was turned into this stone, and when my hour
was come, that I should be transforned into this stone, because I had been such
manner of man, and having a Friar at mine ear y^ tempted me thereto, I
bequeathed by my Testament, somewhat for Masses to be said for my soul. Mine
heirs at a certain time afterward, having perceived y^ I was from Purgatory,
The opinion of Pythagoras was, that when a man's soul departed from his body,
it entered into the next body that it met, were it of man or beast.
(as they thought after Pythagoras opinion) become thus a stone, and seeing
therefore, that I had no more need of Masses, they asked often times of the
parish Priest, how long those Masses should continue, who answered, that
they must yet still be said, because they knew not, whether I were in
purgatory or in Paradise, they said they would believe the best, and that so
many years now being passed, and that Master Pasquine was a good honest
soul, and then being a dry body as he was they could not believe, that he
could so long continue in the fire. The good Parson in this point put them out
of doubt: be it as be may (quoth he) we will say our Masses, and we will have
your money. And yet mine heirs alleged that I was not in Purgatory, but that I
was become a stone, and that I did make and write as I did before. Tushe (quoth
he in the end) that is no matter to me, these be my rentes. Thou that art a
Canonist, ought to know, that this is a donation for the respect of death,
made with condition, that if Pasquine dye, the Priest should have this money to
say Masses for his soul, so long as till he come out of Purgatory. For this
donation is as it were the use of a profit limited, with condition of a thing
to come. If this now that is in this condition can never be known, neither by
the dead man's heirs, nor by the priest, (for no dead man has at any time
come back again hither) what needs it therefore, to give so great goods to
these Massemumblers? or give so great credit to their Masses? what a mad
folishnesse is this, to give so great credit to a thing so uncertain.


Marforius. What, do not thou believe, that some of those that be dead, have
come hither again, to tell their friends some news of the other world.


Pasquine. Yes, if thou will believe the dreams and lies of Friars.


Marforius. If thou will needs that other be liars, yet shalt thou not for
all that make Saint Gregory a liar. Pope Gregory was a Friar if he were no
liar.



Pasquine. And yet was he a Friar also, and if he lied not, yet shamefully lied
that deceitful dead, or wicked spirit, who made him believe that he was the
soul of a dead man, and he was but a beast to believe any such thiing,
contrary to the commandment of God, Deuteronomy. 18.
who forbids to seek the truth, Esaias. 8.
(much less any other thing) at the dead. But I will tell thee also an other,
Luc. 16.
that by one thou may learn them all. Iugling of Ipocrite Friars espied at
Orleaunce.
In Orleaunce a City in France, it is not long since the Presidentes wife
dyed, a noble and great woman, who ordained by her Testament, that they should
carry hit to be buried without light, without Masses, Look Sleydane in his
ninth book of his Cronicles.
and without any manner pomp. And so was she buried in the Monasterye of the
Friars of Saint Fraunces. Anon after, they began to hear in that place
horrible noyses, until one of those Massemumblers, turning his arse to y^
people, showed them their round God made of Dowghe. When this was once spread
abroad, every man ran thither, one said he heard it, one other said he
understood it, and an other said he saw all. The husband hearing this, came
thither him self. Then does the coniurer bind the spirit to answer to his
questions, and he asked him if he were in Paradise, and there was no answer
made, he asked if he were in hell, and yet there was no answer, he asked him
if he came from Purgatory, and then the spirit made a great rushing against
the wall, then did the coniurer ask, whether he was such a one or such a one,
naming many and sundry persans that dyed long ago, and yet was there no
answer heard, nor no manner of noise, but when he named that woman that was
buried without pomp, the spirit then made two great rushings against the
wall. Then did the coniurer ask whether she were condemned for this or that
cause: and in the end it said, because she was a Lutherane, then was there
heard three great rushes against the wall. The husband being a wife and
circumspect man, marked every thing, and made as though he had much marvelled
at the matter, and desired those Wolves to supper, and the day following caused
an hundredth Masses to be said, and to light a whole world of Candels. The
Wolves howled, they sent their Gods into Purgatory, wet the grave with unholy
water, and they perfumed it with Frankincense, and when this was done, carried
the Friars to dinner, and in the mean season sent the officers to the place
where the deceyt was done, where they found certain vaultes, and there within
three spirits hidden, whom they took and carried away.


Marforius. And how could they take the spirits, that have no bodies?


Pasquine. These were of those spirits that have bodies, Some kind of
spirits have bodies. Monasteries are spiritual, for sprites dwell in them.
of whom Saint Augustine speaks of, of which sort are almost all those that
dwell in Monasteries.


Marforius. Were they spirits in deed?


Pasquine. Thou art very gross, they were three Friars of those that they call
Nouices, that is to say, such as know not yet very well the sleightes and
falshoodes of the Friars.


Marforius. In deed the Monasteries are even full of deceytes, and the world
is very blind in that they espy them not. In Turine also there happened of
late the like matter.


Pasquine. Well, the officers having found the Bugs that made men afeard, led
them away like three little Devils as they were, By Belsabub here ye may
understand the Prior of the place.
into the place where the other great Devils were at meat, whom when Belsabub
and his brethren saw, they knew their knavery bewrayed, and as men all dumb,
they began to look one upon an other.


Marforius. But were they not punished for their labor.


Pasquine. Yes afterward with shame enough, they were rewarded according to
their demerits.


Marforius. I marvel much, that the king hearing that these traitors did so
shamefuly abuse the true Religion, did not suffer that the Gospel might be
freelye preached.


Pasquine. Thou must not marvel at this, but thou must marvel rather when
thou see, A rare thing to see Princes do well.
that any Prince does any thing that is good, they receive with good will the
true Christian Religion, for eating flesh on days forbidden, and for the
other commodities of the flesh, but they persecute, imprison, and slay, other
that in eating of flesh, and in other things, follow the liberty of Christ, and
condemn the bondage of Antichrist. Apoca. 17.
They will fight against the Lamb, but the Lamb shall overcome and confound
them all. Lo, now are the Wolves all in manner come to confusion, and shall or
ever it be long be at an evil point, except such as are on ye Lambs side none
shall escape, but this they believe not, but thou shall see it.


Marforius. I believe it certainly, for me thinks that hereof Saint John
speaks in his Revelation. But to return to Purgatory, of the which I remain
not altogether satisfied, tell me, ought we not to hope the best?


Pasquine. Think thou that to hope the best, is to believe, that one abides
for ever in Purgatory? And wherefore hope they not rather, y^ he is in heaven,
and so make an end of all their Massing?


Marforius. And what can this hoping hurt?


Pasquine. It hurts the pursses and goods of the heirs and executors of
men, but if they have so great a lust to say them, In the Popes Church no Penny
no P^ter noster.
to do good unto the dead, why do they not satisfy their lust without any
taking of money? but yet for all this, I will for my part believe, that he that
dies in the faith of Christ, goes straight to heaven, and not into purgatory.
And this it is to hope the best. What a cruelty is this of our shepeheards,
who have so evil an hope of our salvation, that they rather believe we be still
in purgatory than in heaven: Alas this is even a token that they know before
hand, that the doctrine taught us by them, is not able to bring us to heaven.
But if they fed their siely sheep with y^ wholesome word of God, What
shepeherdes of souls should do.
and saw them depart hence full fed with faith in Christ, what should they need,
to give so evil a judgment of them? and beat their brains about so many
sacrifices, which because they never make an end of, show an evident token
that they never have sufficient? And thus to proceed still without end, is an
argument, to be holden for certain, that in Purgatory there is no redemption.


Marforius. They have for all that an end many times.


Pasquine. Yea when paying of money has an end.


Marforius. So would I have said unto thee. But since thou art come to speak of
Purgatory, I pray thee tell me, whether thou have seen it, and how thou
came out of it, for as thou have well said, the dead come never back
hither, to tell us ought of it. Pasquine never dyed.



Pasquine. I (to tell the truth) never dyed, but was changed from flesh into
a stone, so that, the name of Pasquine is yet alive, how^ would thou
therefore, that I should have seen Purgatory, when I tell thee I was in
heaven? Exc^pte thou meanest by Purgatory, the blood of Christ.


Marforius. This is a plain heresy.


Pasquine. Even so in deed say the Friars, but certainelye it is an heresy to
say or believe otherwise. Paul in his Epistle to the Heb^ues affirms, Hebr. 9.
that it is impossible, that remission or purging of sins should be done
with out blood. In Purgatory there is no blood but fire, therefore is it not
possible, A good argument to ou^rth ow purgatory.
that in Purgatory should be any remission, or purging of sins. And that
there is no blood there, thou may be assured thereof by this, for they say,
that there are souls without bodies, and souls have no blood. But this have
they taken out of Poets fables, The opinion of Purgatory therefore it ^ueth.
and have feigned that there is a fire, the more to fear the minds of the
poor simple people, and chiefly such as be sick of the Fever, who feeling the
heat of the Fever, have thought, that that heat of Purgatory is ten times
greater, or else because those people that are toward the North, are very
cold, to the end they should not so go frosen to God, it was meet that they
should first be heat a little. And therefore was Saint Patrikes Purgatory
devised in Scotland. The A^tho^ would say in Ireland^.
And it is yet to be seen in certain old paintings, that the Angels plounge
the souls into this fire, as it were into a baine, and the^ forthwith hoyst
them up alofte, and many are seen with their arms stretched out, with their
beardes, with the hairs of their head safe and sound, and their whole body
clean, Purgatory fire can do no harm.
which betokens, that that fire does not burn. But this so terrible a fire,
that made the whole world for fear to quake, while it was thus kindled, by
good chance is nows quenched.


Marforius. Would God it were so. But how know thou it?


Pasquine. As I came from Geneua, upon the way I found an Inkeper, that told
it me.


Marforius. What did he tell thee.


Pasquine. Do thou not remember that year, in which the Secretaries of the
news said, that there would come so many raynes and floods of water?


Marforius. I remember it well, and it was in the year of our Lord 1524.


Pasquine. Even so it was, do thou remember what prayers were made to God,
that he would deliver us from so great destruction?


Marforius. I remember it well.


Pasquine. God then being moved with compassion, Neptunus is feigned of the
Poets to be the God of the Sea.
commanded Neptunus to carry those waters into some other place. Neptune
therefore since he could not bestow where he would, so great store of waters,
which he had prepared for the drowning of the whole world, Purgatory fire was
quenched by Neptune.
let a great part thereof soake through into Purgatory, and quenched the fire in
such sort, that since that time hitherto, it never gave no great flame. A great
part thereof remained utterly quenched. Another part thereof eschewing the water
as his contrary, retired first to Cicilia, and after to Porzolo, whereas, after
it had by little and little made his way, it burst forth, Purgatory fire came
from Rome, and thither it will again.
with wonderful great hurt to the country, and now is in the way to go to
Rome, where first it began to burn.


Marforius. Why then, will so wicked a fire assail so holy a City?


Pasquine. He that with good reason returns to his own country, it is not
to be said, that he does assault it.


Marforius. Well, tell me, how did this strange chance please the people of
that heaven, of which thou speak?


Pasquine. Thou could not believe what grief they feel thereby. They do
now naught else, but stir up Vulcane to make such an other, Whence purgatory
fire first came.
for they know that from his Shop in the hill Atna, a certain Abbot called
Odilus brought the first fire to Rome to saint Gregory. And if Vulcane make not
such an other, they doubt, that so great rentes, as they receive by this
forge, will all come to naught.


Marforius. They have good cause to doubt, for if it be known abroad that this
fire is put out, what will he be, that will take from his own children and
heirs, to give to these lazy lubbers? wh^ will build any Chapels? who will
build any Monasteries? who will any more fat these Hogs? who will have any
more estimation of them? I for my part, have hitherto esteemed and reverenced
them, for fear only of this fire. For they made me believe that it burns
even the stones. But because they see that me^ are not afeard of this their
imagined fire of Purgatory, they make them feel the fire of this world: and
all to maintain their tirannicall kingdom. Yet profit they little for all
that, for those men whom they so burn live in the fire, and of their ashes do
increase and multiply infinite numbers. But leave we this, for I am out of
doubt thereof, and let us return to the Queere where the Friars be, of whom
thou spakest not long since. Saw thou any of those Scapuchines?


Pasquine. Thou meanest those y^ have already begone to nestle the^ selves in all
y^ towns of Italy, Scapuchines and their garments.
with filthy garments and ^roked conditions, with their hoode drawn up with a
peake in the top, after such fashion as the Diuill is painted * tempting
Christ in Math. 4.
the desert?


Marforius. Those I ask for.


Pasquine. I saw one or two, but they went all alone, hated of al men,
Scapuchines defenders of freewill.
and they mumbled to them selves I wot not what, touching freewil.


Marforius. I believe that, for in this town, and in Padoa, I have heard them
at the Shrouetide, beat it into the heads of the Fackins. But what was the
cause they were so hated? Faccini be such as the Porters of Billings gate.
that garment of theirs should give them some credit, at the least with these
poor whoresons.


Pasquine. They were hated, because that with their filthiness, and with their
weed, they did so magnify and set forth Ipocrisie, that they made some
suspect, that thereby they would whollye withdraw the people from the other
Religions, and allure the^ to theirs.


Marforius. Why then, does envy reign among them?


Pasquine. Not envy only, but hatred also. Envy and hatred reign among Friars.
^arn. Ochine the inue^tor of Scapuchines.
For they so deadly hate the inuentour of this order Barnardine Ochine, that it
can not be spoken, seeing him now to be become a Rebel to this heaven, and
that he does so valiantly assault it, and lays to the walls so ruinous a
battery. And beside that do thou not remember, that I told thee, that it
was the heaven of Popes and fools, where those that are immortal are a great
deal worse than those that be mortal? But thou shall understand me better,
by that time, thou have heard the whole of me, point by point.


Marforius. Follow on therefore I pray thee: for I take great pleasure to
hear thee discover so great wickedness, and to show the truth naked and
plain.


Pasquine. We left therefore the streate of the Friars: whereas all these
sects disputed together of their diverse customs, Habits and Institutions,
that the Tower of Babylon was never fuller of confusion, and came to the second
streate.


Marforius. Tarry I pray thee, do they agree so well together in this heaven?


Pasquine. They do all agree in seeking to prefer them selves before Christ,
in the rest they are as wide as East and West.


Marforius. I can not believe that.


Pasquine. Can thou not believe it? O Marforius Marforius, thou take little
heed to things, I know well that thou find not this in the Comentaries of
Gratian, nor Accursius, Gratianus and Accursius.
but wherefore serve so many Churches, so many sacrifices, so many Frieries,
so many Monasteries, made in the honor of this Saint, and of that, but to
banishe by little and little the memory of Christ out of the world? The
increasing of these Frieries, The increase of the Frieries has diminished the
faith. The order of of the Virgins.
has been the diminishing of the Christian faith.


Marforius. That is like enough to be true, out of doubt. But proceed on a
little, and tell me what follows.


Pasquine. Then comes the order where the Urrgines be, where are to be seen
many thousands of foolish women.


Marforius. Why, and are the women there above men, and in a more worthy place?


Pasquine. It was requisite that they should be put in between the Monks and
the Confessors, for the Monks teach them how to put the devil into Hell, how
he must be fought with, and the manner how to fall into a trance. And on the
other side the confessors, understand all that they do in sight, thought,
word, and deed, and then laying their hands on their head, and the displing
rod, as the penitentiaries here do they assoyle them.


Marforius. I understand thee well. They are put in the mids because they
shall not run away, but this seems to me very strange, that in the Letany
they are last, and here they are above the Monks, A wonderful disordered
heaven.
under whom (me thinks) they would do much better.


Pasquine. The fault is in the books and not in the matter, and he that made
the Letany knew not al, for then would he not have set the women in the
rerewarde, for they ought to be kept and not to keep other, nor let it not
seem strange to thee, that they be above the Monks, for the Monks can bring
them under them when they list?


Marforius. Are they all after one fashion? have they al one kind of garment?


Pasquine. So full of diversity is this division or Queere; as the rest are,
The sundry sorts of Nu^nes.
for as much as some are called Celestines, some Clarines, some Vastalines,
some Martirines, some Brigidines. Other are called Barbarines, other Lucianes,
other Marianes, other Marthanes, other Benedictanes, other Franciscanes, other
Dominicanes, other A^gustinianes, other Carmilitanes, Putanies be those Nu^nes
that we call the green Friars on strawbery bank.
and some Putanies also.


Marforius. What did they?


Pasquine. First of all they gloryed in their goodly title, and next they
rejoiced, that they had drawn into that opinion the chiefest part of
Christe^dom. And of this most especially they boasted The opinion of virginity
what it has done.
, that the opinion of Uirginitye: or to say better, the hatered of Matrimony,
had builded from the foundations upward, a great part of that heaven.


Marforius. They diseeyued them selves never a deal; for if the Prelates and
Priests, had not forborne wives, the Popish Religion should long since
have been brought to nothing, for the multiplying of their children would
have divided their revenues into many portions. If thou will see how much
marriages are hurtful to this Church, take example of that, If the Pope give
such gubbes away he will leave Saint Peter but a lean patrimony.
which this other year Pope Paul did when he married his sons son to the
Emperors bastard daughter, which he sold to the Pope. If all Popes were of
that mind, and then begat children apase, it would sone come to pass with
them as it did with the Marquises of Lunigiana, who in the end had neither
Merchandise, money, nor land, left them, and therefore they pass, not for
any other thing than the commodities of the flesh, and hate Matrimony as a
very plague.


Pasquine. Thou understand it Marforius and so do I.


Marforius. But I marvel much, how there can be so many Uirgines, this being
so rare a gift, and most of all since it is lost by the desire only. Virginity
lost by desire.
For who soever looks on a woman to lust after her, has commtited adultrye
with her already in his heart.


Pasquine. The matter is, that they take not virginity after this sort, Math.
5.
but for a virgin they mean her that is without a husband, Such were the
virgins of strawbery bank. The Popes Virgin^s.
or him that is without a wife.


Marforius. By this meaning Fornicatours and single women also may be Uirgines,
ah?


Pasquine. Yea out of doubt, so that they swear never to mary, and remember
that if they live not chaste, they may take a whore secretly.


Marforius. I doubt least by this opinion, many are become dishonest virgins.
But saw thou there Saint Katherine, Saint Barbara, Saint Julian.


Pasquine. I saw them, and they were very full of cursed ambition.


Marforius. What is that I hear thee say? are those virgins ambitious, that
dispysed all things of the world?


Pasquine. A man may read in some stories that they dispysed all things, and
I think it well done to believe godly, and learned hystories, whereas a man may
not see any thing that is superstitious or wicked, but there, (well I wot)
they have changed both countenance and conditions. What the saints of this
heaven can do.
Saint Katherine promised to him that has in remembrance her passion, to
deliver him from lightnings and tempests. And Saint Barbara, to make him in
the Wars kill his enimyes.


Marforius. Did thou never hear that fine toy, of this Saint Barbara, how
she gave a gift to certain soldiers that had fasted on. Saturday in the
honor of her, Bylike they had no meat, soldiers fast else seldom.
that they might with most stout courage fall unto the spoil? There are also
many devout soldiers, that bear her painted on their Harquebushes, and upon
their Morions, or upon their Curasses, that she may defend them from Gunshot.


Pasquine. O Marforius how many times have I marvelled A marvel, that Saints
would hurt men.
(and yet could I never believe it) that the good Saints had any desire to do
hurt to men: and that they had this ambition, to desire to get credit in the
world, and to do it by these means. For I knew it was the foolishest thing
in the world, to believe that that which they eschewed, while they were
subject to the affections of the flesh, they seek so now, that they are out
of bondage of those affections. If we will please Saints, How to please true
Saints.
that are the true Saints in deed, let us do that, which they (while they
lived) commanded us, that is to say, let us love God, and let us use charity
to our neighbor: for doing otherwise, we do highly offend them, How to
displease them*
that is to say, we make them ambitious, desirous of revenge, cruel and
proud, the which things in their life time they so much abhorred and hated.
As might right well be seen in their stories, if the Friars by their
presumption, and for that cursed rage of gain, had not corrupted and perverted
the same. And therefore let us seek to Christ only: Christ only is to be
followed.
for he only is the John. 14.
way, he only is the truth, he only is the life, he only is the John. 9.
light, he only is the Math. 23.
Master, he only is the John. 10.
shepherde, he only is the Hebr. 10.
hye Priest, he only is the 1. John. 2.
Advocate, he only is our full Ephe. 1.
redemption and salvation. Let us therefore sollowe Christ only, forsaking
those things that are the causes of so many inconveniences. For we see right
well, that because we follow not Christ only, there are sprung up so many
sundry sects, so great diversities of rites and customs, so many
superstitions which have led away the Christians so far from Christ, y^ of his,
The fruit of devotion to Saints.
they have now no more but only the bare name, and this is the fruit that is
gotten by devotion to Saints.


Marforius. To return therefore to the purpose, this virginitye, is it not so
holy a thing, as the world takes it to be?


Pasquine. Thou have heard that it has been the foundation of a great part of
this heaven.


Marforius. I have heard so, and for ought that I have heard, I see also, Vices
clad with virtues clothes.
that vices are clad with the clothes of those virtues that are their
contraryes, for I see that fornication, is called virginity. But much I marvel
that Saint Jerome did so much extol this virginitye, that he durst make this
conclusion. It is good for a man to be without a wife, therefore is it evil
for a man to have a wife. And in an other place he says: that God has
promised heaven to virginitye, and the earth to them that be married. Saint
Jerome spotted with the heresy of Mo^ta^us.



Pasquine. This is even the full and flat heresy of Montanus. The which, Jerome
follows also in condempning altogether the second marriage, as is to be seen,
in that he writes to Iouinian, where he affirms, that the second and third
marriage is naught, and where he takes hold for the confirmation of his
opinion, he wresteth the scriptures to his meaning, without purpose, as a man
may see in the Epistle that he writes, to that gentlewoman of Rome, who
because she was a wyddow, and but a young woman, to obey Saint Paul's council
was married again: the beginning of his Epistle is this. Thou art become
shameless, and have put on the face of a Harlot.


Marforius. Me thinks therefore that his works should have showed with
great aduisement, what is the cause, that being a man of so great learning, he
takes things so clean contrary, and that he is so stubburne in his opinions?


Pasquine. What? because he was a man, Dalmatian^ obstinate people.
and a Dalmatian.


Marforius. Thou meanest somewhat, in that thou call him a Dalmatian.


Pasquine. I mean then, that Nation is most obstinat, in that which once
enters into their brains, and sets naught by the opinion of al other
Nations. Know thou not that old friend of Cardinal Chietti, that comes
often times to see him?


Marforius. Ha, yes yes, I know him, he speaks Greek very often, because he
would seem to understand much of it.


Pasquine. That is he. When this man talks of any thing of his own, thou
never heardest a prouder man, nor a greater boaster speak, nor that more
disprayseth all things that come not from him self, or from his countrymen,
nor a more stubburne in his opinions: and therefore marvel not at Saint Jerome,
for they are all such kind of men.


Marforius. This also makes me much more to marvel, that these men have so
much extolled this virginity, since there is not in all the holy scripture, any
one precept that forbids to any kind of men marriage, and where there are so
many places that comaunde and commend it. For by this mean, God would that
the world should be maintained. And this was defended by the good Bishop
Paphnutus in the council of Niece, Paphnutius defends Priests marriage.
against three hundredth Bishops. This heaven has many Virgins but no Mary's.



Pasquine. I believe that it is for the Uirgin Mary's sake, that these men
would have so many Virgins.


Marforius. Yet can they not for all that, bring to pass, that there should be
many Mary's, the which was verily a Phoenix.


Pasquine. I like it well that thou beginnest to understand the matter.


Marforius. See Pasquine, I have done as Thelemachus did in Homer, who said,
that by other men's wise communications, he had learned much.


Pasquine. I much rejoice, that this my talk has brought forth so good fruit
in thee.


Marforius. And I rejoice much more thereat. But to return to the purpose of
this virginity, I say, that the Uirgine Mary never made accoumpt that her
Uirginity should be of any merit toward God, for she had determined, to have
a husband, and would before have had him, but that the Angel of the Lord
declared to her that high and heavenly determination, that God had made
concerning her. And God had regard not to her virginity, but to her humility,
as may be seen in her own song, where she said. Luc. 1.
He has regarded the lovvlines^e of his handemayde, and said not, to the
virginity of his handemayd, for lowliness is it that pleases the Lord, and
that is by him commanded unto us, whiles he says. Math. 11.
Learn of me, for I am meek and lovvlye of heart, and said not, Humility
preferred before virginity.
learn of me, for I am a Uirgin. And if thou will see this more clerelye, look
that place of the Gospel, where the Disciples sought to know who should be
greatest in the kingdom of heaven. Christ set there in the midst among them
a child, Christ techeth humility by the example of a child.
saying: That they must humble them selves and become as that child, if they
would enter into the kingdom of heaven. And if he had made so great an
accoumpt of Uirginity, Math. 18.
or had known it to be so necessary, he might have said, Luc. 18.
that they must be virgins as that child was, if they would enter into the
kingdom of heaven. And see moreover, the greatest praise that is given to
Christ, is, for that, (as the Scripture says) He made him self of no
reputation, Phil. 2.
taking upon him the shape of a servant: and not because he was a Uirgin. But
hereupon the Lords saying puts me in some little doubt, Math. 19.
which says. That some do make them selves chaste for the kingdom of God.


Pasquine. Let not this trouble thee, Chastity and what it is.
for this word to make chaste in that place, means nothing else, but to take
away every evil affection, not only of fleshly lust, but also of all manner
evil desire thereto. As also where he says. Math. 5.
That thou should pull out thine eye, and cut of thine hand, he means
nothing else, but that thou should take from thee that vice, which
overcomes thee, by means of that member of thine. And the gift of chastity,
Math. 19.
is not given to every one that vvoulde have it, but to whom God will. This
therefore ought not to be given as a commandment, but they that are called
thereunto by god, ought to use this as a council. Origin mistook Christ's
words.



Marforius. Why then Origin much mistook this matter, in cutting away his
instrument of generation.


Pasquine. Without doubt he should better and more holily have made him self
chaste, if he had assuaged his hot desire with an honest wife of his own. For
this thing God commands us, and not the other.


Marforius. But he should not have been chaste after that sort.


Pasquine. Nay rather he could not be chaste, after the other sort, as
Logitians define, Whether Eunuchs be cha^te or no.
who call not the Eunuchs chaste, because they can do nothing. But that he
having a wife might also be chaste, the book of wisdom does plainly
dedeclare, where he says: Sap. 4.
O, how fair is a chaste generation with virtue. Lo, he calls chaste, the
generation of children. And to ye Hebrews, thus it is written: Marriage is
honorable among all men, The praise of marriage.
and the bed undefiled, but Fornicators and adulterers, God vvil judge. Hebr.
13.



Marforius. I would it were Gods will that thou might be a Preacher to the
world but even a few years, then should it not be half so blind as it is.


Pasquine. Such was Gods pleasure, that those that have been delited with lies,
and foolish toys, should in lies and foolish toys be drowned and buried.


Marforius. Sith we are entered into this talk, I would have thee tell me,
what it is, that has deceived so many great learned me^, to set forth so
carefully this virgintiy: A learned Bishop of France.



Pasquine. A French Bishop, full of great learning, of great judgment, and of
much godliness, opened mine eyes in this point that thou now demaundest,
saying: that very many errors are sprung up by the deceytfulnesse of such as
to curiouslye sifte the scriptures, who finding in the same, some one thing in
especial, or that particulerly has been commanded to one man, have gone
about to make it general, Math. 19.
as this: If thou vvilt be perfect, go and sell all that thou have, Marc. 10.
and give it to the poor. Here Christ speaks to that young man, Luc. 18.
that boasted that he had always kept the commandments, and gives this
lesson particulerly to him, to beat down ^lat his presumption, in that he
said, he had always kept the commandments of God. And it is no general
precept, for Christ denies not, but that a man may serve God having riches,
Not the riches but the abuse of it spoken against.
for a man may see in the old Testament, that infinite Patriarchs and Kings,
and other servant of God were exceeding rich. Likewise where Saint Paul
says to the Corinthians: not commanding, but saying his advise, and speaking
condicionally: 1. Cor. 7.
That it is good for a man for the present necessity, to be without a wife.
These men have made this place general, and yet Saint Paul says, for the
present necessity, The reason why Paul counseled to so bear a wife.
because that the^ the Christians were driven to and fro, and if they had wives
and children, they had more greater charge to carry about after them, than if
they were unmarried. And thus says he, because of y^ afflictions of the flesh,
and the persecutions of those times, and not for any other cause. And therefore
said he afterward, 1. Cor. 7.
that he spoke for their profit, not to tangle the^ in a snare. Many other
places there are in the Scripture, A great absurdity.
which albeit they be most special, these fellows have gone about to make
most general. And even so is it of virginity, the which being a gift
granted to very f^we by especial privilege from ^od, they notwithstanding,
have sought to have it of every man, as a thing general, because they are not
of capacity to understand that saying as Christ spoke it. Math. 19.
^ut these precepts are particular, as that was of Abraham to kill his son.
An example of Abraham to kill his Son.
And as it shou^e be a great absurdity to go about to make that precept
general: even so is it no less absurdity to command and commend this other
also.


Marforius. This discourse of thy ^yshop pleases me very well: Gene. 32.
he is ^arre differ^nt from the Duncysh Sorbones, of Paris, who say if they had
saint Paul in their hands they would burn him. I perceive that the light of
Gods truth burns in y^ heart of this Bishop. The order or Queere of widows.
But saw thou there never a widow? was there not Judith of Sarepta, * Anne
the Prophetess, that so openly confessed Christ in Saint Lukes Gospel, Luc. 2.
nor that other that offered the two Mytes, and was therefore so much commended
of Christ?


Pasquine. Marc. 12.
There was none of all these there, for they (as it was told me) were in the
other heaven. But in this heaven were some that none durst be so bold to name
them, and they were of those, that saint Paul calls idle, ^. Tim. 5.
ever babbling, busy bodies, and speaking things which are not comely.


Marforius. And why are they in this heaven?


Pasquine. The Angel told me because some of them had founded Monasteries,
and erected sundry sects, and enryched the places, and became Nonnes: and
especially English women, Hungarians, Dutch women, and French women. Of
Italians and Spanyardes there were very few. Albeit there be in our days of
country women of Italy, that for superstition seek to pass those of old
time.


Marforius. Who be these?


Pasquine. Thou must needs have heard speaking of them: for that they seek to
be known for Saints, meet in very deed for this heaven: have thou never
heard speak of the Countess of Vastalla? Vastalla erecteth a new sect of
Religious people.
and of her that causes her self to be called the holy Lady Saint Camill?


Marforius. Yes, but I never took heed thereunto, what be they?


Pasquine. I can not tell what they be. For they do that which Paul does
disalowe, being idle, gadding from City to City, and from house to house. But
yet has Vastalla founded her sect in Millaine. Camilla was of late in Pauia,
and now is in Venice, for into the deep waters, Where the caraine is, thither
do the Eagles resort.
the great fish always goes.


Marforius. Tell me somewhat of the same Vastalla, whether she bring forth any
monsters.


Pasquine. Thou say very well, for who soever forsakes God and nature, can
do nothing but bring forth monsters. The story of Vastalla. Vastalla reuiueth
the heresy of the Adami^es.
This Vastalla being a wydowe, rich, wealthy, and of great birth, and therefore
called a Countess, has ordained a sect of women and men, who must seek to
atta^e to that purity and ^nocencie that was in Adam and Eve, before they
offended, and to be such as can sin no more, and to be without all feeling of
affection or passion, and the mean to come hereunto, is long prayers, much
silence, continual fastings, and to be shriuen every day, showing and opening
what soever it be either good or evil, that they have done, said, or thought,
without leaving behind any jot or tittle of any thing. Moreover they must
receive their maker every eight days, and they call their maker that round
Cake in the which they say is the body of Christ: which is in heaven.


Marforius. Alas what say thou Pasquine, beleuest thou not, that the
consecrate bread is the body of Christ?


Pasquine. And do not thou believe that Christ is very man?


Marforius. Yes, I do believe it, and that he was borne of the Uirgin Mary, and
that he suffered, dyed, and was buried.


Pasquine. Beleuest thou not that he afterward rose again, very man, and that
he ascended into heaven, bearing with him his body full and whole, and that he
shall come thence (in the same fashion, that he was seen go hence) to judge the
quick and the dead?


Marforius. Yea, I do believe it, and do look for it.


Pasquine. If thou believe this, wherefore will thou believe, that that bread
is the ^ody of (...) what gladness have thou brought me unto. I do right well
believe, that thou haste been in heaven, and haste brought from thence, these so
high mysteries. For this knowledge is not of men, but heavenly. Now have I let
go the Woulfe, and by thy labor and dil^gence, a^ come out of great danger,
wherefore I give ^od thanks without end.


Pasquine. All that which this sect of the Countess of Vastalla, and all the
Popish route else, The papists understand not Christ's Institution.
do go about concerning this Sacrament, because (they are so far wide from
the institution of Christ, and from the truth) all that I say is nothing else
but that which the scripture calls, the cursed Idol, and abomination.


Marforius. And I was even now thinking thereupon, and much I marvelled how
it should come to pass, that some which understand these things, should
remain still blinded, in the error of these so wicked Sacrifices, and be
partakers of them, the which (surely) can not be without most heinous offense
against god.


Pasquine. What man, some does it for fear, Ma^y lette^ therebe to keep me^
back from God.
some for vaineglory, and other some for covetousness, and deceytes of the
devil. But yet can the Lord keep safe those that he his.


Marforius. I perceive that thou say truth, and I see that this sect of
Vastalla, and such like, become so much the worse, as that they do the
oftener use that Sacrameat, and other wicked Sacryfices. But is there any thing
else to be said of her?


Pasquine. The best is yet behind.


Marforius. What is that?


Pasquine. When she will know, whether any be come to the purposed point of
this purity, this way she tries it, Proper devises to bring men to purit^e.
she causes him to wear about^ his nocke, or upon his head, or in some other
notable place of his body, some thing of much shame, as a Frying pan, or a
Kettle, or else the horns of an O^e, or of a Ram, or else his garments with
the wrong side outward, or otherwise evil fauouredly put on, and sometime
wrapped in a Net, or half naked, and somewhile altogether naked, be it man
or woman. And so does she make them go through the City, for says she, our
first fathers were in the beginning naked, and afterward did cover their
dishonest parts with leaves, and then went half clothed, and last of al, (as
evil did increase together with their shame) they did wholly cover the^ selves
with beasts skins. Who so ever does therefore desire to return to that
former sincerity, must come backewarde by the self same degrees, and from
clothing him self, must return to nakedness, and if of these things they be
not ashamed, then is it a manifest token* that they be already in Paradise.


Marforius. Oh what a shameful thing is this.


Pasquine. Hark, there is worse yet. Then put they Adam and E^e in the
night season alone in a bed, Horses and mares turned loose together.
who if they eat not of the Fruits, if they speak not together thereof, nor
have thereof no manner of thinking, for as much as of every thing they are
afterward strayghtly examined, and must of force confess it, then are they
already become Angels, A very chaste religion.
and made Gods. But if they eat of the fruits, (for that, for the most part,
she that went to bed a ^irgin, arose from thence spedde with her errande) then
are they driven out of Paradise, and condemned to perp^tuall torments.


Marforius. I know not who deserves herein most blame, whether they that do
this, or the Princes, or Magistrates, that wink at it.


Pasquine. The Magistrates of Christendom in these days, neither condemn nor
persecute any, but such as seek the h^nour of Christ, that give all praise to
Christ, and that maintain the Gospel of Christ.


Marforius. Alas alas, thou say even the truth, oh how great account shall
they make to Christ, God lighten them if it be his pleasure. The rule of
Camilla Pallauicine.
But tell me somewhat of that Lady saint Camilla. Wherefore is she called both a
Lady and a Saint?


Pasquine. Lady for her pride, and Saint for her Ipocrisie, for she was not
contented to be of the house of the Pallauicini, the which thou know is
famous and noble in Italy, but would by her cursed pride, make her self a
mo^grel of the blood Royal of France, and says, that she is the daughter of
king Jews the third.


Marforius. And how?


Pasquine. She said, that the King making war in Italy, An honest woman to
make her mother a whore.
had then to do with her mother, and so was she begotten.


Marforius. That was a terrible war in deed, but yet was there no blood
shed. And does she then rejoice in this goodly title, to be a bastard, the
daughter of a whore, both borne and begotten in adultery.


Pasquine. Yea out of doubt, but not without cause, for thou may see that
that good fellow of Millaine in his Paradoxes, shows that it is better to be
a bastard, than lawfully begotten. Better to be a Bastard than lawfully
begotten.



Marforius. Oh how much it displeases me, to see how goodly wits are
occupied about vain unprofitable vile and shameful exercises, which else might
better be employed in better studyes. But this Camilla was a bastard before
that the Author of those Paradoxes was borne. But what life leads she?


Pasquine. Mary she gaddeth now here, now there, under color of Religion.


Marforius. Of what Religion? A good religion of her own making



Pasquine. Of a Religion of none other bodies making but of her own. She has
with her three women of the self same Ipocrisie, and superstition. She
abides not in any Monasterye, as Nonnes do, but dwells in a private house,
and changes it often (such is her womanishe fickleness) and she haunteth
places pleasant and solitary, albeit she have no greater pleasure in any one
thing, than in the conversation of men, as may well be seen, for his house is
continually haunted with women, and gentlemen and Lords, as if it were the
house of a conning Doctor, or rather of the Oracle of the City. The great
blindness of the world.
And the world is such, as more easily does suffer it self to be drawn away,
with the gay glistering of superstition, and feigned holiness, than with the
true and humble religion. Sometime she shuts up her self in a Chamber, so
straight and so dark (which she often used at Pauia,) that it rather seems
a grave than a Chamber, and this she says, she is the more familiarly to enjoy
the company of Angels. On the Friday, she will not speak to any man, nor let
her self be seen, for she says, that on that day she remains altogether
occupied in the contemplation of the Cross of Christ, and of his nails,
through the meditation whereof, she says, Camilla has the five wounds that
Christ had. No Ipocrisie.
she has received the marks of the five wounds of Christ.


Marforius. Why then, she does counterfaite Saint Katherine of Siena, and Saint
Fraunces?


Pasquine. Nay, rather is she Saint Fraunces wife, for she loves his Friars
as her own children, and prefers his sect before all other, and goes also
cladde in his weed. And moreover, she has her hands and her feet, wrapped in
cloutes, that the eyes of sinners should not see those holy wounds, which are
only meet to be seen of Angels.


Marforius. Are they wounds in good sadness?


Pasquine. I can not tell, but I will show thee what (merrily and paraduenture
truly) an Ambassador of the French Kings said, talking one day of this woman,
and of her wounds. There was one that said, he marvelled that she kept them
covered. A witty saying of a french Ambassador.
Marvel not at all quoth he) for things that are filthy, ought to be kept
conered, and paraduenture they are the plain marks of the French Pockes,
which disease is wont to break out in these places, albeit sometime in the
foreheade, but not altogether, nor after one sort to all men.


Marforius. What answered that other good fellow?


Pasquine. He was blank, he knew not what to say.


Marforius. No more could I tell what to say, if I said not, that those
wounds are made by art of man, or the craft of the Devil, as happened in
Berna a town of the Svvychers, where certain Dominicane Friars did ye like to
a poor simple soul.


Pasquine. Thou say truth, for I heard speak of it, when ye news thereof
was brought to Pope Iulie the second, albeit this be also written in a
faithful story, and yet escaped they not unpunished therefore, Four Friars
burnte at Berne for Ipocrisie.
for four of the^ which were privy to this, and other so great sacrileges were
burnt alive. And this was before y^ Berne had the understanding of the gospel.
But those Lords of Berne have been always enemies to deceytes, and to these
knauish devises, whom if the Venetians would follow, and not suffer so many
false miracles, and other deceytes, of gredy Ipocrites, as the body of saint
Roch, which is made of toawe and of Chaulke, and of so many Ladies y^ for
gredinesse of gain, Gredynesse of gain works miracles
are made to work miracles, not only they, but y^ rest of Italy, and the other
parts of Christendom would open their eyes, and espy out so many and so
manifest deceytes, that who so ever does not find them out, is well worthy of
all blame and shall in the end be punished therefore of Christ. But to return
to the wounds of Camilla, I have heard say, that being desired to supper by
certain Nonnes, in the evening after supper, when she should go to bed, she
asked for a little Malmesey, and when a woman of the Monastery had given her
some, being desirous to know what she would do with it, she stood and looked
through a little hole of the door, and saw, Mark well.
that she cast the Malmesey drop by drop, upon her hand, and she groned,
but she could see nothing else.


Marforius. By like she did keep those wounds open, with this subtle devise,
and even so with the same subtle devise, did make them at the first.


Pasquine. I could say also of her, how she entermedleth her self, with
making of Marriages, moved thereto for the zeal of her pursse, Camilla a broker
of marriages.
for she will be well paid. Then uses she many other brybing fetches, there
are many presents sent unto her, and she sends them covertly to sell, she
plays the Physician, Camilla uses many fine shystes and all for money.
and asks this thing and that thing, to make Medicines withal, and then
sends the things to sell, as happened to a poor woman for a great many
pounds of wax. And such one as thou hear is she, and yet is accounted a
most holy one.


Marforius. God be he that provide therefore, for of men I see not how remedy
may be hoped for. But if there be nothing else to be said of this division or
Queere, go on forward. The Quere or order of the confessors.



Pasquine. In the third streate, were the confessors. This was a great route,
and wonderfully out of frame, full of rytes, and different customs. Some had
three Crowns, some Myters, some Hats, some were shaven, some covered faced,
some lay brothers in gray coats, some blewe, some read, some white, some
black, some gray, some hooded like the Scapuchines, some of the order that
Chietti made. All had some sundry sign of Ipocrisie, Chiettines are the
rankest Ipocrites.
and most of all those Chiettines.


Marforius. What a thing is this, that they ever speak of Christ, and never
seek the honor of Christ, but of them selves?


Pasquine. I have always seen, that these that have Christ still in their
mouths, never have him in their hearts.


Marforius. It is true. But what made these men with so many sundry liueryes.
The Gods sore troubled.



Pasquine. I can not tell thee of certainty, but for as much as I perceived,
they were also in great trouble.


Marforius. And wherefore?


Pasquine. Least they should be forsaken of their devout Clients.


Marforius. What is that I hear thee say? why are these Gods afeard of men?


Pasquine. If they be made and invented by men, will thou not, that by them
they may be also overthrown? of these Gods speaks the Scripture, where he
says: They are the work of men's hands, Psalm. 115.
and therefore are they afeard.


Marforius. Wherefore are they called Confessors.


Pasquine. Because they have spent al their whole life in hearing confessions,
wherefore they are called conf^ssours.
and other men's sins, or in confessing them selves to other as commonly
they do.


Marforius. Thou laughest Pasquine?


Pasquine. I laugh in deed, but yet it follows not, but that I say the truth.


Marforius. I thought they had been called Confessors, because they should
confess Christ, What true confessors should do. False confessors.
with their tongues, with their lives, and with their deaths.


Pasquine. Thou art deceived, unless thou would say, that to confess, y^
the Pope is the head of the Church, and that salvation is gotten by man's
merits, is to confess Christ. But that is not in the Creed or Simbole of the
Apostles.


Marforius. As far as I can perceive, this is rather a denying of Christ,
than a confessing of him. But me think thou make a mock of confession,
which is a thing very holy and necessary.


Pasquine. Do I make a mock of confession? Nay I confess my self very often
times, did not thou say even now, that they are true co^fessours, that
confess Christ, and profess him with their words, and with their deeds?


Marforius. Yes, and I thought that for this cause they had been called
confessors. For of this confession I think our master Christ spoke, when he
said: He that shall confess me before men, Math. 10.
him will I also confess before my father which is in heaven. Math. 5.
And so let your light shine before men, that they may see your good works
and glorisie your father which is in heaven. But I ask thee of that other
confession, that is called Sacramental, and Auriculer, Ear confession.
which is made to man, and of him, is had the absolution of sins.


Pasquine. I should stand to long, to answer thee to all that that thou
demaundest me. But of this I will in few words put thee out of doubt. Think
thou that Christ was perfectly wise?


Marforius. I believe, that he was most wise, Luc. 11.
and very wisdom it self.


Pasquine. Think thou, that his doctrine was absolute and perfect?


Marforius. I believe it, for he was God, unto whom can be ascribed none
imperfection, without great and heinous offense.


Pasquine. Does there want any thing in his doctrine, delivered unto us by his
Apostels?


Marforius. Nothing, that is necessary to live well, and to go to everlasting
life. Ear confessoures not spoken of in the scripture.



Pasquine. Sith he has therefore, made no manner mention of this ear
confession, it is not necessary for our blessed life.


Marforius. This is it that I would so feign know: for many affirm that it
is allowed by Gods word, and many deny it.


Pasquine. Thou must needs know what thine own doctor Panormitanus says
concerning it, to whom I am sure, thou give credit.


Marforius. He says plainly, Panormitanus Judgment of ear confession.
that such confession is not found in all the holy scripture, nor that the
Greeks were therefore by our Churches never holde^ as Heretics, who deny the
same, and will none of it, and yet does the Pope condemn and hold him as an
Heretic, that refuses and denies it to be commanded by Gods law.


Pasquine. Oh marvel not at that, for he conde^neth also him that confesses:
That christ is our only Luc. 2.
Savior, 1. John. 4.
our only redemer, and our 1. John. 2.
Advocate, tha^ the which, there is nothing more clear in the holy Scriptures.
It is no marvel therefore if he condemn such and account them as Heretics,
as will not receive men's devises, in stead of Gods laws.


Marforius. Yet it seems, that it is commanded in the holy Scriptures, most
chiefly in that place (leaving al other aside, which in deed do little approve
it,) where he Math. 16.
gives to the Church, A wonderful clubstanciall reason of the papists
ye power to bind and to loose, and to remit and retain sins. And how shall
the Church remitte sin, say they, if the sinner tell it her not? and how shall
she loose him, if she see him not bound?


Pasquine. If Marc. 16.
thou believe the gospel, What it is to bind and lose syanes.
thy sins are forgiven thee, thou art assoyled, if thou believe not, thou art
bound, and John. 8.
and art in sin, and the servant of sin, and of the Devil. And this it is
to bind and loose, to remit and retain sins, and it needs not that other
know thy sins. It is mough for thee, that thou know them and consider them,
and that thou feel the weight of thine own sinful nature. Lo, we read that
the woman that sinned, was sorrowful within her self, and she heard that
healthful saying, Thy sins are forgiven thee, nor we do not read, A
comfortable example for every sinner.
that she reckened up her sins. Have thou also thy sins in defiance, and
believe the gospel, and thou art assoyled.


Marforius. And Saint James says, not he? Knowledge your faults one to
another, Iac. 5.
and pray one for an other, that you may be healed?


Pasquine. This which Saint James speaks of here, is that which Christ our
master had before spoken, of brotherly love, that if we have offended any man,
we ought to seek to reconcile our selves to him, and this can not be done,
except he that offends, do confess to the other, that he has done amiss.
The true confession.
This is the true confession and reconciliatio^ which among Christians, from
one to another ought to be done, the which Christ accepts before all
sacrifices, and every other holy act. We need not talk with Sir John of the
matter, he must be none that is offended. And if thou have offended God only,
and not man, Luc. 7.
confess thy fault to God only, who only forgiueth sins, and health the
infirmities of the soul. It is not therefore evil done, if thou ask council
for the infirmities of thy soul, at some man that is honest, and kn^weth the
truth, as thou docst for the infirmities of thy body, mingling therefore with
it no manner superstition, and shall we (leaving the wholesome councils, and
precepts of Christ) consent to a confession, Confession better called confusion.
that ought rather to be called confusion, devised by the shau^^ngs, to know
the secrets of the world, and so with ^cc^ytfulnesse to bring the world under
their feet, Confession wherefore it was invented.
as they have done already. But Christ shall as leaves, confound all
inventions of men, Psalm. 1.
and overthrow the deuisers thereof with the breath of his mouth.


Marforius. Theu haste delivered me out of a marvelous scruple, that did sore
hold my mind entangled.


Pasquine. Shall I therefore speak of the other, since thou haste understand
what these confessors be?


Marforius. I pray the heartily.


Pasquine. In the same Queere, saw I also Doctors mingled with co^fessours.
The order or quere of Doctors.



Marforius. I would that thou would name them unto me.


Pasquine. I do even scarcely remember the^, so diverse were they, and so mad
headed. Some were called Magistri nostri, some Nostri magistri, some Rabini,
some Scotistae, other Illuminati, other Cherubici, other Seraphici, some
Extatici, and some also Apostatici, and Lunatici, and their several names
were, Holcot, Briccot, Triccot, Scot, Capriuol, Zabarel, Lira, Hoccam,
Barbazza, all obscure, but when the world was ignorant accounted most
excellently learned.


Marforius. Out upon thee, what Doctors are these? thou make me afeard, only
to name them. But what did they.


Pasquine. All were laboring, to enrich that heaven, with both the
Testamentes. There saw I Saint Gregory with other Popes, The old testament
more profitable than the new.
who had hired fouretene Porters, to cause the tenthes of the old Testament to
be carried into the new Testament, and in like manner the Myters, the Bendes or
Fillets, the Sacrifices, y^ offerings, the Perfumes, the Lights, and almost all
the things that were in the Jews Temple.


Marforius. And did they not also bring the wives of ye holy Fathers?


Pasquine. No, but their handmaydes. For they said that wives belonged not to
the new Testament.


Marforius. Therefore have they now for this cause, Priests may keep whores
but mary no wives.
in stead of wives, whores?


Pasquine. Yea, for they say, that it is not lawful for them to have wives,
but if they have whores and bardasses, it makes no matter.


Marforius. And what if any of them were married?


Pasquine. They would persecute him, they would kill him, they would undo
him.


Marforius. But for keeping of whores, and worse tha^ that they would never
blame him.


Pasquine. No, know not thou that Priest of Placentia, A Priest of Placentia.
that this other day was accused to have a wife and children, and straight way,
the Pope deprived him of the Benefices he had, and he went to Rome and showed,
how she neither was nor could be his wife, because she had a husband, but her
he kept as his Concubine, and by and by, the Pope restored him to his benefices
again.


Marforius. Oh unspeakable abomination, and detestable generation, y^ stink of
them must needs ascend even up to heaven. How is it possible that God should
suffer them any longer to continue? I can not believe, that they can last much
longer thus. But follow on the rest.


Pasquine. In conclusion I saw all the old Testament brought into the new,
All was brought that brought any gain.
saving only matrimonye.


Marforius. That may be the cause, that so many Jews in these days do become
Christians?


Pasquine. It is in deed, and yet there would be many more of them, if the
Popes would not then confiscate their goods, for thou know how covetous and
gredy they be of money.


Marforius. But how is it possible, that the new Testament that is so narrow
and straight, could receive so great spoil as they brought from the old.


Pasquine. They play as the Shoemaker, The Popes cle^gie can str^tche things
for advantage. Old pulling and all for advantage
that retcheth his Leather with his teeth, and Dyers that strech y^ clothes at
the Sun upon the Tenters, and as marchau^ts that thrust the wolles that
occupy great rowmes, into a little corner of the Ship, one haled on the one
side, an other heaued on the other side, one stole away a piece here, an other
put to a patche there some stamped it very fine, and some mingled this piece,
and some other that other piece, so that each man served his own turn.


Marforius. But in transporting the Bishops, from that Testament to this, in
that place where it says: 1. Tim. 3.
That the Bishop must be the husband of one wife: How did they use the
matter?


Pasquine. Well I wot, there was hard hold. For Paul will in any wise, that
the Bishop have his wife, and that, for to take away all suspicion of him
self. As they were therefore al in a great stir, a Roman Abbot stood up and
said: hear ye fathers, know ye not, All the things of the old testament were
good saving wives.
that it is not lawful, to bring the wives of the old Testament into the
new? but it behooves us, that in stead of wives we have benefices and fat
livings enough. Therefore will I that ye understand that place thus: 1. Tim. 3.
Let the Bishop be the husband of one wife, that is to say, let him have at
the least one benefice. And so shall we find a place for our Bishop. And as
for the rest that troubles you so much, care ye not at all, for he need not
care whether he has one wife of his own, that may have wives inoughe of other
men's.


Marforius. O there was a good Doctor.


Pasquine. Even such as be all. But among the rest, I saw one, that is
accoumpted a pillar of the Church, who ran so at randon, A bold Doctor.
through out the whole Gospel, and with such boldness, that he set all at
havoc. Afterward he gave him self to write against Matrimony, then after
that, he opened his clothes before him, and began to knock him self on the
breast: and that done, he stood up, and held the form or proportion of a
Church in his hand.


Marforius. Why did he beat him self?


Pasquine. Because he did that which God commanded not, as he had done against
that which God had commanded, that is to say, speaking against Matrimony.


Marforius. Know y^ not the names of any of them.


Pasquine. Yes, and if I reckon them to thee, thou would wonder at it, but I
will name one or two of them to thee, because I will not leese so much time,
for I have many other things to tell thee. There was Thomas of Aquine, Thomas of
Aquine.
who sought if it were possible to defend his disputation De Dulia and
Hyperdulia. Dulia and Hyperdulia.



Marforius. I remember that disputation. It is vengeance subtle.


Pasquine. Who knows not, that he had need work subtillye, that will make
all men believe, that under the form of the Devil a man may worship Christ?
And that is, when as under the figure or Image of the devil, which thou see
before thee, Sound doctrine of the diuelles devising.
thou do for all that Imagine with thy self, that there is Christ, and yet
meanest thou not to worship that figure or stock which is in thy sight, but
Christ whom thou have (under that figure) conceived in thy mind.


Marforius. How can that be done?


Pasquine. How could it be done in the old time, that when they offered an
Ox, conceived God in their imgination, and under the Image of that Ox
worshipped him? Think thou that men have at any time been so foolish, that
they thought that an Ox was God? and notwithstanding that there was no manner
of resemblaunce in the world, between an Ox and God, they conceived (for all
that) God in their imagination, through the Image of that Calfe, and being so
conceived, did worship him. And this is y^ subtle Hyperdulia of Thomas Aquine,
that thou join God with a stock, and that thou worship the stock as God, even
as the Jews worshipped the Ox for God.


Marforius. This is in deed a very subtle but no Christian opinion.


Pasquine. And yet is it defended in these days as an article of our faith.


Marforius. I know, The prepo^erous doings of the papists
that they will maintain all such things as ought to be condemned, and
co^demyne all such as ought to be maintained.


Pasquine. This therefore was it which Saint Thomas of Aquine so botched up, for
if the truth of his matter might be known abroad, their carved stocks, their
pictures, their Images, their paintinges, and their Idols all would be in
great danger, and the gain that is gotten thereby, would sone he at an end.


Marforius. Thou say the very truth, All for money.
for even for the religious care of their gain, and not for any other cause,
do the Priests seek to maintain all that which God so much forbids.


Pasquine. Hard beside Thomas Aquine, I saw his master sit, to whom all the
rest of his order used much reverence.


Marforius. How was he called?


Pasquine. Me thought they called him Albertus Magus.


Marforius. I know not who that should be.


Pasquine. It is that holy Doctor which so profoundlye disputch of the secrets
of women.


Marforius. Thou vnderstodest them not well, he is called Albertus Magnus, and
not Magus, Albertus Magnus better called Magus.
who wrote also of the wonders of the world.


Pasquine. It may be that I mistoke it, albeit he may be called, after which
sort you will, for he was without cause called Magnus, being a marvelous
great Doctor and a great Magician.


Marforius. And what did his Disciples there with him.


Pasquin. They were entreating of him, that he would go Ambassador to the City
of Coleyn. A godly Bishop that reformeth his Church.



Marforius. For what purpose?


Pasquine. Because it was said, that the Bishop there, favored to much the
Gospel, and did as became a true shepherde, and went about (with the help of
Bucer and Melanchton) to reform his Church, according to the rule of the
Gospel.


Marforius. But what would they have had Master Albert do there?


Pasquine. That he should seek if it were possible, to let y^ going forward of
so holy a work. But he might have gone thither, and have lost all his labor,
for albeit the City stand somewhat stiff, the sheep for all that will follow
their good shepherde.


Marforius. Of such good Bishops should they much need, who hitherto have been
deceived by these false Gods. But saw thou any of those new Doctors? New
Doctors.



Pasquine. Whom meanest thou to be the new Doctors.


Marforius. Fysher, B. of Rochester, Ecchius, Pighius, Albert of Vdine Bishop
of Chioggia.


Pasquine. Rochester is not only a Doctor, but also a Martyr, therefore shall
we find him in the Queere of the Martirs. But John Ecchius and Pighius I saw
not, and by that I could learn, they were yet kept in their Purgatory, which
they so stoutly defended.


Marforius. Why are those defendours of Purgatory served with the same sause
for their labor? The reward of the purgatory Champions.



Pasquine. I pray God, they be not cast into the bottomless pit of
everlasting fire, No purgatory but Christ's blood.
for none can defend other Purgatory than Christ's blood, without cruel
injury and blasphemy to Christ, for so it happens to such as serve cruel
Tyrannes turns, that they them selves first feel the smart of their wicked
deseruings. Perillus Bull may teach them.


Marforius. But do thou think that they shall at any time come up hither,
and be placed among the Gods?


Pasquine. Of Pighius I dare not say, because he is much esteemed among those
Gods, for his eloquence and singular learning: But sure I think that Ecchius
shall never be able to climb to heaven.


Marforius. And why not?


Pasquine. Because he had a foul great paunch, that hong a foot and a half
over his Codpiece, and that will be a great let to him. And thou know
Marforius that natural writers affirm, that heavy things of their own nature
go down to the Center, which thing he right well understood that made his
Epitaph saying. Here lies Ecchius buried full low, Ecchius Epitaphe.

That loved well wine and belly chere:
Where his soul is seek not to know,
For those were his Gods while he was here.



Marforius. A pleasant Epitaphe, and meet for such a paunche. This that thou
say, makes me the better to believe it because I have seen Pope Lion the
tenth, for his great fatness had much a do to go up three steps in Saint
Peter's Palace, whereby I conclude that much less therefore shall be able to
fly to heaven, and especially when he has no wings. But what can y^ tell me
of Albert Bishop of Chioggia? Albert bishop of Chioggia



Pasquine. I saw him in the midst among Pelagius, Arrius, Manichaeus, and
many other, and he was altogether full of hepinesse.


Marforius. Know thou the cause why?


Pasquine. I would needs understand the matter. And it was told me, for there
was come thither a Friar of Saint Fraunces of the Uine, who had told him, that
he had seen in Venice a Shop where they sell Pilcherdes, Cood ware to stop
mustard pottes.
full of his works, which were sold by waighte to them that kept Shoppes.


Marforins. I think, that y^ like will hap one day to all the writings of the
founders of this heaven. But tell me, was there none other looked for there?


Pasquine. Many were looked for, Cocles canonized a saint.
but most chiefly was one John Cocles looked for, because he was already
canonized a Saint by the Pope, and appointed to this heaven. There was looked
for also, one Costazarus, and one Cornelius, who with his Phariseicall and
frierish opinions, stoutly fighting against Christ, had gotten the Bishoprike
of Bertinoro, or to say more truly of Bruteonor.


Marforius. What was spoken of them?


Pasquine. Of Costazarus, Costazarus.
I heard, that these Gods were all wonderously offended with him, for he had
deceived his God the Pope.


Marforius. And how?


Pasquine. I will tell thee. Preaching in a Lent season in Spoleti, Spoleti a
City in Italy.
he made a bargain with the Serattanes (who are all common pickepurses) to part
the gain between them, and so published certain false bulls, of the pardones
of Clement the.vij. the which pardoned al manner of sin and mischief, A
friars fine devise to get money. Friars and Pick purses hold together
to him that would pay a piece of money therefore. But first he let pass
half the lent, before he published his Bulls, that the length of the time
should not discover his knauerie, therefore when he saw it was time, he cast
forth his nets, and drew a great quantity of golden fyshes. The Citizens of
Spoleti, Il halting before a Crepill.
who are as crafty as the Devil, smelled out the deceit, and he no less
crafty than they, was ware that they perceived it, and so without bidding his
host farewell departed, and left the nets, but the fish he carried away
with him.


Marforius. There was a conning Fisher, but what was concluded by these Gods
concerning him?


Pasquine. To forgive him, so that he follow his old wickedness, and above all
things to beware that he deceive y^ Pope no more nor speak ought against him.


Marforius. And of Cornelius, what was said?


Pasquine. They commended him much seeing him so valiauntly in the Council
defend the Popes cause against Christ. And they were (...) led away to the
great glory and renown of this heaven. And even very then, was come a letter
of his, in the which he showed his diligence, and made those reverend fathers
understand, how Venice, and all Italy, was full of Lutherans, and y^ they did
continually increase.


Marforius. These news must needs much displease those that were above.


Pasquine. Thou may be sure of that. And they were also vengeance angry
against the Pope.


Marforius. Alas man, against the Pope, and why?


Pasquine. For they looked for an other to come to this heaven, that had built
so many Churches of stone, so many Chapels, so many Aultars, so many
furnitures for them, and so many other things for the conservation, praise, and
glory of this heaven, that few were like unto him. A foul fault in the Pope
to loose such a benefactour.
And the Pope, because he gave him not the Byshopricke of Verona, has now
lost him altogether, and as the letters of the little Greek said, this
gentleman is now about to forsake them, and to join him self to Jesus
Christ, their mortal enimye. Christ and the Pope mortal enemies.



Marforius. If these news displeased them, it does the more please me, for (to
tell the truth) they are grown into such a deadly hatred with me, (because
they are so bitter enemies to my Lord God) that I fear I shall not live to
see them all destroyed. But follow on the rest.


Pasquine. We came to the fourth streate, The quere or order of the Martires.
where the Martirs are.


Marforius. What do they there?


Pasquine. All of them much disdayning their deaths, sought by all means to
give to men the punishment which they them selves suffered. O, I will tell thee
a merry pastime that happened while I was there, I heard a great noise, I saw
every man run and I run for company, and I saw Saint Rock, and Saint Bastian
that were together by the ears, Vnqui^^ Saints tha^ fight in heaven.
Saint Rock had his left hand upon the nose, and all over Saint Bastians
face, and with his right hand, bobbed him about the head with his Palmers
staff, Saint Bastian on the other side, he had with one hand caught hold of
Saint Rocks bearde, and with the other having drawn out of his thighe one of
his Arrows, was about to have thruste it through Saint Rocks sides, and if
the other blessed Saints had not come between them, there must needs have been
the Devil and all to do.


Marforius. Wherefore fought they?


Pasquine. Because each of them pretended to be Master over the plague.


Marforius. How agreed they?


Pasquine. It was concluded that one of them should have the Plague, and the
other the Pestilence. As I told thee therefore a little before, Cruel and
revenging Saints.
all these Martyrs thinking scorn of their deaths, sought to give to men that
punishment, that they them selves ^ad suffered. And therefore Saint Anthony
thought to fasten his fire upon some one, Saint Rock his plague, Saint Bastian
his Pestilence, Saint Apolonia the Toothaches, Saint Blase the disease of the
throat.


Marforius. What strange things be these? I have heard, that they have helped
such as had these diseases, but what profit get they by this cruelty of
theirs?


Pasquine. What thing is it that makes thee so much to esteem the Pope?


Marforius. Fear, for with sword, fire and water, he punishes, who so ever
abateth one ^ote of his power and kingdom.


Pasquine. Thou say true, The Popes violent argumente^ in Disputacion.
and these be the arguments, with the which he disputes against the Gospel.
But if he had no power to do this to thee, how much then, would thou
esteem him?


Marforius. But little.


Pasquine. May fear therefore of other men's power do so much among men, as
to make one, of a man a God?


Marforius. Yea out of doubt, for fear made the first Gods in the world.


Pasquine. Much more therefore ought thou to think that this comes to
pass concerning Saints, who are other manner of fellows than the Pope.


Marforius. Thou meanest therefore, that they use this feate, that they may be
both feared and worshipped in the world?


Pasquine. Who doubts of that?


Marforius. And who has given them so great power against men? God uses his
Saints as Ministers of of his wrath.



Pasquine. The most high God who sends his plagues by these saints, that are
^uil Angels, that is to say Devils.


Marforius. And after what sort?


Pasquine. If men forsaking the true God, do run to false saints, will thou
not, that God does leave them in the power of those, whom they have chosen to
be their defendours?


Marforius. And me thinks it good reason.


Pasquine. If I therefore choose to my self, Saint Rock, or Saint Bastian, or
Saint Anthony, to whom I bear my devotion, and in my missehaps and adversities
run to them, and stand in fear of them, am not I as a slave unto them?


Marforius. No Pasquine we pray them, The blind opinion of the ignorant
concerning Saints.
that they will sue unto God for us, and there obtain for us. Then we pray
unto them, that they will not use against us that power, that they have of God
to do us hurt, but that they will deliver us from the same.


Pasquine. Tell me, think thou that God is become so old, that he can now
no more govern the whole world alone, and that he must divide his kingdom,
and his power among his Saints? Beside that, when thou prayest to Saint Ro^ke*
do not thou evidently show y^ thou beleuest, y^ he is more merciful than
christ and that herein he can do more than christ? for else thou would go to
christ.


Marforius. Albeit I said no, the effect said yea.


Pas. Doing therefore this, see thou not, that y^ do injury to Christ.


Mar. And wherein?


Pasquine. In preferring man before God, How Injury is done to Christ.
in believing that a man has more mercy, and can do more than Christ: to whom
the scripture says, that God has given al power in heaven, and in earth,
Math. 28.
and that he is altogether mercy. In that thou will have an other advocate than
Christ, who as the scripture says in many places, is our only Advocate, 1.
John. 2.
and only mediator between God and man. 1. Tim. 2.
What inexcusable foolishness is that therefore of them, y^ forsaking so
mercyful a Lord, so gentle and liberal a defendour, so mighty an Advocate, in
whom only God the father is pleased, they run back from God and his son, to
certain Saints, whom they know not whether they be in heaven or no, nay
rather is it to be thought, that they be in the Devils Codware, and thus leave
they that only Mediator, that only Advocate, that God has prepared for us,
Math. 3.
in whom only God is pleased. Oh how many are upon the Aultars and work
miracles, whose souls are tormented in Hell.


Marforius. Oh my Pasquine, how much am I bound to thee, that make me to
understand the greatness of my gross ignorance. Now am I sorry for the time
that I have lost about Johannes Andreas and Speculator. Writers upon the law
Cano^.
But tell me, are Anthony and Rock Martyrs?


Pasquine. Thou askeste me even in time, for I my self marvelled much at it,
Bonner and Story lacked when martyr dome was so hard to come by.
when I saw them in that Queere. But seeking more curiouslye to be out of
doubt thereof, it was told me, that they were not Martyred, but they earnestly
sought to have been, and that they roamed through many Cities to be offered to
the Lord, and could find no man that would kill them.


Marforius. This did such at all times find, as never sought for it in deed,
think thou now, whether he might lack it, that sought for it, and most
chiefly then, among those Diocletanes and Maxentij, Cruel tirauntes like
Bonner and his Babes.
that were waxed fat therewith, as do in these days the Popes and their mitred
Mahoundes, who if they knew these our communications, I can assure thee, that
they would easily grant us to be martyrs. But thou saw not there Saint
Peter and Saint Paul?


Pasquine. I saw them, The Apostels of Saint John Late^ane.
and I saw them not. For they were behind a certain Courtine, the which was
by and by let down so low that a man might see to their breasts, and anon
it was drawn up again in the turning of a hand.


Marforius. But Saint Christopher was he there? Christophe^
If he were, thou did take much pain to see him, and to know him among the
rest.


Pasquine. I saw him, and beholding so monstrous a Giant, I asked mine
Angel, if this Giant were ever in earth, much maruelling, that none that has
written hystories, nor none of those that with so great diligence, have written
the doings of the Greeks and Romans, and of others of old time, has made
any mention of so huge a giant.


Marforius. What did the Angel answer thee?


Pasquine. He laughed at it: and desiring him to answer me, thus he began.
Believe not Pasquine (quoth he) that there has been at any time, so great a
Giant in the world: but this is a devise of those wise men of the first
christian common wealth, who meaning to set forth the life of a christian
man, comprehended the whole under this Image, The fable of Saint (...) topher
is a figure of ^ Christian man's life.
the which they after ward called Christophorus, for Christophorus is no more
to say, but, Bearing Christ. They feign therefore, that he is a Giant, for
that he must be strong that bears Christ and his truth in the presence of
men. They feign also that he carries men over a water: for our life is as a
water, over the which we can not pass, unless we be carried, that is to say,
we can not pass to heaven, except he that is of Christ do carry us with the
truth of his Gospel. They feign also that he has in his hand a tree to stay
himself by, this signifies faith, y^ which if it did not hold us up, full
often should we fall to the ground: they feign that after he had used this work
of charity, the tree waxed green again, for faith without good works, is as
it were dry and withered. And thus is he painted at the entry into the
church, Why Saint Christopher is painted without the Church door as in Italy
is used and other where. The fable of Saint George is the example of Christ's
life.
to the end each christian man should remember, whether he be as he ought to
be. There were also other Saints (mine Angel told me) that were likewise
feigned, to set forth unto us (under that representatio^) some truth As Saint
George that kills the Dragon, to deliver the Kings daughter from that
terrible beast that destroyed a^l Cappadocia. This Cappadocia is as much to
mean, as the world: the Dragon is the Devil, that deuoureth all that come to
his hands, the kings daughter is the Church of God, saint George is Christ, who
seeing his church in peril, s^ayeth that Dragon, and delivers his most fair
daughter. And so he told me many other like.


Marforius. This do I believe right well, for I remember that the Decretal
holds these two hystories of no authority, and not allowed by the Church,
albeit the Friars have since drawn all things to their own gain, partly
through false dealing, and partly through ignorance. If this be true (as I
well believe it h^w do lies swarm in Friar James of the Synkehole, Writings of
lieng legende?
and Anthony of Florence, and many other such like, who have devised not
hystories, which ought to be the lights of truth, but fables of Lucian, not
lives of men, but lies of Devils, and with a barbarous and yrkesome style have
entreated thereof. And he that takes them not to be true, woe be to him: he is
an Heretic, let him go: nay rather kill him. And so say I also of those
doltishe devises lately written of saint Katherine, and of saint Thomas Aquine
at the instance of that Ipocrite the Marquis of Vasto.


Pasquine. Thou see therefore, that we must not folishly believe every thing.
I could reckon unto thee a number of Gods of the aunciente heathen, The Gods
of the Heathen are become our Gods. Sancta Maria Rotunda in Rome.
transfourmed into our Gods, with the same error and falsehode, and without
changing any other thing than the name only, and often times without changing
the name at al. Behold the Rotunda, which in the old time was called Pantheon
(because it was the dwelling house of all the Gods) now have they made it the
dwelling house of all Saints: and in place of Cibele mother of all the Gods,
have they set the virgin Marie, for head of al^ the Saints. And here hard by
thou know is the Minerua, Minerua.
which was in the old time the temple of Minerua, and now have they
dedicated it to Saint Minerua the Uirgin, Romulus and Remus. Castor and Pollux.
even as Pallas Minerua was a Uirgin. The Temple which in the old time was of
Romulus and Remus, they have made now the Church of Saint Cosmus and Damian.
The temple that was of old time of Castor and Pollux, A number of heathenishe
ceremonies converted into necessary articses of belief.
have they now made the Church of Saint Geruays and Prothays. Those of old
time that had Lucina to heal their eyes, these of our time have Saint Lucie.
Those of old time had Ceres to be the Goddess of Corn, these of our time
have Pancras. Those of old time had Mars and Pallas to be Gods over the wars,
these of our time have Saint George and Saint Barbara. The Scafaring men in the
old time, saw Castor and Pollux, in the end of a tempest: these of our time
see Saint Eremus. Among those of old time, it was not lawful for the Uirgins
of Vesta, to marry: with these of our time, it is not lawf^ll for Nuns to
mary. Among those of old time, A vengeable long leap, or a vengeable loud lie.
the Church of Diana departed from Zante, and together with the builders
miraculouslye went into Spain, as a man may read in Pliny, with those of our
time the Church of our Lady at Loretto, came out of Sclauonie, and is
maruellously come into Italy, These Ladies be at Rome, and at Venice they have,
our Lady the fair, our Lady of the garden our Lady of the beans, and our Lady
of the Snow.
as is to be read in the lying Legendes of these pickpurse priests devising.
Those of old time washed selves with fair clear water, to cleanse them selves
from sins: these of our time fillip with their finger a little holy water on
their forehead. They of old time had Juno Feronia, Juno Lucina, Juno Saturnia,
Juno Curites: these of our time have our Lady of grace, our Lady of the
miracles, our Lady our Lords mother, our Lady of the people. They of old time
filled their Churches with little Tables, containing the vows they made: these
of our time fill their Churches full of little Tables containing their vows.
Those of old time said, that in beans dwelled the souls of y^ dead: these of
our time give Beans for the souls of the dead. And even so, The Paganes and
the Popish religion al one, or else but little difference between.
he that will go and search, point by point the Popish Religion, either
shall he find it altogether like to that of the old Paganes, or if there be
any difference, it differs but in the names only. So that if we will
worship these our Saints, because we will not be accoumpted Heretics, we
fall to worshyppyng of Juno, Minerua, Mars, Hercules, Polyphemus, Briarius, and
an infinite number of Diuelles, This Nafissat was made a Saint by the Pope,
byc^^se she did prostitute her self not for money nor carnal lust, but for
pure deuocio^ to God and mere necessity of the party, having none other
alms to give for Gods sake.
under the name of Saint Anthony, Saint Nichodeme, Saint Christian, and Saint
Nafissa,


Marforius. Oh Pasquine thou haste well opened my understanding, now certainly
thou say the truth, these things are very clear, I thought ever till now,
that I had done well following y^ worshipping of those devils.


Pasquine. I have other things without nu^bre to say, and when I shall utter
the^, I will make al y^ world wonder.


Marforius. Oh happy day, when y^ truth shall be seen to shine abroad.


Pasquin. Happy therefore is this day, for y^ see how it is spro^g up and how
it goes showing it self abroad, to the world in despite of the shaven
Crowns.


Marforius. Now proceed on a while to the other Queeres.


Pasquine. I will so, but first I must tell thee a few things, that here I saw
and heard.


Marforius. Tell me them therefore.


Pasquine. I saw one of these martirs, y^ warned the rest of his fellows that
they should do nothing against the Heretics, except they would bear the
pains thereof themselves and that they should take example by him, The
Charitablest Saint in all that Heaven.
who had felt the vengeance of God, for that he had accused of heresy such
as he knew not, and of such things as he understood not, and if there be any
they should rather be won by admonishing them to leave it, than with fire and
torments to make them away. For they be not al Heretics, that be so called,
but such as judge contrary to the holy Scripture, and that leave the
commandments of God, Who be heretics.
and follow those of men, and defend the same as heavenly commandments, and
also prefer them before Gods commandments, these b^ Heretics. And
heavenly things are the same only, that are contained in the old and new
Testament, which if they will not believe, the day of the Lord shall come, that
shall discover all things, and shall make them repent it, and their repentance
shall not then help them.


Marforius. Who was that, that was so honest?


Pasquine. It was Rochester, about whom, were two Martyrs, the one was Peter
Martyr of the order of Friars Breechers.


Marforius. Thou would say Preachers. Pasquine alludeth to these words,
Pedi^catores and Predicatores. Saint Thomas Becket.



Pasquine. I always miss in deed. The other was Thomas of Canterbury, each of
them confirmed Rochesters talk.


Marforius. But had Rochester his red Hat?


Pasquine. He had in deed his head red, and his shoulders, but it was with
blood, and not with a Hatte.


Marforius. And I heard say that the Pope sent him a Hatte.


Pasquine. Yea, but when the King of England understood it, Rochester lept
without his hatte and his head also.
he caused his head to be cut of, before he should have to do with that
Romish harlotte, whereupon the Papists, for that they thought he dyed for their
defense, and because he had written against the Lutheranes, they put him in the
number of these holy Martyrs.


Marforius. It is very well. And for one self cause, as far as I can
perceive, both Peter Martyr, a Dominicane Friar in Italy, and Thomas of
Canterbury in England dyed, the one for persecuting after their Frierish
fashion, certain poor Country men, as Heretics, between Milaine and Como
was slain. The other, stryuing with the King for certain jurisdictions, was
condemned, to have done against the estate.


Pasquine. Thou say truth.


Marforius. Follow on then.


Pasquine. Such manner of Martyrs are these of the Popes. The Order o^ the
apostles and Euan^^^ listes.



Marforius. Say on the rest.


Pasquine. From this Order, we went up to that of the Apostles, and
Evangelists.


Marforius. I like well to hear of this. Thou will anon put me out of doubt,
whether there be.xij. Apostles or more. For if Paul of Tharsus were a true
Apostle, then are there.^i^j. Apostles, leaving also the other, that are by him
in his Epistles called Apostles.


Pasquine. This question might well have been put among th^se, Tit. 3.
which Paul called unprofitable and superfluous, but to satisfy my friend
Marforius, I will answer in two sorts. First, therefore thou must remember,
that we are in the Popes heaven: where al things are contrary and preposterous,
In the Popes Heaven all things are contrary.
and therefore is there not y^ number of Apostles egall with that number y^
Christ had, as thou shall understand afterward. There was neither y^ true
Peter, nor James, nor John, nor Paul, nor none of y^ rest, but other of an
other manner of sort.


Marforius. Who were they?


Pasquine. Those y^ are called Cardinals, Cardinales are Apostles in the Popes
Heaven Court of Rome and this Heaven all one.
y^ which in this heaven are in the place of y^ Apostles.


Marforius. So it is also in Rome, but I thought y^ there had been some other
thing different one from another.


Pasquin. Nay, one milk is not so like another, as this heaven is like the
court of Rome, in y^ which each man knows that the Apostles and disciples are
made for money, and not twelve, The Apostles and Desciples are made for money.
but there may be made of them without number. But concerning the true number of
the Apostles, know thou, that they are taken in two sorts. Apostle is as much
to say, Phil. 2.
as a messanger, Ambassador, or one that carries glad tidings. And so Paul
does call Epaphroditus an Apostle, whom the Philippians have sent unto him.
But proprely those twelve are accounted Apostles, Math. 28.
whom Christ our king and God sent in the beginning to bear his gospel
through the whole world. But speaking of Paul, Mar. 16. Paul a true and
faithefull Apostle.
it is not to be doubted, that he is not a true and faithful Apostle of
Christ, Act. 1.
for even as those twelve, (of which number Judas failed, and in whose place
was by the Apostles appointed Matthie, by divine inspiration) were chosen by
Christ, being then mortal: even so by the same Christ, Act. 9.
being since immortal and glorious, was Paul called to the office of the
Apostleship. Wherefore the Apostles were verily.xiij. xiij Apostles and not xij.
and not.xij. except they will take those twelve only that were chosen by
Christ, all after one manner, and Matthie as chosen by the Apostles, but yet (as
I have said) by the spirit of God.


Marforius. I see in deed that it is no great matter, whether a man know
these things or not: yet is it right pleasant to me, that I have understood
them. But tell me, was saint Jerome in this number? for I see, that they painte
him like a Cardinal, and so they say he was.


Pasquine. Saint Jerome was not there, Saint I^rome was never no Cardinal.
neither could he be there, for it is an euidente thing, that in his time
there were no Cardinals, but as that Poet says, Painters and Poets have
always had authority to devise what they list themselves. And
notwithstanding, in these days men build upon y^ dreams of Painters, the
chief matters of our religion, and they account that which is paintedlie as
an Article of Faith, and him that speaks against it, for an Heretic. But I
say, that Jerome would never have suffered, no such manner of titles devised by
men, through the provocation of the Devil. Saint Jerome an enemy to the
Romish Church.
For he was religious, and learned, and far from all ambition: and a most
mortal enemy to the Romish Church of Antichrist, that then began to grow, as
in all his writings may well be seen.


Marforius. Why then have they feigned him to be a Cardinal?


Pasquine. I will tell thee. When the Church of Rome began to make Cardinals:
seeing that y^ order nor title could not be founded upon any place of the
Scripture, Ierom was called a Cardinal and was none.
because it excelled neither in any great learning or holiness, to the end it
might yet have the greater authority and reverence they began to paint saint
Jerome (that was long before dead) with a red Hat, and set him forth as a
Cardinal.


Marforius. That was well done, but then it behooved the rest to follow him, in
learning and holiness.


Pasquine. Is it not enough that they have followed him, The order of
Cardinals more abominable than honorable. How the degree of Cardinals is
grown to so great authority.
in speaking against matrimony?


Marforius. But because there has not been one honest man at any time since,
is not that order therefore more shameful and abbominable, than honorable?


Pasquine. How will thou that they should be honest, if in their cursed oath,
they rebel from Christ, and do deny him, and join them selves to Antichrist,
and worship him?


Marforius. By my truth thou say true, who reads that oath, shall find
that it is so, I never took heed of it before.


Pasquine. But since they could not give dignity, and authority, to that
degree, with holiness of living, and with sincere goodness, they have given
it to the same with their superfluous richesse, and like very Tyrannes by
force, and not by love, have they gotten to them selves authority, and
reverence, or as we may say, This word saving your reverence is used of us
when we speak of some thing that is uncleanly or filthy, for men use some time
to say saving your reverence he is a knave, or a Cardinal, and so the Author
m^aneth that this word reverence belongs to there riches and high estate, and
this word saving your reuerenc^ to their vile and filthy life.
saving your reverence also.


Marforius. Thou must needs see also Bonauenture, that made the come^tary upon
the Master of the Sentences, and Vincent y^ Dominicane Friar, that left
certain Sermones behind him, for they are both Saints.


Pasquine. I saw them, and they were wrangling together as they had been mad.


Marforius. And whereupon?


Pasquine. Of that foolish question, that has already bred so great discordes
and tragidies, Brabling and contencion between the Saints.
between the Friars of Saint Fraunces, and Saint Dominicke.


Marforius. Of the conception of our Lady thou meanest.


Pasquine. Yea.


Marforius. Is not that fond foolishness yet laid to soake?


Pasquine. It will be laid to soake when all sects of Friars, shall be laid
to soake, or (to say better) overthrown and brought to naught, the which is
already begone, and with the help of Christ shall shortly be ended.


Marforius. God grant it be quickly. But know thou whence this name
Cardinal was taken? for Barbazza will needs that Cardinal should be derived
from this word Cardo Cardinis, The original of this word Cardinal.
which in our tongue is the hook or hendge of a door. And Hostiences, will
needs that they be founded upon that place in the book of kings. 1. Reg. 2.
Epenthesis.
The pillars of the earth are the Lords, and he has set the world thereon.


Pasquine. But I found in an excellent Gramarian, that Cardinal is so called
by the figure called Epenthesis, in stead of Cardinal, as they say,
Induperator, for Imperator, and for to allege thee two Authors, to set against
thy two, I found in Ruzzante, that this word Cardinal comes from the
Canker, for the Cardinals are the very canker of y^ church, the which disease
if it be not altogether taken away, with some edge tool, or with fire, it will
never be whole. Another exposition have I also found in Calapine, who says
that Cardinal, Carneuale is shrouetide.
is even the self same that Carneuale, for neither the one nor the other does
attend to any other thing, than to eat, drink, sleep, commit whordome, The.
wickedness o^ Cardinals is unspeakable.
fall to banketting, and last of al, to do al those goodly valiant acts, that
to declare them all, would weary Demosthenes, Cicero, Virgill, Homer, Horace,
and Pindarus. All tongues are dombe to speak of them even the thousandeth
part. Better it is to be still than say little of them. And although a man
wrote of th^^r vile naughtynesse more tha^ Saint Augustine wrote, yet should he
have said but little, for the stink of them reaches even to the Scytheans,
and to the Hiperboryans, and to the furihest parts of the new world.


Marforius. They are therefore Apostates and not Apostles. But tell me somewhat
of Cardinal Coutarine, Cardinals that favored the Gospel.
and Cardinal Fregoso, called Salernitano,


Pasquine. I saw them not, for my good Angel told me, that they were not
received into this heaven, for they had favored the doctrine of the Gospel,
more than was the duty of Cardinals, and that if the weight of their
Cardinalship have not pulled them down: he thought, that they were ascended to
the true heaven.


Marforius. God is strong enough, he might easily have drawn the^ up thither,
if it were his will.


Pasquine. I know that well, for all things are possible with God.


Marforius. I pray thee heartily talk no more to me of these men, but follow
on the rest.


Pasquine. I will: but I doubt that we shall go from evil to worsse, The order
of of the Evangelists.
for after these come the Evangelists, whom when I saw, me thought I felt my
soul to be torn, as it were out of my body, for very sorrow.


Marforius. Alas, what is that I hear thee say?


Pasquine. It is as I tell thee, for in place of those four Evangelists, and
of their Gospels, (albeit the Gospel be but one only, be it either written by
the Apostles, or the Evangelists) I saw that there were four councils
received, that is to say, that of Nice, that of Constantinople, that of
Ephesus, and that of Calcedon. And then four Doctors of the Church, that is
to we^e Ambrose, Augustine, Jerome, and Gregory. And after these, other
innumerable, whom we had seen in the Queere of the Doctors. And moreover,
were added the books of the Decrees, Decretalles, Sects, and Clementines:
neither did all this suffice, but it was also granted to every one, so that he
had either a Cowle or a shaue^ Crown, to write what him lusted, and the same
to set forth in stead of Euangelical and Apostolical Doctrine: What shaven
Crowns may do.
In so much, that the Pope has drawn all things to him self, and has
placed him self in the stead of Christ's Gospel, and of God him self, nay
rather above God, 2. These. 2. The Pope is above al, both God and men.
and above al laws, of God or men, affirming that all consists in his own
breast. Behold therefore, what manner of Evangelists, and what Gospels they be.
And yet I tell thee nothing of the Belles, of the carved, of the painted, and
of the molten Images of the Church, of the Crosses, of lights, How the Popes
^altrie must be esteemed.
of wax, of vessels, of garments, and other ornaments, all which things
they will needs have to be taken for true Evangelists: Wherefore I pray thee
cause me not to speak any more of this so abominable and detestable a Queere.


Marforius. Proceed therefore to the rest.


Pasquine. A little of from hence, The order of the Preistes and Leuits.
was the order or Queere of Priests and Levites.


Marforius. New or old?


Pasquine. New made of the old.


Marforius. How?


Pasquine. Remembrest thou not, that we said before that I saw in y^ Queere of
the Doctors, they carried the old Testament into the new?


Marforius. I remember me well of that, but I thought that our Priesthood had
come from Christ, and not from the old Testament.


Pasquine. What did make thee think so?


Marforius. Many things: first, Number. 1.
they were Priests, by nature, and by succession: for the Trybe of Leui had
this privilege of God: wherefore Leuiticus, was called y^ A comparison between
the priesthode of the old law and the Popes prieste^.
priesthood. Our Priesthood consists not in any family or kindred, but they
are Levites and Priests, that are by the Bishop thereunto chosen and greased.
Beside that, they sacrificed brute beasts, but our Priests do offer and
sacrifice Christ to God.


Pasquine, Thou folowest the error of the Papists Marforius, that is to say
of the Romish Church, but a remedy must be found for this error.


Marforius. What remedy is that?


Pasquine. The Philosophers said, that Philosophy was the medicine of the
mind, Errors the infirmities of the mind. True wisdom the medicine of the
mind.
for it took away errors and purged the mind. But we that have received y^
truth from the true God, say not that Philosophy, (that is to say, the desire
of worldely wisdom) but the wisdom it self, given unto us in the wrytings
of the Apostles, is the medicine of the mind, and a most sure remedy against al
errors which are y^ diseases of y^ mind.


Mar. Why the^, is y^ an error of our priests.


Pas. It is a foul error, and a madness of mind very dangerous.


Marforius. I much desire to be healed of this infirmity, and to have again
y^ health of mind, which is the wisdom of Christ.


Pasquine. Thou shall sone be hole, for thou know thy disease, Christ's
wisdom the health of the mind.
and desire the medicine. I will therefore begin to cure thee. All that thou
have spoken of Priesthode, shall be overthrown, if thou will think, that
neither the Apostles, nor the Evangelists have written so much as one tittle of
such kind of Priesthode and Sacrifice: But where they have spoken of
Priesthode, and of Priests, they have not meante it of those that are anointed
by Bishops, A discriptio^ of the true Priesthode.
but of that Priesthode that makes all Christians, to be Priests, consecrating
them with the unction of the holy Ghost, and not with oil coniured and
consecrated by Bishops. Peter the Apostle says, 1. Pet. 2.
that all Christian man are a spiritual household, and a holy and royal
Priesthode, to offer spiritual offerings acceptable to God, Al Christians are
Priests.
through Jesus Christ. And so saint Paul, prays the Romans, and other the
true worshippers of Christ, that they offer their bodies in a living sacrifice,
Romans 12.
holy and acceptable to God, which is your reasonable serving of him. Wherefore
thou see, that we are all the temple of God, Priests, Offerings, and
Sacrifices most acceptable unto God, for our Lord Jesus Christ, the high Priest
and everlasting Bishops sake. Induction.
I would therefore know of thee now, if thou believe that Jesus Christ the
high Priest and Lamb, Heb. 10.
have taken away the sins of the world, as says saint John, John. 1
and all the whole scripture.


Marforius. Yea I believe it.


Pasquine. I would know of thee, for what occasion thou think that the
Priests of the old testament so often times renewed those sacrifices, and
heaped so many offerings one after another.


Marforius. Because God had commanded it.


Pasquine. That is true, but yet for an other cause, says Paul, Sacrifices of
the old law could not take away Sin.
that is, because those sacrifices did not take away sins, and therefore were
they so often renewed: for else there should have been an end of their
sacrifices, as Paul says.


Marforius. I understand thee now, but I know not to what end thou speak
this.


Pasquine. To what end think thou that Heb. 10.
the Priests and other of the old law, Why Priests in the old law were
instituted.
were instituted by God?


Marforius. For sacrifices I think.


Pasquine. Priests therefore were instituted for sacrifices, and the sacrifices
and the altares for sins.


Marforius. So it seems to me.


Pasquine. Take away therefore sin, and thou shall see, that there is no more
priesthode, aultare, nor sacrifice. For as much as Paul shows us the reason
thereof, by that which the holy ghost spoke. This is the Testament, Heb. 10.
that I will make with you. Iere. 31.
After those days I vvil give my laws into their hearts, and vvil write
the^ in their minds, and vvil no more remember their wickedness: Thus does
he conclude, where as remission of sins is made, there is no more oblation
for sins, and to show that we are true priests, Hebr. 10.
he adds exhorting us. Since we have therefore my brethren thorovv the blood
of Jesus, liberty to enter into the holy place, by the nevve and living way,
which he has prepared for us, through the veil, that is to say, his flesh.
And seeing we have an high priest, which is ruler over the house of God, let
us dravve nere with a true heart in a sure faith, having our hearts vvashed,
and the evil conscience put away. But as touching that thou have said, The
Popish Priests can not offer Christ.
that our Massemu^blers offer every day Christ in their sacrifice to God: thou
art not able with any little authority of the Scripture, to confirm it. Nay
rather is it against the Scripture, and is devised to the blasphemy of Christ,
and of his Sacrifice. For it is wrtten to the Hebrews. That we are sanctisied,
Heb. 10.
by the offering up of Christ's body once only done. For he having offered one
only offering for sins, is set down for ever, at the right hand of God,
and from hence forth tarieth till his enemies be made his fotestole, for with
one only oblation, has he made perfect for ever, those that are sanctified.
Wherefore there needs no more any other sacrifice, to pourge sins. For
Christ to whom it was said. Thou art a priest for ever, has once only and
sufficiently offered him self for our sins, an everlasting, unchangeable,
perpetual offering, and sacrifice. But these mates calling their Mass a
sacrifice, go about to show, that the sacrifice of Christ once only done, is
not of perfection to wash away al sins. The which how great an offense, The
great blasphemy of the Popish Priests.
how great a blasphemy and injury it is against the blood of Christ, all
godly men do know, and not only do they this outrageous offense, but they do
also commit sacrilege these Massemumblers of ours, who affirm, that they
offer Christ to God, whom the father gave to us. And Christ said to Wall: Take
ye, Math. 26.
eat ye, drink ye of this all of ye. And these for all that do the contrary,
Luc. 22.
and will seem to be more rich than God, since they say, that they give that,
which they receive, or rather that they might receive, if they believed the
holy scriptures. But the matter is far otherwise, for they neither give nor
receive nothing, The Priests say they give Christ.
they give not, for no man can give that he has not, and that they have not
Christ, by this it may be seen, in that they have not faith, the which only
makes of the heart of man, the temple of Christ. And for the same cause can
not they receive Christ, How Christ is given.
whiles he is offered us. For with the only faith and assured steadfastness in
y^ goodness of God, and of the sacrifice of Christ, Christ is to be received.
And if they can give any thing, The Papists give the Devil and (...) Christ.
they can give the Devil, who^ they have received: even as Judas the traitor
into whom Satan entered when Christ offered him y^ piece of the mystical
bread. But if thou have any thing to say hereunto, John. 13.
say on, for I will say nothing else.


Marforius. What would thou that I should say against so open testimony of
the Scripture? Will thou have the sick man strive with the Physician? I have
taken this wholesome drink that thou have given me, and I hope, that having well
digested it in the bowels of my soul, it will purge me, and heal me, not
only of this, but of many other diseases. But one doubt sticks yet in my
stomach, whether thou w^lte have in the Church of Christ, any orders or any
holy faction.


Pasquine. I deny not, Orders necessary in the Church.
nor refuse not, (my Marforius) the ministry of the Church, nor any order,
that may be brought in by the Testimony of the new Testament. For I learn by
S. Paul, that Christ has given unto his Church, Ephe. 4.
Some to be Apostles, some Prophets, other to be Evangelists, Romans 12.
other pastors, and some teachers, 1. Cor. 12.
that the Saints might have all things necessary to work and minister
vvithall, to the edifying of the body of Christ till we every one in the
unity of faith, and knowledge of the son of God, grow up to a perfect man
after the measure of the age of the fullness of Christ.


Mar. This must needs be a very goodly order: but I understand it not very well.


Pasquine. I will declare it unto thee. Apostles are those, Apostles what they
be. Prophets what they be. Evangelists what they be.
that bear the Gospel unto diverse people and Nations. Prophets are those y^
being inspired by the holy ghost do forwarne the Church, of the things that are
like to happen unto her. Evangelists are those, that best are able to show
forth and declare the Gospel, and are good Orators in Christian knowledge.
Pastors that also are called Bishops, Pastors what they are.
are those that have the authority well to govern the congregations, and that
feed their flocks with good example of life, and with true doctrine, and are
watchful to understand the manners and the lives of their congregation, and
the names of each of their sh^pe. Doctors are they, Doctors what they are.
that in the congregation teach good sciences, whether they be holy or
profane. And this is it, that thou demaundest of me. Albeit I do not separate
from the body of Christ, neither Magistrates, nor the duetye of good Princes,
nor any other offices of the Christian common weal, which Paul him self in
many places declares. But I have declared to thee briefly, these five
principal offices.


Marforius. But what say thou of Priests?


Pasquine. A Priest is as much to say as an Elder, Prieste^ what they are.
and they were the self same, that the bishops were, or Senators of the
church, of no less respect for their age, Priests were no sacrificers in the
primitive Church.
than for their godliness. But yet were they never Sacrificers, nor
Massemumblers, what soever our smeared shauelings prate thereof, be they either
the highest, the lowest, or the rude sort of Sir John's.


Marforius. I stand now hearkening that thou should show me, what thou
saw in that Queere of Priests.


Pasquine. I saw a shameful and disordered rabble of Priests, of whom some
were Canonnes, A disordered rabble of shaued Priests.
some Parsons, some Chaplains, some Archedeacons, some Archepriestes, some
Prouostes, some Singlesoled priests, some Deacons, some Chau^ters, and some of
a thousand other sorts of names, which have been found out, since the name of
a minyster, (through the pride of the wicked) began to stink, as nothing
honorable, and yet too burthenous.


Mar. What were all they doing? The consultacion of the Popes clergy. The
Popes clergy is craf^ie and subtle.



Pasq. They were consulting of their riches, of their tithes and pensions.


Mar. What might be the cause thereof?


Pasquin. Because y^ pope demanded y^ te^thes of their benefices, Fat Priests
fell to packing for fear of sacking.
and not once only, but every year once, yea twice a year, and they were
devising means, how to scrape home to the^ selves, by some other fine fetches,
all y^ which they were constrained to give to y^ Pope. There shuldst thou have
heard diverse opinions, some there were y^ said, that it was good counsel to
divide among the^ selves, y^ riches of their churches, as Chalices, Pate^s,
silver plate, and the gay Copes, and other ornaments, alleging, that if they
did it not the sooner, the Pope, or the Turk, or else the Lutherans would sone
after do it: since they have their weapons ready. Here against spoke certain
poor hedge Priests, The hedge Priests for fear they shall lick no part,
work an other way.
doubting, that they should not have their part of the Pie, and said, that it
should be much better for every man's purpose, if each of them in his own town
and Church, would first show forth outwardly great holiness, in their church
garments, in their own apparel, in their countenance, in their gestures,
and above all things, in Massing devoutly, and to attend diligently to all
their outward ceremonies. And that done, that each of them find out some
goodly Image, or of the bones of some dead man, and some new Relics, or to
make some drops of blood come out of a crucifixe, or of some other Image, or
else to make the Uirgin Mary weep, or find some of her milk, The way to
bring Priests in credit and estimation.
or say that their God leapeth, and is in form of a child: or else say, that
they have seen, strange and wonderful things in their Massing, or have seen
some strange vision, or to feign some other pretty feate: affirming this to be
the way, to cause them to be reverenced, and obeyed of the people, and to
recover that reputation, which for their abominable naughtiness they have
lost, and not only to mainteyne, but also to increase their riches. But such
as most commend this devise, Ipocrites commend most this devise. Chietti
sets up a new sect of Ipocrites.
were of the Ipocritish order, instituted by Cardinal Chietti.


Marforius. I remember, that I heard while he dwelled in Venice, that he had
set up a new sect of Priests, founded altogether in Ipocriste and outward
show of holiness, whereof it is come to pass, that all Ipocrites are called
Chiettines, the which sect he forsook, as soon as he had caught that he
fished for, for he had left his Bishopric, that he might get him a Cardinals
Hatte, as Arettine said. Forthwith therefore as his devise came about, he came
flinging hither, to infect the Court of Rome with his Ipocrisie.


Pasquine. Did thou never hear, how he answered his Priests at his
departing from Venice, when they asked him whither he went.


Marforius. No, John. 8.
I heard it never.


Pasquine. Whither I go quoth he, thither can you not come, meaning that he
left them in poverty, and in their filthiness, and that he went to Rome, to
that great dignitye, as to his own heaven.


Marforius. He used the words of christ to good purpose vile Uarlet that he was.


Pasquine. In such like sort do they interpret the scriptures all the pack
of them, and so by abusing it, find they out Purgatoryes, Popes powers, and all
other reasons for their defense. The order or Quere of Patriarchs and
Prophets.
But let us come to the Queere of the Patriarchs, and Prophets.


Marforius. Mary I beseech thee heartily, and say on. Whether there were in that
place the.xij. sons of Jacob, for they were all called Patriarchs.


Pasquine. No but those that I saw, were of the new Testament.


Marforius. Why, are there also Patriarchs of the new Testament? Patriarchs
of the new Testament.



Pasquine. To tell thee the very truth Marforius, the Patriarchs of the new
Testament, are none other, than Popes, Cardinals, Friars, Priests, and such
like, of whom thou shalt not find one jot in the holy Scripture. But our
forefathers, who were the deuisers of this so great a mystery of iniquity, and
of deceyte, to the end, other should not perceive, that they altogether played
the Jews, carried not the Patriarchs of the old Testamente into the new, but
into their own Sinagoge.


Marforius. Two sorts of Patriarchs.
And who are these.


Pasquine. There are two sorts of Patriarchs, of the one sort, are the
Patriarchs of the four Regions that is to say, that of Rome, of Antioch,
Alexandria, and of Jerusalem. And the seat of the Empire, The one sort.
being afterward removed to Constantinople, to the rest of the ^atriarches was
adjoined he of Co^stanstinople, and afterward other, as that of Aquiligia, and
that of Venice. And they have ^btayned this degree, because they are heads and
rulers of other Bishops, as they also are Bishops them selves. There was an
other sort of Patriarchs, The other sort
who had no manner superioritye or dignity of the Patriarch^ships while they
were alive.


Marforius. Why, and are they made Patriarchs when they be dead?


Pasquine. Yea out of doubt, When Peter was made Pope.
even as Saint Peter was made Pope after his death, which never was, nor never
could be, nor yet was he at any time in Rome. And even so was Saint Jerome made
a Cardinal. Among these Patriarchs are accopmted Saint John Baptist, Saint
Dominicke, Dominicke and Fraunces are Patriars ches.
who instituted the order of breaching, I would say preaching Friars, and Saint
Fraunces the order of Friars Minores, or underminers.


Marforius. Why are they called Patriarchs?


Pasquine. Because they are the chief of the Fathers, and the deuisers of
sects, Friars are no liars that call them selves Fathers.
that is to say of the Friars who call them selves Fathers.


Marforius. Why then, by this reason, every order and house of Friars may call
his Author or fou^der Patriarch.


Pasquine. That they may, but these Families of Friars have been more ambitious
than the rest.


Marforius. Saw thou there Dominicke and Fraunces.


Pasquine. I saw them, Fraunces and Dominicke clad like shepeherdes.
but in other apparel, than they were in the Queere of the Friars, for there
were they both cladde like shepeheardes, with a weed of rough course cloth,
and in the mids thereof a hole, to thrust out their heads, and a hoode made
fast thereto to keep them from the rain, and from cold, for so were the
shepeheardes of Italy and Spain wont to be clad. But here I saw them in
Pontifical apparel, and with Crowns on their heads.


Marforius. Two things there are, that make me much marvel, the one is that I
see, their successors, and followers go clad in so fine clothes, and to be so
lofty and proud, the other is, how it is possible that they may be in two
places at once, here and among the Friars.


Pasquine. Thou must not marvel at that, Fraunces and Dominicke are Gods.
for they are Gods, and occupy no place at all, but where and when they list,
they are seen, and do suffer other to look on them, as (if thou understand
not what I mean,) I will show thee by a similitude. Even so are they in diverse
places at one instante of time, Just as Ierman^ lips.
as Christ's body with his natural length and breadth is contained in a thousand
Hosts and Masses at one instant.


Marforius. If I did not understand thy similitude, I should with the
Logicians conclude, that if they be not in some place, ergo, they be not at
all, for there is nothing but has a place proper to his nature, but these
things I let pass, and desire to hear what these Patriarchs did.


Pasquine. Thou ask me not of Saint John Baptist.


Marforius. I had forgotten, that he was accounted among the Patriarchs, for I
took him to be only a Prophet and more than a Prophet.


Pasquine. Know thou not, John Baptist John. 11.
in the Letanies of saint Gregory, he only is placed there under the title of
Patriarchs and Prophets?


Marforius. I have heard a thousand times, but I remember it not.


Pasquin. I saw him in that place, but (oh Lord) how far different from
that which the Evangelists describe him.


Marforius. Thou tellest me of wonderful alterations, and far more strange
than Ouide writes of.


Pasquine. I tell thee as the truth is, if thou will believe the Gospel, thou
may see, that the same John Baptist was Cladde in a garment of Camelles
hair, Math. 3.
and called all men to repentance, Luc. 3.
he baptized, and shevved forth plainly the Lamb of God, John. 1.
that takes away the sins of the world. But this John Baptist that I
speak of was a terrible fellow and had in his hand a fair sharp glaiue, A
new John Baptist Patron of the Knights of the Rodes. Knights of the Rodes.
and was armed at all pieces, and was followed after, not by a number of
sorrowful sinners, but by a ro^te of sea rouers, that call themselves Knights
of Therodes.


Marforius. Thou meanest Knights of the Rodes: so called by the Isle of Rodes,
that they lost.


Pasquine. I have always heard them called Knights of Therodes by such: as
speak clarkely and within book, and now are they called Knights of Malta,
Malta a fretting stone.
according to the nature of the stone called Malta, which is to freate and
consume: for such is the nature of those Knights.


Marforius. Oh what a wonderful odds in conditions is there. But what does
this John Baptist?


Pasquine. This also does baptize, but by violence and in the water of the sea.


Marforius. Thou meanest, when he sinketh the ships of pore Maryners?


Pasquine. he makes many to repent themselves, John Baptist f^rceth men to,
event, not by preaching but by ^iracie.
and sends them into the wilderness.


Marforius. Yea, when with his Mates he falls to rouing and spoiling this
man, and that, and leading away the siely souls, as prisoners.


Pasquine. So I say, for he follows Saint John Baptist in all things and that
courageously.


Marforius. If Christ had sent this John Baptist before him, he should more
easily have brought the Jews to subjection, John. 18.
for fear of him.


Pasquine. The Kingdom of Christ our God, was not of this world, as thou
know, for the Jews look for a Messiah, that should be lusty, and that
with weapons, and mischief should destroy all.


Marforius. What badges wear they?


Pasquine. All wear in their upper garment a cross, some white, some read,
some green, some plain and straight, some gathered, and some toothed like a
saw, and those I took to be Spaniards, not only by their apparall, and by the
Palabras, Palabras in Spaynishe is to say, words.
but also because they stood next of all to their God Saint James.


Marforius. Wherefore wear they that cross in the upper garments?


Pasquine. Because they can not carry it in their hearts, and if thou will have
an other reason therefore, because they crucify and trouble many from time to
time.


Marforius. But what have these fellows to do with John Baptist?


Pasquine. What? they make, many deserts in the honor of Saint John Baptist.


Marforius. But Saint John never made no deserts, but dwelled in them.


Pasquine. And these Mates make them, and leave other to dwell in them, and dwell
in more ease and pleasure than Sandanapalus.


Marforius. I have in deed heard, that when they had Rodes, they did such
things as Turks would not have done, The filthy life of the Knights of the
Rodes.
and for this cause I think, by Gods justice they were driven from their old
abiding place.


Pasquine. So comes it to pass, when w^ will with force and cruelty, bring
men to Christ, and not with love, righteousness, faith, and true Christian
doctrine: as did our old Fathers in times past.


Marforius. For ought I see, in these Knights thou speak of, there is no
more Christianity in them but in the names, only.


Pasquine. Nay nor yet in the name, Knights neither Christians in deed nor in
name.
for they are not called the Knights of Christ of Heaven, but of Saint John of
the Rodes. But in this point they seek to be like him, in that they mary no
wives and live like single men.


Marforius. If they have no Wives, they have the more Harlottes, and though
they live like single men yet live they not chaste, but this is not, to be like
Saint John, but rather some vile filthy Ruffian.


Pasquine. Thou have hit it.


Marforius. Follow on to the other Patriarchs. The Popes Patriarchs conspire
the death of gods servant.



Pasquine. Saint Dominick had called to Chapter all his Priours, Subpriours,
and the Uicares of all other nations, and most chieflye of the Spaniardes, and
was treating with them for the burning of Heretics, or how by some other
devise to make them away.


Marforius. But this is not done like a Prince, but like a Tyrant, not like a
Saint but rather a Devil, A wrong way to win men to Christ.
for this is not the way to win men, but to destroy them, nor the way to
follow Christ, but Sathanas, who was a murderer from the beginning. Behold
what Christ says, John. 18.
suffer them both to grow until the harvest, that while ye weed out the
tares, Math. 13.
ye pull not up the corn also. But these men weed not out the tares, but pull
up the good corn: for if they would root out the cockle and tares, they
must of force root out themselves, who take for Heretics all such as
speak against, Why Lutherans are condemned for Heretics.
their Hypocrisy, wickedness, and curssed Idolatry, as the Lutheranes, who
are in deed true christians, and they themselves Antichristians.


Pasquine. I see now, that thou understand the matter: but could thou
show in few words, and with any effectual reason, which are the Christians,
and which the Antichristians.


Marforius. I do in deed in my self understand it, but I should not be able
to show the same plainly to an other.


Pasquine. I will do it then. Let this be unto thee an evident token, How to
know Gods enemies from his friends.
to know thereby these y^ have always persecuted, are Gods enemies, and those
that are persecuted be his friends. And to begin at the beginni^g of the
world, thou see that Genesis 4.
Abell did neither persecute, nor slay Caine, but was persecuted and slain by
Caine, Jacob did not persecute Esau, but Genesis 27.
Esau persecuted Jacob: Moses did not persecute Pharao, but Exo. 14.
Pharao persecuted Moses: christ did not persecute the Pharisees, John. 15.
but the Pharisees persecuted Christ. The Apostles, and all the true Martyrs of
Christ did never persecute the Tirantes, but the Tirantes persecuted them, and
stewe them. And yet for all that, Abell, Jacob, Moses, Christ, the Apostles,
and Martyrs, christ church has been persecuted from the beginning.
were Gods Friends, and so contrariwise Caine, Esau, Pharao, the Pharisees, and
the Tirantes, were Gods enemies. And even so now Saint Dominicks* Friars and
the rest, Priests, Prelates, and Princes, that persec^te such, as give all
praise to Jesus Christ, and follow his holy gospel, are his utter enemies,
and the pore that are persecuted, his friends.


Marforius. Oh what a manifest reason is this, who is so blind that can not
see this?


Pasquine. I will tell thee of some other, Paul* writing to Timothe, 1. John.
4.
says. The spirit speaks manifestlye, that in the latter times some shall
depart from the faith, (mark well all I tell thee) and shall give heed to
spirits of errors, and the deuilish doctrine of them, (mark) that speak false
through Ipocrisie, and have their conscience marked with a hot iron (mark,
mark if thou vvilte know them) forbidding matrimony, and meats. What say
thou by this, Marforius? Who shall excuse himself with God, that he has not
known them, None* excuse can serve with God.
who forbids matrimony? who forbids meats? who would have the matter
more clear?


Marforius. Tell me no more of this I pray thee heartily, for I am cleared
thereof enough and enough, they may go about to excuse themselves, but they
make but a foolish piece of work. Say on I beseech thee.


Pasquine. A certain Spaniard one of the Inquision for heresy, accused
certain Spaniards and of the best of them for Lutheranes, and by this he said
he smelled them out, because they gave to the pore great alms, and to the
Friars they gave nothing, and before time they were wont for every trifeling
matter to swear, in dispite of God, and to blaspheme God, Christ and his
saints outragiou^ly, to fall to play, to run on whore hunting, ^en taken for
heretics because they will not swear and do evil.
and to do the devil and all of mischief: and now they will praise God and
live soberly, chastely and godly, and absteyning from evil apply only things
grave and profitable. But the worst is, they will al day long read the holy
scripture, and therefore were they taken for stinking heretics.


Marforius. What answer made Saint Dominicke?


Pasquine. He said, they must follow him, and do as he did, at Tholosa,
where at the procuremente of Innocent the third, Dominicke burned and played
the Devil, therefore was he made a saint. Some became gods for playing the
Di^el.
he quenched that heresy with marvelous speed.


Marforius. And how?


Pasquine. He said that the must not dispute the matter, but fall to this
business with fire and sword, and for this cause was he made a saint.


Marforius. So came it to pass with those of old time, that many for their
evil doings, and with slaughter of men, are also made Gods. As Jupiter, Mars,
Romulus, and many Cesars. But concerning the counsel that Dominicke gave, the
self same did Alexander Cardinal of Brundusio advise not only the Pope, but
also the Emperor, and Ferdenando of Austriche, Good gostly counsel.
because they should not differ from Turks. And therefore in Spain and in
Almaine, where their authority is greatest, this good counsel is very
straightly observed.


Pasquine. It is observed in deed. But the Lord will overthrow and destroy
all greatness and power, which sets up it self against his majesty and
greatness. And therefore thou see, that now of his justice he sends y^
Lantzgraue grave to plague them both.


Marforius. Oh God grant it. But Saint Fraunces what was he doing?


Pasquine. Saint Fraunces kept a stir with his Friars, Of the Patriarche
Fraunces.
that they had not with more diligence, sown his Conformities, abroad in the
world, which if they had done, it might have happened, that he should not only
have been taken for as good as Christ, but also better.


Marforius. What Conformities are they?


Pasquine. It is a book made and devised by Saint Fraunces Friars, with the
which if thou compaire the Alcoran of Mahomete, Alcoran is the whole Book of
the Turks law.
thou will say, that the Alcoran is in comparison of it, most holy, albeit in
many things they are like.


Marforius. I have heard say, that when Saint Fraunces was required by his
disciples to give them a rule of living, he gave unto them the gospel.


Pasquin. So it is said: but his followers have very evil observed it, which if
they had well done, they should not have dreamed out so many lies, and monstrous
tales of him, as if they would make him another Christ, for they say, that
their Saint Fraunces, is above all, thrones, dominations and powers.


Marforius. How can that be?


Pasquine. Whether it can be, or can not be, it is enough, that in the very
Pulpits they are so bold to preach it, and to tell also this notable shamlesse
lie, that is, Divine Doctrine drawn out of Legenda Aurea, or such like.
that one that desired once to know in what place Saint Fraunces was, ran out
of his wits, and was led round about all the parts of Heaven, and never
found him, at the last, he came to the throne of the divinity, where
demau^ding for Saint Fraunces, Christ then rose up from his seat, on the right
hand of God the Father, and opening his clothes upon his breast, and forthwith
came Saint Fraunces out of his side, then came he to his wits again.


Marforius. Who was that?


Pasquine. It was a Friar.


Marforius. It was a false Knave thou would have said. I believe thee well,
that he ran out of his wits, but I believe not that he came afterward to
himself again, for if he had not been altogether beside himself, he would
never have letten escape his mouth, so great a blasphemy, and so beastly a
foolish tale, meet for Mahomet or Lucian to tell: and it seems there is so
great blindness in the world, that there are such that will sooner believe
this deuilish devise, than the truth of the Gospel. But what did those head
Patriarchs?


Pasquine. They did strive for the primacie of the Church, The Patriarchs
strive who should be chief.
for he of Canstantinople said, that to him appertayned the title of
universal and chief Bishop, because there with him was the sea of the Empire.
He of Jerusalem, he would have it for himself, alleging, that in that place,
Peter's see, at Antioche. One Pope speaks against another.
the high Bishop Christ had triumphed. He of Antioch, he would needs have
it, alleging that Peter chief of the Apostles, there had kept his see, and
that he was never at Rome. He of Rome(not regarding the saying of Saint
Gregory, who said, that he should be Antichrist, who would be called the
universal or chief Bishop over other Bishops) partly by deceit, and gifts,
and partl^ by force, obtained at the last, The Popes vain gloriou^ titles.
to be called the chief Bishop, the greatest, the higest, universal, most
blessed, most holy, and the lawful successor of Peter, and of Christ.


Marforius. What say thou, that Peter was never at Rome?


Pasquine. That matter is to clear: and if thou do not believe me, read that
book entitled. Quod Petrus nu^quam Romae fuit. To which author I refer thee,
because I will be brief.


Marforius. I will seek to have it, as soon as I can, and will read it over.
But what said the Patriarche of Alexandria?


Pasquine. And he also alleged reasons, and showed, that for as much as he is
nere to Babylon, Babylon the hea^ of al abomination.
and that Babylon has been always the head of all abomination, and because
Babylon is the greatest of all other Cities, it was good reason, that he
should be the head: and so much the more, that if Rome would so feign be the
head, it must needs be called Babylon, Petrarke cal^eth Rome Babylon.
as in Petrarke the Poet is to be seen, who had learned the same in the
schoolehouse of Saint John the Evangelist.


Marforius. By my faith he said not amiss in his kind. But let us speak a
little of the Prophets, saw thou Esaias, Prophets.
Jeremy, Daniell, and the rest.


Pasquine. Not one of them, but the sons of Balaam, Number. 22.
who loved the reward of iniquity, and was therefore reproved by the Ass.


Marforius. Are there no Prophets in the new Testamente?


Pasquine. Yes that there are. Do not thou remember that heretofore, we
reckned the Prophets, among the offices of the Church of Christ? for I mean
nothing of the old Prophets, but of those that have followed and yet do the
way of false Prophets, and of such as have prophesied for reward. But thou
must learn, that these words Prophet and prophecy signify two things,
This word Prophet has two meanings.
the one is, he that by divine inspiration foretells things to come, and
discovers such things as are hidden, and that can not be known by man's wit
or cunning, these are called Prophets and seers. This word Prophet also
signifies a Doctor, or teacher, not every Doctor, but him that is sent by
God to instruct the Church, and to reform it, being better reple^ished
inwardly in spirit, tha^ furnished with worldly knowledge, The difference
between the Prophet and the Doctor.
and in this point is the Prophet different from him that is but simply a
Doctor, for the Prophet, teaches only heavenly things, and the Doctor
embraces also human sciences, and the arts liberal: the Doctor may teach,
those things, which he has learned out of books, and at the mouth of men. But
the Prophet must be inspired of God, and instructed in the hard meanings of
the scriptures, the better to expound them. In this Heaven saw I, both sorts
of Prophets, saving that, The Popes Prophets are not inspired by God.
neither those that fortolde things to come, nor those that taught religion to
the Church, were not inspired by God, nor by the spirit of Christ, but by the
Prince of darkness, and the spirit of Satan. And they that foretold the
things to come, were Wysardes, Southsayers, Sorcerers, Enchanters,
Negromancers, Astrologiens, and such as follow the damnable art Magique, among
the which, there were Popes, Cardynalles, A blessed company if a man should
rake Hell.
Bishops, Abbottes, and all sorts of Friars, but most chiefly the Friars of
Saint Dominick, and Saint Fraunces, who with socery and witchcrafte, (the which
they chieflye apply) learn evil and deuilish arts.


Marforius. This thing is most true, for a man may read, that Siluester the
second, gatte to be Pope by the help of the Devil, and with this condition,
that after his death he should be wholly the Devils own. And in our days
Paul the third called Pope Farne se or Fransie whether ye will, A virtuous
study of a holy Father.
in Astrology and divination has not left his like behind him.


Pasquine. It is no lie at all, and therefore, because he would have a
companion in this art, he made Denis a Friar of the order called Serui, Like
will to like.
a Cardinal. And this Paul chalengeth the praise of this art wholly to
himself, and by good reason is it due to him, for in this art he has spente
al his life. But a man can not say whether by this his art, he could tell
aforehand what would come to pass when he sent to wake the waspes of
Germany, that were on sleep.


Marforius. I believe right well, that in this point, he is yet still wide, and
deceived in his Almanacke which he accompteth his Gospel.


Pasquine. Think thou then, that by his art he can tell whether he must go
when he is dead?


Marforius. I do not believe, that he thinks thereupon, for he in Rome, it is
certainly said, that he believes that the soul is mortal: The Pope doubts
of the immortality of the soul.
and I in his talk have often times perceived it.


Pasquine. Yet does not Peter Jews his son doubt, that the soul is
immortal.


Marforius. Yet yea, no more than the Epicures and the Saduce is, and his
Father, Quali^ Pater talis filius.
and also Cardinal Chietti al his whole life does witness.


Pasquine. Just eue^ so, and sith we are now come to talk of Cardinal
Chietti, me thinks, he is well worthy to be numbered among the Prophets of
this heaven.


Marforius. And for what occasion?


Pasquine. I will tell thee the whole matter A Gentleman of Venice, fell in
contention with his wife upon a certain doubt to be declared in foro
conscientiae, the matter was such as troubled them both, A very proper
practice not unlike the devises used by the holy maid of Kent.
the woman being more curious than the man, as women lightly have spiced
consciences, was the first that would be cleared of this doubt, she goes to
the Church of these Chiett^ines, and there confesses her self to one of them,
that was a subtle Ipocrite, opens all the matter, and prays him to resolve
her of this doubt, he did as well, as he could, then goes he to the Arch
Ipocrite Chietti, The Knaves will tell tales out of the schole.
himself, and opens to him the whole confession, (as it is the old use of so
many as be Chiettines) when he had well understood it, he commanded him to be
secret, and finding out the resolution thereof in the Canon law, marked the
place, and tarried til this gentleman came unto him, who was wont to come for
like matters to him very often, the morrow after he came, and being alone with
Chietti, after four or five words, when he was coming to his demand, that
did so burden his conscience, Chietti commanded him to hold his peace, took
him by the hand, put his hand into the book, and shut it fast in the place
which he before had marked for that purpose: and then bid him tell his tale,
and when he had ended, this Coll Prophet Chietti said to him, Mark the
knauerie of this Coll Prophet.
look there, where you have your hand, the Gentleman opened the book, read,
and found that he sought for, and not thinking that any other creature had
known it but his wy^e, forthwith fell down on his knees, and worshipped him,
as it had been an other Christ, These knaves have many such knackes in their
Bougets.
that had known the secrets of men's hearts.


Marforius. I know a thousand other such tricks of blind prophecies, whereby
learning the secrets of simple siely souls, they show thereby themselves so
be Prophets. For the great profit therefore, which they get thereby, do they
with such rage seek to maintain this confession.


Pasquine. If thou know a thousand, I know ten thousand. But because there
is at this present other matter to talk of, we will return to speak of
these Prophets, which there had the charge to teach religion. They taught no
manner things y^ were heavenly, No true Prophets.
but things worldly, nay rather Deuilish: and sought to please men, and praised
themselves, and their own things, and advanced them up to heaven, and to
conclude, they were all of those of whom the Lord by his Prophet
complayneth, Iere. 14.
saying: They preach lies unto them in my name, I have not spoken with them,
neither gave I them any charge neither did I send them. Of whom our only
Master and Savior Jesus Christ, warns his Church, Math. 7.
saying: Bevvare of false Prophets that come unto you, cladde in shepes
clothing, but inwardly they are ravening Wolves, ye shall know them by their
fruits. Lo, the Lord says plainly unto us, that we should beware of them.
And because we should not be deceived, he teaches us to know them by the
fruits they work. What manner of fruits those be, of the Court of Rome, The
goodness of these Romish fruits.
and of all the followers thereof, how bitter, rotten, Worm eaten, sour, full
of poison, and how much to be avoided, every man may without controversy
confess. From these therefore we ought to beware, by the commandment of our
Lord and Savior, who shall say unto them in the day of judgment. I never
knevv you, Luc. 13.
depart from me you that work wickedness.


Marforius. Let us therefore let them alone. But whether wentest thou afterward?


Pasquine. We went into a marvelous great court, The court of the Popes
heaven.
which had many rowmes severed one from an other, where satte most severe
Judges, there were many matters treated of, and there was such a scolding
among the Proctors and advocates, that demau^ding, who those Judges were, I
could not hear, what answer was made me.


Marforius. How did thou to understand it afterward?


Pasquine. I withdrew my self a little out of the noise, and then I asked.


Marforius. Who could tell thee the order and form of that Court? Just
judgment and void of fear when sentence was given against the Devil.



Pasquine. A Devil against whom his matter passed, went his way iombling to
himself.


Marforius. Who did he say that these Judges were?


Pasquine. He spoke Greek, I understood him not well, whether he said, they
were Apostles or Apostates.


Marforius. I did never believe before now that there were Devils in Heaven,
nor that there was any need of other advocates, than of Christ.


Pasquine. Whence do thou gather this opinion?


Marforius. Out of the mids of the Gospel.


Pasquine. Art thou of a popish Lawyer so sone become a Gospeller?


Marforius. Thou art cause thereof, that have warned me to search the Scriptures.


Pasquine. Tell me therefore the place.


Marforius. I remember Christ says, that he is the John. 14.
way, the truth, and the life, if Christ be the truth, and if he be Act. 10.
Judge of the quick and the dead, as the Scripture says, what need is
there then of so many advocates? for by the laws I term y^ the advocate is
not ordained for any other purpose, The office and duery of an aduo^ate.
than to inform y^ Judge of the truth, whereby I conclude mine argument, that
if the Judge be the very truth it self, what need is there of any to declare
the same unto him?


Pasquine. If I shall show unto thee, that in this place this word Advocate is
as much to say as Mediator, how will thou answer me?


Marforius. Paul says, that we have an 1. John. 2.
advocate appointed us by the Father, to be a 1. Timo. 2.
Mediafor us toward him. In an other place, the father says, that Christ is
his well-beloved son, in whom only he is pleased. Maht. 3.
If Christ be appointed by the father to be a Mediator for us, and if Christ
only be acceptable to God, wherefore will we seek other advocates? Do not we
commit great injury to the father and to the Son, Great injury done to
Christ when any other advocate is sought.
putting in his place, an other advocate, as though he were more acceptable to
the Father, than Christ, or if he were more sufficient than Christ. Are not we
very fools in that we will have those to be our advocates, that have need of
an advocate themselves? Christ only is righteous, and all men are sinners. And
this is it that Saint John says in his canonical Epistle, 1. John. 2.
My little ones, if any man sin, we have an advocate with the Father Jesus
Christ the righteous: If there were other advocates, they had need to pray for
themselves, for they also had need to be made righteous: But Christ only is
the advocate that is righteous, and has no need to pray for himself, but
John. 17.
prays only for us, all other had need to pray for themselves, and to
sacrifice for themselves: and their prayers and sacrifices are not perfect,
Heb. 10.
therefore are they often times renewed. But Christ has once only and for
ever prayed, and sacrificed for us, and for his own merit sake has been
heard.


Pasquine. Oh Marforius, this disputation of thine, makes me think, that thou
are no more Marforius, and I hope surely, that this next spring thou will, as
the serpents do, cast thine old skin.


Marforius. I desire with the Gospellers, and not with the serpents, Math. 10.
to cast away mine old learning.


Pasquine. That is it, that at Easter the petie shauelings were wont to yel^^
out to the gross and Ignorant people, in a tongue that neither part
understood.


Marforius. And good reason it is, that to him that understands not, things
be spoken, yea and not understood by them that speak them.


Pasquine. But now let us follow on our story.


Marsorius. I desire it much.


Pasquine. Heardest thou not what was done before these Judges.


Marsorius. I heard, but I have forgotten to ask thee, what allegations they
bring forth in defending their causes: do they use Bartolus, Bartolus and
Baldus.
and Baldus, and such other spill causes to set men together by the ears?


Pasquine. I will tell thee, the Judges give not sentence, when they have heard
the matter, as they do with us, but even as if they had heard neither party,
they send them both to the balaunce to be tried.


Marforius. What is that balau^ce?


Pasquine. In the mids of this Court, stands a great Saint, Saint Michaell
wayer of souls.
that is wynged, and in the one hand he holds a huge pair of Balaunce, and
in the other hand a sword, and when the matter has been well brawled, A
vengeance crafty advocate that could match the Devil.
before the Judges between the Devil and the Advocate, they come to this
Saint, as to an Arbytratour who sets his balaunce even, and in one of them
the advocate puts all his clients things, as Masses, Bulls, Pardons,
Prayers, sundry services of our Lady, Masses and such trash showed forth in
evidence.
and of the holy cross, and Dirges for the dead, Beads, Rosaries,
Pilgrimages, Fastings, Friars Hoods, Friars Coats, as gray, white, asure, and
blewe: vows, abstinences, whipping of themselves, garments of hair, and such
like Trumper^e, and in the other scale of the balaunce, they put the wretched
^^ely soul, and to this scale of the balaunce to make it way the more, takes
hold and hangs fast a foul great Devil and a fat, such as commonly the
Priors and Prouincialles of the Friars are.


Marforius. O what a crafty part is that, The craft of the Devil.
meet in deed for the Devil, that to make the balaunce way the more,
hangs thereat rather a fat Devil than a lean.


Pasquine. Nay this is not enough, for that Devil that clingeth so fast,
shakes, stirs, and moves the cords of the balaunce, puncheth the soul,
and does all that he can to make his part way down the heavier.


Marforius. And that great winged Saint what does he when he sees this?
Michaell beats the devil.



Pasquine. Then is he in a great rage, and lays upon the Devil flatling with
his sword, and threateneth him with a red Cross that he wears on his
breast, where upon the Devil coucheth and is somewhat more still, hanging
down his head like the Fox, that the country man over takes from whom he
had stolen a Hen, and though he be well beaten, yet lets not go his Hen
for all that.


Marforius. A pretty similitude, but what follows then of this waying?


Pasquine. If the works way down, then is the soul led with great pomp to
some one of those places aforesaid, Great honor and joy, when the Pope wins
a soul.
and there is committed to the chief governor, who places him, either higher
or lower, according as he has deserved, but if the Devils part of the
balaunce way more, he goes straight to Hell or to Pagatorie.


Marforius. Why call thou it Pagatorie?


Pasquine. Because the rude country people, Purgatory justly called Pagatorie.
and such as is void of wit and understanding pay sweetly, to be delivered
from that horrible and fearful invention.


Marforius. I understand thee, but tell me the name of the wayer.


Pasquine. They said it was Saint Michaell.


Marforius. Is that he that they said was in love with a Michaell in love with
a Bull, look Legenda aurea.
Bull in the hill of Garganus?


Pasquine. It is even he.


Marforius. Is he not weary of so hateful an office?


Pasquine. Yes sometime, but that country man that gave the name to the hill
Garganus at times helps him.


Marforius. What, did a man of the country give the name to that hill? The
fable of Saint Michaell.



Pasquine. So is it to be read in y^ history of Saint Michaell.


Marforius. How can this hang together, for it is to be seen that long before
this fable of Saint Michaell was heard of or known, this name of the hill
Garganus was? as I remember I have seen in the Poet Lucanus, Lucanus the
Poet.
who says. In Pulia a hill that Gargan hight into the sea does reach.


Pasquine. That is out of doubt, for I aleaged also this verse once against a
Friar, who had in the Pulpit recited this foolish tale, and he answered me,
having nothing else to say, your Poets (quod he) are all liars.


Marforius. O what a wise answer he made, Friars and liars shaped both in one
moulde.
meet and worthy for a Friar, nay rather worthy of half a dosen good stripes
with a quodgell: and what sayedst thou to him again.


Pasquine. I looked about me, if I could find any thistles, to give the Ass
for his labor, Draffe good enough for Hogs.
for this kind of beasts, if a man give them any deintier meat, they can not
savor it, and such as they sauoure not, they utterly despise.


Marforius. Could thou tell by any means, whence this same Saint Michaell
had his beginning?


Pasquine. Even from the very ignorance of Friars.


Marforius. Peradventure it is feigned, as thou haste said before of Saint
Christofer?


Pasquine. Even so it is.


Marforius. Why then, under this representation or Image, is contained somewhat
else, than that which is outwardly seen?


Pasquin. Yea out of doubt.


Marforius. And what is it?


Pasquine. Gods justice, for so did those ancient Christians, Saint Michael^
fable* a figure of Gods Justice.
set forth this same, taking it from the Gentiles, who did almost in the self
same sort, set forth justice.


Marforius. What the Devil means it, that they have changed so holy a
representation into so foolish and wicked a fable?


Pasquine. Because the world has given so great authority unto these lying
Friars, The world abused by Friars.
that al manner of falshoode is both believed and granted to, at their hands.


Marforius. I marvel much at this one thing, that the Christians have
suffered themselves hitherto, to be so mocked with these false and foolish
histories,


Pasquine. I know not how it comes to pass, but I am sure, if Lucian had
known them, Lucian.
he would have put them in his book De veris narrationibus. And every man
would have laughed at them. But because the Friars say, and affirm, that
Saint Michaell had to do with a Bull in the hill Garganus, all men take it for
the Gospel, What the Gospel causes.
or rather to be better believed than the Gospel, for the Gospel makes us to
perceive and understand their lies and deceytes, and it commands us to
beware of them, and not to believe them, and yet for all that, are they believed.
For there is not in the world any thing so far past all belief, that being
spoken by the Friars, Friars use violent persuasions.
is not fully and wholly credited. And if any man doubt thereof, they cry, that
we rather ought steadfastly to believe, than to go curiously searching, Beati qui
non rid^runt et credideru^t.
or else they cry, down with him for he is an Heretic.


Marforius. I will therefore, from hence forth steadfastly believe, that they are
all false Knaves, rather than go search whether they be so or no.


Pasquine. Thou shall do well so. But for to follow our history, I tell thee,
from this court, which was very great, we went to the Palace, which was in
the midst, The Palace of the Popes Heaven.
and in the highest part of the City, this Palace seemed not to be very old,
but a man might see, that it was begone with so great cost, y^ it could not as
yet be finished, even as Saint Peter's Church at Rome that has filled so many
Popes Purs^es, the fashion of this Palace was like to that of the Coliseo, The
fashion of it.
but yet with this difference, that it was all covered over.


Marforius. It must needs therefore be very dark.


Pasquin. It was in deed exceeding dark, The Popes Saints can not abide the
light.
but know not thou that the Saints of this Heaven can abide no light, and
rather will they have the light of Candels, than of the son? For as soon as
we were entered in, we saw, all things smoked with the lay of the Candels and
Lamps, and the walls and the Pillars, were laden with little painted tables
of vows, and with Gold and Silver.


Marforius. This seems to me to be an Alchimistes shop. The Popes heaven
resembled to an Alchimistes shop.



Pasquine. There was only one difference between them, for this place was
full of Gold and silver in deed, which the Alchimistes have not. And to say
more, in the heart of the Palace in a high seat sat a Queen, of a duskishe
color, which had at her back the Son, The Son and the Moon shine both at
once.
and at her feet the Moon.


Marforius. How can it be therefore, that the place should be so dark, as
thou say, if there were both the Son and the Moon?


Pasquine. I will tell thee how it can be. This Son that closes ye Queen,
has not his beams at liberty, Strange virtue of Bead^ that can darken both
Son and Moan.
for if it had, out of doubt it would give light to all the whole place.


Marforius. And what lets it?


Pasquine. This Son is compassed about with a pair of Beads, the which,
Saint Dominicks Friars have put round about it, so y^ it can not spread forth
his light: and for this cause the place remains dar^e, and needs candels
and lamps.


Marforius. What pair of Beads is that?


Pasquine. It is that, The description and use of Beads.
which they call our Lady Psalter, that which the hoggish herd of Friars, do
also call the Bosarie, that with the which the Paternosters, or rather the
Anemaries, are given by tale to God, nay rather to the Devil, that which every
foolish woman caryeth in her hand, when she goes out of her doors in the
morning, that which is said more with the hands then with the heart, that
which is painted always in the hand of Ipocrisie, Ipocrisie always carries
Beads.
that which soldiers make more conscience to leave of, than they do to kill a
man, that is it.


Marforius. I understand thee well. I have been also of this opinion hitherto
my self, that he could not be saved, which had not mumbled over his Beads,
at the least once every day. But I marvel yet of an other thing, how is it
possible, that the son which is so great (as they y^ write of the
Mathematical sciences affirm) can be comprehended in so little a space, and
about a Queen, it must needs be, that that Palace should be an other
world, and that that Queen should be mo^strously great without measure, if
this could be.


Pasquine. Thou must understand, that there is a great difference between
that Son and the Moon, which we see in this world, and them that clothe this
Queen.


Marforius. If there be that difference, which is between a thing that is
true, and a thing that is feigned, it is very great.


Pasquine. Thou have hit the truth.


Marforius. Follow on the rest since I understand this so well. In this great
Hall, al full of benches (as that is of the great counsel at Venice), The
Counsel of all Saints.
was assembled a counsel of all sorts of Saints, a number infinite


Marforius. Came they therefore in this heaven call^ Counsel without any
business: and in earth neither by somoning, nor no other way, can it assemble?


Pasquine. Yea, but the cause is, that these Saints doubt lest if there
should be a counsel called in earth, there should somewhat be done in it,
that might not well please them: but in their counsel, The scope and end of
their counsel.
there is no danger at all for them, for all with one will and careful study
seek to maintain and increase their Kingdom, and (if it were possible) to
overthrow the Kingdom of Christ. It is true in deed that in the old time,
Why in old time so many counsels were so easily called.
counselles were easily called together in earth, and for this cause, for that
there was not one, that took Christ's part, or if he took his part, durst
discover himself, for then would they have burned him quick, as they did John
Husse and Jerome of Prage, and many other, because they defended the truth of
the Gospel against the falsehode of Popery: Why counsels in these days can
not be assembled.
But now, that they see a good part of the people of Christendom, and of
other nations, have a good opinion of Christ, and an evil of the Pope and his
followers, they are so Slow to the counsel, that though the Emperor desire
it, and all the world look for it, yet can it not be had: in so great hatred
have they y^ truth, for fear, that it be not known abroad. I speak not
this, as if the good and Godly men had need of counsels, nor of the help of
men, but because their doctrine should be known for true, holy, The effect of
^^unsels.
and godly as it is, and because it should not seem, that they fly, or avoid
the remedies of strife and contention, used by those of old time, and because
the consciences of the weak should be satisfied, and last of all that having
Campofranco. That is to say free ground, they may enter into the listes to
combat with their adversaries, armed, not with iron nor steel, but with the
sacred Scriptures, and the holy ghost* and there staying al deceyte and
falsehoode, make the truth open and manifest. But as for the godly, they have
had the counsel of Jesus Christ, with the joint assent of all the holy
Apostles, Verbum dominiman^^ in eternum
inspired by the holy Ghost, the which counsel shall endure for ever. But in
this Popish counsel are gathered together the Kings of the earth, the chief
Priests and al sorts of these Saints, Psalm. 2.
against the Lord and Christ his Son.


Marforius. A man may see in effect, that the Pope will needs have the
counsel kept at Trent, to the which for all that, the Dutchmen never resorted.


Pasquine. How can it be Marforius, that y^ should not understand the
subtlety and falsehood of the Pope? know thou not, that when two will fight
the combatte together, Equalitic would be used in trial of weighty matters.
it is first requisite that they have free ground, and that then they be in
Armor, Horses and in every other things equal, that the one have not one
jot of advantage of the other? Tell me, would thou go to fight with thine
enemy, at home in his own house, with disaduauntage, nay rather when thou
could not occupy thine own weapons, nay, with one, who beside that he is
thy mortal enemy, were both the one party that should fight, and also Lord
of the soil wherein the listes are? The Pope keeps his counsel at Trent, and
to whom belongs Trent? to a member of the Popes, and beside that, it is
subject to Ferdinando, a most bitter persecutour of the Gospel. Behold for
the first part, The Pope never fights on even hand.
there is no free ground, then afterward, that this counsel is kept, where
the Pope bears so great a swaye and maintayneth his tirannicall authority,
the which while it endures, there is no speaking against him, and he that
speaks against him, is but a dead man: And though they granted
saufeconductes, they break them as faithless people, covering themselves with
their curssed laws, which say, that promise must not be kept with Heretics,
Who be Heretics, and who be no Heretics after the popes judgment.
and they call Heretics, not such as speak against the Gospel, as they do,
but such as speak against their curssed constitutions. And I will tell thee
further, that the Dutchmen have discovered all this gear, and if they had gone
to the council, they had been dispatched out of the way, The Dutchmen first
smelled out the Popes crafty conueyaunce.
and thou would needs have them go home to there Enemies, which is Lord of
the listes? but to hold a council in a free place, and with equal match, they
will not hear of.


Marforius. In deed thou say the truth. But in this council of Saints that
thou speak of, did thou come in.


Pasquin? I came in, I saw and heard all the whole.


Marforius. But how did they suffer thee so to do?


Pasquine. They could not see me, for my good Angel as long as pleased him,
had made me invisible.


Marforius. What heardest thou in the beginning?


Pasquine. All cried with one voice, The song of the Popes Saints.
Let us break their bonds, and cast away their yoke from us.


Marforius. What bonds? what yoke meant they.


Pasquin. The bonds of peace and love, and the yoke of our Master and Savior
Christ, that is to say his doctrine, for he says, Psalm. 2.
Take my yoke upon you. etc.


Marforius. Why, Math. 11.
and did they seek to break, so sweet and holy bands? and to cast away so
light and so pleasant a yoke?


Pasquine. Yea, for to the wicked and to the evil lyuers, the precepts of
righteousness are bitter and unpleasant, but vices are to them sweet and
pleasant, and under the color of well doing, they follow all manner of
wickedness.


Marforius. This do I know right well, but what other thing were they doing?
Politic fetches used in the Counsel.



Pasquine. They were treating how they might bring Germany into the lap of
the Romish Church, either for love, money, or by force.


Marforius. Speak they nothing of deceites and treasons?


Pasquine. These men rather do them, than talk of them. Then called they for
one Saint Joyce, Saint Ioice patron of fruitful succession.
and they all besought him, that he would cause the Princes of Germany to have
many sons.


Marforius. For what occasion?


Pasquine. To the end, (the better to maintain so many sons in estate and
reputation,) they should be constrained to seek at the Popes hands, some good
benefice, Bishopric, or Cardinalship.


Marforius. I have hard say, that many Flemings go to this Saint Joyce, who
has a Church in France, that they may have children, and they speed of
their purpose.


Pasquine. It is true, Spiritually begotten children meet to maintain the
Popes spiritual kingdom.
for while they be on their voyage, saint Joyce uses y^ priests and Friars as
instruments with their wives. They were treating also, how the learned men of
Germany, might be corrupted with rewards and with letters, and with the
devises of certain Cardinals, that seem to be better learned, and better than
y^ rest. But that which in this counsel with greatest study was sought to be
provided for, The weighti est matter of all the counsel.
was to cause the Pope forthwith, without any other consideration, to give al
his whole help to Charles y^ fifth, for they doubt much that Charles will fall
to some agreement with the Lutherans, Charl^s the^^ suspected by the Pope.
to the great hurt of this heaven, or else least the Lutherans should have
the better hand, which if it should come to pass, either the one way, or the
other, this heaven is over thrown and destroyfull and whole. They were
treating also, that great aid should be given to Ferdenando, who has a great
many children, Ferdenando upon condition shall have aid from the Pope.
and a sore war eue^ at hand, and has his dominion very weak, but with this
condition, that he should fall to play, make wars, use good cheer, early
and late, and such like things, rather than to the study of searching out the
truth, nay that he should rayther put to death all such as confess it, and
after this sort should bring up his children: and beside all this, that he
should not keep in his Court other than such as Faber, Ecchius, and Hosius.


Marforius. Thou must not marvel, Popish Doctors.
that these spiteful (I would have said spiritual) men, will not have men,
and chiefly Princes, to meddle with holy scripture, for their heaven is
builded altogether upon ignorance, The Popes heaven builded upon Ignorance.
and would thou have them desire any other thing, than Ignorance to al
other men, which is the mother of all errors and evil? Of pleasures I speak
not, Ignorance mother of all errors.
for therein they far exceed Sardanapalus, and Zerxes. But above al other
things, the duty of a king or Prince is, to fear God, and defend the true
religion, The duty of a king.
which is contained in the Gospel, to love wisdom, and in all goodness and
good governance of himself, to be so much the more better, than other, as he
is higher in degree and dignity, and yet for all this, is every one of them
become a greater persecutour of the Gospel, than any Nero: for the which, they
shall have of God their just punishment, and sooner than they think for. But
what, was there nothing determined concerning Fraunces the French King?


Pasquin. They were al of this opinion to send him some Flatterer, Fraunces the
French King.
or other stale courtier, thoroughly instructed with the fine fetches of the
court of Rome, who for every thing that the king should do, or say, were it
never so foolish or evil, should say, oh well done Sir, and to cause him
still to remember the title of most Christian King, which his progenitors
received from the Bishops of Rome, and therefore should with all his power
defend the dignity of those that gave so goodly a title, and if he would
that the name of most christian King should be truly verefied on him, he
should not fail to persecute Christians even to the death, under the color of
Heretics, and Lutherans, and those that are contrary to such as gave him
that title. For other things, that he should fall to dancing, The Popes
counsel to Kings and rulers.
to banketting, to serve Venus, and to hunting, rather than to favor
learning, as it seemed, he would do.


Marforius. Let him beware that the fire of the Lutherans (that he has burned)
do not kindle and burn up his whole realm. He, Mark how Pasquine
prophecieth of France.
and other princes his followers should take heed, how many kings there have
been, (that sooner than they thought for) having washed their hands, in the
blood of the Martiyrs of the high Lord of all, have been by him sharply
punished: for the very ashes of them that have been persecuted and have dyed
for Christ's sake, Apoc. 20.
cry vengeance. But if he will appease Gods wrath, The way to appease Gods
wrath
and be worthily called most Christian King, let him cause Christ's pure
Gospel, to be freely set forth within his realm, let him cast down Images,
let him restore the true use of the Sacraments, Joan. 4.
and worship God with spirit and truth, and not with the hands, nor with
incense. And so say I, of other Princes, if they will be (truly) Christians,
and if they will not even shortly feale the scourge of God, who has given them
power, to the end they should defend his Gospel, and not y^ they should
persecute such as defend it.


Marforius. Were not these Saints affeard, Auignion usurped by the Pope.
that the King would take again Auignion from the Pope, and the other places,
that he usurps, or that he would give aid to the Lutherans in this wars:
or else would do these Saints some other harm?


Pasquine. They doubted this nothing, all the while the King was in league with
the Turk, Machomet and the Pope are brothers.
for Machomet and the Pope are brothers, and hereby thou may perceive it,
that when the Turks army passed along the Sea coasts, of the Popes dominion,
it did there no manner hurt, nor damage: but rather good, but if the French King
shake off the league with the Turk, then are they in a wonderful suspicion.
The King of England.



Marforius. What was said of the King of England?


Pasquine. They were sore in doubt least other Princes would follow this Kings
example in taking away the possessions of the Church.


Marforius. Is it lawful to do it?


Pasquine. Yea, if it be done, to put them to better use, nay rather, How the
possessions of the Church should be bestowed.
Princes are bound to have regard, that the possessions of the Churches under
their subjection be dispensed to the pore, impotent, for the marriage of honest
maidens, to the godly ministers of y^ true Churches, and not to lying Friars
and idle priests, enemies to the Gospel, as thou may see, In Codice
Iurisconsultorum. And saint Paul says, ^. Thessalonians. 3.
He that laboreth not let him not eat. The same do I say also, of the
treasures of the Church, as vessels, vestements, Images of Gold and Silver,
Jewels, ba^ners, crosses and such like, which either idle priests and Friars
(enemies of the pure gospel of Christ) do enjoy, and either do unprofitably
reserve for ambition, consume in letcherie, or else for superstition do
worship.


Marforius. I surely think that these possessions were left to the Church,
Why possessions were given to the Church.
to the end they should be disposed in such sort as thou haste said: and to
say y^ truth, what does Gold in the Churches? as that Poet said. But was there
any other thing in doing.


Pasquine. It was decreed to increase the number of the Cardinals, and to cause
that of all the chief houses of Italy, A policy used to preserve the Popes
Kingdom.
and else where abroad, there should always one or other of them be a
Cardinal, by this mecanes to keep them always in the devotion of the Church
of Rome, the which they now, through the reading of holy Scriptures, begin
to know and forsake, The reading of the Scripture brings knoweledge.
that they may enjoy the liberty of the Gospel. But above all other things,
that their should be always vj. or.iiij. at the least of the Venetians,
Cardinals, and this they meant, because they know, Why so many Venetia^s are
made Cardinals.
what a number of those Senators are wyttie men, and of profound judgment,
doubting least they should slip their heads out of the collar, and most of all,
seeing that sacred Senate, (when it has been often times by the Popes Legates,
pricked forward to the destruction, and slaughter of their vessels, because
they withdraw themselves from the Popes tyranny) has showed evidently that
they take more care of their true, Careful magistrates over their people.
and faithful subjects, than to have given ear to the presumption of him that
takes upon him to command them.


Marforius. Thou have told thy tale, but I have heard say, that they bury men
quick.


Pasquine. How do they bury them quick?


Marforius. Thrusting them into prisons, as into graves.


Pasquine. The Legate condem^neth them, and not they.


Marforius. Truly I much marvel, since there has been at no time any power
so great, that has been able by force to s^bdue them, they will for all that so
wilfully submit themselves to the service of the Pope, The Pope abuses al
magistrates.
and suffer for his sake that within their Territory, Justice should be
defaced or blemished, which being driven from all men, is come to seek
succors at them.


Pasquine. I would understand thee better, and then I will answer thee.


Marforius. They are great Lords, The Pope makes all Princes his Butchers and
hangmen.
and never knew what bondag^ meant, and yet they suffer that a vile scuruy
priest shall in their own dominion give sentence against their subjects, and
they must execute other men's sentences. Think thou that this is not great
bondage? I speak not of the Tenthes of their Dominion, the which they give the
Pope, The great justice of the Venetians.
and many things else. And furthermore, there is not a man condemned in that
just City, that is not judged by forty Judges, neither is there any one so
evil or heinous an offender, but may allege for himself the best he can,
and yet they suffer, that a legate only, The spirituality does rule and reign
each where.
shall condemn whom he list, and the person accused, shall not come to his
purgacion, for this false Judge refuses the Testimonies of the^ that speak in
the defense of him that is accused, and allows such, as for hatred or any
other dampnable occasion speak evil against him. And they perceive not y^ if
I bear displeasure to one, I may go and accuse him to the Legate, of heresy,
and cause him to be banyshed, or committed to some place to abide during his
life, and forfeyte his goods, and yet shall not he have once so much favor,
Truth can not be heard where such ^irannie r^ygneth.
as to say for himself what he can, and peradventure, he is an honest man, and
faithful to his estate. Do thou not think, that it were a thing very
requisite for them, to provide better for this case?


Pasquin. Thou know Marorius, y^ there have ever been, and shall ever be,
members of Antichrist. And they be the cause of these and such like disorders.
Antichrist and his members the cause of disorders.
But be thou fast and sure of it, they can not long continue thus, for there
are among the^ that are very wise me^, and many more than I speak of, who have
depely considered the great tumults, and the great seditions and flaughters, y^
in times past have been in Germany, for persecuting such as were faithful
subjects and men that in all points were honest, and therefore are very loathe,
that the like should come to pass, in their countries, for they see aforehand,
the scourge that God has prepared for the Emperor and his brother, for these
causes.


Marforius. God knows, The Chariti^ of Pasquine.
that I wish their well doing, as much as any of themselves, and do therefore
wish they did as thou say, and I would have them thus to consider, that
when any of them is made a Cardinal, he should be forthwith banished, for
these be they, that cause all their secrets to be known to y^ Pope, and are
the very occasion that they are kept in such vile bondage.


Pasquine. Doubt not thereof, they will have greater regard to the public
weal, Good members of a common wealth.
than to their private commodity, and when need shall be, will leave all
these considerations, and open the way to all Italy. And the saints of whom
we speak, are much in doubt hereof, and do therefore seek by making many of
them Cardinals, to keep them still in bondage, for if they had not had so
great respect to y^ Tyranne the Pope, they should long since have been
Lords of all Italy. The which thing might easily come to pass, By what way
the Venetians might become greater.
if they would embrace the Gospel of Jesus Christ, the giver of all power,
dominion, and all other good things, as I hope they will.


Marforius. follow on I pray thee, the other determinacio^s of this counsel.


Pasquine. Concerning Spain, it was decreed, that the Inquisitors should not
henceforth be severe with the Marranes who deny the Divinity of Christ, Gods
enemies favored and his friends persecuted.
but should be most cruel against the Lutheran^s, who deny the Divinity of
the Pope, and most constantly confess the Divinity of Christ.


Marforius. That is even as much, as to desire that Barrabas be delivered,
John. 18.
and Innocent Christ crucified, but what was else decreed there? Luc. 23.



Pasquin. One thing horrible, fearful, and to make all Christendom quake.


Marforius. Alas what may that be? A diuelishe decre of the Popes saints.



Pasquine. First they decreed to make league with the Turk, to make thereby all
their enemies affearde, and that done to send all their Angels, through all
the parts and Cities of Christendom, and most chiefly, such Angels as sow
wilful wars, dissentions, deceits, mischieues, and offenses, and calling
therefore one of them, that had the face of a Uirgin, and the feet, and hands
of a Lion, and his bosom full of Serpents: after whom went one laden with
weapons, fire, and sword, and one of these Gods thus spoke unto her. O virgin
daughter of the night; The oration of one of the Saints to this Devil their
Messanger.
take thou this pain for us, and so work, that our honor and fame do no
where decay. Thou that art able to set loving brothers to cruel war, and
fill al houses with mortal hatred, one of an other: thou that can if thou
vvilt, bring into all houses destruction and death: thou that have a thousand
names to color thy self with, and as many vvayes to work mischief, styr up
thy noble heart hereto, that has such stuff in store overthrow the peace
that is already made, (...)
sovv nevve causes of vvar^^ let each man cry for war, let every man have
his hands full. When the Angel heard this, he promised fully to obey it, and
away he gets, flying through all the several Queeres of the other Angels,
and out of them took all such, as was skillfull in murders, The Popes saints
fill all the world with wars and mischief.
deceyts, and all kinds of mischief, and carries them with him, and part he
sends into Germany, part into France, and part into Spain, and the
messanger self goes into Italy.


Marforius. This is like that, which Juno in great rage said to Alecto. Since I
can not (^ she) move the gods to pity, I will stir by y^ devils to michiefe. But
is it possible that these saints be such manner of fellows?


Pasquin. They are much worsse and far do pass the wicked spirits and
furies of Hell in all kind of cruelty.


Marforius. Where then did that fury Alecto abide?


Pasquine. In this City, Rome the Devils dwe^ing place.
which has been the head of the world, and from hence sends his other
Angels abroad into other towns and places of Italy, and sometime goes him
self in person, as to Bologna, to Ferrara, and leaves some of his serpents
there, to infecte and poison that place.


Marforius. Woe be to the world therefore, since so cruel a plague, is sent
unto it: but wherefore do they this?


Pasquine. First, The cause of this diuellys^ decre.
for to kindle the hatred and wrath of all kings and Princes, against the
defenders of the Gospel, and moreover, that they being occupied in wars,
discords, and discentio^s, should not so much as think upon the restoring of
this decayed religion, not to call a general Council, and they in the mean
time, should live in pleasures and stand to behold this tragedy, and enjoy
the fruit of other men's harms, yet rejoice they never a whitte, of this new
war of Germany, doubting least it should be turned altogyther upon their
necks.


Marforius. Oh what a wonderful blindness of men is this, that such as are
the causers of so many evils, of so great wars, and of so manyfold errors,
men cease not yet, to call most holy, most blessed, and most reverend, and to
think their ways to be so good and holy, to the which things God send
redress, as right needful, for the souls of such sheepishe fools as will
believe such manner of people. But say on the rest.


Pasquine. Al these things were written in their Authentic Authorities, for a
pretty Ganimedes called them all to supper, and so the Council brake up. And
my good Angel, said to me: Come with me.


Marforius. Whether led he thee? to the Queere of Angels?


Pasquine. No, The Order or Queere of the Angels.
for he told me he had business to do, and therefore it behooved him to make
haste, and go out of this heaven, but so as we went together, he talked to me
of them.


Marforius. How are they placed? what be their names?


Pasquine. He told me that there is so great a confusion of their names, that
with much a do can their offices be rehearsed, yet the best he could, he told
me, and these were their names, Penitentiaries, Procuratours, The (...) orders
of the Popes Aungelles.
Abbreuiatours, Auditors, Prothonotaries, Chamberlaines, Suffraganes, Abbots,
and Cardinals, even as a man would say Angels, Archangels, Thrones,
Dominations, Principates, Uertues, Powers, Cherubines, and Seraphines. Thus
stands this heaven my Marforius, as thou have heard, which when I had
understood, I came my way following my guide.


Marforius. Thou haste told me nothing of Christ, Christ is not in the
council.
saw thou him there in the council among those Saints?


Pasquine. I saw him not, but as I came out afterward, I saw before the
Palace a little child that played with certain other children there, Christ
goes to play like a child.
of whom, when I had asked, it was told me that it was Christ, who fell to
playing, and therefore came not to the Council, for his mother had the whole
charge of all things.


Marforius. Why then is Christ always a child in this heaven?


Pasquine. Yea always.


Marforius. Saw thou any other thing there?


Pasquine. As I went from that place, going for to see the rest, I found only
a great void market place, The marcha^ dises of the Popes store houses.
whereas were above.vj. hundred storehouses, or barnes, as great as those that
Joseph builded in Egypt.


Marforius. What was there in them?


Pasquine. Some of them were full, but not with corn, but of Wax, some full of
Copes and vestments, some with chains, some full of little broken pieces of
Gold and Silver, some other of those store houses, were empty, and upon the
doors of these empty houses, was set a little writing, that said: The
storehouses of Germany, and of England: and they were altogether empty, for
it was now a great while, since any thing was brought into them, and that which
was wont to be there, was all spente in alms upon the Nuns of Pozzo Bianco,
God grant they be never better stored.
and Strada Iulia, and other places, but most of all upon the marring (I would
say marrying) of pore boys. And while I was there, Pasquiue means that our
Peter pe^s and other our proffits the pope had hens were spent upon the
mayntena^ce of where is and bardasses in Rome
lo, there comes forth the old man, (that would not open the door unto me)
with his great rusty keys in his hand, and his great evil favored myter on
his head.


Marforius. What said he to thee, I pray thee heartily?


Pasquine. He saw me not, nor he spoke not to me, for he was busy about other
things.


Marforius. What did he?


Pasquine. He went as one all full of sorrow, and heaviness, viewing those
storehouses, and other places of the palace, and he saw in many places that
the walls gaped for the riftes they had, the foundations were so decayed and
ruinous, that all the whole building looked as though it would shortly fall.
The Popes keys are the keys of the storehouses.



Marforius. I thought first, y^ those keys had been the power and authority
to ass^^le and condemn, but as far as I could perceive, they were the keys
of y^ store houses, but wherefore was he so full of heaviness?


Pasquine. Wherefore? think thou it a question to ask wherefore? he saw the
store houses empty, and saw no hope how to fill them, he saw y^ building almost
falling, and saw no hope how to repair it, Gods word must destroy the Popes
heaven.
he saw that not only Germany went about (all that it might) to overthrow
this his heaven, but almost all Italy had laid hand on the sword that must
destroy it, the which sword issues forth of the mouth of the son of Man,
Apoc. 1.
as the Revelation shows. But when I saw the buylding, in so many places
look as it would fall, I determined not to tarry any longer there, and by
the same way that I came, I returned back, Pasquine goes out of the Popes
heaven and goes up to Gods heaven.
running away from this heaven, as fast as I could, for fear it should fall
upon me, having yet always my guide with me. And when we came to the place
where our Chariot was left, I gate up into it, and so we take our way toward
Gods heaven, and mounting upward, mine Angel told me, that he that will go
into the true heaven, must have his mind pure, and lifted up, where al things
are unspotted and full of all cleanenesse, and altogether contrary to the
first heaven. And being now passed the sphere of the Moon, A wonderful
strange sight
as we came to that of Mercury, we found a number of souls tormented in
sundry sorts, amongs which was one, that was tied between two Posts, with a
cord made fast about his middle, so that he hong, and could touch no
ground: he had upon his head two great hearts horns, and between the horns
was fastened a linne^ cloth, after the manner of a sail, and at his feet hong
a great pursse full of crowns, and so went this ghost continually whirling
about, for as any wind blew, it stroke in the sail, that was between the
horns, and turned him with his feet upward, and as the wind ceased,
Pasquine sets forth the punishment of the Neuters.
the contrepoise of the Pursse turned him with his feet down again, and so
the pore wretch was still whirled about, and one while was his head and another
time his heels turned up on high to heaven.


Marforius. Did thou know who that was?


Pasquine. I knew him not, but mine Angel told me, that it was Erasmus of
Roterodam.


Marforius. Alas what is this thou tellest me? and why was he that was so
learned, and so honest a man, in this miserable case?


Pasquin. The hearts horns signify his fearfulness, and the Pursse his
covetousness, which two things were so much in him, that the one while the
one, an other while the other, made him bow, now this way, now that way, so
that it could not be discerned whether he drew nearest to Gods heaven, or to
the Popes heaven, and therefore is he placed in the mids between them both.


Marforius. In very deed no man must think to hold one foot in heaven and
another in earth. Neutralitte must be vtte^^ly avoided.



Pasquine. O if it were Gods will, I would this thing were known beneath in the
earth, that so many might not go into that place, where the pains are much
greater, than any man thinks for.


Marforius. Thou say that there were many other: who were those?


Pasquine. The most part were preachers, Weather^ cocks and turncotes are not
to be believed.
that knowing the truth gave all laud and praise to God by Jesus Christ, and
al blame and confusion to men, and afterward, at a sudden, for fear of the
Inquisitour, they preached of ear confession, of Purgatory, of the false
authority of the Pope, and of a thousand other Heresies and deceiptes to
their pore hearers.


Marforius. And how would thou have them do?


Pasquine. I would rather have them suffer banishement from their country,
imprisonment, or shed their blood, to maintain y^ honor of Christ against
Antichrist, Certain Italians true christians.
as of our country men, Augustine, Maynard, Benardine, Oclime of Siena, Julius
of Myllaine, Peter Martyr the Florentine, Paulus Lazisius of Verona, Peter of
Cittadella, Baldus of Cherso, and infinite other, as well Frenchmen and
Flemings, as Dutchmen and Spaniards also have done.


Marforius. I have heard say, that there are such in France as will hold
with the Hare and run with the Hounde.


Pasquine. It is true, and I know one of them, that is a man of great name,
upon whom I fear, Hebr. 6.
that the fearful sentence, that Paul writes to the Hebrews, will one day
fall, That such as having once known and received the truth, have afterward
forsaken it, who says he, it is not possible that they should repent, nor
enjoy the kingdom of God, and so do they offend against the holy ghost, which
sin shall never be forgiven as Christ affirms.


Marforius. May he be named who he is?


Pasquine. Why would thou have me be affeard to name him, who is not
affeard to do such injury to my Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, and his holy
church? he is called Peter de Charles, Peter de Charles a wether cock.
he is a Piccarde borne, and has played many lewd parts, in Geneua, and in
Losanna. He has always been very inconstant, an evil speaker, furious in all
his preachings, that one while has defended one part, an other while an other
part, and at an other time neither of them both, one that has sought to
corrupt the Churches every where, and because he could not do as he would
among the^ Svvychers, he ran to Mets, Farellus a true preacher
(where he heard that good man Farellus a sincere preacher, had preached
Christ) to take away from thence the wholesome seed of Gods word, before it
should take root in the hearts of those of the City, but let them take good
heed what they do, Number. 22.
lest they bring upon the^ the curse of God, as Balaam did, who was hiered for
to curse.


Mar. Now I pray thee, let us leave these Ribaldes, knaves, and thieves, wicked
and stinking Antichrists, for I can not abide any longer to hear them to be
spoken of, and follow on thy voyage.


Pasquine. Passing the Sphere of Mercury, The heavenly harmony.
we were carried up higher through other spheres. And there I began more clearly
to see the marvelous workmanship of the circles and bodies celestial, and to
taste with mine ears the harmony and most pleasant concordaunce, that is
caused by the moving of those circles, the which concordaunce Plato affirmed,
and Aristotle denied, because he believed rather his corporal senses, Plato and
Aristotle differs in opinion.
than the capacity of the ymagination, and the diligent working of the mind,
the which while I considered, there came into my mind a very sincere and
profounde cogitation and thinking of God, as it behooves such to have that
search these places, even as mine Aungel (at my first ascending up thither) had
told me, and being so occupied in beholding the variety, beauty and
sweetness of those things, (almost before I was ware thereof,) I saw that I
had passed all the planets, and was come to the firmament, whereas there
begone to appear things much more marvelous.


Marforius. I am also, of this opinion, taking mine argument from this visible
heaven, that those things are much more beautiful and marvelous, that are
furthest off from the sense of seeing, because that they do most nearest
approach to things that are true and heavenly. Christen philosophy.



Pasquine. Thou say well Marforius, and I do not think that this is the
last or least part of Christian Philosophy and divinity, that is to say, to
seek and search out by the things that are creat and subject to our senses,
the great goodness, power and wisdom of god, and therefore to praise, and
magnify the maker thereof. And therefore it is, that certain foolish and
gross Friars, which understand not the working and heavenly cunning of God in all his things (but attend rather to feed their belly, than their mind) can
not love or have God in any admiration. The way to know God Psalm. 19.
For by the things created in this world, do men come to the knowledge of God,
even as Christ teaches us. And David also says, That the heavens declare the
glory of God, and the firmament shows forth his handy works. And whereby
can thou better know God, whether by a stone set upon an altar that ca^
neither speak, nor move, nor be profitable for any purpose, or else by ye
order of al things created? The variety of Gods works declare his great power.
Behold therefore among the Elements, first does ye earth show forth her self
with her herbs, flowers, fruits, sweet savors, beasts of so many sorts, so
many sundry regio^s, and the natures, and custo^es of men so diverse, then the
main Sea spread about the earth, and within the land also, for our great
commodity, with so great diversity of Fishes: then if thou consider the
nature of the air and of the fire, and also of the mouinges of the planets,
and most especially of the Sun, and of the Moon, so well ordained for the
commodities and needful service of man. If thou way all things diligently,
thou shall feel a meruellous delectation and singular pleasure. For the
consideration and beholding of nature, is a feeding to y^ mind.


Marforius. I believe in deed, that through the consideration hereof, man may
approach nerer to God, but yet for all that say they, The P^pe would have his
dead Images to be our lively scholemasters.
that the stone nor the Image is not to be considered, but that thing, which
the stone or Image signifies.


Pasquine. If thou be of that opinion, wherefore do thou not, when thou
will have the Image of Peter, set before thee, some holy Pastor, that may in
conditions, life, and doctrine, be like unto him, rather than a stone, which
can not instruct thee in any heavenly knowledge, nor can not so much as
speak? And even so, when thou will have the Image of the Uirgin Mary, why
do thou not rather behold some holy young virgin that most may be like her,
rather than a stone wrought by some whoremonger or adulterer, made often times
to the likeness of his harlot?


Marforius. Thou say truth, The dead picture of the vergin Marie lively
counterfeited after a Popes whore.
know thou that picture of our Lady, which stands over the door of
Cardynall Farnese his chamber, where as sometime Pope Alexander Borgias dwelled?


Pasquine. Yea.


Marforius. That same is the natural and lively cou^terfaited picture, of yc
sister of Alexander Farnese, which late was Pope, Paul the third, for she was
Pope Alexanders co^cubine, and she by her honorable means, caused Alexanders
Farnese her brother, to be made a Cardinal, who since was Pope, for the
greater plague to the world.


Pasquin. What think thou by this therefore?


Marforius. Mary stark naught. But where shall a man find either such a
Bishop or such a Uirgin as thou speak of?


Pasquin. Where? even where the gospel flourishes, where Christ does bestow
his heavenly treasures in these our days, as in Svvycherland, Christian
Regions.
in Sauoy, and in Germany, albeit there want none in Italy, and in France,
for all that they be oppressed by the Popes tirannie. And I say unto t^ee, that
there are in these days, through the great goodness of God, both women and
men, full of holiness, and of the knoweledge of the truth.


Marforius. God for his great mercy be praised for it, that gives so great
gifts, and so great light to this our time. But if thou think good, follow on
thy voyage.


Pasquine. When we had passed the firmament, Apoc. 4.
we came to the sky of Ise, called the Cristall sky, not because that there
is any Ise there, but because the pureness of it, is like unto most pure Ise,
or of most antique Cristall, and much more also, from thence, we went up to
the highest heaven, and there for the brightness of the great light) we were
feign to stay a while, that our eyes might begin a little to be enured to abide
it, as he does that is brought forth upon a sudden out of the darkness into
the sun shine, and so having a little while acquaynted our eyes with that
brightness, we began to approach the City of the Lord. The description of
the true Heaven.
I call it a City Marforius, for that I know not by what other name to call
it, for it was rather a whole country, shyning with so great majesty, that I
my self am not able with thought, much less with tongue, to express it unto
thee.


Marforius. Tell me yet, as much as thou can express of it.


Pasquine. Haste thou ever read the Apocalipse?


Marforius* Yea, but I understand it not.


Pasquine. Whereas John speaks of the City of God, he says, That in the
mids of the throne sits God, Apoc. 5.
and the Lamb, having seven seals, that is to say, all power, and dominion
over all things that are in heaven and in earth, for in the number of seven,
is contained the infinite and perfect number. About the throne, are infinite
numbers of Saints, of all nations, and of all tongues, who singing continually
to the most highest, make an harmony of such sweetness, as can not be told.


Marforius. What sing they? The song of true saints.



Pasquine. Alleluya, to God only, and everlasting, the God of Hosts, great
and marvelous, who has wrought mercy on the world by the blood of the Lamb
Christ.


Marforius. Did they sing all this song?


Pasquine. Yea al Marforius, and him only did they all behold, he only is
King, and the ruler of his fathers Kingdom, the advocate and defendour of all
miserable wretches, even Jesus Christ.


Marforius. Were there here, no several Queeres or orders, as in the other
heaven?


Pasquin. No, 1. Peter. 4.
for here is no difference of persons, for as much as I could perceive, there
was a certain equality among them all, Equality among the true Saints.
without any envy, and most aptyly ^ente to perpetual continuance of that
kingdom. This one thing saw I also beside the rest, y^ the Lamb held his
Testament sealed with his own blood, Apoc. 5.
in the which, all the Saints were written as heirs alyke, neither was there
any one among them that desired to be greatter than the rest, but all with one
voice, song laud and glory to God only, and to the Lamb that was offered up.


Marforius. And was there none of those things here in this heaven, Christ is
the way and the gate to Heaven.
that was in the other heaven?


Pasquine. None at all.


Marforius. And is not then, Saint Peter porter there?


Pasquin. This heaven has none other gate but Christ, John. 10.
who is the way, John. 14.
the gate, y^ truth, and the true life, there is here no manner danger, but
peace, sure and everlasting. There Michaell, Gabriel, the Cherubi^es and
Scraphines, are of an other manner of fashion, than here beneath with us they
are accounted, or painted. If thou saw these things, thou would wonder at
the folly of men, Dionis^us
and at the dreams they make of them, and especially of Denis the Areopagite,
Areopagita.
a d^uisour of foolish things, that he never saw nor know. God who is even
the same that we call father, is covered with a certain light, which no man
may attain unto, 1. Tim. 6.
even as it were with a garment. From hence are the ministers of the God of
Sabbath (which are spirits and powers) sent forth, for the salvation of his
Church, nor it is not possible to make any distinction in their Orders and
degrees, neither with place, nor with name. For God only can make distinction
of them, when he sends them, where it pleases him, for they al are as the
breath of Gods mouth, all are of fire, all are flying and winged, for the great
desire they have to obey God, upon whom only they are bent, and whose will
only they do most fervently desire to do. And in fine, here are all things
one, and one all things.


Marforius. And is there never a Queen there? The Queen of Heaven.



Pasquine. One I saw clothed in that garment, that the Psalm speaks of. My
heart has indyted a good matter. Psalm. 45.
Her espouse was Christ, and I took her to have been the virgin Mary, The
Queen of Heaven i^ the Church and not the virgin Mary.
but mine Aungel told me, that it was the Church.


Marforius. Why then, the virgin Mary bears no rule in heaven?


Pasquine. No but she for her part, and after her manner, adourneth and
garnisheth the body of the espouse.


Marforius. Those things therefore that are said of our Lady in the Prime and
hours, and other service of hirs, do rather appertain to the Church, than to
the virgin Mary.


Pasquine. That do I well know, for I have seen it is so.


Marforius. But how comes it to pass, that this Queen, y^ is the espouse of
Christ, is so little known and esteemed among men?


Pasquine. Because the Popes have advanced them selves above her, Popes have
usurped the authority of the Church.
and have usurped unto them selves her authority, and made laws after their
^wne devises, without having any regard unto her. And because the things
should not be applied unto them, which the holy scripture speaks of the
Church, therefore have they thrust into the place of the Church, the virgin
Marye, and have attributed all things unto her, and have called her Queen and
Empress of heaven, and our Advocate, so that y^ name of the true Queen is
utterly abolished and lost.


Marforius. Do thou remember what this Queens apparel was.


Pasquine. I remember it well, The Queen's apparel.
she had the whole show of a most chaste Matrone, and albeit she consist of
diverse members, 1. Cor. 12.
they are notwithstanding with so great proportion joined to their head
Christ, that nothing can be more agreeable. And this Queen from day to day was
better garnished. And albeit the handfasting have been long ^ithens made, yet
is the marriage day looked for to be at the last day, in the which all men must
rise again.


Marforius. Truly, it is a marvelous matter, Of marriage.
that Priests do so much despise marriage, seeing that Christ will fynishe his
kingdom with the marriage of his Church.


Pasquine. And I marvel much at it, but I fear they be no Christans, albeit
they have the name, for they dispyse the example of christ, unto ye which Paul
also exhorts us saying. Ephe. 5.
Ye husbands love your wives, as Christ loved his Church.


Marforius. Whereof comes it therefore, that we do not content our selves with
christ only? Io. 1. and 3. and 15.



Pasquine. Because the world is at that point, that it is always contrary to
Christ, for every beast sets more by straw, Iac. 4.
than by gold.


Marforius. Oh I would it were Gods will, The world contrary to Christ.
that our Country of Italy might once have some understanding, and not be so
without knowledge as it is, then would it not suffer so many superstitions as
it does, nor peradventure should feel so many wars.


Pasquine. Fear thou not, it is not altogether without knoweledge. The Lord
has reserved seven thousand men, 3. Reg. 19.
that have not bovved their knee to Baal. Romans 11.



Marforius. And does Christ then rule and govern al things, and gives he no
authority or charge to his Saints?


Pasquine. He does all things him self, he only prepares the place for his
Saints, John. 14.
they ^e at rest, The saints be at rest.
without busying them selves in any of those things, that are done here
beneath. And they are all of one mind, that Christ be praised, and that he
reign in all things. So says the virgin, Ap. 4. et. 7.
Mary so says Saint Peter, so do the Martyrs, and all the rest. And in the
base or lower part of the divine Majesty, I saw written. I WILL NOT GIVE MY
GLORY TO AN OTHER.


Marforius. Was therein that Esaias. 42.
place no diversity of garments? The wedding garment.



Pasquine. No dyuersity at all, Esaias. 61.
for all had on the wedding garment, the which out of faith, Mat. 22.
is changed into perfect Charity, the which here beneath among us can not be
done.


Marforius. And does not this worldly governance of things come from the true
Saints?


Pasquine. No I tell thee.


Marforius. Know thou whence it commneth.


Pasquine. Yea, I know, it comes from unclean spirits, that with gay
glorious titles deceive men Know thou not that the Lord said in the
Gospel, Antichrist.
that Antichrist with miracles should destroy the faith? 2 Thessalonians. 2.
and that by Gods sufferance, that those which believe not the truth, should
be confirmed in unbelief. Know thou not, 3. Reg. 22.
that a spirit departed once from the presence of God, 2. Para. 18.
and swear to become the spirit of lies, in the mouths of all the Prophets
of Achab? 2. Cor. 11.
And moreover, it is a thing most certain, that Satan can transform him
self into an Angel of light. And since there are so many Legerdemaynes, and we
so easily drawn to all false Religion, it is no marvel, if so many fond
dreams be received as truth. And do thou think that our master Christ and
his Disciples, Watchwords given in the Scripture.
have without cause, so oftentimes (foreseing these things) cried unto us? Take heed, bevvare, look well to your selves, consider. 1 Thessalonians. 5.
Try all things, and keep that which is good. 1. Ioh. 4.
Try the spirirs, whether they be of God or no? How many times have these
shauelings told thee, Demaundes of our Lady.
that the virgin Mary has appeared, and demanded of foolyshe men, that
Churches and monasteryes should be builded by them for her? Think thou,
that it is to be believed, that this most modest handmayd of the Lord, that
being of such a singular humility, and has the chiefest place in the body of
the Church, which is Christ's espouse, and that intierly loves her espouse,
has at any time desired that, which she knows does belong to her only
espouse? Wherefore has she not when she so appeared, demanded that the gospel
should be prcached? that the Lords vineyarde should be well looked unto? that
the Wolves should not be made she pheardes, nor such dogs as can not ^arke? nay
rather these mates will needs have her to favor and nourish both wolnes and
swyne.


Marforius. The more thou talkest to me Pasquine, the more is the truth opened
unto me, would god, Marforius wishes Pasquine to be Pope.
y^ thou were Pope once, that thou might cause all these things to be openly
showed to the whole world, which are in deed no less true, than necessary to
be known.


Pasquine. Thou wishest me a ^ery good turn Marforius, in that thou would
have me become Antichrist. If I were Pope, I should be even as the rest were,
for the Papacye would make me to be as it is, and I should not make it be as I
say. And beside that thou know, that they can not abide me.


Marforius. I wonder much that in so great a scarcity of Gods work, the people
do not learn of thee, the way to know God.


Pasquine. Fear not, for there are so many spiritual schools, The schools of
Pasquine.
both of men and women, (albeit they be not seen abroad) that even very
shortly thou shall see so many true gospellers come abroad, that the world
shall much wonder whence they come.


Marforius. We will therefore call thee master, sith thou have so many
Christian schools. Christ the only Master.



Pasquine. The master of al is christ only, whose doctrine this is that I
teach. But to knitte up our communication, I say unto thee br^e^^y, Mat. 23.
that Christ is the head of all, and the espouse of the Church. Coloss. 1.
And the Church is made of many and diverse members, Ephe. 1. et. 4.
joined together in one, to the which, by the espouse only, is the way made
unto the father. There is no manner of ambition, nor desire of the vain and
(...) things here on earth, al give the^ selves wholly to praise god, Apoc. 5.
and 7.
through Jesus Christ for ever and ever Amen. To him is their only desire that
all glory praise and honor be attributed and given, none seeks there for his
own things, but for the Bridegroom, they seem al to have forgotten this
world, to the which they are dead, and live only to one God, Christ only
governor.
and all things there are only governed by Christ, who only prays for us,
who makes continual intercession for us, whose only Sacrifice is always
before his Father for us, who sends daily his holy Spirit to bys elect,
and by it he governs his Church, he only is King and Lord, the beginning
and end, the head of all the Saints, of all godliness, Mat. 8.
of all sincerity, and of all true Religion, he is the light of the world, Io.
14.
for he sees all things, none can make him believe one thing for an other, for
he is the truth it self, without him if thou walk, thou go out of the way,
for he is the way, by him do all things stand and fall, for he is the life of
all things, for his sake only does the father hear us, Mat. 7.
for as much as all that we ask for his sake, and in his name, he graun^^th it
us, that which we ask through him, we are sure to have, for the father has
promised for his sake, who can not lie. He has not promised ought to such as
ask in the name of any other, nay he is rather angry with them that think
that any Saint, is more merciful then Christ, or better, or more careful over
us, or more acceptable to the father. For if we will have an advocate, 1. Io. 2.
who is more merciful, better, or more acceptable to y^ father tha^ Christ.


Marforius. I se that all the fault proceeds hereof, Heavenly things must not
be measured according to man's brain.
in that we measure heavenly things according to our own brain. And therefore
do we think that the Virgin Mary is more merciful than Christ, whom we
imagine to be some cruel T^raunt and fierce Judge, (an error grown of the
diversity in nature between man and woman, because we see, that Women are
more pitiefull than men. But what a devilish madness was that, to take away
the government from Christ, and give it to her? Luc. ii.
as though Christ who is the wisdom of the Father, doted or could not tell
what he had to do.


Pasquine. It pleases me much Marforius, that of a crafty Popish Lawier, A
marvelous yea almost a miraculous change.
thou art become a good and plain Gospeller.


Marforius. I thank thee for it, good Pasquine, nay, rather Christ, who has
by thy means delivered me out of so great Ignorance. And now at this time
have thou told me many things more, than the other time thou did. Is
there any thing behind to be said, of other matters.


Pasquine. No, as touching heaven, but if thou have leisure to hear me, I will
declare unto thee, the voyage I made into Hell. The ^^iage to Hell.



Marforius. What, and have thou also gone that voyage?


Pasquine. It is but eight days past, since I was there.


Marforius. I would leave all other bu^nesse to hear thee tell of that, for I
was not aware, that thou had been there, and I would feign understand the
truth of things done in those parts.


Pasquine. I will show thee, of hell and of Purgatory, things no less
marvelous, Pasquine a far travailed man.
than true and Godly.


Marforius. Begin therefore I pray thee heartily, for me seems each hour
a year til I hear thee.


Pasquine. Thou know, that this other time that we talked together of the
voyage into heaven, I told thee, that the Angel at his departing promised
me, that if at any time, I would make a voyage into hell, he would bear me
company.


Marforius. I remember it well. Pasquine a Curious searcher of things.



Pasquine. Being therefore desirous to vnstande what possibly might ^e known
of heaven, of the earth, and of the bottomless places, a few days fithens
gate me unto the cave, that in the beginning I told thee of, and there,
without making any more a do, said my prayers, and prayed the Aungel that he
would come, he came, I then humblye besought him, that he would keep his
promise, that he made me, that is to say, to bring me to see the lower parts:
He said, Pasquine goes to s^e hell.
with a good will, and bad me follow him, and so took on his way, and I after
him. And we were no sooner departed, but I know not how, even in a sudden
with more speed than I can tell thee the tale, we came to a marvelous great
gate, and a way wonderful large and broad, and there the Angel bid me, be
of good courage, and fear nothing that I should see or hear, declaring unto
me, that that was Hell gate.


Marforius. I hear thee begin much otherwise, than that I have sometime
read of in diverse Authors, thou did not first sacrifice sheep, and
black bullockes, thou did not offer up a black Lamb to the mother of the
Furies, nor the baraine Cow to the Lady Proserpina, thou soughtest not for the
branch of Gold. The way to Hell is sone found out.
No thou gave not thy self, so much as a little holy water, nor markedst thy
self with the sign of the cross, and could thou so sone find the gate,
and then thou say, that it is so great, and the way so broad and large,
where as it seems that other say the contrary. I pray thee tell me the very
truth of all things, that reporting the same again to other, I be not laughed
to scorn for my labor.


Pasquine. If I have begone far otherwise than the old Authors speak of, I
have so done, to tell thee, the matter as it is, and not to feed thee with
fables and lies, for I must not work any of those superstitious ceremonies,
that thou toldest of, for albeit that all such as do them, do find the way,
(for it is an easy matter to go to Hell, as every man knows, as Virgil
says. Facilis descensus Auerni,) that I have then so lightly found the gate,
and said that it is great, because thou may be sure that it is so, hearke^
what Christ says. Math. 7.
Enter ye in at the narrovve gate, for vvyde is the gate and broad is the way
that leads to destruction, and many enter in thereat.


Marforius. Thou have satisfied me in this point, but tell me, where foundest
thou the gate, at the lake Auernus?


Pasquine. I found it where it is, it is enough for thee to know, that he
that goes thither shall find it without any business.


Marforius. Follow on therefore the rest, for I am with child till I know it.


Pasquine. When we came unto this gate, I felt such a terrible fear and
horror (because of the things I saw and heard) enter into my breast, that I
could not utter it, for even forthwith I felt mine ears to be stricken with
certain horrible and fearful outcryes, like unto those that he makes that
is under the hands of the hangma^, or that is beset with thieves or
murderers, or that is in a City that is put to the fire and sword, well I
wot, the hairs of my head stood upright, and I was even almost at the point
to have repented me, that I was so curious to know things, but that the
Angel, who was ware thereof, put me in good comfort remembering unto me,
Math. 16.
that Hell has no manner of power, over the elect children of God. Whereupon
taking good courage, I began with more heed to behold al things, The
description of Hell.
and I saw so great a rabble of Friars, and Priests, following the Nonnes and
the lay sisters, as are the Bees, that being driven by a sudden shower of
rain, do by swarms hasten them to their hiues, or as are the birds when they
take their flight over the sea. In fine, they were so many in number, that I
would never have believed, that there had been so many in the world And the
Angel seeing me marvel thereat, said unto me, let it not seem strange unto
thee, for hither come al they that be in the world, excepting such as either
forsake there coat, and old Customs also, or if they keep their coat still,
live no more in that Fryerish filthiness, because they are washed by the pure
word of the gospel, What and whom Pasquine saw in Hell.
there saw I also all the Ipocrites, (although the more part were Friars) all the covetous men, all the Sodomits, all persecutours of the Gospel, all those
that put their trust in pardons, and have foll^wed the Popes ways, and finally
all those that have had any trust or affiaunce of their salvation in any other
thing, than in Jesus Christ.


Marforius. How did thou know them?


Pasquine. All their sins were open and manifest, and they were seen
outwardely, as their garments are known here.


Marforius. Did thou not know any one of them?


Pasquine. I will not tell thee of any person perticulerly at this time, I will
show thee afterward in due place, where I saw them all, one by one, I have
now other matter to say to thee.


Marforius. Say on then.


Pasquine. After I had stand a while diligently beholding such as entered in,
I began afterward to consider and mark the gate: it was as thou have heard,
Hell gates never shut.
great and large, and stood day and night continually open.


Marforius. How comes it therefore to pass, that those that are in such a
miserable place, do not come out?


Pasquine. If thou had let me have made an end of my talk, y^ should have
h^ard, that it stands always open for them that will go in, Al may go into
hell that will, but none may come out.
and always shut for those y^ are already gone in: beside that, there are
certain waters, as thou shall hear hereafter, which take away al power to
return back.


Marforius. And how came thou then back again?


Pasquine. If thou stand still and hearken, thou shall understand altogyther.


Marforius. Of what stuff was y^ gate?


Pasquine. Amongst us there is no such manner of stuff, Of what stuff
belgates were made.
a thing it is that lasts for ever.


Marforius. Of what work was it made?


Pasquine. Neither of Dorique, nor Ionique, Corinthian, nor Rustique, nor of no
Compounde, but of a work Diabolique.


Marforius. Saw thou no notable thing in it?


Pasquine. I saw it full of arms, among which, there was one in the top of
the forefronte above all the rest, Caine the first that entered his father the
deuilles Kingdom. Caines and his successors bloody arms
and that was the arms of Cain, who was the first that entered in thereat.


Marforius. What arms were those of his?


Pasquine. Murder in a field red.


Marforius. Peradventure it was because, he was the first that did commit it,
and because that of Murder comes blood, which is read?


Pasquine. Thou understand the matter.


Marforius. The other arms whose were they?


Pasquine. It was well known, that there had been other arms very ancient,
but they were all taken away except those of Cain.


Marforius. Wherefore were they taken away?


Pasquine. To place there, the arms of Popes, as those that better deserved
the place, Popes arms triumphantly placed over Hell gate.
for it could not hold so many. So that thou might there have seen the
gate all con^red with great huge keys, set tw^ and two a Cross, with a Myter
between them, and under the Myter, the name of the Pope, and the year of our
Lord what time he entered: so that there was lest but a little void space,
wherein were certain letters, and underneath, so much space, as might hold one
arms, or very few more.


Marforius. What letters were those?


Pasquine. They were written in Caldey, I could not read them, because I was
then in this mortal body: but the Angel told me, that all those souls
that go thither, can read them, and the effect of them, The Inscription over
Hell gate.
is this, That that place is prepared for the vessels of Gods wrath, and that
each one that enters therein, Mat. 25.
spoyleth himself of all joy and gladness, and puts upon him all misery
and sorrow, for there is weeping and gnashing of teeth. Apo. 14.



Marforius. If there be so little room left, upon that gate, where shall the
arms of the other Popes be hanged, that shall come hereafter? Pasquine
prophecieth that there shall be but few popes more.



Pasquine. There must be but a certain number, so many as that their arms
may serve that room.


Marforius. I wyshe therefore that the room were very little, but are there y^
arms of al y^ Popes?


Pasquine. Of all, and they had already set up the furnyture to place therein
the arms of Pope Paul the third that sone after, When this book was written
Pope paul was looked for in Hell.
should make his entrance there.


Marforius. He that would therefore write of them, might there find a long
beade roll.


Pasquine. That might he better do in Hell, where they are all in propre person.


Marforius. Say on I pray thee, for I fear y^ wilt never come to an end. Hell
way less occupied than it was wont to be.



Pasquine. Then began I to consider the way, the which, for ought y^ I could
perceive, was sometime much more trodden than it is at this present, for a man
might see, even in some part of it, the grass grown up, I thought at y^
first beginning, that this had been caused by y^ springtime which then was at
hand, then remembering, that there was never no spring, I asked the Angel the
^ause thereof, who told me, that even as a man might have seen long agone the
people come from al parts of the world into this City for the Jubilee: with
the self same throng. The Pope and his people run hedlong to Hell.
and greater also, went they to Hell, sent thither by Popes, and among other,
these Popes them selves with their Iubilies, but sythens that prophecy was
fulfilled which says: That out of the North shall come a plague upon all the
dvvellers of the land, Iere. 1.
the grass has begone to grow up in this broad hie way.


Marforius. I am wondrous glad, that y^ art come to talk of this saying, for
I desire much to understand it of thee. These Priests of ours, understand,
that it thus signifies: That those nations of the North parts, are cause of
all evil, and heresy.


Pasquine. Those Priests of yours understand the scripture quite awrye, The
Popes pri^ts areigno^^unt and w^^st the Scripture.
and for the authority they have, they cause it to be declared after their own
fashion. But I say to thee, that this word, (Al evil,) is in the scripture as
much to say, as, That which is contrary to the Gospel, What this word all
Evil signifies in the scripture.
or to tell thee it more plainly, it signifies Antichriste, for even as by
the Gospel, Christ (which is al goodness) is given unto us, even so again it
must needs be, that all evil is his direct contrary. In the same
signification saint Paul said, that covetousness is the root of al evil, 1.
T^mo. 6. Coloss. 3.
for thou see that Antichrist which is all evil, has his roots so fastened
in Covetousness, and al his members also, that for this cause, many of them,
Covetousness causes the Scripture to be kept under
y^ know y^ truth of y^ gospel, either they hide it, or else with stand it,
because they will not loose their livings. For the self same cause also does
Antichrist with all his whole power seek to destroy it. This prophecy therefore,
was thus much to say, as: That from y^ North should blo^ a wind with so great
force, y^ it should take away from the Wolf his sheep skin, and make him to be
known as a Wolf, or to tell thee the same more plainly, that from those
parts, the Pope should be discovered for to be Antichrist. From the north the
pope is discovered to be Antichrist.



Marforius. I perceive that God has made thee to speak for my soul health,
I see, that thou say the truth.


Pasquine. Sythens therefore that he who took him self to be y^ shepeherde,
is discovered to be the Wolf, the sheep being affearde of his cruel look,
knowing him to be their enemy, Io. 10.
have fled away from him, and have followed the good and true shepeherd Jesus
Christ, Why the Popes paths grow grene.
who is the way, that leads to the sweet pastures. And this way therefore
that leads to perdition, begins to shoute out grass, for it is not any
more trodden but by the members of Antichrist, who albeit they be many, (as I
told thee a little before) yet are they few in respect of those, The Popes
folowers fall from him.
that sometime did follow him.


Marforius. I rest fully satisfied in this point. Now would I know, how the
walls were made, that compass in that place.


Pasquine. There are no manner of walls at all.


Marforius. What need is there then to have a gate? can not every one come in
and out that will?


Pasquine. Thou know that Venice, Venice.
has no walls and yet cannot every one come in and go out that will, albeit,
the strength of this place is contrary to others, for other are made, that none
should come in, and this is made, that none should go out, for as thou have
herd the entry is free to every man.


Marforius. Is y^ place compassed about with waters, as Venice is?


Pasquin. It is compassed about with waters, but not as Venice is, Venice
compassed with sal^ waters and hell with waters of fire.
for Venice is compassed with waters of the Sea, and this place is compassed
with waters of fire.


Marforius. How can this hang together? the water and the fire are direct
contraries, how is it possible that they should agree together?


Pasquine. How is it possible that souls, which can not feel nor be felt,
should burn in the fire, and that the bodies should abide in the fire, Great
contradiction in the Popes Doctrine.
and not be burned? and yet this happens in Hell. Even as we see, Luc. 16.
that Christ witnesses in the parable of the rich man and Lazarus the
beggar, saying: That the rich man was in Hell fire, and yet his body was not in
Hell, for men's bodies must remain in the earth until the day of Judgment,
after the which, the bodies shall go together with y^ souls into everlasting
fire. As may be seen in all the whole scripture, and in that place, where
Christ says: That thou cut away thy hand that offends thee, Math. 5.
for better shall it be for thee, that thou lack a membre, than that all the
whole body should be cast into Hell fire. The things of Hell are of an other
manner of sort, than those of this world, he that could tell how to make
these things, of this nature, knew also how to make those of an other nature:
so that thou must not marvel, if I told thee, that this place is compassed
with waters of fire.


Marforius. Are these waters so broad, as those of Venice?


Pasquine. These be not all of the^ together, but are divided into five great
dyches. The first whereof is called Lethe, The waters of Hell and their
significations.
which is as much to say as, The forgetting of goodness, the second
Phlegeton, that to say, desire of evil, the third Acheron, which is to say,
the utter forsaking of al gladness, the fourth Cocytus, that is to say
weeping, the fifth is Palus stigia, Charons boat.
which is to weete, Everlasting hate and misery.


Marforius. How do they pass, in Charons boat?


Pasquine. As I have told thee of the gate, even so I tell the of these waters,
for, to go thither, they pass without any business, but to return again, it
is not possible to pass them. Even as thou see, that it fares by the River
Danubius, Danubiu^.
and of many other waters that down the stream they sail wondrous easily,
but up against the stream, it is impossible. In fine, I tell thee, that to go
thither, there is no manner of let by the way, No stop nor stay in Hell way.
no, whether they have their penny to pay Charon for his ferye, nor whether
they have been buried or no, nor of none other thing.


Marforius. What a foolish devise was that of them, that thought that Charon
must be paid, The folishe opinion of Charon and his boat.
and therefore put a penny in the dead man's Mouth? And of these other, that
thought, that the soul could not pass over on the other side in an hundredth
years, unless the body were buried?


Pasquine. That was without comparison less harm, than that of our Priests,
who hereupon have founded a lying and dampnable Purgatory, and have made the
foolysh people believe, that not he that puts a single penny in the mouth of
the dead man, but who so ever puts not a great gubbe of money into their
pursses, Purgatory^ devised topic al men's pursses.
or leaves not to them good possessions, can not so sone be delivered from the
pains of that Purgatory of theirs.


Marforius. Oh thou can now tell me certain news of this purgatory, if it be
there thou must needs have seen it.


Pasquine. I will fully declare unto thee the truth, and that thou may the
better believe me, I will allege so many reasons, and authorities of y^
scripture, that thou shall be assured that it is as I shall tell thee. But
first I will rehearse unto thee, To hell is eue^ company going.
piece by piece, that little that yet remains for me to tell. We entered in at
that gate, and walked along by that broad way, being still among a great
multitude of people, that passed thitherward, and hearing still more and more,
those dolorous and lamentable outeryes, all those people went with great have,
being driven by their cruel destinye, and forthwith, were they all seuerallye
put to diverse punishments and torments, as afterward I shall show thee. But I
(that was not come thither, to suffer any of those punishments, but to learn
things, by the declaring whereof afterward, I might cause, that other should
not endure them) went on fair and softly, considering each things, and prying
in every corner, to see where Purgatory was. The description of Purgatory.
And I saw on the one side, a huge Lake, that with the lower end of it
touched the tormenting places where the dampened souls be, whereof when I had
much marvelled, I demanded the Angel what it might mean: he answered me,
that the Purgatory which the priests had made, began at the upper end of that
Lake, and reached unto those tormenting places, which were divided from
Purgatory, but with a thin wall. And when Neptune let drop his waters
(that before I told thee of) down into this place, this Lake was then made,
which for all that did not fill up all Purgatory, but that part which joined
to those tormenting places, remained set on fire, and at the same very time,
the fire took hold on each side of the wall, Purgatory quite consumed.
and burnt it quite, and so was it made all one place with Hell, and this part
that remains yet on fire, is for them that believe in Purgatory, and the other
that was quenched, altogether by Neptunes waters, is for them that believe not
in it.


Marforius. All that thou talkest, I hold as things true, yet notwithstanding,
if I should at any time prove unto other, the vanity and falshoode of this
deuyse, with other testimonies than thine own only, I pray thee to allege me
also those of the scripture, and together with them, all those reasons that not
long ago, thou saydest thou would bring forth.


Pasquine. I will with all my heart, stand still and give good ear.


Marforius. I will give good ear, say on hardly.


Pasquine. By the word of God, None other Purgatory but Christ's blood.
thou shall never find other Purgatory, than the blood of Jesus Christ,
through the which only, all sins are perfectly pardoned, and therefore do
they commit grievous sin, that say there is other Purgatory than this,
Hebr. ^. et. 9.
and it is a blasphemous and Diuelishe fondness, of them that believe it. And
that thou may know, how false this diuelishe devise is, I will first allege
certain places of the scripture that go against it, Places of the Scripture
to overthrow Purgatory.
in Saint Matthew, and Saint Mark, thus we read: He that believes and is
baptized, shall be ^aued, and he that believes not shall be dampened. Mat. 28.
By the which words thou may perceive, Mar. 16.
that salvation is given us by faith, and dampnation for lack of faith.
Therefore either we dye in faith, Who dies in faith is saved.
or without faith, if we dye in faith, we are saved, for it is written. He that
believes shall be saved. If we dye without faith, we are dampened, for it is
written. He that believes not shall be dampened. Besides this, John. 3.
Saint John says. So God loved the world that he gave his only begotten
Son, to the end that all that believe in him, should not perish, but have life
everlasting. For God has not sent his son into the world to condemn the
world, but that the world might be saved by him, he that believes in him
shall not be condemned, and he that believes not, is condemned already, because
he believes not in the name of the only Son of God. Thou see that the
father, has given us his son, to the end that he that believes in him,
should have everlasting life, and that everlasting life follows him that
believes. What think thou now, that this everlasting life is?


Marforius. I think it is heaven out of doubt.


Pasquine. Thou say well, but if the beleuer be judged to go to Purgatory,
what a heaven is this? do thou not see, how this is contrary to the word of
God? Moreover y^ word being saved by Christ, needs must it be that he which
believes, have a life without pain, and he that believes in him is not judged.
But if he went to Purgatory, he should be judged to go thither, the which can
not be to him that believes. For Saint Paul says, Romans 8.
that there is no condempnation to him that believes in Jesus Christ. And
Christ him self says. Verily, verily I say unto you, he that hears my
words, John. 5.
and believes on him that sent me, has everlasting life, and shall not come
unto dampnation, but is escaped from death to life. But if any man went into
Purgatory, see thou not, that he should not have everlasting life, that is to
say heaven, but y^ he should be condemned, and that he should not pass from
death to life, the which is clean contrary to Christ's own saying?


Marforius. What, this is not condempnation?


Pasquine. Nay, the traditions of these men say manifestlye, Traditions are
good trashe when they tread scripture under ^eete.
that the soul for every deadely sin is judged to abide seven years in
the fire of Purgatory, the which is a most horrible lie, for in all the holy
scripture is not found one only jot spoken of seven years, nor of no
such foolyshe brabling; nay rather is the contrary found in y^ whole
scripture, as in the Parable of the rych man and poor Lazarus: Luc. 16.
each of them dies, the one is buried in hell, and the other is carried into
Abraham's bosom, without touching any whit of the pains of Purgatory. And the
thief that was crucified with Christ, was never in Purgatory to do penance
for his sins, and yet Christ said unto him. This day shall thou be with me
in Paradise. Ioh. 16.
If there were any such false Purgatory, it must needs be, that some mention
must be made of it in these places of the scripture. But there is none other
purgation, than the blood of Christ, Ephe. 5.
the l^uer of regeneration, which is sufficiently shed upon us. But tell me,
this Purgatory, was it before the incarnation of Christ, A hard question.
or since only?


Marforius. In good faith, I can not answer thee, for if I say, since Christ
only, I should be brought to show, that Christ has been a cruel exactour,
and not a gentle Redemer, the which should be a most horrible blasphemy. And
if I say, that it was from the beginning of the world, I have no place at al
in the ancient scripture to prove it, Moses in his book Leuiticus. Has
described so many sacrifices, oblations, washings, purgings, for the sins of
the living: but he speaks not one jot of the dead, nor of this purgatory,
nay rather does he forbid the priests to stand and weep, and lament the
dead, as does also Saint Paul, to the Thessalonians. 1 Thessalonians. 4.



Pasquine. Therefore, is there no manner of certayntie of this Purgatory,
throughout all the Scripture, Purgatory is not found in the scripture.
for the Scripture is clean against it, as may be seen in this text of the
Apocalipse: Blessed are the dead that dye in the Lord: Therefore must it
needs be, Apoca. 14.
that whosoever dies, either dies in the Lord, or not, if he die in the
Lord, he must needs be by this testimony, Sophisterie brought in to maynteyne
Purgatory.
blessed, but if he dye not in the Lord, he must needs be accursed, for there
are but two ways.


Marforius. Distinguo, sic, Quantum ad poenam, nego, sed quantum ad culpa^,
concedo.


Pasquine. What meanest thou by this beggarly Sophistry.


Marforius. I mean that God pardons the offense, but not the punishment.


Pasquin. O what great folishnesse art thou in, and where find thou, God
forgiueth al or nothing.
that God pardons the one, without the other? The works of God are perfect,
he pardons all or else nothing, without mangling or cutting of his free gift,
as witnesses Ezechiell, where he says. What time soever a sinner will
repent him of his sins, ^zech. 18. et 33.
I will no more remember any of his iniquities says the Lord. And Saint
John says. 1. Io. 2.
If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to pardon us, and make us
clean from all wickedness, and if we walk in the light, even as he is
light, we have fellowship with him, and the blood of his son Jesus Christ
does cleanse us, from al sin, for he sits on the right hand of God,
making intercession for sins, and by one only oblation has he made perfect
for ever, those that are sanctifies. More over the Psalm says. Psalm. 32.
I have confessed my sin unto thee, and have not hidden mine
unrighteousness, I said I will knowledge mine offense, and accuse my self
unto the Lord, and thou have forgiven the wickedness of my sin. If
therefore the Lord forgive us all our sins, when we pray earnestly to him for
it, we can be no more troubled for them: for they are forgiven us for the
faythes sake, that we have in the death and passion of Jesus Christ, the which
is either perfect, or imperfect: Blasphemy against Jesus Christ.
If it be perfect, there needs none other thing to make it more perfect, but
to say that it is imperfect, is to blaspheme Jesus Christ, and his passion, as
do these monstrous soul Merchaunts, which will have them to make satisfaction
for their sins in the fire of Purgatory.


Marforius. David sinned, An objection of the papists
and his sins were forgiven concerning the offense, but not concerning the
punishment due for the offense, for he remained for all that bound to one of
those three plagues, that were offered unto him.


Pasquine. And I tell thee, that God either pardons all or else nothing, for
he that forgiueth the greater, will not stricke to forgive the lesser, it is a
more matter to forgive the offense, than the punishment. If therefore he forgive
y^ offense, To what end we are left in troubles.
he reserueth not the punishment. But to keep us under, here in this world,
and to exercise us in patience, and to make us know his mighty power, he
leaves us often times in troubles, so does he also those that have not
offended, as we see in Job, and Jeremy, and many others. For as Saint Paul
says, Romans 5.
Tribulation brings forth Patience, and patience brings forth proof,
proof brings forth hope, and hope is not confounded. And even so albeit God
had forgiven David, both the offense and the punishment, David an example of
patience.
yet would he bring him low, and try him, that the world might know, how
full of faith he was. The punishment therefore is not it, that purges our
sins, but faith, the which Saint Paul says, is the purging of sins. And
so if they will have any other purgatory, than the blood of Christ, Romans 3.
it is none other, but to make his passion of none effect, Hebr. 1.
and to say that his works are imperfect. This is plain, To affirm
purgatory is to deny Christ's blood.
that all the elect are members of Christ and if they be his members, it
follows, that his virtue, and the infinite merits of his passion be common
unto them, whereby they are assoyled from all punishment, Gala. 2.
and consequently from purgatory. And Saint John says. John. 1.
That they that believe in Christ, are the Sons of God, and heirs of the
inheritance that is given them by promise, and not by works. What need have
we therefore of this Purgatory to give us that inheritance? Oh Lord streatch
forth the arm of thy mighty power, and destroy and bring to naught these false
Prophets, Seducers, and Ipocrites, y^ deceive thy people, with Trentals, and
Quarentals, and other foolish inventions full of all covetousness. But to see
plainlye with thine eye, the uncertain hold that this Purgatory stands on
(albeit that which I have already alleged unto thee might suffice thee) hear
what Salamon says. If the tree fall tovvard the South, Eccl. 11.
or tovvard the North, where he falls, there it abides. To fall toward the
South is to dye in faith, and toward the North without faith, he therefore
that dies in faith, has everlasting life, and he that dies without faith
has dampnation, here is no manner of mean or middle place, where to fall
between these two.


Marforius. Why, has this Purgatory in very deed no manner of foundation in the
Scripture?


Pasquine. None at a^.


Marforius. Where have they found it then?


Pasquine. The iauent^urs of purgatory.
Among the blind beggars of Hildibrand the Sorcerer, afterward called Gregory
the seventh, glosing upon that place of Virgil. Centum erant annos, or else in
Plato, in his Timeo, or else in Macrobius, in the dream of Scipio, or else
among the false miracles, visions and illusions wrought by Satan, transforming
him self into an angel of light. 2. Cor. 11.
For albeit all true Angels of heaven should tell us any other thing, Gala. 1.
then y^ which is in y^ word of god, The Apostles never heard of purgatory.
let him be accursed. But if there were such a Purgatory, how much were the
Apostles worthy to be blamed, that have not spoken one word thereof? Saint
Peter writes fully to the instruction of the Churches, yet makes he no manner
mention of the dead. Saint James, who commends so much good works, makes
no mention of Masses, nor of offeringes for the souls of the dead. Saint John
in his Epistles does highly set forth charity, and yet speaks not a word of
Charity for the dead. But what shall we say of the great diligence of Saint
Paul in teaching the Romans, faith and good works? and yet teaches he none
other purging of sins, Hebr. 9.
but by the blood of Christ. Read his epistles to the Corinthians, 2. Cor. 9.
thou shalt find, that he makes collections, requests, and recommendations,
for the poor brethren, that are in captivity and need, so that he says, he
has taken away from the other Churches to send to the poor at Jerusalem,
and yet makes he no manner of collection or other thing for y^ dead.
Purgatory pence how they are bestowed.
As these thieves do all day long whereby they are become rycher then Craesus,
and fall to Iolye good chere, with whores and bawdes, and the poor dye for
hunger. vvoe be to you Scribes and Pharisees, Ipocrites, Math. 15.
that lay a side the commandment of God, (which is to help the poor), for
your cursed traditions of Purgatory the which has swalowed up almost all the
goods of the world. Purgatory never satisfied.
It is that sack whereof the Prophet speaks, that is never full, and that
horse-leach (whereof Salomo^ says) that has two daughters that cry: Bring
hither bring hither. Prouer. 30
So say these thieves bring hither for y^ souls of your dead friends and
parents. Priests cry bring bring.
Forget not the poor that be dead, that cry unto you Miseremini. Oh
slanderous and traiterous falsifiers, what a presumptuous boldness is this
of you, to maintain such lies, and deceive the people? this is that fire y^
never cries hoa. If you should give all the whole world to these false
thieves, they would never say hoa: for they are the very insatiable Hell it
self.


Marforius. How understand thou that place of Saint Matthew y^ says. Agree
with thine adversary quickly while thou art on the way with him, Mat. 5.
that he give thee not to the Judge, and the Judge give thee unto the hands of
the Minister, and thou be cast in prison, verily, I say unto thee, that thou
shall not come out from thence until thou have paid eue^ to the vttermoste
farthing?


Pasquine. Do you find any purgatory in this speaking?


Marforius. I will not affirm it, Sophistical reasons f^r proof of
purgatory.
having heard of thee so many probable reasons to the contrary, but I will
tell thee, how the Sophisters prove the same upon this text, they say that
our adversary is sin, who gyuethe us unto the Judge, which is God, and he
puts us in prison which is purgatory, out of the which we shall not come,
until we have made full satisfaction, suffering the fire of it. The devil the
chief doctor to teach purgatory.



Pasquine. It was the devil, that in this sort did interpret, these words,
and his ministers seek to maynteyne the same interpretacion. But if thou will
have the true exposition of these words, thou must take good heed whereof
Christ speaks: there he speaks, of leaving of hatred, and that a man ought
to reconcile him self to his neighbor, the which who so does not, is in
danger to take the overthrow, and to be cast into Prison, from whence he shall
not come out, until he have made full satisfaction, and the same does Saint
Luke confirm saying. Luc. 12.
While thou go with thine adversary to the ruler, as thou art in the way,
give diligence that thou may be delivered from him. He says plainly, unto
to the Ruler, before whom men go to plead their causes, and to receive
justice. Thus does Chrysostom and Theophilacte understand that place, and
Ambrose which says, The opinions of diverse ancient doctors concerning
purgatory.
when thou go to the Magistrate. And Hillarie also in his Cannones where he
says. That in this place it must be understand, of the reconciliation, and
says not, of the satisfaction for sins in Purgatory. Thou see therefore,
that these interpretations of thine can not stand with the meaning of the
Scripture, for it is rather a sense cu^ningly wrested, which (as Saint Jerome
says) is not good to prove the rules or grounds of our faith.


Marforius. There are also other textes, with y^ which, they prove Purgatory.


Pasquine. What be those?


Marforius. That of Saint Matthew, where Christ says. That the kingdom of
heaven is like unto a King, Math. 18.
that would take account of his servant. etc. And says that one of them
was brought before him, which ought him ten thousand Talents. etc. And the
Lord was wroth, and delivered him to the kepers of the prison, until that he
had paid the whole debt that he ought. They say this text means that he
should be put in Purgatory, and there left, until the full satisfaction of
the debt, which when he has paid, he shall come out.


Pasquine. This text is so clear, that it is not possible otherwise to be
understood, than according to the matter that Christ speaks of. And if it
were possible to give this place any other interpretation, yet is it most
impossible to interpret it for Purgatory. Consider a little, wherefore Christ
uses this similitude: He says, Thou evil servant, have not I forgiven thee
all the debt thou ought me, Math. 18.
even as thou have prayed me: should not thou likevvyse have had compassion
on thy fellovv, and shovv mercy unto him, eue^ as I have shevved it unto thee?
This therefore has none other meaning, but to exhort us to forgive one
another, if we will that god forgive us, and means nothing of Purgatory, nor
of no such foolish toys.


Marforius. Thou meanest therefore that this debtour was cast into Hell, and not
into Purgatory?


Pasquine. So I mean.


Marforius. He that is cast into Hell, can never come from thence, and yet it
seems that this debtour, of whom Christ speaks shall come out, for he says
until he pay the debt. Therefore when he has paid the debte he shall come out.


Pasquine. All thy doubt stands upon this word until, does it?


Marforius. Yea, What this word (until) signifies.



Pasquine. And I tell thee, that that word until, in this place signifies not
a time that has end, or is definitive, but a time without end, and that is
infinite.


Marforius. Beware that thou interpret not also things clean contrary, as our
Priests do.


Pasquine. I will prove it unto thee, all that I have said, with the
authorityes of the Scripture, and not with Sophistry, nor with man's
authorityes.


Marforius. Do thou find in other places of the Scripture, that this word,
until, signifies a time infinite?


Pasquine. Yea, Mat. 1.
out of doubt. Saint Matthew says that Joseph knew not the Uirgin Marye, until
she had brought forth her son, will thou perhaps say, that, that most pure
virgin after her deliverance was known by Joseph?


Marforius. God keep me from so thinking. I believe that she was always a
Uirgin.


Pasquine. This word therefore until, signifies not any time that has end.
Apoc. 110.
The same shall thou find also in the.Cx. Psalm. And who so would otherwise
understand it, should confound all the whole meaning of the Scripture. And
furthermore, I would feign know of thee, what he is that can at any time make
god amends for his sins, No man can make amends for his sins.
truly not one, for we see, that Christ is become our righteousness, because
that by our own righteousness we could not be saved. 1. Cor. 1.
If it had been possible for us to have gone up to heaven, it should not have
been nedeful for Christ to have come down into the earth. And if we must for
the purging of our sins be boiled in Purgatory, what good does Christ's
passion unto us? How are we then saved by grace, Ephe. 2.
as all the whole scripture testifies? Romans 11.
how go we to the father by Christ only as he him self affirms? Do thou
not see how great a blasphemy, this is against Jesus Christ, to say that with
the boiling in Purgatory, that thing is done, which Jesus Christ only wrought?
as these murderers say, wherein they are much like the Ceretanes, who the
better to sell their Poticary ware, Ceretanes the common pickepursse^ of Italy.
say, that there is a great plague coming, Priests as common pickpursses as
they.
but they have the remedy thereof, and they swear and stare, that they have
proved the same a thousand times. Even so have these marked Monsters devised
their Purgatory, and then they say, that the remedy thereof is their Masses,
their alms, their prayers, and Pilgrimages, as a man may see in the decree
of their own handyworke, and all this is for the wealth of their kitchen. They
find out great sweetness in their Masses that are paid for, which ready
money, and their great ruinesse left unto their Monasteries to pray for the
souls of them that bequeth them. Oh what good do their prayers, their
fastings, their recomendation of souls, their seven Psalms, their Dirige by
note, and their De profundis over the grave. They pray still for those that be
dead, for those I mean that pay sweetly, for otherwise there is not a word,
No penny no Pater noster.
and if there be a poor man that has naught to pay, he must seek some money,
yea, though he burst his heart for it, for they say. Est ad pias causas. Oh
cormoraunt thieves, God once destroy you, for the health of the pore seely ones.


Marforius. Upon that other place also of Saint Mathewe they ground this their
devise, where he says. That whosoever shall speak a word against the
son of man, Math. 12.
it shall be forgiven him: Mar. 13.
but he that speaks against the holy ghost, shall not be forgiven, neither in
this world nor in the world to come. Now, if there be forgiveness in the
world to come, The papists will have a third place beside heaven and Hell.
it can not be said, that it is in heaven, for up thither enters no sin,
nor in hell it can not be, for there is no redemption: it follows therefore,
that there is an other place where sin is forgiven, and that is Purgatory,
how answerest thou to this?


Pasquine. I answer that this saying, neither in this world, nor in the
world to come, is as much to say, as never, as may be seen in the Apocalipse,
where he says, that those beasts had no reast, Apoca. 4.
neither day nor night, which is nothing else to say, but that they never
rested.


Marforius. I give great credit to thy saying yet.


Pasquine. What meanest thou by (yet) I tell thee, that those words are as
much to say, as (never, world without end, do thou not believe Saint Mark?


Marforius. Yes marye do I believe him. Mar. 3.



Pasquine. Read therefore this self same text in Saint Mark, and thou shall
find, that he says, that the sin against the holy ghost shall never be
forgiven.


Marforius. Says he plainly, never?


Pasquine. He says most plainly thus. Mar. 3.
He that speaks against the holy Ghost shall never be forgiven, but shall be
guilty of everlasting judgment. Will thou have a more playner saying? Go
look in the third chapter and thou shall find it as I tell thee.


Marforius. Oh thieves you Priests, Pasquine criethout upon the popish priests.
Oh Traitors, deceyuers and murderers, from henceforwarde I will not believe
them, if they say their Pater noster. Luc. 12.



Pasquine. Saint Luke also affirms the same, saying flatly, that he shall not
be forgiven. Behold therefore how well they interpret the Scriptures.


Marforius. I am already at a point with them, but thou shall do me great
pleasure to expound also unto me, certain other places, upon the which, they
ground this deceyte, one is, in the first Epistle to the Corinthians, where he
says. 1. Cor. 3
If any man build upon this foundation, Gold, Silver, Precious stones,
Timber, Hay or stouble, every man's work shall appear, for the day shall
declare it, and it shall be shevved in fire, and the fire shall try every man's
work what it is. If any man's work that he has built upon, do abide, he
shall receive a reward, if any man's work burn, he shall suffer loss, but
he shall be safe himself, Nevertheless, yet as it were through fire. Here a
man may see, that in this place the Apostle speaks of fire.


Pasquine. Think thou therefore, Fire in the scripture what it signifies.
that he means in this place material fire? he speaks by a Metaphor or
figure, for by fire here in this text are meant, troubles afflictions,
temptations, and perilles of death, as is to be seen in that psalm of David,
which says: Thou have tried me with fire, which is nothing else to say, Psalm.
17.
but with troubles, for a man shall never read, that David was at any time in
material fire. And in an other place, Psalm. 66.
we have passed through fire and water, and thou haste brought us to a resting
place. 1. Peter. 1.
Saint Peter also in y^ first chapter of his first Epistle says, even the same
so does also Esaias, and the other prophets, and even so does Saint Paul. And
because thou shall well understand this piece of Scripture, I say to thee,
What this word (to build) means.
that to build, is as much to say, as to preach Gods word, the foundation
is Christ, the work built thereupon, are those that have received the word,
the fire, is temptation and persecution iustlye sent by God, the Gold, Silver,
and precious stones, are they, that have in such sort received the faith of
Christ, that they will rather dye then deny him, the timber, hay, and stouble,
are those that believe for a time, and make a show, as though they did believe,
but if they feel afterward any persecution or affliction, they forsake
Christ, and bring forth no fruit because they have no root. This is the true
meaning of the Apostle, and of Saint Jerome upon Ezechiell the third Chapter.
The offices of a true and false preacher.
If therefore the preacher of the truth, has wholly builte any man upon Christ,
so that perscutions do none otherwise to him, then does the fire, to the
gold, silver, and precious stones, it is a sign, that he has faithfully
administered the word, and built strongly, when his hearers are more ready to
leese their life, than their faith, but if any man do so coldly handle the
word of God, that his hearers feeling the persecution, do deny their faith,
they shall be consumed by persecution, as timber, hay, and stouble, are
con^umed by fire. And then shall be known the negligence, of the (...) minister
and of his hearers, for the day of the Lord, (which is not to be understand
of the day of judgment, The day of the L^^^.
but when it pleases him to visit us with troubles) shall reveal and open
those things that were not known, and so every man's doctrine shall be tried.
And yet if the minister during the fire of persecution, shall conti^ue to (...)
it, he shall be safe: but he shall pass through the fire, that is to say, he
shall patientlye bear his persecution. The Apostle therefore in that place,
speaks of y^ trying of faith, and of doctrine, in the time of persecutions.
And so does Saint Jerome declare it, whereby thou may know wha^ doltes and
asses those are, that gather that he speaks of a Purgatory, that never was,
but the Devil mayntayneth his kingdom, by such as these are, that he that is
in filthiness should in filth^nesse continue.


Marforius. The other fou^datio^ of theirs, is upon the book of Machabees.


Pasquine. By this thou may know how well learned they be, 2. Maca. 12.
that know not which be the books of the Bible: The ignorance of the Popes
Clergy.
the books of the Machabees are al re^ected and not allowed as Saint
Augustine, Eusebius, Jerome and other ancient doctors say, and therefore are
not read to confirm the authority of the doctrine of the Church. But I would
ask Judas Machabeus, where he has found, that God commanded him, to offer
two thousaund Drammes of Silver in sacrifice, for the sins of the dead, and
where ^e has found that Silver is a Sacrifice. Leui. 3. et. 5.
The sacrifice was offered of beasts that were commanded in the law* and not
of Silver, Sacrifice for sins whereof it was made. Crafty conueyaunce of
false knaves.
nor Gold. And therefore have these false knaves the Priests, full of all
craft, and sub^ltie, in their Mass for the dead, thrust in this place for
the Christle, and have craftily taken away from it this word, Sacrifice, for
they know well enough, that Sacrifice was never made with Gold, nor with
Silver, and yet could they not carry so cleanely, but that their iuggeling and
deceyte has been espied, so thou may see, with what falsehoode they work,
and then call they him an Heretic, that believes not their knackes of
knauerie. Apo. 14. 21.



Marforius. They have also an other ground, upon that place of the Apocalipse,
that those that follow the Lamb are without spotte, before the throne of God,
and that no foul thing shall enter into that holy and heavenly City. And they
say that he that purges not him self in this world with good works, must
needs ^e purged in ye other world with the fire of Purgatory, that he may
enter clean and pure into heaven.


Pasquine. Who knows not, that none can enter into heaven, that has any
spot? but where have they found, that fire can purge sins? let them answer,
if they can, let the^ allege but one text only of the Scripture. Thomas of
Aquine, Thomas Aquine dr^uen to a hard point.
sought it narrowely, but at the last, he was constrained to say, that
Purgatory is not to be found in all the whole Bible, but yet we must believe
it, for certain balde reasons, that he makes grounded upon the Churches and
miracles of Antichrists. And even in the same manner have they also devised
Saint Patricks Purgatory, Saint patrickes purgatory.
where many horrible things are seen, as the Friars of that place tell with
lie and all. But if thou will see their lies overthrown by their own selves,
ask of them I pray thee, whether the souls work in Purgatory, or no. If they
would say yea, thou may show them that they lie falsely: for Christ says,
John. 9.
Work while it is day, for the night will come, wherein none can work.
And hereby the day is meant life, and by the night death. And yet when they
see, they can not withstand this place, they say, that they do nothing else
but satisfaction. Ask them then, if there can be any satisfaction, without
works, I speak according to their own false doctrine, None can work for
satisfaction, nor work but in the day.
they can not say, but no, unless they will lie upon themselves saying, that
man can do all things with his own good works. If therefore they will say,
that souls work in Purgatory, they fall to gainesaying of Christ, who says,
that in y^ night none can work, that is to say in death. And so, to which
side soever they turn them, they are in an evil case. See now upon what sure
foundations, these traitors have builded, a thing of so great deceyte, the
which notwithstanding, many think they commit a great offense, yea, think
themselves heretics, if they do not believe. But this thing is clear,
certain, undoubted, and infallible, that in matters of faith, it is not
lawful for us, Nothing must be followed but Gods word only.
to follow the thoughts and imaginations of men, but the only, only, only
word of God, clear, evident, and open. Following the which, man need not fear
going amiss. But who could at any time declare, the greatness of the errors
and blasphemies, that are sprung of this theeuish devise? What fruits spring of
the opinion of purgatory.
First it is an open and plain renouncing of Jesus Christ, and a denying of his
merits, and a not believing of the Gospel: which says. That Jesus Christ
only has Ao^. 1.
washed us, and Heb. (...).
purged us perfectlye by his blo^de, and that he has Heb. 9.
offered up him self without spotte, to God, to cleanse our consciences from
dead works, and that he has Esaias. 53.
borne our pains, and suffered our sorrows, and that he is the John. 1.
Lamb of God, that takes away the sins of the world. Oh what an horrible
blasphemy and error springs of this detestable devise, and more over, hereof
grows it, that through this devise, many are become thee^es, many murderers,
many cruel traitors, full of all filthynesse and mischief. Through it many are
become vserers, and chiefly those of Bergomo in Lu^ bardie: A people of a City
under the venetians naturally wise (...) subtle much given to travel and
traffic.
who gather together so great store of goods, by hook or by crook, they care
not how, for say they, when we shall be old, the will we confess our selves
to the Priest, who will give us absolutio^, through the which the everlasting
punishment which we have deserved, shall be made temporal, that is to say, to
last but for a time, and that punishment: shall we suffer in purgatory, from
the which we shall be forthwith delivered, by the power of Masses, an^ holy
water, and of our witles and Testaments, by the which we shall bequeath that
Chapels, Churches, and Monasteries, be built, by which means we shall of
force come to Heaven. And thus they die, and forthwith go into that place,
which (as I told thee before) is under the Lake, where thinking themselves to
be in Purgatory, Wily (...) them selves that think they go to Pargator^e and
go straight to Hell.
they are in Hell, for the wall (which I told thee of before) is quite burnt
up, and has made it all one rowme. If I had (I say to thee) an hundredth
tongues, an hundredth mouths and a voice of iron, I should neither be of skill,
nor power sufficient to show unto thee, the horror, the miscrye, the
greatness, and number of torments, and fearful things, that I saw there,
and so much the more should I coufound my self in the imagination thereof. If I
went about to show them, Where no orde^^ th^re is confusion.
as y^ I found all the same so confused and disordered.


Marforius. Is there no difference between the dampened souls, in such manner as
Danthe or Virgill speaks of? are not y^ princes (at the least) divided from
the base people? or is there no order at all?


Pasquine. The best observed order that there is, is the disorder and confusion
that always and every where, is there to be seen.


Marforius. Is there at the least no difference in pains, some in more, some
in less?


Pasquine. Yea, that there is, for thou know that the Lord says. Mar. 12.
You shall receive the greater judgment. And many there are that are more
tormented then other, that in this world were accounted happy men.


Marforius. I pray the declare unto me the whole, even in such sort as thou
think best.


Pasquine. The nerer still that we approached to these places of miserye the
more did we feel our ears, eyes, and nose, to be stricken with strange and
doleful noyses, with thick and troublous smoke, with stink of Brimstone that
could not be abidden, and when we were come to those places, we saw on every
side, woes, there the pleasant noise of Insturmentes, are woes, Nothing but
woes in Hell.
sweet songs are woes, feasting and ba^ket^ing are woes, there, discourses and
love toys are woes, plays and pastimes are woes, huntings and goodly painted
stories are woes, sights and triumphs are woes, occupations and marchandises,
all sorts of pleasure and exercise, and of every other thing, is nothing but
woes, and among all these woes, One woe greater then the rest.
there is one as if it were king and Prince of the other, which is the utter
deprivation of al hope, to come out of these woes. All are tormented with fire
and Brimstone, Apo. 14.
as Saint John says in his revelation, and the smoke of their torments, The
pains of Hell described
ascends up for ever and ever. And they never have rest, neither day nor
night, and they cry pieteously to the Lord, and the Lord hears them not.
Then knew they plainly, that all worldly things, that were causes to bring
them thither, are but vanities, and they would repent, but there repentance
helps them not: wherefore they blaspheme the name of God, Apoc. 16.
feling the dolor of their torments, and gnawe their own tongues for sorrow
and rage, Apo. 14.
and feel an intolerable thriste, and in so great burning they drink of the
cup of Gods wrath, and for their greater torment, they see the happiness of
the blessed, and from their eyes continually rain tears, and from their
mouths issue gnasshing of teeth, and they still burn, and never are burned,
and they seek death, and death flies from them, and yet are they still in
death, and shall be for ever, so that they still dye, and never give over to
death. And in effect, there is no trouble, sorrow, misery, unhappiness, nor
afflection what so ever it be in this world, The pains of of this life are
nothing to those of Hell.
that (in comparison of that they feel in hell) is not pleasant. And this know
for truth, that I can not by talk make thee understand, the very least part of
that which by sight I comprehended: think thou then, what that is, that they
must needs continually comprehend by feeling.


Marforius. Thou make me tremble from top to toe, hearing thee tell such
horrible and fearful torments, the which do so much y^ more put me in fear,
as that I know them to be true, for in the Apocalipse, and in many other
places of the scripture, a man may read, the things that agree just with thy
saying: But I would fame learn of thee, whether they were naked or clothed.


Pasquine. They are all naked, Apoc. 16.
and do show the filthiness of their nakedness.


Marforius. How can this hang together? Did thou not say, that their bodies
are yet in the earth? How do they then show the filthiness of their
nakedness?


Pasquin. Thou know that while we be in our mothers womb, we have about us
a certain flesh that covers us, the which, so sone as we come forth, into
the light of this world, it does leave us and go from about us, it is called
in Latin


Secundina. That same is our own laweful and natural clothing, the which for all that serves us not, but while we be in the darkness of our mothers womb:
but as soon as we come into the light, The mystery of man coming into this
world.
we remain naked, if we provide us not things from other: and if therefore we
will cover our nakedness, we clothe our selves with the Woll of the sheep.
Even just so, is it of the nakedness, that now I tell thee of, for while we
be in the darkness of this world, we may well cover our selves with our own
proper merits, and good works: but forthwith as we enter into the light of
gods presence, these merits of ours, which are nothing else but flesh and
sy^ne, go from us and forsake us, and we come to remain naked, We are all
naked of good works and therefore must be clothed with Christ's righteousness.
unless we cloth our selves with the wol of that most meek sheep, that without
opening his mouth, was led to the slaughter, to cloth us with his woll, and
feed us with his flesh, and to give us drink with his blood, even with the
blood of that meek Lamb of God, that takes away the sins of the world.
These men therefore, of whom we spoke, Esaias. 53.
because they were not clothed with this woll, Psa. 53.
that is to wete, the merits of Jesus Christ, Act. 8.
show forth the filthiness of their nakedness, Io. 6.
not that nakedness of the body, but that of the soul, for as much as their
sins, mischievous deeds, there evil thoughts, and all other their
filthynesse are openly showed and seen.


Marforius. What kind of people be they, show me some particularity.)


Pasquine. There are some Hebrews, In hell are of all sorts of men.
some Caldeans, some Arabia^s, some Indians, some Africanes, some Svvithians,
some Turks, some Moors, some Christians, as Dutchmen, Frenchmen, Spaniards,
Italians, rich, poor, men, women, and finally a^ sorts of people.


Marforius. Of which sort, is there the greatest number?


Pasquine. Of those that have worshipped the beast, Apoc. 14.
and his Image, and have received his mark, and have committed fornication
with her, and are dronken with the wine of her whoredom.


Marforius. I understand not this talk of thine.


Pasquine. In the mids of the bottomless pit, I saw a very great Dragon,
Apoc. 12.
of read color, which had seven heads, and every head had a crown, and ten
great horns, and a tail of an unmeasurable length, with the which he had
drawn to the bottomless pit, an unspeakable and incomprehe^sible number of
the people of y^ world. Beside this Dragon, I saw a beast with seven heads,
Apoc. 17.
and ten horns, and every horn had a crown, and with a skin like a
Leoparde, and having the feet of a Bear, and the mouth of a Lion, and to this
beast the Dragon had given his full power, his seat and great authority,
whereby y^ Dragon was worshipped, because he had given power to the beast, and
the beast was worshipped, for that it was esteemed above all other beasts, for
the wonders it wrought, while it was upon earth. All those therefore, that have
worshipped the beast, and have received his mark, have been by the beast
drawn down with him into y^ bottomless pytte, whither Gods justice has
committed them, for ever.


Marforius. I understand thee now less than I did before.


Pasquine. This beast, is the son of perdition, 2. Thessal. 2.
of whom Paul speaks to the Thessalonians. That is exalted above all, that
is called God, and that sits in the temple of God, as God, and shows
himself as God. This beast is that monstrous wicked beast, of whom Saint John
speaks so plainly in the.xvij. Chapter of his Revelation, and the Dragon is
that old Serpente, that from the beginning has with his poison brought death
into the world.


Marforius. I pray thee, if thou will have me to understand thee, speak a
little more plainelye.


Pasquine. This beast (to speak so as thou may understand me) is the
Pope, What the beast is. What the dragon is.
and the Dragon is the Devil.


Marforius. What, the Pope? Why is he not in Rome?


Pasquine. I speak not of one particular man, but I speak generally.


Marforius What do not all Popes generally dwell in Rome?


Pasquine. Yea, while they be a live, The Popes dwelling place.
and after their death in the bottomless pit.


Marforius. Thou meanest therefore that all those, that have put their
confidence in the Pope, and have followed his ways, are dampened, and that the
Pope, has no power from God, but from the Devil?


Pasquine. Now thou understand the matter, it needs not that I declare the
same any better unto thee.


Marforius. Thou shall do me great pleasure to tell me the meaning of those
things, that thou have showed unto me.


Pasquine. It would ask to much time, Gene. 3.
to open to thee the whole. Psalm. 17. 73. 90. 103.
But I will tell thee brieflye as the time will serve. The Dragon as thou have
heard, is the Devil: John. 8.
he is read, through the blood of Martyrs, for he was ever a murderer from
the beginning. The seven heads he has, The description of the dragon.
are seven sundry beasts, whose nature they signify. By y^ crown and
Diademes, are meant the Kings and Princes, that are the Devils ministers, to kill
and persecute such as defend y^ honor and glory of Jesus Christ: the number
determinate, signifies the multitude: the tail signifies his folowers, and
Ministers, through whose labor and dilygence he draws unto him so many
wicked persons. The beast, that stands by him, is (as I have told thee) the
Pope, The description of the beast.
his confiderate and good Minister. The seven heads are seven hills of Rome,
where his seat is, the horns and Crowns, are the Kings, and great Lords,
that for his sake and respect, persecute the true servant of Christ, that
defend the Gospel. The Leopardes skin signifies his unsteadfastness, and
inconstrancie, his Bears feet and his Lions mouth, signifies his gredinesse,
his ravening, and his cruelty, the power that he has of the Dragon, means
the force and efficacye of his deceyuing, the seat signifies his kingdom,
and domynion, the power he gave, betokens the virtue to work wonders, and
great signs: that with these three things he may keep the world drowned in
darkness. And even as Christ was sent from GOD into the world to save it,
Ioh. 3.
even so was he sent from the Devil to destroy it. Antithesis.
And as Christ sytteth in the Throne of GOD in heaven, Apo. 4.
even so sits he in the Throne of the Dyuell in Hell. Those therefore, that
worship the Pope, and take him so, as he will be taken, and follow his ways,
and confess him for Christ's Uicar, Who have the beasts mark
and wrap themselves in his benefices, and for his sake, kill the defendours of
the Gospel: these are they y^ have the beasts mark, and that have committed
fornication with the whore, and all these are with the Devil. And if thou will
be sure, that it is as I tell thee, read the Apocalipse, and especially
the.xiij. and.xvii. Chapters, where thou shall find that he says plainly,
that the seat of Antichrist shall be in Rome, Rome the seat of Antichrist.
saying: That, that whore is a great city, that in Saint John's time had the
whole dominion over the kings of the earth, the which can be none other but
Rome.


Marforius. That is y^ matter, that in certain old books, printed long
before Luther was ever spoken of, a man may see this beast painted with a
Popes Miter on his head, I think surely, he that painted it so, did Prophecy
even in those days.


Pasquine. Ye so he did, Apoc. 14.
but Saint John did more plainly prophecy, who says, y^ he that has
worshipped the beast, and received his mark, the same shall drink of the Cup
of Gods wrath and shall be tormented with fire and brimstone, everlastingly.
Even as on the other part he says, Apoc. 20.
that those that have suffered for the Gospel, and those that have not
worshipped the beast, nor received his mark, shall live and reign with Christ
for ever.


Marforius. Thou say then that all Popes go to the Devil, for besides the
proves that thou have alleged, if those that follow them go to the Devil,
it must needs be, that they also that lead them, If the blind lead the blind
both fall into the dytche.
go thither themselves also, but me thinks it a hard matter to believe, that
they be there al of them.


Pasquine. It ought rather to thee a harder matter to believe, that they should
not be there all of them: for thou know, that two contraries can not stand
together. Christ and Antichrist are contraries, how will thou have it
therefore, that they may be together? That the Pope is Antichrist, thou
should not now be in doubt, as well for the authorities that I have now
alleged unto thee out of the Apocalipse: as also for that I told thee before
in my voyage to heaven, and for y^ that Master Bernardino Ochino, Bernardin,
Jerome, and Theopila^^. plainly pro^^ Rome to be the seat of Antichrist.
says, who paynteth him out unto thee and for that, which Saint Jerome
says, who plainly affirms that his seat is in Rome, and for that, which
Theophilactus says who shows, that the Empire of Rome, the conqueror of
all other Empires, shall be possessed by Antichrist, and by his manifest works
showed unto us, A plain proof who is Antechrist.
that he is the very same, to persecute the defendours of the gospel, is among
many other, an undoubted token.


Marforius. Yet should not (me think) Pope Gregory be there, Pope Gregory
confesses that the Pope is Antechrist
for he confessed, that, he that should call himself, Pope, and superior
over other Bishops, should be the fore runner of Antechrist.


Pasquine. Lo, there is an other testimony, that the Pope is Antechrist, and
albeit he said the truth in this point, yet devised he afterward so many
lies, and dreams, as Purgatory, Masses, the v^sitations of Rome (commonly
called the stations) sole life in Priests and Churchmen, Pope Gregory for his
lies and blasphemies accounted among Antechristes.
and so many other blasphemies against y^ blood and merits of Christ, that he
may without al doubt, be accounted also among the other Antechristes, who thou
must understand are infinite: albeit for his notorious worthynesse he shall be
called Antechrist, that shall be worsse than all the rest, and all the Popes
state, put them all together, yet will he say that Antechrist must come, as
Gregory said. It is true that there have been diverse Gregory's, and it may
be, that some one of them has been good and honest, but all such as have been
Popes, are in the lake that burns with fire and brimstone in the bottomless
pit. They that were the first, were less wicked, but since have they grown
worsse and worsse, and the last shall be y^ worst of all, Pasquine prophecieth
truly of Chietti, for never was there nor can be a worsse than Paul the
fourth.
and I think that shall be the Cardinal Chietti, except the dutch
Launceknights come into Italic before, and so make Pope Paul the third to be
the last.


Marforius. And yet perhaps they will not be taken for the very masters, or
heads, for they call themselves, Serui seruorum Dei, and Prouidentia diuina
Papa. P. tertius, and a number of such gaye glistering titles, they outwardly
show.


Pasquine. This was the cause, Math. 7.
wherefore Christ said, that outwardely they should be like sheep, but
inwardly they should be Wolves, and Saint Paul says, that they shall have a
show of Godliness, 2. Tim. 3.
but in effects they shall be quite void of it. And mark well whether they
be made Popes by Gods divine providence or no, A woman made Pope.
when there was a woman once made Pope, they are made in deed by the
providence of the Devil, and not of God: for Gods providence knows well
enough, He. 5. 6. 7. 8.
men from women, and has made one only high Bishop, which is Christ.


Marforius. Saw thou that she Pope?


Pasquine. Yea mary did I see her.


Marforius. And what can thou tell me of her?


Pasquine. Thou must understand, that those things, that in this world, are
in greatest highness, greatest felicity, and greatest glory, there beneath,
are in so much the more baseness, wretchedness, and shame, the Popes
therefore, that in this world could not satisfy their hungry and greedy
desire of honor, being in the estate of Kings, and Princes, but would be
esteemed above al other men, and above great Lords, and being not contented
with this, have lift up themselves, above the gospel, Popes have there Heaven
in this world
and made themselves Gods in earth, in how great deepenesse of misery they are
their beneath passes all men's imagination. And they are therefore so much the
more cruelly tormented than other, as that they have been the greatest occasion
of the loss of so many people. Thou might there have seen them with Myters
of glowing brimstone on their heads, The description of the Pope in his
pontificalibus in Hell.
and their other ornaments of their body all of glowing Brimstone, with their
Chaires of glowing Brimstone, and they have about them as servant, woes and
Devils, and before them have they infinite hosts of those graceless people,
that following their wicked steps, are drowned with them in everlasting
miseries, al which of them do nothing else, but curse them and ban them. And
before this she Pope stand all those Rascalles, and seely fools, that since
her time, Deuilles can abide no popes espsciallie no she popes.
have believed in the Popes authority, and their are they cast in y^ teeth with
it, and cursed by the Devils themselves, for that after so manifest a token,
given by her from God to the world, as that they should not meddle with
Popes, would they yet needs believe them, and follow their curssed ways.


Marforius. And have Popes then even in hell, servants to wait upon them.


Pasquine. Yea, such manner ones, as I told thee of before.


Marforius. Wherein, do they any service unto them?


Pasquine. To torment them everlastingly.


Marforius. What torments used they to them?


Pasquine. To go about to show the torments of those that be dampened, should
be even much as to tell thee, how many graynes of sand are in the sea, and
thou again to stand to hear them, would be so stricken with fear, that
thou would not any more give ear unto me. But let this suffice thee, to
know also that which Saint John tells thee, Ppoc. 14.
that is to were, that they are tormented with fire and brimstone for ever and
ever. The^ saw I, Pageauntes set up for popes in Hell. The decree of Pope
bonifaco the eight.
in sundry places, diverse Arches of triumph, (or Pageaunts as we may call them)
One was of Boniface the eight of that name, for that goodly decree he made,
that every worldly creature should be obedient to the Pope as they will be
saved. And therein was graven that decree in every point as it stands,
saving the last word, which is. (As they will be dampened,) an other there was
of Hildebrande the Sorcerer, which afterward was, Pope Gregory the seventh,
Pope Gregory the seventh.
for his many and sundry new devises, through the which, so many seely
wretches are gone headlong to the Devil, and because also he did so malapertly
stand against the great Princes of the world, as Boniface and many other, and
almost all of them have done. An other there was of Alexander Borgias,
Alexander Borgias.
in the which, beside his other notable and famous factes, Incest committed by
a Pope (and his brother) with his own daughter.
was graven also that worthy and holy act of his, to lie with his own
natural daughter Lucrece, with whom also Duke Valentine his brother lay. An
other there was of Julius the second full of horrible bloudsheddings and
adulteries. Another there was of Leo the tenth, Julius the (...) Leo the tenth.
Peter Jews. Paul the.iij.
in the which a man might see, how the tributes of y^ great cities of Sodom
and Gomorre were brought unto him. And yet was there one much fayrer, y^ was
preparing for Peter Jews, some to Pope Paul y^ third, and one for his father
also


Mar. And of y^ great princes of y^ world, whom saw thou?


Pasquine. The greater part, and within a few of all.


Marforius. What is the cause, that so many of them be dampened?


Pasquine. The causes are many, but the principal cause is, that for as much
as they have received their powers and dominions from God, as the Scripture
says: By me Pro. 8.
Kings do reign etc.: Romans 13.
There is no power but of god, the powers that are, are ordained of God. etc.
He it is that makes the wicked to rule for the sins of the people. This have
not they acknowledged from God, nor have with their good example, and good
government, kept their people in the fear of God, nay thinking rather that
they did high service to God, have slain such as defend the Gospel, The
office of Kings and Rule^s.
and the honor of Christ. Whereas they ought rather to have abolished all the
sundry se^es of Friars, all Idolatries, the carcasses and bones of the dead,
such as they call Saints, in the which, they put all their religion, and should
rather have regard and care to honest maidens, to the poor, old, sick and
impotent persons, relieuing them with that infinite richesse, that unjustly
and wickedly are possessed by the smered swarm of shauelings, and ought to
suffer or rather to cause Jesus Christ to be preached. But they do
contrariwise persecute, and suffer to be persecuted such as preach him, and
worsse do those of these days, than those of foretymes, for these are some for
one wordely respect, and some for an other, so joined in league with this
wicked beast, that they have more regard to Antechrist, than to Christ. In
Christ's cause there is not one, that will once speak a word, Antechrist more
regarded than Christ.
doubting least he should be called a Lutherian: but for Antechristes cause
each man will discover himself what he is, against such as defend Christ,
calling them Herctiques, and persecuting the^ even to the death: Marvel not
therefore, if they also be condemned by their head, whom they have persecuted
in his members.


Marforius. Can thou not tell me any one sundry sort of torments, that
these great princes had different from the other? Yea, The punnishment of Kings
in H^ll.
that I can, thou know that they will, still above al other things, be
honored, magnified, flattered, and fed with the smoke of clawing talk: In
Hell therefore, they are a good part of the time, hanged up in the smoke of that
cursed brimstone.


Marforius. What, and are not the Popes served with the same sause?


Pasquine. More they, than the other.


Marforius. Whom did thou see particularly? Talk to me a little of some
one namely among the rest.


Pasquine. Herein will I do, not after thine, but after Plato his mind, who
wills that when a man comes to particularities he ought to make a stay,
for if I would come to those particularly, there should be few alive, To
tell truth bredeth hatred.
but they would banishe me.


Marforius. Why and are men for saying the truth, banished by Princes and great
men?


Pasquine. Yea, and with the worst kind of banishment that they can, and most
of all, those that most speak the truth, for they are not content to banish
them out of their countries that confess the way of Christ, (which only is
true,) but they banishe them out of the world.


Marforius. Let them therefore remain with the Devil, since they are there
already, and being such manner of men as they be. But tell me, how did thou
know them, being confusely scattered among other, and being naked, as thou have
said before? thou could neither know them by their apparel, nor yet
because they were not placed in order.


Pasquine. I knew them by their sins, the which (as I told thee) are al
plainly seen. In them a man might see the sins of great men, Sins where
to Kings and great men are most euclined
as for crample, never to forgive injuries received, to work revenge for every
trifle, to be occasion of the death, of numbers of their people, to fulfill
their appetite, to defile their Uassals wives, to punish the good, to reward
the evil, to despise virtue, to favor vice, and such other small pieuish
faults, and beside that, they were all castin the teeth by the Diuelles, with
these words among other. Psalm. 49.
The man that was in honor has not thankfullye received the same, but was as
beasts without understanding, behold his glory comes not down with
him hither belovve.


Marforius. This was the way, to make them to be known to thee for great men,
generally: but how did thou know them one from an other particulerlye?


Pasquine. I knew them by the self same token, that I told thee, for as much
as their sins are discovered, and the names of every one of them, and this is
done fo: their greater torment, for what matter were it, if sins were seen,
and it were not known whose sins they were? I tell thee, Esa. 47.
they show the filthiness of their nakedness, Apo. 16.
and every one is known what he is.


Marforius. The Friars therefore, Friars and Nounes sore asshamed in Hell.
the Nuns, the lay Sisters, and all the other Ipocrites, must needs be full
of sorrow, seeing so many, and so grievous of their abominable wickedness
discovered, which in this world they have had so great care to keep close.


Pasquine. Thou may be sure of that.


Marforius. Saint Benets Monks should there find the^ selves much deceived, in
that they obeyed their holy Abbot, in that godly saying. Sion cast, tamen
caute.


Pasquine. They are them selves deceived, and all other, that have said, that a
fault closely done, is half pardoned.


Marforius. Thou should me think therefore see, many goodly things of Friars,
and of their lovers.


Pasquine. Nay I saw things that were so filthy, that they were to shameful
even in very Hell. There might thou have seen how Friars meddled with Nuns
and lay sisters, A beadroll of the unspeakable filthiness and other
mischieues daily committed by the Popes religious ^able.
and with worsse, thou might have seen the murdering of young babes, and
because their dishonesties should not be discoured, y^ might have seen that
they were cast into the Iakeses. Thou might there have seen also one Friar
teach, one woman the way how she should not conceive with child, an other,
Friar taught an other woman the way to destroy the child in her body, an other
Friar taught an other woman, the way to poison her husband. This Friar gave to
his woman some of his holy Oil, to work inchauntmentes to those of the
house. One Friar gave to his Leman one of his consecrate Hosts, for the same
purpose. An other killed a whole householde, with gyuing them things to eat
that should make them sleep, because he would not be seen go into the house,
to play y^ knave with the good wife. One false priest feigned that our Lady had
wrought miracles, because there might be some offerings brought to her by the
foolish ignorant people. An other persecuted the Christians, and preached
against the truth, because he would be made a Bishop or a Cardinal. An other
false knave in confession caused a simple foolish woman to give him her money
in keeping, and afterward denied it to her. An other Friar sat tooting in the
bosom of a simple young Maid (whom her foolish mother had brought to be
shriuen) that she might begin to learn some of the friars knavery. An other in
confession persuaded him that was sick (peradventure more in his soul than in
his body) to leave his goods unto their Monasteries, depriving thereof the true
and lawful heirs. This good son wished his own fathers death, that he
might do after his own mind. That Nephew killed master Parson his uncle,
the sooner to succeed him in the benefice, that afterward he must leave unto
him. That woman defiled her husbands bed, and this good man his wives. That
wicked and naughty servant betrayed his master, to whom he ought by Gods
commandment to be obedient, and faithful. Thou might there have seen,
Simonies, Sodomies, Ipocrisies Robberies, Scismes, Apostasies, and those, more
in the polleshorne Prelates than in all y^ other. Then saw I in diverse parts,
diverse signs of victory. There was to be seen, graven the glorious
cognisaunce, of the Chanon of Turney: who after his death left a book,
wherein he had noted, the name and house of two hundredth women of the chiefest
of that City whom he had enjoyed at his pleasure. A chaste chanon.
There was also to be seen, how a false thief a Friar in Friseland, had put
into the heads of the foolish women this opinion, that they must give to the
Church the tenth of all things, and even in like manner, Tenth nights paid to
the Church men.
the tenth night as they do to their husbands. And how also an other
traiterous Friar with an host poisoned, brought to his death Henry the seventh
Emperor of that name. Then heard we a noise, a busteling, and such a
confusion, that we thought, An Emperor poisoned with an host.
they would have made a Pope.


Marforius. Whence came that noise?


Pasquine. From y^ Diuelles, Devils keep Consistory.
who kept consistorye.


Marforius. Know thou what things were treated of?


Pasquine. They treated of those self same things, that I told thee, were
treated of in that council, that was kept in the Popes heaven. They cried al
with one voice, down with the Lutheranes, as Rebels, enimes, and destroiers of
the infernal kingdom. And one of them, proclaming silence, (such as in that
place could be,) said. Cursed Devils, you know, that from the beginning of
the first man hitherto, we have had alvvayes trybute of the world, An oration
of a devil.
and when our kingdom did most flourish in riches, came that great enimye of
ours, whom here belovve we can not name, and utterly destroyed us: we then
with our subtilty, and earnest travail, stirred up so many sundry sorts of
Friars, and thervvithal our wicked brother Antechrist, by which means, so
many and great trybutes so freshlye came from all parts unto our kingdom,
that it is now become more rich, than ever it was before. But last of al
has our enemy, begi^ning on the north parts, raised up so many of his
faithful in all Europa, and almost throughout the whole world, who have
discovered the Pope to be Antechrist, and his Friars to be Ipocrites, that you
see, that the way, that leads down hither, and that in times past was,
wont to be so well trodden, is now become full of, grass, and thorns, and
if we do not provide the better, will be altogether shut up. True it is,
that our brothers the Dominicanes, and other many, and our wicked brother
Antechrist with his members the Cardinals, Prelates, and all other with
shaven crowns, and the princes also of the world, do all their endeavor, in
our furtheraunce and favor, killing the well-beloved of our enemy. This
notvvithstanding, it is your office and duty, to prick forwards with all
the power you can make, our ministers, the Friars, priests, and all such as
be joined in league with our faithful brother Antechrist, that they (more
now than ever they did before) do persecute, imprison, and drive out of the
world, all those, that give to our enemy only the praise, that (under
diverse Images,) was wont to be given to us, those also that have charity,
that do forgive injuries received, that do give great alms and other like
works, to us most contrary, that by these means the number of our enimyes may
be deminished, and the number of our co^federats incresed. Here against spoke
the other devils, saying: that things must not so be done, for we see already
quoth they by plain experience, that the more those men are slain and
destroyed, the more they do increase. Then spoke an other Devil. And why quoth
he, take we such thought for this matter? Have not we our ministers the Market
monsters, that work better for us, than we our selves can desire? Is not the
City of Rome yet in his chiefest glory, the which we may call our infernal
Jerusalem? One Devil spoke against this, an other against that, so y^ being
al full of wrangling, and confusion (even as is it the use in Friar houses)
they departed all without any agreeing. Yet did they all apply them selves,
some in one sort, other in an other, to cause the number of the dampened souls
still to be increased, albeit not one of Christ's sheep can perish. How foul
these things were to be seen, how great fear and horror they brought with
them, there is no tongue that can express it.


Marforius. I believe it well, but saw thou any other thing, that may be
told?


Pasquine. I saw many other things but amongst the rest, The catholic
Church, Christ's espouse.
even as in Gods true heaven, I saw the Catholic Church of the faithful, to
be the espouse of Christ, even so saw I in the bottomless pit, the
Malignant Church of Rome, to be the Devils whore. And as that was in the world,
The malignaunte Church, the diueles whore.
in so great trouble, and is now with her most sweet espouse Christ in
unspeakable happiness: even so, this malignant Church, that was in the world
in so great feliciie, is now with the most cruel devil in unspeakable pain
and sorrow.


Marforius. Did thou know there below no one friend of thine.


Pasquine. No friend of mine, but I knew in deed a great number of these siely
sheepishe siely women, that thou see go all day up and down, with a Reed in
their hand, of whom if thou demand whyther go ye good mother B? they answer,
Stations are certain churches where pardons be granted.
I go to the Stations, for the souls of my father and my mother. I knew there
John Ecchius, I knew there Pighius I saw there Albert Bishop of Chiozza, there
saw I Gilbert Bishop of Verona, I saw there many of the Sorbonists of Paris,
and I saw there, to tell thee at a word, all those y^ in my trance I saw in
the Popes heaven, I saw them (in their right being) in Hell, where they are in
so great a depth of miseries, torments, and sorrows, that we while we be
tormented by them in this world, ought yet to have great compassion of the^,
and pray to the Lord for the^, that he vouchsafe to deliver them out of so
great misery.


Marforius. Was there nothing said to thee, by any one that knew thee?


Pasquine. There were many of them, that desired me that I would tell their
kinsfolks that are here, that they should not follow their footesteps, that
they might not come afterward into those torments, and the Bergamaschi
prayed me heartily that I would give warning to their heirs, that they should
spend no more money in Masses, nor in any other thing, for their souls, for
in any wise the Money is cast away.


Marforius. What answer made thou to the^?


Pasquine. I said, they have the Gospel, Luc. 16.
to the which if they give no ear, less will they give ear unto me.


Marforius. So answer Abraham to the rich man, but what said they to this?


Pasquin. They gave me most boiling sighs, for answer: they renewed with
double force, the doleful woes, their torments were doubled, their flames of
fire increased, the smoke and stink grew still greater, their sorrow waxed
more vehement, they cried our Misericordia, and were not heard, their weeping
and gnashing of teeth augmented, they called and cried for death, and all in
vain, every thing was death, their howlings grew greatter: every thing was
fire, every thing was smoke, every thing was Devils, every thing was sorrow,
tormenting, misery, rage, and so great infelicity, that because I was neither
able to see it, nor hear it, since the very Devils, themselves were weary of
it, I prayed mine Angel that he would bring me back hither again, and so
it was done.


Marforius. When thou bega^nest to talk, of thy going to Hell, thou did
promise me to tell me, how thou did to come back again. Now it is time,
that thou tell me it.


Pasquine. Know thou not, that the scripture says. That the gates of Hell
have no manner of power against the Church of Christ? Math. 16.



Marforius. Yea,


Pasquine, The gates of hell could not therefore hold me in, but that I did
come out.


Marforius. Did the Angel then forthwith leave thee?


Pas. No, for he came along with me, even unto Prima porta, talking with me of
the things we had seen: and he promised me, to cause me in the like trance
also, to see the destruction of the world, and the dreadefull doom of Jesus
Christ.


Marforius. Oh I pray thee, when that time shall be, make me partaker thereof
I heartily beseech thee.


Pasquine. I will without doubt. It is now time for me to be going my ways.
Adewe good brother.


Marforius. Go in the Lords peace. To whom with all heart, tongue and pen, be
given al praise and glory both now and for ever. Amen.


FINIS.
Questions of Pasquine to be disputed in the Council now holden at Trent.
PAsquine having now of late years put for the many matters and in diverse
manners, because he has spente his words in vain, does now therefore propone
certain questions to be disputed, of the which he desires to be better
satisfied, for that he hears, that they are very often called in
controversy. And first

1 Whether the ^inginge that Friars make every day, may rather be called
labor and toil of Asses: and a travail of the body rather than of the mind.

2 Whether the Canons (or Prebendaries as we call them) coming to sit in the
Queeres and Churches for the gain they have thereby, do receive their reward
in this world.

3 Whether Resignations, permutations, chopping and changing, and such
coming to benefices as now is daily used, be Simonie.

4 Whether such as say and sell Masses for money, may be compared to Judas that
sold Christ, or to the Porters of Paris that in every streat offer themselves
to hire, and cry. A new master a new.

5 Whether it be to be suffered, that Friars and Nonnes should marry, since
Christ said that all men could not comprehend that saying.

6 Whether it be perilous and not to be suffered by Citizens, that the fat
and well fed Priests, and such as are full of idleness, and lascivious
living, should dwell so near them without wives of their own.

7 Whether it be needful in any City to have so many thousand of
Massemombling priests, of which, few or none, teach or can teach the
Gospel, since Christ commanded his Apostles, as their very duty and office,
saying. Go ye preach the gospel. etc.

8 Whether such as instruct not the people, that is to say, which do not the
very true office, that belongs to the Church, may receive and enjoy the
goods of the Church, or are to be called Thieves and Robbers

9 Whether that, granting the justification by faith in Christ, Purgatory be
overthrown and all that is built thereupon.

10 Whether there be in all Europe any one Bishop, that does his office in
such sort, as was prescribed by the Apostles.

11 Whether the Bishops that are careless of their flock, and fall only to
flaying their sheep, may be called true Pastors, or Hyrelings, as Christ
says.

12 Whether the shaven crown, and the smearing of Priests hands, be the
beasts mark, whereof the Apocalipse speaks.

13 Whether the Schole doctors, that take no pain with their doctrine, but
are ever up with Cherubin and the Angels, ought to be called rather
Speculatours, than Practicioners.

14 Whether such as would not have the holy Scripture to be readde by the
people, do freat and rage with in themselves? that such books are abroad.

15 Whether the.xxi^j. Chapter of Matthew may be applied to the Divines, Friars,
Priests, and all the rest of the Popes rabble, of our time.

16 Whether the persecutours of the Gospel and the truth in our time, may be
compared to the Pharisees which sought the death of Christ and his Apostles.

17 Whether, the like matter do not now in these days stir up the Papists
against the truth of the Gospel, as is recited in the Acts of the Apostles,
concerning Diana of Ephesus.

18 Whether that saying of the Gospel. Beware of false Prophets: Math. 7.
And that also of Peter. That through covetousness they shall make merchandise
of you with feigned words, 2. Peter. 2.
and many other like places of the Scripture, do rightly belong to the whole
swarm of shaven Papists.

19 Whether that which Christ speaks in the.xxiiij of Mathewe, of many false
Prophets that shall come, may be understand to be the sundry sects of Monks
and Friars, who, some by one way, some by an other, some by the help of this
saint, and some by that saint, go about to come to heaven.

20 Whether that which Paul foretold should come, 1. Tim. 4.
that in the latter times should arise men of evil conscience, forbidding
matrimony and meats, (which God has created to be taken with thanks giving,)
may be meant to be of the Pope, which has forbidden all these things.

21 Whether Friars and all the rest of the smeared shauelings, having been so
often taken with the manner to use deceyte, and to mock the simple people with
new found miracles, be therefore any more to be trusted afterward, according
to the old rule: he that is once a false knave, it is marvel if ever he be
honest man after.

22 Whether that saying of Daniel of the Abomination of desolation standing in
the holy place, Math. 14.
may be aptly applied to ye Churches of our time, in which the Pope s^lleth
heaven for money, which is seen to be the greatest and most unspeakable
abhominatio^ that can be.

23 Whether it be true that their Church as they say can not err, and yet they
confess them selves that there are many abuses, which their Church has
hitherto brought in, and also increased.

24 Whether the Pope with all his religious rabble, be the true Church of
Christ, since they follow christ neither in doctrine nor living.

25 Whether the Pope be the man of sin, and the Son of perdition, that
sits in the temple of God, and exalts him self above all that is called
God, as Paul says in the second epistle to the Thessolonians the second
Chapter* Since that place can not be understand of any Tyrant, that by force of
arms rages or spoyleth, but of him that under color of Religion, puts in
ure his infinite Tyranny upon the minds and consciences of men, y^ under
pretense of holiness does make and determine what he lists: which long time
has flourished and triumphed in his ruff, because he was not known, till at
the last in his due time, he is discovered and revealed by the spirit of Gods
mouth: y^ is to say, through the preaching of the gospel.

26 Whether the Pope be that great whore with whom the Kings of the earth have
committed fornication: and with whose cup of her abomination, all nations
are drunk as the Apocalipse says.

27 Whether the Pope be that little horn that has eyes and a mouth speaking
great things, Apoc. 17. 18.
that Daniel speaks of.

28 Whether the Pope being Antechrist, may be Christ's U^are.

29 Whether Monks, Friars, and all the rest of the polleshorne Papists, be
those merchants of whom the Apocalipse speaks.

30 Whether the Popes Sea, and the Court of Rome, which is so defiled with all
manner of filthiness, may be called Babylon.

31 Whether a man may believe, that the Pope means or can call, a godly and
free general Council, in the which so great an ouerflowing of euilles and
mischiefs, as he himself has brought upon the world, may lawfully be purged.

32 Whether Pope P. who is reported to be most covetous, do at any time think
of God, since Christ says. Where your treasure is there is your heart also.

33 Whether the Pope that is guilty of heresy, Math. 6.
Idolatry, and blasphemy, may be head and Judge over a Council.

34 Whether Peter Luis the Popes son, whom all men say to be a most filthy
Sodomite, be worthy to be chief Champion and captain of the Church.

35 Whether it be expedient for the Christian common weal, to take away from
the Pope his kingdoms and dominions, that thereby it may be seen whether he
will return to the ancient office of the church.

36 Whether the Pope would have Germany, yea, rather all the world destroyed
by wars; than that his tyranny and power should be any whit diminished.

37 Whether it may be doubted, that the Papa^^^, and y^ great beast will not
shortly have an overthrow, as the Scripture says, since long since Boheme,
and almost all Germany, all Denmark, England, and Scotland, have fallen
from her, and secretly France, and Italy.

38 Whether the French king have just cause to forbid that no more money
henceforward be carried to Rome, since Popes have in times past being furnished
with the riches and armure of France, made war upon the French.

39 Whether the Pope dispensing all things for money, may be called Pope penny
Father, and therefore be suspected of Covetousness.

40 Whether there may be any hope of goodness conceived of the Popes
recovery, and of his sworn shauelings, since Christ denies, that blasphemers
and such as withstand the truth against their consciences, can be healed.

41 Whether the primacie of the Popes see, be lawfully come by, since it was
gotten of Phocas the Emperor, who was a murderer, and secretly and with great
treason slew the Emperor Mauritius his Lord.

42 Whether the Pope, Cardinals and Bishops be or ought to be called Christ's
spouse, since they keep at home so many whores and boys.

43 Whether if Christ were in these days among the Papists, he should be
crucified again as he was by the Scribes and Pharisees.

44 Whether that Pope that made the decretall De duobus luminaribus magnis, be
to be compared with them that built the Tower of Babylon.

45 Whether Pope Innocent the eight, that was utterly ignorant and unlearned,
might be dispensed with, to say mass.

46 Whether Pope Julius the second who was a warrior, did plainly show that
Antechrist was already come, and that it needed not any longer to look for him.

47 Whether Pope Lion the tenth a very Sardanapalus, might be compared with
the rich glutton.

48 Whether Pope Clement the seventh, who was the match to kindle the fire of
wars between Princes, filled up the measure of his forefathers.

49 Whether Pope Paul the third who wholly was given to Necromancie, may be
excommunicate.

50 Whether it be to be believed, first that the Pope wishes from his heart ye
concord of Princes, since his foregoers, were ever the beginners of wars:
Then, if ^he wish it, whether it be for the common weal sake, or for his own
private cause: Lastly, whether peace made by his request may either be of any
continuance, or else have any good success. For that Christ says, Mat. 7.
that an evil tree can bring forth no good fruits.

51 Whether the Popes purpose, when he seems to go about to reconcile
Princes, be like unto that counsel which the Devil put into Pilates wives
mind, Mat. 27.
and that was, not because the death and torments of Christ did any whit
grieve her, but because she saw that her kingdom and tirannie suffered
violence, and such hurt as could not be recovered.

52 Whether the end of this alteration of our time can be any other than
sorrowful, horrible and lamentable, ^ithe the filthiness of the Antechristian
and Popish kingdom is so terrible and incomprehensible, and the obstinacy so
outrageous as can not be spoken.

53 Whether the writings of Sadoletus: and other that hitherto have valiauntly
defended the Popish church be to be accounted suspect, since now they suffer
honors and dignities to be given by the Pope, whether they will or no.

54 Whether the Pope, that now at the last has granted a legate to France,
could well skill of that which was wont to be said, that is to say: Of two
evils (that is to mean the Patriarch and the Legate) the least is to be chosen.

55 Whether the Pope if he knew that it would come to pass that the Emperor
and the French king would not join their forces together, and help him
against the Protestaunts, that he would once speak of peace or of a general
counsel.

56 Whether it may be confessed that God for our wickedness and ingratitude,
is not highely offended with us, sith we see all our counsels and devises have
so evil success, and war to arise in an others neck, one mischief after an
other, and all our purposes, upon ye sudden to quail, and so to be eftsoon
confounded with new lettes, that we cannot see which end to begin at.

57 Whether that kings and Princes, who albeit in this most clear light in
these days can not but needs know Antechrist, and yet do not only
dissemble, but also seek by all ways and means to pleasure him, and be at
the beck of so open an enemy to the truth) ought to fear y^ as in time past
God took from many Kings both their kingdom and people, so he will therefore
deal with them.

58 Whether it be to be believed, that Monks and Friars do purpose or can
find out a true and godly reformation, as long as to their counsels and
deliberations, they admit such as for many causes are the Popes own
dearelings, and that they will rather suffer any thing, than either to leese
any jot of their riches and commodities, or else to have their wickedness and
knauerie discovered.

59 Whether the Pope, who by Cardinal Contarine, at Ratisbona after long
contention in matters of religion, willed that all things should be referred
to a general Counsel. And when the Princes of the Empire determined to have a
National Counsel, if the same general Counsel began not within seven
Months, stoutly withstanding their decree, did evidently show what might be
looked for at his hands, and what his meaning was.

60 Whether when the same Cardinal Contarine said in a certain writing of
his to the Princes of the Empire, that he hoped that it would come to pass
that the Protestaunts would return to the lap of the church of Rome, and they
likewise in a writing of theirs made answer again in a writing of theirs that
of al men they would never do so: whether afterward I say needed any talk
between them for the matter.

61 Whether any ought in these days to be offended, because the doctrine of
the Gospel seems to bring dissentions and alterations, since that Christ
says, that the same is a singular token and most plain demonstration of his
word, Math. 10.
which is to send the sword, and not peace, and to set the son against the
father, and the daughter against the mother.

62 Whether that argument be of force, which many in these days do hold* that
it is not to be believed that God would have our forefathers to err until
this time, and to be without the true doctrine, for as much as by the same
reason it may be asked, why the same God has suffered Africa, and all Asia, to
fall into so horrible darkness* after they lost the light of the Gospel and
new doctrine brought in. For it must be confessed, that all that remained
after the preaching of the Gospel was only in Europa the third and least
part of the world.

63 Whether such as are in these days put to death in many places, be very
heritiques in deed: and albeit, they be such, whether they ought to be put
to death or no, for that Christ does expressly command, that we suffer the
cockle to grow with ye corn, and not to root the same up.

64 Whether the decrees of the Fathers and of the Counselles ought to be
referred and examined by the prescript rule of the gospel, 1. Cor. 3.
sith Paul so plainly said, That other foundation than that was already ought
not to be laid, and yet should it come to pass that many there upon would
build, some gold, some stouble, some wood.

65 Whether those solepmne and ordinary disputacions of the Sorbonists, do
any thing profit to the understanding of the holy scripture, sith they are
altogether idle questions of vain things, crooked, more than supercelestiall,
crabbed, and Seraphicall, the which neither they that speak, nor those that
hear them, do at any time understand, and albeit they do understand them,
yet are they never a deal the better by them, or the better learned.

66 Whether if the Pope would at any time suffer in a general counsel (if
any shall hereafter be) any one article to be pulled away from him, that then
it might not be truly said and affirmed, that he is not the Church,
forasmuch as hitherto he stands stiff in defense, that the Church can not
err.

67 Whether the Church, that is to say, a congregation of people may err,
forasmuch as it is propre to man's nature to err and fall. Then if it can not
err, for that they allege, where^two or three are gathered together in my name
etc. Whether then the Consistories of Popes, Cardinals, and Bishops may err,
sith these many years they have called their counselles, not to set forth
Christ's glory, but more and more to confirm and stablish their riches and
dignity, sith y^ the scripture tells that in the latter times should spring
horrible errors.

68 Whether in matters perteyning to faith and our Salvation, any other thing
ought to be commanded beside the gospel, Math. 7. 24. 61.
sith Christ commanded that his only son should be head and none other.
And sith also that Christ commands us to beware of men and of their
doctrine.

69 Whether sith we plainly see into how foul stinking abominable errors
we are fallen, since we left the prescript rule of the Gospel, and opened the
way to al man's traditions: we ought not to have great cause, seeing so many
mischieues and inco^ueniences before our eyes, to become wise, to give place,
and casting aside al hautinesse of mind, give over our selves wholly to him,
which only cannot err, and who commanded that in his commandments we
neither turn aside to the right or left hand.

70 Whether it ought to be confessed, that it is a great miraculous mystery,
that religion, (which now is in disputacion, has of so small and f^eble
beginnings as by one man only who was notoriously condemned in the beginning
and counted as an abiected to ye whole world or rather as a pray laid forth
to al me^) has so sprede it self and grown to such a greatness, that such as
have been against it and withstoode it, may not justly be affearde, if they
have any wit at all.

71 Whether such as will seem to favor the gospel, thereby to be thought
that they know much, and do for all that flatter such as styre up persecutions,
may be compared to Herod who made more conscience to break his unlawful
promise to a Harlotte, than to save the life of so holy a man.

72 Whether that saying of the Gospel who loves his soul in this world,
shall loose it. etc. may not aptly agree with the fine worldly wise heads of
our time, who for the doctrine of the Gospel, will not for any little
suspicion thereof receive loss or displeasure but live pleasauntly, and
quietly, and keep their riches and promotions untouched.

73 Whether such as in these days do confess y^ there are errors, and in
the mean time do not only contempne, but also condemn such as do show them
those errors: be like unto the Pharisees that said to him that was borne
blind and had received his ^ight, John. 9.
of Christ, we know that God spoke to Moses, but who this is (meaning Christ)
we know not, nor whence he comes.

74 Whether such as for certain opinions in religion have styrred up horrible
persecutions, and are become so mad therein, that more cruelty cannot be
devised: may not very well, (if they will acknowledge their offense, confess
that they are the begynners and authors of so outrageous and merciless
butcherie and slaughter.

75 Whether that saying of the Gospel (least happily the Romans come and take
away our place) John xj. do hytte just, such Kings and Princes, as will be
borne in hand, that if they receive the gospel, it will come to pass, that
their people will rebel and not be obedient.

76 Whether that which Paul speaking of the doctrines of Diuelies, which he
in spirit foresawe should arise, do serve right for the Papists? who for
their tradicions, 1. Tim. 4.
slay, and in sundry sorts do torment men, which is the very nature of Satan*
who is delyted with murder and blonde, and whether the Protestants who
persecute not their enemies, are not much to be preferred before the Papists,
especially sith they have both strongth and richesse, wherewith if they were so
disposed they might show violence and cruelty as the Papists do.

77 Whether the Pope in this of all other the most pestilent time of wars,
calling his Cardinals and ^hieflye the French to Rome, for a counsel (as
the show is made) to be holden, d^o penly mock y^ world, sith in time of peace
he made no manner mention of a Counsel, and now he does it because he sees and
knows that it is impossible to call them together, and especially sith he
used the self same fine fetch, the last wars now past.

78 Whether the old and new Testament did every where of it, beat into
men's heads, or command such manner of Articles, as the Sorbonistes of
Paris of late years made and caused (...) by Parlame^t, whether the same
divines wo^^^ forbydde that the Bible should not be printed in th^^ french
tongue.

79 Whether the Sorbones of Paris, (who as it is said wrote to the Pope, and
grievously complained that in restoring and upholding their Church, which was
about to fall, and would very shortly have lain in the dust, they were forsaken
by those that should most chiefly have helped them) deserve that punyshmente,
that in times past, Bid the Divine had.

80 Whether ye same Divines, (in despite of whom though they gain said it as
loud as they could cry, the french king willed and commanded the Bible to be
translated, printed, and set abroad in the vulgar tongue) may not now be
affearde, that their king conceyueth an evil opinion of them, and think that
they (because they went about by a thousand s^eights and devises to hinder so
Godly and necessary a work) are in breding some monster, and that they can not
abide the truth: especially since the said king is not ignorant, how
grievously they took it a few years past, when by his bountiful
liberality, professors of diverse tongues were instituted and appointed: and
that he hears not often times as occasions serve, what trouble and business
these unlearned and witless doltes, put the good and the learned men unto,
which Asses when they write or speak any thing, do cause all men to scorn,
and make men loathe and also abhor them.

Imprinted at London by William Seres Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.


