A BRIEF DISCOVERY OF DOCTOR ALlens seditious drifts, contrived in a Pamphlet
written by him, Concerning the yielding up of the town of Deuenter, (in
Ouerrissel) unto the king of Spain, by Sir William Stanley. The contents
whereof are particularly set down in the page following.

Revelation Cap. 17. ver. 3. And I saw a woman sit upon a skarlet-coloured
beast, full of names of blasphemy, which had seiren heads, and ten horns. and
ver. 9. The seven heads are seven mountains, whereon the woman sits. Matthew.
Chap. 15. ver. 6. Thus have ye made the commandment of God of no authority by
your traditions. and Chap. 23. ver. 13. Woe therefore be unto you Scribes and
Pharisees, Hypocrites, because ye shutvp the kingdom of heaven before men, for
ye your selves go not in, neither suffer ye them that would enter, to come in.
Matthew. Chap. 7. ver. 15. Beware of false prophets, which come to you in sheep
clothing, but inwardly they are ravening woolues. LONDON Imprinted by I. W.
for Francis Coldock. 1588.

A Summarie collection of the particular contents of this discourse.
FIrst, all the arguments brought by D. Allen in his said pa^phlet, for the
justification of the delivering up of Deuenter, are particularly discussed, and
fully answered: and her Majesty's actions in the relief and defense of the
low Countries, against the king of Spain, by D. Allens own arguments and
assertions, and by the authorities of his own autours, proved most just and
lawful. Secondly, his malicious mind and purposes against her Majesty and
the state, are openly displayed together with his cunning order, method, and
means which he uses to accomplish the same: his sclandrous defamations also
of her Majesty's most honorable and princely actions, and of her Ministers and
country, in like sort answered, and retorted: and the Popes authority to
depose princes utterly confuted and overthrown by D. Allens own arguments,
and examples of Scripture, which he himself produces. Thirdly, his seditious
persuasio^s to her Majesty's liege people, are by the defeating of his
arguments and examples (cited to that effect) most forcibly encou^tred: and
some gross errors and ouersights in policy, escaped him in his pa^flet,
manifestly detected. Lastly, the Subjects are by example of the Romanists
double and irreligious dealing, dissuaded from the credit of their doctrine and
persuasions, and by the due consideration of their own duty, weal, and
tranquillity, exhorted to the due obedience of her Majesty, maintenance of
their own safety, and defense of their deer Country.
To the Reader.
THis pamphlet of Doctor Allens, which has ministered the occasion of this
discovery, is pretended to be written by him in manner of a letter, dated at
Rome the 20. of April, 1587 to satisfy the consciences of those English
soldiers, which had in January before delivered up the City of Deuenter
unto the King of Spain, and revolted from her Majesty (their liege
Sovereign) unto his service, that their action therein was both lawful,
honorable, and necessary, and that all others, especially those of the English
nation, that deteine any Towns or other places in the low Countreies from the
King of Spain, are bound upon pain of damnation to do the like: for occasion
whereof, there is also prefixed before it, another very short letter, only of
three pages, pretended in like sort to be written to Doctor Allen from
Bruxels, the 20. day of March next fore past, by an English Gentleman, (whom
Doctor Allen terms honorable, under the name of R. A) There is another print
of this pamphlet extant (without me^cio^ of place) which differs much and in
sunday pla^es, from the coppie printed at Deuenter. For in that, the gentlema^s
letter is dated the 20. day of May. 1587. and subscribed with the letters N. R.
and D. Allens answer dated the 20. of July following, besides diverse other
differences in the substance of the pamphlet.
demanding his opinion and resolution touching the aforesaid action. This
question and answer being thus compiled in one pamflet, is supposed to be
imprinted at Deuenter in the So^mer follovving, of likelihood by the
appointment or procureme^t of Sir William Stanley, as should seem. Which
coming by hap unto my hands, and upon diligent perusing thereof, finding
nothing in it but mere malice and mischief, no one iott of sound doctrine or
substance, answerable to the gravity and learning of such a (...) as the
author thereof is esteemed to be: I did at the first utterly contemn and reject
it, as a thing of no account, thinking it neither vvholsom to stir so foul
and stinking a puddle, nor glorious to overthrow so sclender and superficial
a defense. Yet considering better of the most seditious driftes and deuilish
persuasions cunningly conveyed in the argument of this pamflet, under the cloak
and shadovve of Religion, by means of which title it might happly obtain the
more credit, if the fraud were not detected, I thought it a thing very
necessary, to discover and lay open to the world, the slye and subtle
dealings of D. Allen in this pamflet, together with the most absurd, profane,
and impious shifts used by him therein, to the end that no man might either by
simplicity and ignorance, or for affection to him and his faction, or through
overmuch credulity of his doctrine, be seduced by his deceitful abuses and
impostures, to their own utter ruin and destruction. As for the more apposite
and particular answering of this pamflet from point to point throughout, the
chief questions therein being matters of Divinity, not of policy, I leave
therefore to the further disquisition of the learned Divines, of whom some
perhaps when this pamflet shall happen to be more publik, and come to their
hands, will for the quarrels sake, being good and just (though not for the
worth or weight of the thing it self) vouchsafe to bestow a little pains in
that argument. For mine own part, being neither of that profession, and
having also another purpose, it suffices me to confute only those arguments,
which lie in my way, to hinder the scope of mine intent, which is only in the
behalf of our country, to discover his policies, and encounter his
persuasio^s, which tend wholly to the hurt and overthrow of our country. The
safety, peace, and prosperity whereof, whosoever respects, loves, and
wishes to continue, as (no doubt) all good, honest, and well affected
subjects do; let him with judgment read this small treatise ensuing, and
with reason, and conscience vveighe the abuses therein discovered, and then I
doubt not but he shall be thereby stirred up, to a better Religion toward God,
a more faithful obedience toward her Majesty, and a more natural love of
his country.

G. D.

A brief discovery of Doctor Allens seditious drifts, contrived in a Pamphlet
written by him, Concerning the yielding up of the Town of Deuenter (in
Ouerissel) unto the King of Spain, by Sir W. Stanley.
SInon the subtle Greek, (in whose Aeneid. lib. 2*
person the learned Poet pourtraieth out the lively pattern of a crafty
companion) being caught by the Trojan shepherds, albeit he came of his own
accord, and put himself voluntarily in their way to be taken, upon purpose to
deceive them with a counterfeit tale, and thereby to betraie them into their
enemies hands: yet (the better to color his intent, and to move the Trojans
to give the more credit to his talk) neither would he utter any thing unto
them, but what they by their demands first urged him unto: and having both
occasion and encouragement given him to speak, yet (the more cunningly to
disguise his principal drift) not without a preamble of many solemn
Protestations, he still deferred that to the very last end of his discourse,
which was indeed the first and only purposed end of his coming.

Whose president Doctor Allen seeming very rightly to have imitated, as well
in the matter, as in the method of this his politic Pamphlet, first because
he will have it seem to proceed of an occasion offered, and not of his own
voluntary motion, least his intent therein might be suspected, and A trick of
D. Allens cunning,, to write a letter to him self in another man's name,
demanding his resolution, only to give himself some probability of occasion
to enter into the treaty of this argument.
his work thereby discredited, frames a letter to himself, in the name of
two letters of the Alphabet (his supposed honorable friend) whom he faineth
thereby very instantly to demand his opinion, touching the lawfulnes of S. W.
Stanleys and Captain Yorkes action, in rendering up the Town of Deuenter and
Fortes of Zutphen unto the Duke of Parma: and thereupon takes occasion in his
answer thereunto, to fall (as it were by the way) into a further matter,
whereto in truth the whole purpose of his treaty was from the beginning
intended.

A sorry shift of so cunning a Clerk, in an Apes skin to cover a Fox, whom
even his very tail may bewraie. As though men were so simple, or of so
slender judgment, as that they could not discern by the style, the letter and
answer to be both A far further purpose in D. Allens Pamphlet, then that
which is pretended by the title.
of one stamp. And, for the chief purpose of this Pamphlet, that it tends
to a far further end, then to the satisfying of the consciences of S. William
Stanley and Capt. York, and other like Romain Catholics, touching the
lawfulnes of the yielding up of Deuenter and Zutphen Fortes, if this were not a
sufficient argument thereof, that the parties themselves never made conscience
or question of the matter, either before the yielding of them, or since, and
therefore needed no such resolution as D. Allen will needs entreat himself to
offer them, which were and are still as resolute as himself in disobedience:
the very plain dealing of D. Allen himself generally throughout the whole
Pamphlet, but particularly in the latter and greater half of it, makes the
thing more then manifest, as shall be laid open unto you more at large, when we
come to the particular handeling of that point.

I am sorry that I should have such occasion given me, even in the very first
entrance to use a An unseemly thing for a man of D. Allens profession or
calling, to use shifting and dissimulation.
comparison so odious and unbeseeming the name, profession, and calling of such
a man as D. Allen is, or should be, as to liken him to one, in whom the very
Prince of Poets employed his best wit and skill, in liueliest colors, to
express the true shape and substance of a most subtle and malicious
dissembler: for in truth I do naturally and inwardly hate all immodestie,
bitterness, and violence of speech, generally in all actions of life and
conversation, and especially in these of controversy and confutation, where
the truth is to be defended, not our own passions displaied, the adversary
with reason convinced, not with railing defaced, his sinister and lewd
dealings orderly reproved, not his person in any wise vndece^tly outraged. But
D. Allens dealings in this Painphlet, both for the manner, matter, and meaning,
do in all points most evidently resemble the dealings of Sinon.
if D. Allen have in this Pamphlet both in manner and matter so rightly
resembled Sinon, as that he has not left me the choice of any man to whom I
may so rightly resemble him, as to Sinon, it is he himself (and not I) that
has made himself comparable to Sinon. Nay, if it appear further by this
Pamphlet, that he has the very mind, meaning, intent, and counsel of Sinon,
by like solemn protestations and subtle persuasions, under color of Religion
to entice you (I mean such as are wholly devoted to his Religion, or have been
affected to his doctrine, or can be allured by his enchantments) to prostrate
and lay open your Country, by your arms and assistance, to bring in the
Spanish and other foreign forces, to the certain ruin, destruction, and
overthrow both of your selves and your Country: I think I may lawfully
without just touch of malice or immodestie, be bold to show you his shadow in
a glass, that hides his body from you under a gloss, and by the example of
his doings whom this man so lively resembles, lay before your eyes the very
mark, which he so cunningly aims at: to the end that being once warned,
you may be ever armed against his pernicious practices.

But I know it will be a matter of great labor and difficulty for me to
persuade you that are of D. Allens religion, to see or acknowledge any error,
falsehood, or malicious intent in him, because you are already settled in
persuasion of his learning, sincerity, and goodness of his cause, and carry
the contrary opinion of me, because you esteem me to be of a contrary
Religion both to him and your selves.

Albeit my purpose is not particularly either to draw him into discredit with
you, or to withdraw you from the Religion you profess (though I could be
content (nay most willing and desirous) to hazard mine own life in traveling
to win you to the true way of eternal life:) but only to lay open his
errors and abuses to the world indifferently, that such as have Matthew. 13. 9.
ears to heart, may hear, and such as are not wilfully blind may see, and
satisfy themselves accordingly: yet if either by example or persuasions, I
may stir you up to the straighter examination of your consciences, and
better consideration of the grounds of your religion, together with more
advised deliberation, how you give credit to men's counsels, or enter into
their confederacies, and consequently into your own destructions, I shall
think my self, of all things that ever happened or can happen to me, most
happy in this, that it has pleased God to make me the means of so happy an
effect to you. Of whom I will therefore think it no skorne to crave A
preiudicate opinion ought not to make men so obstinate, as to condemn a thing
before they know, or have seen it, and so utterly to reject, reason.
even upon the knees of my heart, only that which you ought your selves to
yield me of your own accord, being a thing no way possibly hurtful, but
likely many ways beneficial unto you, that is, that you will only be
content for a time to lay aside all affection, partiality, and preiudicate
opinion, and to read with indifferency, weigh with aduisement, and with
vprightnes to judge of that little which shall be most faithfully delivered
unto you.

I will not in truth (neither can I if I would) deny my self to be of that
religion, wherein I have been bred and brought up even from mine infancy, that
is, the true ancient, Catholic, and Apostolic religion professed in the
Church of England, which the Romanists do so much impugn, and so earnestly
endeavor to supplant. But as I do confess my self most steadfastly to hold
that Religion, and therein to stand fully resolved: so do I unfeignedly
protest, that since I came to the years of reason and discretion to conceive
what Religion was, I never held any opinion obstinately, as one that being
in an error should hate to Psalm. 50.
be reformed, but came first to the reading and consideration of those things
which it behooued How humbly, circumspectly, and uprightly me^ ought to behave
themselves in matters of religion.
a Christian to know, even with a bare and naked mind, void of all
foredeeming, and apt to receive any impression, only humble and desirous to
be instructed in the truth: and whatsoever I read or heard expounded out of
the holy Scriptures, neither did I esteem it by the credit of the person that
taught it, but by the authority of the doctrine it self, neither was I led
unto any opinion by the voice or opinion of multitude, but by the testimony
of mine own conscience consenting thereunto, neither did I attribute the more
credit to it, for that it was first taught me, but for that daily instruction
and reason confirmed Every man ought to examine his own conscience, and sift
his religion, and endeavor still to be rightly informed of the truth, not to
rely wholly upon the example, authority, or persuasions of other men
(especially in matters of controversy) stopping their ears against reason:
for every vessel shall stand upon his own bottom.
it unto me: never variable, yet ever willing to yield unto reason and the
truth. For I am not of their mind that make Religion as a matter of
inheritance, to be taken of their ancestors or their parents, or that think
it sufficient to say, I believe as the Queen believes: But I think it the
duty of a Christian still to endeavor to inform himself how he ought to
serve God, and not to pin his soul on another man's sleeue. Such a reverend
regard have I always had, and ever will have of Religion, as a matter of
salvation, not as every common action of man's life, as a thing to be measured
not by opinion, but by truth, to be chosen not by example, but by judgment,
to be holden not for company, but for conscience. If you also have the same
measure, choice, and ground of your Religion, as in reason you ought to have:
it may happlie fall out, that the discovery of the weakness of D. Allens
arguments, and of his deceitful and malicious dealing in this his Pamphlet, as
it has confirmed in me the Religion I hold, so it may alter in you the
opinion you have hitherto persisted in: and not without great cause, knowing
that the naked truth seeks neither cloak nor corner, nor a simple and good
cause, any subtle, or bad conueyance.

Let not then any preiudicate opinion of my Religion differing from yours,
withdraw you from the patient reading and considering of my simple discourse,
no more then the like opinion of D. Allens Religion has withdrawn me from the
diligent perusing and perpending of his subtle pamphlet, a greater learned and
far more cunning allurer then myself: especially seeing, that it is no part
of my meaning herein, either to impugn your Religion, which is nothing at all
fortified by this pamphlet: or to strengthen mine own, which is as little
weakened thereby: for those points I leave to Divines, if there be any that
think it worth the reading, or answering. For mine own part I find nothing in
it, for which I would have cast away so much paper and inck, saving only a
cunning conueiance of pernicious driftes, tending to the practice of sedition
and mischief, which I thought fit to be displayed and laid open to the world,
that the simple and such as give too much credit to his doctrine, might not be
therewith deceived, and thereby drawn to their own utter destruction: and on
the other side, that such as are of more capacity, and judgment, either better
affected in religion, or men indifferent, seeing the monstrous shifts used by
such a principal Roman Catholic, as D. Allen is, might thereby take a
Caveat, to be the more wary, how they yield themselves to be seduced by such
Catholics persuasions.

But let us now come to the examination of this pamphlet, and see what it is
that master Doctor undertakes therein, and how well he perfourmeth his task.

He pretends upon occasion of the former counterfeit letter (which I
mentioned to you before) to resolve the consciences of those English men which
were the yeelders up of Deuenter and Zutphen fortes to the Duke of Parma,
touching the lawfulnes of their actio^: Whereof though he had already by his
letters to Sir William Stanley, given his opinion, as he says, yet he will,
for better clearing of the cause, set here down his mind more largely and
distinctly.

BEfore I run into the particulars, I must note unto you a thing in general,
which is not to be omitted. I assure you though I be far from the profession
of Divinity, yet can I not but blush to see a thing written by way of a
Resolution for the satisfying of men's consciences (being a matter of Divinity)
a treatise of 60. pages, and not so much in all as half 6. textes of Scripture
cited for confirmation of the matter proposed, either directly or indirectly:
especially being done by an ancient D. of Divinity, by estimation singularly
well read and learned, and the only man of name among all the English
Catholics. It is a shame for D. Allen (so great a Divine) to handle a matter
of salvation or damnation so profanely, using altogether arguments and
authorities drawn from philosophers, but none from the holy Scriptures.
What is there to be presumed of it, that so learned a man, so great a Divine,
now a Cardinal and chief pillar of the Church of Rome, should undertake to
resolve men's consciences in a matter of Christian duty (yea whereon he
pretends salvation or damnation to depend) only with a Chaos of words, a
confusion of arguments, drawn from moral philosophy, the law of Nature, and
heathen constitutions, and with definitions, distinctions, and authorities fet
from Plato, Aristotle, Cicero, etc: leaving utterly all proofs, arguments, and
authorities of holy Scripture, yea skarce so much as alleging one text by way
of exhortation? In mine opinion men are in common sense to judge, that either
the matter is very bad, and not justifiable by Gods word, which yields not
sufficient argument or authority (nay none at all) for the defense of it: or
that such His profane handling, and neglect of Scripture proof, is a great
argument either of weakness in his cause, or hypocrisy in himself, or of both.
Divines show themselves to have very little zeal or religion in them, when
they measure matters of conscience, salvation, or damnation, by the line of
profane Doctrine, and not of the holy Scriptures. Whereupon must necessarily
be inferred, that they are either impostors and deceivers, in seeking to
persuade men by a show of natural reason (vernished over with a gloss of gay
words, and superficial colors of philosophy) that which they are not able
to prove by Divinity; or else plain Atheists and Hypocrites, in carrying only
the bare name of Religion on their backs, for a cloak to their disguised
practices, and neglecting wholly the ground and substance thereof, in their
cogitations, doctrine, and persuasions. But the less M. D. has used the
proofs of Scripture and Divinity in this argument, though it be nothing the
more for his own commendation, or for the credit of his Doctrine, yet have I
the less cause to be displeased with it, considering that he has thereby made
it the fitter for so mean a scholar as my self (no Divine at all) to deal
with, and the easier for any man to overthrow.

Albeit my purpose is not (in truth) so much to enter into the particular
confutation of his arguments (which are indeed none at all, or not D. Allen
neither frames nor follows any one argument in due form, and orderly, but
shuffleth out single propositions at randon and confusedly.
worth the standing upon) as to decipher unto you his driftes and policies,
which are founded even upon as weak grounds: yet to the end you may perceive
how loose, imperfect, and quite void of force his reasons are, I will not
grudge to cast away a little time and labor in repeating, and reducing them to
a kind of form, which are so disorderly, confusedly, and dissolutely shufled
out by him.

The maine proposition and ground of his first The maine proposition and ground
of his first argument.
argument is this, That every thing wrongfully obtained, and unjustly detained
from the true owners, whether they be by fraud or violence come by, according
to all Divine, and humane laws, and by the very rule of nature, ought to be
restored to them to who^ they duly perteine.

M. Doctor would seem by speech to draw his argument from Divinity, and yet
not so entirely from Divinity, but that he can be content with Divine laws, to
mingle both humane laws, and the rule of Nature: how be it his manner of
prosecuting it, together with his authorities which he alleges, do argue it
rather to be derived principally from the rule of Moral justice, which Drawn
from the rule of moral Justice, whose peculiar office is, suum cuique tribuere.
gives unto every man his own: But let him take his choice from which he will
draw it, for all is to one effect, that is, to none effect at all for his
purpose, for (to cut off this proposition short) see, I pray you, how
sophistically he deals. He D. Allens sophistry.
sets first his proposition indefinite: That every thing wrongfully
obtained, and unjustly detained, ought to be restored to the true owners,
without adding by whom it ought be restored, and concludes (as he must needs,
if he conclude to his purpose) definitely, that is, That it ought to be
restored by Sir William Stanley etc. Whereby he makes his argument consist of
four termini (as the Logicians term it) which is a foul fault in logike, His
argument being laid together, consists of 4. termini.
as every wrangling sophister of half a years standing in the University can
tell you. Therefore good M. D. set down your proposition certain, and reason
ad idem, and then we will yield it to be true: that is, That every thing
wrongfully obtained, and unjustly detained, from the true owners ought to be
restored to them again, that is, by them that wrongfully obtained, and
unjustly detained it: (for there is no man bound to satisfaction, neither by
Divine nor humane laws, nor by the rule of Nature, but he only that has done
the wrong:) and so will I agree with you, that, whatsoever Sir William Stanley
and the rest had wrongfully obtained, and did unjustly deteine from the king of
Spain, ought to be by them restored unto him again. But you know well enough,
and all men know that Deuenter, and Zutphen fortes were neither obtained, nor
detained wrongfully by Sir William Stanley and his accomplices, but quietly,
peaceably, justly and by lawful authority delivered unto them in charge and
custody, under her Majesty, by my L. of Leicester her Lieutenant there: and
therefore were not they any way bound to the restitution of them (saving only
unto those of whom they had received them) being neither obteiners, nor
deteiners of them, but only ministers of their Princes commandment. For
howsoever the town and fortes were obtained, yet the subject being tied to his
Prince by allegiance and oath, and having upon that oath received from his
Prince, or her lawful deputy, any place of charge to keep and hold to her
use, is not to Every private subject is not to examine his princes public
actions, be they right, or wrong, but to look to his own peculiar charge,
duty, and oath.
enquire into her right, how justly or unjustly she has gotten or keeps it,
but to look into his own charge and oath, whereof he is bound to give
account. Yea suppose the Queens Majesty had by violence, fraud, or injustice
entered upon those places, and so detained them from the k. of Spain: yet the
same justice, which gives unto every man his own, and in such case tyeth her
to restitution of whatsoever she wrongfully Much less may any private subject
make himself judge, corrector, and executioner of Justice against his Prince,
upon his own authority, and at his own pleasure. Offic. lib. 1. D. Allen
shows no authority of Scripture, whereby the Popes Bull may dispense with
this breach* of their oath.
witholdeth, yet the same justice (I say) gives her subjects no such
authority over her, as to be judges of her just or unjust dealing, much less
to make themselves correctors, or executors of justice against her upon their
own judgment, and at their own pleasure. Nay, the same Justice, whose
foundation, (as your own Author Cicero affirms) is Faith, tieth them to the
performance of their faith and oath given unto their Prince: which oath how
little authority your Popes Bull has to dispense withal, as learned men as
yourselfe M. Doctor (without offense of comparison) have already discussed.
And therefore let them, whose consciences you undertake to satisfy, examine
their consciences better touching the lawfulnes of this their action.

Thus you see M. Doctors subtle Sophistication, and how little his principal
Basis, whereon he builds his whole argument, serves his purpose. But, that
you may see the weakness of the rest of his consequences, as well as of this
foundation, let us for good fellowship grant him this proposition even in such
sort as he puts it (that we may have more of his custom) and suffer him
to proceed, that we may see how he will conclude.

Every thing (says he) wrongfully obtained, His argument.
and unjustly detained from the true owners, whether it be by fraud or
violence come by, ought to be restored to them, to whom it duly pertains.
What infers he hereupon?

But the Town of Deue^ter and the Forts of Zutphe^ were both wrongfully
obtained, and unjustly detained from the true owner (viz. the King of Spain)
being by fraud or violence come by, by the Queen of England.

Ergo, The Town of Deuenter and the Forts of Here now appears manifestly the
fault of his argument, being drawn to a form of Syllogism.
Zutphen ought to be restored (and therefore were lawfully and justly
restored) to the King of Spain, by S. W. Stanley and Capt. York, who had the
charge and keeping of them for and under the Q. of England.

Here may you now (by the way) more plainly discern the fault of his
argument, whereof I told you before, which he himself has not so laid
together nor reduced into straight form, in his pamphlet, least the fault
should too easily be espied, but to color his fallacy, has gone about the
bush with a circumstance of words, creeping slilie by degrees to the top of his
intent, thinking by that means to steal it away vndescried, as in truth he
might easily from plain simple men, and such as are no scholars, which might
well have suffised his turn, for he seeks no more: But let a man of any
mean judgment mark it, and lay it together, and it is presently discovered.
For the argument is evident enough, and cannot be otherwise framed to his
purpose, as any man of reason may plainly perceive, and he himself (I am
sure) will not deny. Now to examine his Minor, mark, I pray you, of how many
parts it consists.

1. First: that the town of Deuenter, and Zutphen All these three points are
contained in his Minor, which he is to prove.
fortes were both wrongfully obtained and unjustly detained from the k. of
Spain by the Q. of England. 2. That the k. of Spain is the true owner of
them. 3. That they were by fraud, or violence come by, by the Queen of
England.
All these three several points ought D. Allen to prove, or else he proves
not his argument: and yet of the two latter has he not spoken a word, more
then a bare affirmation: of the first he has spoken much, and proved just
nothing. But because his manner of reasoning is not close and well knit
together, but in a declamatorie kind, which is fitter for his purpose to
persuade, though not so forcible in reason to prove, I will endeavor to sever
his Logike from his Rhetorike, and gather his arguments aparte, that we may see
what, and how directly he proves.

Whatsoever (says he) is obtained by unlawful His argument for the proof of
his Minor.
wars, and so detained, is both wrongfully obtained, and unjustly detained.

But the Queen of Englands wars in the low countries, whereby she obtained
Deuenter and Zutphen fortes, and so detained them, are altogether unlawful.

Ergo, The town of Deuenter and Zutphen fortes were both wrongfully obtained,
and unjustly detained by the Q. of England (from the true owner, the k. of
Spain.)

For this must also be added to his conclusion, otherwise does he not fully
prove the Minor, of his former argument, which he is to prove: Wherein if a man
would stand with him upon every strict point, he might justly say this argument
is even as good as the former, for there is This argument is even as good as
the former.
more in the Conclusion, then is contained in both the Praemisses.

But let that go, and let us grant him also his Mayor, and come directly to
his Minor, viz.

That the Queen of Englands wars in the low The Minor of this second
argument, which he is to prove.
countries, whereby she obtained Deuenter and Zutphen fortes, and so detained
them, are altogether unlawful.

What if we should deny, first that the Queens Two points of this Minor to be
denied, whereof D. Allen proves neither.
Majesty held any wars at all in the low countries?

Secondly, and if she did, yet that she obtained not Deuenter by wars?

D. Allen is able to prove neither of them, and The causes why they may both,
justly be denied.
we might justly deny both: For no man can say (and say truly) that ever her
Majesty took the war upon her self, but only sent some forces for gods
cause to relieve the poor distressed countries, craving her assistance. And
for Deuenter, neither did her Majesty obtain it by wars (for the town did
voluntarily of itself receive, nay, they earnestly desired our garrison:)
neither did her Majesty obtain it at al, for it was never hers, neither did
she ever claim it, or accept it as her own, but only was content at the
request of the better sort of the town, for their safety, to put her soldiers
into it, to defend it. So is M. These two points being denied (as appears
they may be with good reason) D. Allens argument is utterly avoided, without
further answer or proceeding: for he proves neither.
Doctors argument clean avoided.

But I know he will say these are but cauils, for trial whereof, I refer
them to the judgment of any man of reason and indifferency, which has been
rightly informed therein: howbeit, because, if I will stand upon them, he is
able to go no further, I am therefore content to ouerpasse them and suffer him
to proceed.

I pray you let us see how he proves The English wars in the low countries
(seeing so it pleases him to term them wars) to be altogether unlawful.

His rule whereby he measures the lawfulnes of wars, is fet from Cicero, who
says in his books De Republica, as Isidorus cites it: The war is just,
which is denounced for recompense or revenge of injuries, and annoyance, or for
defense against enemies.

This position being laid, because the Queens Marshall not justify her doings
upon any title she has to the low countries (which is without the compass of
his division) he presupposes that all the world knows that she can make no
just claim to Holland, Zela^d, or any other of those parts which she has (as
he says) by arms seized on: all There was never any such confession heard of,
as D, Allen here imposes upon us, but the contrary is both affirmed, and
absolutely maintained at this day.
those provinces being confessed to (...) his Catholic Majesty's ancient and
undoubtful inheritance.

These matters concerning Princes titles are fitter for other me^ then M. D.
and me to decide: therefore I will not take upon me to say any thing touching her
Majesty's right to the low countries, or any part of them, howsoever D. Allen
dares affirm them all to be the king of Spaines ancient and undoubtful
inheritance, by what authority I know not: but how ancient and undoubted soever
he makes it, I am sure men better acquainted with those causes then he, do
not only doubt of the kings title to sundry of the provinces, but are flatly
resolved the contrary. But it is beside my purpose, and therefore I leave it.
Now let us see how he proves the English wars (as he terms them) in the
low countries to be neither for recompense or revenge of injuries and
annoyance, nor for defense against enemies, and therefore not just, according
D. Allens assertion to prove the English wars in the low countries not to be
for defense against enemies.
to this former position out of Cicero.

The defense (says he) of the kings rebels against their most just Lord and
Sovereign is no lawful nor honorable quarrel of war; neither have the said
Traitors and rebels any authority to yield up their Souereignes towns, and
ports into his enemies hands, or themselves to the English protection or
subjection. All this is but a bare affirmation, which being All D. Allens
proofs depend upon the authority of his own word: for he does but barely
affirm what it pleases him, without adding any reason to confirm his
assertions.
denied, his argument is at an end, for he proves no one part of it. Besides
it is a Besides, in this assertion he does petere principium, assume that which
is all the matter in question.
plain petitio principij, which is a gross error in Logike, where groundeth
his argument upon that which is itself in question. For he presumes the
people of all the low countries to be the k. of Spaines rebels, and him their
most just Lord and Sovereign: which is the whole matter in controversy. So
you see this argument is clean cut off by the root.

The English wars in the low countries justified by several reasons drawn
from D. Allen himself.
And since he has nothing disproued her Majesty's dealings in this point by
the reason he has brought, give me leave now to justify the^ by an argument
or two drawn from himself.

Page 41. 42. 43. 44. 45. 46.
In the latter part of this pamphlet, where he goes about to persuade her
Majesty's subjects to revolt from her, he doubts not to affirm, that it is
lawful for the subjects for religions sake not only to revolt from their
sovereign, and to deliver up his cities and countries into other men's hands,
but also to bear arms against him, being in such case clearly discharged from
all bond of oath and fidelity to him.

Whereupon I infer, first, that those of the The first argument drawn from
D. Allen.
low countries, though they were (as he supposes) the lawful subjects of the
k. of Spain, yet might they for Religion (if there were no other cause)
lawfully reuolte from the k. and yield up his cities, and countries to the
Queens Majesty, or any other.

Secondly, that if it be lawful for the subject, for religion to bear arms
against his sovereign: then is it much more lawful for an absolute Prince,
for Religion also to yield succors to her distressed neighbors, against a
Stranger. The argument follows very well, a fortiori.

I am content M. Doctor to use your own arguments against yourselfe, albeit I
do neither allow of them, nor think them in truth to be sound; yet since you
thought it no injury to us, to make unlawful weapons for your own advantage
against us, you must think it no injury to yourselfe to be beaten with your
own rod.

Yet must I be so bold as to borrow another argument from you, for the
justifying of her Majesty's dealings in the low Countries to be lawful by
your own rule, as being for defense against enemies.

In your Inuectiue against our unjust dealings, Page 23. Another argument drawn
from D. Allens own words, to justify the English wars in any sort against
the K. of Spain, as being for defense against enemies.
you say, that we think it cause of war good enough to hinder our
neighbors greatness, and to disturb other men's quietness, to procure our own
peace and safety. Let us see what English is to be picked out of this. Why
should we seek to hinder our neighbors greatness? are we any thing the less,
by his being greater? no: unless he make himself greater, by making us less:
what need we then to fear his greatness? Belike it is to be feared, that, if
he be greater, he will make us less. What need I, nodum in in scirpo
quaerere? what need I so to hunt out the cause why we should seek to hinder
his greatness, when D. Allen himself has set it down in plain terms, to
procure our own peace, and safety? Whereby he gives us a good caveat to
provide for both, giving us to understand, that if D. Allen gives us to
understand, that if the K. of Spain were once quietly possessed of the low
Countries, we were not likely long to enjoy either peace or safety.
the King of Spain should once grow great, as D. Allen thinks he should in
deed, if he were once quietly possessed of the Low Countries, then should not
we long enjoy either peace, or safety. Which in truth has been upon good
cause long suspected by us, but may now better be believed, when D. Allen
(though I think in truth unadvisedly, and against his will) does so plainly
assure us of it.

Now where he says, that We think it cause of war good enough to hinder our
neighbors greatness, and to disturb other men's quietness, to procure our own
peace and safety, Let us see whether no man else thinks so, besides our
selves. What say you if his own Author Cicero think so as well as we?

Suscipienda quidem bella sunt (says he) ob eam Lib. 1. de Offic.
causam, vt sine iniuria in pace viuatur* Wars are to be taken in hand, that
is, may and must be taken in hand for that cause, and to that intent, that men
may live in peace without injury, that is all one as if he should say, in
peace and safety. VVhereupon I frame my argument thus:

Those wars which are taken in hand, to the The Argument gathered into a
Syllogism.
end that the undertakers thereof may live in peace and safety, are taken in
hand upon just cause, and consequently lawful.

But our wars against the K. of Spain (if we hold any wars against him)
are taken in hand, to the end that we may live in peace and safety.

Ergo, Our wars against the King of Spain are taken in hand upon just cause,
and consequently lawful.

The Mayor I take out of Cicero: the Minor out of D. Allens own words: the
Argument cannot be denied, for it is a good and true Syllogism, and the
consequence necessary. VVherby you may evidently perceive, that not only our
wars in the low countries, but those also by Sea, which D. Allen so defameth
(if we did maintain any such wars) or any other wars which we should
undertake against the K. of Spain, are both just and lawful, even by his own
allowance, being for our own defense, and the procurement of our own peace
and safety.

Further, because D. Allen shall have no show of Another Argument drawn from D.
Allen himself also, to prove the King of Spain our enemy.
reason left him, whereby he may cavil upon the word, saying that we cannot
justify our wars to be for defense against enemies, the K. of Spain being
(as he terms him) our neighbor, allie, and confederate: albeit it is a thing
not needful to be proved, nor does any way concern my argument, (which is
most strong and infallible without it) neither will I take upon me of my self
to affirm the K. of Spain to be our enemy, or touch him in any wise with
breach of his league and confederacy with us; yet to stop M. Allens mouth
with his own words, that he may (I say) have nothing to cavil upon, I will
only set himself to answer himself in this behalf.

The defe^se (says he) of the kings rebels against their most just Lord, and
Sovereign, is no lawful, nor honorable quarrel of wars: neither have the
said traitors and rebels any authority to yield up their Souereigns Towns and
Ports into his enemies hands, or themselves to the English protection, or
subjection.

Here D. Allen terms us the K. of Spaines enemies, The Argument a Relatiuis.
and if we be his enemies (as D. Allen affirms) then must he necessarily
be our enemy in like sort, for it is a word of Relation, which being rightly
pronounced of the one, must also necessarily be pronounced of the other. For a
Prince can not be said to be the confederate of him that is his enemy: but
they must be both as the one is, either both Socij, or both hosts, both
Confederates, or both enemies. This a very mean scholar, nay every man of
any reason or common sense may perceive to be true. And I do not doubt but D.
Allen himself, when he termed us the K. of Spaines enemies, knew him well
enough to be our enemy.

Thus you see not only that D. Allen has failed in the proof of the one part
of his division, that is: That our wars are not for defense against enemies,
and therefore unlawful: but also that we have proved the contrary against
him, both according to his own division, that is: That our wars are for
defense against enemies, and therefore lawful: and also by other reasons of
our own, that is: That our wars are for the procurement of our own peace
and safety, and therefore most just, and lawful. Wherein our proofs and
arguments (though they be strong enough of themselves against any man) yet are
they strongest against him of all men, being drawn even from his own
Allegations, reasons, and assertions: and therefore the more to be credited.

Now come we to the other part, and let us see The other part which D. Allen is
to prove, of his division drawn from Cicero. D. Allens assertion, that the
King of Spain has done unto her Majesty no injury. etc.
how he proves The English wars in the low Countries not to be moved for
revenge of injuries or annoyance.

The Kings Majesty (says he) has done to the Queen or her Realm no such
injuries, for redress or revenge whereof she should by hostility enter into
his Dominions, and surprise his Towns and Castles, and bring his people into
her subjection.

This is a point wherein I am loath to meddle in uttering what I think, or have
heard, yea scarcely would I touch that which is commonly bruted abroad in the
mouths of all men, considering that the matter concerns Princes, and is not
fit for private men to deal in: therefore would I rather refer the judgment
thereof to every man's own particular knowledge, opinion, and conscience. Yet
because it is a part of D. Allens argument, which he must not so clearly carry
away, least it should seem to be yielded unto him, as true: I will crave
pardon and leave, only to remember some particulars either known, or commonly
believed and reported.

And first I know men of judgment think it no great kindness in a Prince to
harbor (much less to enterteine and maintain) within his Dominions the
fugitive Rebels or Traitors of another Prince, his confederate, understanding
how vnduetifully (nay how lewdly and impiously) they have dealt with their
natural Souereign. But these (you will say) are but actions of unkindness, not
such heinous injuries. Well: I would they were less, offenses I am sure they
are at the least, and such as fall within one of the kinds of Injustice and
Injury. For greater, it is not fit for me to speak of.

A touch only of some parts offered the Q. Majesty by the K. of Spain, which
may well be deemed Injuries, yea in the highest degree.
Yet I doubt not but D. Allen himself (whatsoever he says here) and a great
number of Romish Catholics more besides him, know somewhat touching the
Inuasio^ made by the K. of Spains subjects in The Inuasio^ in Ireland, Anno.
1580.
Ireland, in the year 1580. and of the practices of his Ambassador The
practices of Mendoza, his Ambassador here, with our English Traitors.
Mendoza since that time, and of others her Majesty's most unnatural, subjects
shall I say? nay most bloody, abominable, and butcherly minded traitors, both
before and since. The very bowels and secrets whereof although they have been
happily kept from our knowledge, (I mean from the knowledge of the meaner
sort:) yet their own confessions have discovered more then is meet for me to
rehearse: and so much as has bred a general opinion and rumor yea even in the
very common people of England, that the K. of Spain has been not only privy
to the^, but a principal Author and Actor in them all. I will not speak of
the secret practices conspired for the deposing of her Majesty, and advancing
The practices for the deposing of her Majesty, and advancing of the Q. of
Scots to the crown.
of the Q. of Scots to the crown of England: which whether, or how justly they
may touch the K. of Spain, it is no part of my duty to deal with. I am sorry
to have had occasion to say so much, in a thing so little apperteining to me:
but I am the more to be pardoned, in that the argument has enforced me
thereunto, and in that I have mentioned nothing more then is known and common
to the multitude, and I could not have said less, unless I should have said
nothing at al. But I hope this that has been said, For this point I appeal to
the conscience and knowledge of the Papists themselves which know any thing.
may be sufficient to S. W. Stanley, Capt. York, and to all the English
Romanists, to whom D. Allen does especially direct his Pamphlet. For I know
there is not any of that sort of any account, but is so well acquainted with the
priuities of these actions, as that he can pick out of these enough to assure
him, that D. Allen has but dissembled with the^ in this point. Which being
so, they must also know and confess, and all men else may plainly perceive,
that this other part of his division serves not his turn, no more then the
former, to prove her Majesty's dealings in the low Countries unlawful, being
grounded upon a false supposition, that is, That the K. of Spain has done unto
her Majesty no such injury, whereof she should seek revenge. All D. Allens
arguments end in single affirmations, which also are neither confirmed with any
authority, or reason by him, nor carry any truth, or probability in
themselves.


Thus have you heard his argument brought to an end, for here he rests even
in simple affirmations, which I hope have been sufficiently convicted both by
substantial reasons and instances: so that there remains not now any thing
to be further answered, his whole argument and every part thereof, being
confuted in order from the first proposition to the last. And, besides this
which you have heard, has he not any argument in his whole Pamphlet, either
to justify the rendering of Deuenter and Zutphen Forts, or to disprooue her
Majesty's doings against the K. of Spain any way; which I have here both by
the authorities of his own Authors, and by reasons derived even from
himself, most evidently declared to be justifiable every way, if they were
greater then they are: which I could with further and more infallible reasons
also confirm, if it were requisite, or apperteining to my purpose.

But I must now bestovv a word or two in noting unto you some errors or
ouersightes (at the Some gross errors or ouersights, escaped D. Allen, in the
handling of this argument.
least) escaped from D. Allen, even in the very entry almost of his argument:
where in the circumstance he uses, to induce a probability and credit of his
first proposition, he sets down a general Thesis flat contrary to that
which he goes about to prove. For after many speeches touching the
necessity of Restitution, how things vvrongfullie gotten and detained, ought
to be restored, in the end he concludes with these very words: Yet
whatsoever is done against A general Thesis pronounced by himself, flatly
co^demning the action which he labors so much to justify, and commend.
military discipline and Justice, is sin and punishable by Gods laws. What
can there be said more directly against the action of S. W. Stanley, and the
rest? For there is none of them, nor any soldier else of any knowledge or
experience, but knows, that to yield a Town, Fort, or hold, wherewith a man
is put in trust, to the enemy (yea besieging it) so long as there is within it
sufficient strength and means to defend it, yea though it were not defensible,
yet to yield it before due summons, is death by the law of Arms: much more to
render a Town freely, without either force or demand; or rather corruptly and
traitorously to sell it for money: but the law of Arms does not punish any fact
with death, which is not done against the The rendering of Deue^ter proved by
D. Allens own position, to be sin, and punishable by Gods laws.
same law and discipline: therefore it must needs follow that the rendering up
of Deuenter and Zutphen Forts is against military discipline, and consequently
(by D. Allens own position) sin, and punishable by Gods laws. What a
resolution call you this for the satisfying of men's consciences touching the
lawfulnes of their action, to lead them about with a circumstance of other
meaning, and in conclusion to tell them in plain terms, that that which they
have done is sin, and punishable by Gods laws?

Yet are there two other errors, though not so evident, Two other ouersightes,
(or rather gross absurdities) more sentence.
yet as worthy the noting, even in the next sentence immediately going before:
where, after, he has taught, that restitutio^ is to be made of al things
unjustly taken and withholde^, upon pain of damnation, he adds these words:
And this I say even in lawful wars, or such as to the common people may be
upon their Princes credit so deemed. Where though they may offend th'enimy in
life, goods, liberty, and otherwise: etc.

Wherein first he makes no difference between The first of the two
ouersightes.
lawful wars, and unlawful wars, which may upon their Princes credit be
by the common people deemed lawful: as though things were just or unjust
either upon the Princes credit, or according to the peoples opinion of them,
not of their own nature, and according to the grounds and causes of them. By
this reason there should no wars be unlawful: for there is no war
undertaken, but that both the Prince which moves it, is able, and does
pretend some reason (or color of reason) to make it seem just, and the common
people also, by the Princes declaration and persuasions, may easily be induced
to esteem it to be lawful. Wherein by the way I must note some simplicity,
or great dissimulation in D. Allen, which would admit the lawfulnes, or
unlawfulness of wars, to be measured by the opinion of the common people, who
(God wot) are furthest from the knowledge of State matters, and the secret
dealings which pass between Princes, and from the consideration of the
injuries and occasions of war, and therefore the vnmeetest of all men to be
judges of the lawfulnes thereof.

But howsoever it be deemed lawful, whether by the common people, or by the
better and wiser sort, and such as are most privy to the secrets of the State,
upon the Princes credit, or otherwise, if it be in truth unjust; neither can
the No comparison between things simply just, and things only deemed just.
war it self be in any sort equalled with that war, which is indeed
lawful, neither can th'executions thereof be allowed and justified as
th'executions of a lawful war. For the one is simply just, and the other
simply unjust. And howsoever the subject presuming a thing to be just upon the
Princes credit, persuades himself that he does no injustice, because he
knows not that which he does, to be unjust: yet is his action in it self
never the less unjust: for, ignorantia non excusat peccatum.

You see what a foul error in Divinity this is; yet is there as bad even in
the next words following: The second absurdity.
viz. where though they may offend th'enimy in life, goods, liberty, etc.

Having showed before that restitution ought to be made of all things unjustly
gotten and detained, upon pain of damnation, and that even in lawful wars,
or such as to the common people may upon the Princes credit be so deemed, he
now makes it lawful notwithstanding, even in the same wars, to offend
th'enimy in life, goods, and liberty. As though it were not as great an
offense, unjustly to take away Vno absurdo dato, infinita consequuntur.
a man's goods, as to withholde them: or not a greater offense to take away
life or liberty, then to take away goods: Nay, as though to take away both
goods, liberty, and life, were no offense at all (for he makes them all
lawful) where, in the same case, to withholde the same goods, is an offense
damnable. What gross absurdities are these, and how contrary to all Divinity,
humane reason, and laws politic, yea even unto themselves? For what can be
more contrary to it self, then first to say that restitution of things
wrongfully obtained and unjustly detained, is to be made, under pain of
mortal sin and damnation (wherein is plainly employed by himself that both
wrongful obteining, and unjust deteining, D. Allen first makes both wrongful
obteining and deteining of goods, sins mortal and damnable, and afterward
makes the obteining lawful, and the deteining damnable.
is mortal and damnable sin,) and now after to say that the obteining is
lawful, and the deteining damnable? A thing being justly and lawfully gotten,
how ca^ the possession of it be unjust and unlawful?

For better distinction of the actions, let us suppose them to be in distinct
and several persons. Is not he that robs a man, and takes away his goods,
in as great fault, both by Divine and humane laws, as he that receives and
possesses The wrongful taking away of goods as as great, or rather a greater
sin, then the wrongful withholding of the same goods.
them? Nay rather in greater: for we account him principal, the other but
accessarie: and by great reason. For if the goods had not been first
wrongfully taken, they could never have been wrongfully detained. So the unjust
taking was the thing that made the deteining unjust: and (even by the rules of
Philosophy) Quicquid efficit tale, id ipsum est magis tale.

Now if the taking away of goods be a greater offense, or but as great, as the
deteining of them, what is then the taking away of liberty, yea of life?
Undoubtedly, unless we will hold with Illyricus the opinion of the Stoiks,
omnia peccata esse aequalia, which opinion the holy church has condemned, and
Illyricus himself for an heretic The wrongful taking away of liberty, and
life, a greater sin then ye wrongful taking away of goods only.
in holding it, we must needs confess the offense to be far greater, as the
things themselves which are taken away, are of greater account, and deerer
unto men. Being then a greater offense in reason, laws politic, and
especially in Divinity, to take away life, goods, and liberty, Ergo the
wrongful taking away both of goods, liberty and life (all which D. Allen
makes no sin, but a thing lawful) are far greater sins, the^ the wrongful
deteining of goods only, which D. Allen pronounces to be a sin mortal and
damnable, even in the same case.
then to deteine only goods so taken, it must needs appear to be a great
error for a man to affirm, that the wrongful deteining of goods (which is the
less sin) is a mortal and damnable sin, and the wrongful taking away
both of goods, liberty, and life (which is proved to be the far greater
sin) even in the same case, is no sin at all, but a thing lawful.

What man then, that is of any judgment, reason, or sense, will give credit to
his doctrine, or think him to be an honestman, Note the honest and Sincere
dealing of D. Allen.
which having expressly taught, that the greater sin is no sin at all, goes
about to persuade him that the less sin is a sin mortal and damnable, and
thereupon groundeth his whole argument? It is an old rule for such as will
practice the trade of lying, that Mendacem oportet esse memorem, A liar must
have a good memory, least he be entrapped in his own tale: but it seems D.
Allen presumed so much upon his continual exercise in the art, and thought
himself so much his crasies master, as that he never minded the precept made
for Scholars. But so it fares ever with a badde cause, which have it never so
stout a patron and A bad cause betrayeth it self.
defender, yet will it by one means or other betray it self: such is the
force of the naked, simple, and vndisguised truth, which confounds falsehood,
1. Esdr. 4. 41.
even in her own colors. For, Magna est veritas, and praeualet: Great is the
truth, and prevails: yea it breaks out unawares, even out of the mouths of
those that labor most to obscure and suppress it, that God (the author of
Truth, yea the very truth itself) may be glorified even by his enemies.

Diverse other things could I note unto you out of this pamphlet, even as
gross, and absurd, and as directly against D. Allens purpose, as any thing may
be: But it were vain to spend time in the further confuting of that, which is
skarce worth the looking on: and besides, it is not my special purpose, as I
told you before, neither would I have said so much concerning this part of his
pamphlet, but only to the intent to make my way plainer to the rest, by laying
first eue^ with the ground this dead rotten hedgerow of his disordered,
dissolute, and scattered argument: wherein you see not only every part thereof,
in order (as well as it might be gathered and put together) clean dissolved,
answered, and confuted, with substantial reasons and authorities produced
thereupon at large, so far forth as the matter required; but also sundry
ouersights and errors (committed in the handling thereof) so manifestly
discovered, and retorted upon him, as most effectual against himself: In
so much as I do not a little marvel how he durst adventure to write so slender
and superficial a thing unto them, and so patched together and stuffed up with
so many and so apparent contrarieties, and falsehoods, unless he either
presumed of their ignorance (which is the virtue that he, and the cunning
clerks, and learned sort of his sect, do so much commend D. Allen presumes
either upon the ignorance of the^ to whom he writes, that they are not able to
discern his abuses: or else upon their credulity, that they account all Gospel
that he speaks: otherwise would he be more wary how he published such evident
absurdities, and falsehoods.
unto their scholars, as the mother of Devotion) or else assured himself of as
much credit and authority with them, as Pythagoras had with his followers, that
would believe whatsoever he said, without any reason or further enquiry of the
matter, and thought it a sufficient cause to allege also unto others, (...)
that he said so. If D. Allen have brought his Catholics so much to the bent of
his bow, he may be bold to tell them that the soul which was in the Cobblers
cock, after many (...) is crept at the length into his body.

But in matters of conscience, salvation, or damnation (as he says these are)
let such as have a conscience, look to their consciences, and not hazard
their salvation, or damnation upon his word, but lean unto reason and seek to
inform themselves rightly of the truth. For if it be true (as it is most true)
that Christ says, If the blind lead the Math. 15. 14.
blind, they fall both into the pit, which he means of those that are blind
indeed of ignorance; much more shall it be true, being meant of them that are
wilfully blind, of obstinacy, and desire not to see, that both the leader,
and the follower shall fall into the bottomless pit of everlasting destruction.

BBut let us now come to the very point and Now to the very purpose of D.
Allens pamphlet.
purpose, whereunto this cunning pamphlet of D. Allens appears wholly to tend:
for he were very simple and of a shallow reach, that would think that D.
Allen had not a further meaning herein, then to satisfy the consciences of Sir
William Stanley and his accomplices, touching the lawfulnes of their giving up of
Deuenter, especially when he had before (as he says himself) delivered his
opinion by his letters to Sir W. Stanley thereupon, (and therefore needed the
less to go about to resolve them again, which were never unresolved in that
point:) and besides, even in this pamphlet which he pretends to write only
for their resolution, spe^deth least part of his time, D. Allen spe^deth the
least part of his labor in the justification of the action which he pretends
to be the occasion of his pamphlet: and besides leaves it in the end more
indefensible then in the beginning.
labor, or cunning in that argument, neither justifies their action in any
sort, but only with bare words void of weight or substance (as has been
sufficiently showed) but rather by his own reasons disalloweth and reproves
it, and leaves it in the midst more doubtful and indefe^sible then before:
leaping into an other argument inuectiue against her Majesty; her doings, of
her excommunication, and deposition by the Pope, and from thence to a
persuasion of her liege people to reuolte from their obedience and allegiance
unto her. Whereby he plainly bewrays (even more clear and manifest then the
light of the Sun) to all men of any mean understanding, yea to him that has
but half an eye, that his very direct end and purpose was wholly to prepare
What his direct purpose is.
the minds of the Romish Recusants (such as are apt hearers, and ready
followers of his doctrine) for the furtherance and assistance of all seditious
practices, that may be moved and attempted against her Majesty by the
malicious Associates of that wicked confederacy, and especially of the most
injurious invasion, long since conspired, and complotted, and now presently
provided to be put in execution against her Majesty and her Realm, by the K.
of Spain, the Pope, and their Adherents. And to this purpose wholly was this
Pamphlet of D. Allens intended, and the other Theme (touching the rendering of
Deuenter) enterteined only for an introduction thereunto. Wherein Whether D.
Allen have had any wrong offered him in resembling him to Sinon, let all men
judge.
whether he have had any wrong offered him in resembling him to Sinon, whom he
has so truly represented herein, I refer to the judgment of the Romish
Catholics themselves, that hold him in greatest reverence. Who, how soever
they are affected toward him for Religions sake, yet if there be any spark
of true honor, English valor, or love of their Country in them (as I trust
and assure my self there is) I doubt not but looking into, and well foreseeing
the end of his purposes, they will utterly abhor his unnatural practices.

But mark I pray you the order he observes The order which D Allen
observes to attain unto his purpose.
to attain unto his intent.

First to draw her Majesty into discredit and disliking with all men, and
consequently with her subjects, whereby they may be the more easily incited
against her: he defameth all her most noble, First, he defameth her Majesty's
most noble and Princely actions.
princely, and Religious actions, undertaken for the relief of her poor
oppressed neighbors, by the name of public robberies, and sacrilegious wars
against God and his Church.

Secondly, to give them some encouragement Secondly, he gives the Subject a
warrant to disobey and revolt from her Majesty.
and warrant (as it were) whereby they may be the bolder to disobey, and to
renounce their due allegiance and service unto her Majesty: he teaches them
that since her Excommunication and Deposition by the Pope, she has no just
title or interest unto her Crown and Kingdom, nor any power or authority
over them, to command them, but that they are ever since that time, freely
discharged from all duty and allegiance unto her Majesty: nay further, that
no act done by her authority, since the publication of that Excommunication
and Deposition, has been, or can be lawful by the law of God, or man: and
therefore that no man may lawfully serve her in any action, be it otherwise
never so just.

Whereupon he runs into an earnest persuasion Thirdly, He persuadeth them
flatly to disobedience, and plain rebellion.
of revolt, to withdraw her Subjects from her service, and exhort them to the
service of the Romish Catholic party, and her enemies.

What blasphemous slanders, prodigious affirmations, impudent lies, and
deuilish persuasions are these? and how far unbeseeming the name, profession
and calling of a Divine? But what is there so honest and godly, that D. Allen
will not defame? what so false and incredible, that he will not affirm? what
so wicked and abominable, that he will not persuade? It had been far fitter
The names and doings of Princes, are not to be called in question by such
companions.
for D. Allen to have dealt with his Portis, and let alone the names and doings
of Princes. If he had been as busy in his book, and as careful of those
things which belong to his vocation, he might have sought out more Divinity
to satisfy the Consciences of his Catholic Soldiers, and with more credit (or
probability at the least) defended their action, then he has done.

And as unfit as it was for him, to call in question the names and doings of
Princes, so unmeet were it for me, and repugnant to all good discretion, to
presume to enter into their defense, of whose actions I am neither able, nor
worthy to speak, sufficiently for their worthiness: whose sacred Majesty and
authority derived from the high Governor of the world, is as the brightness of
the Sun shining in his greatest perfection, not to be gazed on by our dazzled
eyes, and ought to be a shield of protection to all their doings, against the
curious scanning, and venomous detraction of malicious monsters. Wherefore I
will not dare to meddle, so much as with the mention of their names Princes
represent the power and Majesty of God on earth.
or actions, whom God has ordained to represent his own power, and authority
over us here on earth, without former craving of pardon with all humility,
that I may be licenced only to examine the truth, (nay the detestable
falsehood) of these most injurious calumniations. Whereof also, that I may not
seem to make a question of that which is past al question, and not to be
brought into question by such companions, I will be as spare of speech, and
use as much brevity, as the cause and case will permit.

Now then I pray you M. Allen (for to you will I now address my speech, to
you, which are the defamer of virtue it self, and the detracter of all
godliness) what public robberies are those you object unto us (for her
Majesty's name is not fit to be defiled by your impure lips)? what
sacrilegious wars against God and his Church? If you mean the defense or
relief of the low Countries, which is the only thing that galleth you, in
respect of the K. of Spain your chief Patron, and the only matter that
ministered you the argument Her Majesty's dealings in the low countries already
justified by D. Allens own arguments.
of this your pamphlet, her Majesty's dealings in that cause (which it pleases
you to term wars) have been sufficiently justified already against your
objections, in this former discourse, as well by the overthrow of your
arguments, as also by better and more forcible arguments brought against you,
drawn even from your own Authors, nay from your own manifest affirmations.
Therefore have you small cause, and less reason to run on, upon a headlong
conclusion of your own false assumptions, to defame those actions, which you
could not disprooue, nay which your own assertions have proved most lawful.
This only should be sufficient to stop your mouth, though there were nothing
more to be said in that behalf.

But because I think it more expedient to satisfy other men (such as will with
reason be satisfied) then necessary to answer your slanders, I will not stand
wholly upon those advantages. Wherefore if any man doubt either of the reason,
intent, or Justice The declaration of the causes that moved her Majesty to
relieve the distressed people of the low Countries: published, Anno. 1585.
of that action; first, for the former points I refer him to the declaration
published by authority, at the time when her Majesty first sent her forces
over into the low Countries, Anno. 1585. wherein are declared the causes that
moved her Majesty to give aid and succourse unto those afflicted Countries,
so fully and plainly, as I doubt not but may satisfy any reasonable man,
touching her reason, and intent therein.

As for the justice and lavvfulnes of the action, albeit the reason and intent
thereof being before declared, and allowed, must needs make the action also
justifiable, unto such as shall allow of the causes, yet because D. Allen
shall not run clear away with an opinion of his conceit, I Her Majesty's
actions in the low Countries by further reasons proved lawful. Offic. lib. 1.
vvil think it no great labor to justify also the action, by arguments
drawn from his own authors.

Iniustitiae duo sunt genera, (says Cicero): vnum eorum qui inferunt: alterum
eorum, qui ab ijs, quibus infertur, si possint, non propulsant iniuriam. There
are two kinds of injustice: the one, in them that do wrong, themselves: the
other in them that do It is one of the kinds of Injury, or Injustice, not to
defend the iniuried.
not reskue and defend other men, from the injuries offered them, if they be
able.

Now of these two kinds of Injustice, the one was exercised by the K. of Spain
upon the people of the low Countries (as they say themselves, for I, for my
part, will not imitate the example of D. Allen in charging Princes with
Injustice): whereupon the said people craving her Majesty's aid and
assistance, the other kind (says Cicero) should have been offered them by
her, if she should have denied them her help and succors, to defend them
Ibidem.
from injury. Qui autem non defendit (says he) nec obsistit, si potest,
iniuriae, tam est in vitio, quam si parents, aut patriam, aut socios deserat.
But he that does not defend, nor withstand, if he can, the wrong done to
others, is as much in fault, as if he should forsake his parents, Country,
or friends: which is the most unnatural injustice.

Now if it be a principal point of Injustice for a man not to defend and
succor them that are iniuried, if he be able, and so far forth as he is
able to do it: then it follows a contrarijs, A principal part of Justice,
to defend the iniuried.
that it is a principal part of Justice, to assist and defend them that are
wronged. By which argument her Majesty's most gracious and Princely action, in
yielding aid and defense unto the poor oppressed people of the low Countries,
is effectually proved to be most just, lawful, and honorable, and he a
liar, a slanderer, and an abuser of men, that has wickedly sought to dishonor
it.

I will not (though well and justly I might) justify the action upon Religion,
(as being for the defense of the true Catholic and Apostolic Religion, which
we profess) because I will not run into the same fault, which I reprehend in
him, that is, Petere principium, to ground mine argument upon that which is in
question between him and me: no more then I will allow him to impeach it upon
the authority of his former assumption, That all the Provinces (of the low
Countries) are confessed to be his Catholic Majesty's ancient and undoubtful
inheritance: which is in question of arms even at this day, and therefore not
necessary to be disprooued by me: neither might I do it, unless I would
offend in the same fault, which I also reprove in D. Allen, that is, in
dealing with Princes titles, which is no part of his duty and mine. How
falsely D. Allen charge her Majesty with entering by hostility into the K. of
Spaines Dominions, etc.


Now how unjustly and falsely he charge her Majesty with entering by
hostility into the King of Spaines Dominions, surprising his Towns and
Castles, and bringing his people into her subjection: let all men judge, that
have in them either reason, discretion, or indifferency.

First, it is (as has been already said) a thing in question and
controversy, whether those parts of the low countries, where her Majesty's
forces have bin, be the K. of Spaines Dominions, or no: and if they be not,
then is this a most evident and manifest slander, even before the face of the
whole world.

But suppose them to be the K. of Spaines Dominions, as he presumes; yet is it
not unknown to any private mean man in this Realm, that knows any thing
of the affairs of those Countries, that her Majesty has been offered, yea,
with humble and earnest suit of the people of those parts, entreated, to take
both them and their Countries into her absolute protection, rule and
government, which, though there Her Majesty being offered and entreated to
take the low Countries into her absolute government, has refused them.
were no great doubt, but that she might lawfully have done, yet has her
Majesty ever hitherto utterly refused them: which she needed not, neither by
all likelihood would have done, if she had had any such great thirst after
those Towns, Castles, Countries or peoples Dominion.

No, her Majesty is content with her own Her Majesty content with her own
kingdom. Her just and merciful government.
kingdom, and governs her subjects by lawful authority, with Justice and
Clemency, not by tyranny, with rigor, and oppression: neither seeks she,
either by the Popes pretended authority and assistance to depose, or by
violent arms to deprive, other Princes of their kingdoms. She cleaves not
to the Pope, to make his supreme power a warrant for her will, though she might
have many advantages and privileges thereby, to take and leave It is a great
benefit for him that seeks worldly pleasure or profit, to be friends with the
Pope, who by his special prerogative can dispense with any sin, be it never so
abhommable and make all things lawful that he lusts, howsoever God forbid
them.
what, where, when, and how she likes, to confound all laws, both of God and
man, and to make all lawful that she lusts: but she has care of her
ownesoule, and conscience, and of the charge committed unto her by him, to whom
only she is to give account thereof: she respects not her own profit or
pleasure, but the purity and syncerity of religion, and the true worship of
God: and therefore she rejects all friendship, favor, and countenance of the
Pope. She thinks not kingdoms to be rightly theirs that can catch them, nor
practices by Machiauelian shifts (as you term them) to dispossess Princes
of their lives, to the intent to possess her self of their kingdoms. For
this which D. Allen obiecteth to us, let him look to his own party.
She thrusts not her neighbors out of their rightful inheritance, to
enlarge her own dominions, but diminishes her own forces, to succor and
relieve her distressed neighbors. And shall these her most virtuous, godly,
and religious actions be defamed by a most vicious, ungodly, and malicious
detractor?

But the Palm tree, which resembles virtue, the more it is burdened, the
more it rises again, and the pure gold the more it is rubbed, the more it
glistereth; and her virtuous, pure, and D. Allens tongue is no slander.
golden deeds, the more they are blasphemed by such an one, whose tongue (as
they say) is no slander, but his reproach rather a credit, the brighter shall
they shine in glory to the everlasting memory of her unspotted renown.

And since I am in hand with D. Allens malicious and slanderous inueighing
against her Majesty, and her ministers, I may not by the way omit this proper
quippe given my L of Leicester (wherein he seems wonderfully to have pleased
his own queint conceit) by offering a comparison between the D. of Parmaes
glorious exploits, and his Lordships famous D. Allens Scosses at the Earl of
Leicester.
factes (as it pleases him skornefully to term them) with a scilicet.

O le pidum caput, O lusty Cardinal: so well it becomes a man of your coat
and calling, to play Dauus, to take upon you the part and person of a scoffer?
And I pray you what great 1. Psalm. 1. and has not sit in the seat of skorners.
dishonor have you done the noble Earl therein? As though his virtues were so
far inferior, to the others. I speak not any way to the derogatio^ of the
Dukes honor, for I know him to be a worthy a Prince, and a famous soldiour:
neither by way of comparison, for I am not so il nurtured, as to make
co^parisons between Princes. But I hope your Catholic soldiers Sir W.
Stanley, and Rowland York, and the rest will confess, that for the small time
he was in those countries, and the little means he had there, considering also
the great crosses he had both there and elsewhere, he was The Earl of
Leicesters managing of the low country affairs during his abode there.
neither idle, nor spent his time and travel in vain: he showed sufficiency
enough both in his temperate, prudent, and politic government of the State,
and managing of the military affairs: neither was he backward for his own
person (if he were not too forward) at any service in the field, where either
his counsel, presence, or help of hand was required. They all know this to be
Grave betrayed.
true. And, howsoever Grave was cowardly (and by evident proof also
traitorously) delivered by Hemert the Governor, Venlo sold by the Burghers,
Venlo sold.
before th'enimie ever prepared to march toward it, Nuys (after the wounding
of the Governor) Nuys badly lost.
with little force obtained, but not without some treachery, and lastly Berke
two months Berke two months besieged and then abandoned for fear of our
army marching toward it.
besieged, and in the end aba^doned for fe^e of the Earl of Leicester with his
army, being at Elte^ onward in his march thither, to leauy the siege: yet my L.
of Leicester (with a very small power, not above 5000. men, of al sorts)
enca^ped before Duisburgh on tuesday, entre^ched it on wednesday, planted
Duisburgh yielded to the Earl of Leicester on Friday the second of Septembre
1586.
his ordinance on Thursday, battered it on Friday, and had it yielded to his
mercy the same day by noone: and within a fortnight after, removed with the
same power to Zutphen, abode the Duke of Parmaes coming (who was reported This
encounter was the 22. of Sept. 1586, wherein the most worthy, noble, and valiant
knight Sir Philip Sidney received his deth^ wound.
to come with almost four times so many) encountered his vantgard one to six
at the least, besieged the fort, and within three weeks The Earl of Leicester
wan the sort, the 6. day of October following, the Prince being with his whole
army within two mile of the place.
wan it, even in the Duke of Parmaes sight, which had before that time endured
ten months siege of more the^ twice so great an army, and yet held good
Neither did the Earl of Leicester raise his siege from either of these pieces,
till he had gotten the^: neither bought he either of them, but with the Here
are not mentioned all the services which were done under the Earl of
Leicesters conduct in the low countries, as the overthrow of the Spaniards at
Grave, the winning of Axell, and diverse fortes and Castles in those parts, but
only those parts, but only those services whereat he himself was present in
person, and a principal director and actor in them all.
price of his own labor and industry (being present in person and giving
both direction and assistance in all these services) and with the blood of his
soldiers, and those very few. All this your Catholic soldiers also know to
be most true. And are these exploits, none at all, or to be contemned and
derided?

But in truth M. Doctor you know not what they be, and therefore you make light
of them. If D. Allen had been there, I believe he would have been in an other
humor, skarce so pleasant, though happily more ridiculous.
I would you had been present your self either in the town of Duisburgh, or
in one of the fortes of Zutphen, to have seen them: then might you better have
judged of them, at the least I am persuaded you would not so have skorned them.

And if you think the unfortunate success of Sluys the year following, an
impeachment to the credit gotten by these exploits: you do greatly abuse your
self. The fault of the loss of Sluys, not to be imputed to the Earl of
Leicester, which was in other men's negligence, or
For it is very* well known to all men (especially of those countries) where
and in whom the fault of that default lay. For if those preparations which my
L. of Leicester commanded, and made sure account of, had bin duly
accomplished, as they were certainly promised and assured by them that had the
charge thereof: the town had (with Gods help) undoubtedly been relieved. But
howsoever the matter fell out either by the negligent or treacherous dealings of
other men, that were put in trust therein: I say with Ovid: careat successibus
opto, Quisquis ab euentu facta notanda put at: Ill may he Epist. 2.
chieue, that measures the fact by the event: and little reason has he, that
will impute another man's fault, as a dishonor to my L. of Leicester.

But herein may you plainly see the intemperancie of D. Allen, and how he
deals by affection, that when he has nothing that he can justly object in
particular to so honorable and worthy a noble man, yet he will in a general
sort glaunce at him, only to bring his name in question with the multitude. But
all the world may easily know the cause why the Earl of Leicester The cause
why the Earl of Leicester is most odious to D. Allen.
is above al me^ the most odious to D. Alle^, that is, only because he is one
of the greatest, and principal patrons of true religion, which D. Allen so
much hates.

And for this cause also have there been sundry Sundry libels heretofore cast
forth by Papists particularly against the Earl of Leicester.
other infamous libels heretofore secretly cast out and spread abroad, against
this most noble gentleman, likely enough by Allen himself, or by Persons, or
atleast some one of that viperous backbiting generation. Wherein, the authors
(as if Beelzebub himself, the master of that malicious sect, had sat by, and
given them instructions) have not only raked their own brains to the The
Papists cankred malice to the Earl of Leicester
bare scull, but (I am sure) have not left any one corner within the whole
compass of Hell it self vnransacked, to seek and find out some new and
strange kinds of rancor and venim (more then all the Poets from the beginning
of the world could ever invent for the description of Envy, and the Furies
themselves) wherewith to exasperate and empoison their most outrageous
slanders, breathed out against him. Which even upon the very first view have
appeared unto all men so manifestly false, monstrous, and far from all color
of truth, credit, or likelihood, as his very enemies themselves, and such as
Their libels discredited even by the notorious falsehoods contained in them.
hate him in their hearts, have not only been ashamed of the slanders, but
openly condemned the authors of that most barbarous villainy, and shameless
immanity. In which respect being with all men generally so much discredited,
detested and abhorred for their abominable untruth, they have not hitherto
been And therefore thought not fit to be answered.
thought worthy, fit, or seemly to be answered by any man, and therefore shall
not presently be further stirred by me, but returned to the filthy sink, from
whence they proceeded.

And for the authors thereof, as, thinking by The mischief which the authors
thereof meant unto the Earl, is fallen upon their own heads.
this means to make his Lordship odious amongst men, they have not only
failed of their purpose, but have thereby also made themselves hateful unto
God, and infamous to the world, and fallen themselves into the pit which they
dug for him: So have they contrary to their Psalm. 7. 15.
own minds, and against their wills) heaped on his head the heavenly blessings
which Christ himself with his own mouth pronounces upon those which are
reviled, persecuted, and falsely Matthew. 5. 11.
slandered for his sake. Which may be, and (no doubt) is a singular comfort to
the most honorable, zealous, and godly minded Earl, not only to despise and
contemn their despitefull slanders, but so much the more heartily to rejoice
and triumph over their malice, as he sees him self the more impudently, and
furiously assailed with their injurious reproaches.

It were too much labor, and too ill bestowed, either to reply upon, or to
repeat all the railing and slanderous speeches, which D. Allen belcheth out
against his Sovereign, her ministers, and country: for therein only (in mine
opinion) he seems to himself to have best grace. But he that will defile his
own nest (as they say) the country wherein he was borne and bred, calling it
the Buckler of all rebellion and injustice, D. Allens unnatural impiety
toward his country.
and an enemy of lawful Dominion and Superiority, yea, he that will not
stick to rippe up the womb, and to tear and take out the bowels of his own
mother, he that will endeavor to bring in an invasion, to the utter spoil,
ruin, and depopulation of his dear country: what injury, what wickedness,
what impietye, will he leave unattempted?

But now will I come to the second step of his The second step of D Allens
ladder.
ladder, wherein (having already sought, by defaming her Majesty's most just
and honorable actions, to withdraw the hearts and love of her subjects To give
the subject a warrant for his disobedience.
from her) he now goes about to embolden them to disobey her, by giving them a
warrant for their disobedience, teaching that since her Majesty was
excommunicate and deposed by the Popes authority, there is no subject that
need or ought, or may lawfully serve her in any case, be it otherwise never so
lawful.

A very good doctrine (no doubt) and well agreeing with the word of God.

The holy Ghost says, Let every soul be subject Obedience and subjection both
to the Prince and his ministers, commanded.
to the higher power: and whosoever resists the power, resists the
ordinance of God, and they that resist shall receive to themselves judgment.
And further: Submit your selves, whether it be to the king, Romans 13. 1, and 2.
^. Pet. 2. 13. 14. and 15. ver.
as unto the superior, or unto Governors, as sent by him: for so is the will
of God. etc.

But these are matters out of my profession, and meeter to be argued by
Divines, and so is all this whole question touching the excommunication and
deposition of Princes. Yet because I see little Divinity used by D. Allen for
the proof of Little Divinity or rather none at all used by D. Allen to warrant
the subjects disobedience.
his part, but such as may easily be answered by a man of small reading, I may
be the bolder in brief manner to examine his handling of this point, that you
may see what he has to say for manteinance of this seditious doctrine. Wherein
if I proceed vltra crepidam (as D. Allen has done in dealing with Princes
titles and State matters) or step a little out of square, I humbly crave
pardon of the learned Divines, for entering into their profession, which D.
Allen does not of Princes, for entering into their possession. But the less
marvel is it that he is so bold with Princes in that point, when he touches
their D. Allen is very bold with Princes, which makes them all subject to a
Priest.
freeholds so much nearer, in making both them, their persons, and kingdoms
subject to the Commandment, and disposing of a man of as mean quality (in a
manner) as himself.

But we see God has given unto Princes authority and commandment over their
Subjects, and has willed all sorts of people, as well Ecclesiastical, as
Temporal (and consequently both D. Allen and the Pope himself) to submit
themselves unto Princes, to be subject unto them, to obey, and not to resist
them, under pain of judgment: let us see then by what authority D. Allen can
release and discharge the Subject from his obedience, duty, and allegiance
unto his Prince.

His first authority is taken from Hildebrand D. Allens first authority to
warrant disobedience to the Prince* Hildebrand a Pope of Rome, otherwise called
Gregory the seventh.
(whom he calls Gregory the seventh) who taking upon him more like a king of
kings, or lord of the whole world, then like a true scholar and follower of
Christ, pronounces his decree with a great Majesty in the plural number, We
(says he) according to our predecessors Decrees, do assoile and discharge
all them that by obligation of oath, or fidelity, are bound to persons
excommunicate: and that they do not obey such, we do expressly forbid.

His second authority (which is even the like) he D. Allens second authority
to warrant disobedience. Pope Urban the second.
fetches from Vrbanus the second, who uses this inhibition: forbid (says
he) the sworn soldiers of Conte Hugh, that they serve him not so long as he
stands Excommunicate: And if they pretend their former oath made unto him:
admonish them that God is to be served before men, and that the oath which they
made to him when he was a Christian Prince, is not now to be kept toward him,
being an enemy to God and his Saints, and a breaker and contemner of their
commandments.

A fair pair of authorities, drawn from a couple A good warrant from a pair
of Popes.
of Popes, who had even as good authority to give these discharges and
inhibitions, as D. Allen himself.

Is this the best warrant you have to release the Pope Hildebrand took upon
him to Excommunicate the Emperor Henry the fourth, and to make wars against
him, and erect another Emperor in his place: But God (to punish the pride of
the Pope, and disobedience of his Adherents) giving the victory unto the true
Emperor Henry the fourth, against the usurping Pope and Emperor, the said
Henry caused Hildebrand himself by a Synod in Italy to be deposed, as Pope
John, Syluester, Benet, and Gregory the sixth, were also by other Emperors,
four Popes within a few years deposed.
subject of his oath and obedience to his Prince, because two Popes of your
own pack (whose whole practice has been for these four or five hundredth
years, to bring the heads of Princes under their girdles) have, to that
intent, pronounced it to be lawful for the subject, to renounce his allegiance
to his Prince, whenever it should please his holiness (forsooth) upon any
displeasure or private occasion (under pretense of some heinous crime) to
Excommunicate him?

What if we should deny that these Popes, or any other Pope ever had, or has
any authority to Excommunicate a foreign Prince, no way subject to his charge?
D. Allen has not proved it in his Pamphlet, nor any where else, neither is
he able to prove it with the help of all the Cardinals in Rome (yea and of
the Pope himself too) while he lives.

But such as are Romanists, are of another mind, and will happily believe D.
Allens bare affirmation in this behalf, and so may be persuaded, not only
that the Pope has authority to Excommunicate and depose Princes at his
pleasure, but also that the subjects of Princes so Excommunicate and deposed by
the Pope, may lawfully, and ought in duty to disobey and revolt from their
service.

How they may be seduced by erroneous doctrine, I know not: but for other men,
that are either of sounder Religion, or men indifferent, or not so thoroughly,
and obstinately (as upon a mere Neither D. Allens affirmation, nor the
authority of any Pope, ought to have any credit, being directly
contradictorie to the express word of God.
selfewill) addicted to that faction, I doubt not but they will be better
advised, then to give credit unto the affirmation of any man, or the
authority of any Pope (though he make himself more then a man) being
directly contradictorie to the express word, and will of God, as has been
showed by the places of Scripture above rehearsed, and by many more may be.

But because they also shall not have any color of defense left them, whereby
to excuse themselves so much as upon ignorance in this behalf, I will (since I
am entered into it) lay before them, in as few words as I can, the abuses of D.
Allen whereby he goes about to deceive them in this point, and prove
directly and manifestly unto them, that neither the Pope has any authority to
depose Princes from their thrones, which is the ground whereon he builds his
warrant of revolt: and further that it is utterly unlawful for the Subject,
for any such occasion to deny the Prince the obedience, subjection, and service
due unto him, much more in traitorous manner to rebel against him; which D.
Allen so allows and commends.

First therefore, as concerning the Popes authority That the Pope has no
authority to depose Princes.
to depose Princes, I demand from whom he has that authority, whether of
himself, or from God? Of himself I know he will not say, for that were as
great arrogancy, as absurdity in him to say. And if he would (as perhaps he
could be content to take it upon himself, if he thought it might go for
current) yet can he not yield any color or show of reason to maintain it,
being Romans 13. There is no power, but of God, Ergo, the Pope can have no power
of himself to depose Princes.
contrary to the express word of God. For There is no power (says the
Apostle) but of God, and the powers that be, are ordained of God. Then can the
Pope have no power or authority of himself, unless he will affirm himself
to be God. Again, No man has power of himself to frustrate the ordinance of
God, Ergo the Pope has no power of himself to depose Princes, which are
ordained of God.
And the Prince being a power, and consequently ordained of God, it were great
presumption in him to affirm, and greater blindness in men to believe, that the
authority of man can frustrate or take away the ordinance of God.

It rests therefore, that the Pope, if he have any If the Pope have any
authority to depose Princes, he must have it from God.
authority to depose Princes, he must have it from God. If he have it from
God, he must have it by some warrant out of his word.
And if he have it from God, the^ is there some warrant in his word to
authorize the Pope thereunto: But no place of Scripture gives him warrant to
depose Princes.
But there is not any place of Scripture that gives the Pope any express
power to depose Princes: Ergo, he has no authority from God.
and therefore has he no such authority from God.

For the proof of my Minor: First it is likely, that If any place of Scripture
had warranted the Pope to depose Princes, it is likely D. Allen would have
alleged it: but he alleges none.
if there were any such place of Scripture, as gives the Pope express power
to depose Princes, D. Allen would undoubtedly have alleged it, for the more
credit of the cause, and not have passed it over with a bare affirmation,
being a matter heretofore by many and manifest arguments and proofs of
Scripture, clearly disprooued, and convinced against him.

Secondly, for further confirmation thereof, I reason thus: Besides the
obedience and subjection which God has commanded in the Scripture to be done
unto Princes, he has further forbidden all men Exodus 22. 28. Ecclesiastes,
10. 20.
to speak evil of the ruler of the people, or to curse the King, yea so much
as in thought. Whereupon I frame this argument.

God forbids all men to speak evil of Princes, so much as in thought: Ergo
much more to hurt them in deed, and to deprive them of their kingdoms, and
lives too, which the Pope seeks to do, and D Allen mainteineth, may lawfully
be done.
God forbids all men to curse the King, yea so much as in thought, Ergo: he
forbids the Pope to curse the King, so much as in thought; And he that
forbids to do the less, much more forbids to do the greater: But it is
far greater to curse the K. indeed, and openly, and to deprive him of his
kingdom, then to curse him in thought only, or to speak evil of him: Ergo,
God forbidding the Pope to speak evil of the King, or to curse him in his
thought, much more forbids him to curse the King openly, or to deprive him
of his kingdom: whereupon it follows by good consequence, that God does not
in any place of Scripture authorize the Pope to depose Princes: for so should
he allow and warrant that in one place, which he has forbidden in another:
whereof you see what inconvenience should follow, that God should command
contraries, and the Scriptures should be repugnant to themselves, which were
plain Atheism to affirm. Whereby it may be clear and manifest unto every
man, that has any sense of Christianity in him, that God having in these
former places of Scripture expressly forbidden all men to curse in thought, or
to speak evil of the King, much more to curse him openly or to bereave him of
his kingdom, does not therefore in any place of Scripture admit or authorize
any man (contrary to this inhibition) to curse, excommunicate, and depose
Princes What God commands in one place of Scripture, he does not countermand
in another: neither are the Scriptures contrary one to another.
out of their kingdoms. For that were to countermand his own commandments,
and to show himself variable, inconstant, and repugnant to himself, which
were high impiety for any man to imagine.

Thus you see (beside the presumption, which is to be gathered out of D. Allens
own dealing, in that he alleges no place of Scripture to warrant the Popes
depriving of Princes, that it is therefore likely that no place of Scripture
does authorize him thereunto) you see it (I say) directly proved by sound and
substantial argument, (as by many more also might be very abundantly, if
either the cause required proof, or if it were my purpose to stand upon the
confirmation of that, which is of itself so manifest) that the Pope neither
has, nor can have any express authority, given him directly by the word of
God to depose Princes: which is the thing that God reserueth wholly to himself:
for it is he (not the Pope) that deposes the mighty from their seat, and
exalts Luke. 1. Dan. 2. 20. and cap. 4. 14. and 22.
them that are low: it is he (not the Pope) that puts down kings, and
sets up kings, and gives kingdoms to whomsoever he will. For God has
ordained God (not the Pope) puts down and sets up Kings.
Princes to rule his people, and to represent his own Majesty amongst them,
which cannot be subject to any earthly creature: and as he has put all men in
subjection under them (as his own Vicegerents on Earth) so has he subjected
the^ unto none, but only and immediately to himself. Which supreme The ancient
Fathers and Doctors of the Church, confirm the supreme authority of Princes
next immediately under God. Tertul. ad Scapulam.
authority of Princes next under God, howsoever D. Allen does maliciously and
wickedly impugn, yet the Church of Christ has ever confessed and confirmed
it, as appears by the sentences of the holy Fathers and Doctors of the
Church touching that point. Colimus imperatorem (says Tertullian) vt homine^ a
Deo secundum, and solo Deo minorem: we worship the Emperor, as a man next unto
God, and inferior to God only. And again, Deum esse Idem in Apologetico.
solum, in cuius solius potestate sunt, a quo sunt secundi, post quem primi,
ante omnes and super omnes Deos and homines: That it is God only, in whose
power alone Princes are, to whom they are second, and after whom they are
first, before all, and over all both Gods and men. Optatus in like Optat.
contra Parmenian. lib. 3.
sort says: Super Imperatorem non est nisi solus Deus qui fecit Imperatorem:
There is none above the Emperor but only God, who made the Emperor.
Chrysostom ad populum Antioch. hom. 2. Greg. epist. lib. 3. cap. 100. and cap.
103.
And Chrysostom says: Parem vllum super terram non habet: The Emperor has
no equal on earth. And Gregory affirms further, That power is given to
Princes from heaven over all men, not only soldiers, but Priests.

If Princes then (by the judgment of the old learned Fathers and Doctors of
the Church, whose names D. Allen does more boast of, then allege their
testimonies) be in authority next unto God, inferior to him only, and
superiors to all men; and if there be none above the Prince, but only God The
Pope must necessarily presume himself to be God, else can he not be above
Princes.
who made the Prince: the Pope must of necessity either presume himself to be
God, else can he not be above the Prince, or at the least make himself no man,
but a monster, otherwise must he needs be inferior to the Prince.

And if the Prince have no equal on earth: the The Pope must either
acknowledge himself to be no man, and not to be at all, or else must he
necessarily be inferior to Princes.
Pope must either acknowledge himself to be under the Prince, or else not to
be at all.

The Pope, whatsoever he be, Ecclesiastical or temporal person, must needs
be subject to the power of Princes.
And if power be given unto Princes from heaven over all men, not only
soldiers, but Priests also: then cannot the Pope (whether he be soldier, or
Priest, or whatsoever he be, so he be a man) exempt himself from that power,
which God has given unto the Prince over him: much les can he take away from
Princes that power, which The power to set up, and put down Princes, peculiar
to God alone.
God has given unto them. For the power of setting up and putting down
Princes (being in Majesty the greatest on earth, and proper to God himself
alone) has he not imparted unto any earthly creature, either absolutely from
himhimselfe, or jointly with himself, but has reserved it wholly to himself.

But because D. Allen is so much more devoted D. Allen more devoted to the Pope
then to God.
unto the Pope then to God, as that he can be content to pull out of Gods hand
his peculiar authority and prerogative, to draw the same wholly unto the Pope,
by what means he cares not, A notable impiety added to sacrilege
right, or wrong, and (the more to augment the injury) will needs make Gods
own word a warrant to rob himself of his honor, and right: having already
showed that he cannot by any means directly draw from God unto the Pope, the
authority of deposing Princes, I will lay before you also the indirect means
he uses in this pamphlet, to accomplish his intent, and how little What D.
Allen cannot prove directly by sentence of Scripture, he endeavors indirectly
to induce by example. Athalia. Ahab. Iesabell.
they also serve his turn.

What he cannot prove by sentence of Scripture, he labors (by the way) to
induce by example: as namely by the mention of the usurping Queen Athalia, the
wicked King Ahab, and cursed Iesabell, who were all (as he seems to intend)
deposed from their kingdoms and slain: because the Priests and Prophets of
God did therein give assistance, counsel, or direction, he would hereupon
feign infer, that the Pope may by these examples take away both the crowns
and lives of princes.

An argument far fet, in truth, and sauouring An argument sauouring more of
malice, then of substance.
more of malice then of substance. For, the comparison of her Majesty unto an
usurper, or to wicked Idolaters, is as odious and improper, as the resemblance
of the Pope to the holy Prophets, is unfit and unequal. Wherein I must note
unto you by the way an evil spirit in D. Allen, that seeks (or rather
snatcheth) D. Allens cankred mind.
all opportunities to spit forth his venim against so gracious a princess. But
let us leave his vice upon himself, and look in to the virtue of his argument.

Athalia, was lawfully deposed from the kingdom, D. Allens argument drawn from
the example of Athalia.
and slain, by the authority of Ioiada the high priest: Ergo the Pope has
authority both to depose, and procure the death of the Queens Majesty: (For
that is it, that D. Allen does as earnestly labor to justify, as the Pope does
diligently endeavor to atchieue:) but I trust the Pope shall fail as much of
his wicked intent, as the Doctor fails in his weak argument.

Whereof, to speak first of the whole, I do The consequent denied
utterly deny his consequent. For neither is it to be granted him, that the
Popes authority is The reason why.
as great against the Queens Majesty, as Ioiadaes was against Athalia:
neither is her Majesty's case like to Athaliaes: of both which I will make
plain demonstration.

First concerning Ioiada, as he was high priest, The Demonstration showing the
difference between both the persons* and cases.
so was he also the Priace of his tribe, and thereby had more authority to
deal in the state of that kingdom, then the Pope can have to deal in a
foreign kingdom. And for Athalia, she was an usurper, who came to the crown
by killing the kings children, all saving one, whom Ioiada kept secret and
saved from her fury, until he had the means to restore him to his kingdom,
by suppressing the usurper. But it is very well known, that the Queens
Majesty is no usurper, but a lawful The Queens Majesty known to be a
lawful prince, no usurper.
Prince, neither came to the crown by any such wicked means, but by due right
of inheritance: So is there as great odds betwixt her case and Athaliaes, as
between the authority of Ioiada, and of the Pope: And the cases being unlike,
the consequent cannot be good. For though an usurper may lawfully be deposed,
and slain, yet it follows not therefore that a rightful Prince may: and
though the chief Princes and States of a country united together, may aid
and assist the lawful King to place him in his throne, and to put down the
usurper: yet does it not follow, that a priest, which is a mere stranger to
the country, may therefore thrust a lawful Prince out of his kingdom.

And as little reason as there is in his consequent, D. Allens Antecedent also
false.
so little truth is there in the antecedent. For neither was Athalia deposed and
slain by Ioiada himself, neither by his authority (much less by the
authority of his priesthood:) For he did not in any sort take the matter, or
the authority upon himself, but what he did, he did by the common consent of
the Nobles and Capteines, whom (as the text says) before he would attempt any
thing, he caused to come unto him into the house of the Lord, and made a
covenant with the^, 2. Kings. 11.
and took an oath of them in the house of the Lord, and showed them the kings
son, After which consent and covenant accorded amongst them, having disposed
an order for the proclaiming and Ioash was restored not by Ioiada alone, but by
the whole Nobility and State.
establishing of Ioash (the young and rightful king) whom he had so saved from
the massacre, he brought him forth (as the text says) and put the Crown upon
him, and gave him the testimony, and tehy made him king: And when Athalia
hearing Athalia deposed and slain by the Nobles and State, not by Ioiada
alone, nor by his authority.
the noise of the running of the people, came in, and cried treason, treason:
the text says, they laid hands on her and she went by the way, by which the
horses go to the house of the king, and there was she slain.

So it appears by the very text itself, that Athalia was neither deposed nor
slain by Ioiada, nor by his authority, but by the Nobles and whole state of
the country, and by the authority of the rightful king, whom they
firstcrowned, anointed, and proclaimed: neither did Ioiada any thing in the
matter, more then duty, nature, and conscience moved him unto, to present unto
the nobles and fathers of Israel, the kings son whom he had saved, and to
further the restoring of him to his right, being the king his masters son,
and nearest allied unto him, and (especially) right heir to the kingdom: None
authority did he take upon himself therein, especially in respect of his
priesthood. Thus you see how little this example of of the usurping Queen
Athalia serves D. Allens turn to prove the Popes authority to depose Princes.

And for the other of Ahab, and Iesabell, they Ahab and Iesabell.
prove even as much. For if D. Allen mean Ahab himself, touching his own
person: he was neither Ahab himself was never deposed.
deprived of his kingdom nor slain by any priest or prophet, but died king of
Israel, and was slain in the field fighting against the king of Aram, about
Ramoth Gilead. But if he 1. King. 22.
mean the sons and whole house of Ahab, which were destroyed by Iehu, D.
Allen abuses both himself and you very much, to tell you that they were
deposed and destroyed either Neither priest nor prophet but Iehu (king of
Israel, deposed, and smote the whole house of Ahab. 2. Kings 9.
by Priest or Prophet: for it was Iehu (the king of Israel) that slew Iehoram,
and smote the house of Ahab, and caused Iesabell to be cast out of the window.

But (says D. Allen) Iehu received authority and commission so to do, from
Eliseus the prophet: and therefore the Pope may give (and consequently has
himself) authority to depose and kill Princes.

I deny your antecedent (M. Doctor:) For it is most false that Iehu received
authority from Eliseus (as you seem to intend he did from Elias, mistaking
either the man, or the matter, in your defense of the English Catholic) to put
down the son and whole house of Ahab: for the Prophet which was sent by
Eliseus unto Iehu to annoint him, never spoke word of Eliseus to him, much
less delivered him any authority from Eliseus, but delivered his message
expressly from God, beginning with, Thus says the Lord God of Israel, 2.
Kings. 9. 6.
etc: not, Thus says Eliseus.

So was it the authority of God (and not of a The house of Ahab, and Iesabell,
deposed and slain by the authority and express commandment of God, not of a
priest, or prophet.
Prophet) whereby the house of Ahab, and Iesabel were put down and slain;
neither was priest or prophet the doer, but Iehu the king of Israel, whom God
had by special commandment appointed to depose and smite them, being himself
before anointed king in their place by the same commandment. Now if D. Allen
will hereupon gather any argument to maintain the same authority in the Pope,
to depose and destroy princes, he nust needs make him equal in authority with
God: which neither Christian, Jew, nor Pagan, will in reason allow unto any
mortal creature.

Now for his other example of k. Saul, whereby D. Allens example of k. Saul
deposed.
he goes about to infer, that as Samuel deposed Saul, so the Pope may depose
Princes: it does not only make nothing at all for his purpose, but is also
most forcible against himself, as shall be most plainly declared unto you.
For whereas first he assumeth it as a thing most true and certain, that Samuel
deposed Saul, he utterly Saul not deposed by Samuel.
mistaketh, or rather most wickedly belyeth the holy history in this, as he
has done in the others: For the Scripture says, that God rebuked 1. Sam. 16.
Samuel for mourning for Saul, that God had rejected him from reigning over
Israel. Whereby it appears manifestly, that although Samuel in this place (as
the rest of the prophets in other places) did by Gods express commandment
denounce the sentence of deposition; yet was it not Samuel but God himself,
that deposed Saul deposed by God himself to the great grief of Samuel.
Saul from his kingdom, to the great grief of Samuel. So is D. Allens
argument clean overthrown in this example as well as in the former, unless he
will conclude, that the Pope D. Allens argument overthrown, unless he will
conclude that the Popes authority is equal to Gods.
has in himself as much authority, as God himself; which I think he would
not greatly stick to affirm, if he thought he might be believed: for he
makes it not dainty to dubbe that which is as false, in saying that the
prophets deposed Princes. So little regard has he either of God, or man, so
that he may bring his purpose to effect.

But let us look further into this example, and This example further prosecuted
against D. Allen.
we shall see how far it sets him beside the saddle. Albeit Saul was thus
deposed by God himself, and David anointed king in his place by Gods own
precise commandment, yet did Samuel thereupon ever go about to deprive him of
his kingdom, or encourage the people to revolt from him, and disobey him? Or
did the people themselves stir against him so long as he lived? Or did David
which was the anointed king in his place, ever offer to thrust him out of the
kingdom, or seek his life? No: Saul reigned many years after that, and the
people both obeyed and served him. Yea and David himself when he might have
slain him in the Cave, and so have gotten also the present possession of the
kingdom to himself, yet he would not, nay he thought it a sin for Though
Saul were deposed by God himself, yet neither did Samuel encourage the people
to reuolte from him, neither did David (the annnointed king) secke to put him
out of the kingdom, neither did the people disobey him so long as he lived,
which was many years after.
him to have done it: For who (said he) can lay his hand on the Lords
anointed, David when he might have slain Saul, would not: nay, he thought it
sin to have done it: and calls him the Lords anointed, after his
deposition.
and be guiltless? Yea, 1. Sam. 26.
percusso cord trepidauit (says S. Augustine.) he was stricken, and trembled
at the heart, because he had cut but the lap of Saules coat. And in the end
when word was brought him of Saules death, how rewarded he the messenger, I
pray you, for his tidings, and for the Crown and Bracelet of Saule^, which he
brought him? Aug. contradit Petihan. lib. 2. cap. 48.
Forsooth he caused him to be slain forthwith in his presence, saying: How
wast thou not afraid to put forth thine hand to destroy the Lords anointed?
Thy blood be upon thine own head, for thine own mouth has witnessed against 3
David caused him that brought news of Saules death, to be forthwith slain. 2.
Sam. 1.
thee, saying, I have slain the Lords anointed.

Thus you see Saul a wicked King deposed, not by a Pope, nor by a Priest, nor
by a Prophet, but by Mark how direct this example is against D. Allen.
God himself, and David chosen and appointed by God, and anointed in his
place: and yet neither the Prophet ever counseled or moved the people to
disobey Saul, being so deposed, nor the people ever offered to revolt or to
deny him their obedience and service, nor David (the true and rightful king
appointed by God in his place) ever sought or co^se^ted to deprive him of the
kingdom, though due unto himself, but (notwithstanding he knew him to be his
deadly enemy and to hunt after his life) yet having him twice in his hands,
where he might safely have slain him, and thereby invested himself of the
kingdom, nevertheless would he neither touch him himself, nor suffer any other
to touch him, calling him the Lords anointed, and esteeming it a high sin to
lay his hand on him, though he were deposed by God himself: Howsoever D.
Allen inte^deth Saul to have been deposed by Samuel: yet the learneder Divines
take the sentence of God pronounced by Samuel touching his rejecting of Saul,
not to extend to the present deposing of Saul himself
and (which is yet most notable) caused the messenger, that brought him the
first news of his death, to be forthwith slain for his labor. And all this
notwithstanding, yet is not D. Allen ashamed to wrest this example quite
contrary to the truth, for a president to prove that the Pope has
authority to depose and deprive Princes both of their kingdoms and lives, and
to release and discharge the subjects of their allegiance: and further, that it
is lawful for subjects to revolt from their Souereignes, to yield up their
holds trecherously unto their enemies, and to bear arms No example in the
whole scripture more directly against D. Allens doctrine and purpose, then this.
against them. To which doctrine he could not have found in all the whole
Scriptures (though all be flat against it) any one example more directly
contrary then this: the judgment whereof I refer to the reason,
consideration, and conscience of all men that have any spark of
Christianity, moral virtue, or natural reason in them.

Now then, if none of all these examples of Scripture, The Conclusion.
which D. Allen has cited to prove the Popes authority to depose Princes,
do show that any of those Princes, whom he mencioneth, was deposed either by
Priest or Prophet (as he falsely assumeth) but by God himself: how can he
then infer upon these examples, that the Pope has any such authority,
unless he attribute (as I said before) as much authority unto him, as to God
himself?

And if ( Saul being deposed by God himself) yet neither the Prophet did
thereupon dissuade the people from obeying him, nor the people once offered to
revolt from him, but continued in all duty and obedience toward him as long
as he lived, which was many years after his deposition: and if David, being
the lawful anointed King in his place, yet neither sought to put him out of
the kingdom, but yielded him obedience and service (calling him Lord and
master) during his life, and thought it sin to lay his hand on him,
notwithstanding he was deposed: and lastly, in token of the misliking and
displeasure he took at the death of Saul, caused the messenger that brought
him the tidings thereof, to be slain: how can D. Allen by this example induce
men of any reason or sense to believe, that either the Pope may lawfully
authorize, encourage, or exhort subjects to disobey, or to lay hands on the
Lords anointed, or that any subject may lawfully renounce his allegiance,
revolt, from, and bear arms against his Sovereign, being a lawful Prince,
only upon a colorable warrant of deposition, by a man, a Priest, a stranger,
who has no authority in the world to depose any Prince from his kingdom
(no, though he were an Infidel) but is himself even by Gods ordinance a
subject to Princes? With what face can he utter such manifest untruths? with
what confidence can he persuade himself to be believed, when his lies are so
monstrous, and his impostures so evident? But most of all, with what conscience
can he presume to force the word of God to his purpose, which is so directly
against him? But hereby may all men plainly perceive how small regard that
sect has unto religion, but only to serve their turns, which are not ashamed
to make such impudent and ungodly shifts, to maintein their usurped
authority. Call you this holiness, M. D. to abuse the people with false
doctrine, to belie the scriptures, and to pervert the most sacred word of God,
and to rob him of his own peculiar authority and prerogative, for the defense
and furtherance of your own rebellious practices? In truth it resembles As
much conscience in D. Allens holy thief, whom he mentions in his Pamphlet,
as in himself.
much the holiness of your holy thief, whom it pleases you somewhat merrily
in your Pamphlet to compare unto us, but in truth a righter pattern of your
own profession: which (to speak truly what I think in my conscience) is much
discredited by your own double dealing.

You your self, to further your own purpose (as you supposed) could prefixe
before your Pamphlet even in the first page, as a sentence under the title
thereof, the resolution given by Christ, upon Matthew. 22.
the tempting demand of the Pharisees, Reddite quae sunt Caesaris, Caesari:
wherein Christ himself commands D. Allen prefixeth before his Pamphlet the
sentence of Christ, which notwithstanding in the same Pamphlet he does wholly
courtermand in his doctrine.
all men to give unto Caesar (that is to the King and Civil Magistrate)
whatsoever is due unto him, that is fear, honor, subjection, and tribute: And
how dare you then, even in the same Pamphlet countermaund this commandment of
our Savior, bending all your forces, craft, and cunning to persuade the
subject to resist his Sovereign, and thereby to break this high and
peremptory commandment?

But you say the Pope has authority to discharge the subject of this duty
and obedience, which is here commanded. Show me then, I pray you, some Text of
Scripture, that gives the Pope so large Commission as you speak of: nay, show
me any dispensation out of Gods word, that may exempt you, or the Pope
himself out of the compass of this commandment. For the precept is general,
and therefore extends to all men, and besides, was expressly given by Christ
unto his Disciples, to whom he spoke in presence. And if the Pope and you be
the Disciples of Christ, as you would seem to be, then must you also (as
well, or rather then others) yield obedience and subjection to your Civil
governors, or else fall into the breach of Christ's commandment. And if you be
subject to the civil Magistrate, as you are by this rule of Christ: how can
you take that authority from them, which Christ has given them over you?

If you say there is no subjection due unto them, longer then they continue in
the truth of Religion: The Pope and his followers will be both parties, judges,
and executioners of their own doom, in their own cause. Princes, whether
they be Heretics, Turks, or Heathens, yet is there subjection due unto them.
Romans 13.
I pray you tell me first, how prove you them to be heretics, unless you
your selves may be Judges? Will you then both condemn and punish them, before
they be convicted of crime? and will you that are parties, be both judges,
and executors of your own will and pleasure?

Secondly, suppose they were (as you unjustly condemn them to be) heretics,)
yea suppose they were Jews, Turks, Heathens: yet is there nevertheless
obedience and subjection due unto them. For what was Caesar himself, but a
Heathen? what were the Princes in the Aposties times (of whom it is said, Let
every soul be subject unto them: and whosoever resists them, resists the
ordinance of God) what were they all, but Heathens? If Christ himself then
has confirmed the authority and power even of Heathen Princes: how can the
Pope dissolve and take away the authority, power, kingdom, yea and life too,
of Christian Princes?

And yet he claims his authority from Christ, The Pope claims his
authority from Christ, as his Vicar.
as his Disciple, and Vicar here on earth: by which title he makes all Princes
subject unto his authority. In truth so is the greatest Prince living, subject
unto the meanest Preacher and Minister of God, to The greatest Prince living,
subject to the admonition and reproof of the meanest Minister, but not to his
correction.
obey the doctrine and word, which he delivers out of the Scriptures, and to
receive his instruction, exhortation, admonition, and reproof: yet is he not
(though he should reject his instructions) to be therefore deposed from his
kingdom, or resisted and disobeyed by him. And greater authority has not the
Pope himself over any Prince, then the meanest Minister and messenger of God.

I find not in all the Scripture that ever Christ gave unto his Disciples any
Commission to depose Princes, although they should disobey his word: but I
find that he gave them Commission Matthew. 10. The punishment for disobedience
of Gods word, and contempt of the Minister, is reserved unto God.
to Preach: And whosoever should not receive them, nor hear their words, he bad
them, that when they should depart out of that house or City, they should
shake the dust of their feet, reserving the punishment of them unto God.

As for the superiority which the Pope challenges over Princes, as the
Successor of Peter, and disciple Peter, from whom the Pope claims authority,
as his successor, was commanded by Christ to feed his sheep, but expressly
forbidden to use the sword.
of Christ: I find no such Commission given unto Peter himself, to authorize
him in such sort over Princes: but I find that Christ said unto him three
times, Ioh. 21.
Feed my sheep. As for the sword (whereby is signified the Civil Authority)
Christ expressly forbad Peter to use it, commanding him to Matthew. 26. 53. Ioh.
18. 11.
put it up into the sheath. To the same effect also spoke he not only to Peter,
but to all the rest of his fellows the Apostles, when there was some
contention risen amongst them about superiority: Ye know (says he) that the
Lords of the Gentiles have Matthew. 20.
domination over them, and they that are great, exercise authority over them:
But it shall not be so among you: But whosoever will be great among you, let
him be your servant.

And if the Pope be Christ's Disciple, he must learn this lesson of his
Master, to be a servant to his fellows, not a Commander of Kings.

Christ, from whom the Pope deriueth his authority, never took upon him the
authothoritie to depose Princes. But the Pope does.
Christ himself, from whom the Pope deriueth his supreme authority, as his
Vicar on Earth, never took upon him the authority to deprive Princes of their
kingdoms, nor to discharge the subjects of their duty and obedience: Christ
not only commanded others, to obey, but did himself also obey Princes:
but contrariwise confirmed the power of Princes both by his doctrine (teaching
that Fear, Honor, Obedience, and Subjection The Pope not only refuses
himself, but also forbids others to obey Princes.
is due even to Heathen Princes) and also by his own example, yielding
tribute, with all duty and obedience unto them, and submitting himself, his
body, and life to their authority, judgment and correction: Christ professed
himself not to be a king of this world, but a subject to kings, and a servant.
And for himself professed that Ioh. 18. 36. Matthew. 20. ^^.
his king do^ was not of this world, and that he came not to be served, but to
serve. And if Christ acknowledged himself not to have any kingly authority in
this world, but to be a subject unto kings and to their inferior officers and a
servant: how can the Pope derive unto himself The Pope pres^^neth himself not
to be a subject to Kings but a superior and Lord over all Kings of this world.
from Christ not only a kingly authority, but a predominant authority over
all kings? The Scholar above his Master.
Can the scholar be greater then his Master? The Vicars authority greater
then his, from whom he takes all his authority.
will the Vicar take upon him more authority, then he, from whom he takes
all his authority? Nay, will he of himself presume to give warrant Phe Pope
in all points opposite to Christ.
directly contrary to the commandment of Christ? Let every man then judge,
both what he is, What is this, but Antichrist?
that so opposes him self against Christ, and what D. Allen is, that
justifies his so doing, and (for justification thereof, pretends warrant of
Scriptures against God himself: D. Allen a wrester, peruerter, and belier of
the Scriptures.
which how shamefully he has therein wrested, perverted, and belied, has been
(I hope) already sufficiently declared unto you, so far forth as his pamphlet
gave occasion, and farther should have been, but that this question is handled
at large, and all that D. Allen can say therein, abundantly confuted by a
learned M. Bilson, Warden of Winchester, in a book published Anno. 1586.
whereof it seems D. Allen will take no knowledge.
Divine, a man of as great sufficiency, and of more sincerity then himself,
in the answer to his Defense of English Catholics.

Now to come to the matter, and to the prosecuting of D. Allens purpose, you
see that he has not only failed in the proof of the Popes authority to
depose Princes, and consequently of his warrant for the subjects revolt: but
also his own examples and arguments retorted against himself, and the
contrary part proved both by them, and by diverse other reasons, and
authorities of Scriptures: out of which Doctor Allen brings not so much as
one Text (in truth, I must confess, because he cannot, unless he should
coin it himself) to prove directly his profane assertions. So that no man
can be so blind, but he must needs perceive and acknowledge, that the Pope
has neither power of himself, nor authority from God, to depose Princes from
their kingdoms: neither can give to the subject any commission, or license
(saving only that license which All this has been directly proved, both by
express authority of Scripture and by arguments drawn from D. Alle^s own
examples.
he has himself, that is, that license qua sumus omnes deteriores) so much as
to disobey their Souereignes, much less to reuolte from them to their enemies,
to lay hands on them, and to bear arms against them. Whereby it cannot but
be most apparent that D. Allen respected wholye herein the subtilty of his
drifte, not the soundnes of his doctrine, and for the obteinment of credit, D.
Allen respects the cunning conueiance of his purpose, not the sound teaching
of the truth.
and attainment of his purpose thereby, affied him self altogether upon the
smoothnes of his persuasions, and the affectionate minds and inclinations of
his adherents.

ANd since we have already discovered the An entrance into th'examination of
D. Allens persuasions.
foundation of his persuasions to be weak, false, and rotten: it shall not be
amiss to bestow a little labor, to try if a small wind will not overthrow
the building it self, which I doubt not but we shall find to be patched
together of as rotten stuff, and of as slender substance as the foundation is,
and to have nothing in it to withstand the weather, but only the bare outside
and color of religion.

The end whereunto this persuasion of The end of his persuasions, already
declared.
disobedience, and reuolte from her Majesty, tends, has been already
declared; namely the furtherance of all traiterous and rebellious designementes
that may be by any person, or in any wise attempted against her Majesty, and
particularly the assistance of the k. of Spain, and the other foreign forces
invasion, now presently intended, and prepared against our country. Let us
then next see to what persons To what persons his persuasions are intended.
D. Allen principally purposes and addresseth his persuasions.

First for Protestants, and such as are of sound Religion (as I trust the
greatest part of England, Not to Protestants.
by great ods, is) D. Allen cannot be so mad as to hope, that his persuasions
can have any authority, or work any effect with them, but to confirm them
rather in her Majesty's service and obedience, for the better mayntenaunce of
their Religion, and defense of themselves and their goods: which they know, if
the contrary faction should prevail (which God I trust will never suffer) not
only the estate of Religion were clean overthrown, but themselves also, and
all theirs prostrate to the sword, rapine and spoil, which it sits them
nearest, with all their force, might, and maine, to defend. Nor (likely by any
great reason) to Newters, or men indifferent.


As for such as are neither Protestants, nor Papists, but men indifferent, or
of no religion at all, and (as D. Allen terms them) plain Atheists, into
which estate he most slanderouslye in his pamphlet reports our country to
be He slanderously reports our whole country to be fallen into Atheism.
fallen, but I trust, and do fully assure my self, that he shall find fewer of
that sort in England than in Rome, though the scope be far larger: his
persuasion (in mine opinion) should do but little good (or harm) with them:
First, by his own reason, being drawn from Religion, how can it work with
them that are of no religion, and therefore regard not Religion? And if they be
men indifferent, and such as may by reading, instruction, and exhortation be
drawn alike to the embracing of either religion: Why should men indifferent be
lead rather by D. Allens lurking persuasions, to a blind and supersticious
religion, then by our public and continual preaching to a clear and
perspicuous religion?
what reason has D. Allen to think, that his persuasions should rather draw
them to his religion, then the continual preaching and teaching of a great
number of our godly ministers (men as learned and more zealous then D. Allen)
should win them to ours? Or why should he imagine, that they should more
easily bend unto a blind and superstitious religion grounded upon ignorance,
then to a clear and perspicuous religion, grounded upon knowledge of the
truth, unless he presume upon the corruption of men's nature, which is more
inclined to evil, the^ to good? But neither of these sorts of men are the
persons, unto whom D. Allen purposely intended his persuasions: for the matter
requires hearers more affected and assured to his faction: howsoever he might
happily put it in adventure to seduce others, such as were apt to be defiled
with his pitch, being all but one labor to him. But I hope this shall not be
the last labor that such brokers of mischief shall spend in vain. It rests
that D. Allens persuasions must needs be chiefly or wholly intended to the
papists.


They must needs be therefore of your own fraternity ( M. Doctor) men sworn
to the Popes pantofle, with whom your wholesome persuasions must prevail: who
(I trust) when they come to the tale, will not be so many by two parts of the
three, as you presume. But such and so many as they are, do you think them so
simple The papists in England not so many, as D. Allen presumes.
or sottish, as to be bewitched by your enchauntments, to respect more your
tromperie, then their own oath, allegiance and duty? But the Pope has
discharged them of all duty, you say: But they see the contrary proved
against you. But whatsoever they see, you do happily There are none so blind
but will see when a man gives them counsel against themselves.
assure your self, they will see nothing against you: But good M. Doctor
charm them not so blind, but that you give them leave to see, what counsel
you give them against themselves. Your words are weighty and forcible with
them in other cases, but their own weal and safety is much deerer unto them
in this case. They see the The D. of G. and those of the holy league in France,
though they pretend the patronage of the popish Religion, they spare no papist
more the^ protestant, from the spoil, and sword.
dealings of the Duke of G. and the rest of the holy league in France: who,
though they pretend the quarrel and patronage of the pretended Catholic
Religion, yet spare they neither Catholic person, nor place, but use all
violence, spoil, and sackage of such towns as are mere Catholic, and of
Catholics goods, without favor or difference: Wherein as they have showed
themselves (co^formably to your doctrine) very obseruant of civil Justice, in
using little partiality, or respect of persons: so have they bewrayed their
intent (answerable to your policy) to be the wreake of private malice, the
disturbance of the public peace, The very quarrel and intent of the D. of G.
and the ambition of a kingdom, shadowed only with the color of their
Catholic Religion. In so much as some of the greatest and best Catholics Some
of the greatest and best affected papists hane abandoned that party.
of that sort, which of zeal were entered into that confederacy: besides many
others most earnestly and sincerely affected to that religion, finding at
length their disguised purposes, have already clean abandoned that party, and
revolted to the contrary.

And do you imagine, our English Romanists so besotted with your Siren songs,
as that they will take no heed to themselves by the examples of others their
neighbors? Yes, doubt you not, they will forecast all events that may happen,
and consider what is most likely to happen, and seek What danger the English
papists run into, if they should but offer to stir against her Majesty, to
take part with a foreign power.
their own safety whatsoever happen. They know, if they should but offer to
stir toward a foreign enemies party, against their own country, if we get
the upper hand (as we faithfully assure our selves, God being on our side) they
loose all they have, both goods, lands, and lives too, like traitors, as they
well deserve. On the otherside, if th'enimie should prevail (which we The
Pretended Catholic armies in France, spare not their fellow Catholics, being
their own countrymen: how then will a foreign army spare our English
Catholics, being strangers to them.
little doubt, and God, I trust, will never permit) what protection shall they
have by their Catholic Religion? They see the pretended Catholic armies in
France, spare not the like Catholics being their own countrymen; what favor
can English Catholics then expect of a foreign army? especially of the
Spanish soldier, who in the opinion and report of those nations which have
felt his fury, and endured his yoke, is very hardly thought of, and almost
infamous for his pride, insolence, cruelty, rauishments, and such like kinds
of violence, without regard of estate, religion, The Spanish soldiour very
hardly thought and reported of, for his insolence, cruelty, and vicious
dealings, where he subdueth.
decree, or calling, wheresoever he gets the maistry? And if these be his
natural properties generally to all men, how much more will malice augment his
fury toward our nation, to whom the very name of an English man is no less
odious for the envy of our virtue, and valor, then the the name of a Spaniard
is unto us, for the report of his vice, and insolency? Small favor or The
Spaniard malicious to the English nation.
courtesy (God wot) is an Englishman to hope for at a Spaniards hand, be he
never so Catholic. The Spanish soldier, where he is lord, never uses The
Spanish soldiour makes little conscience in his choice.
to ask (or to hear) whose wife is this? whose daughter, whose sister, whose
house or goods these are: A Catholics wife, daughter, house, and goods, are as
sweet to him, as another man's. And what It would be an intolerable despite to
an English man, to see his wife, sister, or daughter forced before his face.
pleasure would this be to an English man, whatsoever his religion be, to see
his wife forced, his sisters ravished, his daughters deflowred, his house
sacked, his goods pilled and spoiled by a stranger before his face? yea, and
his own throat cut, if he but offer to make defense? Such is the fury and
violence of the soldiour, especially of the Spaniard. What avails him then
the name of a Catholic, if it please the lion in his ravening mood, to take
the hare for an ass, because he has long ears? To whom shall his headless
body complain for redress?

And is this the goodwill you bear to your D. Allens kindness to his Catholic
countreyme^.
brethren and Catholic countrymen ( M. Doctor) that you would allure them to
the bringing in of their own assured calamity, and utter overthrow? They love
you better, I am persuaded, yet not so well, as to cast away themselves, and
all theirs, at your request and counsel. They are professors of your religion,
but will be no partakers of your rebellion. They like to be of your fraternity,
but not of your conspiracy. They can be content to hear your doctrine: but
you must be content to let the^ prefer their own safety. They see Religion is
not the quarrel, that can stir up foreign forces to an Religion is not the
Spaniards quarrel to England.
invasion, with such terrible threatenings of utter rasing and depopulation of
themselves and their country, but mere malice and revenge of private grudges,
with a greedy thirst after the spoil and sacking of a rich and plentiful
country. They could wish with all their hearts that the Catholic Religion
might prevail and flourish in their country: but they will strive with heart
and hand both to defend their own All our lives and liberties and the weal
and freedom of our country depend upon this quarrel.
lives, and liberties, and the weal and freedom of their country, which they
see are al assaulted, all in peril, and all likely to be lost, if foreign
powers should get the conquest of their country.

Is this then so easy a matter think you, M. Doctor, to persuade your
Catholic countrymen unto? For mine own part, I am of another mind, and so
shall you find the^ also, I doubt not, if ever the matter come to trial. For,
admit they bare so malicious minds toward her Majesty, as you give good cause
to suspect, yet they are English men, and if they bear English hearts in their
bodies, they will never endure a stranger, much less an enemy, especially so
insolent, cruel, and intolerable an enemy, to tyra^nise over their country.
And if they were so void of al duty, piety, humanity, good nature, and
manhood, as to betray their liege Sovereign, abandon the defense of their
dear country, and to abject their minds, honor, and reputation, and subject
their names to everlasting infamy: yet that inward working of natural love,
affection, and care of themselves, their wives, their children, their parents,
and kindred, yea of their own lives, and liberties, (which lie al upon the
stake) will be continually knocking at their bosoms, at their heads, and at
their hearts, to stir them up to the withstanding of their own calamities.

But as we have considered somewhat of the To the force of D. Allens
Persuasions.
persons, whom D. Allen chiefly goes about to persuade by this pamphlet: so
let us now examine a little the force and weight of his persuasions.

After a long dehortation of the Q. Majesty's liege subjects from her service
in these wars, (which it pleases him to term unjust) and persuasion to them
to revolt unto the other side, for Religions sake, with diverse circumstances
tending wholly to that purpose, wherein he uses only his own authority for
reason: amongst the rest, to move them thereunto the rather by examples, he
cites out of Eusebius, How for refusing to commit Idolatry D. Allens examples
cited out of Eusebius, to persuade the Papists to revolt for Religion.
by sacrificing unto Idols, and in particular for disobeying the Emperor
Maximinus his commandment therein, the famous Colonel S. Maurice with the
whole legion of Thebes, sustained most glorious martyrdom. As diverse others
did under Julian the Apostata, and the like: And many noble soldiers, for that
they could not exercise their Christian vsages, partly were driven to abandon
their profession in displeasure of their Princes, and partly were licenced to
depart: etc.

Mark, I pray you, the force of these examples, Some abandoned their
profession, some their Countries, and some suffered death for Religions sake,
but none revolted, no not from Heathen Princes, nor from Julian the Apostat^
himself.
and how well they serve the purpose, for which D. Allen cites them. We see
not by them, that any of all these valiant Christian Soldiers, whom he
mencioneth, did ever revolt from the Princes whom they served, or take arms
against them; which is the purpose whereunto they are cited: but rather, that
to avoid superstition, and the abominable service of Idols, they forsook
their profession, their Countries, yea and their lives also, before they would
offer to revolt to their Princes enemies.

Yet see the odds between the persons and cases. They were Soldiers, and were
urged to forsake the true God and to commit Idolatry, yet rather endured death
then they would offer to revolt from a Heathen Prince, notwithstanding he
would have enforced them to renounce Christ: And yet M. Allen goes about by
these examples, to persuade subjects, to Rebel against their natural Prince,
being The Queens Majesty does not drive any from the service of God, but
endeavors to draw all men from Idolatry to the true knowledge and worship of
God.
a Christian, neither compelling, nor commanding them to forsake God, but
endeavoring by all good and godly means to draw them to the true knowledge and
worship of God, from the blindness of superstition and Idolatry. Is not this a
strange thing, to see a man so learned, as he is esteemed to be, so much to
ouershoote himself, in offering such evident abuses, to seduce those with whom
his credit may prevail?

Yet has he another argument as fit for his purpose Another trim argument of
D. Allens, to encourage the Papists to revolt.
as this, whererein he encourages the English Catholics, and such as are
pliable to his persuasions, to revolt from her Majesty's service unto the
pretended Catholic party, by mention of the great victories and happy
success, which God gives unto those, that with their arms uphold That God
fights himself, for the defense of his own cause, and of the right.
and maintain the true Religion, declaring also that God fights himself for
the defense of his own cause and of the right, which (in mine opinion) can be
no encouragement, but ought rather to be a great terror to the English
Romanists, for enterprising to take arms against their gracious Sovereign.

For first looking into home examples of the The rebellion in the North by the
Earls of Northumberland, and Westmerland:
like sort, within their own memory, they know what befell unto the two late
Earls of Northumberland, and Westmerland, and the rest of that rebellious
faction: who having entered into the like conspiracy, and for the like cause
that D. Allen now so much recommendeth unto his Catholic Countrymen, and
having made For the same cause that D. Allen here so much commends. The
Rebels by Gods power and assistance overthrown.
a very strong party, in several parts of the Realm, and sodeinly raised a
great power of the greatest strength of the North of England, were
notwithstanding by the providence and assistance of God (for it is he only
that gives victory, not the strength of man, or of Horse) within very short
time overthrown, dispersed, and scattered, the most and principallest of the
Ringleaders taken, and executed according to their desert, and the rest driven
to abandon their Country, and to live abroad like outcasts and vagabonds.

They remember likewise since that time what The Invasion in Ireland, Anno.
1580. upon the same cause and quarrel.
became of the Romish Catholic Forces (whom I before mentioned) which landed
in Ireland in the year 1580: who as they came in defense of the same cause,
and of the same Religion, so found they even the same encounter, in so much as
few of them (I think) returned home, to boast or make report of their victory.

If then this position of D. Allens persuasion be The success of these Rebels
and Inuaders does) by D. Allens own argument) both show the cause to be
naught, and warns our English Papists, for the like cause not to enter into
the like action.
true (as it is most true) that God fights for the defense of true Religion,
and of the right: the English Catholics, and all men else, may see by these
examples, that the cause was naught and unjust, and the Religion corrupt and
false, in the defense whereof these armies were so discomfited: and may
likewise be warned by their success, to take heed how for the like cause they
enter into the like action.

Secondly, the examples which D. Allen recites of the ouerthrows, which have
happened unto the K. of Spaines Rebels (as he terms them) in the The
ouerthrows which have lighted upon the K. of Spaines Rebels (as D. Allen says)
ought to terrify all men from Rebellion.
low Countries: what do they else but admonish all English men to beware, how
they rebel or stir in arms against their lawful Sovereign; seeing
overthrow and confusion threatened as a just recompense of rebellion? And if
our English Romanists, or any other whosoever, her Majesty's natural
subjects, will but duly and uprightly consider of these arguments, though
brought by D. Allen to a contrary purpose: I doubt not but they may be
thereby sufficiently dissuaded and discouraged, from all such wicked and
unnatural attempts.

But, because this Pamphlet of D. Allens (is as we A note of certain
ouersights in policy escaped this great politicien in this Pamphlet, which is
mere politic.
have showed you) altogether politic, tending not so much to the defense of
the action which he pretends, as to a further purpose, which I have also
discovered herein: it shall be no great labor to me, but some reproof to
him, to note in a word or two, before I make an end, some ouersights even in
policy, escaped this great politicien, even in this small Pamphlet, which is
nothing else but a packet of politic driftes, composed for a preparatiue unto
mischief.

And first to begin with the whole argument of his persuasion, affirming it
to be lawful His whole argument of revolt for Religion, a warrant for the
revolt of the low Countrymen, and consequently for all that assist them,
against the K. of Spain
for the subject in cause of Religion to revolt from his Sovereign: what does
it else but give warrant and defense to the people of the low Countries in
resisting the King of Spain, (though he were, as D. Allen supposes him to
be) their lawful and undoubted Sovereign, and consequently to the actions of
all such, as hitherto have, or hereafter shall yield them any succors or
assistance against him? For it is well known, that the first and principal
matter, wherewith they found themselves agreeued, was the restraint Their
first coffeehouse for Religion.
of Religion, for that they might not freely use and enjoy the liberty of
their consciences under him. Which being the true ancient Catholic, and
Apostolic Religion, cleansed from the dregs and superstition of the Romish
Church, it was and is lawful for the people of those Countries (by Doctor
Allens position) for defense of that Religion to take arms against the King of
Spain, though he were their rightful king, and consequently for us, or any
other, in that lawful quarrel to assist them. Thus the policy which D. Allen
contriueth to impeach us one way, is not only a defense unto us in the
principal cause, which he impugneth, but as great an impeachment to his own
Patron.

Another oversight in policy, which I note D. Allens words may be
prejudicial to the K. of Spain, his Patron.
in Doctor Allens Pamphlet, is, that in the whole discourse throughout,
wheresoever he speaks of the people of the low Countries, he terms them
Rebels and Heretics: which terms, as they cannot but be very scandalous to
the people, so may they be very prejudicial to the K. of Spain, whose
party he so much favors.

For where the Duke of Parma has long endeavored, and still does, by such
factors and secret practisers, as he has among the States of the countries, to
win them by fair means and inticements to the obedience and subjection of the
K. of Spain: what a hindrance may this be to that practice, when the people
shall see themselves reputed and published Rebels and Heretics by so great a
man as D. Allen, a Cardinal, and professed Advocate to the K. of Spain, whom
they may imagine, for his credit, calling, and adherencie with the King, to
know better then themselves, what opinion is held of them, and what mind
toward them, by the King, and not to cast What construction the low
Countrymen may make of it, that D. Allen openly terms them Heretics and
Rebels.
out such words at randon, of his own mere intemperancy? What may they gather
of it? or what construction may any man in reason make of it?

This only may they well think with themselves. All is not gold that
glistereth, and within a fair bait, may be hidden a foul hook. And
howsoever the Duke of Parma in the behalf of the King (his Master) allureth
us with courtesy and fair promises (as it stands with good policy for him
to do) if he may by that means draw us home to his obedience, yet having
once gotten us under his hand, it is doubtful how he will entreat us. For the
wound which we have made him by these long wars and infinite troubles,
charges, and expenses, is so great, as it can never be so clean healed, but
there will still remain a foul skarre, which will put him always in
remembrance of the hurt he has received by us: so that though it be for the
present in show forgiven, yet we may well assure our selves, it can not in
heart be for ever forgotten: neither is it wisdom to trust a reconciled
friend, much less a scarce reconciled Lord, that has our lives and all at
commandment. Besides, this may also be a caveat unto us to be the more
circumspect how we trust him, that we see even whilst he is yet seeking to win
us, his deuote favorers, and such as for their credit with him, are privy to
the estate of his dealings, and opinion of us, do not stick openly to call us
Rebels and Heretics: how much more then may we assure our selves, that we
are in inward account so esteemed by him? And if he A Maxim of the Papists,
That there is no faith to be kept with Heretics.
hold us for Heretics, what faith or promise will he keep with us, when we
are once fast in hand? If Rebels, what other thing are we to expect at his
hands, then the flat reward of Rebels? Thus may D. Allens terms (and not
without great reason) kindle, or at the least increase such a suspicion, in a
subtle, ielous, and wavering people, already doubtful of their security, as
may frustrate all the Duke of Parmaes earnest endeavors, and secret practices
for the reclayming of those Countries, and greatly endomage the King of Spain,
his own Patron. For in truth, that people is very apt, and has good cause
upon former experience to be suspicious in this case, by how much the more
likely it is, these very terms may draw them into a further jealousy of the
Kings meaning toward them: which occasion Doctor Allen should not in policy
have ministered, to the prejudice of this Catholic Protector.

3 Now for the whole latter part of his Pamphlet containing the persuasion of
revolt, judge, I pray you, what policy it was for him to enter into that
argument, in such open sort, and in so dangerous a season. For where his
purpose and whole intent therein is, to stir up his Catholic countrymen
against her Majesty, to the aid and assistance of those foreign forces, which
are prepared for the invasion The means which D. Allen uses to effect his
purpose, is a most likely occasion to prevent and defeat his purpose.
of her and her Realm: see if the very means which he uses to atteine unto
his purpose, do not give sufficient occasion to prevent and clean cut off the
accomplishment and end of his purpose, for which he uses the^. For when her
Majesty shall see an open persuasion used publicly unto her subjects
(especially those that are of the Romish Religion) inciting them to reuolte
from her obedience, to join with her enemies against her, and to employ their
uttermost forces to the bereauing of her both of kingdom, and of life, with a
justification of the action, drawn from the authority of their holy Father the
Pope (which their ignorant and superstitious devotion has by all likelihood
persuaded them, that it were damnable for them to disobey:) and published by a
principal pillar of their Church, the credit of whose Cardinalship, is likely
enough to prevail with the^, even against their own knowledge, nature, and
spirit: when her Majesty (I say) shall in so perilous a time and expectation
of invasion, see so great a danger His pamphlet a good occasion to her Majesty
to look straightly to the Papists.
imminent over her, by her Romish Catholic subjects, and (as it were) a plain
denuntiation and threatening of the utter ruin and overthrow, both of her
self and her whole state, to be doubted (or rather certainly expected) at
their hands, will it not make her look better to her self, and streighter to
those Catholics? Nay, being thus D. Allens dealing might well and justly
provoke her Majesty to take a severe course with the papists, and not for
Religion, but for the better establishment and assurance of her self and her
estate, especially considering her great dangers past, and seeing the perils
imminent, and daily threatened unto her by them: but Clemency has ever
prevailed with her, which God continue till, so that it may be with her safety.
warned, as she may well be, by this persuasion of D. Allens, what can she do
less (if she will do but that, which in reason and in all good policy she may,
and is by this pamphlet admonished and whetted on to do, for the preservation
of her self and her kingdom) then provide speedily to cut such Catholics
clean of, and to root them out of her country, and not to nourish any longer
so many and so venomous serpents, yea such pestilent hydraes in her bosom, by
whom such assured danger and mischief is portended and threatened toward
her? At the least, if her princely nature and clemency, which has ever
hitherto but too much prevailed with her in the like cases, will not suffer her
to use that means, which in reason were most fit and necessary for her best
assurance: yet the natural and due care of her own safety, and the weal
public, must of necessity enforce her, at the least to disarme, and utterly
disable them from doing harm. By which means D. Allen (I trust) shall at the
least be disappointed of his purpose (for any assistance his Catholic brethren
here, shall be able to yield unto his Catholic king, against their liege
Sovereign) The papists are much beholding to D. Allen for provoking her
Majesty by his pamphlet, to deal hardlyer with them, then any protestant
would wish.
even by occasion of his Religious persuasions: which, if her Majesty's mercy
were not greater then his wisdom and foresight in this point, might be a
mean of more displeasure and harm unto the English Romanists, then either D.
Allens counsel, or the king of Spaines forces, or the Popes blessing, will
ever be able to repair. And for this might they thank D. Allen, whose
profane policies turn to the confusion of his own friends and folowers. A
brief recapitulation of the premises.


Now, to grow toward an end, and to give you a brief remembrance of that
which has been already spoken: you have herein seen,

1 First, all D. Allens arguments, brought in his pamphlet for the
justification of the delivering up of Deuenter, particularly answered and
confuted, the fact of Sir William Stanley and York (by his own position)
proved plain treason, and all her Majesty's actions in the low Countries (or
otherwise) toward the k. of Spain (by D. Allens own arguments, assertions,
and authors) proved most lawful, just, and honorable:

2 Secondly, his most wicked and malicious mind and practice, against her most
Excellent Majesty, and the whole State and Country, most plainly and
evidently discovered; together with his cunning order, method, and means he
uses to atteine unto his treacherous purpose: his slanderous defamations of her
Majesty's most princely and godly actions, and of her ministers and country,
most truly and iustlye refuted, and rebanded upon himself and his party: and
his holy fathers authority to depose Princes, together with his warrant for
the subjects disobedience, utterly disproued and overthrown, not only by
sundry authorities, both of the holy Scriptures, and of the ancient fathers and
Doctors of the Church, but also by those very examples, which D. Allen himself
produces, for his best confirmation thereof:

Thirdly, his seditious and ungodly persuasions unto her Majesty's natural
borne subjects, showed to be most deceitful, corrupt, malicious, and such as
ought to have no force, being grounded upon such examples and arguments, as do
rather enforce the contrary: and his policies so profane, absurd, and
unadvised, as (being measured by the line of right consideration) they turn
wholly to the advantage of them, against whom they are intended, and to the
great prejudice of himself, and his associats.

Wherein, that you may the better perceive by Notes to be considered both in the
whole, and in every particular.
the whole course of his dealings, and every particular point thereof, the
honest and religious mind and disposition of this Cardinal, you are in the
first to consider the lawdable and high renowned In the first what facts, and
persons D. Allen defends.
fact, which he takes upon him in this pamphlet to defend and extol, and the
worthy and famous persons, for whom he offers himself an Advocate* and
broacheth his best vessels of Rhetorike, with his ruinous and decayed eloquence
to solemnise, and proclaim their veluetheaded virtue and devotion.

Touching the fact, I need not by bitterness The fact, treason.
of words to augment the infamy thereof, being not only most apparent of it
self, but by D. Allens own assertions also proved, most traitorous,
dishonorable, and infamous. The persons discontented, disloyal, and ingrate.


For the persons, I rather remember them with pity, then pursue them with
malice: that the one of them being of an ancient and noble house, a man well
frended and greatly favored, and Sir W. Stanley.
then even in the ready way of advancement, should (of a mere discontented
mind) deceive the expectation and good opinion of his gracious Sovereign and
honorable friends, and prevent his own good happes: the other R. York.
having in former times lead a loose and dissolute life, and played some
slippery parts, to the touch of the best joint in his body, and In the low
countries.
yet having afterward found extraordinary friendship for the saving of his
life, and saluing of his former trespasses, and being now received into some
favor, and credit above his demerits, should (of a vagrant humor, and vicious
disposition) return with the dog to his vomit, and with the swine to his
former filth and wickedness: and lastly, and especially, that both of them
should unto the foul attaint of Treason, add the most odious and shameful
guilt of Ingratitude, Ingratitude. Sir W. Stanley sometime servant to the E. of
Leicester.
the one of them in betraying his L. and Master, by whom, and through whom he
had received all his honor and preferment, and greater was to receive, if his
disloyalty had not prevented it: the R. York.
other in betraying his most honorable The E. of Leicester.
benefactor, of whom he had received sundry favors and great benefits, and by
whose special means he had received his life: both of them in betraying their
General, which had trusted them both, above their desert: both of them in
preferring the present gain of some few crowns, before the respect of their
own consciences and reputation, their duty and allegiance unto their most
gracious Sovereign, and the honor of their country.

But it were but a small glory, to insult upon the miserable, and less
pleasure it is to me, to oppress them with reproaches, whom their own doings
have already cast down to the lowest dungeon of discredit. I will therefore
only bewail their want of grace, not afflict their persons, by rubbing over
the raw skarres of their fresh wounds, not yet fullye skynned.

And these (forsooth) are the famous facts, which D. Allen so highly
commends: these the honorable persons, whose Orator he makes himself, to
declaime of their praises. And no marvel if an Archtraytor defend Treason: for
if Treason An Archtraytor must needs defend Treason.
should have no defense, his own fact were the more infamous: and if the
inferior Traitors be so highly extolled, how much the greater is his own glory?

In the second, you are to observe the actions, In the second, what actions and
persons he inueigheth against.
which he sets himself to impugn and discommend, and the persons against
whom he opposes himself, and shoots out the most venomous sting of his
slanderous and blasphemous The actions already proved godly, virtuous and
honorable.
tongue. The actions, such as by the adversaries own arguments, affirmations,
and authorities, have been already sufficiently justified against his false
calumniations, and are in themselves most apparent godly, virtuous, and
honorable:

The persons so sacred, so religious, so unspotted, so far above all blemish of
detraction, as Malice The persons, sacred, religious, and unstained with
reproach.
it self cannot name without reverence, nor think on without trembling; and
such, as D. Allen is by Gods own word expressly forbidden, not only to
speak, but so much as Exodus 22. 28. Ecclesiastes. 10. 20.
to imagine evil of, in thought. Yet such is the corruption of his mind, the
disobedience of his heart, the neglect and contempt he has of Gods
commandment, as no regard of virtue, no respect of ciuility, no fear of God
or man, can restrain his outrageous intemperancie. But herein has he observed
Decorum, and showed himself in all points like himself: for he that He that
is a professed patron of vice, must needs be an open enemy to virtue.
has professed himself an open patron of vice and treachery, and a
cannoniser of disloyal traitors, it fitteth best his person and quality, to
object himself as a sworn adversary to all honorable, godly and religious
actions, and a malicious and slanderous defamer of all true noble, virtuous,
and renowned personages. In the third, what it is, that he persuades you to.


In the third, you are to note the nature of the thing, whereunto he goes
about to persuade you, that is, to reuolte from the due obedience and service
of your Sovereign, to rebel and to take arms against her, and your country:
a thing first, in it self, A thing unlawful, and repugnant to Gods word.
unlawful, displeasing to God, and repugnant unto his word, as has been by
sundry arguments, and express authorities of Scripture, manifestly declared
unto you: secondly, for the effects, unnatural, odious, and infamous
throughout the Unnatural and odious to the world.
whole world, as being the most pestilent disease of the body politic, the
greatest enemy to civil government, and the dissoluer of all humane society:
thirdly, for the intent, most dommageable, Most hurtful and pernicious to
yourselues.
and utterly pernicious to yourselues, as tending directly to the very ruin
and overthrow of your peace, liberty, wealth, prosperity, and finally in a
word, to the extreme misery, calamity, and destruction of yourselues and your
country.

A fit persuasion for such an author, wherein Fit for such a perswader.
he has showed himself hitherto no changeling, that he might at the least
purchase unto himself the commendation of constancy, though it be but in
mere lewdnes, and shameless impiety.

Lastly, for a full consummation and accomplishment of his praises, you are in
all and every In all, you are to consider his fraudule^t dealings and
impostures.
particular of this his pamphlet throughout, to consider (that which has been
heretofore in sundry places noted unto you) his fraudulent and indirect
dealing, not only in the fallacies and Sophistications of his arguments, but
also in the open falsehood of his affirmations, and especially in his perverting
and wresting of the holy histories, and examples of Scripture, to his
seditious and wicked purposes. Which if any (upon the good opinion they have
conceived of D. Allens integrity and zeal in religion) do think not to be
intended by him to the deceiving of them, they do He that makes it no
conscience to abuse Gods word, will not make it deintie to abuse men's
credulity.
therein utterly deceive themselves. For it stands not with reason or common
sense, for any man to believe, that he will make it nice or deintie, to abuse
the ignorance or credulity of men, which makes it no conscience to abuse the
most sacred and holy word of the eternal God.

But herein has he (I say) duly and orderly accomplished his course, with
such equality, proportion, and uniformity in all points, as the middle D.
Allens uniformity in all points of his Pamphlet.
appears in each respect answerable to the beginning, and the end unto both:
insomuch as the Author has effectually showed himself not to have
degenerated in any point, from his first humor and disposition: but that you
may rightly say of him (for so much as he has declared in this pamphlet,) that
if there be one good zeal, motion, or affection in him, there is never a bad.

If any man think me to have been more earnest and bitter in speeches
against the man, then I No hard speech used against D. Allen, but against his
malicious and wicked dealings.
heretofore promised and professed, let him impute it to the bitterness of the
argument and occasion, for I protest I have not in any thing inueighed against
the person, but against his wicked, malicious, and pestilent practices: which I
know no subject well affected could with patience endure to think upon, and I
my self have been enforced to command my self temperancie, in repeating and
answering them, laboring in no wise to discredit him, but endeavoring wholly to
discover his double and deceitful dealings, his irreligious and profane
policies, and his evident abuses and impostures: Deceits and impostures, the
only means to establish their Antichristian Monarchy.
which has been ever hitherto the only means, that not he alone, but all
the rest of the same sect have used, to seduce men from the Truth to the
following of their faction, for the setting up of their Antichristian Monarchy.
For that is the very mark they shoot at, to make themselves Lords, and
Rulers of the world, and to draw as well the authority of the sword, as the
custody of the keys, into their own hands, and to bring all Kings,
Princes, Emperors, and all Civil powers, under their subjection and obedience.

Which knowing at the first that they could not by any means bring to pass,
if the word of God, (which is directly against their purposes, and beats
down their intolerable pride, and ambitious desire of Souereigntie) should
once be made public and common to the people, whereby they might be able to
discern their doctrine, and find out their errors and abuses: to keep and
restrain men from that knowledge, they endeavored first to The restreint of
the Scriptures from the people, to hold them in ignorance.
suppress the holy Scriptures, by prohibiting them to be published in those
languages, wherein the people might read and understand them: teaching the
people, that it was not convenient for them to meddle with the Scriptures, but
that it was sufficient for them to rely wholly upon their doctrine, and
necessary for their salvation to believe what they taught, and to fulfill what
they commanded. So by this means might they teach whatsoever they would, for
who could control them? and whatsoever they taught, the people were bound to
believe, upon pain of damnation; for who durst offend his Ghostly Father?

If any true member of the Church of Christ, stirred up by the spirit of God,
and an earnest zeal of his word, to encounter their wicked proceedings, and to
hinder the kingdom of Antichrist, did put himself forward to reprove their
errors, rebuke their abuses, and sincerely to teach the word of God, and due
administration of the Sacraments, according to the true institution Whosoever
taught the liberty of the Gospel, and free use of the Scriptures, was
proclaimed by the Papists for an Heretic.
of Christ, and the doctrine of the Apostles and the Primitive Church,
endeavoring to communicate unto all men the knowledge of the truth: they
forthwith condemned him for an Author of new doctrine, a sower of sedition,
and (to make him the more odious unto the world) proclaimed him for an
Heretic, thundering out their Bulls, excommunications, and curses against him,
and all to the end that men might not incline to him, nor give any credit or
regard to his teaching, whereby All to cover their abuses.
they might come to the knowledge of the Scriptures, and to the discovering of
their Popish abuses, and impostures.

Now, when they see these policies no longer avail the^, but that mighty
Princes and whole Nations, moved by the inward vvorking of the holy Spirit,
have caught hold of, and embraced the light of the Gospel, and thereby have
begun to descry their iugling and tromperie, and to fall away from their The
Papists proceed from policy to plain force.
obedience; they fly now from policy to plain force, and join the one with
the other, and fall to inciting not only of natural borne subjects, but of
foreign Princes and nations, to join in arms against the defenders of the
true, ancient, Catholic, and Apostolic Faith, only to the intent to reduce
them to their former subjection and obedience, and to establish their own
Antichristian Deceit, their only means to persuade men to their purpose.
Monarchy. And what other means use they to draw them to the accomplishment
of their ungodly, and worse then barbarous designements, but even their
ancient and accustomed policy and practice of deceit, seducing them with false
doctrine, and persuading them, those things to be most lawful, honorable
and necessary to be done, upon pain of damnation, which are expressly
forbidden by the word of God?

And can any man then be so senseles as to be moved by their persuasions,
seeing how first they have noozled them in ignorance, and barred them the
means, whereby they might have come The Papists restrain the knowledge of the
Scriptures, only to bind men (by ignorance) to the believing of their
traditions.
to the knowledge, to be able to discern of truth, and falsehood, only to the
intent to bind them wholly to the believing of their traditions: and now
(having so Captiued their understandings and judgments with blindness, as
either they have not the knowledge to descry their abuses, or at the least have
it wholly restrained to the credit of their doctrine,) forbear not to impose
upon them any falsehood, that may further their ambitious purposes?

There is no man but knows that the plain The Truth beggeth no credit, nor
fears sifting.
and simple Truth, which is ever able to justify it self, craves no credit,
nor fears to be sifted to the uttermost: but it is falsehood, that seeks
corners, and uses policy to creep into credit, and refuses to come to open
trial. And why should then the Romish Church recommend ignorance unto the
people, and lead them on in blindness with their own traditions, restraining
from them the reading and knowledge of the Scriptures, which is the true
touchstone of Religion, if their doctrine were pure and sound, and able to
abide the touch? Christ bids all men search the Scriptures; why should they
then forbid or hinder any man to read the Scriptures, but that they know the
Scriptures condemn both their doctrine and doings, and therefore fear to
have their falsehood and wickedness discovered? Wherein they do most of all, and
most The Papists own doings condemn them.
evidently condemn themselves (to the judgment of all men, in whom there is
any jot of judgment or common sense) bewraying themselves to be the
children of darkness, not of the Matthew. 15. 14. Matthew. 7. 15.
light, The blind, leaders of the blind, Wolves in Sheep clothing: And
what better mark seek ye to know them by, then the same very mark, whereby
Christ himself has notified them unto you, that is, by their fruits? their
pride, their Ibidem.
ambition, their malice, their deceit, their imposture, their falsehood, their
profaneness, to conclude, their plain Atheism? And can you (notwithstanding
all these notes of them (given you by Christ) believe them, or suffer your
selves to be seduced by them?

But me thinks I do even see D. Allen himself proceeding on with the rest
of Dauus his part, D. Allen is never weery of an ill work.
and saying to the Pope (his Master) Deceptus sum, at non defatigatus: Hac non
successit, alia aggrediamur via: I am disappointed of my purpose, but not
Teren. Andri.
weary of my work: Since this trick has not served our turn, let us try
another.

In truth I doubt nothing of his good will, nor of his endeavor, neither yet
of the readiness of the rest of that crew, to pursue this argument: for neither
is this the first assault, that D. Allen has given to the subjects fidelity
and obedience, neither is D. Allen the first and only Champion, that has
stricken the first blow in so bad a quarrel, though none of them ever yet
answered the encounter. But the best hope is, let him, or any other give the
assaie again, when, and as often as they lust, I trust they shall be still
disappointed, and in the end weery, or clean worn out: and when they have
attempted all the ways they can, they shall be as wise, as they were in the
beginning, and in the beginning, midst, and ending, nearer to their own end,
then to the end of their purpose. For God will never give success to so
godles an enterprise.

As for this slender push of D. Allens Pamphlet, I hope there is not the
holowest heart of all her Majesty's subjects, in whom there is either fear of
God, sense of reason, or regard of his own safety, but that having seen his
weak forces, his brittle weapons, his false fires, and counterfeit engines, is
sufficiently armed in himself with his own honesty, faith, and loyalty, to
abide and withstand and this feeble and forcelesse battery.

But what shall I now say to M. Allen, and the rest of our fugitive
Countrymen, that have left their Sovereign, their Country, and their duty
altogether, especially such as have not only left them, but do maliciously
stir up all the means they can to overthrow, destroy, and utterly The
English Fugitives seditious dealings deserve more then to be inueighed against,
of every true subject.
deface them? Shall I whet my self wholly to inueigh against them? I know their
deeds have not only deserved it, but do justly provoke me and every good
subject unto it. But I will use Charity, even where it is not to be showed.
Shall I then in Charity reprove them? I would they were as willing to hear
reproof, and as ready to be reformed, as they have been charitably,
friendly, and brotherly admonished. Shall I labor to exhort and persuade them
to the Small hope of converting them by persuasion.
consideration of their duty, the repentance of their grievous offenses
committed against their Sovereign and Country, and restoration of their due
obedience and fidelity? I fear I shall but loose my labor, to cry to them
Resipiscite Psalm. 2. 10.
and conuertimini, Be wise and turn, their ears are so close stopped, their
hearts so ouerhardened, their minds so maliciously bent against her Majesty,
their Country, and us all. What shall I then say further to them? Alas, in so
desperate a case, I can say no more, then Doctor Allen in his Pamphlet says
to his Country (but with a better mind and meaning toward them, then he does
toward us,) Alas for them, and thrice Alas for them: for I do even from the
bottom of my heart pity their error, I envy not their Religion: I do even
from the bottom of my heart bewail their obstinacy, I hate not their
persons* I do even from the bottom of my heart lament their their miserable
estate, I malice not the men: I wish better to them, then they do unto us: I
desire neither the spilling of their blood, nor the spoiling of their
substance, but I pray, and pray heartily for them, God amend them, God lighten
their eyes, if they be blind and do not see, open their ears, if they be
deaf and cannot hear, turn their hearts, if they be obstinate and will
neither see, nor hear. God (if it be his will) give them grace to know his
will, to acknowledge his will, and to conform themselves to his will, that
they may be heirs of his everlasting Will.

And to you (my brethren, countrymen, and An exhortation to all her Majesty's
liege subjects.
fellow-subiects) what shall I say more then has been said? Shall I endeavor
to exhort you to obedience, and to the love of your prince, and defense of
your country? Why should I seem so much to suspect your obedience, your love
to your Prince, or your zeal and care of your country? Because D. Allen has
attempted by his perswasio^s to corrupt you, and withdraw you from the^? Why,
you see his persuasions are of little force, grounded upon falsehood, and
contrary to the word of God. But were they never so forcible, why should you
be corrupted by them? An honest faithful mind may well be assaulted, but
Virtue most showed in withstanding the strongest assaults of vice.
will reuer be overcome with the corruption of wicked persuasions: Nay, there
is virtue most showed, where against the hottest assault is made the strongest
resistance.

But why should you disobey, and reuolte from your princes service, and take
arms against her and your country, as D. Allen exhorts you to do? Whether
upon just cause, or upon coffeehouse? If upon coffeehouse, you show
yourselues rebels* not to your Sovereign only, but to God himself, in that
you are not contented with his ordinance, but will strive to put it down, and
set up a new ordinance of your own. This motion cannot proceed but of the
devil himself, the rebellious spirit, and mouer of all sedition.

If you say upon just cause, you deceive your There is no just cause, to
commit an unjust act.
selves: for there can be no just cause, to commit an unjust fact. If there
might any cause be just, who shall be judge of the justice thereof? Your
selves? that were not fit: you are parties, and therefore partial, and no
competent judges. Again you are private men, and subjects, and therefore can
have no lawful authority (in this case) to judge? Who then shall be judge to
determine this cause? There is no lawful power in this Realm, but your
Sovereign, and her ministers: then if there be any cause, you must open it
unto her, and submit both your selves and the cause to her judgment, and
reformation, and in the mean time continue in your due obedience, till the
cause be decided.

But (you will say) your Sovereign is a party also, as well as you, in the
cause. So may she be, and yet a judge. But to whose judgment then will you
appeal? there is none to be judge over her, but God. Will you then be judged
by him? Indeed he is the highest judge, and by him the whole world is to be
judged. And will ye be content to stand to his judgment? I know you will not
call him out of heaven, in person to judge betwixt you: for you need not:
because he has left his laws and judgments amongst you, here on earth,
recorded in his own books of the old and new testament, which may be
sufficient to determine this cause, without any further assistance, seeing that
by them the whole world is to be iuged. Look then into his book for his
judgment in this case, and you shall find that he forbids you absolutely
(without exception of any cause) to lay your hands upon the Lords anointed:
and commands you as absolutely (without all manner exception) to submit your
selves as well to your Prince, as to her ministers and inferior governors, 1.
Peter 2. Romans 13.
to obey her, and not to resist her, for if ye resist her, he tells you that
ye resist his ordinance, and shall thereby receive to your selves judgment.

You hear now, how God in his holy Scriptures You may not resist your*
Sovereign.
determines this case directly against you, that you may not (for any cause)
offer to lay your hands upon your Sovereign, but that you must submit your
selves unto her, obey, and not resist her, upon pain of judgment. How then
will you dare to lift up your hands, and to take arms against her?

But, if it were lawful for you (as it is not) for any cause, to rise in arms
against the Queens Majesty, your liege and drad Sovereign, what cause (I pray
you) would you pretend for your so doing? will you say Religion? Indeed
Religion is the cause, for which D. Allen teaches you, that it is lawful and
honorable for you to take arms against your prince, and labors earnestly to
persuade you thereunto, such as are of his religion. But what kind of Religion
call you that, that stirs you up A good Religion, that stirs up subjects
to Rebellion.
to Rebellion? You have received no such religion from Christ, nor from his
Apostles: for they teach you the contrary, both by their doctrine, and
examples. They tell you that you must submit your selves to your Sovereign,
obey, and not resist her. They, when they were imprisoned, tossed, and Christ
and his Apostles suffered persecution without either resistance or moving of
sedition.
turmoyled from place to place, reviled, and stricken, yet never offered
resistance against the Magistrates, neither moved, or attempted any sedition,
nor entered into any conspiracy against the^, but endured all with patience, as
constant witnesses of the Truth: which is clean contrary to this Religion,
which you profess. From whom then receive you your Religion? from your holy
father the Bishop of Rome? It may very well be; for it shows it self from
whence it comes. And is this the Religion, for which you will take arms
against your Prince? Why, you see it is a Religion taken from man, and not from
God, and therefore cannot stand. You see it is a Religion contrary to the
doctrine and Religion of Christ, and the Apostles, and therefore not the true
Religion. Will you then take arms against your Prince in the quarrel and
defense of a false Religion? you know not what you do, and that is also the
fault of your Religion. For if you had given your selves to the reading of the
Scriptures, and study of knowledge, whereby you might have been able to give
an account of your faith, and known the ground of your Religion, and not
leaned so much, nor given so great trust unto men's traditions: you might (with
Gods grace and assistance) have found out a sounder Religion. But then should
you have fallen from the precepts of your Popish teachers* But yet should you
have followed the commandment of Christ, who bids you Search the
Scriptures.

What fault find you with our Religion? We teach nothing, but what we learn
out of the The Protestants Religion.
Scriptures: we hold constantly the doctrine of our Savior Christ, and of the
holy Apostles in all points unchanged, and by them we offer our selves to be
tried, and our Religion. And do you condemn the Scriptures, the doctrine of
Christ and his Apostles? If you do, the whole world will condemn you: if you
do not, how can you then condemn our Religion? Compare it with your own, and,
if you be not over partial, senseless, or shameless, be judges your selves,
whether of the two is the sounder.

We ground our Religion wholly on the word The comparison of the Protestants
Religion with the Papists.
of God, you, more upon the traditions of men: we recommend unto all men the
knowledge of the Scriptures, for the direction of their life, and assurance of
their salvation; your teachers restrain from you the knowledge of the
Scriptures, delivering you their own traditions, both for your instruction of
life, and assurance of your salvation: we commend unto subjects obedience, and
fidelity, to their Princes, they command subjects disobedience, and rebellion
against their Princes. Deny any part hereof, if you can: examine your own
consciences, if this be not all true, and then judge your selves by the true
cognizance of Religion, whether of the two is the true Religion. We fly not to
arms to maintain our Religion, for the truth is able to uphold it self, and
has God for her protector: Your Religion had need to be advanced by arms,
else must it soon decaie, having neither God, nor the Truth, nor reason to
maintain it And will you then take arms against your Prince for defense They
that take arms for the Romish religion, take arms against religion.
of this Religion? No, no, if you do, you deceive your selves, you take arms
against both your Prince and Religion, and (in defense of men's traditions and
tromperies, under pretense of Religion) you seek to overthrow the true
Religion: wherein you rebel not only against your Prince, but against God
himself, who is the author and defender of this Religion.

Christ teaches you not to take arms, though Christ teaches subjects to
fly, or suffer for Religion, not to rebel.
ye were persecuted for Religion, but to fly: and if ye will abide and stand
in the Truth, he wills you to suffer, like Martyrs, not to resist, like
Rebels. But you have no such cause given you, either to resist, or to fly;
for ye are not persecuted, but instructed: and if ye refuse to come to hear,
ye are punished for your disorder The Papists punished for disobedience, not
for Religion.
and disobedience, not for Religion: for what Religion teaches you to refuse,
to hear the word of God preached? Christ says, My sheep hear my voice:
whose sheep are you then? for you are none Papists refuse to hear the word
preached: Ergo they are not of Christ's flock.
of Christ's. If ye will be of Christ's flock, you must renounce that Religion,
which withdraws you from the hearing of his voice: for till then you cannot
be his sheep.

Do you call the execution of Justice against your Jesuits and Seminaries,
persecution for Religion? You do either ignorantly mistake it, or
slaunderouslie misreport it. For none was ever executed The Jesuits and
Seminaries executed for Treason, not persecuted for Religion.
for Religion, but for express Treason against her Majesty's person, as has
been sufficiently declared and published to all men. But (you will say) they
did nothing but what Religion moved and bound them in conscience to do. I
believe it, and affirm as much as you say: and this is the fault, I warned you
of before, in your Religion. A good Religion (ywis) that moves and binds men
to the committing of Treason against their Christian Rulers. Can you confess
so much your selves, and yet are ye so blind, that you will not see the
impiety of your Religion? Yet see your own danger, how in professing that
Religion, you condemn Papistry and Treason inseparably united together.
your selves of treason. If your Religion tie the^ necessarily to treason, that
hold it, as in truth it does, (for they must either disobey her Majesty, or not
obey the Pope:) how can you acknowledge your selves professors of that
Religion, and not condemn your selves for traitors to your sovereign?

Leave, leave therefore that erroneous and ungodly profession, and term it not
by the holy name of Catholic Religion, but mere blindness and Superstition,
being grounded upon the vain inventions and traditions of men, so directly
opposite unto the word of God, so contrary to the doctrine of Christ and his
Apostles, and so inseparably combined and linked with Treason, as you cannot be
either true Catholics, Christians, or loyal subjects, so long as you persist
in it. Pretend not the quarrel of Religion, against your Prince and Religion:
for (assure your selves) if you will admit (as you ought) that only to be the
true Religion which is founded upon Christ, the head Corner stone, there is no
Religion, that allows so rebellious an action.

If you give any heed unto outward and Civil respects, consider with your
selves the long, peacible and prosperous reign of your Sovereign, the like
whereof your forefathers have not seen, nor any age does record. If long peace,
Peace, wealth, and prosperity, the blessings of God, and assured tokens of his
special favor.
wealth, and prosperity, be the outward blessings of God (as undoubtedly they
be) whereby he declares his special favor unto that Prince and kingdom,
which fear him* and worship him syncerely, and with whom he is well pleased,
according to his word and promises in the Scriptures, al these may be to you
an assured argument, both of the singular favor of God, unto your Prince and
Country, and of the true sincere Religion professed by them, wherewith he is
well pleased.

But look yet further into the exceeding favor The singular favor of God
unto her Majesty, particularly*
of God showed particularly unto her Majesty (I speak not of her rare and
singular gifts of wisdom, learning, virtue, and other her excellent, and
Princely qualities and perfections, both of body and mind, with all other
Complements of nature, so abundantly bestowed upon her, as few ages have ever
known her equal, all which we must yet acknowledge to be the special
graces of God) look, I say, into his gracious goodness toward her, in
protecting her from the manifold In protecting her from the malicious attemptes
of Traitors.
dangers and mischiefs attempted against her own person.

I know there is none of you ignorant, how often and sundry times her dear
life has bin sought, and how near the bloody tortors have been to the very
execution of their deuilish designement, some of them (more then once or twice)
in nearest Her Majesty's life sundry times sought by Traitors, and
miraculously preserved by God.
and private place, with their murderous weapons in their hands, even ready to
strike the deadly and cursed stroke of our calamity, and their own utter
confusion and damnation; had not God prevented it, by striking them with a
sodeine trembling of heart, and astonishment of mind, for the preservation of
his anointed servant and handmaid. This you know to have been attempted not
once, nor twice, nor thrice, but oftener then either memory serves me to
repeat, or horror of the villainy will suffer me to remember: and will you
not acknowledge the Divine providence, and the fatherly and loving kindness of
God unto her Majesty, in so miraculouslie delivering her, even out of the
bloody hands of the cruel Butchers, for the advancement of his glorious
Gospel, and propagation of true Religion, by her faithful and zealous
Ministry: and on the other side, his just judgment Gods just judgment upon
the Traitors.
and vengeance upon the traitorous Parricides, in not only defeating, but
discovering most wonderfully (even by some of their own mouths) their
accursed and damnable purposes, and bringing them to a shameful end, for an
example to all others of that sort, to take heed how they enter into such
wicked conspiracies?

And who have bin the actors in all these tragical The murderous Traitors, all
Papists, and set on by the Pope and his Adherents.
attemptes, but only such as you term Catholics, professors of the Romish
Religion, and such as the Pope and his adherents have inueigled, and set on to
execute their most impious and detestable devises, and (to conclude) such as
Doctor Allen inticeth, and exhorts you now to be? But what Atheist is he so
irreligious, what monster of nature so barbarous, what Tiger so fierce and
cruel, as can find in his heart to lay his hand upon the Lords anointed, to
imbrue his murderous blade in the blood of a Prince, of a Maiden Prince, in
whom is nothing but mildenes, clemency, virtue, modesty, Religion, all kind
of Princely nature and exellencie? Whose royal Majesty ought to be a terror
to all traitorous thoughts, whose tender sex ought to be a safeguard against
all violent assaults, whose sacred virtue, a protection against all villainous
attempts.

Let Gods especial favors therefore miraculously showed unto her Majesty,
and his exceeding blessings abundantly powered out by him upon her Country, be
unto you (as it is indeed) an assured argument, that her Religion is the true
Religion acceptable unto God, and conformable to his word: and let the ungodly
and The ungodly practices of the Romish Church, the very badges of
Antichristian Religion.
irreligious practices of the Church of Rome, to murder Princes, and maintain
Rebellion (contrary to the word and will of God) be unto you (as they ought to
be) infallible tokens of a false and counterfeit Religion: and let the
grievous judgment, and just vengeance of God, inflicted upon those abominable
Traitors, be unto you (as to your best behoof it may be) a terror from
assenting unto any such traitorous, or rebellious enterprise.

Look into the Histories of ages past, either of foreign Nations, or your
own Chronicles, and tell me where you ever read, or heard, or found
written, that Rebels did ever prevail against their lawful Souereignes.
Look nearer into the examples of your own Country and within your own
memory, and namely the Insurrections in the time of the late most virtuous
Prince of famous memory, Edward the sixth, against whom a rabble of rebellious
subjects in sundry parts assembled themselves, some pretending the quarrel
of Religion, some of a Common wealth, and gathered mighty forces of many
thousands, to the great amazement of the whole Country, and the Prince a
Child, yet what (I pray you) was the end of their Rebellion, but Rebels ever
overthrown.
speedy discomfiture, and confusion?

The histories are full of the like examples of all ages for what age has not
brought forth of both sorts, as well disobedient Rebels and miscreants, as
honest and duetiful subjects? but how different soever the causes and quarrels
have been (as there was never any such action so bad, but had the pretense and
color of some good intent) for which the Rebels Rebellion ever colored with a
good pretense.
have entered into Arms against their lawful Princes, yet the end has ever
(for the most part) been alike. For they that resist their Rulers, resist God,
Whose ordinance they are, and those that resist God, God will confound them,
and (which is most wretched and miserable) their infamy shall remain upon
perpetual record, for a spectacle to all posterity. What hope have you then
left, to encourage you to so godless an action, to take arms against your
gracious Sovereign? Do you expect redemption (as you pretend Religion)
through the means and assistance of foreign Forces? Nay rather assure your
selves of certain Captivity or destruction. For, if foreign powers should
prevail over your country, do you hope for adua^ceme^t at their hands in your
country? No, no, your foreign Lords will A stranger will never trust him,
which has not been true to his own Prince and Country.
stand too much in doubt of your fidelity toward them, which have not been
faithful to your own natural Prince, and Country, and therefore will keep
you low enough for their own security: for though they love your treason, yet
they will not trust your traitorous minds. So shall you be feign with your
Country to endure the loss of your liberty, and in your Country become
vassals and bondmend unto Strangers: A just reward for your unjust rebellion:
And this is the best issue you are to expect of so bad an action.

For, if your foreign auxiliarie forces go to the ground, as I trust they
shall, if ever they give the attempt against her Majesty and this Realm,
look you to go with them also for company (as you are well worthy) if you
go not before them; even when soever you shall first offer to stir. For (I
know) Englishmen naturally faithful to their Prince and Country, especially
against a foreign Enemy.
English men, how soever some few of the skumme and dregs of them (as of
other Nations) may either of a discontented mind, or desire of alteration for
hauock and spoils sake, or through the lewd inticements of others, be stirred
up to sedition, yet they are all generally by nature most faithful unto their
Prince and Country, and especially against foreign enemies, in a case of
Invasion, whereupon they shall see, lies the hazard of the universal overthrow
of themselves and their Country. And therefore whatsoever you be, that bear
a Rebellious mind against your Prince and Country, and an unnatural
affection to the partaking and furtherance of a foreign enemy, make sure
account of A good Caveat for Papists.
this, that there shall not so soon be five Rebels gathered in a cluster to
run to their confederates, but there will be fifty true hearted Subjects
round about them ready to cut their throats. And doubt you not but the
Magistrates are circumspect, provident, and careful enough, to set a good
order and caution, for the timely preventing of all such your pernicious
purposes.

Seeing then the assured issue of your rebellious attemptes (if any of you
should be so wickedly inclined) and the present danger and destruction hanging
over your heads, me thinks you should have but little courage, or comfort to
stir in such a cause against your Prince and Country. But let not terror in
these outward respects either only, or principally, drive you from disobeying
or resisting of your Souereign, whom you are expressly commanded by God to obey,
not for fear, but for conscience: but if Romans 13. 5.
there be in you Religion (as you pretend) show your religion in obeying his
word, and fear his everlasting judgments, if you disobey him. So shall your
obedience to your Prince be a willing, a hearty, a cheerful, a loving, and a
faithful obedience, acceptable to God, comfortable to your Prince, and
healthful to your own souls.

NOw to such as are faithful and true hearted subjects to her Majesty (as I
trust all are) I shall not need to use any exhortation at all, because I know
you are already so well affected in heart toward your gracious Sovereign, and
so thoroughly confirmed in your obedience and duty, as there cannot be more
added thereunto by any man's persuasions.

Therefore will I only give you in a word such An encouragement to all true
faithful Subjects.
comfort and encouragement, as I have received my self from mine own
conscience, to persevere constantly in that obedience, and in the defense of
Gods truth, our Princes safety, and the weal and liberty of our Country.

You have plainly understood by this discourse, the malicious mind and purpose
of D. Allen and his party, against our Queen and country, and the seditious
practices, and persuasions used by him in his Pamphlet, to the furtherance
thereof: which though (I know) they can take no hold of any of you, yet let us
take this benefit of our enemies, to make their doings our warnings, to arm
our selves against their malice.

That they wish ill to us, we need not doubt: their own writings bewray it.
That they intend il toward us, we must needs suppose: their practices have
declared it. That they mean to attempt ill against us, we may well assure our
selves: their preparations do certeinlie confirm it. How then? shall we be
dismayed at it? that were not manlike. Shall Romish and Spanish forces appall
us? That were dishonorable for English men. Shall we be daunted with the fear
of a foreign enemy? Then should we degenerate from the courage of our
forefathers.

Their forces are great: ours greater. Their threatenings are terrible: our
valor is tried. Their pride unmatched: our courage vnmated. Their malice
deadly: our minds undaunted. Their fury The odds of the quarrel.
vehement: our quarrel just, godly, honorable. They fight for revenge, we
for defense: they for the spoil, we for our lives, and liberties: they for the
Pope, we for God, and our Prince. And what is he, nay, what is she, that will
not take arms, that will not fight, that will not die in this quarrel?

Our fathers have vanquished foreign Princes: The examples of our ancestors
virtue.
and shall not we fight for our own Prince? Our fathers have conquered other
Realms: and shall not we defend our own Realm? Our fathers have been Lords
of other Countries: and shall we be slaves in our own Country? What an
alteration (or rather degeneration) would this be in us? how dishonorable to
the English name and Nation? How justly might all other Nations reproach us,
and all succeeding ages record us, for unworthy Subjects of so worthy a
Prince, degenerate Children of so generous Parents, and infamous Inhabitants
of so famous a Country? Let us therefore all of us (seeing the quarrel is
general and common to us all, for the defense of true Religion, our Prince,
and our Country,) let us all prepare our selves cheerefullie to the encounter,
let us not respect the cry of wife, or child, let us respect their defense:
let us pluck up our hearts, take up our arms, and march hardilie to meet
with our enemy; let us fight with him, let us die upon him, yea let us seek
him, if he seek not us.

We do all owe God a death: how shall we better pay it, then in his quarrel?
Our lives are all at our Princes commandment: how can they be better spent,
then in her service? We are all borne for our country: why should we then
refuse to die for our country? If we die in Gods quarrel, we shall live in
his kingdom: If we die in our Princes service, we shall live in the memory of
all posterity: If we die in defense of our country, our renown shall live
for ever. A Heathen Poet could say to his heathen countrymen in his age,
Dulce and decorum est pro patria mori:

It is a sweet and honorable death,
In countries cause to spend our vital breath:
And shall not we Christians think it most dishonorable for us, to fear to
die in the common cause of our God, our Prince, and our country? D. Allens own
encouragement.


Why, D. Allen himself, in his pamphlet, where he goes about to discourage us,
by admonishing us not to be emboldened by the Memory of our old English
notorious battles and victories, which in old time were comparable to what
provinces or peoples were most famous, nor by th'esteeme or opinion (either
true, or partial) of our present strength and courage in England: what does he
but add comfort and courage unto us, in stirring us up as well by the examples
of our forefathers victories, to imitate their virtues, as by the knowledge of
our own strength and courage, to take heart and courage unto us?

Let us then not cast away that encourageme^t which he gives us, rather let us
augment it by our own constancy of mind, and resolution. If the strength of
our Realm were great in our Our Realm never of greater strength then now.
forefathers times, it is now far greater: Nay, it was never so great in any
Princes age, as it is now, God be thanked. And when our realm was not so
strong, yet has it conquered other Nations, and was never conquered by any, so
long as it was true within it self. And now, when our forces are greatest,
shall our faith be least? when our state is most prosperous, shall we be
most miserable? when our quarrel is most glorious, shall we be most infamous?
No, no, let us link together in one mind, in one faith, in one force, let us
stick together, fight together, die together, like men, like Englishmen, like
true-harted Englishmen. Let us all and every one of us show ourselves forward
in aduauncing this service of the common cause, with our substance, with our
forces, and with our bodies also to the uttermost, as a great number of our
faithful countrymen in diverse parts of the realm, yea, whole countyes,
cities, and towns, and The duetiful, and honorable forwardnes of the Londoners
namely the honorable city of London, have done most duetifully, lovingly, and
honorably. Which I do the more willingly remember, not only for the comfort of
my self, and them* and every good subject, and to their great honor and
commendation, but also for an incitement unto others by their example to be
stirred up unto the like duty and forwardnes. Wherein if we join all, our
hearts, arms, and forces together, like true and faithful subjects, I am
fully persuaded our, foreign inuadors, whenever they come, shall find England
the hotest country that ever they set foot in: We are likely enough to
measure their Spanish Cassocks with our English bows, and their shoulders with
our brown bills, before they measure our broad cloth with their long pikes.
And before it come to that, I doubt not but some thousands of them ( God being
our guide) shall carry their last message unto their great grandfathers, the
next way by water.

But what do I use encouragement to the^, that The assurance of Gods
assistance, our greatest comfort.
are of themselves most courageous, valiant, and even eaguer to fight? Yet let
me add this to your greatest comfort, If God be with us, who can be against
us: And that God is with us in this quarrel, let us steadfastly assure
ourselves, howsoever D. Allen persuade the contrary: and let him and his
partakers know that God is against them, and will be, so long as they oppose
themselves against the obedience of his word, the knowlddge of his Truth, and
the light of his glorious Gospel. And that God may be with us still, and
continue with us for ever* let us humble ourselves unto him daily and duly,
with earnest* and hearty prayer and repentance, let us serve him continually
with a zealous fear and obedience, let us glorify him incessantly with a
lively faith and constancy: lastly, let us give ourselves wholly to him, that
we may win him wholly unto us.

So we being his, and he ours, let us all, and every one of us, comfort
ourselves upon his assurance, let us fortify our mynds upon his assistance,
and add our endeavor to his encouragement: assuring ourselves, that fighting
in so godly, so just, so honorable a quarrel, the success cannot be but most
happy, most prosperous, most glorious: that, if we defend our country, we
shall remain free and safe; if we overthrow our Enemies, we shall abide
victorious: if we die in this quarrel, we shall live eternally. To which
assurance of freedom, safety, victory, and life, what comfort can be
comparable?

FINIS.

