Godly and fruitful Treatise of Faith and works. Wherein is confuted a
certain opinion of merit by works, which an adversary to the Gospel of
Christ Jesus, held in the conference, had in the Tower of London.

Math. 7. ver. 21.Not every one that says unto me Lord, Lord, shall enter
into the kingdom of heaven, but he that does my Fathers will which is in
heaven. John 6. verse 40And this is the will of him that sent me, that uery one
that sees the Son, and believes on him; may have everlasting life: and I
will raise him at the last day. LONDON Printed for Gregory Seton, and are to be
sold at his shop under Aldersgate. 1583.

To the Right honorable, and his very good Lord, Ambrose Earl of Warwick,
Baron Lisley, master of her Majesty's ordenance, knight of the most honorable
or der of the Garter, and one of her highness privy Council, H. D. wishes all
prosperity in this life, with increase of honor, and in the life to come
eternal felicity, in the heavenly hierarchy by Jesus Christ.
AT what time Right honorable, I had finished these my slender labors,
containing such wholesome doctrine, I trust, as may semeneces sary for the time.
Certain of good judgment having per used the same made some persuasion to
suffer the impression thereof, which at the first, considering my own
weakness, the slender handling of so weighty a matter, the pretense in the
beginning for my private exercise, I disassented to their desire. But being
somewhat pressed to do some good to the Church, how little soever, and to cast
forth some public stone to the repairing of the building, leaving the success
to almightye God, I was in the end contented to yield, and imboldened to
commit this little treatise to the printe. The first and only occasion of the
writing whereof, was an argument which an adversary of the truth held in the
co^fere^ce, had in the Tower of London, the force whereof seemed to me so
weak, as that I thought my simple skill, might easily confute the same,
wherefore committing that argument to memory, I applied my endeavor to the
confutation thereof. And although art, and the eloquent order, and form of the
learned herin be wanting, yet I doubt not but done according to the truth. Yet
judge I this my labor little worth, and smally, or nothing able to prevail
against the cauils, and slanders of the adversary, unless your honorable L.
were patron thereof, to whom I do dedicate both my good heart, and work also,
not as to teach your L. ought contained in this treatise, whose honor aboundes
both in Zeal, and knowledge of this doctrine, but by your authority, to get
it the more favorable intertainement with others, when they shall behold this
simple discourse, shrouded under the protection of your honorable good L. Thus
being bold in all humility to prostrate this little book before your honor,
observing the examples of others in like oblations, for the better defense
thereof. I pray to the Lord Jesus long to preserve you, in much honor, and
felicity,

Amen,
Your honors most humble to command, H. D.

To the unlearned Papists.
Unto you I write ye unlearned Papists, whom the Pope and his Prelates have so
blinded, and dulled your senses, that you have ears and hear not, eyes and
see not, a heart, and yet cannot understand the truth, nor find the way of
your salvation. For blind ignorance, (who among you is called the mother of
devotion, though most untruly) has so lulled you a sleep, in popish dreams,
that you can neither hear, see, nor understand the word of life, but has shut
up the same from you, so as you cannot learn Christ truly, nor obey your
Prince faithfully: but does nussell you up in old wives fables, and legions of
lies, as they think most meetest for your study: fearing that if they should
suffer you to read the word of truth, the blind way which they have led you
in all this while, would be by you so espied, as their great hypocrisy and
false doctrine could no longer lie hid, but would be known to their great
shame, and utter condemnation. The Lord has opened the eyes of a number of his
people, which have been led in the way of your blindness: and the Lord in
mercy may also open your eyes, and will if you will not too obstinatlie
withstand his offered grace. The Lord calls you, if you will hear him. He
bids you search the scriptures, for therein you shall find life and wisdom,
which is Christ. But your Antichrist forbids you to read them, because he
would have you still blind, and know no other Christ, as a leader to heaven but
him. Forsake not him that is life, to follow him that leads to death, whose
doctrine draws to despair, taking away al confidence, by the merits of
Christ, and leaves you in perpetual blindness and confidence of your works.
And therefore awake out of these Popish dreams, fly from that whore of Rome,
who has made you drunken with the cup of her fornication. Embrace Christ
Jesus the only Savior, and only rest upon him for your salvation. Do as
much good as you can, and fulfill the law to the uttermost of your power, that
God may be glorified thereby, but repose no trust of salvation, nor merit
therein. Leave that only to Christ, unto whom it does apperteine, for he
only has obtained it, by shedding his most precious blood without the help
of our works. For if those works might save us, the^ Christ died in vain:
for what need is there of his death, when our works may save us. But forasmuch
as this is most untrue, and that there was nothing in the world whatsoever that
was able to redeem the soul of man, the commandment of God being once broken
by Adam, but Christ. Therefore the most precious body of Christ, was made the
alone and only sacrifice for to redeem us. Wherefore stay no longer,
forsake all vain helps from the Pope, and fly to Christ only, and there
rest ye.

And so farewell. H. D.

(...) the Christian Reader, a preface premonitorie.
I Need not (good Christian Reader) to stand upon either the commendation of
the Author of this book, or the work it self, for Vino vendibili hadera
suspensa nihil est opus, both the one and the other (such is the exellencie of
them both) may fusticiently commend themselves. Only this I am to request at
thy hands (good Reader) that what faults or escapes soever thou shall meet
withal in this book, (as there be some) I beseech thee impute them not to the
negligence of the Author, who is greatly agreeued at them, but to the oversight
of the printer, through whom they were committed. Wherefore gentle Reader I
beseech thee read this book (being I assure thee a learned work) cum iuditio,
not praeiuditio, with the spirit of modesty, not of contumacie, knowing that
(as the Apostle says) charity covers the multitude of faults, enuieth no
man, speaks ill of no man, but receives all things in good part. And
whersoeuer any fault shall be committed, freendly to amend it with thy pen,
and especially for the pointing thereof. And for the marginal notes, and
quotations also, the like ouersights as before are committed, wherefore good
reader blame not the author without cause, either for the one, or for the
other. A greater volume thou may have, but a learneder treatise for the
substance thereof, I persuade my self, is hard to find. Thus putting thee in
mind of the old adage (...) it is easier to find fault, and to carpe, than to
imitate, or amend. I commit thee to God, who bless thee with the knowledge of
his truth.

Thine in the Lord Phillippe Stubbes^

Faults escaped in the printing.
Page. Line. Fault. Correction. C. 1^. (...). for first read first Adam. F.
(...) (...) for work of the law. read works of the law. F. (...). (...) which
make* read which walk,

A TREATISE OF Faith and works.
GOD by his eternal wisdom, in his secret counsel, before the foundation
of the world: decreed the creation of the same world. And in that his secret
counsel determined to make mankind, and also appointed a number certain how
many he would create, before the end of the world: and that the world should
not end, before that number certain were accomplished, even to the last person.
God decreed so to make man in his first creation, as that he should be perfect
good, and should have free will, that if he would, he might stand and abide in
that perfect goodness, and not fall from the same, and so never to be dampened.
But God foresawe, thatnotwithstanding he would make man the purest creature
above all that he would make, under the compass of the heavens: and would
give him free will, power, and strength to keep himself from falling if he
would, yet notwithstanding he would fall, and break the commandment, which
God would give him: whereby both himself and his whole posterity should fall
into the state of damnation, and so the justice and wrath of God should take
hold, and be powered upon al mankind for his so transgressing, the only cause
of all their corruption. The mercy and love of GOD foreseeing this fall of man,
and perpetual death for the same, by the just judgment of God: preassed
forward, and as it were, pleaded against the justice and wrath of GOD: That
though by the fall of a first Adam, Romans 5, 12. 18.
sin entered, and the whole posterity of mankind should be brought into the
state of damnation, (for in Adam all do die) 1: Cor. 15, 22.
Even so by the death of a second Adam Christ Jesus, mankind is to be
recovered, bought, made righteous and redeemed Rom 5, 19
from the pain due by that fall. Which love and mercy in God being as high, or
higher in dignity then his justice, is to have as great, or greater interest
in man, then his justice; And the power of mercy is as well to be showed on
man, as the power of justice. But justice replied, that death must fall upon
mankind for transgressing; For the reward of sin is death: To. 6, 23:
and therefore justice otherwise could not be answered, but by death. The mercy
and love of God, to make a full agreement for mankind, and by justice to
satisfy the justice of God: ordeining, That we should be made the
righteousness of GOD in 2. Cor. 5, 21.
Christ. Granted that death by death should be redeemed, and that by innocent
death, even the death of the very son of God; Who only should take on him
our infirmity, and bear our pains, by 1. Pet. 2, 24. Esai. 53. Mat. 8, 17
whose stripes we should be healed: And he should be the redeemer in justice
(by death) to satisfy the justice, and appease the wrath of God. Whereupon the
justice and wrath of God, being therewith answered; and the elect freed from
the same justice and wrath of God. The Lord in mercy and love decreed in the
same his secret counsel, to give unto the redeemer, those whom before they
were, he had bought and made sure to himself, by a price which he would give
in the appointed time, before set down in the secret counsel of God. And
those whom before they were, he had bought and chosen, were unto him
certeinelie known; Romans 8. 29.
the number certain, and every particular person he knew before they were.
For God was not ignorant thereof; neither can there be ignorance in God;
neither would he redeem those whom he knew not. In the fulness of time, the
word Mat. 25. verse. 12. Galat. 4, 4.
being the second person, and very God of very God, took flesh made of the
substance of the virgin Marie, in which flesh living here upon the earth, he
fulfilled the whole law to the uttermost. Who did not sin, neither was their
guile found in his Esai. 53, 9^ 1. Pet. 2, 23.
mouth. The^ to satisfy the justice of God, for that number which were (before
they were created) elected and chosen to be saved. The same flesh being man
(joined to the Godhead and so one Christ) laid upon himself, and bare all the
1. Pet. 2, 24. Esai. 53. 5.
whole burden of sin in his body on the tree, done from the first to the last
end of the world, by all his elect. Thus bearing all our sins, he, being yet
an innocent lamb, was slain and hanged upon the cross, suffering before
diverse torments and passions. And when the uttermost penny for man's ransom was
paid, Christ hanging upon the cross (a little before his death) said; It is
finished: That is to Joan, 17, 4. 17, 30.
say, all the prophesies which were prophesied of me by all the Prophets, from
the first to the last, are fulfilled. And with all; I have finished the work
which was Luke 24, 26 27. Ioh. 17, 4.
given me to do of my Father. I have satisfied the justice and wrath of my
heavenly father against the sins of mine elect, I have paid their full
ransom, I have redeemed all from eternal death, and have Esa. 25, 8. Cor. 15,
54. Osee. 13, 14
for ever destroyed death: and hell for them. Death is swallowed up in victory.
So that now there is no more to be laid against them, nor to be done for the
redeeming of them from their sins, all is finished. The elect of God being
thus redeemed; And elected before the foundation Ephe. 1, 4. R. 9. 11.
of the world, before they were, or had done either good or evil: And that of
a certeintie infallible, without alteration of purpose, and without repentance
by To. 11, 29. Sam. 15, 29
God, in any respect, in his secret counsel. For in God there is no
repentance, nor alteration of any thing, decreed in his secret counsel, but
his purpose stands firm and stable, for ever. This election being thus in
certeintie determined, the number and persons certeinlie known to God, by name
set down, and written in the book of life by the finger of God, and not one
of them to be lost; For Christ said, Ioh. 17, 12.
those whom thou gave me have I kept, and none of them be lost, but the lost
child, that the scriptures may be fulfilled; Nor any one to be added
thereunto, but the decreed number to stand full without alteration of the same,
or any person thereof: because that God is altogether perfect wisdom, without
alteration of mind, not mutable, his knowledge certain, not ignorant of any
thing. All things past and to come are still present before him: Neither is it
with God as with men: to be Nom. 23, 19. Cor. 1, 7, and 10, 13 These. 5, 24.
of one mind to day, and of an other mind tomorow: but God is still faithful.
One and the self same, from the beginning to the end, I say without
alteration from his first decree, in his secret counsel. The^ all this being
thus undoubtedly true, it cannot be said, that man can by himself otherwise,
or by any other means merit and work out his own salvation, then has been
already wrought, through the mercy and love of God, in, and by Christ our
Savior, the only full worker of the same, by suffering his most grievous
passion and death. For how can it be said in any respect, that man by his
good works can merit his own salvation, seeing before he was, it was made
sure to the elect in God his secret counsel, and decreed to stand firm
without alteration, being advisedly purposed, by God in Christ, Before the
foundation of the world. So that without all contradiction Ephe. 4. 1.
and doubting, all the good works that has been wrought by mankind, can not
be said to merit their salvation.

The Jesuits in their last disputation in the Tower, held those to be the
works of Christ that man woorketh, for that Christ works them in man: and
being the works of Christ that are wrought in man, they merit (said he)
salvation. But this cannot be true; For election being decreed before ever man
was, and in that election, man's salvation made sure, and certain by that
decree through Christ his passion and death, and for his sake only, for that
he would give his life for the same in the appointed time. How then can it be
said without great absurdity, and derogation of the majesty of Christ Jesus,
his passion and death; That man's good works can merit or deserve that, which
many thousand years before he wrought any good works, was made sure and
certain unto him, for and by Christ as is aforesaid. Surely it is more then
extreme doltishnes once to think it. As for example; A prodigal servant that
had consumed his masters goods, and thereby he greatly indebted to his
master, yet his master in mercy and love, not only forgave him his debt, but
made him heir to all his lands. Now if after that his master had thus
forgiven his debt, and made him heir to all his lands, to the end the servant
should be a faithful friend to him, and love him with all his heart: the
servant would yet say; I will so please my master, I will work, and do so
much good in his sight, that I will deserve, that he shall not only forgive me
the debt which I owe him, and the evil life which I led toward him, but also
make me heir to all his lands. Were not this to be judged a very foolish
speech, and the speaker a right pattern of an insolent fool? To say he would
merit or deserve that which before was made sure to him of mere mercy and
love. Wisdom would rather have exspected this kind of speech from him, my
master has done much for me, he has not only forgiven me the debt which I
ought him, and am never able to pay it, but also he has made me heir to all
his lands, I will therefore by the help of God (according to my bounden
duty) extend my whole endeavor, to the uttermost of my power to do him the
best service I can all the days of my life: and shall think all that I am
able to do, to be nothing in respect of that, more then fatherly kindness,
which he has done for me. This had been rightly spoken, and this must be
our speech, which are the elect of God: For we were elected before Ephe. 1, 4.
the foundation of the world, that we by the working of the holy Ghost, should
be holy and blameless: and not elected, for that God saw we would be holy
and blameless, to merit our own salvation: for that is contrary to the
meaning of the holy Ghost, uttered by Saint Paul in the first to the
Ephesians. And so Gods election and decree uncertain (which is most certain)
if our salvation should rest upon our own well or ill doing, which cannot be.
For Gods election being once decreed (which as Paul says, was before the
foundation of the world) it stands sure for ever, and rests not upon our
well doing, yet if we lead not a godly Christian life, we show our selves
to be damned creatures; and not of the number elected, in whom the holy spirit
of God works. And here we see that God the father by his mercy and love, is
the first efficient cause of our salvation; The son of God the second
efficient cause; The passion and death of Christ Jesus the material Ioh. 3, 16.
cause, and Faith the isntrumental cause. For Faith apprehends (and so
cannot works) and thereby we take hold on Christ his passion and death: and man
believing Christ to be the son of God, God and man, and that he died for his
sins, he thereby is certainly assured, that he is the elect of God the
father, bought and redeemed by Christ the meritor, redeemer, and Savior, and
written in the book of life before the foundation of the world. Faith now
being the instrument wherewith we take hold on Christ, assures us that we are
elected. And good works proceeding from justifying faith, declares to the
world that we be the elect of God: and we please God by doing of good works,
but we merit not salvation thereby, neither has good works any part in the
merit of our salvation, but only Christ Jesus: For when we have done all the
good that ever we are able to Luke 17, 10.
do, yet are we but unprofitable servants: And how then can we merit our own
salvation? The best works that ever were, without Faith pleases not GOD: For
without Faith it is impossible to please Heb. 11, 6.
God. Yea, if it had not been appointed, that Christ should have died in the
world: all the good works that ever Christ did himself in the world, without
his death, could never have merited heaven for us: which if they could, Christ
would never have died, neither should he have needed. But if Christ's good
works besides his death were not able to merit our salvation, much less our
good works which are, as a stained cloth polluted. Therefore only Christ by his
passion and death, Esai. 64, 6.
and not the works of the law and of grace, neither does Faith merit
salvation, because it is the proper office of Christ only to merit the same;
much less then our good works; yet if we be void of good works, and have
not Faith chiefly to believe that Christ is the son of God, God and man, and
that he died for our sins: then may we be sure that as long as we remain in
that state, we be none of those whom God has elected, but are of the
reprobate number, and condemned sort. Faith therefore may be without good
works, and yet salvation to the believer in Christ. The thief that hanged on
the Gibbet on the right hand of Christ at his death, he did no good works,
yet he had Faith, and that but at the instant before his death; And Christ
pronounced him his elect, saying; To day shall thou be with me in Paradise.
Luke 23, 42.
But rarely may Faith be found without good works, though works done in
civil charity may be without Faith. For Turks and Jews do as many civil
charitable works, as all the Christians do, and yet are they without faith in
Christ, and therefore remain in the state of damnation, and their civil works
of charity avails them nothing, neither can they be saved by them. Therefore
Faith which apprehends Christ, does only justify, but so does not works;
for Faith is above good works, and good works are but handmaidens to Faith, to
wait upon her, but not to merit salvation, because of imperfection. For the
best works that ever were wrought by man besides Christ, if they be brought to
Gods tutch-stone they shall be found to be dross, and no fine gold. Therefore
we are to take hold only on Christ Jesus by Faith: and so shall we stand sure
of our salvation without doubting: which works cannot assure us of. And why
then should any man hang upon good works which cannot assure us of our
salvation, or think his own works, Friars works, Priests works, or works
of supererogation, to merit for them: when as the good works of Christ which
were most pure and undefiled, could not save mankind; and because they could
not save mankind, Christ therefore would die to purchase that which good
works could not. Peradventure some will ask wherefore Christ should work all
his good works which he wrought in the world? Was it not to merit our
salvation, and to purchase heaven for his elect? I say no. Neither was it the
purpose of the eternity, to send down from heaven into the world the second
person in Trinity, to take our mortal flesh, and by fulfilling of the law, to
merit heaven for his elect. But the purpose and end of his coming down to
take flesh, was, to die for the salvation of his chosen children, who could not
be saved, nor enter into the kingdom of heaven, but only by the bloody
sacrifice and death of that unspotted and innocent lamb of God, Christ Jesus.
And so heaven which was lost by Adams fall, was not merited by fulfilling of
the law, or by doing the good works of grace, either by Christ himself or by
his chosen children. You will ask again to what end then did Christ all that
was commanded in the law, and fulfilled the same most perfectly, if thereby
he should not merit heaven for his elect? It is to be answered for five causes.

The first cause is, to show that Christ by fulfilling of the law, was a just
person, had therefore no cause of death in him, and that also he dying,
suffered his death most wrongfully. For Christ living justly in the world
without sin, and without spot or blemish of sin, fulfilling the whole law in
such sort, as neither the justice of God, nor all the devils in hell could lay
any thing to his charge, or could find any one spark of sin whereon they
might take hold, thereby to put Christ justly to death: and showing him self
thus to be a just, and most righteous person, so fulfilling the whole law to
the uttermost that might be, ought not to have died, but to live in the same
according to the word; Do this and live: Luke 10, 28
And therefore he was most wrongfully put to death. But most graciously for
poor miserable man, whose deliverance from the wrath of God and fiery lake of
hell was wrought by the same death, who otherwise must have lived in perpetual
torments. Christ his good works in deed was a fulfilling of the law in his
own human person alone, but not for any others, neither could mankind
thereby be saved. And therefore Christ would suffer his passion and death,
because that neither by his own, nor by others good works mankind could be
saved, which (as before is said) if salvation for mankind might have come
thereby, Christ should never have needed to have died. And now ye children of
God hear the Trump of Christ Jesus sounding in your ears, a conquest, a
conquest; victory, victory. A conquest? Victory? By whom? Over whom? And
for whom? Even by Christ Jesus the most innocent, and unspotted lamb of God,
sacrificed and slain. And he it is that triumphs over death, hell, and all
the power of hell: and over the wrath and justice of God the Father, and over
the law of God; so that now the justice and law of God has utterly lost
their force: and Satan with all the power of hell has lost their interest,
which they had won against the elect by Adams fall; And that by the most
wrongful putting to death, the most innocent and immaculate lamb of GOD
Christ Jesus. And for the chosen children in Christ, is this most royal and
victorious conquest won. Christ has suffered the pain, and we have reaped
the gain. And this has the death of the blessed son of God Christ Jesus
done; which all the good works in the world could never do.

The second cause was, that all persons should know, that God had not
commanded that which was impossible to be done by man: for Christ being man,
did in his own person fulfill the whole law, did work all the good works
that the law required to be done, even to the uttermost silable of the law,
all was performed by Christ.

The third cause was for example: 3
that all persons should follow Christ in ^. Pet. 2, ^ 1. ^oh. 13, 15 Ephe. 5,
1.
well doing, to live in the world as he lived in the world, to hate sin as he
hated sin; to love virtue, as he loved virtue: that thereby our conscience
might stand assured of our election: and that the world might judge us (by
seeing the works of Faith to proceed from us) to be the elect of God in Christ
Jesus, and those whom Christ died for.

The fourth cause was, to show the 4
difference betwixt the first Adam, and the second Adam Christ Jesus. The first
Adam in his first creation was the perfect image of God: For God said; Let us
make man in our image according to our Genesis 1, 26. 27.
own likeness. And he was good in the sight of God, having free will to
keep himself so if he would: but he fell by breaking the commandment. The
second Adam was borne the very perfect son of God, having also freewil which
held, and kept himself in the obedience of his heavenly father, all the days
of his life: and kept all the commandments, which God had commanded. The first
could be tempted with an apple or fruit of the tree. The second Adam Christ
Jesus could not be tempted, with all the kingdoms of the world. The first
Adam Mat. 4, 9
was, Of earth earthly, and subject August. contra Adamantu^. Cap. 12
to falling. The second Adam was, Of heaven heavenly, and could not fall.

The fifth cause and end of all his good works, his godly life and
conversation 5
in this world, was to set forth the glory of his heavenly father: And he so
glorified him thereby, that his heavenly father from heaven said; This is my
well-beloved son, in whom I am well pleased, Mat. 3, 17.
etc. And that we also which are the elect of God, Might have our light so
shine Mat. 5, 16.
before men, that they may see our good works, and glorify our heavenly
Father which is in heaven: according to the example of our master Christ. Now
here you may perceive, to what end the godly life and good works which Christ
did in this world did tend too; which was not to merit salvation for mankind,
neither was that the pointed price for the same; neither could that obtain it.
But (as it is said) the very price of our salvation, was only the passion
and death of Christ Jesus, and not the works of grace. And in Gods election
before the creation of the world, the salvation of mankind was made as sure
for them, and Christ as sure of his elect which he bought before they were
(though the price for the same was not then paid, but to be paid in the
appointed time) as a man is sure of a piece of land that is void of
encombrance, which he buyeth to pay for the same at a day appointed. The
bargain of which lands being set down under hand and seal: and all things
done that ought to be touching the sale, saving payment which is reserved to
the appointed day. The land is now the buiers, and no man can take it out of
his hands, and the seller has no more to do with the lands, though yet he
be not paid for the same: neither can the seller have action against the
land, but against the buier. And so the land does remain firmly to the
buyer still, even from the first concluding of the bargain. Even so stands
it with the justice and law of God, and the mercy and love of God in Christ
for mankind elect. They have now no more action against the elect, which were
bought by Christ, (and in time paid for the same) then the seller has against
the land which he sold, and in time was paid for it. The elect were
Christ's from before the beginning, after he had bought them, and they could
not be taken out of his hands after the bargain was once set down, and
written under hand and Seal, (that is to say) written in the book of life,
and sealed with the promised passion and death of Christ Jesus: and so remained
surely his own for ever. And therefore it is plain, that good works has no
part in the salvation of the chosen children in Christ, seeing the same was
made sure to them, before they were created, or had done either good or evil:
neither could Gods election rest uncertain upon works to come* as a cause of
salvation, which are but the fruits of Gods children, and of Faith.

And although good works proceeding from justifying Faith, have no part in
the merit of our salvation: yet be they of great virtue and force, and have
their crown. For a godly and a virtuous life in the children of GOD, and the
good works which they do, which are the children of God elect in Christ Jesus,
do please God, and do stay the wrath of God that the plagues due for sin, as
war, pestilence, famine, and such like, fall not upon us as a just reward for
our wickedness. And therefore to stay the wrath of God, that his heavy hand
fall not upon us, and that the favor and love of God may still be bent
toward us. The children of God by the operation of the holy Ghost (who
works both the will and the work) in all the elect of Phil. 2, 1^.
God (because of our selves we are not able to think a good thought) do make
their Cor. 3, 2. epist. 2, 5.
humble prayers unto God, do all the good works that they are able to do, to
the glory of God, and are made by the holy Spirit of God, to hunger and thirst
after righteousness, to detest and abhor sin, and thereby do work out
their salvation: Phil. 2, 12.
That is to say, they outwardlye show unto the world by their good life and
conversation, that they are the elect of God. And they are assured in their
own consciences, (having a feeling of the holy Ghost working in them and by
leading a godly Christian life) that they are of that number which were chosen
and appointed to salvation, before the creation of the world. And God blesses
that land and that people, that obey and work good in his sight, by true faith
in Deu. 7, 13. 14,
Christ, and gives his peace and plenty of al good things unto them. And thus
the Lord does crown our good works, and rewards the same by these blessings
and the worldly blessings which god gives us, are infinitely of greater value,
and more then all the best works that all the whole world is able to do or
deserve.

Therefore O miserable man what art thou? that dare presume to lay thy defiled
works (which even the very best of them are most impure) before the most high,
just, mighty, and pure god, the judge of righteousness, to merit thy salvation:
who setting aside his mercy, cannot abide inperfection. Augustine cries out,
woe be to the most upright life of man, if God Aug. conf. li. ca. 13.
examine the same setting his mercy aside. Then, when all the best works that
we are able to do, cannot deserve one of the least blessings which God has,
and daily does bestow upon us: what should thou mean, O miserable man, to
hold them meritorious to purchase salvation. For thy best works, and thy best
life is sin, and will thou have sin to merit thy salvation? what says Gregory
upon the words of Job, in the 9. chapter, whose words be these: Man cannot be
justified, being com pared to God. The holy man (says Gregory) does perceive
that all the deserving of Greg. cap. 9 of Job.
our best works are faulty, if they be weied in the righteous balla^ce of the
just judge. And can that which is faulty, deserve other then damnation, if
mercy in Christ Jesus go not betwixt? therefore is Christ only the merit for us
and not our good works.

Will you hear what Barnard says who making a long discourse (as out of a
Barnar. in festo om. sanct. ser. 1.
learned fathers book I gathered) of the unrighteousness of man's
righteousness, demanding in the end of what value all our righteousness may be
in the sight of GOD. Shall it not be imputed filt hie like unto a foul
menstruous cloth, according to the saying of the Prophet, and if strickt and
narrow examination be made thereof, shall not all our righteousness befound
unrighteousness, and nothing worth.

But there is yet another shifte in the Papists storeboxe, which I trow will
strike the matter dead. And what is that trow you? Forsooth that by grace we
be renouated, which grace is given us from God the father, whereby we fulfill
the law: And men by grace fulfilling the law, do merit their salvation.

But forasmuch as this grace cannot be given us, but by faith in the death and
merit of Christ Jesus: therefore we say that by grace infused into us, by faith
in Christ good works are wrought, which are not now our works, but the works
of grace, and those works merit salvation. Who is able to overthrow this
Bulwark, builded upon so sure a rock, which being so profound, is not
possible for a man to undermine the depth, nor come near the top thereof
being so high? But the God of heaven will with the breath of his mouth,
overthrow such wicked blasphemy: whereupon, by the help of whose power, thus
I answer: that this is but a subtle cavil, and untruly spoken, to say that
they be not our works. For although that by grace we receive the holy Spirit
of God, who by his mighty power, mightily stirs up our hearts, replenished
with faith in Christ Jesus, to work such charitable works, as are prescribed
in Gods book, (though yet imperfectly performed on our parts) yet can it not
be said, but that they be our works, even as faith is said to be our faith,
which we receive by grace. As for example, who will doubt of the woman, which
was diseased with Mat. 9, 20. Mar. 5, 25.
an issue of blood twelve years, having a strong faith in Christ Jesus, but
that she had the same by grace. And yet Christ said unto her: thy Faith has
made thee whole. here you see that Christ called it Mat. 9, 22.
her faith, though she had the same by grace: and so of works, they be our
works though they be done by grace. But let it be granted for truth, that by
the grace of God we being renouated, receive the holy spirit of God, who
works in us all good things, yea all the good works that are wrought by man,
according to the saying of Saint Paul, who says: It is God that works in you
both the will and the deed, even of his good pleasure. And Phil. 2. 13.
that we could not have obtained grace from GOD the Father, but by faith in
the death and merit of Christ Jesus, so that they are not now to be called
our works, but the works of grace. Let all this that is said be granted,
yet that by fulfilling of the law, by the same grace we merit salvation, that
is utterly false, and repugnant to the word of God. For Saint John says;
Behold the Lamb of God, which takes away the sins of the world. The
sins of the world being Ioh. 1. 29. 36
taken away, what follows then? The kingdom of heaven, and salvation to
them, whose sins are taken away by the slain Lamb Christ Jesus. But it is
not said, Behold the good works of grace, which take away the sins of the
world: but, Behold the Lamb of God, which takes away the sins of the
world. Then it is only Christ that meriteth heaven for us, by taking away our
sins, and not the works of grace, nor our fulfilling of the Law. And why is
he called a Lamb? because of his innocence. For Saint Peter says. He is a
Lamb undefiled, and without spot. And because he was to be sacrificed and
slain, as a sheep to the slaughter: He was innocent, and as the Prophet
says, He did never violence, nor unrighteousness, neither Esa. 53. 7. Act. 8.
32. Esa. 53. 9 1. Pe. 2, 22
has there been any deceitfulness in his mouth. He was without sin, and
deserved not to die: but he dyed, and therefore for something. Truth, he died
for our sins, which were laid upon him, for Esaias says: The Lord threw them al
upon him, and so made him to be sin for us which knevve no sin. But by
imputation Esaias 53, 6. 2. Cor. 5, 21
were they made his sins. And our sins being thus taken from us and laid
upon him, death had thereby power over him, which slew him for our sins: So
that as by imputation, Christ was made the only sinner for the elect, and
therefore dyed: so are all the elect by imputatio^, made as innocent Christ. And
Christ clothing his elect with his innocence, God the Father beholds them no
more as sinners to damnation, but as Christ Jesus: because Christ has washed
clean away in Gods judgment, all the filth of sin from us, with his
precious blood, which he has shed upon the cross, so as the filthy
Chanelraker, polluted with the filth of the Chanel dirt, is by the Barber
washed clean, that no spot thereof is to be seen, so has Christ out blessed
Barber, washed away all our filth, the dirt of sin, in such sort as our
heavenly father for his Christ's sake, beholds them no more. And Christ once
dying for the sins of his elect, according to the purpose of God in his
secreate counsel, before the creation of the world, (which purpose could not
be altered, but must stand still for ever) has thereby only merited salvation
for us: then is it great blasphemy to maintain such an heresy, which does cut
away the cause of our salvation, by the only death and passion of Christ our
Savior, and attributes the same to me rites, and works by grace, whereby they
have made the works of the law to put Christ clean out of office, in the
merit of our salvation: and only the works of the law, which are wrought by
Faith and grace, to be the mean to merit the same. And Christ by his death
and passion, but only the cause of grace: who in deed is the only effectual
cause in the merit of our salvation, so that the works of the Law and Grace,
have no part in the cause thereof, but only as effects, do de clare us to be
the elect of God. Saint Luke says, Fear not little flock, for it is your
fathers pleasure to give you a king dome. To give you a kingdom, see, here Luke
12, 32.
is the kingdom of heaven given us: and that which is given, cannot be said to
be bought, or merited, and if it were either bought or merited, it cannot be
said properly nor rightly to be given. Then being given us, we by the works of
the law and grace have not merited it. And so are we not justified by them
before God, and so the proposition, that the works of grace, or the deeds of
the law, do merit or justify before God, is false, though they be wrought
through faith, by the power of the holy Ghost and by grace: because it is the
proper office of Christ immediately, that is to say, without any o there mean or
cause to purchase man's salvation, and not the office of the holy Ghost, by
grace working in man, for salvation could not be purchased but by death: and
the holy Ghost could not die, but Christ only by taking our flesh, was lead as
a sheep to be slain, and made a sacrifice for sin. Therefore Christ Esaias
53, 7^ Romans 3, 2^
is the only purchaser of our salvation. Neither do the works of the Law
justify us before God, nor merit salvation for us, though they be done after
grace received.

But with what face can you, O Papists, and Jesuits, maintain, that the
works of the law do justify us before God, and merit salvation, when there
is no good works wrought by the children of men, from Adam to the last person
created, that were of force to justify before God, if he wey our works wrought
by grace, in the balance of his righteous judgment: what says David: The
Lord looked down from heaven upon the children of men, to see if there were any
that Psalm. 14. (...) 53. ver. 2, (...)
would understand, and seek God: all are gone out of the way, they are all
corrupt: there is none that does good, no not one. Here you see the sentence
upon all flesh, there is none that does good, etc.

Saint Paul has the like saying, which he repeteth out of the same 14. and 53.
Psalm. There is none righteous (says Romans 3, 10, ^1, 12.
he) no not one: there is none that understands, there is none that seek
after God, they are all gone out of the way. They are all become
unprofitable, there is not one that does good, no not one.

The Prophet and the Apostle you see are of one mind: and speaking by one
spirit, affirms no goodness to be in the children of men, not one good, and
none that does good. And yet these Papists will maintain, that the children of
men be justified by the works of the Law, and grace, which is clean
contrary to the word of God, and to them that are the mouth of God, speaking by
the holy Ghost. The holy Prophet and the blessed Apostle say, that none does
good; the Papists and the Jesuits give them the lie, and teach clean
contrary. For (say they) our priests, friars, monks, Jesuits and such like,
do not only work so much good as will serve their own turn to bring the^to
heaven but have also works of supererrogation, to help others out of purgatory
to heaven. But by your leave sir, it must cost your purse first, for no penny no
pater noster with the^. But O you foolish papists, who has bewitched you that
you should not obey the truth. Before we proceed further, let it be understood
that in the popish church be ii. sorts of works. The first sort is such, as
both we and they do allow to be good works, being wrought by faith, else they
are not good, neither please God. For without Faith it is impossible to please
God, and they be those our savior Christ speaks of in the gospel, when he
says, For I was hungry, and ye gave me meat, etc. That is to say, when you saw
your poor brother hungry, you gave him meat, thirsty you gave him drink, a
stranger, you took him in, naked, you clothed him, sick, you visited him, in
prison, you came to him: these indeed be good works, which true Christians do
delight in, and they please God. But the second sort of works, the papists
term them also good works, but in deed they be the devils works: as
erecting of idols and images, offering to idols and images, going on
pilgrimage, maintaining of lights before Images, giving ornaments and iuels to
deck images crouching and kneeling to the cross, and to images, giving money to
pray for the souls departed, mainteining of idle mas priests, friars, monks,
nuns, Jesuits and such like: giving money for pardons, and to be released out
of purgatory, to geeue money for popish ornaments to sing and say mass with,
to give yearly pentio^s to such as sing and say mass for souls departed,
saying Aue Marias on our beads by number, trusting in holy bread and holy
water, cristning of bells, and other infinite matters beside too long to stand
upon. But of these no more, because they are not worthy to bear the name of
good work, but the devils works. But for the first sort of good works before
rehearsed, which are contained in the second table of the law of Moises, which
yet stands in force, and is called the moral law, which consists in
manners, teaching us to love our neighbors as our selves, and to do good to
them. Let it be examined what is to be gathered out of the word of God
touching the same, and the works thereof, and such as think to be justified by
those works of the law wrought by grace. Saint Paul says, As many as are of
the works of the law, are under the curse: Gal. 3. 10. 11, 12. Deuteronomy. 27, 2^
Abac. 2, 4. Romans 1, 17* Heb. 10, 3^ Le. 18, 5. Eze. 20. 11 Romans 10. 5^
for it is written, cursed is every man that co^ tinueth not in all things which
are written in the book of the law to do the^: and that no man is justified by
the law in the sight of god, it is evident. For the just shall live by faith:
and the law is not of faith, but the man that shall do those things shall live
in the^.

Here you see Saint Paul's sentence against all you papists, that will hang
upon the good works, or the deeds of the law wrought by grace. You see by his
words that you are under the curse, as many as be of the works of the Law, if
you do them not in their perfection: but that you, or any else of the children
of men, be not able to do that which the law commands, it is evident. For
saint Paul says, it is evident that no man is justified by the law in Gods
sight: therefore none of the children of men do fulfill the law, which if they
did, then they should live by the law: then not doing the law, they must die by
the law, if they will stand to the law. But the just shall live by faith, to
wit, the just by imputatio^, for no man is just in the sight of God, al are wic
ked, and al are gone out of the way, al are Romans 3, 12.
become unprofitable, there is none that does good, no not one.

Here we see what we are, and in what state we stand before the Lord, not
able of our selves to do the works of the Law, and yet will those
adversaries to Gods truth, say, that they do merit their salvation, by
fulfilling of the Law, which is clean contrary to that which is said by the
Apostle, who again says in the third to the Romans; That by the works of the
law there shall Romans 3, 20^
no flesh be justified in Gods sight. The holy Ghost foreseeing that this
generation of vipers should start up to deface the glory of Christ in the
salvation of mankind, by mainteining this gross error of justification by the
works of the law: has plentifully set down in Gods book most excellent
matter, and words of great force, to overthrow this deuilish opinion. In the
same third Chapter, after that the Apostle had laid abroad the wicked state of
man, complaining; That there is none righteous, no not one: and that the Romans
3, 10* 22. 23. 24. 25. 26.
righteousness of God comes by Faith in Christ Jesus (without the law) unto
all, and upon all that believe. And so lapping us up altogether in one bundle,
says; There is no difference; For all have sinned, and have need of the glory
of God: but are justified freely by grace, through the redemption that is in
Christ Jesus: whom God has set forth, to be a propitiation through Faith in
his blood to declare his righteousness, by forgiving of the sins that are past,
which God did suffer to show at this time his righteousness, that he might be
just, and the iustifier of him that believes on Jesus. Here you see that they
which believe, are freely justified by grace through the redemption that is in
Christ Jesus; He says freely: if it be freely, the^ is it without respect of
good works: For if good works were the cause of justification, then were it
of desert and not freely. And S. Paul had not said rightly when he said; You
are freely justified, if works should justify us, we are freely justified by
Christ Jesus; Freely (says he) through the redemption that is in the same our
Christ: If freely through the redemption, then not in respect of the works of
the law, nor by the law. And S. Paul says; That God is the iustifier of him
that believes in Christ Jesus, he says not, the law is the iustifier. And he
says further in the 19. verse of the same Chapter; Now we know Romans 3, 19.
(says he) that what thing soever the law says, it says it to them that be
under the law. That every mouth might be stopped, and that all the world
might be in danger to God. But who be those that be under the law? The
Phariseicall Jews, and the Papists, for they both hold of the law. But S.
Paul tells you to what end the law speaks unto you, that will be justified
by the law, even to stop your mouths, that will so vainly brag and boast in a
phariseicall manner of the justifying by the law. And withal to bring all you
lawmongers into Gods danger, that will be justified by the law, and are not
able to perform one title of the law, according to the precise rule of God.
And Saint James says; whosoever shall keep the whole law, and yet fail in
one point, I^ v. 2, 10.
he is guilty of all. Behold if we fail but in one point, we offend in all.
And it is not possible that man can live in the world, no not one; but still
he shall offend and break the law in one point or an other, or rather in
all. And yet will these Papists and Jesuits carry such a pride in their
bosom, that they will be justified by the works of the law. But Saint Paul
in the 27. verse of the same third Chapter, demands of such boasters,
saying; Where is then thy bosting? Romans 3, 27.
It is excluded; By what law? of works? Nay, But by the law of Faith.
Therefore we hold that a man is justified by Faith, without the works of the
law. Behold here Saint Paul's conclusion, how he shuts out the works of
the law in respect of justifying: and tells you plainly, that without the
works of the law, a man is justified by Faith. What more plainer matter can
be uttered, to maintain, that Faith only does justify without the works of
the law. And although Saint Paul does exclude the works of the law from
justifying. Do we then Romans 3. 31.
(says he) destroy the law through faith? God forbid: but we rather
maintain the law. Does Saint Paul exclude the law, and maintain the law
too? How can this agree? Forsooth very well: For he excludes the law in
respect of man, as not being able to perform the same in such sort as the law
requires, and as the law may justify him, as it justified Christ, who
performed it in full perfection, so that no one title or letter thereof was
left unperformed by him, whereby he was void of sin. And thereupon is he
called the innocent and unspotted lamb of God, who did no sin, but is
altogether 1. Pet. 2, 22.
without sin, which argues the fulfilling of the law by Christ, to the full
satisfying of Gods justice, which none amongst the children of men was ever
able to do: which when you do, then you may boast, and claim salvation by
it. But because we cannot, therefore it behooved Christ Jesus (for the salvation
of his elect) to die, and to do that for his elect, which the law could not
do, being there imperfect, even in the very best of the elect. And in that
respect Saint Paul excludes the law, as not being able to justify, because
of the imperfection thereof in man. And Saint Paul also mainteineth the law,
as a most perfect and excellent Romans 2, 13.
virtue, and of such power, as if any man can fulfill it, and not offend in
any one point thereof, he shall be justified thereby, and shall live in the
same: As Saint Luke says; Do this and live. But Luke 10, 18. Iam. 2, 10.
Saint James tells you; If you fail in one point you offend in all. And
Moses tells you; If you do not all that is written Deuteronomy. 27, 26.
in the law, you are under the curse. The law cursing us for not doing it, how
does it then justify us? It does not. But you cannot tell what the fulfilling
of the law is, you are blind therein, and that makes you to hold your wicked
opinion. But I will tell you, you Phariseical shauelings, you that so much boast
of your fulfilling of the law: and that you have works not only sufficient for
your selves, but to spare for others, which you term works of supererogation.
If yet you see, your poor beggarly brother, I mean not your beggarly Friars,
your cou^terfeit beggars) but your pore neighbors lie in the street, and take
him not into your lodging, and use him as your self, to lay him in your own
bed, or in as good as you lie in your self, and do not feed him with as good
meat and drink as you feed your self; and give him as good clothing as you
wear your self, you cannot say you love him as your self; neither do you
love him as your self. And how can you the^ say you fulfill the law. And
again, who is he amongst all the children of men, from the beginning of the
world to this day, that in truth could ever say, that he loved God above all,
but at one time or other, the very best failed therein? None, no not one,
Christ excepted. And therefore al are under the curse of the law, and the^ can
you not be justified thereby. So that none can rightly say, he is justified by
the works of the law and grace, being under the curse of the law, because none
is able to fulfill the law in his perfection, according to the precise rule of
God, and as GOD does command it to be done. But me thinks I hear an old
Jesuit one of the purest sort of Papists, a Puritan in deed, and such a
precise person for life and good works, as heaven gates cannot hold him out,
the force of his holy works is such. This champion he comes bragging out,
with bristles up like a Hedgehog, foming at the mouth like a Bore, whetting his
tuske for the combat, and he will maintain and prove, that the works of the
law does justify. And that it is so, he will prove it by Saint James, who in
his second Iam. 2, 21. 22.
Chapter says; Was not Abraham our father justified through works, when
he had offered Isaac his son upon the altar? See thou not how that Faith
wrought with his works: and through the works was the Faith made perfect.
And the scripture was fulfilled which says; Abraham believed God, and it was
imputed unto him for righteousness: And he was called the friend of God, see
then how that of works a man is justified, and not of Faith only. Likewise
also was not Rahab the harlot justified through works when she had received the
messengers, and had sent them out an other way? What plainer matter can be
uttered, to maintain that the works of the law does justify. And so it is
evident by Saint James, that our works does justify us. For you see that both
Abraham and Rahab, were justified by their works: and so all other in like
sort, that shall work as they did. And he concludes, that Faith without
works is dead, and this is plain. And all this matter which is alleged out
of Saint Paul makes nothing for you against justification by works; For the
law which he does exclude is the ceremonial law; as circumsition,
ceremonies, and clensinges, which cosisteth in outward obseruatio^s, with
sacrifices and such like: but he excludes not the moral law, as by a number
of places of scripture besides S. James, may be well proved, that works being
wrought by grace after renouation, do merit salvation.

I doubt not but as heretofote you have Answer to the objection.
been by diverse and sundry godly learned men, suffitiently answered, upon
this place of S. James, and all other places (by your side alleged) and so
answered, that as yet none of you were ever able in truth to confute or
overthrow that which has been written against you. So doubt I not but by the
help of God, you shall receive from the pen of a simple unlearned person, such
matter, as with truth you shall never be able to gainsay. First let us
consider what moved Saint Iams to write as he does in setting out of works.
S. James writing to the Jews, which were converted to Christ, and scattered
abroad: and seeing in them some imperfection, and how apt they were to
boasting, as when they were under the law, how they would then boast
themselves, and what outward shows they would make like hypocrites, etc. As in
the Gospel of S. Matthew, in the 3. and 6. Chapter appears, and other places
besides, and that they should not be like bosters under the Gospel, as they
were under the law, only to brag of Faith and of the Gospel, and not to bring
forth the fruits of the same; He wrote his Epistle, where in the 1. Chapter he
begins with exhortations, first to move them to patience in afflictions, to
make their prayers in Faith, pronouncing blessing and a crown of life to them
that endure afflictions, telling them that every good and perfect gift,
comes from the father of light, and persuading the^ not to be hearers only,
but doers also. And in the end of that Chapter, to cut the^ off from vain
bosting, says; If any man amongst Ia. 1, 26. 27
you seem to be devout (or religious) and refrain not his tongue, but
deceives his own heart, this man's devotion (or religion) is vain. Pure devotion
and undefiled before God, is this; To visit the fatherles and widows in their
adversity, and to keep him self unspotted of the world. Here you may see
wherabout S. James goes. First laying abroad a form of Christianity, then
he goes about to condemn the vain devotion which the Jews were in,
deceiving their own hearts by vain persuasions, and but seeming to be
religious; not refraining from speaking and boasting so vainly of their stock
and generation, and fulfilling the law moral and ceremonial, and also
seeming rather to be but hearers of the word then doers; And some having but an
outward show of religion, only boasting in the professing of the Gospel, and
not living accordingly, whereby they made their Faith to be no Faith, but a
dead Faith; for a justifying Faith is never idle, but always working and doing
good; Visiting the Iam. 1, 27.
fatherless and widows in their adversities. And this is pure devotion says
he: adding; That they should keep themselves unspotted of the world. But he
means not that this they can do of themselves, for that is the work of the
Lord. For he says in the 17. verse before; That every good giving, and every
perfect gift is from above, and comes down Iam. 1, 17.
from the father of light, with whom there is no variablenes, neither
shadovv of turning. Behold here is all from the Lord, nothing ours, all
goodness in us is the Lords. And here you see, that S. Iams suspecting, or
knowing some in whom the fruits of the Gospel did not appear, and that they
were a slander to the Gospel, being found rather fruitless, then fruitful;
he goes forward, and in his 2. Chapter as aforesaid, from the 21 verse, to the
end of the 25. verse there entreats of works. Wherein is to be considered
what S. James meant, in mainteining justification by works, whither he meant
justification before God, or only before men. Surely it must needs be taken
that he meant only before men, else should he directly write against Saint
Paul, if he should mean that works do justify before God. For Saint Paul
says as before;

That by the works of the law there should no flesh be justified in Gods
sight. Romans 3, 20.
But you say, that S. Paul meant only of the ceremonial and not of the moral
law, as S. James means. And S. Paul agrees with S. James. They differ not
(you will say) for Saint Paul says; That God will reward every man
according to his Romans 2, 6.
works. And in the same Chapter (he faith) For the hearers of the law are not
righteous before God: but the doers of the law Romans 2, 13. Iam. 1, 22. 23.
shall be justified. Does not Saint Paul say; That God will reward every
man according to his works, and that every man that are doers of the law
shall be justified. What plainer matter can there be, to maintain that we are
justified by the works of the law. And here you see S. Paul and Saint James
do agree very well, in mainteining the moral law, which here they entreat
of, to justify. But in other places where Paul speaks against the works of
the law, that they justify not in Gods sight; he means only the
ceremonial law, as before is said.

Have you said master Papist, but what if it be proved that S. Paul means
the Answer.
whole law, as well moral as ceremonial, will ye then yield? Choose whither
you will yield or not, but surely you must needs abide the overthrow. For S.
Paul himself will overthrow you, and tell you plainly that you abuse him, and
lewdly allege himself against himself, contrary to his own meaning, what
color of agreement soever you would seem to set down. But first to prove,
that when S. Paul speaks against the works of the law, that they justify
not before God, he means the whole law, as well the moral as the
ceremonial, yea and rather the moral law, then the ceremonial law. Let us
consider of S. Paul, in how many places, where he of purpose writes touching
this matter of justification. It is to be considered that S. Paul was the
Apostle of the Gentiles, amongst whom there was no part of the ceremonial law
used: and then had S. Paul no cause to write in that sort of the ceremonial
law only, but of the moral law also. Again mark whereupon S. Paul does
entreat, before he come to those words; By the works of the law there shall
no flesh be justified in Gods sight. In the second Chapter to the Jews he
says; Behold thou art To. 2, 17.
called a Jew, and restest in the law, and make thy boasts of God, (or
gloriest in God) and know his will, and allovvest the things that are
excellent, in that thou art instructed by the law. Then in the 21. 22. and 23.
verse he says; Thou that preachest a man should not steal, Do thou
steal? Thou that say a man should not commit adultery, do thou commit
adultery? etc. Thou that gloriest in the law, breakest thou the law? Is not
this meant trow you, of the moral law. And so proceeding to the 3. Chap.
where he proves that al are sinners, both Jews and Gentiles; And that there is
none righteous, and none that does good. Their Romans 3, 10 12. 13. 14.
threats an open sepulclre, etc. Whose mouth is full of cursing and
bitterness, etc. Now when he had thus laid abroad the wicked estate of man, and
breach of the moral law, and seeing a man not able to fulfill the law, in that
sort as he may be justified thereby before God.

Therefore says Saint Paul in the same chapter: By the works of the law shall no
flesh be justified in Gods fight: Forby the law comes the knowledge of sin,
which law must needs be the moral law, the law of the x-commandements. For
that is it that brings the knoledge of sin. And moreover, the ceremonial
law was clean taken away by Christ, and was no more a law among the christian
Jews after Christ's death, and there fore there was no cause why Saint Paul
writing against justification by works, should write as meaning only of the
ceremonial law, but of the moral law also. And therefore master Papist, you
must yield your self convicted and ouerwen, in mainteyning that S. Paul does
mean only the ceremonial Law, and not the moral Law. Again to your
justification by the works of the law, which S. James and Saint Paul speak
of: this is to be understood, that Saint James does mean justification
before men, and it must needs be so taken, or else he must be flat against S.
Paul, who has a number of places for this one place of S. James, as before is
set down, and hereafter shall be if God permit. And if it should be so, that
the writer of that epistle, that bears the name of saint James should mean
as the Papists take it, that in plain meaning, works done by the children of
men, do justify before god, yet I must rather prefer Saint Paul, writing
in so many places to the contrary, before that one place of Saint James, and
the rather, because none doubts of S. Paul's epistles, but to be his own, but
the learned have doubted of this Epistle which bears the name of S. James,
when there S. James were the author and writer thereof or not: but let it be S.
James epistle yet he does not say: Ye see then that of works a man is justified
before God. He leaves out (before God) so that the meaning is then to be
taken, that good works may justify before men, but not before God, because of
imperfection. For there is justification before God, and justification before
men. And the justification before men, is that which S. James means. Again,
S. James says, was not Abraham our father justified through works, when he
offered his son upon the altar? This iusti fication must needs be taken to be
before men, and not before god, and that it must be so taken, let us see what
S. Paul says of the said Abraham. For if Abraham (says he) were justified by
works, the^ has he wherein Romans 4. 2. 3. 4. 5
to boast (or to rejoice) but not before God. For what says the scripture?
Abraham be leued god, and it was counted unto him for Genesis 15. 6 Gal. 3. 6 Iam.
2. 23
righteousness. To him that works, is the reward, not reckned of grace, but
of duty. To him that works not, but believes on him that justifies the
ungodly, his faith is counted for righteousness he says, if Abraham were
justified by works, he has wherein to boast or to rejoice, and so he has if
he were justified by works. But yet with God, good working Abraham could not
boast in his good works: for though Abraham were one of the best among the
children of men, yet how he had been able to have stood in trial with God,
if his works should have been wayed in the righteous balance of Gods
justice, without Christ, no question but Abraham must have fallen to the
ground. And who will doubt, but that Abraham in offering of his son whom
he so entirely loved, to be a sacrifice and to kill him, who was begotten in
their old age, when they were past all hope to have children, and being his
only son, and he to be the killer of him, him self, must needs have
inward conflictes, passions, combats, and grieves, in which sin, (no doubt)
appeared before God enough to have condemned him, if God without mercy would
narrowly have looked unto him. And therefore to show that Abraham was not
justified by works, Saint Paul says, if Abraham were justified by works,
which word (if) imports a plain negative in this place, that Abraham was not
justified by his works and therefore that it might be known that Abraham could
not be justified by his works before God, but was to be made righteous by
faith (he says.) For what says the scripture, Abraham believed God, and it
was counted to him for righteousness. But Saint Paul says, that God will
reward every man according to his works. And therefore (will you say) good
works merit reward. But Saint Paul uses not these words here, to Objection.
Romans 6. 2. Answer.
teach that works do merit reward. And though God does reward of his free
mercy, yet is it not of duty, or by desert when he rewards: For he teaches
that Abraham could not be justified by his works before God. Then much les any
man else, which is not of his perfection. The hipocriticall Jews, against who^
S. Paul wrote those words, would take upon them to judge others of those
vices, which they themselves did commit, which caused saint Paul to write
against them those threatening words, that God would reward them according to
their deeds. The like phrase praierwise, though in the other place threatening
wise, he uses in his prayer to the Lord, against Alexander the Coppersmith,
and says: The Lord reward him according to his deeds, that is to say, with
punishments 2. Tim. 4. 14
according to his deeds: that as the deeds be evil and wicked, so the
punishment to be accordingly. And where Saint Paul says in the next verse
following: To them which continuing in well doing: Romans 2. 7
seek for glory, and honor, and immortality, and eternal life. (Some books
have it translated thus, that is to say, praise, honor, and immortality to
the^ which continue in good doing, and seek eternal life. A sophistical head
may cavil upon these words of Saint Paul, in not taking them as he means,
but will peruerslye expound them contrary to his meaning, inferring, that
works (by these words) should deserve and merit eternal life, which Saint
Paul means nothing les. For if he should in this place mean so, then should
he not agree with himself, and also cause contrariety in the holy Ghost,
whose pen S. Paul was, which were great blasphemy to mainteyne. Saint Paul
uses these words, not to maintain, that works (as they are done since the
fall of Adam) are so meritorious, as they should deserve their reward. But he
rather writes in this sort, to provoke and stir up (by the power of the
holy Ghost) the hearts of Gods children to a godly life, that their faith
thereby may the more appear to the good example of others, and God of his free
mercy (...) yielded his travel to overthrow that pernicious sect of the Jews,
of justifying by the works of the law, because it was evident to him, that if
that sect should continue and take place, the glory of Christ Ie sus his
passion and death, should be clean ouershaddowed and darckned thereby, and so
made altogether insufficient, which is only and alone sufficient to merit and
purchase salvation for us. And the ho ly Ghost foreseing that as mischievous a
generation should rise up, whose head should be Antichrist, who in like sort
would maintein justification by the works of the law, a devise of Satan to put
Christ from his glory, stirred up Saint Paul that most notable instrument of
GOD, who has so employed his pen, and wrote so large a discourse in his
Epistles, in (at the least) five and twenty chapiters of the said Epistles,
mainteyning either in plain words, or by circumstances, faith to justify
without the works of the law and that the righteousness of god comes by
faith, and not by the works of the law, as the mouth of the adversary cannot
but be stopped tberby. For proof after he had said, That by the works of the
works of the law, no flesh should be justified Romans 3. 2^
in Gods sight. (meaning thereby, as well the law written, as the law unwritten)
because we are not able to perform the law, which if we could, then would
he not have vvritte^ against them that boast of the performing of the law, as
he did, but would (no doubt) have as earnestly mainteyned Justification by
doing the Law, as they. As partly you may perceive by his words, in that he
says, not the hearers of the Law, but the doers of the law shall be
justified, meaning still, if they be done in their full perfection, so as God
can find no fault by their imperfection. So in deed they justify, else not.
he proceeds forvvard and says: but now is the righteousness of God made
manifest Romans 8. 21. 22
without the law, etc. To vvitte, the righteousness of god, by the faith of
Jesus Christ, unto all, and upon all that believe. Here be saint Paul's words
very plain, that the righteousness of God is made manifest without the Law,
he means here all the whole parts of the law, for proof, in this chapter he
begins first with circumcision, then to unbelief, then to man's
unrighteousness, that proof is made, that Jew and gentil is under sin, by our
sinful acts and deeds, and then comes to those verses before rehearsed, so
that it is plain, he means the whole law, moral and ceremonial, written
and unwritten. And he gives you to wit, what righteousness he means, even
the righteousness of god, by the faith of Jesus Christ, which righteousness
consists in Gods promise, which he performs to all those that believe in
Christ Jesus. And what is the promise? It is salvation unto all that believe in
Christ Jesus, as in the acts of the Apostles it is said. Be it known unto you
therefore men and brethren, Act. 13. 38. ^9
that through this man is preached unto you the forgeuenes of sins, and from
all things from which you could not be in stified by the law of Moises, by him
every one that believes, is justified. Here is the promise. It is not said;
every one that believes and does good works: but every one that believes. For
the imperfection of man's works (except Christ's works) be such, as that they
are not once to be named in the cause of justification, though at sometime they
be set down to justify, to maintain the excellency of the law, in the
perfection thereof, when it is fulfilled according to the precise will of God,
which (I say again) never man was able to do, but only Christ, who justifies
all believers from all things which the law of Moses could not. And thus you
see the law of Moses clean cut off from iustifiing. And S. Paul says, For
(that that was im Romans 8. 3^
possible to the law, in as much as it was vveak because of the flesh) God
sending his own son in similitude of sinful flesh, and for sin condemned sin
in the flesh, that the righteousness of the law might be full filled in us, which
make not after the flesh but after the spirit. Here is laid before us the
weakness of the law, not that it is weak in it self, for the law is of
great force both to co^demn and to justify: for as many as offend the law, it
condemns to the pit of hell, if mercy in Christ go not be twixt. And it is of
great force to justify, if it be not in any point broken, which if it be, then
is it weak and impossible to iusti fie: and because the case stood so, that
man could not be justified by the law, being weak in man, therefore God in
mercy sent down his son in similitude of sinful flesh, to do that for mankind,
which was impossible for man by the law to do. Again that you may understand
that saint Paul means not only the ceremonial law, when he says, the
works of the law justify not, but the moral law also, not only the scriptures
before alleged does prove it, but these that follow, do also manifest the
same. In the 9. chap. he says: For ere Romans 9. 11
the children were borne, when they had neither done good nor evil, that the
purpose of God might remain according to election: not by reason of works,
but by him that calls, etc. Here is Gods election before birth, before the
children had done either good or evil. But you will say that God did elect
Jacob, because he saw before that Jacob would be good. The Pelagian in deed
is of your mind, whose opinion Saint Augustine did con fute in his book of
Predestination of Saints, where in his 18. chapter he allead geth saint Paul in
the first to the Ephesians, to confute them, saying: He chose us Aug. can. 1
that we should be holy. Not for that we would be holy. But S. Paul in this
place is very plain against you: sca^ the words well he tells you that before the
children of God had done either good or evil, that the pur pose of God might
remain according to election. Gods will and purpose then is the first and
chiefest cause of electio and reproba tio^: the will and purpose of god as
touching salvation being once past, stands firm for ever. There is no shadovv
of turning in God. And election and reprobation rests not only upon Jacob and
Esau, but it stretches ^m. 1. 17
over the whole world, man, woman and child. S. Paul says, as he has chosen
us in him before the foundations of the world, etc. and who has
predestined ^ph. 1. 4. 5
us, etc. Here he includes all the elect, not Jacob alone. And as the good will
and purpose of God is the first cause, so the free mercy of Cod in Christ
Jesus (being also a first cause in the second person) is the mean, and an
inferior cause of our salvation, because the will and purpose of god was first
in God before election, and to cut you off from your opinion, that the works of
grace to come, and past (which you say do merit) was, and is, the cause of
election and salvation. Saint Paul's sword is ready at hand, for he says: that
the purpose of God might remain (in prede stinating he means) according to
electi on, not by works but by him that calls. And may it be doubted, that
the works done by Jacob, the elect vessel of God, which Saint Paul speaks
of here, were not wrought by grace? Was elected Jacob without grace, when he
did those good works? He was not, for the Lord had chosen him, and therefore
he could not be without grace. And Jacob was elected; but not by works says
he. I pray you mark it well, for he says not by works. Is the election not
by works Paul? By whom then? By him that calls; And who is he that
calls? Even God the Father through his mercy in Christ Jesus his son. Then
election wherein salvation is included, rests not in our works and will, but
in God; who for Christ his sons sake, by suffering passion and death for us,
has in his free mercy chosen, called, and appointed his elect to salvation.
And then rests it not in our will and works wrought by grace. For Saint Paul
in the same Chapter says; So then is it not in him that wills, Romans 9, 16.
nor in him that runs, but in God that shows mercy. You shall further see
how Saint Paul in this Chapter (if you please to read it) proceeds still to
maintain election and reprobation, of which he makes a further discourse from
the sixteenth verse to the one and thirty, and then he says; But Israel which
follows the law of righteousness, could Romans 9, 31. 32. 33.
not atteine unto the law of righteousness. Wherefore? Because they sought it
not by Faith, but as it were by the works of the law, etc. You may see now
that our works can neither atteine righteousness nor justification: But
Christ only does justify us by Faith without works. For it is written;
Behold I put Esai. 28, 8. 14. 16. 1. Pet. 2, 6.
in Syon a stumbling stone, and a rock of offense: and whosoever believes in
him, shall not be confounded. Again; We which are Jews by nature, and not
sinners Gal. 2, 15. 16. 21.
of the Gentiles, know that a man is not justified by the works of the law,
but by Faith in Jesus Christ. Even we I say have believed in Jesus Christ,
that we might be justified by the Faith of Christ, and not by the works of
the law: Because that by the works of the law, no flesh shall be justified.
I do not abrogate the grace of God. For if righteousness be by the law, then
Christ died in vain. But Christ died not in vain (for our sins were the cause
of his death) therefore righteousness is not by the law.

Saint Paul himself has so largely and so plainly laid abroad this matter
of justification by Faith without the works of grace, that there needs not
any more to be said of any other for better understanding of the matter, then
himself in plain terms has set down. But this is the malice of Satan in
his impes, to impungne the truth, and by the devils sophistry to pervert
whatsoever has been set down by the Saints of God, to the glory of Christ
Jesus. But make what blind distinctions soever you will upon S. Paul's words,
his words are plain enough to overthrow your justification by works wrought
by grace. And Saint Paul speaks plainly to the whole world, Jew, and
Gentile, of the whole law of Moses, as well moral as ceremonial: that it
justifies not before God. And it does appear, that Bildad in the 25. Chapter
of Iobe, was of Saint Paul's mind; That a man cannot be justified before God:
his words be these; And how may a man be Job. 25, 4.
justified with God? Or how can he be clean, that is borne of a woman? The
meening of these words may thus be taken, that if a man or the best life of
man be compared with God, it is so base, so vile, and so unclean in the sight
of God, that it is impossible that he should be justified before God. And yet
you Papists will be so pure, that by good works you will be justified. But
will you hear what Saint Paul says to the Jews, and so consequently to you
Papists that will be justified by the law, he says; whosoever Gal. 5, 4. 5.
are justified by the law, ye are fallen from grace, for we through the
spirit, vvait for the hope of righteousness through Faith. Though the
circumcised were the cause that Saint Paul wrote these words, and tells
them that they are bound to keep the whole law, and that they were abolished
from Christ. Then as in the former words plainly appears, he tells all
iusticiaries. That whosoever are justified by the law, or that will be
justified by the law, they are fallen from grace. And in what state you stand
that are fallen from grace, I doubt not but you know, even from salvation. And
I trust that in this place you will not say, but that Saint Paul speaks as
well of the moral law as of the ceremonial law, if you will not be too
blind or two wilful. And because you shall the better understand that he
speaks here of the moral law, he says in the 14. verse of the same Chapter
thus; For all the law is fulfilled in one word, which is this; Thou shall
love thy neighbor as thy self. And so going on still upon the moral law,
telling them that if they bite or devour one another, they shall be consumed
one of another, signifying unto them, that if they walk in the spirit, they
shall not fulfill the lusts of the flesh, and that if they be led by the
spirit, they are not under the law; and so shows them what be the works of
the flesh, as adultery, fornication, uncleanness, wantonness, idolatry,
witchcraft, hatred, debate, emulations, wrath, contentions, seditions,
heresies, envy, murders, dronkennes, gluttony, and such like. And so from
these forbidden vices, he goes to the fruits of the spirit; which are, love,
joy, peace, long suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, temperancie:
against such (says Paul) there is no law. Now master Papist ye hearing all this from Saint Paul, dare ye yet say, that he means not the moral law,
when he says; By the works of the law no flesh shall be saved nor justified
in Gods sight, but of the ceremonial law. And he says in the third Chapter
to Titus yet more plainly, thus; For we our selves also were in times Tit. 3,
3. 4. 5. 6. 7.
past, unwise, disobedient, deceived, serving the lusts and diverse pleasures,
living in maliciousnes and envy, hateful, and hating one another. But when
the fullness and love of God our Savior toward Tim. 2, 1. 9.
man appeared, not by the works of righteousness which we had done, but
according to his mercy he saved us, by the washing of the new birth, and the
renewing of the holy Ghost, which he showed on us abundantly, through Jesus
Christ our Savior. That we being justified by his grace, should be made
heirs according to the hope of eternal life. Now you justified men, behold
here your downfall, your breaknecke, such a chokemorsel for you, as if S. Paul
had written no more but even this piece of scripture alone, it had been
sufficient to have overthrown your whole castle of comedowne, of justifying by
the works of the law and grace. I beseech you sirs, mark these words of Saint
Paul, how he terms them the works of righteousness. No doubt but these
works of righteousness which Saint Paul writes of here, which were done by
him and others of the godly sort, were wrought by grace, received from God the
Father. And yet for all that we are not justified nor saved by them (says he)
but according to the free mercy of God he saved us, in Christ Jesus our
Savior. And you cannot deny, but these be works of the moral law. And let
it be that these good works done by S. Paul were the works of Christ; as the
adversary before has said such works be: yet you see he says; Not by these
works of righteousness were they saved. So that take it how you will, S.
Paul cutteth good works off from justifying before God, and that salvation
comes not thereby, but by grace (says S. Paul) for by grace (says he) you
are Ephe. 2, 9. 10
saved through Faith, and that not of your selves: It is the gift of God, least
any man should boast himself, for we are his workmanship created in Christ
Jesus unto good works, which God has ordained, that we should walk in them.
Here you see the cause of our salvation, which is grace through Faith in
Christ, and not works: Salvation is the free gift of GOD to them that believe
in Christ Jesus, it is not of us, not of our moral works. And he stops you
from boasting of your selves, and does beat you, clean from the pride of your
hearts, that you should not once think that there could be (...) good works
wrought by you, that could merit salvation, or justify you before God. And
with all he tells you, that they which are elect, are Gods workmanship,
created in Christ Jesus unto good works, of his free mercy and grace* and not
by nature are we so created. We are created unto good works which God has
ordained, that we should walk in them as the elect vessels of God, not thereby
to merit salvation, but to signify unto the world that we be the elect of
God, who being possessed with Faith, show forth the fruits of faith, which are
our good works, to the example of others, that they may follow in well doing. And
will you here what S. Paul says of himself, whose words are these.
Doubtless I think all things but loss for. the excellent knowledge sake of
Christ Jesus Phil. 3, 8, 9.
my Lord. For who^ I have counted al things loss, and do judge them to be
dung, that I might win Christ, and might be found in him, not having mine own
righteousness, the righteousness of the law, but that righteousness which is
through the Faith of Christ, the righteousness, which is of God through Faith.
Here he says, that he might win Christ and be found in him, that is to
say, as one ingrafted in Christ by Faith, laying aside his own righteousness
which is of the law; which is all his good works; whereof he was full, in the
most perfect sort. No Papist in the world like him, no, not the Pope himself
as pure as they make him. Of this righteousness would not S. Paul presume,
but laid it aside, esteeming it no better then loss, yea, and all things to
be but dung, for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus his Lord: and
only depended upon the righteousness which is through the Faith of Christ.
But to cut the Papists off from cauelling upon this place, that S. Paul should
mean his righteousness before grace, and not his righteousness after grace: it
is most evident and plain, that he means as well his righteousness after
grace, as that before grace. And although these words in the 7. verse. vz. But
the things that were vantage unto me, the same I counted loss for Phil. 3, 7.
Christ's sake. May be taken to be spoken of his righteousness before grace
(as the Papists would have it) yet that which follows after, makes it
manifest and plain, that he means as well his righteousness after grace, as
that before grace. For proof whereof, S. Paul says in the 8. ver. following: Yea
doubtless I think all things but loss for the excellent knowledge of Christ
Phil. 3, 8.
Jesus my lord. Note here that he says eue^ in his apostleship, when he was a
just man and a righteous person, that he thinks all things but lost, etc.
He means not only that righteousness before grace, but that after grace.
Note this word, all things, for it is worthy the noting, and is of great
importance: for when he says, all things, it is a general word whereby he
excepteth nothing: neither his works done after grace: neither his
righteousness before grace: neither any thing else whatsoever; he accounts all
but loss and of no value, for the excellent knowledge sake of Christ Jesus his
lord. We see here that S. Paul makes no account of any thing but only of the
excellent knowledge of Christ Jesus, which knowledge of Christ consists only
in believing, that by his death and passion we are redeemed from everlasting
death, to eternal salvation. And that there was no hope in S. Paul which he
could find in himself, whereby to receive comfort of himself. Behold how he
complains of himself, and accuses himself, for that by himself he is led
captive unto the law of sin: and so with an outcry, and with a pitiful
lamentation says; O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the Romans
7. 24*
body of this death. Where is now Saint Paul's righteousness, wherein he is to
repose (as the Papist say) his hope of merit, by his righteous works. He cries
out on it, accounting and judging all things as before to be but dung, in
respect of the excellent knowledge of Christ. Thus you see S. Paul beholds
nothing but Christ only: and lays all his righteousness aside, having no
hope at all thereby to merit heaven. Then if S. Paul's righteousness be laid
aside as not meritorious to purchase heaven, what shall become of al your
popish righteousness, but eue^ be laid aside as S. Paul has laid his, nay
rather commit it to the dunghill, as not vvorthie to be compared with S.
Paul's righteousness. But methinks I hear one demand a question, the same that
was demanded in the 3. to the Gala. which is this; Wherefore the^ serves
the law, if when we have done the works of the law, we shall not merit by
them, nor be justified by the^. S. Paul makes Gal. 3, 19. (...). 22. 23. ^4.
the answer; It was added (says he) because of the transgressions, till the
seed came, unto the which the promise was made, etc. Is the law the^ against
the promise of God? God forbid: for if there had been a law given, which could
have given life, surely righteousness should have bin by the law. But the
scripture has concluded al under sin, that the promise by the faith of Jesus
Christ, should be given to all that believe, but before Faith came, we were
kept under the law, and shut up unto the faith, which should afterward be
revealed: wherefore the law was a schoolemaister to bring us to Christ, that
we might be made righteous by Faith. Now here you see, wherefore the law
serves, it is as a glass for us, wherein to behold our sins, for our sins were
the cause that the law was added. And the law showing us our sins, and we
finding no help thereby but damnation (because no man can fulfill the law in
such sort as it can give life). Therefore it teaches us like a good
schoolmaster, to who^ we shall resort for life, pointing us as with a finger
unto Christ Jesus. For the scripture has concluded all under sin, man and all
his works, no hope in our selves nor in our works, but to run to Gods
promise by Faith in Christ Jesus. And this is our last refuge, and the very
vpshot of our game, whereby the kingdom of heaven and salvation is won for
ever. And to make an end of this little work, I will join 3. verses of Te
Deum, which the Papists sing daily in their Churches, but in the lattin tongue,
so as neither the singers nor the hearers can understand the same. But blessed
be our God, that has planted amongst us such teachers, who has given unto us
which are unlearned, the same in our natural tongue, so as we may understand
the same to our comfort, and find therein, that you Papists do teach us false
doctrine, when you teach us that by the works of grace, salvation is merited:
whereby you make Christ no redeemer nor Savior: but the means whereby we
receive grace, and by which grace we do good works, by which works (say you)
but falsely, we merit salvation But you shall hear what Te deum teaches you
to say to Christ: thus it teaches; When thou tookest upon thee to deliver
man, thou did not abhor the virgins womb, when thou had overcome the
sharpness of death, thou did open the kingdom of heaven to all believers,
we therefore pray thee help thy servants: whom thou have redeemed with thy
most precious blood. In the 1. verse of the three, we say to Christ; When
thou tookest upon thee to deliver man, etc. So that Christ took upon him to
deliver man from the justice of God, from death, hell, and damnation, before he
was conceived in the womb of the blessed virgin, and before any of you
Papists were created, which will be justified by your works. And delivered
you from the pain of hell (if any of you be delivered) before you did any
good works. And it is not to be said, that he vvoulde deliver those whom
he knevve not: he knevv them whom he would deliver, and that before the
creation of the world.

And unto this I am sure you agree, but the difference is in this (as
aforesaid) that you Papists will say, that Christ took upon him to deliver
man, because he knew before that they would do good works, to merit to be
delivered from perpetual death to eternal life. But we by Saint Paul do
maintain the contrary, as before is sufficiently proved. But if it were as
you say, then should it have bin said thus: When thou with the help of our
good works, tookest upon thee to deliver man, etc. But it is not so said: but,
when thou tookest upon thee to deliver man, etc. And therefore Christ alone took
upon him the deliverance of man, without man's works, but if the works of grace
merit salvation, the^ no doubt but the works of grace do set open the king
dome of heaven to all good workers by grace, and then what need have we of
Christ? But because this is false, therefore we say to Christ, in the second
verse, when thou had overcome the sharpnes of death. Thou (not thou and the
works of grace) but thou did set open the kingdom of heaven, to whom I
pray you, to whom? to all good workers by grace? no, but to all believers,
that believe in the passion and death of Christ Jesus. In the third verse we
pray our blessed savior to help his servants who^, what? that has merited
heaven by the works of grace, surely that is forgotten. No, no, but those whom
thou haste redeemed with thy precious blood, here is not with thy precious
blood, and the works of grace, but with thy precious blood alone, without the
works of grace.

And to confirm all this most true and unreprovable doctrine of justification
by faith, only in the passion and death of our savior Christ Jesus: And to
stop the mouths of all the adversaries of Gods truth, from caueling any more
against the same. Let us hear the words of the Lord Jesus himself, which he
spoke unto his Luke 17. ver 7. 8. 9. 10.
Apostles saying. Who is yet also of you having a servant plowing, or feeding
cattle, would say unto him by and by, when he were come from the field, go,
and sit down at the table? and would not rather say to him, dress wherewith I
may sup, and gird thy self, and serve me, til I have eaten and dronken, and
afterward eat thou, and drink thou. Does he thank that servant because he
did that which was commanded unto him? I trow not. So likewise ye when ye have
done all those things which are commanded you, say, we are unprofitable
servants: we have done that which was our duty to do. Note here the most
plain words of Christ, how he overthrows all the works of man as
meritorious to deserve any thanks from God. He says playnelye to all the
world, as well as to his Apostles: When you have done all those things which are
commanded you, yet say, you are unprofitable servants, and deserve nothing,
for that which we do, is but our bounden duty, being bound to do the
commandment of God upon pain of damnation. As if a master command his
servant to do a thing, and the servant does not that which he is commanded to
do. does not the master lay him on with stripes? Then must the doing of his
masters commandment be, not only for obedience due, according to the duty
of a servant toward his master, but also to save him from many stripes, which
he should deserve, according to the saying of our Savior Christ, He that
knows his masters will and does it not, shall be Luke 12, 47
beaten with many stripes. Now, not that the servant in doing his masters
commandment, should therefore deserve to have his masters inheritance, as the
Papists do maintein, that by their good works they merit the kingdom of
heaven. And so stands it with us toward God, yea much more, for no earthly
master could ever do for his servants, that our master Christ has done for
us, and therefore though we do all that ever we are able to do, to the
uttermost of our power, yet are we still unprofitable servants, and deserve
nothing at the hands of God.

And behold the wisdom of the lord, what person he has chosen, by whom to
make this similitude touching this matter. A ploughman, a servant plowing, or
serving his cattle, which kind of people of all men in the world, best deserve
their hire, and yet unprofitable servants, and deserve nothing: For the Lord
says: Does he thank that servant, because he did that which was commanded unto
him? I trow not. Here is a question demanded by the Lord, whether thanks be
to be given to a servant that does his masters commandment, the Lord making
the answer himself, said. I trow not. Then is it thus much to say, if a
temporal master is not to give thanks unto his servant for doing his
commandment, much less our Lord and God, (unto whom no temporal master is to
be compared) is to geeue thanks to any person that is bound to do his
commandment. But if there be no thanks to be given by god to man, for doing
his com maundement, which man in duty is bound to do, then is it clear,
that man does not merit heaven by his good works, nor deserves thanks for
the same. And thus has the Lord him self ouerthrown the popish error of
meriting heaven by works, done after grace. And now for final conclusion, if
to much obstinate wilfulnes do not remain within the breasts of the
adversaries, and that if the Lord have not utterly cast them of, as reprobates,
it is not possible, but that these words, so plainly set down, and written
with the pen of the holy Ghost, by the hand of the holy Apostles, and saints
of God, and here incerted, must needs perce their flinty hearts, and mollify
the same, which if grace be allotted unto the^, whereby they may have fleshie
hearts, and yielding spirits to Gods truth. It can not be possible for them to
hold out against this truth, but will yield them selves unto Christ,
acknowledging him to be the only sufficient savior of all the elect, without
any help of man. And so reposing their whole trust and confidence only in
Christ, and casting off their good works, as not meritorious, and think that
if they could fulfill the law in greater perfection then the best that lives,
is able to do, that yet they should do no more, but that which in duty they
ought, and are bound to do. No doubt but as the Lord is altogether merciful,
so will he in mercy receive them, and bring them into his fold, even upon his
shoulders, as he did the strayed sheep, and embrace them, as he did the
forlorn son, if they can depart from their errors, and embrace this truth
which leads to eternal life. And for that the Lord God, has made prayer a
means to obtain any thing, that shall be asked of him by faith, and according
to his will: And also for that prayer may be made, for such as we know not, but
may yet stand in the state of grace, whereby the Lord may draw them to him
self. And for that also many numbers of papists, have willinglye departed
from their popish religion and turned to the gospel of Christ Jesus. And
hoping that a great number of them, by prayer, and by reading the word of God,
and such good books, as be agreeable to the word of god, may be brought to the
acknowledge ing of their errors, and to fall from the same.

I pray and desire al Christians to pray to the eternal and almighty God, for
their good conversion and reformation, and that they may have the spirit of
GOD to guide them into the way of truth, that they may cast off their
heresies, and vain popish opinions, either of merit by works, or whatsoever
else not agreeable to the word of God, and so to cleave to Christ Jesus, our
only Advocate, Mediator, Intercessor, Savior, and Light of eternal life. Unto
whom, with God the father, and the holy ghost, be all honor, praise and
thanks, for ever and ever.

Amen.

