CHRISTIAN HOSPITALITY Handled Common-place-wise in the Chapel of Trinity
College in CAMBRIDGE: Whereunto is added, A short but honorable Narration of
the life and death of Mr HARRISON, the late hospital Vice-master of that Royal
and Magnificent Society:

By CALEB DALECHAMP Minister of Gods Word, and Master of Arts in the said
College.

GREG. NAZIAN. Orat. 16. (...).

PET. MART. in Judic. 19.18. Vt vitium est gravissimum hospites contemnere, ita
excellentissima Virtus est. Hospitalitas.

Printed by TH. BUCK, printer to the Universitie of Cambridge. 1632.

TO THE RIGHT REVEREND FATHER IN GOD AND RIGHT HONORABLE LORD, JOHN, LORD
BISHOP OF LINCOLN, ONE OF HIS MAJESTY'S most Honorable Privy Counsel.
Right Reverend and Right Honorable,
AS this Treatise was delivered to the most hospital Society that I know, so
must it be dedicated to the most hospital Prelate I can hear of: That as the
Orator waxen old Vt in Catone. majore ad senem senex de senectute, sic in hoc
libro ad amicum amicissimus de amicitia scripsi. Cic. init. lib. De Amicitia.
wrote of old age to an old man, and of friendship to his much endeared friend;
so I being a stranger may speak and write of the entertainment of strangers to
persons given to entertain strangers. Tanta est haec Virtus, ut illam non semel
Paulus in Episcopo requirat. Pet. Mar. in Genesis 18.16.
This Virtue, says Martyr, is so great, that Paul does more then once require
it in a Bishop: And your practice of the same is so known, that for a fit
Patron of my Discourse thereof I need not have recourse to any other pattern
of a good Bishop. Your love to the College where I am, and to the Nation
whence I come, and the favorable countenance You showed me at my Ordination,
make me hope that these my poor labors shall find acceptance with your
Lordship; though not for the worth of the work, yet for the worthiness of the
subject upon which it does work. If your Lordship be pleased to turn this hope
of mine into certainty and assurance, and to receive cheerfully so small a
present from a mean stranger, I shall be obliged to You for a great piece of
hospitality, and will ever say concerning your very worthy deeds most worthily
magnified by others, Long may You do so, as Vitellius congratulating Claudius
his applauded works said briefly to him, Saepe facias. Sueton. in Vitellio cap.
2.
Often may You do so. That great Shepherd and Bishop of our souls, whose Gospel
You credit with your beneficence, bless your Lordship on earth with length of
prosperous days, and make your reckonings cheerful at the common Audit, with
that unspeakably sweet voice, Well done, Matthew. 25.21.
good and faithful servant, enter thou into the joy of thy Lord.

Thus prays Your Lordships in all humble duty and observance CALEB DALECHAMP.

The Contents and Method of this Treatise.
The First General Part.
CHAP. I.
THe Introduction and opening of the Text. Page. 1 In the Introduction this
Argument is proved to be Material, and worth the handling Page. 2 Rare, and
seldom handled Page. 2 Seasonably here prosecuted Page. 3
In the opening of the Text there is 1 An exposition of the words (...) Page. 4
(...) Page. 5
2 A Division into an Act and its Object Page. 5 3 A Collection and
confirmation of this Doctrine, Christians must be given to hospitality Page.
5, 6
The Commonplace whereof is reduced to seven heads, The Nature, the Kinds,
the Parts, the Object, the Subject, the Means, and the Motives. Page. 6

CHAP. II.
The Nature and Kinds of hospitality Page. 6 First, The Nature of it, or what
it is. It is either falsely so called, or truly so called Page. 6 Hospitality
falsely so called is the keeping of a good table, at which seldom or never any
other are entertained then kinsfolks, friends, and able neighbors, merry
companions, jesters, and tellers of news. Page. 7 Hospitality truly so called
is taken either in a large, or in a strict sense. Page. 7 In a large sense it
contains all the works of charity and mercy and courteous kindness,
specially the feasting of mean neighbors, the relieving of the poor, and the
entertaining of honest guests and travelers of the same country. Page. 7 In a
strict and proper sense it is nothing else but The love that is born unto
strangers or outlandish men; and comprehends two things, affectum and effectum,
affection and action, wel-willing and well-doing. Page. 10
Secondly, The Kinds of it, or how manifold it is: Hospitality exactly so
called, is either mercenarie, or gratuitous. Page. 10 Mercenarie, when a
stranger is kindly and courteously used for his money. Page. 10 Gratuitous,
when a stranger is entertained freely and for grand merci. Page. 10 And this
again is either of magnificence, when a stranger of note and ability is
entertained with pomp and state: or of friendship, when a stranger of
acquaintance is familiarly entertained: or of humanity, when a foreiner that
comes to see places, and being a stranger is in courtesy invited: or of mercy,
when a poor stranger is harbored and relieved in his wants Page. 10 Of this
last the Text is to be understood Page. 10 Merciful hospitality is either
Public, belonging to free Princes and Magistrates; or Private, belonging to
subjects and private persons. Page. 11


CHAP. III.
The Parts of Public hospitality. Page. 11 They are chiefly four, To suffer
strangers to come into the land and country Page. 12 To defend them by good
laws from injuries and wrongs Page. 13 To give them leave to exercise their
lawful calling, and to advance the ablest of them to some place of preferment
Page. 15 Where a State-question is moved and resolved concerning the admission
of strangers into great offices and places of importance. Page. 16
To procure the relief of those that are in want and necessity. Page. 17

CHAP. IIII
The Parts of Private hospitality. Page. 18 It consists in four things, In an
earnest invitation Page. 18 In a cheerful entertainment Page. 19 Cheerfulnes
implies three things Page. 20
In a faithful protection Page. 21 Objection from Jaels example answered Page.
22
In a courteous dismission and deduction Page. 23 Deduction is of honor and
civilitie beneficence and charity
Page. 24


CHAP. V.
The Object of hospitality Page. 24 It contains four sorts of persons to whom
it must be showed, Generally all strangers Page. 25 Except Abominable sinners
Page. 26 Seducing heretics Page. 27

Specially strangers professing the true Religion Page. 27, 28 More especially
strangers persecuted and banished for professing the true Religion Page. 29
Most chiefly and above all, Ministers and Divinitie-readers persecuted and
banished for teaching and defending the same true Religion Page. 32

CHAP. VI.
The Subject of hospitality Page. 36 It comprehends four sorts of persons of
whom it is required, Bishops and Prelates of the Church Page. 36 Other
inferior Ministers Page. 40 Here the people are exhorted to enable them
thereunto Page. 42 Rich Laymen and Women Page. 43 Poor Laymen and Women.
Page. 45

CHAP. VII.
The Means to practice hospitality Page. 48 Labor or industry in lawful
getting Page. 48 Frugalitie or thriftinesse in spending our goods lawfully
gotten Page. 50 Frugalitie in particular considered As a rasour, to shave off
all expenses about unlawful things, as harlotry, drunkenness, etc. Page. 53
As a rule, to moderate and diminish all expenses about things lawful,
necessary, and commendable. Such are The building and trimming of houses Page.
53 The buying and keeping of horses, and hawks, and dogs Page. 55 Bodily
exercises and recreations Page. 55 Apparel and raiment Page. 56 The furnishing
of studies with books Page. 57 The taking of Tobacco Page. 57 Banqueting and
feasting Page. 59


The Defense of prodigality recited and refuted at large Page. 61 Exhortation
to frugalitie even in true hospitality Page. 65
CHAP. VIII.
The common Motives to hospitality Page. 68 The Precept and President of God
Page. 68 The Examples of the godly Page. 73 The Practice of Infidels Page. 77
The manifold Profit wherewith it is rewarded Page. 82 The diverse Detriments
whereby the contrary vice is punished Page. 91
CHAP. IX.
The proper Motives to hospitality Page. 95 The Certainty of being already
strangers Page. 95 The Possibility of becoming yet more strangers Page. 97 The
Prelation of this Virtue before her near kin Page. 101 Conclusion of all the
Motives Page. 102

The Second General Part.
CHAP. I.
The Duties of Strangers Page. 104 Which Duties consist 1 In the observation of
this general Rule, To live well and unblameably Page. 105 2 In the practice of
these three Virtues, Discretion, Modesty, and Thankfulness Page. 105
Discretion must be showed by shunning Pragmaticalnesse and meddling Page. 105
Singularity in things indifferent Page. 106 All distasteful speeches Page. 106
Modesty must be showed in four things, Humility Page. 107 Patience Page.
107 Accepting of an offered entertainment Page. 109 Moderate abiding in a place
of free entertainment Page. 109


Thankfulness is to be expressed toward the public and private host, and
other benefactours Page. 110 By praying for them Page. 111 By praising them
Page. 111
In particular: A stranger must be thankful to his public host By obeying
cheerfully his lawful injunctions Page. 112 By discharging faithfully what
Office he has bestowed Page. 112
To his private host likewise a stranger must be thankful By taking in good
part what entertainment soever he gives Page. 113 By doing to him what
pleasure he can Page. 113
Not only while he abides with him, but also after, and any where Page. 114
Thankfulness further pressed By the histories and fables of the Heathen Page.
115 By the examples of brute creatures Page. 116


CHAP. II.
That all Strangers, especially Christ's Strangers, should perform all those
Duties Page. 116 And that in four respects; Of God Page. 118 Of their country
Page. 119 Of themselves Page. 121 Of their fellows Page. 122

CHAP. III.
The Conclusion Page. 123
CHRISTIAN HOSPITALITY. The First General Part.
CHAP. I. The Introduction and opening of the Text.
ROMANS 12.13. -- (...).
-- given to hospitality.

THere be two kinds of good works, or two duties of charity, the performance
whereof credits and commends much our Christian Religion, as the Apostle
insinuates, (...).
1. Tim. 5. The education of children, and the entertainment of strangers. The
former duty, being practiced as it ought, consists not only in preserving
their bodies with food and raiment; but also, and most chiefly, in adorning
their souls with godliness and good manners, as In a Latin Treatise entitled
Votum Davidis, seu officium boni magistratus and patris-familias.
elsewhere I have showed. The latter has diverse parts and parcels, all which I
purpose to prosecute in this place. For though I had rather any man should do
it then my self, Cicer. Epist. Fam. 5.12. Quid, non per qu^m, accipias attend.
Aug. Tract. 5. in Evan. Joan.
yet my self rather then none at all, as the Orator resolved in an other case.
Howsoever, it matters not so much who speaks, as what is spoken: and I am sure
that none of those three things which are wont to prejudice an Argument, can be
found in this Theme I have in hand, Slightness, commonnesse, and
unseasonablenesse. For this matter is not so mean, that one may say of it as
Saul said of his tribe and family, 1. Sam. 9.21.
It is the least and smallest of all: Ad finem hom. 47 in Matthew. Hist. Eccles.
lib. 7. cap. 27. Lib. 6. cap. 12. Comment. in Genesis 18. Problem. Theolog. Loc.
170.
or as Chrysostom writes of fasting, In the troop of moral virtues it has
the lowest rank. For hospitality is called by Sozomen, A sure token of a most
virtuous mind; by Lactantius, A principal virtue; by Calvin, The chiefest
office of humanity among us; and by Aretius, The most elegant ornament of a
Christian life. Neither is it so common and ordinary, that it may be loathed of
any as Manna was of the Israelites, Numb. 11.6. There is nothing at all besides
this Manna before our eyes. For so little in our days has been written of
this subject, that I may truly say as much of it, as a late worthy Divine
affirms of an other: M. Ward of Ipswich in the first part of his Coal from the
Altar, or sermon on Revel. 3.19.
I have often wondered why poor zeal, a virtue so high in Gods books, could
never be so much beholding to men's writings as to obtain a just Treatise, which
has been the lot of many particular virtues of inferior worth; a plain sign
of too much undervalue and neglect. Nor is it true of this Theme what Hushai
did object against the counsel of Achitophel, 2. Sam. 17.7. It is not good at
this time. For the time of public and national calamities, as war, famine,
and pestilence, but especially the time of troubles and persecutions for the
truth, makes the treating of this Argument seasonable and needful. And
therefore the Apostles in their writings do beat often upon it, because the
Christians were then persecuted by the Jews and Pagans. And in the next
succeeding age, Heathenish Rome continuing still to be Sanctorum debellatrix,
as Tertullian styles her, Adversus Judaeos cap. 9. and advers. Marcionem lib.
3. cap. 13.
and raising against them a fourth persecution under the Emperor M. Aurelius
Antoninus about the year 172; Melito, a learned Bishop of Sardis in Asia,
wrote a book (...), whereof nothing now remains but the title, and mention in
the Church-historie of Eusebius, Eusebius. lib. 4. cap. 25.
and in Hieromes catalogue of Ecclesiastical Writers. Some 200 years after,
the Catholics being driven out of their houses by the furious Arrians under
the Emperor Valens; Saint Austin in Africa, S. Ambrose in Italy, and S.
Chrysostom in Greece made sermons and homilies of hospitality, preserved to
this day among their other Works. Finally, in the year 1573, that is, soon
after the Pope had procured that horrible massacre in Paris, and in many other
great cities of France, thereby to extinguish the Reformed Religion, Aretius in
Helvetia or Switzerland published A commonplace of hospitality: and his
countriman Lavater preaching and pressing this virtue much about the same time,
said, Est haec virtus valde necessaria nostro tempore, quando bella geruntur ab
Antichristo contra fideles, and multi a suis deserti in exilium pelluntur.
Lavat. in Judic. 1^. hom. 95.
That it was then very necessary, when wars were made by Antichrist against
the faithful, and many forsaken of their own were cast out into banishment.

In imitation therefore of so many and so worthy patterns and presidents, I
have thought it seasonable and fruitful to take this matter in hand;
considering that within these ten or twelve years last past, it has been
given again unto Papal Rome to exercise the power of the Pagan, Revel. 13.7.
to make war with the saints, and to overcome them: and that thereupon from
several parts of Christendom many strangers are come over into this Island,
as to a refuge from the storm, and a shadow from the heat of persecution.

And to treat of this subject I have made choice of this short and pithy
exhortation, Be given to hospitality: wherein the Apostle speaks as Menelaus
in Homer, (...). Iliad. 3. Heb. 13.2.
Few words, but very fit, express, emphaticall, and significant. For he says
not here as elsewhere, Be not forgetful to entertain strangers: nor as S.
Peter, 1. Pet. 4.9.
Use hospitality without grudging: but, (...).
Be given to hospitality. He said not exercising, but pursuing hospitality, as
Chrysostom notes upon this place. For the word (...), used here in the
original, signifies eagerly to pursue and follow: which being attributed to
persons, is evil for the most part, and is as much as to persecute, as in the
next words after my Text, Bless them which persecute you, and Matthew. 5.11.
Joh. 15.20. Act. 7.52. and 9.4. Gal. 1.13. But if it be applied to things, then
it is good or evil, as the things are good or evil which we pursue, and it
implies a singular love to a thing, and a great labor and earnest endeavor
about it, as Philip. 3.12. and 14.

Now (...) is very well translated given to hospitality: Doctor Curll, the
now Reverend Bishop of Bath and Wels. Sermon. on Hebr. 12.14 page 5. Parr. on
Romans 12.13.
for this kind of phrase notes an eager affection or following of a thing: So
a common drunkard is said to be given to drink, and a covetous man to be given
to money.

As for the word (...), it is compounded of (...) and (...). Now (...)
signifies three things; To love, to use and entertain friendly, and to kiss.
In the two former acceptions it is here to be understood. And (...) signifies
also three things; An host, a guest, and a stranger. And a stranger put
without any addition is taken five ways in Scripture, First, for any other man
besides our selves, Proverbs 6.1. and 14.10. and 27.2. Secondly, for one that
is no kin to us, either by blood, or by alliance and affinity; that is,
neither of ours, nor of our childrens household and family, Proverbs 5.10.
Matthew. 17.25. Thirdly, for a whore and harlot, Proverbs 5.20, and 7.5.
Fourthly, for a foreign enemy, Psalm. 18.45. Hos. 7.9. Fifthly, for an outlandish
man, and one that comes from another country or nation, Matthew. 27.7. and 3
John 5. In this last sense it is taken in this Text, and in all places where
hospitality and entertainment of strangers is mentioned: and in the books of
Moses a stranger is often called a sojourner or dweller with the Israelites,
Levit. 24.16. and Numb. 15.30. Levit. 24.22. Levit. 18.26.
and opposed to him that is born in the land, that is of their own country,
that is of their own nation.

This exhortation then has two parts; An act or action, and the object
thereof: both affording this doctrine or proposition,

Christians must be given to hospitality. For as our Apostle exhorts the
Thessalonians to follow that which is good, 1. These. 5.15. Hebr. 12.14. 1. Tim.
6.11. 1. Cor. 14.1.
and the Hebrews to follow peace with all men, and Timothy to follow after
righteousness, and the Corinthians to follow after charity: So does he exhort
here the Romans to follow after hospitality. Which virtue is also by S. Peter
commanded to the believing Jews, and by Saint John commended in Gaius and
Demetrius, and the contrary vice blamed and reproved in Diotrephes.

But for the better handling of this excellent virtue, so often pressed and
patterned in the holy Scriptures and in the Fathers, seven things are to be
considered; The Nature of it, the Kinds of it, the Parts of it, the Persons to
whom it must be showed, the Persons of whom it is required, the Means to
practice it, and the Motives or Inducements to it. All which are comprised
within these two verses: Quid, Quotuplex, Parts, Quibus, A Quibus, illico
dicas,
Accedant Mediis, Quae Moveant: satis est.


CHAP. II. The Nature and Kinds of hospitality.
FIrst, The Nature of it: What it is. Hospitality is either falsely so called,
or truly so called. Hospitality falsely so called is the keeping of a good
table; at which seldom or never any other are entertained then kinsfolks,
friends, and able neighbors, merry companions, parasites, Donare res sua^
hist^onibus, vitium est imma^e, non virtus. Aug. Tract. 100 in Joan. Great.
did. 86. can. Donare. Crates apud Stob. Sermon. 13
jesters, and tellers of news. This is no hospitality, though it be commonly
graced with that title, but it is good fellowship or some such like thing, as
learned Expositors aver. An ancient Philosopher said, that the riches of many
great housekeepers are like figs growing on the brim of a deep downfall: for
as crows, and not men, fare the better for these; so base fellows, and not
worthy men, have the benefit of those. Mr Charles Fi^z G^fferie The curse of
corn-horders on Prove. 11.26. Sermon. ^. page 49.
And a late Divine writes, that entertaining of Nimrods, Esaus, Ismaels, and
those devouring Dromedaries, their followers, is a mock-chimney, or rather
poison of hospitality.

Hospitality truly so called is taken either in a large, or in a strict sense.
In a large sense it contains all the works of charity and mercy and courteous
kindness, specially the feasting of mean neighbors, the relieving of the
poor, and the entertaining of honest guests and travelers of the same
country. Thus it is taken by King James in that punctual and pertinent
passage of his Works, which I keep till the end of this Treatise, as a dainty
morsel for the closure of an homely feast. And so it is hospitality to build
houses for the blind and maimed, the aged and decrepit, for poor widows and
young orphans, which are either past their labor, or not come to it, as many
Princes and Prelates and other devout persons have done in former times, and in
latter ages. For such houses and mansions endowed with revenues are commonly
called Hospitals, though they be not Xenodochia, receptacles of needy strangers
and foreiners, but Ptochodochia or Ptochotrophia, nurseries for the poor of
the country. It was hospitality when Abigail relieved David and his followers
with two hundred loaves and two bottles of wine and five sheep ready dressed,
1. Sam. 25.18.
and other commodities: when Shobi, Machir, and Barzillai brought beds, 2. Sam.
17.27, 28, 29.
and basins, and earthen vessels, and diverse kinds of victuals for him and for
the people that were with him hungry, and weary, and thirsty in the
wilderness: when Job did not eat his morsel alone, Job 31.17, 19, 20.
but made the fatherless eat thereof, and warmed the poor with the fleece of
his sheep: Esther 9.22.
when the Israelites in their feasts and good days sent gifts to the poor,
Neh. 8.10, 12.
and portions unto them for whom nothing was prepared: when Martha and others
received our Savior into their houses, Luke 10.38.
and gave him kind entertainment. Finally, it was hospitality which God
required of them that would keep a true religious fast, Esaias 58.7. To deal
their bread to the hungry, to cover him whom they saw naked, and not to hide
themselves from their own flesh: and unto which Christ exhorted his host, Luke
14.12. saying, When thou make a dinner or a supper, Non damnat Christus
convivia fratrum, sed ne id misericordiam and liberalitatem arbitremur.
Pharisaei isti putabant satis se esse misericordes, si compharisaeos
invitabant: Suadet ergo Christus ut liberales and misericordes simus in
pauperes, hospitalitatemque commendat, and pollicetur nobis aeternam mercedem.
Stella in loc.
call not thy friends nor thy brethren, neither thy kinsmen, nor thy rich
neighbors; lest they also bid thee again, and a recompense be made thee. But
when thou make a feast, call the poor, the maimed, the lame, the blind: and
thou shall be blessed; for they cannot recompense thee: Scriptura negationem
saepe usurpat pro comparatione. Hos. 6.6. Joel. 2.13. Luc. 10.20. Joan. 6.27.
1. Cor. 1.17. and 9.9. Et vice versa comparationem pro negatione. Eccles. 5.1.
Matthew. 10.28. Luc. 18.14. Ephesians. 4.28. 1. Tim. 1.4.
for thou shall be recompensed at the resurrection of the just. In which words
the negation is to be taken for a comparison, Call not thy rich neighbors, but
the poor, for call the poor rather then thy rich neighbors, as Proverbs
8.10. Receive my instruction and not silver, where the particles and not are
put for rather then, as appears by that which follows in the same verse, by
way of exposition, and knowledge rather then choice gold. Because the feasting
and entertaining of such as may entertain us again, and of such as are linked
unto us by kindred or any other bond, though it be lawful in it self, and
sometimes commendable and expedient, yet it is no true trial, nor due proof or
sufficient testimony of our charity. God gives us leave and liberty according
to the places and times wherein we live, and according to our estate and
calling to make such feasts of civility and gratitude, of peace and
reconciliation, of friendship and acquaintance, as Abraham made the same day
that Isaac was weaned, Genesis 21.8. Genesis 26.26, 30. Genesis 29.22.
as Isaac made to Abimelech and his followers, as Laban made at the marriage of
his daughter, as Samson made at his wedding, Judges 14.10.
as the sons of Job made one to another and their sisters, Job 1.4. Espenc.
in 1. Timoth. lib. 2. cap. 1. ex Sulpitio.
and as Saint Ambrose made now and then to the Governors and Consuls of
Millan: but always with this proviso, that we be not disabled by them from
being bountiful to the poor and needy: whom if we remember effectually, and
to some purpose at such times, then all these feasts shall be clean unto us,
Luke 11.41.
as Saint Austin discourses in his second Sermon de Tempore.

Hospitality taken in a more proper, more strict, and accurate sense,
Hospitalitas est erga extraneos. Calv. in 1. Tim. 3.2. Illyricus in Hebr. 13 2.
(...). Opus est affectionis anim^ declaratio. Naz. Orat. 36. Strom. lib. 2.
ante medium. (...).
is nothing else but The love that is born unto strangers or outlandish men;
and comprehends two things, (says Illyricus) affectum and effectum, affection
and action, wel-willing and well-doing: the former being the fountain and
foundation of the latter, and the latter the stream and demonstration of the
former. Both these are comprised in the definition which Clemens of Alexandria
gives of this virtue: Hospitality (says he) is an art of wel-using strangers.

And touching the Kinds: This exactly so called hospitality is either
mercenarie, or gratuitous: mercenarie, when a stranger is kindly and
courteously used for his money; when one makes him pay no more, but rather
less, because he is a stranger: gratuitous, when a stranger is entertained
freely and for grand merci. And this again is either of magnificence, or of
friendship, or of humanity, or of mercy: of magnificence, when a stranger of
note and ability is entertained with pomp and state: of friendship, when a
stranger of acquaintance is familiarly entertained: of humanity, when a
foreiner that comes to see places, and being a stranger is in courtesy
invited: of mercy, when a poor stranger is harbored and relieved in his wants.

Of this last the Text is to be understood: for, as Gualther has well observed
upon it, the Apostle having exhorted the Romans to distribute to the
necessities of the Saints, lest thereupon any man should think to have
sufficiently discharged his duty, if he did good to his countrymen and
fellow-citizens, he therefore adds a peculiar precept concerning strangers and
foreiners, of whom there was then a great number in all Churches, by reason of
persecutions every where raised against the faithful.

Which merciful hospitality (defined here by Calvin, Hospitalitas est non
exigua species charitatis, id est, benevolentia and liberalitas quae peregrinis
exhibetur, Calvin. in Romans 12.13. Est beneficentia erga peregrinos. Ursin.
Catech. in 8. Decal. Praecept.
A benevolence and liberality showed unto strangers) is again twofold; Public
and Private. Public hospitality belongs to free Princes and Magistrates:
Private, to subjects and private persons.

CHAP. III. The Parts of public hospitality.
THe Parts of public hospitality are chiefly four. 1. To suffer stangers to
come into the land and country. 2. To defend them by good laws from injuries
and wrongs. 3. To give them leave to exercise their lawful calling, and to
advance the ablest of them to some place of preferment. 4. To procure the
relief of those that are in want and necessity.

First, to suffer strangers to come into the land and country. Qui peregrinos
urbe prohibent nequaquam probandi. Ferae non expellunt feras, and homo excludit
hominem? Ambros. Offic. lib. 3. cap. 7. Peregrinos usu urbis prohibere sane
inhumanum est. Cic. offic. 3. In illa lege, qua peregrini Roma ejiciuntur,
Glaucippus excipitur: non enim unus afficitur beneficio, sed unus privatur
injuria. Idem Orat. 15. sive de Log. Agraria in Senatu.
For, says S. Ambrose, one wild beast does not expel another, and should one
man exclude another? It is an inhumane part for any Prince or Magistrate, to
forbid strangers the coming or abiding in his Dominions; and so inhumane, that
Christ's disciples thought the Samaritanes unworthy to live, for not receiving
him into a village of theirs, Luke 9.52, 53. And the Lacedaemonians have been
branded with the nickname of Alex. ab Alex. Genial. dier. lib. 4. cap. 10.
Dirinoxeni, Tiraquel. in loc. (...), inquit, a vocabulo Spartano (...), id
est, injuriam facere, ut scribit Favorinus in vocabulo.
Injurious to strangers, for not permitting strangers to dwell among them, nor
to pass at all times through their country, but only to come at some great
feasts and public solemnities. The Purchase Pilgrim. Tom. 3. page 268.
later Kings of China deserve the like censure: for they have made a law, that
no stranger, except Ambassadors and slaves, should enter the Kingdom: and if
a stranger steal into the country, Page 390. 399
they permit him not to return. But much more blamable is that custom among
the Page 443.
Tartarians, to suffer no stranger to come within the Realm; if any do, the
same to be made bond-slave to him that first takes him, except such merchants
and others as have the Tartar Bull or Pasport about them.

When the Israelites possessed Canaan, strangers might come among them by Gods
appointment; whether they desired but to pass through the land, or to sojourn
there for a while, till the business for which they came was ended; or whether
they purposed to dwell there altogether. And therefore David and Solomon coming
to the Crown, and finding many thousand strangers in their Kingdom, permitted
them to abide there still at their pleasure. Neither did the Governors of
Bethlehem hinder Ruth the Moabitesse from coming to, or dwelling in their city.

And this first part of public hospitality has been showed to strangers,
Genesis 20. Chap. 26. Chap. 47.
even by aliens from the covenant of grace. For Abimelech King of the
Philistines received Abraham and Isaac into his territories, Pharaoh King of
Egypt harbored Jacob and his whole family, and the King of Moab gave leave to
Elimelech and his wife and children to sojourn in his country, Ruth 1.1. 1.
Sam. 22.3.
and to David to place his parents there.

But this toleration of strangers is ever to be understood with a double
caution; Genesis 34.21. Ubi Pareus ait duas r^moveri objectiones. 1. Non conveniet
nobis ipsis. 2. Regio non capiet omnes si mul.
That they be peaceable men, and that the land be large enough for them. For
there is no reason that the natural subjects should be pestered with their
unquiet manners, or too great number. Neither do we say that a ship should be
so laden as to be in danger of sinking.

Secondly, Plin. l. 8. c. ult. Angues in Syria erga indigenas venenum non
habent, nec eos petunt, exteros cum cruciatu exanimant: ita quidam populi in
suos satis humani, in alienigenas immanissimi sunt. Eras. in Simil.
to defend them by good laws from injuries and wrongs. For almost in every
country, many of the vulgar and common sort of people do rather imitate the
snakes of Syria, which never sting the native inhabitants, but do exceedingly
vex all strangers, then the scorpions of Caria, and of Cassan in Persia, which
strike the native inhabitants, and spare none but strangers and passengers. And
therefore a good vicegerent of God ought herein to be a follower of God, who
being the sole Monarch and Lawgiver of the Commonwealth of Israel, provided for
the safety of foreiners by these express Statutes: Thou shall neither vex a
stranger, nor oppress him, Exodus 22.21. and 23.9.

If a stranger sojourn with thee in your land, ye shall not vex him, Levit.
19.33.

Let the Judges of the land judge righteously between every man and the
stranger that is with him, Deuter. 1.16.

Cursed be he that perverts the judgment of the stranger: and all the people
shall say, Amen. Deuteronomy. 27.19.

I will come near to you to judgment, and I will be a swift witness against
those that turn aside the stranger from his right, and fear not me, says the
Lord of hosts, Mal. 3.5.



Abimelech was to careful in this point, that having given leave to Isaac and
Rebekah to sojourn in his kingdom, he forbad all his subjects, under pain of
death, Genesis 26.11.
so much as to touch them, by way of offering thereby the least injury or
wrong, as that kind of speaking is also taken Ruth 2.9. Psalm. 105.15. Zech.
2.8. And King Pippin, father to Charles the Great, and styled in the French
History, An excellent pattern for excellent Princes, made a law, that whosoever
could be proved to have slandered any stranger, Peregrino ulli calumniam
saciens, 60 solidos solvat, etc. In Synod. Meten. can. 4. anno 753.
should be fined a certain sum of money; one half whereof should be carried
to the Kings Exchequer, the other given to the slandered stranger. And among
those excellent laws, for the making whereof Charles K. of Gothland and
Swedland is so much commended, this is one; Olaus Magnus l. 5. c. 1.
Whosoever is convicted to have thrice denied harbor unto a stranger, his
house shall be burnt with fire: that so he may justly be deprived of that, the
use whereof his inhumanitie would not impart to others. And the first Duke of
Wirtemberg, commonly called The good Duke Eberhard, gave express charge and
command in all the parts of his Dominions, Camerar. in vita Melanchr. l. 3.
that strangers and passengers should be kindly received, and used without any
fraud or violence. And K. James gave this precept in Scotland to his eldest
son Pr. Henry, Basil. Doron. l. 2. paulo ante medium. Anno 1517, Honr. 8.
nono. Vide Stoum, and rerum Anglicarum Arnales. Pietate plenum est, peregrinam
gentem publ^cis beneficiis obligare, and non tantum consanguineos ad
substantiae lucra mittere, quantum ipsos quoque advenas invitare. Cassiod.
Epist. 9. lib. 12. Genesis 47.6. 1. Sam. 28.
Take as strict order for repressing the mutining of ours at strangers
craftsmen, as was done in England at their first inbringing there.

Thirdly, to give them leave to exercise their own lawful callings, and to
advance the ablest of them to some place of preferment. Thus courteous Pharaoh
not only suffered Joseph's brethren to profess and exercise their pastoral
occupation and shepherds calling in his Kingdom, but also spoke to Joseph
concerning them on this gracious manner: If thou know any man of activity
among them, then make them rulers over my cattle. Who in all likelihood did
accordingly. And Achish King of the Philistines knowing David to be a wise and
a valiant Captain, he preferred him to an eminent place in his wars, and gave
him opportunity to exercise his skill and courage in Martial affairs. 1.
Chron. 22.2. and 2. Chron. 2.17, 18. Lavat. in loc.
David also and Solomon set the strangers that were in the land of Israel to be
bearers of burdens and hewers of wrought stones for the building of the Temple;
not out of scorn and contempt, thereby to depresse them as slaves and drudges,
but out of care and charity, thereby to provide for their maintenance, and to
make them earn their living, being workmen and laborers by trade and
occupation.

Whether it be fitting and expedient to admit strangers into the public
government of a Commonwealth, and advance them unto great offices and places
of importance, I leave to Statesmen and Historians to discuss and discourse,
unwilling to meddle with these matters that are too high for me. Only I will
here produce this short decision of a godly and well deserving Divine: Doctor
Willet on Dan. 6. quaest. 6.
Though it ordinarily be more safe for such Governors to be appointed which
are of the same nation, because both the hearts of the people will be more
inclined unto such, and the care and love of such Officers will be greater
toward their country: yet it is better to appoint a stranger, when as there
are any singular and extraordinary parts of wisdom and integrity in such an
one, as there was in Joseph, Daniel, Mordecai, more then is to be found in any
other. But to prefer able strangers unto any Scholar-like employment, and
other places of an inferior nature, especially in time of war and
persecution, is a thing no less common then commendable in a Magistrate:
Hancce (...), petimusque damusque vicissim, say justly and truly almost all
Christian nations at this day. And to say nothing of other professions, it is
certain that if we look into the lives of late Divines both Papists and
Protestants, we shall find that many of them have been Pastors and
Professors in foreign countries, though there were oft-times as sufficient men
as they among the natives, and though they had not the tone, the pronunciation
or the accent like the homebred inhabitants. Hospitality stands not upon such
niceties, nor does it suffer Gods gifts in any man to perish unprofitably under
these pretenses.

Fourthly, to procure the relief of those that are in want and necessity. For
in that ancient and most wisely governed Commonwealth of the Jews, besides
that general law, Levit. 25.35. If thy brother be waxen poor and fallen in
decay with thee, then thou shall relieve him; yea though he be a stranger, or a
sojourner, that he may live with thee: Five particular things were appointed
for the sustenance of the poor and the stranger; to wit, three things out of
every corn-field in Israel. First, a corner of the field, Secondly, the
gleanings, Levit. 19.9. Thirdly, the forgotten sheaf, Deuteronomy. 24.19. Fourthly,
all the single grapes, that is, the grapes which grow single and not in
clusters, Levit. 19.10. Lastly, a part of all the tithes of every third year,
Deuteronomy. 14.29. and 26.12. And that such laws as these do still bind and oblige
Christians, Quatenus humanitatem aliquam suadent in egentes, viatores, and
peregrinos.
so far forth as they require some humanity to the poor, to travelers, and
to strangers, is the gloss of the learned Jesuit Lorinus, upon Levit. 19.10.
and the judgment of Saint Austin: Aug. contra Faust, Manich l. 6. c. 2. and l.
10. c. 2. and l. 19. cap. 18. Vide Zanch. De cultu Dei externo, page 441. Tom.
4. Probl. Theol. Loc. 133. and 137. Ararium pauperum peregrinorum. M. Fox Acts
and Monuments about the year 899. ex Polychron. l. 5. c. 1. and Guliel. De
Regib. Ang.
and also the common opinion of Protestant Divines. For which cause not only
the potent Commonwealth of Berna is very bountiful and charitable to poor
strangers and passengers, as Aretius reports in his Common-places of
liberality, and collection for the poor; but also the poor city of Geneva
has a treasury for the relief of needy strangers, as Beza tells us in the
life of Calvin. And K. Edward the sixth, Qu. Elisabeth, and her Royal
Successors have diverse times procured and furthered the refreshing of
distressed foreiners. King Alfred (the first King of the Anglo-Saxons) bestowed
the sixth part of his riches and rents upon the poor strangers of the
country, and sent every year little less to foreign Churches without the
Realm.

CHAP. IIII. The Parts of Private hospitality.
PRivate hospitality consists in four things: In an earnest invitation, In a
cheerful entertainment, Abraham did look about every way to spy a stranger to
give entertainment unto, as a hunter looks into every bush and brake for a
ba^e. Chrysostom. hom 20. in Romans
In a faithful protection, And in a courteous dismission or deduction.

First, In an earnest invitation. For a man given to hospitality will not stay
till strangers obtrude themselves upon him, and crave entertainment, but he
will seek and invite them, as Abraham did: nay, he will in a manner compel
them to enter into his house, if out of modesty and bashfulnesse they do refuse
it: Genesis 19.3. 2. King. 4.8.
as Lot pressed upon them greatly, and the Shunamite constrained Elisha to eat
bread in her house. Thus the faithful have done, not only when there were no
innes to receive and lodge strangers, but also after innes and taverns were
erected, as appears by the example of Lydia, Act. 16.15. Luke 24.29.
Coegerunt, id est, multum instanter, and quodammodo importune invitaverunt.
Carthus. in loc. Ex quo exemplo colligitur, peregrinos non solum invitandos
esse, sed etiam trahendos, Greg. Hom. 23. in Evang. Ad Atricum lib. 13. Ep. 33.
Non solum in rebus meis magno mihi adjumento fuisti, verum etiam diversorium
relinquere, and domum tuam commigrare propemodum me coegisti. Epist. Dedic.
Grammat. Syriac. 1. Pet. 4.9.
who besought and constrained Paul and his companions to take lodging at her
house: and of the two disciples going to Emmaus, who taking Christ for a
stranger, constrained him to tarry with them that night. Whence S. Gregory
gathers, that strangers must not only be invited, but also haled and pulled
in, as it were: according to that phrase or proverb in Tully, penulam scindere,
to tear ones cloak, that is, to invite and entreat with great earnestness and
impatience of denial, as a man that will take no nay. Thus Archbishop Parker
dealt with Tremellius: for meeting him in London, he did almost force him to
leave the inn, and to take lodging at his Palace. For innes and taverns are
places of great charges and expenses, which every stranger and passenger is not
able to bear.

Secondly, In a cheerful entertainment. For Saint Peter bids the faithful to
whom he writes, to use hospitality without grudging: that is, without repining
at the number, or long stay, or chargeablenesse of their guests, which those
times of persecution did cause. And S. Paul in the eighth verse of this
chapter, requires of him that shows mercy, to show it with cheerfulness: for
God loves a cheerful giver, 2. Cor. 9.7. Now cheerfulness implies three
things. First, Alacrity and willingness of mind: 2. Cor. 8.12. (...).
Phurnutus in opere De natura deorum. 2. Cor. 8.10.
for of gifts the mind is the best part. The grace of a benefit is
voluntarinesse, the freeness of the mind and the opennesse of the heart.
Therefore Paul commends the Corinthians, for that they had begun before, not
only to do, but also to be willing and forward a year ago. Gods people is a
willing people, Psalm. 110.3.
and whatsoever they do, they perform it willingly, not by constraint and of
necessity. They think it not enough to be rich in good works, 1. Tim. 6.18.
unless they be also ready to distribute, willing to communicate. Secondly,
Amiablenesse of face and countenance: which flows from the former as the
stream from the fountain. Prove. 15.13.
For as a merry heart, so a willing mind makes a cheerful countenance:
without which the best entertainment finds no acceptance from the guests: Vultu
saepe laeditur pietas. Cic. Orat. 2.
and as piety is often wounded, so hospitality may be spoiled with looks.
Vultus indicat virum hospitalem: One may read in the face of a man, whether he
be given to hospitality or no: for as a man's wisdom, Eccles 8.1.
so an entertainers alacrity and hearty affection makes his face to shine,
and banishes all heavy looks. 2. Cor. 9.5, 6. and Sirac. 7.32. (...) ponitur
pro (...), vel (...), ex Hebraeorum idiotismo. Vid. Genesis 33.11. Judic. 1.15. 1.
Sam. 30.26. 2. Reg. 5.15. Ecclus. 18.15, 17.
Thirdly, Affablenes and courteous language. For out of the abundance of the
heart the mouth speaks, Matt. 12.34. No man is a true Boniface that is not
also a Benedict: and therefore in Scripture beneficence is sometimes called a
blessing or benediction, to show that good works must be graced and adorned
with good words, and that both are with a gracious man. Blemish not thy good
deeds, neither use uncomfortable words when thou give any thing, says the
wise son of Sirach. For as to show ill looks, so to give ill words to guests or
strangers, it is to feed them, as the Proverb says, with a bit and a knock.

All these good properties and conditions were eminent in Lot and Boaz, but
especially in Abraham: whom therefore Chrysostom says that we admire not so
much for that he killed a good and tender calf, and made cakes of fine meal,
Homil. 20 in Romans
as for that he received those strangers with much pleasure and delight. He did
every way testify to his guests that they were heartily welcome, and behaved
himself toward them, rather as receiving then as doing a kindness. He did,
Philemon and Baucis, de quibus sic Ovidius, Metam. 8. -- Super omnia vultus
Accessere boni, nec iners pauperque voluntas.
as that old couple of loving yoke-fellows, afford unto strangers such
commodities as he had, and -- above all these
A cheerful look, and ready will to please.


Thirdly, In a faithful protection. For a true host must not only abstain
from doing wrong to his guests, according to that of Solomon, Proverbs 3.29.
Hoc adversus malefidos (...) facit, quibus confidunt qui ab illis excipiuntur.
Cart wright. in locum. Germani proverbio dicunt, Caupo pater esse debet sui
hospitis quem excepit. Lavat. in Judic. Hom. 96. Genesis 19.8.
Devise not evil against thy neighbor, seeing he dwells securely by thee:
but also must suffer none to hurt them during their abode with him. We see this
in righteous Lot. When the Sodomites would have offered outrage to strangers
received into his house, he was willing to undergo any loss or indignity
before strangers should sustain any harm at all: He did pray and profer what he
could devise to free them from injury: He did crave and plead the laws of
hospitality, and allege this reason for the last and most pregnant, that
therefore those strangers were come under the shadow of his roof, that so they
might be protected by him. We see this in the old man of mount Ephraim that
dwelt in Gibeah: For he dissuaded certain sons of Belial from doing wrong to
a Levite, Judges 19.23.
by this reason, that he had taken him into his protection as his guest, and
therefore he must see him to be safe under his roof. Ruth 2.9, 15, 16.
We see this in good Boaz, who did not think it enough to entertain kindly
poor Ruth in his harvest: but did moreover take order she should not be
injured by word or deed. For he charged and commanded his young men, that they
should neither touch, nor rebuke her for gleaning.

Objection. But Jael was so far from protecting her guest Sisera, Judges
4.21. and 5.24, 26.
that she killed him in her tent: and yet she is much blessed and extolled by
Deborah for that act.

Answer. Although a faithful protection and defense from wrong be one of the
laws of hospitality: Omnes necessitudines, omnia jura tantisper valere debent,
quamdiu divinae voluntati probantur, etc. P. Martyr in Judic. 4.22. The
intervention of a command from the Almighty alters the state of any act, and
makes that worthy of praise, which else were no better then damnable. It is now
justice, which were otherwise murder. The will of God is the rule of good. What
need we enquire into other reasons of any act or determination, when we hear
it comes from heaven? B. Hall Contempl. lib. 14. In David and Achish.
yet no law is in force, no right is to be kept any longer then God allows.
Jael knew that Sisera was a cruel oppressor of Gods people, and a cursed
Cananite; that God had appointed him to destruction, and foretold by the
Prophetess Deborah that he would sell him into the hands of a woman. And
therefore having warrant and instinct from God, she did commendably break this
band asunder, as Abraham brake before the band of blood and natural affection,
in being ready to kill his son: and as the Levites brake it, in slaying every
man his brother, his companion, his neighbor, Exodus 32.27. And are both
commended and rewarded for that act, Deuteronomy. 33.9, 10. When God says slay, it is
not mercy, but hypocrisy to spare.

Fourthly, In a courteous dismission and deduction: according to this old and
approved rule, (...), Diligitor praesens: cum vult, dimittitor hospes. Verba
Men^lai ad Telemachum Ulyssis filium, Odyss. 15. v. 74. Vitam habeo velut
hospitem: si manet, non ejicio, si abit, non teneo, nec penulam scindo. Lips.
Cen. 1. mis^el. Epist. 81.
We should a guest love while he loves to stay;
And when he likes not, give him loving way.
For it is incivilitie, and sometimes injury too, to retain a guest against
his will, and longer then his occasions will well permit. When Genesis 24.59.
Abraham's servant would needs be gone, Laban and Bethuel sent him away: and
when Abraham's Gen 18.16.
strangers rose up from the place where they had been entertained, he dismissed
them courteously, and brought them on the way. Hyrcanus also, that hospitable
High Priest of the Jews, was wont to provide for the safe (...). Joseph. Antiq.
l. 14. c. 16
deduction and return of those strangers whom he had lovingly received. And
Saint John having commended Gaius for his kind harboring of strangers, adds
that he shall do well if he brings them forward on their journey, 3. John 6.
Where a late learned Estius in 3. Joan.
Expositor notes, that in the Epistles of John, and of Paul, and in the Acts
of the Apostles, this deduction signifies not so much a personal accompanying
and conducting forth a piece of the way by way of honor and civil courtesy,
Act. 20.38. and 21.5. 1. Cor. 16.11.
as a liberal and charitable bestowing of necessary things for the journey.
After which manner the inhabitants of the Isle Melita (now called Malta)
dismissed Saint Paul and his companions: Acts 28.10.
and Paul desired Titus to bring Zenas the Lawyer and Apollos on their journey
diligently, Tit. 3.13. Deducere hic viatico prosequi significat, quemadmodum ex
contextu liquet. Calv. in loc.
that nothing be wanting unto them: and Francis Frescobald, an Italian
Merchant, brought Thomas Cromwell on his way hitherward. For when he saw at
Florence this ragged stripling asking alms for Gods sake, Fox Acts and
Monuments, Anno 1540.
he had pity and compassion on him, and received him into his house, and with
such courtesy entertained his guest, as at his departure when he was minded to
return to his country, he provided such necessaries as he any way needed. He
gave him both horse and new apparel, and sixteen ducats of gold in his purse,
to bring him into his country. Hospites benignissime excepti, variis muneribus
ornati dimittebantur. Val. Max. lib. 4. cap. ult.
Finally, it was usual with Gillias, that famous and liberal hospitaler of
Agrigentum in Sicilie, to dismiss strangers with sundry gifts and presents.

CHAP. V. The Object of hospitality.
THe Object of hospitality contains four sorts of persons to whom it must be
showed: Generally all strangers, Specially strangers professing the true
Religion, More specially strangers persecuted and banished for professing the
true Religion; Most chiefly and above all, Ministers and Divinitie-readers
persecuted and banished for teaching and defending the same true Religion.

First, Generally all strangers, that is, strangers of any Region and Religon.
For as the object of love is every thing lovely, so the object of hospitality
is every hospes or stranger. If aliens and infidels were to be harbored by the
Jews under the Law; how much more ought they to be received and entertained by
the Christians under the Gospel? The precept of loving and entertaining
strangers is generally and indefinitely couched in both Testaments: and besides
that, Saint Peter would have the believing Jews to honor all men: 1. Pet.
2.17. that is, to care and provide for them, as 1. Pet. 3.6. and 1. Tim. 5.3
Gal. 6.10. 2. Cor. 9.13. 1 Thessalonians. 3.12.
and S. Paul commands the Galatians to do good unto all men, and commends the
Corinthians for their liberal distribution not only to the Saints, but also
to all men, and prays for the Thessalonians, that the Lord would make them to
increase and abound in love one toward another, and toward all men. Love and
kindness we ow to all strangers which are come amongst us; and though we know
not the purpose of their hearts, yet we must do good unto them for the
proportion of their bodies, because they are men, and the children of Adam like
our selves. Wheresoever a man is, Vbicunque homo es^, ibi beneficio locus est.
Sen. De vita beata cap. 24.
there is room for a benefit, says the heathen Moralist. A Jew, a Turk, a
Pagan, or any other infidel, deserves to be respected and relieved in his
necessities, though not for his manners, (...). Chrysostom. Hom. 2. de Lazar.
Nehem. 5.17. Aug. Confess. 5.13. Stuck. Antiq. conviv. lib. 1. cap. 27. Favet,
fovet, ornat, actuetur omnes, non suos tantum, sed exteros etiam, and quovis
sub coelo natos. Erasm. Annor. in 1 Thessalonians. 2.
yet for his manhood, for his communion and fellowship in the same nature with
us. Nehemiah did entertain at his table those that came unto the Jews from
among the Heathen that were about them. Saint Ambrose showed hospitality to
Austin, though then a Maniche: and Stuckius commends the Commonwealth of
Zurich in Switzerland for receiving and using courteously all sorts of
strangers, be they never so much differing in Religion: and Erasmus extols
Archbishop Warram for his kind and courteous, bountiful and liberal carriage
toward strangers of any country or climate.

Only two sorts of strangers are here to be excepted. First, Abominable
sinners and enormious offenders, whom neither public nor private persons ought
to harbor and entertain: according to that dehortation of the wise son of
Sirach: Ecclus 11.29, 33.
Bring not a mischievous man into thine house, lest he bring upon thee a
perpetual blot. Though Geneva be a city open to all comers, Civitas alioqui
omnibus advenis patens. Beza Epist. 1. Sontium receptatricem. Chronol. lib. 4
anno 1534.
yet it is so far from harboring such unworthy guests (howsoever it pleased
Genebrard, whose pen is no slander, to call it A common receptacle of guilty
persons) that on the contrary they have there a law, which is also put in See
some examples in Mr. Heylins Cosmographie, page 135. edit. 3. and 4.
execution, that if any malefactor flee to them for refuge, they punish him
after the custom of the place in which the crime was committed: otherwise
their Town being on the borders of diverse provinces would never be free from
vagabonds, but rather become like that city of refuge in Israel, A city of them
that work iniquity; Hos. 6.8.
or like that seven-hilled city of Italy, Petrarch. Epist. 18. Epistolarum
sine titulo. Plin. l. 4. c. 11. Plur. lib. de Curiositate.
bonorum hostis and malorum hospes, an enemy of good and an hostess of evil
men; or like that infamous town in Thracia, called Poneropolis, a city of lewd
people, a den of thieves, a cage of unclean birds. Secondly, Seducing heretics
and false teachers, who like the Scribes and Pharisees do compass sea and land
to make one proselyte, Matt. 23.15.
to plant superstition and supplant true Religion. Concerning whom we have this
negative precept of Saint John: 2. John 10.
If there come any unto you, and bring not this doctrine of the Gospel
concerning Christ's person and office, but rather a quite contrary, receive him
not into your house, neither bid him God speed. For he that bids him God speed,
is partaker of his evil deeds. Which are three, as we are taught by Saint Paul.
For first, such deceivers subvert whole houses, teaching things which they
ought not, for filthy lucres sake, Tit. 1.11. Secondly, their infection
proceeds further, eating as does a gangrene, 2. Tim. 2.17. Lastly, they cause
divisions and offenses in the Church and Commonwealth, Romans 16.17.
Seductoribus hospitium magno vestro malo adhuc praebetis. Beza Epist. 1. ad
Duditium Polonum.
Now if they which trouble the Church deserve to be even cut off and expelled
(Gal. 5.12.) how much more to be kept off and repelled?

Nonne lupos pastor vigilans ab ovilibus arcet? It is not inhospitality nor
churlishness, but discretion and godliness, not to receive a stranger that
will disturb his host, Ecclus 11.31, 34.
and turn good into evil.

Secondly, Specially strangers professing the true Religion. For among the
Israelites more privileges were granted to strangers within the covenant, that
is, to such strangers and sojourners as being born Gentiles and aliens from the
faith, became afterward proselytes and circumcised, and professors of the
Jewish Religion, then to strangers within the gates only, that is, to such
strangers as continued still in their Gentilisme and uncircumcision, though
dwelling within the cities of Israel. Hac distinctione locum Levit. 17.15. cum
Deuteronomy. 14.21. recte conciliat Calvinus, Harmon. in 4 posteriores libros Mosis
page 214. omninoque concilianda sunt ejusmodi (...).
For strangers by birth only, and not by Religion, had money lent them without
usury, Levit. 25.35, 36. And were released of their creditors every seven
years without any exaction, Deuteronomy. 15.1, 2, 3. besides their equality with born
Israelites in eating the Passover, Exodus 12.48, 49. in appearing before the
Lord with the congregation to hear Gods law read, Deuteronomy. 31.11, 12. and in all
other things belonging to divine Service and Religion, Number. 15.15, 16. And
Saint Paul exhorts the Galatians to do good especially to them who are of the
household of faith, Gal. 6.10.
meaning them who by consanguinitie of doctrine are of the same family with us,
namely of the same Catholic Church upon earth: and he commends to the Romans
Phebe his sister in Christ, and by profession of the same faith, Romans 16.1, 2.
that they receive her in the Lord as becomes Saints to receive and to be
received: not in any common fashion, but after a singular and extraordinary
manner, as most dear and worthy friends. Genesis 43.34. and 45.22.
As therefore Joseph gave better entertainment to Benjamin then to the rest of
his guests, because he was his brother, not by the fathers side only, as they
were, but also by the mothers: So we should make more of those strangers which
are children with us, not only of the same God by creation, but also of the
same Church by belief and profession. And as there is another manner of use of
things holy and of things common, of the Lords day and of the other days of
the week: So a difference is to be made between true Protestants and other
common Christians: Of those there must be a special regard above these that
are not so linked unto us by the band of Religion. For we ought herein to
imitate God, who though he be good to all (Psalm. 145.9.) yet in a special sort
he is good to Israel (Psalm. 73.1.) Who is the Savior of all men, specially of
those that believe, 1. Tim. 4.10.

Thirdly, More especially strangers persecuted and banished for professing the
true Religion. For we love the truth as we love the entertainment of those that
profess it and suffer for it. Such strangers that have Gods pasport to show,
ought to be entertained before and more then others that come without it. Matt.
10.23.
For they have his warrant, Jos. 22.19.
if they be persecuted in one city to flee into another: and if the land of
their own possession be unclean, to pass over unto the land of the possession
of the Lord, wherein the Lords Tabernacle dwells. It is their praise and
glory that they will not be defiled with idols, Revel. 14.4.
but follow the Lamb whithersoever he goes in his ordinances. Therefore Asa
and Hezechiah Kings of Juda received willingly those strangers that came to
them out of Israel, 2. Chron. 15.9. and 30.25.
when their Kings would have constrained them to commit idolatry. And the
Christians of Greece and Syria showed hospitality to their brethren of Africa,
Vide Baron. Tom. 6. anno 440.
which were driven out of their country by Gensericus King of the Vandals,
about the year of the Lord 440. And those 800 Englishmen that fled beyond the
seas in the bloody persecution under Queen Mary, were kindly harbored and
entertained by the Magistrates, Ministers, and people of those countries and
cities to which they fled, as Mr. Fox proves by diverse letters which some of
them sent hither to their friends, and as Doctor Humphrey testifies in these
words: In the life of Bishop Jewel, number. 22.
The English exiles in this their extremity were bountifully relieved by
Christopher Prince of Wittemberg, who invited many of them unto him, and the
Tigurine Senators, who at the proposal of Bulinger opened the treasures of
their liberality unto the rest. Neither these only, but also Calvin,
Zuinglius, Melanchthon, Pelican, Lavater, Gesner, and all the greatest
ornaments of Religion and learning in all the Reformed Churches, were very
kind and courteous to the English exiles, sending them daily most comfortable
letters, and omitting no duty of love or humanity toward them all the time of
their banishment. Neither was Geneva an Egypt to them that fled thither from
sundry parts of Christendom for the Gospels sake, but a most kind and
courteous harbourer of persecuted strangers, as Beza testifies in Et Epist. 33.
Ecclesiae Tigurinae Pastoribus, anno 1568. Idem Epist. 30. Ecclesiarum
Helveticarum Pastoribus, anno 1567 sic scribit: Nullus dies praeterit, quo non
ad nos veniant misertimorum omnis aetatis hominum caterva. Nos quod possumus
adhuc, per Dei gratiam praestamus: praebentur hospitia, suppeditatur and vestis
and victus, sed (ut in tanta turba fieri necesse est) satis tenuiter.
his 21 Sermon upon Christ's Passion. And there is good reason why strangers
through constraint and for conscience sake, should be preferred before those
that are so of choice and curiosity. For God has recommended them as his own
strangers, and given a special charge to receive and use them favorably for
his sake, Esa. 16.4. Vide Moller. in loc.
Let mine outcasts dwell with thee, Moab, be thou a covert to them from the
face of the spoiler. Where we see that the Lord is so gracious and merciful to
his people, that albeit he most justly Levit. 26.33. Deuteronomy. 28.64.
drives them out of their native country for their wickedness and
ingratitude, yet he will have them to be kindly used and entertained by those
nations amongst whom he scatters them. Because the adversaries which God
stirs up to his Church, do not vex her to that end that Gods glory may be
thus revenged, and men's sinfulness deservedly punished; but only to feed
their own covetous and cruel disposition. For they be like horsleaches which
suck blood greedily, not to ease or cleanse the patient, but to satisfy their
bloody thirst. As then at other times persecuted and weather-beaten Christians
have been harbored by their brethren that were free from the storm: So it is
fitting they should be still received and refreshed by charitable usage and
kind entertainment. For though it cannot be denied that the Protestants in all
places are shamefully See D. Prideaux Ephesus backsliding, or Sermon. on Rev.
2.4. sect. 15.17. and D. Moulins Christian Combat, 1.3.
degenerated from the zeal and holiness of their ancestors, and have kindled
the fire of Gods wrath against themselves by their conversation so ill becoming
the Gospel of Christ: yet are they not persecuted and spoiled by the Pope, for
their profane life, but only for their most holy faith and true Religion; See
2. Macc. 7.18, 19, 31, 32, 33, 34. Psalm. 44.22.
as the Maccabees were by Antiochus, the type of Antichrist. It is for Gods
sake that they are killed all the day long, and counted as sheep for the
slaughter. And howsoever their corruption be great and manifold, yet it is
nothing to that of their enemies, who See Bish. Hall Serious diswasive from
Popery, initio: and Censure of Travel sect. 20.21. Audacter dico;
Quantumcunque sit apud nos (...), tamen nihil esse praeut apud illos est.
Chamier. De Jejuniis cap. 1. Tom. 3. page 706. Edit. Genev. (...). 1 Timothy 1.15.
justify them by their far greater abominations in every kind: it being
also most true of all other sins, what a late eminent Writer is bold to say
of their intemperance: How great soever it be amongst us, yet it is nothing to
that which is among them.

Fourthly, Most chiefly and above all, Ministers and Divinitie-readers
persecuted and banished for teaching and defending the same true Religion.
Every one of them is, as that faithful saying or sum of the Gospel in Saint
Paul, worthy of all acceptance and kind entertainment, and the truest object
of hospitality. For in the persecution of any Church, the Pastor thereof has
always the first and greatest share: He is hunted as a partridge in the
mountains, and smitten, to the end that his flock may be scattered. Genesis 46.34.
Every shepherd in Israel is an abomination to the Idolatrous Egyptians, and
the Syrians of this World labor to catch the Prophet that discovers their
ambushes and stratagems. 2. Kings 6.13.
Who is offended, and I burn not? says the zealous Apostle: 2. Cor. 11.29.
So, which of the people bears a dram of persecution; and I suffer not a
pound? may every true Pastor truly say. All the bearers of Gods Ark pass first
through this Jordan, and the preachers of Christ's cross drink deepest of his
cup. How was Elias and other true Prophets of his time chased by Ahab and
Jezebel? Peter, Paul, and James, with other Apostles and their associates,
hunted by Herod and the Jews? How was S. Cyprian sought by the Novatians,
Athanasius and Hilary by the Arrians, Nazianzen by the Apollinarians,
Epiphanius by the Gnostics and Valentinians, and S. Austin ferretted by the
Donatists and Circumcellions? The tyrannical rage of He began at the
Ministers, Eusebius de vita Constable. l. 1. c. 44. and ended in them, Hist. lib. 10.
cap. 8. (...). Theod. Hist. lib. 4. cap. 17. Vide querelas Athanasii Apologia
prima pro fuga sua in persecutione, and lamenta Basilii Epist. 70 ad Episcopos
Galliae and Italiae. Quid a renato Evangelio factum sit, quam variis and
immanibus pii, and imprimi^ ministri Ecclesiarum, excruciati sint suppliciis,
piget meminisse. Lavat. in 1. Chron. 20. Defensi tenebris, and dono noctis
opacae. Aeneid. 8.
Licinius against the Pastors of the Church is seen in Eusebius, of Julian the
Apostate in Cyrill and Nazianzen, and of Valens in Basil and Theodoret: who
speaking of this Emperor, says that being from a Catholic turned Arrian, he
did in a manner deprive the whole Church of Christ of Orthodox Pastors. And to
come to the Pastors and Professors of Churches and Universities, since the
restoration of the Gospel; How hardly did Peter Martyr escape the snares of
English and Dutch Papists, Musculus the Spaniards laying wait, and Sadeel the
French traps in their travels and journeys? In the year of our Lord 1562 the
city of Rouen being taken from the Protestants, poor Marlorat did pay for
all: for his flock being spared, he was sent to the gallows at the command of
the Duke of Guise. And when the Savoyards by the thick clouds of the longest
and darkest night of the year 1602 came stealing in upon the walls of Geneva,
to surprise it; if they should have gone on to the height of their hopes, all
the men of the city had been put to the sword: only Reverend Beza, being then
83 years old, was to have been sent alive for a great spoil and present to the
Phalaris of Rome, like a second Samson to make sport to the Philistines. And as
the destroyers of Gods people began at his Sanctuary (Ezekiel 9.6.) So the
late persecuters of the Protestants in France began at their Ministers: The
first clap of this thunder has lighted on my head, and my affliction has been
a forerunner of yours, says a famous Pastor of the Reformed Church of Paris
in a letter to his flock. D. Moulin Epist. Dedicat. of his Christian combat.
Anno 1626. Apology for the Reformed Churches of France, page 14.
And in another Province, when the Cardinal of Sourdis came furiously rushing
upon a troop of harmless souls, which were going many miles to hear a Sermon,
his first care was violently to pursue their Pastor; who having escaped his
bloody hands, he began to vex and worrie the flock. It is the blood of those
Saints which the scarlet Whore specially pants after: it is the life of those
Witnesses which the Beast that ascends out of the bottomless pit chiefly seeks
to take away. By how much therefore the Ministers of Christ are hated and
hunted in persecution above all other professors of the truth; by so much also
they are to be received and respected above all other persecuted professors;
that as the sufferings of Christ abound in them, so their consolation may
abound for Christ, 2. Cor. 1.5. Who deserved more to be fed by Obadiah, then
those hundred persecuted Prophets of the Lord? 1. King. 18.13.
How could the widow of Sarepta have better bestowed her slender provision, 1.
King. 17.
then in sustaining poor, hungry, and half-starved Elias? And whom could the
brethren at Damascus and Jerusalem have so worthily preserved, Acts 9.25, 30.
as a zealous Apostle ready to be killed for speaking boldly, and disputing
for Christ? How worthy of that golden mouth is this note of Chrysostom? When
Paul says of Phebe, Romans 16.2. (...), etc. Hom. 30. in Romans
She has been a succourer of many, and of my self also, What is this SELF
ALSO? but of my self a preacher, and a preacher that have suffered so great
things. This is the height and crown of her good deeds, and therefore mentioned
in the last place. Could either King Edward the sixth have better showed his
Christian hospitality, then by making more of Bucer and Fagius then of other
Dutchmen fled into his Kingdom? Or George Anhalt, Prince of Ascania, then by
lodging and preserving many learned Divines, especially that great Philip
Melanchthon, during the tempestuous civil wars of Germany? Or the Church of
Scotland, Ad Gallica usque gentis Ministr^s, Geneva Religionis causa non ita
pridem exulantes, Scoticarum Ecclesiarum beneficentia redundavit. Beza Epist.
ad Regem Jacobum praefixa Iconibus Virorum Illustrium.
then by sending a liberal collection to the French Ministers exiled at Geneva?

CHAP. VI. The Subject of hospitality.
AS the Object, so the Subject of hospitality is fourefold, comprehending four
sorts of Persons of whom it is required: Bishops and Prelates of the Church,
Other inferior Ministers, Rich Laymen and Women, Poor Laymen and Women.

First, Bishops and Prelates of the Church. For Saint Paul 1. Tim. 3.2.
expressly requires of a Bishop that he be given to hospitality. And Tit.
1.8. showing what vices a Bishop ought chiefly to eschew and what virtues to
pursue, the first virtue that he commends unto him is hospitality. Which made
Saint Hierome write thus upon that place: Ante omnia hospitalitas futuro
Episcopo denumciatur: Si enim omnes illud de Evangelio audire desiderant,
Hospes fui, and suscepistis me; quanto magis Episcopus, cujus domus commune
omnium debet esse hospitium. Hieron. in Tit. 1.8
Before all things hospitality is enjoined to him that will be a Bishop: for if
all desire to hear that of the Gospel, I was a stranger, and ye took me in;
how much more a Bishop, whose house ought to be a common lodging of all? And
Saint Austin in one of his Sermons; Perveni ad Episcopatum: vidi necesse habere
Episcopum exhibere humanitatem affiduam quibusque venientibus sive
transeuntibu^. Quod nisi fecissem, Episcopus inhumanus dicerer. Aug. Sermon. 1.
De vita communi clericorum suorum Tom. 10.
I attained unto the Bishopric, and saw that a Bishop must needs show
humanity to all comers and passengers. Therefore Theodoret did stir up by
commendatorie letters sundry Bishops of the East to refresh the bowels of the
Saints whom the wind of persecution had blown thither from the West: and
Saint Gregory likewise did exhort all the Bishops of Illyricum to receive
kindly the persecuted Prelates that were fled thither for refuge, Greg. Epist.
lib. 1. Indict. 9. cap. 43.
and cheerfully to entertain them with their own revenues, according to the
Emperors injunction. Lib. 12. Epist. 6
And having heard that one Florentinus, Archdeacon of Ancona, was chosen to the
Bishopric of the same Church, he earnestly desired the Visitor of that See,
and his brother too, to hinder his Consecration, if the disgraceful reports of
his niggardliness and inhospitality were true. Whereupon the great Canonist
says, Hospitalitas usque adeo Episcopis est necessaria, ut si ab ea
inveniantur alieni, jure prohibeantur ordinari. Great. Did. 85. Conc. Paris.
lib. 1. cap. 14.
that Hospitality is so far necessary to Bishops, that they which are not
given to it, are justly kept from that promotion. Of which virtue so essential
to their Office Bishops have been put in mind from time to time by Council.
Carthagin. 4. can. 14. Vt Episcopus non long ab Ecclesia hospitiolum habeat.

Council. Matisconense 2 can. 11, and 13. Volumus ut Episcopalis domus, quae ad
hoc (Deo favente) instituta est, sine personarum acceptione omnes in
hospitalitate recipiat.

Council. Turonense 3. can. 6. Vt peregrini and pauperes convivae sint
Episcoporum.

Council. Meldense can. 28. Vt Episcopi in suis civitatibus canonice cum suis
filiis degant, and hospitalitate ornati (quae jam pene propter diversas
rapacitates adnullata est) non solum in oculis Domini propter obedientiam
mandati divini reddantur conspicui, verum etiam bonum testimonium secundum
sanctum acquirant Apostolum. Vide. praeterea Council. Aquisgran. 1 can. 141. and
2 can. 3.


many Councels, especially by that of Paris in the year 829, and that of
Oxford 1222. The former has these words among many others to this purpose:
Since hospitality shall be rewarded in the dreadful day of judgment by that
eternal Judge, who shall say, I was a stranger, and ye took me in; it behooves
all Christians to follow after it most eagerly: But they especially which ought
to guide others by their sayings and doings unto eternal life, should be
altogether given to it, laying aside that pestilent covetousness, and every
other occasion whatsoever. And therefore the Bishops must do their utmost
endeavor, that when they preach hospitality to their flock, they practice it
themselves first of all: that so they may show by their works what they teach
by their words. The latter made a Decree after this manner: Statuimus
authoritate praesentis Concilii ut Pralati singuli sint, juxta Apostolum,
hospitales. Council. Oxon. fere initio, sub Rege Henr. 3.
By the authority of the present Council we ordain that every Prelate,
according to the Apostles injunction, be given to hospitality.

For in ancient times all the Church-goods or spiritual revenues were divided
into 4 parts: The first whereof was for the Bishop, the second for his Clergy,
the third for the poor, the fourth for the mending and repairing of Churches
and Chapels. And that first fourth part allotted to the Bishop, was not only
to maintain himself and his family withal, but also to redeem the captives
and to entertain strangers and foreiners, as appears by sundry places of the
Canon Law; Gratian. Cause. 12. quaest. 2. can. Mos est. and can. Sancimus. and
Cause. 16. quaest. 3. can. Praesulum nostrorum. Ibid Cause. 12. quaest. 2. can.
Apostolicos and Paternos.
which also cites a Decree of the sixth general Council held at
Constantinople, about the year 681; whereby the Fathers of that Synod do
confirm and ratify that foresaid distribution of Ecclesiastical revenues, as
being already made by their ancestors.

And as all Bishops should always be, so many of them have been in many ages
given to hospitality. For Saint Cyprian writing to the Clergy of his Dioces,
Viduarum and infirmorum and omnium pauperum curam peto diligenter habeatis: sed
and peregrinis, si qui indigentes fuerint, sumptus suggeratis de quantitate mea
propria, quam apud Rogatianum compresbyterum nostrum dimisi. Cyp. Ep. 36. vel
lib. 3. Epist. 24. Aug. Confoss. lib. 5. cap. 13. Hospitalitatem semper
exhibuit. Posid. in vita Aug. cap. 22. Pal. in vita Chrysostom. Sozom. lib. 7.
cap. 27. and lib. 1. cap. 11. Epiph. Haeres. 77. quae est Aerii. (...). Action
11.
desires them to have a diligent care of the widows and weak persons, and of
all the poor: yea and to afford unto strangers some means out of his own share
and rent, if there were needy ones among them. And Saint Austin reports in his
Confessions, that when he traveled into Italy and came to Millan, being then
but a young Scholar, Saint Ambrose received him Episcopaliter and benign, like
a Bishop and liberally, or courteously, according to the manner and place of a
Bishop. And Posidonius says of Saint Austin, that he kept continual
hospitality. The like commendation Palladius gives to Saint Chrysostom,
Sozomen to Acacius Bishop of Berea in Syria, and to Spiridion Bishop of
Tremythus in the Isle of Cyprus (although he had wife and children) and
Epiphanius to the Bishops of Pontus. And in the fourth general Council held at
Chalcedon in the year 454 Bassianus Bishop of Ephesus accused to be an
unworthy Bishop, and unlawfully promoted to so eminent a dignity, thus
answered his adversaries; How am I unworthy of this place, seeing I have been
hospital from my very youth? And since the Reformation, the most Reverend
Archbishops of Canterbury are generally commended for this virtue: and by name
Archbishop Whitegift, sometimes a worthy Master of this College the space of
ten years, is famous for all kinds of hospitality. For besides his costly
Hospital at Croydon, and continual entertaining of supervenient strangers of
this country, he was so bountiful and courteous an harbourer of outlandish
Scholars, that glorious things are spoken of him for that in the 91 paragraph
of his life.

Secondly, Other Inferior Ministers. For as Saint Paul exhorts Bishops, Tit.
2.7.
to show themselves in all things the patterns of good works: So S. Peter would
have all inferior Pastors to be ensamples to the flock. 1. Pet. 5.3.
And the Fathers of the Council of Antioch (approved by the sixth General at
Constantinople) in their Synodall letters recited by Eusebius, Eusebius. Hist.
lib. 7. cap. 24.
speak to both after this manner: We know, beloved, that a Bishop and the whole
order of Priesthood ought to be a pattern of all good works to the common
people. For every Minister should be a mirror of all virtues, and exemplify
in himself what he prescribes to others. Otherwise he is like to have Mercuries
statue for his fittest Emblem, and no better success then the Scribes and
Pharisees, Matthew. 7.29.
who did teach without authority, and that (in all likelihood) for this reason,
because they said, Matthew. 23.3, 4.
and did not, they laid heavy burdens on men's shoulders, but they themselves
would not move them with one of their fingers. And if Ministers ought to preach
and practice all good works, then consequently so good a work as hospitality.
Therefore Parsons or Parish Priests have been called Lavat. in Ezech. 3. Hom.
10. Ministri Parochi dicuntur (...), a praebendo, quia, ut apud veteres
Parochi, ligna and salem, id est, res necessarias praebere debent hospitibus
and peregrinis. Horatius Parochos posuit pro convivatoribus, id est, convivii
exhibitoribus. Sermon. lib. 1. Sat. 5. sic scribens: Proxima Campano Pontiquae
villula, tectum,
Praebuit: and Parochi quae debent ligna, salemque.

Parochi, from a word which signifies to give, or to show, because they should
give entertainment, and show hospitality to strangers and passengers, as they
are commanded by the Did. 42. can. 1. Hospitalem Sacerdotem. Qui Apostolum
secutus fuerit, alios ad hospitalitatem debet invitare. Quomodo autem
hospitalitatis exhortator poterit esse, qui domum propriam hospitibus claudit?
-- Ab hac quisquis alienus fuerit, in Sacerdotem ordinari non poterit. Si enim
vidu^ ab Ecclesia recipi prohibetur, quae pauperes non recepit hospitio: multo
magis sunt prohibendi a Sacerdotio, qui ab opere pietatis probantur alieni
Canon Law, and by ancient Council. Turonen. can. 18. Vt hospitalitatem
Presbyteri ante omnia diligant: ut peregrinorum cur^m and solicitudinem
habeant. Council. Namnetens. can. 10. Instruendi sunt Presbyteri, pariterque
admonendi, quatenus noverint decimas and oblationes, quas a fidelibus
accipiunt, pauperum, and hospitum, and peregrinorum esse stipendia.
Councels, and their Council. Meldens. can. 28. Episcopi Presbyteros sibi
commissos hospitalitate, secundum eorum ministerium, ornari compellant.
Hincmarus Archiepisc. Rhemens. in capit. ad Presbyteros Parochiae suae datis
ann. 852, cap. 10. Vt curam pauperum and peregrinorum (Presbyter) habeat,
hosque ad prandium suum quotidie juxta possibilitatem con^^cet, eisque
hospitium competenter tribuat. Herardus Archiepiscop. Turonensis hanc virtutem
omnibus suae Parochiae (vel Provinciae) Sacerdotibus and Clericis imperat,
capitulo 18 anno 858.
Diocesans charged to compel them. Therefore S. Hierome exhorted Nepotian
Mensulam tuam pauperes and peregrini, and cum illis Christus convivanoverit.
Ep. ad Nepot
to entertain at his table the poor and strangers, and with them Christ
himself. And Musculus was wont to show great kindness and beneficence to the
poor, specially to foreiners: and Martin Bucer was so ready to entertain
strangers, chiefly strangers by constraint, and for the Gospels sake, that his
house seemed to be an Inn while he lived at Strasbourg, as Pet. Martyr. Epist.
ad fideles Ecclesiae Lucensis.
Peter Martyr, an eyewitness, does bear him record. Memorable also to this
purpose is the example of Calvin, Ipsa a quo potuit virtutem discere virtus.
Beza in Icon. viror. illustrium.
of whom virtue her self might have learned virtue, specially this virtue of
love to poor strangers. For having been very mindful of them all his life
time, he would not be forgetful at his death, as appears by these words of
his last Will and Testament; In Gymnasii aedificationem lego december aureos
coronatos: peregrinorum quoque pauperum aerario ^otidem. Beza in vita Calvini.
J bequeath ten French crowns to the building of the School, and to the
treasury of poor strangers, as many. Which is a great legacy, if we consider,
Non quantum, sed ex quanto: nec de patrimonio, sed animo. Cypr. lib. De opere
and eleemos.
not how much, but out of how much, to leave them three pounds sterling of
threescore and seven, which all his worldly goods were valued and rated unto by
himself, as near as he could: considering also that he had a most dear
brother, and three nephews, and four neeces, for heirs of his so small estate.
Fayus in vita Bezae.
Beza having better means, bequeathed more to the said treasury, namely, 100
French crowns: and Erasmus far exceeding them both in outward substance, is
reported to have left at Basil, where he died, 6000 florens, that is, 900
pounds sterling for the yearly board and lodging of seven poor strangers
students in Divinity. Which exhibition is there called to this day, Erasmicum
stipendium.

Now that every Minister may discharge this duty as he ought, in due sort and
exemplarie manner, it is the peoples part to let him have wherewith to perform
it. For how can he be an Oecolampadius, a shining lamp in Gods house, if the
oil of maintenance fails him? How can he move his hearers to this virtue, with
Paul's words to the Philippians, Philip. 4.9.
What ye have heard and seen in me, do; unless they first practice Paul's
precept to the Galatians, Gal. 6.6.
Let him that is taught in the word communicate unto him that teaches, in all
good things? How shall he be hospital and harborous of strangers, whose living
is scarce able to harbor himself? Ignorance of Priests must needs follow
meannesse of benefices, Ad tenuitatem beneficiorum necessario sequitur
ignorantia Sacerdotum. Panormit. Prove. 3.9.
says a great Canonist: who might have added to the lack of learning, want of
substantial hospitality and good housekeeping.

Honor therefore the Lord with thy substance, o Layman, and with the first
fruits of thine increase.

Bring thou all the tithes into the storehouse, Mal. 3.10.
that there may be meat in Gods house.

Give the portion of the Priests and Levites, 2. Chron. 31.4.
that they may be encouraged in the Law of the Lord.

Count them ever worthy of double honor (of obedience and honorable
maintenance) who labor in the word and doctrine. 1. Tim. 5.17.


Think not much to give them of the fatness of the earth, Genesis 27.28. Deuteronomy.
32.2.
who distill upon thee the dew of heaven.

For if they sow unto thee spiritual things, 1. Cor. 9.11.
is it a great thing if they reap thy carnal things?

Thirdly, Rich Laymen and Women. For when the Apostle requires of Clergymen
to be hospital, he does not thereby exclude or exempt Laymen from this duty,
but only shows that Ministers should be eminent and forward, as in all other
good works, so in this branch of charity to strangers and foreiners. Otherwise,
it is no more proper to the Ministers then other duties there enjoined by the
Apostle; as modesty, sobriety, justice, holiness, and temperance: which
without all question lie upon the people as well as upon the Pastors. Besides,
this twelfth chapter, whereof my Text is a part, is all spent in general
precepts and directions for a Christian life and conversation: the whole
Epistle speaks to the Laytie as well as to the Clergy, being written to all
that be in Rome, Romans 1.7.
beloved of God, called to be Saints. Now, of all Laymen and Women none are so
bound to be rich in this good work, as those that are rich in the goods of this
world. For God has given them all sufficiency in all things, 2. Cor. 9.8. Luke
12.48. Genesis 13.6. Ruth. 2.1. Job 31.32. Dignus fuit proverbio, (...), Haud
unquam arcet ostium. Quod interprers Aristophanis admonet dici de illis qui
impendio sunt hospitales, quorum fores semper patent, neminem excludunt. 2.
Kings 4.8. Gualther in locum. Rom 16.23. Audio te Xenodochium in portu fecisse
Romano, and virgam de arbore Abrahami in Ausonio plantasse littore. Hierom. ad
Pammach. Epist. 26.
that they may abound to every good work. The thicker and greater the clouds
be, the more rain descends from them: and unto whomsoever much is given, of him
shall be much required. Who were fitter to entertain strangers, then Abraham
and Lot, whose substance was so great that they could not dwell together? And
which of the Bethleemites should have been kind and bountiful to poor Ruth,
if not Boaz, a mighty man of wealth? Job in his great estate had been
unexcusable, had he suffered the stranger to lodge in the street, and not
opened his doors to the traveller: and it had been no small shame for the
great woman of Shunem and for her husband, if they had not showed themselves
hospital to Elisha as often as he passed by. And if Gaius was such a one as they
say, a most wealthy citizen of Corinth, he had good reason to be the host of
Paul and of the whole Church: that is, to entertain usually in his house all
Christians resorting to that city. In emulation of which so commended persons,
Hierome reports that Pammachius (a young noble man of his acquaintance) built
an Hospital for strangers in the Roman haven of Mitylene: that Paula (a noble
Roman Matron) built another in Bethlehem, Idem Epist. ad Eustochium.
where Mary and Joseph could find no harbor: and that Fabiola (another woman
of great means) was so loving and bountiful to all strangers, Non solum inopum
necessitatem sustentat, sed prona in omnes munificentia aliquid and habentibus
providet. In Epitaph. Fabiolae. Vide Magdeburg. Cent. 12. cap. 6.
that she did not only sustain the necessity of the poor ones, but did also
provide for those that had something to live on. And about the year of the
Lord 1100 some rich Italian Merchants got leave of the Saracens to build an
Hospital in the holy land, near Jerusalem, for the refreshing of such Western
Christians as should have occasion to travel into those parts. Which project of
theirs was soon after favored and furthered by sundry Nobles and great ones:
who endowed that House with good revenues, and gave to the inhabitants thereof
the name of Hospitallers: Bibliothecam meam 40 amplius annorum spatio magna
diligentia ac sumptu congestam, dividi, vendi, ac dissipari veto, eamque
communem inter filios, qui literis operam navabunt, facio, ita ut etiam exterit
ad usum publicum pateat. Thuanus in Testamento suo ad calcem Continuationis
Historiarum sui temporis. Act. 3.6.
Whence Ordo Hospitalariorum, mentioned by diverse Historians, had its
beginning. And lastly, Thuanus, that famous President in Paris, strove to
exceed in this praise his renowned ancestors, and left to posterity a lasting
monument of his love and respect to strangers: For he gave strait charge and
express command by his last Will and Testament, that his great and costly
Library should not be sold nor divided any way, but entirely preserved for an
ornament to the City, and for the public use and benefit of travelers and
outlandish Scholars: because they are not wont, nor able, for the most part, to
carry many books with them.

Fourthly, Poor Laymen and Women. For though they have neither silver nor
gold, yet such as they have they may give. And therefore upon them also lies
this duty of hospitality, as appears by the Prophet Elias, 1. King. 17.10.
who required it of the poor widow of Sarepta: and by the Apostle S. Paul, 1.
Tim. 5.10.
who among the good works and qualities necessary to a widow that would be
maintained out of the Church-treasurie, requires this in express terms, if she
have lodged strangers. And albeit he did know and acknowledge that the Hebrews
had been spoiled of their goods, Heb. 10.34.
yet nevertheles he sent them this exhortation, Be not forgetful to entertain
strangers: Heb. 13.2.
thereby showing, that poverty did not dispense with them, or free them from
the performance of this duty; but that they were still, as before, obliged to
practice the same according to their present ability. The deep poverty of the
Macedonians kept them not from sending to their power, 2. Cor. 8.2.
yea and beyond their power, a liberal and rich contribution to the poor
Saints at Jerusalem: and the small substance of the poor widow was no let to
her from casting more into the treasury, Mark. 12.43.
then all the rich ones that cast in much. Matthew. 25.23.
As a servant may be good and faithful over a few things: so a man or woman
may be hospital and bountiful in a little estate: for if there be first a
willing mind, 2. Cor. 8.12.
hospitality is accepted (of God and godly wise men) according to that a man
or a woman has, and not according to that they have not. Genesis 24.18, 19 Homil.
Qualis uxor sit ducenda, Tom. 5.
What was Rebekahs hospitality so much extolled by Chrysostom, but water
cheerfully afforded to Abraham's servant for him and for his camels? And what
does Christ require of them that can give no more to his poor strangers, but a
cup of cold water only? protesting withal, Matthew. 10.42.
that if they give but so much, they shall in no wise lose their reward. If but
water, but a cup of water, Hanc excusationem levissimo praecepto Servator
diluit, ut calicem aquae frigidae toto animo porrigamus: frigidae, inquit,
aquae, non calidae, ne and in calida paupertatis occasio ex lignorum penuria
quaereretur. Hier. in loc. Aug. in Psalm. 125. Aug. in Psalm. 103. If we be not
of ability to do strangers any good, yet comfortable words shall please both
them, and God that made this Law for them. B. Babing^. on Exodus 22.21. Ay^au
moins du miel en bouche, qui n'as point de monoye en bourse. Sabell. Exemp.
lib. 6. cap. 1.
but a cup of cold water be not slighted as a cold entertainment of a stranger,
but be thought enough to make a poor man hospital, even by the best priser of
all things and actions; who can exempt himself from this duty under the
pretense of disability? Is not water a cheap provision, a cup of water a small
quantity, and a cup of cold water soon made ready? Let no man therefore (says
S. Hierome here, and S. Austin elsewhere) plead poverty in this case, saying,
I have not so much as a few sticks to warm a cup of drink for a stranger, and
how then should I be given to hospitality? For our Savior has foreseen, and
prevented this excuse by a most easy command. And S. Austin goes yet a step
further, affirming, that courteous affability, and loving language proceeding
from the heart, is able to make a poor man hospital in the fight of God, and
to procure for it a blessed reward at his hand. There are among strangers many
able ones that need not any man's beneficence, and they that stand in need
thereof are well satisfied with the good words of those that can show them no
good deeds. Let such therefore above all others practice here the French
proverb, At the least have honey in thy mouth, thou that have not money in thy
purse. Ever abhor that monstrous doggednesse of those Jews in Sabellicus, who
were so inhospital, that they would not so much as show the way to a stranger
going astray, nor the fountain or spring to him that was thirsty. Which (we
know) are no great matters, but only mere offices of common humanity.

CHAP. VII. The Means to practice hospitality.
NOw because we have been redeemed and purified that we should be zealous of
good works, Tit. 2.14.
by earnest prosecuting the means of doing them in the best manner; Tit. 3.8.
and careful to maintain them, by being provident and forecasting to do them
constantly: therefore we must endeavor to be eminent in this good work we
speak of, and to keep real hospitality all the days of our life, by using
these two special means; Labor or industry in lawful getting, and Frugalitie
or thriftinesse in spending our goods lawfully gotten; according to the French
Apophthegme, Amasser en saison, despenser par raison, font la bonne maison.
Pro. 14.23. Pro. 13.4.
A seasonable gathering, and a reasonable spending, make a good housekeeping.

First, Labor or industry in lawful getting. For it is the beating of the
brain, or the sweating of the brow; not the bare talk of the lips, nor the
desire of the heart, that inables a man to perform this duty and others of the
like nature: according to the common proverb, Wishers and Woulders are no good
householders. He becomes poor that deals with a slack hand: but the hand of
the diligent makes rich, says Solomon, Prove. 10.4. And again, The slothful
man rostes not that which he took in hunting, but the substance of a diligent
man is precious, Prove. 12.27. And the Greeks say, (...). Stob. Sermon. 27.
that plentifulnesse follows painfulnesse, and that all things are made
servants to care and industry. Caius Furius by his painful dexterity and
unwearied labor got more revenues out of one small field, then his neighbors
out of many great ones. Plin. l. 18. c. 6.
Whereupon being accused to the Magistrate, as if by witchcraft he had conveyed
the corn of other men's ground into his own, he came with all his goodly
rusticall instruments, with his strong and lusty daughter, and his wel-fed
oxen, Acts 20.24, 35. Ephesians. 4.28. Argumentum continet a majori ad minus, q. d.
Ei nulla est recusanda conditio, quantumvis dura and molesta, quo nemini sit
injurius: neque id modo, sed ut succurrat fratrum necessitati. Calv. in loc.
Opus manuum nominat, ut ex specie genus intelligatur: and, id quod bonum est,
ut arts victum quaerendi inhonestas excludat. Estius ibid. Prove. 31.13, 19, 20.
and spoke thus to the Judges; See, my Lords, these be my witchcrafts and
sorceries, but I cannot show you my watchings and sweatings. This being done
and spoken, he was presently absolved by the sentence of all. It is labor and
industry in a lawful calling which the Apostle prescribes to the Ephesians, as
a means of bounty and beneficence: Let him that stole, steal no more: but
rather let him labor, working with his own hands the thing which is good, that
he may have to give to him that needs. Where he names the work of the hands
for every work profitable to get a man's living, by one kind understanding all
sorts of labor: and the thing that is good, to exclude thereby all dishonest
trades and unlawful means of getting maintenance. And Solomon describing the
virtuous woman, says in the first place that she seeks wool and flax, and
works willingly with her hands: that she lays her hands to the spindle and her
hands hold the distaffe: and then, that she stretches out her hands to the
poor, yea she reaches forth her hands to the needy. And Saint Luke having
testified of Dorcas, that she was full of good woorks, Acts 9.36, 39.
and alms deeds which she did, he soon after shows the means and fountain of
her beneficence, to wit, her labor and industry in making coats and garments.
So Peter Martyrs wife is commended for having been a prudent and painful
huswife, In re domestica prudens and industria, and erga egenos munifica.
Simler. in vita P. Martyris.
and bountiful to the poor and needy: the former good quality enabling her
to the latter.

Secondly, Frugality or thriftinesse in spending our goods lawfully gotten.
Prove. 18.9.
For as he that is slothful in his work, is brother to him that is a great
waster (the one falling as certainly, though not so speedily, into want as the
other:) So frugality and saving should be near of kinnne to painful and
industrious getting, and must needs concur in him that will continue to be
hospital indeed. Such an one must here observe that rule of frugalitie taught
us by the gracious lips of our If he would be so saving that could do wonders,
and miraculously multiply meat and drink; how thrifty should we be that can
earn so little? Though the Eagle be so able to get her prey, yet she is so
frugall that she lays up the meat that her young ones leave, for another
time; (...), Arist. Hist. Animal. lib. 9. cap. 32.

Fit hoc bifariam: Si vel perire sinamus fruges, ne cui sint usui, quod avari
and foenerato res frequenter faciunt: vel etiam turpiter dissipemus quae multis
aliis poterant sufficere. Gualt. Hom. 46. in Joan.


Savior, so to dispose of that plenty which Gods goodness has bestowed on
us, that nothing be lost, John 6.12. Now a thing may be lost and spoiled two
ways by our own fault, says a godly Writer upon the place; either when we
suffer our meat and drink to wax corrupt and dead, and our garments moth-eaten,
or our gold and silver to be cankred and rustie, rather then bestow them upon
our selves and upon the poor; as those rich men did whom Saint James had good
reason to threaten so: for they should have followed this wholesome counsel of
the Wiseman; Lose thy money for thy brother and thy friend, James 5.3. Ecclus
29.10.
and let it not rust under a stone to be lost: or when by excess and
intemperance we do waste and lavish that, which might have sufficed many others
besides us; as when Nabal did pour so much wine or strong drink into his
stomach that he was very drunken. 1. Sam. 25.36. Bonus condus facit bonum
promum, and bonus Servatius bonum Bonifacium Selneccer. Ruth. 2.18.
A good layer up makes a good layer out, and a good sparer makes a good
spender, says the Dutch Proverb truly. This is plainly verified in that
virtuous Ruth, which was no less pious and charitable in spending, then
soberly frugall in sparing and saving: for she brought forth and gave to her
poor Mother in law that she had reserved at dinner, after she was sufficed.
Genitrix virtutum frugalitas. Just. lib. 20.
Frugalitie, says Justin, is the mother of virtues. I am sure it is the basis
and foundation, the pillar and supporter of liberality and beneficence. For as
by lopping of the superfluous branches, Stipendio modico, vel potius exiguo
contentus vita erat ita frugali, ut quod haberet non modo sibi sufficeret, sed
aliquid etiam superesset ad amicos juvandos. Simlerus in vita ejus
a good tree is made more fruitful: so by cutting off all needless charges
and expenses, a liberal man abounds more in good works. Though Peter Martyr had
forsaken all for the Gospels sake, and left his great riches and preferments he
did enjoy in Italy, having nothing to live on but a small stipend for his
Professorship at Strasbourg, yet being very frugal and sparing he had enough to
maintain himself, and to help his friends too. Whereas on the contrary, Homini
ut agro, quamvis quaestuosus sit, si tamen and sumptuosus, non multum superest.
Cato De Re rustica fere initio Magius innumerabilem pecuniam sibi datam non
conservavit, sed tanquam nudus nuces legeret in ventrem abstulit. Cic. 2. de
Oratore, paragr. 265.
an expensive man is like a costly piece of ground, the charges whereof equal
the revenues, be they never so great. By his wasting and overlavishing of his
estate he disables himself from doing good to others: Either for the present,
as that Roman Captain in Tully, who was not one penny the richer for that huge
sum of money which had been given him, because he had done with it as a naked
man would do with the nuts that he gathers, carry them all away in his belly
for lack of pockets: and the Poets insinuate no less by their lusty giant
Briareus, who had nothing to show of all his comings in, because his fifty
bellies did consume the gettings of his hundred hands: all the labor of that
man or monster was for his mouth, Eccles 6.7.
and did slide through his throat; Devorat os oris quicquid lucratur os ossis:
Or at least for the time to come: for to want and to waste differ but in time;
Pauper non habet divitias, prodigus non habebit.
a poor man has no riches, a prodigal shall have none. And therefore the
Cynicall Philosopher was provident and witty, when begging but half a penny
from other men, he did beg ten groats at once from a prodigal unthrift: who
marvelling at that, and asking him the reason, received this wise and wholesome
answer; Laertius in vita.
I beg so little from other men, because I hope to get often something from them;
and I ask so much of thee, because I look not to have any more alms at thy
hands. It is like the seven years of plenty were not confined to Egypt; B.
Hall Contemp. book 3. In Joseph.
other Countries adjoining were no less fruitful: yet in the seven years of
famine, Egypt had corn when they wanted. See the difference betwixt a wise
prudent frugalitie, and a vain ignorant expense of the benefits of God: The
sparing hand is both full and beneficial; whereas the lavish is not only
empty, but injurious.

Seeing then frugality and saving be so great a help to good housekeeping, and
a preserver of real hospitality, let it remove all lets and hindrances of the
same: let it be used as a razor of all wicked and superfluous, and as a rule of
all good and necessary expenses: let it quite shave and cut off all expenses
about surfeiting and drunkenness, harlotrie and wantonness, and other
debaucht courses, which the best among the Heathens have been ashamed of, and
therefore should not be once named among Christians, Ephesians. 5.3.
as becomes Saints: Nomina sunt ipso pene timenda sono. And let it also
moderate and diminish those excessive charges which too commonly men are at,
about things lawful, necessary, and commendable. Such are

First, The building and trimming of their houses: as if they were to live for
ever in this World. Aelian. Variae Hist. lib. 12. cap. 29. Est stultum genus
hominum qui insatiabili aedificandi studio slagrant, nunc rotundu quadratis,
nunc quadrata rotundis permutantes. Neque vero finis ullus, neque modus, donec
ad extremam redactis inopiam, nec ubi habitent, nec quid edant, supersit.
Erasm. Encom. Mor^ae.
This was a fault found by Plato in the old Agrigentines, and is by the Turks
in the Christians of our times: Fayus in Eccles. 2.4.
whose works are unlike the works of Abraham. For he was not curious in his
dwelling, but courteous in entertaining of strangers: He contented himself to
dwell in a tent, yet his doors were open to strangers and travelers: but
these are curious and costly in decking and adorning their houses, and
negligent and niggardly in harboring strangers and passengers. Their sumptuous
buildings may be called Mock-strangers as well as Mock-beggers: for like the
barren figtree in the Gospel, Mark. 11.13.
they are seen a far off, and promise good relief to the hungry passenger;
but let him come to them, he shall find (at the best) many goodly leaves of
complemental, In verbis quidvis, in factis nil sed habebis, ut de Aulicis dici
solet. Par. in Genesis 18.3 Foliorum latitudo peltae effigiem Amazonicae habet:
fructus rarus est, nec fabae magnitudinem excedens. P^in. lib. 12. cap. 5. Amos
5.11. Jer. 22.14. Ezech. 27 6. Amos 6.4. Amos 3.15. Cant. 7.4. Psalm. 49.11.
but no fruit of real hospitality: or if happily he finds any, it is like that
of the Indian figtree, no bigger then a bean, though the leaves be as broad as
a target: nothing in comparison of that which was expected and justly looked for
by the outward show. In the Old Testament the great ones are often reproved for
their vain and ambitious wastfulnesse in this kind. For they built houses of
hewn stones, they made wide lodgings and large chambers, all sieled with Cedar,
and painted with Vermilion. They would needs have benches and beds, yea, houses
and towers of yvorie: and then their inward thought was that their houses
should continue for ever, and their dwelling places to all generations. But in
this their foolish imagination they did reckon without their host: for I will
smite the winter house with the summer house, and the houses of yvorie shall
perish, and the great houses shall have an end, says the Lord, Amos 3.15. So
displeasing to God is man's prodigality and profuseness in building.

Secondly, The buying and keeping of horses, and hawks, and dogs: wherein some
are so intolerably lavish and exorbitant (to say no more) that Hospitals which
were used to entertain strangers, Doct. Williams of the True Church, book 5
chap. 14. page 802.
are now abused to maintain hawks and dogs, as a late Divine complains. And
well may he: For if Mahomet be justly exclaimed against, for having turned into
stables the Temples which Constantine the great had built for the service of
Christ, and spiritual manuring of Christians: In cultum Christi, and culturam
Christiani.
are they not worthy of a sharp check and censure, that profess themselves to
be Christians, and yet dare change their ancestors liberality upon Christ's
members, into prodigality upon beasts? that so loath the company of strangers,
and so love to be among their hawks and dogs, as to make that their chief
delight, Dan. 4.
which was Nebuchadnezzars punishment, never to be from beasts? Among the
Heathen Romans they were infamous for prodigality, Prodigi dicuntur qui
venationum apparatu pecunias profundunt. Cic. Offic. 2.
that spent too much money about the instruments of hunting.

Thirdly, Bodily exercises and recreations, as shooting, bowling, playing at
tenis, and such like honest and healthful sports: wherein many a man does
sometimes far exceed the rules of frugality prescribed by godly-learned B.
Babing. on the 8 Com. Dan. de ludo Aleae cap. 4. Perk. Cases of Conscience,
book. 3. chap. 4 M. Gataker of Lots chap. 9
Divines; as, First, that the sum of money which they play for, be not great
in it self. Secondly, that it be not greater then the estate of those that play
will well permit. Thirdly, that it be not taken and kept by the winners, but
that it be bestowed upon a common meal, both for the recompense and amends of
the losers, and also for the maintaining and cherishing of mutual love and
friendship.

Fourthly, Apparel and raiment. For many spend so much in the number, matter,
and making of their garments, that they have but little left to be liberal
withal. In our Matthew. 11.8. Christus molles and preciosas vestes minime
sustulit a mundo, sed ostendit quibus convenirent. P. Mart. Loc. Com. class. 2.
c. 11. number. 79. Vno filo villarum insunt pretia. Hieron. in vit. Paul Erem
Saltus and insulas tenera cervix fert: graciles aurium cutes Kalendarium
expendunt, and sinistra per singulos digitos de saccis singulis ludit. Tertul.
de Habitu mulieb. cap. 9.
Saviors time they that wore soft clothing were in Kings houses, and confined
to places of eminency and public authority. But now a-dayes we need not go
out for to see such: for they are to be seen every where. Very carters will be
clothed as courtiers, and ruffle it in silk that scarce are able to pay for
wool. What hospitality, trow ye, can be expected from those, that have turned
great rents into great ruffs, and lands into laces? that carry some whole
Manors upon their backs? Excess in bravery and costly apparel is less
intolerable in the weaker sex: and yet S. Paul will have women professing
godliness to adorn themselves with good works, but A negation for a
comparison, as page 9. Quaerentes ornamenta monilium perdiderunt morum. Cypr.
lib. de Habitu Virg. La soye esteint le feu de la cuisine.
not with gold or pearls, or costly array, that is, rather with those then with
these, because they can hardly stand both together: as Saint Cyprian wrote to
the Virgins of his time, that the seekers of chains and bracelets have lost
their charity and beneficence: and the French proverb says, that silk does
quench the fire of the kitchen: meaning, that sumptuousness of apparel
destroys hospitality and good housekeeping.

Fifthly, The furnishing of their studies with books. For as too much reading
wearies the flesh, and weakeneth the body and brain: so the immoderate buying
of books wastes a man's estate, and disables him from good works. Therefore
Seneca and Lucian among the Heathens, Luc. Sermon. Adversus indoctum and multos
libros ementem. Isidor. Pelus. lib. 1. Epist. 127 and 399. Studiosam luxuriam.
Sen. de Tranquil. Animi c. 9. and Epist. 2.
and Isidore and Petrarch among the Christians, have written purposely against
this unthriftinesse of some Scholars of their times, calling it a studious
excess, and bookish profuseness. In some, says Seneca, this costlinesse and
curiosity about so many and so fair volumes proceeds not from any desire of
growing expert in their own profession, but out of vain glory and ostentation.
In others, says Petrarch, Sunt qui obtentu librorum avaritiae inserviunt.
Petr. de Remediis utriusque fortunae. l. 1. dial. 43. See a pretty Epigram in
Martial (lib. 9. ep. 47.) here appliable, or at least to the first of these
seven particulars. B. Hal Sermon. on Acts 2.37. page 42 in 8.
it springs from a covetous and niggardly disposition, thereby to free
themselves from the duties of bounty and beneficence. They have so many books
to buy every year for the better discharge of their calling (forsooth) that no
man should hold them to be bound to keep hospitality, because the streams of
their expenses run fast an other way.

Sixthly, The taking of Tobacco. The abuse whereof is so great and general,
that a zealous Prelate of this Church complains thus of it in his Sermon to the
last Parliament: Is there not now as much spent in wanton smoke, as our honest
forefathers spent in substantial hospitality? And before him a Royal Author,
K. James in his Treatise of The True Peacemaker.
and a Head of Parliaments has past his public censure upon it in these
terms: That witch Tobacco has quite blown away the smoke of hospitality among
our young gallants, and turned the chimney of their forefathers into the
nostrils of the children. Counterblast to Tobacco, toward the end.
And again, in a Treatise professedly written of this Argument, he speaks thus
to his subjects: How ye are by this custom disabled in your goods, let the
Gentry of this land bear witness; some of them bestowing three, some four
hundred pounds a year upon this precious stink, which I am sure might be
bestowed upon many far better uses. Mr. Burton in his Anatomy of Melancholy
page 350 edit. 3.
An other late learned, and much esteemed Writer lashes the same abuse on this
wise: How excellent soever Tobacco be in it self; as it is commonly abused by
most men, which take it as tinkers do ale, it is a plague, a mischief, a
violent purger of goods, lands, health, etc. In wine and Tobacco the common
saying is commonly made too true; Give to some men an inch of liberty, Sub
finem Apologiae ad Gulielmum Abbatem. Whose words D. Playfer thus contracts and
refines; Vinum Apostolus admittit, Monachus immittit: modicum Apostolus
praemittit, Monachus praetermittit. 1. Tim. 5.23.
and they will take an ell. For as Saint Bernard noted of the Monks of his
time, that because Saint Paul has warranted the lawful use of wine, by
exhorting his dearly beloved Son Timothy to use a little wine for his weak
stomachs sake and his often infirmities arising from painfulnesse: therefore
strong and lusty drones would needs abuse much of it to the great hurt of
their heads, by pouring into their stomachs a modium for a modicum, a barrel
of wine for a beaker: So because some discreet and experienced Physicians, and
also some strict Divines, have told their patients and friends that are of a
cold and moist temper, of a rheumatick and phlegmatic constitution, that it
was good for them to take now and then a little Tobacco: therefore in stead of
a pipe many will needs take a pound: and, which is the worst of all, even they
to whom it is not expedient, by reason of their contrary complexion, are
wilfully brought under the power of that creature, and cast away whole
shillings and crowns in Tobacco, that cannot find one half penny for any
charitable deed.

Lastly, Banqueting and feasting: Wherein one at the least of these three spots
of unthriftinesse is commonly seen; Excess of frequency, excess of plenty,
excess of delicacie. First, Ignavis semper feriae, says the Proverb: So,
convivatoribus semper feriae.
Excess of frequencie: for as with all loyterers, so with some feasters it is
always holy day. This they willingly are ignorant of, that the rich man in the
Gospel is not branded for faring sumptuously, but for faring sumptuously every
day. Luke 16.19.
They are neither of the Prophets nor of the Poets mind, that to every thing
there is a season; Eccles 3.1, 6.
a time to keep, and a time to cast away; a time to fare sparingly with those
of our own family, and a time to feast liberally with our friends and
neighbors: -- Voluptates commendat rarior usus. Juvenal. Sat. 11 (...): Semper
aliquis in Cydonis domo. Erasm. chil. 2. cent. 2. Adag. 15.
that pleasures are more pleasant if they be seldom used. But they will be
famous for their often feasting, and follow the steps of Cydon the Corinthian,
who by daily entertaining in his house one guest or other, gave occasion of the
Greek Proverb, There is always some body in Cydons house. Secondly, Excess of
plenty: for there be some churlish Nabals, who seldom indeed feast their
friends and neighbors; but when they feast them, they go far beyond their
degree and calling: for they hold a feast, not like rich tenants and
countrifarmers, but like Kings and Sovereigns, 1. Sam. 25.36.
like Isaacius Angelus, one of the Greek Emperors; whose common feasts did so
exceed in abundance and quantity of provision, that they were said to be
nothing else but a mountain of loaves, Nicetas in ejus vita lib. 3.
a forest of wild beasts, a Sea of fishes, and an Ocean of wine. Thirdly,
Excess of delicacie: for there be some banquetters and feasters, for whom no
dainties are good enough but dear bought and far fetched: like that belly-god
Philoxenus, who said that that was the sweetest, Aelian. l. 10. c. 9
which was the dearest; and like those degenerated Romans, Juvenal. Sat. 11.
Interea gustus elementa peromnia quaerunt,
Nunquam animo preciis obstantibus; interius si
Attendas, magis illa juvant quae pluris emuntur.

That sought amongst all the elements what might
Best please their palats, and bring most delight:
Contrary to the French Paronomasie, Le coust m'en fait perdre le goust.
That cared not what they paid, yea always thought,
Those things were best that were most dearly bought
This good housekeeping, as the world counts it now-a-dayes, is censured by
Arist. Ethic. lib. 4. cap. 2. ait fumosam and indecoram vanitatem esse in rebus
parvis sumptus magnos facere, and magnificentiam ostentare: ut si qui^ nuptiali
convivio sodales suos excipiat, (...).
Aristotle as a vainglorious and unseemly thing, and termed by Sen. De Benef.
lib. 1. cap. 10. Conviviorum furor, and foedissimum patrimoniorum exitium
culina.
Seneca no better then a madness of feasting, and most filthy wasting of
patrimonies, which has brought many rich men to poverty, and poor men to
beggary: and is a great evidence of our degenerating from our pious ancestors:
whose Christian frugality three grave Divines comparing with our Sybariticall
luxury, cannot refrain themselves from writing, that Bish. Hall, Holy
Panegyric or Sermon. on 1. Sam. 12.24, 25.
in the newfound feasts of this Age profuseness and profanesse strive for the
tables end: Censure of Travel. Sect 21.
in which the nose is no less pleased then the palate, and the eye no less
then either: wherein the piles of dishes make barricadoes against the appetite,
and with a pleasing encombrance trouble an hungry guest: Dr. Tailor on Tit.
1.12. page 257.
That the rule of feasts and banquets seems to be dead with our forefathers,
whose dishes for sort, number, price, and serving out, were inferior to our
sauce: That Mr. Taffin Amendment of life 2. book 14 chap.
such are now the feasts of Christians (for the most part) that less then the
reversion might suffice the whole company: which notwithstanding, we suffer the
poor to starve, who might be well fed with the superfluity thereof.

Tantum luxuries potuit suadere malorum! Of all which immoderate expenses,
which are so many destroyers of hospitality, if we come now to examine the
common defense and justification, we shall find that a bad cause is made
worse, Causa patrocinio non bona, pejor erit. Ovid. 1. Trist. 1. Matthew. 20.15.
Zeno apud Stob. Sermon. 13. In nullo gloriandum, quia nihil est nostrum, nisi
mendacium and peccatum. Cypr. Testim. ad Quirinum lib. 3. c. 4. and laudatur ab
August. lib. de Praedest. SS. cap. 3.
while men go about to make it good. Let a prodigal be reproved for his excess
in any of these things which I but now touched, he has this answer ready; I am
able to be at that cost, and so long as I spend nothing but mine own, what has
any man to do with it? Is it not lawful for me to do what I will with mine
own? But we reply with an old Philosopher, that he is a very bad cook which
having salt enough will put on more then needs, to make good meat both
unpleasing and unwholesome: and with an ancicient Father, that no man ought to
boast of any thing, because nothing is his but lie and sin. Whatsoever else
we have, is so our own before men, as yet before God we are not Lords and
Masters, but only Stewards and Dispensers thereof. For God bestows his
blessings as the Sun does his beams, that is, in such a manner as that they
depend still from him after he has bestowed them. He never alienates from
himself the propriety of any thing that he gives. Though he has given to the
children of Israel the land of Canaan to inherit, Levit. 25.23. compared with
2. Chron. 20.11. Psalm. 115.16. Psalm. 24.1. Job 41.11.
yet still that land is his land and his possession: and though he has given
the earth to the children of men, yet still the earth is the Lords and the
fullness thereof: and whatsoever is under the whole heaven is his; not only of
standing and unmovable goods (as they be called) but also of moveable and
transportable; which in sundry places he does expressly challenge as his own;
Hag. 2.8. Psalm. 50.10, 11.
saying, The silver is mine, and the gold is mine. Every beast of the forest
is mine, and the cattle upon a thousand hills: the wild beasts of the field
are mine. And when he threatens to take away from the Jews, Hos. 2.8, 9. (...).
Non enim tuum est quod datum est, sed ejus qui dedit. Chrysostom. in 1. Cor. 4. Hom.
12.
the corn, and wine, and oil, the wool and the flax that he has given them, he
calls these goods his goods, because they were still his own, notwithstanding
his former grant and bestowing of them.

Seeing then Gods right and dominion over all his gifts is so boundless and
universal, so permanent and inalienable, it was a most false and vain boasting
for those in the twelfth Psalm to say, Our lips are ours, who is Lord over us?
who has power and authority to prescribe us any rule of speaking? for they
shall one day give account of every word idly spoken. And no less untrue and
absurd is this bragging of others, Our goods are ours, who can control or
confine our expenses? for they shall be brought to a reckoning for every penny
misspent. And as when Pharaoh said, My river is mine own, Ezekiel. 29.3, 4.
God immediately threatened him to put hooks in his chaws, and bridle his
arrogancy: So has he oft-times curbed and repressed those proud vaunters and
wasters of their means, by several inhibitions of his Vicegerents upon earth.
Constable. lib. 6. c. De Adificiis privatis.
For Constantine the Great made an express Statute against the building of
stately houses in the country, commanding that whosoever durst afterward
spend much of his means that way, should be deprived of that possession. And
the Emperor Justinian did restrain and confine the games and sports of rich
men to a little sum of money, Cod. lib. 3. tit. 43. leg. 2.
and of other men to a great deal less: charging moreover the Presidents and
other Officers to see this law strictly kept, or else to be fined ten pounds a
piece for their negligence. The laws of this Kingdom likewise inhibit
lavishnesse in the same kind: for in the 33 year of King Henry the eighth,
and in the second and third of Philip and Mary, injunctions were made to
repress the wretched practice of those that were continually crumbling away
their wealth by sports and recreations. And in the year 1601 Henry the fourth
of France made a law against excessive costlinesse of apparel, and namely
against the wearing of gold and silver lace. And the Magistrates of Geneva are
careful to keep all their subjects within the compass of frugalitie and
thriftinesse in every thing, as the best rent and revenue of their Commonweal.

Neither have Heathenish States and Lawgivers been forgetful or negligent in
this point. For the Lacedaemonians had a Statute enacted by Lycurgus against all
manner of excess and profuseness: Plut. in Lycur.
and the Romans had one made by Laetorius, to appoint overseers for prodigals,
as well as for Furiosi and prodigi, licet majores 25 annis sint: tamen in
curatione sunt agnatorum, ex lege 12. Tabularum. Justin Instit. lib. 1. tit.
23. As it appears by the common Adage, Ad agnatos and gentiles deducendus est,
they did account all prodigals mad men: they meaning no more by that, then we
do by our English proverb, when we say of a spend-thrift, Let him be begged for
a fool. The reason of their Adage was, because if any were distracted, by the
Roman law his wardship fell ad agnatos and gentiles, to the next of the
kindred. M. Godwyn Anthol. Romans Hist. lib. 3. sect. 4. cap. 14.
mad and frantic fellows. And besides that they had seven Alexand. ab Alex.
lib. 3. cap. 11.
Sumptuary laws made by several Magistrates, to restrain all superfluity in
apparel and feasting, and in household stuff or furniture. The execution of
which wholesome laws, when Cato the elder saw to die and decay, he labored
might and main to revive it, and used goats skins in public feasts in stead
of costly hangings and curious carpets: whereupon he Non mediocrem laudem
tulit, quod frugales mores exemplo juvaret. Alex. ibid.
got great commendation for helping frugality by his example. And they that are
in good esteem amongst us for their place and gravitie, shall be no less
praised by the better sort, if they will first begin to break the custom of
excess and superfluity in all or any of these forenamed things. They shall be
reputed moderate and reformers, and men willing to give example to change vice
into virtue. Let all such therefore revive that good rule of a Father, (...).
Clemens Alexand. Paedag. l. 3. c. 3. Profecto Sancti piique viri, dum fuerunt
in carne, modeste ac frugaliter vixerunt, atque id genus vitae cum doctrina tum
exemplo commendarunt. P. Martyr in 1. Reg. 7. fol. 54 Pessimus quidem pudor
est, vel parsimoniae vel paupertatis, sed utrumque Lex vobis demit, cum id quod
habere non licet, non habetis. Live. lib. 34. initio.
The measure of these things should be the use, not the cost or stateliness.
Let them renew the doctrine and practice of all ancient holy men, who during
their abode in the flesh lived always modestly and frugally, and commended
that kind of life by their words and actions. Let them cast out that worldly
fear of being noted for poor and pinching, if they do not as other men. For as
Portius Cato answered the proud dames of Rome, which under that pretense stood
so hotly for the abrogation of the Law Oppia, purposely made to restrain the
bravery of their sex: These aspersions cannot be justly laid upon them that
forbear those things which the Law forbids. If a heathen man could say, that
where there is a law for frugalitie and modesty which a man observes, it is
not to be imputed to penury or niggardlines, but to obedience and observation
of the law: how much rather ought we Christians, whom God by so many precepts
and decrees has commanded to keep modesty and moderation, constantly to
reject such reproaches of the World and the Flesh, and to be content with the
testimony of our own conscience, that our frugality proceeds from the fear of
God, and a feeling of our own duty, which binds us to yield obedience to his
holy will?

Finally, though profuseness and immoderate expense in true hospitality be
not a common fault in this age, yet it will not be amiss to say that therein
also it must be avoided, as an enemy to constancy and continuance in the
practice of the same: whereas moderation is the mother of duration, and
maintainer of good works. And therefore S. Hierom wrote to his friend Paulinus,
Nimia liberalitate liberalitas perit. Providendum est ne quod libenter facias,
semper facere non possis. Quid est stultius quam quod libenter facias, curare
ut id diutius facere non possis? Cic. Offic. 2. Etiam bonorum operum sumptibus
immoderatum esse non decet, ut abundes pluribus: nec largiri oportet peregrinis
superflua, sed competentia; nec ornatum convivium, sed cibum obvium. Ambros.
Offic. l. 2. cap. 21. Laert. lib. 2.
that too great liberality destroys it self: and hearing that Paula was
somewhat over-bountifull in this kind, he warned her to take heed, lest she
did thereby disable her self from doing that continually which she did
willingly: then which (says the wise Orator) what can be more foolish? Seeing
it is far better to give a little unto many, then much unto few; we must not
afford unto strangers a superfluous, but only a sufficient entertainment; not
a curious diet, but an obvious fare: and be of Socrates his mind, who said
thus to one that was finding fault with him for providing no better cheer for
the guests that he had invited to supper: If they be honest and temperate men,
there is enough for them, and I know they will take it in good part: if
dishonest and intemperate, there is but too much for them, and it matters not
what they think of their entertainment. Having received strangers into our
houses, we need not be distracted about many things, as Martha was; but only
be careful for them that they lack nothing that is fitting, as the good
Shunamite was for Elisha and his servant. Basil. in Regulis fasius explicatis,
cap. 20.
For this is the scope and end of receiving strangers, to consider their
necessities: Using this World (says the Apostle) and not abusing it; Now
needless expense is an abuse. When thou preparest a table full of dainty
dishes for a stranger, thou do accuse him of gluttony and lickorishnesse,
and disgrace him by arguing that he takes delight in such pleasure and excess.
We have a pattern of frugalitie in Abraham's hospitality: for he prepared for
his guests no curious diet or dainty dishes, but only plain and wholesome
countrey-fare, as cakes, butter, milk, and veal, and such like: and in his
invitation he promised them but a morsel of bread, Genesis 18.5.
for two reasons, as Calvin well observes; First, Calvin. in loc.
to shun vain glory and brags, by extenuating modestly the benefit he meant to
bestow upon them: Secondly, and principally, to move them the sooner to yield
to his invitations and entreaties, because modest men are unwilling to put
others unto any charge or trouble: and therefore he that will make them accept
his kind offer, must first persuade them that they shall be neither chargeable
nor troublesome to him. It is storied of Lucullus, Plutar. in Lucul. Hospitium
quidem vobis apud me erit: familiare scilicet and sobrium, nec propter vos
majorem fumum vicinia videbit. Cent. 1. Epist. 27. Mensa usus est frugali and
parca Posid. in vita Aug. cap. 22. Mensa ipsius neque luxum, neque sordes
praese fert, sed piam frugalitatem. Epist. ad fideles Lucens. Ecclesiae.
that having once magnificently entertained all the Grecians that lived in
Rome, he could not make them come the second time to him, till he had persuaded
them with much ado, that but very little for their sakes had been added to his
own ordinary: and Lipsius knew no beter means to move some strangers to take
lodging at his house, then by giving his word that he would put no more in the
pot for them. Posidonius describing Saint Austins hospitality, says, among
other proofs of his thriftinesse, that he kept a frugall and sparing table: and
Peter Martyr bears record to Martin Bucer, by whom he was once entertained at
Strasbourg seventeen days together, that neither sumptuous excess, nor
pinching baseness was seen on his board, but a pious frugality.

CHAP. VIII. The common Motives to hospitality.
AS it is not enough to hang a clock and set it aright, except we put a weight
to it to make it go: so it is not sufficient to show the Nature and Means of a
virtue, unless we add some reasons and Motives to stir men up to the
practice of the same. Having therefore insisted upon the Nature, the Kinds,
the Parts, the Object, the Subject, and the Means of hospitality; it now
remains to adjoyn the chief Motives or Inducements to it: Which are of two
sorts; either general and common to other Moral virtues, or particular and
proper to this in hand. The general and common Motives are five: The Precept
and President of God, the Examples of the godly, the Practice of Infidels, the
manifold Profit wherewith it is rewarded, the diverse Detriments whereby the
contrary vice is punished.

First, The Precept and President of God. For shall the Rechabites observe
constantly what their father charges them, Jerem. 35.14.
and the Centurions servants dispatch quickly what their master bids them,
Matthew. 8.9.
and shall we not do so what God commands us? 2. Sam. 24.4.
Shall David's word prevail against Joab and the Captains of the host, and shall
not Gods word prevail with us? If the Lord had bid us do some great thing, as
Jonadab bad his children, and David his Captains, would we not have done it?
how much rather then, when he says to us, Be given to hospitality? Again,
Shall the actions of the leaders be a great spur to the followers to do as
the others do before them, and shall not Gods example be a provocation to us to
the performance of this good duty? Naturally the younger do tread the steps of
the elders, servants do as their masters do, children walk like their fathers,
and subjects think it a kind of obedience to imitate the manners of their
Kings and Governors. Look on me, and do likewise, says Gedeon to his
soldiers: Judges 7.17.
If ye were Abraham's children, John 8.39.
ye would do the works of Abraham, says our Savior to the Jews: Ephesians. 5.1.
Be ye followers of God as dear children, says the Apostle to the Ephesians:
Si praecipientem sequi non potes, sequere antecedentem. Lact. lib. 4. cap. 24.
Levit. 11.44. 1. John 2.29. Luke 6.36. Marth. 5.48.
If thou can not obey him that commands, follow him that goes before, says
Lactantius to every Christian.

As then we must be holy, because God is holy; righteous, because he is
righteous; merciful, because he is merciful; and perfect, because he is
perfect: So we must also be hospital, because God is hospital, if learned Moses
had any Logic in him: for thus he reasons with the Israelites, Deuter. 10.18,
19. The Lord your God loves the stranger. Love ye therefore the stranger.
Which love comprehends the whole office of hospitality. Hic amor involvit
universum officium hospitalitatis. Lorinus in locum.
For above all other sorts and conditions of people, the stranger, the
fatherless, and the widow are great in Gods books, and joined together
nineteen times in the Old Testament: but of these three, the stranger is the
greatest; for of the fatherless and the widow Moses says only, in the
forenamed place, that God does execute their judgment; but of the stranger,
that God loves him and gives him food and raiment. Wheresoever strangers are,
be they few or many, God is pleased to care for them in special manner. Psalm.
105.12, 14 1. Chron. 16.19, 20, 21.
When the Israelites were but a few men in number, and strangers in Canaan, he
suffered no man to do them wrong: yea, he reproved Kings for their sakes: and
when grown to a great multitude, Acts 13.17.
they dwelt as strangers in the land of Egypt, he exalted them above all other
people. When they were going to possess Canaan, he gave them this strait
charge concerning strangers: Levit. 19.33, 34.
If a stranger sojourn with thee in your land, ye shall not vex him, but he
shall be as one born among you, and thou shall love him as thy self. And a
little before they returned to it from the Captivity of Babylon; Ezekiel. 47.22.
Ye shall divide this land by lot for an inheritance unto you, and to the
strangers that sojourn among you, which shall beget children among you, and
they shall be unto you as born in the country among the children of Israel;
they shall have inheritance with you among the tribes of Israel. And after they
had been a great while in possession and repossession thereof, Mal. 3.5.
he did sharply reprove and threaten them for oppressing the stranger. He
appointed the Sabbath Day, Exodus 23.12. Josh. 20.9. Numb. 35.15.
that the stranger might be refreshed; and the cities of refuge, that he might
be preserved alive as well as the children of Israel, among whom he sojourned.

And touching Christ's affection to the stranger, I may say the words that were
spoken of Lazarus, Behold how he loved him. For first, John 11.36. Matthew. 2.14.
He did in his infancy sanctify and honor the condition of a stranger, in
becoming himself a stranger in the land of Egypt. Secondly, Matthew. 8.10, 13
Luke 17.18, 19
He did in his riper years grant the requests, relieve the wants, and extol
the faith and thankfulness of strangers. Thirdly, Luke 10.33, 37
He did expound and illustrate the precept of love to our neighbor (that other
great commandment in the Law) by a mercy and compassion showed on a stranger.
Fourthly, Matthew. 25.35.40, 43, 45.
He did account that kindness to be done or denied to himself, which was done
or denied to his stranger. Fifthly, He did appear in the form and habit of a
stranger and pilgrim; both before his Incarnation, to Abraham; and after his
Resurrection, Genesis 18.3. Luke 24.18. Matthew. 27.7. Curae fuit Christo jam jam
crucifigendo, ut ex precio quo venditus erat, emeretur ager in sepulturam
peregrinorum. Lorin. in Psalm. 146.9. 1. Pet. 1.1. James 1.1. (...). Syn. Epist.
57.
to the two Disciples going to Emmaus. Sixthly, He took care at his Passion,
that with those thirty pieces of silver for which he had been sold, a field
should be bought to bury strangers in. Seventhly, After his Ascension into
heaven he did inspire two of his chiefest Apostles, Saint Peter and S. James,
to write three excellent consolatory Epistles to the strangers scattered
throughout Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, and Bithynia.

So that it is not for nothing that Synesius styles our only true God, (...),
as the Heathen termed their greatest God, (...), Jupiter the hospital, or,
Jupiter the defender of strangers, as we have it translated 2. Macc. 6.2.

Now the reason that God bears such a love to the stranger, and testifies the
same by coupling him with the Levite, Deuteronomy. 26.11.
a person consecrated to God, by conferring upon him so many peculiar favors,
and by making so many injunctions, inhibitions, promises, and threats in his
behalf, is, because he needs more then an other man. For being out of his own
country, and far from his kindred, friends, and acquaintance, he is
destitute of those means and comforts, which they that dwell in their native
soil enjoy: as the Shunamite intimated by her short answer to the Prophets
offer, 2. Kings 4.13. In medio populi mei habito: id est, nullius indigeo
patrocinio, cum non peregriner in aliena terra, sed inter meos habitem. Sanct.
Jesuit. in loc.
I dwell among mine own people: that is, I need not any man's defense or
patronage, since I do not sojourn in a strange land, but inhabit my country,
and live with my kinsfolks, as a learned Expositour paraphraseth well that
place. Hence the name of a stranger is put for a name of affliction, and of
base esteem and contempt among men, Genesis 15.13. Nostis cor peregrini. i. scitis
quales sint ejus affectus, quodque sates ei poenarum fit, peregrinum esse, ita
ut non debeant addi aliae molestiae. Lorin. in Deuteronomy 14.29. Psalm. 69.8. Job
19.15.
Exodus 23.9. Obad. 12. Therefore David complains that he is become a stranger
unto his brethren: and Job, that his maids count him for a stranger, that is,
an alien in their sight: yea God himself complains thus of Ephraim, I have
written unto him the great things of my Law, but they were counted as a strange
thing, Hos. 8.12. Zanchius and Rivetus in loc B. Babington on Genesis 19.9.
meaning that his precious word was no less slighted and neglected among them,
then strangers and foreiners are wont to be by the most part of men. Finally, a
grave Author and reverend Prelate notes, that it is as ancient a thing as the
history of Lot, for a man therefore to be contemned, because he is a stranger.
This saying then of our Savior, Luke 16.15.
That which is highly esteemed among men, is abomination in the sight of God,
may be here inverted thus: That which is slighted and shunned among men, is in
high esteem and favor with God. To show that his thoughts are not our
thoughts, Esa. 55.8.
neither our ways his ways, he makes so much of those that are so little made
of. Ista nomina in quantum despectui humano, in tantum divinae misericordiae
sunt exposita. Ad Uxot. lib. 1. cap. 8.
For it is true likewise of the stranger and pilgrim, what Tertullian says of
the fatherless and widow; These names lie open to Gods acceptance, as much as
to men's disdain.

Secondly, The Examples of the godly. For as the word of God is a lamp unto our
feet, Psalm. 119.105.
and a light unto our path: So the life of the godly is the bearer of that
light. In which respect they are said to shine as lights in the world. Philip.
2.15.
It is safe following him that carries the light. Therefore Solomon bids us to
go our way forth by the footsteps of the flock, to walk in the way of good men,
Cant. 1.8.
Proverbs 2.20
and to keep the paths of the righteous. And Paul exhorts us to be followers
and imitators of them, 1. Cor. 11.1.
as they have been of God and of Christ. Otherwise, as our Savior says,
Matthew. 18.7.
Woe unto the world because of offenses: so I may say here, Woe unto the world
because of good examples (slighted or not followed.) For they shall make our
condemnation more just and heavy, if we use them not as looking-glasses to
dress our selves by, and as guides to lead us into every good duty. Examples
of goodness allure men of gracious inclination to resemble, to equal, and to
out go them: as our Apostle testifies, 2. Cor. 9.2.
that very many Macedonians were stirred up and provoked to a liberal
contribution for the poor Saints at Jerusalem, by the forwardness and zeal of
the Corinthians: and Saint Austin confesses, that the examples of Gods
servants did burn and consume his own luke-warmnesse, Exempla famulorum tuorum
urebant and absumebant torporem meum. Confess. lib. 9. cap. 2.
and their fervent zeal set an edge on his devotion.

Now the foot-prints of godly men of all ranks have left us impressions of the
matter, manner, and means of performing this duty prescribed; as I have showed
before by variety of examples, which may be reduced to these five famous Ages
or Estates of the Church; Before the Law, under the Law, and under the Gospel;
first published by Christ and his Apostles, then established and confirmed by
the ancient Fathers, and lastly brought again into light out of Popish
darkness by the late Reformers. All which general Ages and Periods of the
Church have been so plentiful in Examples of hospitality, Humanitatis, quae
hospitibus debetur, observantissimi fuerunt, quotquot in Scripturie verae
pietatis testimonium habent. Gualt. in Joan. Hom. 104. (...). Just. sub finem
Apologiae 2. pro Christianis ad Senatum Romans
that a worthy Author writes thus of the three first; As many in the
Scriptures as have obtained witness that they were true godly men, have been
exact observers of that humanity which is due to strangers. And touching the
fourth Age, it appears out of four sufficient witnesses, Justin Martyr,
Tertullian, Nazianzen, and Sozomen, that it was then as commonly practiced as
any other virtue whatsoever. For Justin says that it was the custom of his
time to divide all the alms and charitable exhibitions of Christians, as well
among needy strangers, as among the poor of the country. And Tertullian also
writes that the three marks of the Christians of his time were, Tert. De
Praescript. adversus Haereticos cap. 20.
Communicatio pacis, appellatio fraternitatis, and contesseratio
hospitalitatis. Which contesseration of hospitality signifies in his dialect an
acknowledgement of some privy token, ticket, Qualis esset Christianorum
tessera, non constat. Lorin. in Deuteronomy. 10.18.
or watchword ( what it was is now unknown, says Lorinus) then used among
Christians, and with this religion, that whosoever brought the same was
presently received, relieved, and furthered in his journey: and not to have
done this and acknowledged such token, was to have renounced Christian
communion. And Nazianzen reports of Julian, 1. Invectiva in Julianum.
that Apostate Emperor, that he observing how the common hospitality of
Christians did credit their profession, and daily increase their number, spent
a great part of his treasury in building Hospitals strictly taken, (...).
or houses to entertain strangers and foreiners, that so he might keep men
still in their Paganism. But none of the ancient Writers that I know, is so
plentiful and punctual for the proof of this point as Sozomen in his
Ecclesiastical History, Sozom. lib. 5. cap. 15.
where he shows how Julian did apishly imitate the good works of Christians
to set up Ethnicisme, and recites his letter to Arsacius the High Priest of
Galatia written after this manner: (...).
Let us consider by what means the Christian Religion is increased, and we
shall find them to be these three, Their kindness to strangers, their care
of burying the dead, and their comeliness of manners. And therefore let us
practice these three things, and let us not be overcome by Christians in them;
but cause you presently many Hospitals to be built in every city, that
strangers not only of our own Religion, but also all others that are in want
may enjoy the fruit of our humanity and compassion.

Cass. Instit. Relig. lib. 4. cap. 7. Hieron. Prooem. lib. 7. in Ezech. and
Apol. advers. Ruffin. Nobis in Monasterio hospitalitas cordi est, omnesque ad
nos venientes laeta humanitatis front suscipimus Con. Aquisgr. 1. Regul. 27.
inter 80. a complurib. Abbatibus editas, anno 817. Conc. Aquisgran. 2. can. 3.
anno 836. Isidor. Hispal. Regulae Monach. cap. 22. D. Abbot Archbish. of
Canterb. Lect. 5. on Jonas number. 5. Epist. ad Alber. Archiepisc. and Cardin.
Mogunt. Epist. lib. 12.
As for Monks and Collegiate Men, they were likewise given to this virtue, as
Cassian testifies of them all in general, and S. Hierome of his own Society in
particular. And when in process of time they began to be therein negligent and
niggardly, diverse Councels took notice of it, and by express Canons charged
them to repractise it.

Finally, That this fifth and last Age of the Church wants no examples of godly
men given to hospitality, is avouched by a great Prelate yet living, and thus
writing: Albeit the common sort of people be unkind to persecuted strangers,
yet those which are wise and godly make use of these aliens as of brethren,
considering their distresses with a lively fellow-feeling, holding it an
unspeakable blessedness that their country should not only be a Temple to
serve God for themselves, but also an harbor for the weather-beaten, a
Sanctuary to the stranger, wherein he may honor the true God; and remembering
the precise charge which God gave to the Israelites, to deal well with all
strangers. And as Erasmus said of Luther, that howsoever all bold and blind
Bayards, all shameless and ignorant Friars were furiously bent against him,
yet the best men and gravest Divines did use him respectfully: so I may say
here, that although hardhearted and unexperienced men make slight account of
this excellent virtue, (...). Homer. Odyss z v. 121. and n v. 202. -- Quibus
art benigna E meliore luto Dominus praecordia finxit. Juven. Sat. 14. Vt non
praestet fides, quod praestitit infidelita* Hieron.
holding it no more needful in the pulpit, press, and practice, then a
parenthesis in a period, which may well be spared; yet it is, and will ever be
better esteemed of all those that are loving men, and like unto God.

Thirdly, The Practice of Infidels: Whom if we suffer to go beyond us in any
moral virtue, they shall rise up in judgment against us, and shall condemn us
for our backwardnes. For the first in knowledge should not be last in practice,
the children of grace should not be outgone by the sons of nature, and the
ground that is well manured should yield more fruit then that which is
neglected. As in the days of Christ's abode upon earth, Luke 7.9.
it was no small disgrace for the Israelites to have a Centurion exceed them in
believing, Luke 17.16.
and a Samaritan in thanksgiving: so now in matter of hospitality it is a great
shame for Christians to come short of the Jews, of the Turks, of the Pagans.

For the Jews, wheresoever they be dispersed, Stuck. Antiq. Conviv. lib. 1.
cap. 27. Lavat. in Jud. 19. Hom. 94.
use hospitality one to another without grudging, and entertain cheerfully
strangers of their own Religion in what country soever they be born. The Turks
likewise at this day affect the praise of being hospital: Leunclav. Hist
Musulman. lib. 18.
for they have diverse wel-rented houses built by their Emperors for the relief
of strangers and travelers, and a sect of Monks that live in cities using
hospitality. And the African Heathen in the kingdom of Marocco are so given
to this virtue, that no stranger, Purch. Pilgr. Tom. 2. p. 769.
be he never so mean, shall want friendly entertainment among them, but is
always honorably accepted of: -- Yea, Page 825.
so great and surpassing is their liberality, that they will heap many gifts
upon strangers, albeit they are sure never to see them again.

Sanctum imprimis olim habitum fuit jus hospitii apud omnes populos: nec
probrum ullum magis detestabile quam (...), vel inhospitalem vocari.
Neither is it of late only that Infidels and Idolaters are herein commendable:
for hospitality is a catholic virtue, having been practiced in all places, at
all times, and by all sorts of people, as Calvin truly affirms upon the 18 of
Genesis; adding, that no infamy was more detestable with them, then to be
called inhospital. When they intended to show that a man was of a wicked and
slavish nature, and worse then a brute beast, they were wont to say to him,
Attersoll on Philemon 22 page 443. Servum hercle te esse oportet, and nequam,
and malum, Hominem peregrinum atque advenam qui irrideaes. Plaut. in Poenulo
Act. 5. Scen. 2.
Get thee hence, thou art an enemy to strangers: and this check and taunt was
more with them, then if they had called him a drunkard, a whoremaster, a thief,
a murderer, a perjured person, and the like. The Scriptures afford us some
examples of Infidels commendable for this virtue: as of Laban, Genesis 24.31. of
Revel, Exodus 2.20. of Shobi, 2. Sam. 17.27. of the inhabitants of the land of
Tema, Esaias 21.14. of Publius, and the Barbarous people of the Island Melita,
Acts 28.2, 7. and of some others before alleged. But the writings of Heathen
Authors are full of them.

Dr. Willot on Romans 12. q. 21. Gualth. Hom. 72. in Romans
To begin with the Greek: It was accounted a capital crime among the Athenians,
not to show the right way to a stranger: The Cretians were wont to invite
strangers to their public feasts termed Syssitia, Athen. lib. 4.
and the Lacedaemonians likewise entertained them in their three solemn
feastings called Phiditia, Copides, and Aecli. Plutarch says that Cimon the
Athenian permitted strangers, which traveled by his grounds, Plut. in vita
Cimonis.
to gather such fruits there as the time and season of the year did yield, and
that Lichas the Spartan has been famous among the Greeks for no other cause
that he knows, Ibidem.
saving that he used to feast strangers that came to Lacedemon on their
festival day. In Homers Odyssea we have the examples of Telemachus and
Penelope, of Nestor and Pifistratus, of Alcinous and Echeneus, of Menelaus and
Eumaeus, and many more; besides some others in his Iliad. And shortly, that
this virtue was much practiced by the Greeks, it appears sufficiently by this
Proverb which by Plutarchs report was common among them, Leave something also
to supervenient strangers: (...). Sympos. lib. 7. quaest. 4.
and by these words so frequent in their Works, (...). The feasts of
hospitality, the table of hospitality, the gifts of hospitality: and also by
these titles so much affected and esteemed of them, (...). Proxenos was he that
entertained strangers in the name and at the cost of the whole city: Idioxenos
and Etheloproxenos, that feasted them in his own private name and at his own
charges: Xenagos and Xenagogos, that led them to all places worth seeing, and
showed every rare thing.

And because Homer and Plato were among the ancient Grecians in the greatest
account, and deemed to be much alike in their kind; Homer, the Plato of Poets;
and Plato, the Homer of Philosophers: I will here produce the chief precepts of
the one, as I have reckoned the main examples of the other. Plato then writes
thus in his books De Legibus: Lib. 5. paulo post initium.
As for strangers, we must think that there are most holy covenants and
commerces between us and them, and that all offenses committed against
strangers are greater and more liable to Gods vengeance then those that are
done against our own citizens and countrymen. For a stranger being destitute of
friends and kinsfolks is more worthy of divine and humane compassion: and
therefore he that is most able to avenge him, is also most ready and willing to
succor him. And much after, Lib. 12 paulo ante medium.
having reckoned many kinds of strangers and travelers; some that come for
traffic and gain, as Merchants; some for learning and religion, as Scholars;
some for public treaties and contracts, as Deputies and Ambassadors; and
others, for other lawful ends and purposes: he concludes of them all on this
manner; We must receive them all in honor and reverence to Jupiter the
Defender of strangers, and not deter or drive them away by eating and
sacrificing them, as the cattle of Nilus (he means the Egyptians) do
now-adayes, nor by savage and barbarous Edicts and Proclamations.

Neither does Aristotle forsake here the steps of his great Master Plato: for
he says in express terms, that among the five sorts of private expenses which
a magnificent man ought to make for decency and comeliness, (...). Ethic.
lib. 4. cap. 2.
one is about the receiving of strangers.

And as all Arts, and Sciences, and good Manners, Recte a Theo^h^asto est
laudata Hospitalitas: est enim Reipub. ornamento, homines externos hoc
liberalitatis genere in Vrbe nostra non egere. Cic. Offic. 2. (...). Athen l.
1. c. 1. nec absimilia Gel. l. 5. c. 13.
so this virtue of hospitality has been also derived from the Grecians to the
Romans. For Tully commends Theophrastus for having praised it, and says, It
is an ornament to the Commonwealth, that outlandish men want not in our City
this kind of liberality. Drusus and Lucullus were famous among them for the
same: and it was there so generally practiced, that Athenaeus calls Rome, A
country or native soil to all men.

Besides which two learned and civil Nations among the Heathen, others also
have been given to hospitality. For among the Lucans (a people of the kingdom
of Naples in Italy) he had a fine set upon him that did suffer a stranger to be
harbourlesse after the Sunsetting: Aelian. Var. Hist. lib. 4. c. 1.
and among the Celts or Gauls and ancient French he was more severely punished
that had killed a stranger, then he that had slain a native inhabitant: Stob.
Sermon. 42
for the former was put to death, but the latter only banished. Tacit. lib. de
morib. Germ.
And the old Germans harbored and received all comers and strangers without
distinction or difference, Caesar lib. 6. de bello Gallic
they feasted them every man according to his ability, they respected them as
Saints, defended them from wrong, Pomp. Mela lib. 3. cap. 3.
and in their common robberies spared none but them.

Now the reason why all ancient Heathen Nations (except some altogether brutish
and barbarous, and hated of all the rest for their savage inhumanitie to
strangers) were so given to hospitality, was, because they believed that every
stranger was sent them from their great and common God Jupiter, who was not
only an overseer of men's good and bad usage of strangers, but also did
oft-times hide himself with some other god, under the form and shape of a
stranger, to try men's kindness and humanity to strangers, and requite them
accordingly. For Eumaeus in Homer presses the same duty by this argument: --
(...) -- Odyss. x. Stob. sermon. 42.
and Stobaeus says, they feared to exclude any stranger, remembering Jupiter
the hospital, as a God common to all, and overseer both of the kindness and
unkindness which is showed to strangers: and Plato makes Socrates speak thus
to one Theodorus, Plato initio Dialogi qui inscribitur Sophista.
You say you have brought us a stranger, but perhaps he is a God disguised
under that habit; as Homer tells us that the Gods, especially that hospital one,
use to converse with men in such form and appearance. And Ovid brings in
Jupiter coming down sometimes alone and sometimes with Mercury, Metam. lib. 1.
Contigerat nostras infamia temporis aures: Quam cupiens falsam summo delabor
Olympo, Et deus humana lustro sub imagine terras. Et lib. 8. Jupiter huc specie
mortalis, cumque parente Venit Atlantiades positis caduciser alis.
and knocking at men's doors, to see what entertainment they gave unto
strangers.

Fourthly, The manifold Profit wherewith it is rewarded. For if any motive can
draw our iron hearts to the performance of any virtuous act, it is the
loadstone of utilitie. Omnes expetimus utilitatem, ad ^amque rapimur, nec
facere aliter ullo modo possumus. Cicer. Offic. 3.
Utility is the thing which we all desire, and are violently carried to,
unable to do otherwise. If Othniel be told what preferment he shall get for
taking Kirjath-sepher, Josh. 15.16, 17.
he will undertake that difficult task; and if David does but hear what shall
be done to the man that kills Goliath, 1. Sam. 17.26.
he dares accept the challenge of that terrible champion; Heb. 11.25, 26
if Moses has once respect unto the recompense of the reward, he must needs be
content to suffer affliction with the people of God; Matthew. 19.27.
and if the Apostles expect to receive some great thing of Christ, they will
soon forsake all and follow him. We should therefore be forward to keep this
commandment in my Text, since in the keeping of it there is great reward, since
the practice thereof brings profit all those ways which learned men have
written of.

Aristotle says that Profit consists in four things; Rhetor. ad Alexand. c. 2.
In the preservation of good things present, in the acquisition of good things
absent, in the propulsation of instant evils, and in the prevention of future
evils: and that when it concerns men in particular, it ought to be divided into
the goods of the mind, the goods of the body, and external goods, which they
call the goods of Fortune. But I will rather follow here the common partition
of Divines, into external, internal, and eternal profit; wherein the
Philosophers distribution is also comprised, as the less within the greater.
External profit contains the obtaining of children, increase of goods, honor,
and good reputation: Internal comprehends the illumination of the mind, the
conversion of the heart, the recovery of the health, and the preservation of
the life of the body: Eternal signifies an endless glorification both of soul
and body. All which blessings and benefits have been bestowed by God upon
hospital persons, for a reward of their hospitality. For

1 Abraham in his old age was blessed with an Isaac, Recepit fructum
posteritatis pro mercede hospitalitatis. Ambr. Offic. 2.21. Hieron. Epist. ad
Pammach. (...). Epist. 57.
a godly son and heir, a glorious type of the Worlds Redeemer; and
entertained Angels, yea the Son of God, the Lord of Angels, by his
hospitality: After so frequent practice of this virtue, whiles he refuses not
men like a churl, he chances to receive God. Whereupon Synesius calls him, Gods
feaster and host,

2 Lot also was honored with the entertaining of Angels, and preserved alive
with his whole family from the destruction of Sodom, by his hospitality. To
these two examples specially the Apostle alludes, Heb. 13.2. saying, Be not
forgetful to entertain strangers: for thereby some have entertained Angels
unawares. And Chrysostom applies this similitude, Hom. 2. de Lazar. T. 5.
that as fishermen casting their nets into the sea to draw out fishes, gather
sometimes precious stones and pearls: so they that are given to hospitality,
sometimes receive Angels into their houses, while they seek and think to
harbor men.

3 Rebekah got so good and great an husband by her hospitality. Genesis 24.14.
For Abraham's servant had his petition granted, that the sign by which he
should know her whom God had appointed for Isaac, might be hospitality. He
considered (says Chrysostom) how his Master had gotten all that he had, by
this virtue: Hom. Quales Uxores sint ducendae. Tom. 5.
and therefore doubted not but it is ever accompanied with many others; and if
the damsel that he sought were given to it, she would certainly prove a
successful wife.

4 Revel or Jethro (for it is the same man under two diverse names, as Calvin
proves upon Exodus 2.) has been rewarded with such a son in law as Moses, and
by him better instructed in the true worship of God.

5 Rahab by her hospitality has gotten an immortal praise in that truly so
called golden legend of the Saints, the 11 chapter of the Epistle to the
Hebrews, and preservation from death and ruin at the sacking of Jericho.

6 Boaz well stricken in years was blessed with an Obed, that is, a servant of
God, a grandfather to David, and consequently with a Royal posterity,
honored with a place in the genealogy of our Savior, Ruth 4.

7 The widow of Sarepta was blessed with a miraculous increase of her meal and
oil, with the preservation of her family in the time of famine, and with the
resurrection of her son, 1. Kings 17.

8 The Shunamite also, which entertained the Prophet Elisha, received above a
Prophets reward: namely, the promise and gift of a son when she was old, and
the raising of him to life when he was dead, and the restoring of her house and
land lost in her long absence for the famine, 2. King. 4. and 8.

9 The two disciples that went to Emmaus were rewarded with illumination, for
entertaining our Savior as a stranger, Luke 24.45. Whereupon S. Austin
observes, Quaestionum Evangelic. lib. 2. cap. ult. Ecce Dominus non est
cognitus dum loqueretur, and dignatus est cognosci dum pascitur. Horn. 23. in
Evang.
that by the office of hospitality we come to the knowledge of Christ. Lo,
says Saint Gregory, The Lord was not known while he spoke, and he vouchsafes
to be known while he is fed.

10 Publius the chief man of the Island Melita, by entertaining Saint Paul and
his companions, got his father healed of a fever and of a bloody flix, Acts
28.8.

11 Gaius by this virtue has obtained a good report in the Church, and gotten
such a commendation as shall never be forgotten so long as Saint Paul's and
Saint John's Epistles shall endure. Romans 16.23. 3. John 5, 6.

Lastly, Hospitality has promise of the life to come, and shall be rewarded
with that unvaluable gain and matchless profit of everlasting salvation. For
thus speaks the giver thereof, Matt. 25.35, 40. Then (at the great day of
Judgment) shall the king say to them on his right hand, Come ye blessed of my
Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the
World: for I was a stranger, and ye took me in: for verily I say unto you, in
as much as ye have done it unto one of the least of these my brethren, ye have
done it unto me. And Matthew. 5.7. Blessed are the merciful, for they shall
obtain mercy. Gualth. Hom. 53. in Matthew. Aret. Probl. Theol. Loco 137.
And who be the merciful (says Gualther, and Aretius) but the hospital? but
they that show pity and compassion to the poor, not only native and
domestical, but also foreign and outlandish?

And to these Examples recorded in holy Writ, others may be added out of
ancient and modern humane writings, to show how gainful and profitable this
office of hospitality has been in all ages. For

1 Saint Alban, the first Martyr that ever in England suffered death for the
name of Christ, was converted from Paganism to Christianity by a certain Clark
whom he had received into his house fleeing from the persecutors hands. For his
holy life and godly exhortations were a means, through the Lords mercy, that
Albanus turned to God from Idols, 1 Thessalonians. 1.9.
to serve the living and true God; as Master Fox reports the story out of Beda,
and writes in the margin, Tom. 1. page 123.
Fruit of hospitality to be noted.

2 By hospitality Saint Ambrose had the honor and happiness to be the
spiritual father of the chiefest of all the Fathers, and to convert that young
Maniche, who proved the most illuminate and profitable Doctor that ever the
Church of Christ had after the Apostles. For Austins heart being melted with
the kindness and courteous entertainment of Ambrose, and allured to the
liking of that Religion which he saw bring forth so good fruits, Non tanquam
Doctoren very, sed tanquam hominem benignum in me. Aug. Confess. 5. 13. Martin.
Cromerus de Rebus Polonicis lib. 2.
he went to hear him preach, and by hearing him was caught by him, and
persuaded to forsake his errors and embrace the truth.

3 The Chroniclers of Poland report of their Piastus, that being but a heathen
and mean obscure man, he entertained two Angels in the habit of unknown
strangers, whom he had met in the street and brought to his house: that while
they were sitting at table, his slender provision, whereof he was ashamed, was
suddenly increased to a great quantity, and that the case being rumoured abroad
he was chosen king by the people: for they hence gathered that he must needs be
in high favor with God above other men, that had been honored with such
guests and miracle, and therefore most worthy of the Crown and Scepter. This
Relation is more probable and likely then that of the Papists touching their
Pope Gregory 1. and Leo 9. that having once invited 12 poor strangers to
dinner, Rhem. Annot. on Hebr. 13.2. Busaeus Jesuita Tract. de Hospital. cap. 4.
Christ came in among them in the habit of a stranger, and made the thirteenth
guest, and the next day spoke thus to each host in a vision; Thou did often
before feast me in my members, We must believe, and it is certain, that Angels
have been received to house and table, in the habit of strangers; and it is not
impossible but they may be again: but that Pope Gregory received our Savior
Christ is beside your Text, which makes promise of Angels only, and would (no
doubt) have mentioned Christ himself, as being a singular encouragement to be
barberous, if with truth he might have done it. Cart wright against the Rhem.
Annotat.
but yesterday in mine own person. For though Christ's own person had been
before entertained in the shape of a stranger, as well as some created Angels:
yet the Apostle to the Hebrews exhorting them to hospitality mentions only
the entertainment of Angels, as a reward of honor so conferred already upon
some hospital men, that it may serve still for a spur to all those that
shall practice this virtue: because such honorable guests may be entertained
unawares till the end of the World. But as touching Christ's entertainment under
the habit of a stranger, the Apostle is silent therein; because (in all
likelihood) such honor is never to be expected since his Ascension: otherwise,
he would have mentioned it as well as the other; for it had been a greater
motive and inducement to this virtue, both for all those believing Hebrews, and
also for all Christians throughout all generations.

4 King Edward the sixth, that zealous Josiah of England, See above all Bezas
excellent Epistle before the Translation of the Psalms into French meeter.
got by harboring persecuted strangers such praises and prayers abroad, as are
to be seen in the lasting Monuments of famous foreign Divines.

5 That goodly and strong City of Strasbourg is still much commended in many
places, for having charitably nourished those strangers, which were driven
thither by the hard famine of the years 1517 and 1529, Hom. 52 in Ezech.
as Lavater reports.

6 The Commonwealth of Zurich in Helvetia has gotten great favor, and her
principal praise with many Nations, by courteous and charitable usage of all
sorts of strangers, Gualth. Hom. 72. in Romans Stuck. Antiq. Conviv. lib. 1. cap.
27.
as Gualther and Stuckius testify.

7 The Hollanders acknowledge that their two prime Cities, Amsterdam and
Leyden, are beholding for their flourishing estate to this virtue we treat of:
for since they did receive their poor distressed neighbors persecuted by the
Duke of Alba, they have ever thrived and increased in riches and honor:
whereas all other Cities which did deny harbor to those weatherbeaten souls,
for fear of waxing poorer by receiving so many poor, have always remained in
their former meannesse and obscurity.

Dr. Abbot on Jonas Lect. 5. number. 5.
8 As other Nations have gotten an immortal praise by being a refuge to the
English in their last bloody persecution in Queen Mary's days: So, What good
our selves have gotten by strangers amongst us, Dr. Tailor on Titus 1.8. page
165.
we should be unthankful not to acknowledge; The blessing of the poor has
light upon us, and we have a long time fared better for affording harbor to
the poor Saints of God, which have come afar unto us. And I am persuaded
that England fares the better for kindness showed in dangerous times to
French and Dutch strangers. Mr. Elnathan Parr. on Romans 16.2.
Long may England be a Sanctuary, refuge, and harbor for the persecuted
Saints. For he that receives a righteous man in the name of a righteous man,
Matthew. 10.41.
shall have a righteous man's reward. Finally, These be the words of King James
written in Scotland to his eldest son; Basil. Doron. lib. 2.
Take example by England, how it has flourished both in wealth and policy
since the strangers craftsmen came in among them: Therefore not only permit,
but allure strangers to come here also.

Thus we see how gainful this Virtue is, not only to particular persons and
private families, but also to whole Cities, Commonwealths, and Kingdoms. In
Judic. 19. Homil. 95.
Hospitality (says Lavater) is profitable: for it winnes and procures favor
and good will to Cities and Regions. We know not who they are which come to us:
oft-times under a mean habit great Princes are hidden, which may do great good
or hurt to a City when occasion serves. The Patriarchs have lodged Angels,
when they thought to harbor men.

Fifthly, The diverse Detriments whereby the contrary vice is punished. For if
profit and gain be a great motive to hospitality; loss and damage should be a
greater pul-back from inhospitality. For we are all naturally more afraid of
punishment, then desirous of reward; more shunning painful sickness and
pinching poverty, Nemo est qui non magis dolorem fugiat, quam appetat
voluptatem. Tom. 4. lib. 83. qq. q. 36.
then seeking perfect health and extraordinary wealth. There is no man (says
Saint Austin) that does not more flee pain, then follow pleasure. He is of a
bad nature to whom good report and commendation is no spur to virtue: but he
is of a worse disposition to whom evil report and blame is no bridle and
retentive from vice. Si te laus allicere ad re^te faciendum non potest, ne
metus quidem a foedissimis factis potest-avocare? Philip. 2. ad finem.
And therefore no marvel if Tully did so wonder at the strange perverseness of
Antonie, whom neither praise could allure to do well, nor yet fear of infamy
and reproach deter from committing evil.

Now to draw men to hospitality, and to drive them from positive and privative
unkindnesse to strangers, God has at sundry times and in diverse manners
punished it grievously in all sorts of persons, as appears by these examples.

1 He has rained Hell out of Heaven, Super impium populum gehennam misit e
Coelo. Salv. lib. 1. de Gubernat. Dei.
says Salvian, that is, fire and brimstone upon the Sodomites; not only for
that unnatural filthiness, which has taken denomination from them, as being
there first practiced, Ecce hospitalem domum Angeli ingrediuntur, clausae
hospitibus domus flammis sulphureis concremantur. Aug. De Tempore Sermon. 70
Joseph. Antiquit. Jud. lib. 1. cap. 12. P. Martyr in Genesis 18.16. Quia Lotum
scurriliter refficere audebant eo quod peregrinus esset. Gualt. in Luc. Hom. 94.
but also for their inhospitalitie, because they did not receive those whom
they knew not when they came: because they used strangers not friendly, Wisd.
19.14, 15. because they were (...), haters of strangers, says Josephus,
peregrinorum hosts, enemies of strangers, says Peter Martyr; because they
were so bold as scoffingly to reject Lot for being a stranger, says Gualther.
How fitly were such inhospitall men punished by that element which alone is
inhospital!

2 He has sent ten several and severe plagues upon the Egyptians for
oppressing the Israelites, for using a more hard and hateful behavior toward
strangers, Wisd. 19.13.

3 He has punished the inhabitants of Jerusalem with war and famine, with
bondage and captivity, because they were guilty of the same sin. For the
Prophet Ezekiel reckons it among those special abominations which did pull
down Gods vengeance upon that city, and hasten her destruction: In the midst
of thee have they dealt by deceit, or oppression with the stranger, Ezekiel. 22.7.

4 At the dreadful day of judgment Christ shall say to them on his left hand,
Matthew. 25.41, 43, 45.
Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire prepared for the Devil and
his Angels: For I was a stranger and ye took me not in. For verily I say unto
you, in as much as ye did it not to one of the least of these my brethren, ye
did it not to me. (...). Anno Mundi 3627.


5 The sea raised by an earthquake overflowed the city of Helice distant 12
furlongs from it, and drowned all the inhabitants thereof for their
inhospitalitie toward the Ionians, as Strabo reports in his 8 book.

6 Plutarch testifies in his golden book Of the late vengeance of God, that the
citizens of Delphe were long time afflicted with famine, pestilence, and other
deadly diseases, for their cruel usage of Esop, a stranger to them: and that
Thespesius being in a trance saw his own father suffering most grievous
torments in Hell, for having poisoned some strangers lodged in his house, to
enjoy their money.

7 God has clothed with shame as with a garment Hierome Cardan, Hilarious
Pyrckmairus De Art Apodemica page 28.
Doctor of Physic in Rome, for his inhospitality and monstrous doggednes to
strangers, as a Dutch Writer and Traveller relates the story. For when
outlandish Scholars went to salute him, Quid mihi negotii cum transalpinis?
Cardanus sum, neminem curo nisi qui mihi pecunias adfert.
and brought him commendations from some famous Professor in their country, he
used to welcome them with this strange complement, What have I to do with
foreiners? I am Cardan, I care for no man except he brings me money. May not
one cry out in this case, as the Orator did in another? O strange thing, and
worthy to be blushed at, not only by learned men, Orem dignam in quae non modo
docti, verum etiam agrestes crubescant! Cic. 1. De Legibus post medium. 1. Sam.
25.11.
but even by rude peasants and countrie-idiots! Is this the voice of a great
Scholar, or rather of an arrant clown? yea worse then that of churlish Nabal,
Shall I give my meat and drink unto men whom I know not? But all the gain that
this his rusticitie brought him, was to be called (...) in stead of (...), in
many libels and epigrams made against him upon that occasion, and to be so
generally hated and evil spoken of all men, that as Herodotus says he saw in
the Temple of Vulcan in Egypt Sennacheribs statue with this inscription, (...).
Herod. lib. 2.
Let him that sees me, be godly: So Cardan deserved to have this written upon
his tomb, Thou that look on me, be hospital: Disce (...) monitus, nec
temnere Christum.

Lastly, As Eutropius, Chamberlain to Arcadius the Emperor, Chrysostom. Hom. in
Eutrop. Eunuch. Tom. 4.
fled for safety to the Altar from which before he went about to take the
privilege of Sanctuary: So by the most just judgment of God, many a man is
driven to flee to those foreiners whom he has despised in his own country.
For it is usual with God to come home to men in their own kind, Matthew. 7.2.
(...). Chrysostom. Hom. 19. ad pop. Antioch.
and with what measure they mete, to measure to them again. Hence that zealous
Salvian, the second Jeremy, lamenting the sins and punishments of the men of
his time, says that their inhospitality was paid in its own coin, that God had
made them Exodus 23.9. Vide marg. page 72. Sentimus illa quae fecimus, and,
juxta sermonem sacrum, labores manuum nostrarum manducamus, ac justo judice Deo
solvimus quae debemus. Miserti quippe exulum non sumus, ecce ipsi sumus exules:
peregrinos fraud cepimus, ecce ipsi peregrinamur. Salv. de Guber. Dei l. 5.
know by woeful experience the heart of a stranger, and scattered them among
foreign Nations, for having been merciless to distressed foreiners.

Now all these things which happened unto those inhospital persons, are written
for our admonition, and recorded to the intent we should be warned by them as
by sea-marks, to avoid the ruin which others have fallen into. For Gods
judgments upon others should be a Catechism to us, and teach us to shun
their sins, lest we likewise follow them in their plagues.

CHAP. IX. The proper Motives to hospitality.
HItherto the general and common Motives: The particular and proper follow,
which are three: The Certainty of being already strangers, the Possibility of
becoming yet more strangers, the Prelation of this Virtue before her near
kin.

First, The Certainty of being already strangers. For if every beast loves
his like, Ecclus 13.15.
much more should every man love a stranger; likeness being the cause of love,
and love the cause of courtesy and kindness. There is so small difference
betwixt the harbourer and the harbored, (...). Hospes. Un host. ^in gast.
that two learned and two vulgar languages (the Greek, the Latin, the French,
and the Dutch tongue) express them both by one and the same word. As the
converted thief upon the Cross said to his impenitent fellow, that it was a
shame for him to rail on Christ, Luke 23.40.
seeing he was in the same condemnation: So it is an absurd part for any man to
wrong a stranger because he is a stranger, seeing he is himself in the same
condition. Ecclus. 21.27. Ob summam conjunctionem and consortium impii cum
Diabolo. Jansen. in loc.
When the ungodly curses Satan, he curses (consequently) his own soul, by
reason of that near resemblance and conjunction there is betwixt them: So when
any man deals harshly with a stranger, he is thereby injurious to himself, and
bewrayes a gross ignorance or forgetfulness of his own case and condition.

Iambico 15.
(...), says Nazianzen: He must needs be harbourous of strangers, that thinks
upon this, that himself is a stranger. Ipse est Christianus, qui and in domo
sua, and in patria sua peregrinum se esse cognoscit. De verbis Domini Sermon. 32.
Cic. Tuscul. 5. Philip. 3.20.
Now it is the part of every Christian (says Saint Austin) to know himself to
be a stranger even in his own house and country. Socrates being asked what
countriman he was, answered, (...), I am a citizen of the World: but a
Christian will rather say with Saint Paul, (...), I am a citizen of Heaven; as
having in Heaven his father and his mother, his eldest brother and his
inheritance. For God our Father is in Heaven, Jerusalem the Mother of us all is
above, Christ our elder Brother is ascended into Heaven where he abides,
Siracides ad finem Prologi sui apud Junium in notis. 1. Pet. 1.17. (...). Wisd.
2.4, 5.
and our incorruptible inheritance is reserved in Heaven for us. But on the
contrary, this World is a strange country, and our time in it a sojourning,
and a passage: and therefore in this respect we may be called Hebrews, that is,
passengers, as living in a place that is not an habitation to rest in, but a
thorow-fare to pass by. A Christian knows that the Israelites were strangers
and sojourners in the Land of Canaan, not only when they were but a few men in
number, and in the time of their travels upon the face of the earth; Psalm.
105.12, 13
when they went from one Nation to another, from one Kingdom to another
people, and when it was no more but promised unto them: but also after they
were grown to a huge multitude, after it was actually conferred upon them as
the lot of their inheritance, and during their settled and constant dwelling in
it, Levit. 25.23. He knows that the Feast of Tabernacles shadowed unto them the
travel of a godly man through the Wilderness of this World to his Heavenly
country. Levit. 23.34. Deuteronomy. 16.13. Scenopegiae festum peregrinationem hominis
pii per hoc Mundi desertum ad coelestem patriam delineabat. Episc. Sarisbur. in
Col. 2.17. Genesis 47.9. 1. Chro. 29.15. Heb. 11.13. Sumus gratia cives sursum,
and gratia peregrini deorsum. Aug. de Civit. Dei lib. 15. cap. 1. Chrysostom. Hom.
24. in Heb. Heb. 11.16.
He knows that not only Jacob sojourning in Egypt terms his life a
pilgrimage, but David also, though reigning peaceably in his flourishing
Kingdom, in the very height of his riches and honor, styles himself a
stranger and sojourner as well as all his fathers: and that the prime
Patriarchs of the Old Testament confessed that they were strangers and pilgrims
on the earth: which acknowledgement was so pleasing and acceptable to God ( as
being the ground and foundation of all virtues, says Chrysostom) that
therefore he was not ashamed to be called their God in a special and
extraordinary manner.

Secondly, The Possibility of becoming yet more strangers. For as the Apostle
exhorts the Galatians to deal meekly with such as have been overtaken in a
fault, considering themselves, Gal. 6.1.
lest they also be tempted: and the Hebrews, Heb. 13.3.
to remember them which suffer adversity, as being themselves also in the body
of flesh and frailty, in the mutable and uncertain state of this temporal
life, (for so long as we dwell here in these houses of clay, and carry about
this earthly tabernacle, we are all subject to the like changes and chances)
and as the Schoolman says, Propter possibilitatem similia patiendi. Thom. 2.2.
quaest. 30. art. 2.
we should have compassion of other men's passion, for the possibility of
suffering the like: there being no man upon the face of the earth how-ever
afflicted, of whom we cannot truly say that verse attributed unto Saint Austin,
Aut sumus, aut fuimus, vel possumus esse quod hic est:
Either we are, or at the least have bin,
Or may be in that case this man is in:
So we should be kind and courteous to strangers, because we may become
strangers as well as they, and add a particular peregrination to our common
and general pilgrimage. B. Babington on Exodus 22.21. Quis sibi vel suis seeds
perpetuas polliceri potest? cum subinde Regna potentissima everti, populos
excindi, and dissipari videamus. Cur ergo non moveat nos ejus conditionis
aspectus, quam vel nobis, vel saltem posteris accidere posse novimus? Gual. in
Romans 12.13. Quod illis in memoriam revocat praeterita, id nobis quoque prodesse
potest, si cogitemus de futuris. Quis enim ita est nunc domi suae, ut certo
sciat, sibi non esse aliquando peregrinand^m? Pet. Mar. in Romans 12.13 2. King.
4.13.
For, says a Reverend Father of this Church, Our state in this World is not
tied to any place, but God at his pleasure may remove us even when we think
least: therefore the Lord would have the Israelites then, and all men still
favorable to strangers. Experiences of evil past, and expectances of future,
if God so please to have it, must make men forbear those discourtesies to
strangers, that otherwise man's corruption will offer. And learned Peter Martyr
uses also this Motive, writing thus upon my Text: God charges the Israelites
not to vex strangers, but to entreat them kindly, because they have been
themselves strangers in Egypt. That he calls to their remembrance things past,
may profit us also if we think of things to come: for who is now so settled in
his house, as to be sure that he shall never travel? How many causes and
casualties may enforce any man to leave his native country? Was not this the
lot of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; of Lot, Moses, Elimelech, and David? The good
Shunamite was deceived to think she needed no friends, because she dwelt among
her own people: for not long after, a famine of seven years made her glad to
find harbor among foreiners: and the proud Treasurer Shebna reckoned without
his host, when he made account to die in his Palace, and to be buried in his
stately sepulcher: Esa. 22.18.
for he was turned and tossed like a ball into a large country, there to end
his days in grief and obscurity. The cities of Tire and No were a long time in
the very height of worldly pomp and glory, Esa. 23.7. Nah. 3.8, 9, 10.
but at length their own feet carried them a far off to sojourn. Jer. 48.11,
12.
Moab also was at ease from his youth and had settled on his lees: but at last
wanderers came that caused him to wander as a bird cast out of the nest. Esa.
16.2.
Neither were the four sons and successors of zealous Josiah exempted from
this vicissitude of humane affairs: for within a few years they were all
carried away captives, partly to Babylon and partly to Egypt with the chief and
prime of their subjects.

And to speak of things that happened within the memory of our fathers and our
own; many English Protestants which harbored persecuted strangers in the happy
reign of King Edward the sixth, were driven to seek harbor for themselves
among foreign Nations in the bloody days of Queen Mary: and the Orthodox men of
the Palatinate, Trelcat. junior Orat. in obit. Kuchlini.
which entertained courteously banished strangers under their good and gracious
Elector Friderick the 3 surnamed The Pious, were banished themselves, and put
to seek entertainment abroad by his Son and Successor Prince Lewis, that hot
Ubiquitary. And again, in this our age the poor Palatinate men, the Bohemians,
and the Grisons cast out of their country for the profession of the Gospel,
and imploring the Christian hospitality of those people which sometimes fled
to them for relief in the like case, are lamentable instances, and too true
examples of this ebbing and flowing of these sublunarie things.

The serious consideration whereof, as it moved of old learned Theodoret, to
reach his helping hand to those outcast Africans, Theodor. Epist. 29 and 52
apud Baron. Anno 440. number. 8. and 13. Tom. 6. Dr. Abbot, the now Archbishop of
Cant. Lect. 5. on Jonas nu^n. 5. -- Rotat omne fatum. Res Deus nostras celeri
citatas Turbine versat. Senec. Thyest. Act. 5. in fine. (...). Xenoph Job
29.18. Psalm. 30.6. Esa. 56.12. Prove. 27.1. Ecclus. 18.26. Nihil ne in totum
quidem diem certi est. Sen. consol. ad Polyb. cap. 29. Vide Senec. Epist. 91.
1. Tim. 6.17, 18.
whom the Vandalick persecution had driven unto the East: (For when I saw
(quoth he) their pitiful estate, I began to lay to heart the doubtful
turnings and inversions of humane things, and to fear lest I my self might fall
into the like evils) So it makes the wise and godly persons of this Nation
still courteous to exiled strangers, recounting that by a mutual vicissitude
of Gods chastisements, their case may be our case.

Since then there is no hold of these earthly things, since those that stand
fastest upon earth have but slippery footing; let no man dream of unshaken
prosperity in this World; vainly saying with Job, I shall die in my nest; or
with David, I shall never be moved; or with those secure ones in Esaias, To
morrow shall be as this day: for no man knows what a day may bring forth. From
the morning until the evening the time is changed, and all things are soon
done before the Lord. Even in a point of time the greatest things are turned
upside down. As they that are rich in this World should not trust in uncertain
riches, but do good with them while they have time and opportunity: So they
that live at ease in their native country, should not trust in uncertain lands
and houses, but make themselves friends among strangers and passengers, that if
ever they be deprived of their homes and dwelling places, strangers may receive
them into their habitations. Eccles. 11.1, 2.
Let them cast cheerfully their bread upon these waters, for they may find it
after many days: Let them give a portion to seven and also to eight, for they
know not what evil shall be upon the earth.

Thirdly, The Prelation of this Virtue before her near kin. Psalm. 119.6.
For as we must have respect unto all Gods commandments, by reason of the
commanders authority, which is despised by the neglect of any: So we must have
greater respect unto the weightier matters of the Law, then unto the lighter:
Those specially must be done, Matthew. 23.23.
though these ought not to be left undone, Eccl. 35.5.
because of the commandment. Now if charity toward our neighbors and
countrymen must chiefly be practiced as a great Virtue, much more charity
toward strangers and outlandish men, preferred before it in both Testaments.
For as in the Old, injury offered unto foreiners is aggravated above that
which is offered to contrymen and fellow-citizens: So in the New, kindness
done unto strangers is extolled above that which is showed to neighbors and
patriots. The Prophet Ezekiel complains thus of the Jews; Ezekiel. 22.29.
The people of the land have vexed the poor and needy: yea, they have
oppressed the stranger: And thus the Apostle Saint John commends Gaius;
Beloved, thou do faithfully whatsoever thou do to the brethren, 3. John
5. Peregrinis inter dum plus quam civibus and indigenis debemus: quando nimirum
illos major necessitas premit, and minus quam hisi by ipsis consulere possunt.
Gualt. in Matthew. 6. Hom. 82. Inter Romanos constat hospites ipsis quoque
cognatis and affinibus fuisse praepositos, inquit Lavat. in Judic. 19. Hom 96.
testem citans Gell. l. 5. c. 13.
and to strangers. Where the particle and signifies chiefly or principally, as
Lorinus notes upon the place: and therefore the old and vulgar Latin
translation renders it thus, and hoc in peregrinos, for idque, and that to
strangers: Which adds a great weight to the sentence, says Beza. Flesh and
blood is not prone to do good to this kind of men, and therefore such
beneficence must needs argue a better and higher principle. For as when we see
the bank of the river, and the ground next to it wet alone, we gather that the
river has overflowed there: but when we see the farthest and remotest parts of
ground wet also, then we know that the rain has done that: So when we see a
man doing good to his neighbors, friends, and countrymen, we think this
proceeds but from good nature in him: but when we see him doing good also to
strangers and unknown persons, then we may well believe there is more then good
nature in that man: He cannot but have at least the gift of common grace. Ruth
2.10. Quare inveni gratiam? id est, Quae causa te movit ut mihi faveas?
Interrogatio admirantis. Piscat. Schol. in loc. Luke 11.31, 32.
Therefore Ruth admired so much the kindness of Boaz, that he should take
knowledge of her, seeing she was a stranger.

To shut up this first general part, I will say no more but this, that as the
Queen of the South and the Ninevites shall rise up in judgment against those
Jews that would not respect the wisdom and preaching of a greater then
Solomon and Jonas: So shall Saint Austin against those Christians that will not
be moved with these Motives. For he was drawn to the practice of every good
work with that threefold cord of obedience, Inerrablenesse of precepts,
innumerablenesse of examples, inestimablenesse of rewards, and behold, there is
here more then a sevenfold.

CHRISTIAN HOSPITALITY. The Second General Part.
CHAP. I. The Duties of Strangers.
HAving thus prosecuted the Duties of homeborn inhabitants toward the
stranger, I must needs now, by way of Use and application of all that has been
said, handle also the reciprocal Duties of the stranger toward the native
inhabitants; lest they question me touching him, as Peter being bidden to
follow Christ did ask concerning John, Joh. 21.21.
And what shall this man do? Is it just and equal that we bear alone the
burden of hospitality? That we do many good turns to the stranger in our land,
and he none at all to us? Is not beneficence a binder, and courtesy received a
strong obligation to requital in one kind or other? Bid him therefore to help
us, and to discharge on his part what belongs to his place.

These or the like objections that I may prevent, and observe the strait charge
laid upon Ministers, of doing nothing by partiality, 1. Tim. 5.21.
I will not like a Gray Friar speak only for my self and my fellows, but
commend to the careful practice of the stranger and outlandish man some
general and particular Rules.

Generally, 1. Pet. 1.1.
Let him observe Saint Peter's exhortation to the strangers scattered throughout
Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, and Bithynia: Dearly beloved, 1. Pet. 2.11.
I beseech you as strangers and pilgrims, abstain from fleshly lusts, which
war against the soul. Eccl. 41.17, 19. Est singularis turpitudinis in eum
locum peccare, in quo quis fovetur and alitur. Jans. in loc (...). Strom. 3.
Let him follow the counsel of the wise Son of Sirach, Be ashamed of theft,
and of any such crime, in regard of the place where thou sojournest. For, says
Clemens of Alexandria, it behooves them that are among strangers, to live well,
and to be of an unblameable conversation, because they are more exposed to the
sight of all men, and a hole in their coat is sooner spied then in others.

Particularly, (...). Menand. Peregrini officium est, nihil praeter suum
negotium agere, nihil de alio inquirere, minimeque in aliena Repub. esse
curiosum. Cic. 1. Offic. Prove. 20.3. 1 Thessalonians. 4.11.
Let him express and show forth in his whole carriage and behavior these
three singular good qualities, Discretion, Modesty, and Thankfulness.

First, Discretion in three things.

1. In shunning the manner of those Pragmaticall fellows, who love to have an
oar in other men's boats, and to be meddling where they have little cause and
less thanks. For every fool will be meddling: But a wise man (specially being
a stranger) will study to be quiet, and to do his own business. 1. Pet. 4.15.
He will never suffer as a busie-body in other men's matters. For this fault
above all others seems intolerable to the native inhabitants, who are ready
enough to say with the Sodomites, Genesis 19.9.
This one fellow came in to sojourn, and he will needs be a judge: and with the
Danes, A stranger is come into the country, and he will domineer.

2 In avoiding all singularity, and morosity in things indifferent, as diet,
apparel, language, and matters of rites and ceremonies; according to the Greek
Proverb, Erasm. Chil. 3. Cent. 6. Adag. 55.
(...), The Law and Land, the custom and manner of the Region where we live
must be the Rule and square of all lawful actions. A stranger must not
Antipodes-like tread contrary to the paths of all men. Homer commending his
Ulysses, calls him (...), not subtle and wily, Qui sapit, innumeris moribus
aptus erit.
but willing to conform himself and to condescend to the various manners and
humors of men. The practice of Saint Ambrose, and the counsel which he gave to
young Austin and his mother Monica, is generally well liked and followed of
godly-wise men; Aug. Epist. 86. extrema ad Casulanum.
When I am in Millan I do nor fast on the Saturday, but when I am in Rome I do
fast on that day: and to what Church soever ye come, observe the custom
thereof; if ye will neither take, nor give any offense.

3 In forbearing all speeches that may give any distaste to his host, as the
Spaniards insinuate by their Proverb, In domo suspensi, funis non est
nominandus.
In the house of one that was hanged, we ought not so much as to name a rope.
Now among the sundry sorts of odious talks, which a discreet stranger will take
heed of, these three specially are to be avoided, The vilifying of any thing
that belongs to the place where he lives, the extolling of his Country and
Nation, and the bragging of his own descent and personal exploits, with the
Rhodian leaper. Hic Rhodus, hic saltus. Erasm. Chil. 3. Cent. 3. Adag. 28. John
8.13. Longarum viarum longa sunt mendacia. Prove. Hispan. apud Canum Loc. Theol.
lib. 11 c. 6. Il a beau mentir qui vient de loing Prove. Gall.
For as to such boasters one may most patly reply what the Pharisees did
impiously object to Truth it self, Thou bear record of thy self, thy record
is not credible: So against them these sayings are commonly used, A traveller
may lie by authority; Long ways have long lies; I had rather believe him then
go try.

Secondly, A stranger must show his Modesty in four things, Humility,
Patience, Accepting of an offered entertainment, Moderate abiding in a place of
free entertainment.

1 In Humility; Both by respectfull carriage toward the people of the Land:
thus Abraham, though a great Prince, did twice bow down himself before the
people of the land of Canaan, Genesis 23.7, 12.
with whom he sojourned: And also by contenting himself with mean things,
without minding high matters: 1. Sam. 27.5. Ubi Junius notat Davidis modestiam
peregrinos decente^, cum in aliena regione versantur.
thus David said to Achish after a modest sort well beseeming a stranger, Give
me a place in some town of the Country, that I may dwell there: for why should
thy servant dwell in the Royal City with thee?

2 In Patience: For a stranger must not think it strange if he meets with many
disrespects and disgraces, 1. Pet. 4.12.
as though some strange thing happened unto him: Spernere se sperni medicamine
fortius omni.
But he must put them up with a generous disdain, as the best remedy; and
consider that so it has been of old, and ever will be amongst ungodly people.
Let the good usage he finds with few civil and gracious men, have more force
to cheer him up, then the harsh and hard dealing of many rude and graceless
ones can have power to dishearten and cast him down. Zanch. Epist. ad Lantgrav.
praefixa Misc. -- me hospitem Lites sequi, quam hic mihi sit facile, atque
utile, Aliorum exempla commonent -- Crito Terent. in Andria. Act. 4. Scen. 6.
Genesis 34.30. and 49.6. Exodus 2.12. Act. 7.24, 25. Hoc vindictae genus nostrum
est admirari: imitori eorum, qui eodem, quo illi, spiritu afflantur. Tilen.
Disp. de 6. Decal. Praecepto. th. 39. Acts 6.1. Procop. Hist. Persicae. lib. 1.
Zanchius showed himself so patient at Strasbourg, that in those eleven years
he lived there, he never complained to the Magistrate of any injury that he
sundry times suffered of his open enemies and secret underminers. Neither must
a stranger avenge his kinsfolks or countrymen which are wronged by the native
inhabitants. For the act of Simeon and Levi was most dangerous and detestable,
and the example of Moses admirable indeed to all, but imitable to none that
want the same calling and instinct. A stranger should not so much as murmr
against the native, for neglecting his countrymen in comparison of theirs,
when offices or alms are distributed, as those fretting Grecians did against
the Hebrews. Arsaces King of Armenia showed once prettily this branch of
Modesty: For being taken prisoner by Pacurius King of Persia, and brought into
a great hall wherein some Armenian earth was scattered on the one side, and
some Persian on the other: as often as he trod on the Armenian, he spoke as at
home, boldly and threatningly; but he had no sooner set his foot upon the
foreign earth, but his speech and behavior were full of meekness and patience.
An eminent Writer in this Church mentioning his conference at Bruxels with that
hot wrangling Jesuit Costerus, says thus, He spoke as at home, B Hall Epist.
5. Decad. 1.
I as a stranger.

3 In Accepting of an offered entertainment. For the rude and churlish refusal
of a wel-proffered courtesy argues plainly either ignorance or immodestie.
Musculus. Pareus. Piscator. B. Babington on Genesis 18.5.
The strangers whom Abraham invited so courteously, did admit of his kind
offer, without either proud contempt, or stern frowardness. And the Prophet
Elisha was so far sociable as not to neglect the friendly offer of so kind a
benefactour as the Shunamite. Saint Paul also with his companions accepted
without much ado the courtesies of Publius: and young Austin was so modest and
civil, as not stiffely to refuse that kind entertainment which Saint Ambrose
did offer unto him. Nay more, the mirror of all virtues and perfect pattern of
good manners, has herein left us many examples, 1. Pet. 2.21.
that we should follow his steps. Luke 7.36. and 14.1, 12. Joh. 2.2. and 12.2.
For both in diverse places and by sundry persons being bidden to dinner and
supper, to a marriage feast and other such meetings, he went thither with great
facility.

4 In Moderate abiding in a place of free entertainment. Gualth. in Romans 12.13.
Qui ad dandum sati^ prompti and propensi sunt, cum tamen ab importunis
hospitibus supra vires graventur, erga illos a quibus ita premuntur, non
possunt non malign affici. Cartwrig. in Prove. 23.8.
For this is one of the chiefest Uses which a famous and long practiced
Preacher makes of my Text, that as the homebred inhabitants ought to be
courteous harbourers of strangers: So harbored strangers should not be like
lingering guests; which the more they are made of, the longer they will
continue: They should labor to be no more nor longer chargeable to their free
hosts, then they must needs. For as Solomon's Proverb says, Prove. 25.17. La
trop longue demeure fait changer l'amy. Buxtorf. Synag. Judaic. cap. 32. Post
tres saepe dies piscis vilescit and hospes; Ni sale conditus sit, vel specialis
amicus. Luke 1.56. Trem. Gram. Syriac. Epist. Dedic. P. Mart. Epist. ad fideles
Lucens. Eccles.
that too often coming, so the French Adage says, that too long abiding causes
a friend to change. And howsoever the Rabbinicall Proverb, The first day a
guest, the second a burden, the third a runnagate: or the common saying, At
three days end a fish and guest
Are oftentimes out of request,
be meant only of those common and ordinary guests which are called flies and
smel-feasts, not of kinsfolks and friends and honest strangers (for the modest
and blessed Virgin which abode with her cousin Elisabeth about three months,
and Tremellius who tarried above six with Archbishop Parker, and Peter Martyr
who lodged in Bucers house seventeen days together, were questionless most
heartily welcome all this while to their hosts and hostesses:) yet it is the
part of a modest stranger not to take too much of a free horse, Germani dicunt
equos voluntary incedentes non nimium calcaribus urgendos esse. Lav. in Prove.
25.17
not to tarry in a house till the countenance of his liberal host be not
toward him as before. Tremellius speaking of his journey to England, when the
University of Heidelberg, where he was then Professor, was dissolved by reason
of the plague, says, that he found so cheerful an entertainment with that
forenamed Prelate and all his family, that he might and would have stayed as
long again with them, Nisi me pudor and officii ratio extrusissent. Ubi supra.
had not his own shamefastness and regard of duty thrust him out.

The third and last Virtue requisite in a stranger, is Thankfulness to his
hosts and other benefactours.

First, by his prayers to God for them. Thus Jacob blessed Pharaoh, that is,
Genesis 47.7.
prayed to God to bless him for all the favors and courtesies he and his
family had received of him. And if the Jews were commanded to pray for the
city whither they had been carried away captives: Jerem. 29.7.
much more should any stranger pray for the prosperity of the State whither he
came of his own accord, and where he lives in liberty and freedom. Eliah and
Elisha prayed for their hostesses, 1. King 17.20, 21. 2. King. 4.33. Luke 10.5.
and our Savior bad his Disciples to wish peace, that is, all sorts of
blessings to whatsoever house they should be received in.

Secondly, by his praises of them to men. Thus the Jews that dwelt in
Scythopolis testified to Judas Maccabeus that the Scythopolitans dealt lovingly
with them in the time of their adversity. 2. Mac. 12.30.
And even Gehazi was so thankful to his good hostess of Shunem, 2. Kings. 8.5.
as to praise her to the King of Israel: and the strangers that had been
kindly entertained by Gaius and Demetrius, 3. John 6, 12.
did bear witness of their charity before the Church. The same part of
gratitude was in John le Preux, the Genevian Printer of Daneus his
Animadversions upon Bellarmines Controversies: Where he does commend at large
the bountiful hospitality of Archbishop Whitegift, toward him and many more
foreiners. Catholici Orthodoxi Tom. 2. Epist. Ded.
Neither is Doctor Rivet, one of the now Professors of Divinity in Leyden,
niggardly in telling the World how much he is beholden to his kind hosts and
Colleagues, for freeing him from those manifold vexations, which strangers in
other places are forced to endure.

In particular: A stranger must be thankful to his public host, that is, to
the Prince or Magistrate in whose Dominions he sojourns.

First, by observing his Laws. For strangers are bound to keep the Statutes of
the State where they live, (...), Menand. Nec distinguitur unde sint, says the
Civil Law.
as well as the natural subjects; or to undergo the punishment due to the
transgressors thereof, without any distinction or difference of Nations. The
Jews that dwelt in the Dominions of Ahasuerus had been much to blame, if their
enemy could have convinced them of not keeping the Kings Laws. Esth. 3.8.
But this obedience to humane Laws and Constitutions is ever to be understood
with this proviso, that they be not contrary and repugnant to Gods Law. Non
obedium praecepto Regis, sed praecepto Legis. 2. Mac. 7.30. Act. 5.29. Exodus
1.20. Hos. 5.11. Sleidanum Belgam excepit Argentina, ubi dignus est habitus,
cui licet peregrino res long maximi momenti procurandae committerentur, etc
Beza Iconib. V^r. illust. in Sleidano.
For if they be, then without all question the Rule of the Apostles, and the
Practice of Daniel, of the three children, and of the Maccabees must be
followed, We ought to obey God rather then men. As God dealt well with the
Hebrew Midwives, for having disobeyed Pharaohs cruel injunction: So he
punished Ephraim, because he willingly walked after the wicked commandment of
wicked Kings.

Secondly, by discharging faithfully that office that he is preferred unto, as
Joseph, Daniel, Mordecai, Sleidan: who being a Low-countriman behaved himself
so virtuously at Argentine or Strasbourg, that they trusted him with the
weightiest affairs of their Commonwealth, and made him their Leiger to England,
and to the Council of Trent: where he ever discharged his Commission to his
own great praise, and to the full content and satisfaction of those that sent
him. A stranger must use the credit and favor that his place or person has
procured him, to the good of those that are unjusty oppressed, as Ebedmelech
the Ethiopian did in the matter of Jeremy. Jer. 38.7, 8, 9.


To his Private host likewise a stranger must be thankful two ways.

First, by taking in good part whatsoever entertainment he finds, so it be
cheerful. He must measure and esteem his welcome by the face and countenance,
Hospitis in mensa vultum, non fercula, pensa: Dat been, dat multum, qui dat cum
munere vultum: Aequiparat laetus lautissima fercula vultus. Luke 10.7. Matthew.
10.11. Chrysostom. Hom. 33. in Matthew.
not by the feast and cost of his host. When our Savior sent forth his
Disciples, he charged them that they should not be curious and choice of their
diet, but to eat and drink such things as their hosts and hostesses should set
before them. Being entered into any city or town, they were not to go from house
to house, loathing as it were their first entertainment, and seeking for better
cheer and more delicious fare: but they were to abide with the first honest man
that received them, so long as they tarried in the same city or town.

Secondly, by doing to him what good office he can. For an ingenuous
disposition cannot receive favors without thoughts of return. Behold thou have
been careful for us with all this care, 2. Kings 4.13.
what is to be done for thee? Would thou be spoken for to the King, or to
the Captain of the host? said Elisha to the Shunamite. Christ and the Angels,
the Prophets and Apostles were very beneficial guests to their hosts and
hostesses, and ever paid a blessing for their entertainment. 1. Kings 17. B.
Hall Contem. book 18. I^ Elias with the Sareptan.
Elias requited his hostess with a supernatural provision. He gave her life
and her sons to her, for his board: yea, in that woeful famine he gave her
and her son their board for his house-room.

And this Thankfulness which a stranger owes to his public and private
hosts, is not to be limited within the time of his tarrying with them; but is
to be showed also after he is gone home, where he may be more able to requite
their courtesies; or to any other place whatsoever. For without all question,
faithful Abraham kept this oath which he swore to Abimelech; According to the
kindness that thou have done unto me, Genesis 21.23.
I shall do unto thee, and to the Land where I have sojourned. B. Hall
Contempl. book 7. In Balaam.
And it is like that Moses having found forty years harbor among the
Midianites, would have been (what he might) inclinable to favorable Treaties
with them, if they had looked for favor from him for Jethroes sake, Number. 22.4,
7.
in stead of joining with Moab against Israel. David having foiled the enemies
of the Lord, sent a present of their spoil, 1. Sam. 30.31.
not only to his friends of Judah and Hebron, but also to all the places where
he had been entertained. Fox in Henr. 8. ann. 1540.
And the L. Cromwell requited to the full Fr. Frescobald, his liberal host
and benefactour in Florence, when he met him in London. Idem in Maria Reg. ann.
1558
And Francis Perusell having received some courtesy in England at the
Duchess of Suffolks hands, stood her in good stead, when she and her husband
Mr Berty fled for Religion to Wesell, where he was Minister of the Wallons.

This Virtue of Thankfulness is so much the more to be followed of Christians,
by how much the contrary Vice was hateful among the very Pagans, as appears
by their histories and fables. For we read of Philip, King of Macedonia, Sen.
de Benef. lib. 4. cap. 37.
that when one of his soldiers went to him to beg the land of a man that had
entertained him very kindly, Philip was so far from granting his request,
that in a deep detestation of such ingratitude, he branded him in the forehead
with these words, Ingratus Hospes, An unthankful Guest. Hom. Iliad. 3. Cic. in
Ver. lib. 2. and 5. Live. lib. 25. Val. Max. lib. 5. cap. 1. Aesop. fabul. de
Cerva and Vite.
We see the sharp invectives that are in Homer against Paris, in Tully against
Verres, in Livie and others against Badius, for their ingratitude to their
courteous hosts. We read in their Apologues, how the hind being hunted by
the dogs hid her self under a vine, whose broad leaves covered her; where
perceiving many sweet grapes, she began to eat them: but by her breaking and
cutting of the grapes she made such a noise and shaking of the leaves, that she
was soon perceived by the huntsmen, and so taken and devoured by the dogs.
Whereby thus much is intimated, that, Unthankful and hurtful guests never
thrive well.

From Jeremies pass over the Isles of Chittim and send unto Kedar, and see if
there be such a thing, Jerem. 2.10.
we may pass to Jobs ask now the beasts, Job 12.7.
and they shall teach thee; and the fowls of the air, and they shall tell
thee: and to the practice of Infidels add the examples of brute creatures,
(...). Basil. in Hexam. Hom. 8. Ferunt martes illorum gallinis parcere quorum
hospitio utuntur, hanc nimirum gratiam occulto naturae instinctu suis
hospitibus referentes. Lavat. in Jos. 2. Hom. 10. Ciconiam ferunt tecti Domino,
ubi nidum posuerat, unum ex pullis tanquam hospitii sui precium relinquere. D.
Willet on 1. Sam. Epist. Dedic. Gesner. Hist. Animal. lib. 3. Nutrierat eum
puer dilectum admodum. Plin. lib. 8. cap. 17. Aelian. l. 6. c. 63 Plin. l. 10.
c. 74.
to raise a blush in the face of such unthankful strangers as live within the
pale of the Church, and profess Christianity. For it is said of polecats, that
by a secret instinct of Nature they spare the hens of the house where they
lodge: and of storks, that they leave one of their young ones to the Lord of
the roof where they built their nests. It is storied of a stork, that having
been healed of a broken leg, and fed a great while by a Tarentine woman called
Heracleis, she brought her the next year a most precious stone for a requital
of her kindness: and of another, that she brought in a thankful manner a
great root of new ginger to a citizen of Wesalia (in Germany) where she was
suffered to nest. We read that a dragon rescued a noble man in Arcadia from
the violence of robbers, because he had lovingly nourished him in his youth:
and that an asp being entertained by an Egyptian, and fed at his table; one of
her young ones having killed a child of her hosts, she was so grieved at it,
that she killed her young one, and left the house for ever, being ashamed to
dwell there any longer.

CHAP. II. That all Strangers, especially Christ's Strangers, should perform all
those Duties.
AS all strangers in general are bound to perform all those forehandled
Duties; so in special Christ's strangers, that have forsaken their own country
for his Gospels sake. For they above all others should labor to be such as
Saint Cyprian warned the ancient Confessors to be, Humiles, and modestos, and
quietos esse debere, ut honorem sui nominis servent: ut qui gloriosi voce
fuerint, sint and moribus gloriosi. Cypr. Epist. 6. vel lib. 3. Epist 10. number.
2. Gualth. in 1. Cor. Epist. Dedic. Calv. Comment. in 1. Cor Epist. Dedic. Beza
in Vita Galeacii Caraccioli. Sermon. 21. in Hist. Pass. Dom.
Humble, modest, and quiet; that they may preserve the honor of their name:
that they which are glorious by Christian voice and confession, may be also
glorious in manners and conversation. Such was the carriage of those English
Divines that fled into Suitzerland in Queen Mary's days, as Gualther bears
them record; and of Galeacius Caracciolus (honored with the title of The
Second Moses) son and heir apparent to the Marquess of Vicum in the Kingdom
of Naples, during his long sojourning among the Genevians, as it is written at
large by Calvin, and Beza; who gives also this praise to those persecuted
Protestants of his time, which from sundry parts of Christendom resorted to
Geneva; that they were so thankful to that city for their courteous harbor,
as to be ready to shed their own blood for her defense. And it is recorded of
Musculus by the Writer of his life, that such was his gratitude to the Church
and Commonwealth of Berna, for having received and used him kindly in his
banishment for the truth, that he ever preferred their service before any
preferment whatsoever. For being sundry times called into England, specially
after the death of Bucer, and to the Palatinate, and other Provinces of
Germany, with many promises of far greater stipend and larger pension then
he had, he did constantly refuse all these honorable conditions. Neither must
I omit here what I have heard of Mr Aaron Blondel, a learned French Minister
about Calais and Bologne; that he is so thankfully affected toward this
Nation, for the kind hospitality he found at Lambeth in his late persecution,
as to say often with great feeling and passion, that if he should meet any where
but an English dog, he would make much of him: So mindful is he to practice
the old precept, Sit cordis festum panem meminisse comestum.

Let all strangers, I say, labor to square their lives according to those
general and particular Rules: and that in four respects; Of God, of their
Country, of themselves, of their fellows.

First, In respect of God, whose goodness and impartiality toward them
challenge no less at their hands. 1. His goodness: For should they not walk
worthy of him that preserves the strangers, Psalm. 146.9.
by procuring them the favor of those people among whom they live? P. Martyr
in 1. Reg. 17.9.
The hearts of carnal men are naturally hardened against strangers, but God by
his Spirit mollifies and softneth that hardness, and inclines their affections
to mercy and compassion: as it is said of the Jews that were in Egypt, in
Babel, and other places; that he gave them favor in the sight of the
Egyptians, Exodus 12.36. Psalm. 106.46.
he made them also to be pitied of all those that carried them captives: and as
it appears in the example of Abraham, of whom God himself speaks thus by the
Prophet; Who gave the Nations before him? Esa. 41.2.
that is, ( by an Hebraisme, Scult. in loc.
says Scultetus) who procured him favor in the sight of foreign Nations, that
they might do him no wrong, but rather show him all offices of hospitality?
When a stranger is tempted to any dishonest act, he should thus reason with
that holy Joseph; Behold, God has so graciously preserved me all the way, and
made me find such acceptance among strangers: how then can I do this great
wickedness, Genesis 39.9.
and sin against him? 2. His impartiality: For if without respect of persons
God will have every man to be judged according to his work, 1. Pet. 1.17.
should not strangers pass the time of their sojourning in fear? As God takes
great care for the poor, Exodus 23.3. Levit. 19.15.
and yet would not have judgment perverted in their behalf: So though he
loves the stranger, yet not so far as to absolve him in judgment, if he be
guilty. He will have indeed his cause searched and dispatched, but in no case
his person spared in any lewd course, because he is a stranger. For he charged
the Israelites to stone to death and cut off from among them any abominable
sinner, any blasphemer of his Name, any presumptuous transgressour of his Laws,
Lev. 18.26, 29. and 24.16. Number. 15.30.
as well the stranger that sojourned among them, as him that was born in the
Land, and of their own Nation.

Secondly, In respect of their Country. For every stranger should be,
Cupidissimus gloriae suae Gentis. De Verbo Dei lib. 2. c. 6.
as Bellarmine says Josephus was, most desirous of the glory of his Nation;
not by telling strange tales of it, but by leading a most virtuous life.
Aristides being asked what did most grieve him in his banishment, Stob. sermon.
37.
said it was the blame that his Country did bear for it. A godly-wise
stranger may be said in some sort to be the exaltation of his Country, and the
glory of his Nation, Judith 15.9. Genesis 34.30. Sirac. 11.28. Significat ex
filiis ut plurimum colligi posse qualis fuerit ejus vita; juxta Adagium, Patrem
sequitur sua proles. Jansen. in loc. Accipe nunc Danaum insidias, and crimine
ab uno Disce omnes. Virg. Aen. 2. Omnes gentes habent sicut peculiaria mala,
ita etiam quaedam bona. Salv. lib. 7. Vide Lips. Cent. 1. Ep. 22. Phil. Lanoyo
John 1.46. John 7.52. John 4.40. Luke 10.33.
which is the excellent praise that is given to Judith: but a scandalous one
may be called the reproach and shame of his Mother-countrey; for he makes her
to stink among the inhabitants of the Land, as Simeon and Levi did their
father. As a man is known in his children; So a Nation is soon esteemed by one
or two of her sons. Albeit one swallow makes not a summer, nor one woodcock a
winter, nor one or two examples a general Rule in other things; yet in this
case it is otherwise: For by the manners of one stranger, men are wont to judge
of his whole Nation, as Aeneas would have his hearers to think that never a
barrel better herring, that all the Greeks were naught, and egregious
impostours, for one treacherous Sinon. Besides, every Nation being branded
abroad for some peculiar vice and corruption, as the Dutch for drunkenness,
the French for vanity and lightness, the Italian for lasciviousness, and the
Spanish for pride and African haughtiness: it is the duty of every stranger
to vindicate his own Country from common imputation, and to show by his
virtuous behavior, that such ignominious reports of his Nation are not
universally true, that notwithstanding the forestalled judgment and
prejudicate opinion of the World, there can some good thing come out of his
Nazareth; that out of Galilee may arise some Prophets, out of hated Samaria
some thankful and compassionate men, and that Etiam Scythia parit Philosophos.
Anacharsis and Toxaris, Cassian and Evagrius were Scythians
even Scythia (the most Scythas Barbaris adjunctos amplificationis, non
distinctionis causa, censer Episc. Davenant. and Cor. a Lapide in illud Col.
3.11. Barbarus and Scytha.
barbarous and brutish of all countries) does bring forth Philosophers and
Divines. Thus Plutarch and Lipsius refuted by their intellectuals those
disgraceful Proverbs of Boeoticum ingenium, and Brabanticum acumen; Erasm.
Chil. 2. Cent. 3. Adag. 7
and Saint Paul and Saint Basil falsified by their morals those foul nicknames
and by-words of Cappadoces, Cretes, Cilices, tria pessima Cappa. -- (...).
Chil. 3. Cent. 6. Adag. 82.


Thirdly, In respect of themselves. For if strangers dare presume to live
loosely and disorderly, they shall not want enemies that will inform against
them, as Haman against the Jews, They keep not the Kings Laws, Esther 3.8. In
peregrinos sunt alioqui cives parum propensi; quod si addantur illorum demerita
and mali mores, pessima laborant invidia and odio. Pet. Mart. in Genesis 34.30. 1.
Sam. 21.15. Macrob. Saturn. lib. 2. cap. 4. Genesis 34.21.
therefore it is not for the Kings profit to suffer them; that will move the
Magistrate to say of them as Achish said of David, when he behaved himself
unseemly, Pack away this fellow, have I need of mad men? and as Augustus the
Emperor said of the cobblers crow, taught to prate like a parret, I have enough
at home of such saluters. Whereas if they carry themselves as they ought, both
Prince and people will say of them, as Hamor and Shechem said of Jacob and his
family, These men are peaceable with us; therefore let them dwell in the land,
and trade therein: yea, as Xerxes, the Persian Monarch, said of Themistocles,
Plut. in Themistocle.
Let the Athenians send us more of such guests. For modesty is of a winning
quality wheresoever it is, and even among strangers will make it self friends.
The good disposition of Ruth carried away the heart of Boaz, Ruth 2.7, 8.
and of his reapers with her, when she craved leave to glean, and carved not
for her self, though she knew well the law of gleaning. But say many a stranger
for all his virtuous carriage cannot win the love of the natives, Psalm. 35.19.
John 15.25. Sed Domino gratias, qui and mihi miserrimo peccatori suo dedit
dicere, Oderunt me gratis. Paulin. Epist. 1. ad Severum. Est aliquid magnis
crimen ab. esse malis. Ovid.
yet at least he shall get by it Christ's comfort against the malice of the
Jews, and Paulinus his solace against the spleen of the Roman Clergy, They
hated me without a cause.

Fourthly, In respect of their fellows. For what is commonly said with pity
and commiseration of kind drunkards and prodigals, They are no man's foes but
their own, is not true of insolent and unruly strangers. For they hurt not
only themselves, but also their fellows, both of the same and of other
countries; involving them, though never so harmless, in their own deserved
punishment. As it fell out about the year 1219, Fox Acts and Monuments Tom. 1.
page 338.
that the disorder and rebellion of some strangers moved King Henry the third
and his Counsel, to ordain and proclaim through all this Land, that all aliens
and foreiners should depart from the Realm, and not return to the same again.
And all the Jews have been often banished out of this and other Countries for the
villainies of some among them. See some examples thereof in Parre on Romans 11.28.
Genesis 47.11, 27. Esther 10.3. Number poenitet Balbos ex Hispania, nec minus
insignes viros e Gallia Narbonensi transivisse? Manent posteri eorum, nec amore
in hanc patriam nobis concedunt. Tacit. 11. Annal.
Whereas virtuous strangers are a great furtherance to their present and future
fellows, and do better the case of those that come after; as appears by the
examples of Joseph and Mordecai, and by these words of Claudius the Emperor,
spoken in the Senate against some that would have hindered strangers from being
made free-denizens of Rome: Have we cause to grieve that the Balbi came hither
from Spain, or those no less excellent men from France? Their children dwell
still among us, and are no whit inferior to us in love and affection to this
Country.

CHAP. III. The Conclusion.
TO conclude this point and wind up all: Let strangers be more careful to
show themselves worthy of kind entertainment, then to take up the complaints
of several Authors about the common decay of hospitality: as, that it is by
some changed into four wheels and some few butterflies, B. Hall Censure of
Travel Sect. 21. Barker on the 8 Command. page 279.
that by others bread and beef is turned into stones; that as store of Lawyers
argues men's unpeaceablenes, and multitude of Physicians proclaims their
intemperance: Calvin. in. Genesis 18.
so abundance of Innes and Alehouses, of Taverns and Cabarets convinces the
World of inhospitalitie; Serar. Jesuita in Tob. 6. quaest. 3.
that now-a-dayes this Virtue is more disused, while hospital Mansions receive
beggars, and Innes all them that are furnished with money. Calvin. and Mercer.
in Genesis 18.
Let them lay the sadle upon the right horse, and a great part of this blame
upon themselves. Let them accuse their bad predecessors, for having made the
names of strangers and travelers to become vile and suspected with the most:
Male istis effoeminatis eveniat, qui rem tam bellam infamaverunt. Sen. De
Benef. lib. 7. cap. 25.
as Aristippus did beshrew those effeminate Philosophers, that had brought so
good a thing as ointment into reproach and disgrace. Let them prove no more
Devils that are received as Angels, but let them prove Angels that are
entertained as men. Let them not be like the sword, which cuts the scabbard
that preserves it; nor like the ivy, which eats up the tree, and undermines
the wall that supports it: But let them strive to be what Israel has been,
Esaias 19.24.
even a blessing in the midst of the land. Let them labor with Joseph, that
the house and country where they dwell, fare the better for their sakes. For
as the French use to say, Les bons rendeurs font les bons presteurs.
that good restorers make good lenders: So it is most certain, that good guests
make good hosts, that Christian demeanor in strangers is a good means to
revive CHRISTIAN Hospitality.

FINIS.
King JAMES toward the end of his Speech in Star Chamber the 20 of June 1616.
This closure is promised in the seventh page of this Treatise.

I Remember that before Christmas twelve month I made a Proclamation for this
cause, that all Gentlemen of quality should depart to their own countries and
houses, to maintain hospitality among their neighbors; which was equivocally
taken by some, as that it was meant only for that Christmas: But my will and
meaning was that it should always continue.

-- It is the fashion of Italy, especially of Naples (which is one of the
richest parts of it) that all the Gentry dwell in the principal Towns, and so
the whole country is empty: Even so now in England, all the country is
gotten into London; so as with time England will only be London, and the whole
country be left waste. For as we now do imitate the French fashion, in fashion
of clothes and lackeys to follow every man; So have we got up the Italian
fashion, in living miserably in our house, and dwelling all in the City. But
let us in Gods name leave these idle foreign toys, and keep the old fashion of
England: for it was wont to be the honor and reputation of the English
Nobility and Gentry, to live in the Country, and keep hospitality; for which
we were famous above all the Countries in the World; which we may the better
do, having a soil abundantly fertile to live in.

And now out of mine own mouth I declare unto you (which being in this place is
equal to a Proclamation, which I intend likewise shortly hereafter to have
publicly proclaimed) that the Courtiers, Citizens, and Lawyers, and those that
belong unto them, and others as have Pleas in Term time, are only necessary
persons to remain about this City; others must get them into the Country. For
beside the having of the Country desolate, when the Gentry dwell thus in
London, diverse other mischiefs arise upon it. First, if insurrections should
fall out (as was lately seen by the Levellers gathering together) what order
can be taken with it, when the Country is unfurnished of Gentlemen to take
order with it? Next, the poor want relief for fault of the Gentlemen's
hospitality at home. Thirdly, my service is neglected, and the good government
of the Country, for lack of the principal Gentlemen's presence that should
perform it. And lastly, the Gentlemen lose their own thrift, for lack of their
own presence, in seeing to their own business at home. Therefore as every fish
lives in his own place, some in the fresh, some in the salt, some in the mud:
so let every one live in his own place, some at Court, some in the City, some
in the Country; specially at Festival times, as Christmas, and Easter, and
the rest.

FINIS.
HARRISONUS HONORATUS: ID EST, HONORIFICA DE VITA ET OBITU VERE VENERABILIS
HOSPITALISQUE SENIS Domini HARRISONI Trinitatis Collegii nuper Vicepraefecti
Narratiuncula Beatissimae ejus memoriae consecrata A CALEBO DALECHAMPIO
Sedanensi, Verbi Divini Ministro and in Artibus Magistro.

1. SAM. 2.30. Honorantes me honorabo.

PROVE. 29.23. Humilis spiritu retinebit honorem.

CANTABRIGIAE: Apud THOMAM BUCK, celeberrimae Academiae typographum. 1632.

PRAESTANTISSIMO VIRO, ET PEREGRINIS STUDIOSIS FAVENTISSIMO, DOM. JOAN. BOISIO,
Ecclesiae Cathedralis Eliensis Canonico primo, and solida Graecae linguae
peritia nulli secundo,

Hanc suam de charissimi ipsius comparis vita and morte scriptiunculam, in
debitae gratitudinis and observantiae (...), inscribit and dedicat Calebus
Dalechampius; addito hoc, non suo unius sed multorum, voto:

Alvaeus non est, and Harrisonus non est; O pretiosa sit Boisii vita in
conspectu Dei: Serus in Coelum redeat, diuque
Laetus intersit populo Britanno,
Illum agat penna metuente solvi
Fama superstes.


Memoriae Sacrum.
FErunt, Athenienses insignem Hyrcani, Pontificis Judaeorum, Joseph. Antiquit.
lib. 14. cap. 16.
hospitalitatem frequenter expertos, memoriam ejus summis honoribus sibi
aeternandam censuisse: in eumque finem auream ei coronam and imaginem in Templo
Gratiarum solenniter consecrasse. Nobis non licet esse tam magnificis erga
virum (...), cui coelitibus nuper addito publicum aliquod gratitudinis nostrae
monumentum dicare satagimus. Sufficient imitari pium conatum officiosae illius
mulieris, quae ad Salvatoris nostri funerationem quod potuit fecit: Marc. 14.8.
Levit. 14.30, 31, 32. Possibilitas tua, mensura tua. Hugo de Sanct. Vict.
(...). Nazianz. Orat. 9.
nam Ultra posse viri non vult Deus ulla requiri.

Honoris igitur et amoris ergo libet hic attexere sequentes versiculos, quibus
Maii 2. 1620.
olim virum humanissimum, adeoque vere Humanitatem laudo in omni homine,
praesertim Academico and literato. Dr. Whitak. Praef. ad Audit. in Tract. Contr.
Academicum, post aliquot hebdomadum absentiam huc reversum salutavimus.

Venerabili Viro Magistro THOMAE HARRISONO Sacrae Theologiae Baccalaureo
doctissimo, and hospitalissimi Collegii TRINITATIS Vicepraefecto dignissimo, de
peregrinis Studiosis affatu and effectu optime merito, CARMEN GRATULATORIUM
eorundem omnium nomine conscriptum.
GAudete o juvenes, viri, senesque,
Et quantum est hominum eruditiorum,
Quos hoc Gymnasium capit stupendum:
Nec tantum indigenae, sed exterique,
Quotquot Pierides in hac celebri
Humanas Academia, sacrasve
Tractatis, patria procul remoti.
Venerabilis tam virtutum, quam annorum numere. Bern. de Amore Dei part 2.
Proverb. 16.31
Is salvus rediit senex colendus,
Cujus canities (quis hoc negarit?)
Est in justitiae via reperta:
Nulli noxius, omnibus benignus:
Cui tot nexibus estis obligati,
Solvendis ut iis pares nec isto
Sitis tempore (credo) nec futuro:
Quem vos, ut facitis, vicissim amate,
Ac illi bona serio vovete,
Quem Coelum tribuit bonis solumque.
O jucunda dies, beata, fausta,
Digna albo numerarier lapillo!
O chare omnibus Harrisone! Salve,
Salve, inquam, sine fine diligendum
Lumen Gymnasii decusque tanti,
Abstergens malam inhospitalitatis
Constanter maculam, tuis Britannis
Quam Vates Venusinus ausus olim
Est aspergere, nuper and Sabinus, Horat. Carm. lib. 3. Od. 4. Sab. in fabul.
4. lib. 6. Metamorph. Ovidii Jul. Scal. Poet. lib. 3 cap. 16.

Nec non Scaliger ille censor acer.
Omnes ex animo labrisque junctim
Gratamur tibi sospitem regressum,
Et nobis, patriae, Deoque felix
Vivas (...) Nestoris aetate dignissimus est, qui Nestoris ejusque filii
Pisistrati erga peregrinos and advenas humanitatem gnaviter imitatur. Vide Hom.
Odyss. 3. initio.
Nestoreos precamur annos.
Ad eundem. Ex Virgilio and Ovidio paululum immutatis.
FOrtunate senex, si quid mea carmina possent,
Nulla dies unquam memori te tolleret aevo,
Semper honos, nomenque tuum, laudesque manerent,
Et fieres illis fama super aethera notus:
Quid tibi deberem toto sciretur in Orb,
Te praesens mitem nosset, te serior aetas,
Nec tibi cessaret doctus benedicere lector.
EPITOMICA Mri. HARRISONI HISTORIA.
NAtus est Londini honestis parentibus anno nativitatis Dominicae millesimo
quingentesimo quinquagesimo quinto. Denatus Cantabrigiae anno 1631, aetatis
suae 76, Vicepraefecturae 20.

Vigesimo sexto die Julii honorifice sepultus est in interiori part Sacelli
Collegii Trinitatis, ab universis ejusdem alumnis: quintoque sequentis Augusti
pompa funebris celebrata est in eodem augusto Phrontisterio, quo dense et
conglobatim confluxerant omnes Academici, per Bedellum ex more Academiae pridie
convocati. In Aula, cujus parietes pulla vest carmine lugubri usquequaque
distincta induti erant, funebri epulo lauto satis and amplo, in honorem
defuncti, excepti sunt Nobiles adolescentes, Doctores and Professores,
Magistrique Regentes and Non-regentes. In Sacello pariter amicto spirituales
cupediae appositae sunt omnibus omnium ordinum studentibus, nec paucis
oppidanis. Ibi enim duo ex Sociis justa defuncto encomia persolverunt: prior
quidem docta disertaque concione Anglica in haec verba nostri Salvatoris, Mr
Thomas Whincop S. Theologiae Baccalaureus.
Lazarus amicus noster dormit, Joan. 11.11; quibus praesenti instituto dextre
accommodatis, ostendit D. Harrisonum, ob assiduum Dei cultum exactamque
Statutorum Collegii and Academiae observationem, De Baptismo contra Donaristas
lib. 6. c. 2. Tom. 7.
inter raros and paucos excellentissimae gratiae viros esse numerandum, ut de
Cypriano loquitur Augustinus: posterior autem admodum polita prudentique
oratione Latina varias ejusdem lauds persecutus est. Mr Henricus Hall in
Artibus Magist^r.


Et laud est hic dignus, and ille, and quisquis honora
Voce refert sancti quae meruere viri.
Sic igitur (...) honoratum videmus D. Harrisonum.

1 Honoratum in nativitate: quae illi contigit non in obscura aliqua Ithaca,
aut ignobili Arpino, sed in celeberrima florentissimi Regni Metropoli, Episc.
Hall Hospitali Concione in 1. Tim. 6.17. quae inscribitur, The righteous
Mammon, anno 1618. ubi sic affatur Londinenses; If preaching can lift up cities
unto heaven, ye are not upon earth.
omnium quae sub Coelo sunt Civitatum optime instituta, praestantissimisque
Concionatoribus long refertissima. Quod si mellito Philosopho licuit gloriari
se in lucem editum Athenis, Platoni apud Lactant. lib. 3. cap. 19.
non Thebis: multo magis huic miti Theologo se natum Londini, non alibi. Psalm.
87.4. Merchant-tailors School erected chiefly by Richard Hills Merchant-tailor,
in the year 1560. Dr Willer pagin. 1226. Synops. Papisim. Edit. ult.
Iste natus est ibi.

2 Honoratum in pueritia and adolescentia, quas bonis moribus and literis
imbuit egregia Schola Mercatorum Scissorum: ubi tam profecit, ut inter omnes
condiscipulos secundas facile teneret; ei quippe soli secundus, Hoc elogio
ornatur Episc. Andraeus ab Episc. Mortono, in Causa Regia Epist. Dedicator. One
Bishop worth many, where all most worthy. Dr Collins in his Epphata, or Defense
of the Bishop of Elie, Epist. Dedicat. to King James.
qui postea evasit plurimum suspiciendus Episcopus Wintoniensis, quo post
renatas literas non extitit ingeniosior aut doctior.

3 Honoratum in juventute: ab honoratissimo videlicet Protestantium Achille
Doctore Whitakero, qui versus suos comitiales pangendi curam ei committebat,
eumque suum Poetam appellitabat.

4 Honoratum in stata and virili aetate: in qua cooptatus est in venerabilem
illum coetum selectissimorum virorum, qui novam Bibliorum Versionem Anglicanam,
Dr Featly in the end of his Commendatorie Preface to the English Concordance by
Cotton.
omnium quae uspiam terrarum extant correctissimam, literatissimi Regis Jacobi
jussu and subsidiis adornarunt. Correctissimam autem accuratissimamque Sacri
Codicis Translationem, Amos 6.8.
vel gloria Jacobi, id est, stupendo Solomonici Templi opere gloriosiorem esse
affirmant eruditi. Bibliander, citante and suffragante Liveleo, Dedicatione
Annotat. in quinque priores ex minoribus Prophetis.


5 Honoratum in senectute: In qua, propter canonicum vivendi modum, tantopere
laudatus est apud eundem eminentissimum Monarcham in Collegio hospitantem, ut
regularem illum hominem, singular Academiae ornamentum, coram videre voluerit:
In qua, ob eximiam Hebraei Graecique idiomatis peritiam, inter primarios fuit
examinatores eorum qui publicam ambiunt harum linguarum Professionem: In qua
totos viginti annos summa cum integritatis and sedulitatis laud functus est
Vicepraefectura praestantissimi Collegiorum Anglicanorum: Pulchrum inventum
Collegiorum, and quod in Anglia magnifice usurpatur: neque crediderim in orb
terrarum simile esse, addam and fuisse. Magnae illic opes and vectigalia: verbo
vobis dicam? Vnum Oxoniense Collegium (rem inquisivi) superat vel dece^ nostra.
Lips. Lovanii lib. 3. cap. 5.
(Anglicana autem Collegia transmarinis multum praestare palam agnoscunt
celeberrimi Scriptores transmarini, harum rerum scientissimi) In qua plurimi
factus est tum ab excellentissimo Duce Lenoxiae, praeclarissimae indolis
Principe, cujus triennali institutione nobilius evasit nobilissimum hoc
Asceterium: tum a variis insignibus Episcopis, maxim a nominatissimo
Lincolniensi Antistite; quem omnes norunt esse (...). Verba Phoenicis ad
Achillem, apud Hom. Iliad 9.
cujus and scientia multum praedicat, and charitas aedificat: tum denique a
Reverendis Professoribus, quos quandiu potuit diligentissime audivit; quando
prae senili infirmitate non potuit, humanissimos visitatores expertus est.

6 Honoratum in morte: tunc enim servum suum, Luc. 2.29.
ut senem Simeonem, Dominus dimisit in pace: tunc eum beavit non solum
indolentia, Diodorus and Hieronymus apud Cic. lib. 2 de Finibus bonorum and
malorum. Psalm. 16.11. Joan. 14.8. 1. Joan. 3.2. Horat. lib. 2. Sat. 6. Nam fere
quoties audisset, cito ac nullo cruciatu defunctum quempiam, sibi and sais
(...) similem precabatur. Su^ton. in Augusto cap. 99. Luc. 16.22. Heb. 12.23.
2. Sam. 1.23.
quam quidam Philosophi falso crediderunt, sed etiam visione beatifica, quam
omnes Christiani certo sciunt esse summum bonum: tunc ei concessit talem
exitum, qualem Augustus, Fortunae filius, semper optaverat, facilem nimirum,
and doloris expertem dissolutionem; in qua per sanctos Angelos asportata est
sancta haec anima in sinum Abrahami, and aggregata spiritibus justorum
perfectorum. Virtus and honos in ejus vita dilectissimi and jucundissimi
gemelli fuerunt, in morte quoque non separati sunt.

7 Honoratum in sepultura: quam non habuit in communi aliquo sepulcreto vel
coemeterio, Psalm. 26.8.
sed in loco ubi honor Dei habitat: ut quod tam diu fuerat vivum Spiritus
Sancti Templum, conderetur in Sacrario jugis culcus divini, ceu spiritualis
incensi, nidore fragrantissimo.

8 Honoratum in supremo funere and exequiis: quippe in frequentissima
literatorum corona eleganter veraciterque laudatum a duobus laudatis viris.
Cic. Famil. Epist. 5.12. and 15.6. and Tuscul. 4
Talium enim Panegyricos, omnes cum Naeviano Hectore and Cicerone merito ducunt
honorificos.

Haec si non singula, certe juncta probant haud vulgariter honoratum fuisse D.
HARRISONUM: Deus enim non ita fecit omni homini, neque hunc honorem
consequuntur omnes ejus Sancti. Nec dubium est quin, his lectis aut auditis,
multi sint in hoc vel simile votum erupturi, Sic mihi contingat vivere, sicque
mori.

Porro tralatitium est ac solenne Heroologis, in cujusque praestantis viri vita
selectiora ejusdem Apophthegmata recensere; quia sermo est index animi, and
familiares sententiae virum indicant: Ideoque subjiciendas hic duxi crebriores
istas ac celebriores in ore D. Harrisoni sententias; partim ex Scriptura, cujus
peritissimus erat; partim ex sententiosissimo Poetarum Horatio, quem sapientem
suum Poetam vocare solebat, desumptas.

In monte Domini providebitur. Genesis 22.14.

A Te sunt omnia, Domine, 1. Chro. 29.14
and ex manu tua dedimus Tibi.
Psalm. 127.2.
Dat dilecto suo somnum.
Eccles 7.2.
Melius est ire in domum luctus, quam ire in domum convivii: eo quod in illa est
finis omnium hominum; qui autem vivit, reponit illud in cord suo.
Esa. 49.23.
Et Reges erunt nutritii tui, and Reginae eorum nutrices tuae.
Romans 12.3.
(...).
Hor. Carm. lib. 1. Od. 11. Idem lib. 2. Od. 10.
-- dum loquimur, fugerit invida Aetas --
Sperat infestis, metuit secundis
Alteram sortem been praeparatum
Pectus --
Ibid. Od. 15.
Privatus illis census erat brevis,
Commune magnum --
Lib. 4. Od. 7.
Immortalia ne speres monet annus, and almum Quae rapit hora diem.
Frigora mitescunt Zephyris: ver proterit aestas, Interitura simul
Pomifer autumnus fruges effuderit: and mox Bruma recurrit iners.
Sed and hoc distichum frequenter recitabat, Nobile lingua bonum quae novit
tempore fari,
Et quae non novit nobile lingua malum.
Alludens videlicet ad lepidum and notum Aesopi factum, In vita Aesopi.
quo docere voluit bonas hominum linguas esse valde bonas, malas valde malas:
sicuti legimus de ficubus Jeremiae, and interpretationibus Origenis; Jer. 24.3.
Cassiod. lib. De Divinis Lection c. 1.
quo, ubi been, nemo melius; ubi male, nemo pejus.

De bonitate autem vel malitia linguae verba facere, quem magis decuit quam
venerabilem hunc senem? Neminem vituperare, laudare bonos, Virgilius solebat,
and hic noster. Tit. 3.2. Eos etiam qui non indigent clementia ullius, nihil
magis quam lentias decet. Atque ego optimum and emendatissimum existimo qui
caeteris ita ignoscit, tanquam ipse quotidie peccet: ita peccatis abstinet,
tanquam nemini ignoscat. Plin. lib. 8. epist. 22.
Nam adeo temperantis and fraenatae linguae vir extitit, ut Apostolicum illud
(si quis alius sui temporis and loci) constanter observarit, (...), Nullius
famam laedere: quamvis ipse esset integer vitae scelerisque purus, atque adeo
justis aliorum censuris minime obnoxious. Quae sane virtus eo majorem debet illi
conciliare honorem, quo difficilior est, and rarior temper and ubique fuit, ut
Hieronymus queritur his verbis: Pauci admodum sunt qui huic vitio renuncient;
raroque invenies qui ita vitam suam irreprehensibilem exhibere velint, ut non
libenter reprehendant alienam: tantaque hujus mali libido mentes hominum
invasit, Hieron. Epist. ad Celantiam.
ut etiam qui procul ab aliis vitiis recesserunt, in istud tamen quasi in
extremum Diaboli laqueum incidant.

Cum igitur (...) Harrisonus de nemine vivus male locutus sit, nemo de eo
mortuo non been loquatur. (...). 1. Mac. 3.7.
Sit ejus recordatio, ut Judae Maccabaei, apud omnes posteros in benedictionem.
Impleatur in eo quod divinus and humanus Vates pridem cecinerunt, In memoria
perpetua erit justus. Psalm. 112.6. Horat. Carm. lib. 4. od. 8.

Dignum laud virum Musa vetat mori.


FINIS.

