A Christian turned Turk: OR, The Tragical Lives and Deaths of the two Famous
Pirates, WARD and DANSIKER.

As it has been publicly Acted.

WRITTEN By ROBERT DABORN, Gentleman.

Nemo sapiens, Miser est.

LONDON, Printed by for william Barrenger, and are to be sold at the great
North-doore of Paul's. 1612.

To the Knowing Reader.
AS no argument more proves the excellency of Poesy then the contempt is
thrown upon it by silken gulls and ignorant Citizens, so there is no blemish
takes from the beauty of this only Allcomprehending-art, so much as the same
wherewith her own professors brand her, for I may truly vary that of the
Tragoedian, Quemcunque poetam vides, miserum dicas, I speak it especially in
regard of that free title better times allowed this heavenly Science, now made
captive by each unworthy hand; in recovery whereof I have, so far as my weak
power extended, procured the publishing this oppressed and much martird
Tragedy, not that I promise to my self any reputation hereby, or affect to see
my name in Print, vsherd with new praises, for fear the Reader should call in
question their judgments that give applause in the action; for had this wind
moved me, I had prevented others shame in subscribing some of my former labors,
or let them gone out the in devils name alone: which since impudence will not
suffer, I am content they pass together; it is then to publish my innocence
concerning the wrong of worthy personages, together with doing some right to
the much-suffering Actors that has caused my name to cast it self in the
common rack of censure, accompanied with so weak comforts, as this Triuiall
work can give it, and that my gratitude may be in the first place, I must in
dispight of any justly neglected C^^nicke confess to have received so much
worthy respect, and approved so much generous honesty in the^, that with any
indifferent hazard, I will study to make good their loss, and my gratitude. I
write this, led by no Mercinary hopes to share in their Fortunes, which has so
put out somes eyes, that measuring others sight by their own weakness gave
her out for blind; but led by that spirit knows no sin equal to
ingratitude: As for the former imputation, granting all objections, I clear my
self by these two positions, No man can feign any ill of a Parricide, the
greater always including the less; this being so tolerable, especially in
Oratory, which is an inseperable branch of Poesy, that it subsists not without
aggrauation; the second is, No man can entitle another to his crimes, for, Alia
est cognatio culpae, alia sanguinis, from which I so far abhor, as my own
descent is not obscure but generous, if this will not give satisfaction, know I
live under too safe a law to fear the stab of a Rouing boy, and for any wrong,
Equo mart, I forgive it, daring thus far to boast my knowledge, that I cannot
be a coward, I write succintly, knowing the bounds of an Epistle, the rather
because I wish no other perusers, then those to whom I dedicate my self;
though herein I speak against the Printers profit, if these accept my
impolished labors, I promise the next shall be coockt for the stomachs of the
Critical, mess it self. Sanabimur si separemur a coe^u.

The Prologue.
ALL fair content dwell here, and may our strains
Give you that choice delight which crowns our pains.
Our subiect's low, yet to your eyes presents
Deeds high in blood, in blood of Innocents:
Transcends them low, and your invention calls
To name the sin beyond this black deed falls.
What heretofore set others pens aworke,
Was ward turned Pyrate, ours is ward turned Turk.
Their trivial Scoenes might best afford to show
The baseness of his birth, how from below
Ambition often takes root, makes men forsake
The good the'enioy, yet know not. Our Muse does tak^
A higher pitch, leaving his Pyracy
To reach the heart it self of villainy.
What to that period makes the nearest way,
Our Scoene pursues, you must supose his stay
Has lately been upon the Irish Shore,
Where wanting men he inuites some strangers or^
Into his Bark, in height of wine and game,
He slips his anchor, and reveals his name.
There fate succedes, and to your gentle view
We give not what we could, but what know true.
Our Ship's aflote, we fear nor rocks nor sands,
Knowing we are environed with your helping hands.
Drammatis Person^e.
Christians.
Captains.
Ward. Dansiker. Francisco. Frederick. Gismund.
Gentlemen.
Ferdinand. Albert. Carolo. Sismund.
Raymond, his two sons.

Turks.
Viceroy. Crosman. Muffty.
Jews.
Benwash. Rabshake. Ruben. Alizia, A Christian woman.
Turkish women.
Agar. Voada. Turks Officers, Sailers.
A Christian turned Turk.
Act. I.
Sc^en. I.
Enter Ward, Gismund, Albert, Ferd. Sailers rise from a Table. Ward. I Will play
no more.


Ferd. Set but my hand out, here is 400. Crowns vnlost yet, Fortune may make
them yours.


Gism. Fortun's a Bitch, a mere strumpet, she has turned up the Ace so long,
I have never an eye to see with* she has sok't me.


Alb. We came aboard to venture with you,
Deal Merchant-like, put it upon one maine,
And throw at all.

Ferd. One cast, and we will leave you.

Gis. Leave us yet? we have a cast worth two of the rest.

Alb. It Is set, throw at it gentle Sir.

Ward. We shall have time enough hereafter,
You are too violent.

Gism. I fear you will not be half so forward anon when we should use you.


Sail. A sail, a sail, a sail.


Omn. Shoute.


Ward. Why stand you so amazed? conceive you not the language of the Sea?


Gism. Now you may show your selves gamesters,
You shall have your bellies full of hazard.

Ferd. We are betrayed.

Alb. Are you not Merchantmen?

Gism. How else? and deal by wholesale, take up much at a long day. Do you
know this honorable shape? Heroicke Captain WARD, Lord of the Ocean, terror
of Kings, Landlord to Merchants, rewarder of Manhood, conqueror of the
Western world, to whose followers the Lands and Seas pay tribute, and they to
none, but once in their lives to the manor of W^pping, and then are free ever
after. This is he my noble mummers.


Alb. We are for ever lost.


Ferd. I^'t be our moneys that you covet, willingly we give it up, only
deprive us not of our fair home, our Country: do but land us.


Ward. Know we have other use for you,
Have not enticed you hither for your gold,
It is the man we want. Is It not a shame,
Men of your qualities and personage,
Should live as cankers, eating up the soil
That gave you being, like beasts that never look further*
Then where they first took food, that men call home,
Which gives them means equal unto their minds,
Puts them in action.

Gism. True, who is it would not smile
To hear a Soldier, that has nothing left
But misery to speak him man, can show
More marks then pence, upon whose back contempt
Heaps on the weight of poverty. Who would not smile
To hear this piece of wretchedness boast his wounds?
How far he went to purchase them? with what honor
He put them on? and now for sustenance,
Want of a little bread, being giving up
His empty soul, should joy yet that his Country
Shall see him breath his last: when that air he terms his
Ungratefully does stifle him.

Ferd. You tell us of a gulf, which to eschew,
You dash us against a rock more full of fear
Of danger: for we should call that action,
Which gives unto posterity our name
Writ in the golden lines of honor, where this brands
Our foreheads with the hateful name of thieves, of robbers,
Piracy, it is theft, most hateful, swallows up
The estates of Orphans, Widows, who borne free,
Are thus made slaves, inthral'd to misery,
By those that should defend them, at the best.
You rob the venting Merchants, whose manly breast
Scorning base gain at home, puts to the maine
With hazard of his life and state, from other lands
To enrich his own, whilst with ungrateful sands
He thus is ouerwhelm'd.

Gism. These children have bin at S. Antlins.
They Will perswad's out of our profession.
A plague upon this Schollership,
One man that savours of an University,
Is able to infect a whole Navy with cowardice.

Ferd. Cowardice? thou lie: there is not a man here dares less then thy self.


Gism. Zounds I Will try that.

Ward. Hold, or by all my hopes, who makes next proffer
Falls on my sword. If you will try your valors
The enemy is at hand. As for your virtuous lectures,
We are Mariners, and Soldiers, not tattered yet
Enough to hear them, though in time we might
Be apt for such tongue-comfort, being swayed
By your directions.

Within. A sail, a sail, a sail.

Enter Sailer. Ward. How? more sails yet?

Sail. The first that we descri'd, does bear a head,
And as it seems, pursued by a man of war,
They make with us for succor.

Gism. Yes, we will succor her, and suck her too, as dry as a Usurers palm.


Al. Nay, then we are put from shore.

Gis. Without ken boys, more sails, the least delay.
O l^^^ turn Serving-men, the trencher hold
Whilst others eat the meat.

Ward. Away, make ready for the fight.

Gis. Courage brave sparks, now to gain wealth, or graves:
To dye in peace fits beasts, and abject slaves.

Fer. Thou needst not fear the curse, bloodthirsty monster.
Oh that our better part should thus be captived
By sense and will! who like a ship vnman'd,
That Is borne by motion of the violent waves
And giddy winds, does seem to make a course
Direct and punctiue, till we see it dash
Against some prouder Sylla, and display
How much she inward wanted to her sway.

Al. You have well described him: but to our own fortunes.

Fer. We must obey necessity, since it is our fates
To be surpised thus, by this monster beast.
We must as did that Captain, so much famed,
Li^k the fierce Lions feet, till happier times
Do give us freedom in his punished crimes.

Al. You have well advised. Fortune in spite of thee,
How ea'r my body's thrald, my mind rests free.

Fer. This stand our comfort: we may happen be
^he Chorus only to their Tragedy.
Exit.
Scoene. 2.
Enter Lemot, his sister Alizia, putting on the weed of a Sailers boy, Monsieur
Davy, and Sailers. Lem. Unfortunate sister, my heart dissolues to blood,
And pays ^ad tribute to thy sadder griefs.
Nay, make no period, our woes are not at full,
Hymen did never behold so black a nuptial.
Alas! with our delay we hasten misery,
See how they bear up to us. Dear sister hide
At least thy sex, though not thy sorrow.

Aliz. Wretched Alizia, little thinks young Raymond
His Brid's so near unto captivity.
Be gentle yet you seas, and swallow me,
Since I am denied his arms, let my virginity
Be offered unto him in sacrifice.
'T will be some comfort, his love a maiden dies.

Lem. Nay then thou cleau'st my soul, do not distrust
Chaste thoughts are guided by a power, that is just.
My worthy friends, yet what persuasion needs
To stir up valor where necessity
And justice of our cause, in basest spirits
Would strike a fire to kindle cowardice?
Three days we have been pursued by a Dutch Pyrat,
And now we are fallen upon no less a monster.
Me thinks I see your eyes darting forth flames
Like Lions in their chase, the greedy hunter
Seeming to warm that blood, whose heat and rage
Proves his destruction.

Enter Ward, Gismund, Sailers above. Gism. Hoy,

Lem. Not ready yet? alas thou will betray
Thy self unto their lust.

Aliz. Rather to death: Nature this comfort gave,
No place so miserable, but yields a grave
To wretchedness.

Gis. Hoy, of whence your ship, and whither are you bound?

Davi. We are of Marcelles, bound for Normandy.
Of whence are you?

Gism. We are of the Sea.

Sail. The Devil land you.

Gism. Bring your master a board* or we will give you a broad side.

Lem. As you are men I do conjure your valors.

Aliz. As you are virtuous keep from slavery.
A hapless, hapless maid.

Davi. Misdoubt it not faire-maid,
There Is not a man here, but well knows how much
He has advantage of his enemy,
A race of thieves, Bankroupts, that have laien
Upon their countries stomach like a ^urfet,
Whence being vomited they strive with poisonous breath
To infect the general a^re: Creatures that stand
So far from what is man, they know no good,
But in their prey, nor for necessity
But for mere hate to virtue, pursuing vice,
And being down themselves would have none rise.

Gism. The curs are sure asleep, we will waken 'em,
Gunner give fire.

Lem. In their own language answer them.

Gism. Zounds do they begin to prate, have with you, lace the netting, let
down the fights, make ready the sm^^^ shot, gunner, give them a broad side,
we will prate with 'e^ A star board there.


Lem. Brave countrymen,
Think through how many dangers, with what sweat, what care,
How long expense of time, we have been getting
Those goods these Robbers fight for, that should make good to us
The sweet of just endeavors, look on this maid,
Think with what honorable welcomings,
You shall deliver her to her betrothed husband,
How much you shall engage him, lastly, think that you see,
Even all the mis^ries despised poverty
Can throw on men, that by this one hours valor
We only can redeem our selves from death
Oh think how happy it is to innocence,
Whereunto guilty souls it looks black and fearful:
At least let this al thoughts of fear dispell,
Truth fights against theft, and heaven opposes hell.

Omnes. We are resolved S. Dennis victory.

Lem. A constant breast may fall, but cannot dye,
Exit.
Enter Ward with a slain friend, and Ferdinand. Ward. Recall thy spirit brave
friend, a while, yet stay,
At least bear thy revenge hence with thee.

Ferd. He has lost all motion.

Ward. Injurious heaven that with so excellent matter
As is our soul, did mingle this base mould,
So frail a substance earth, as if thou had framed man
The subject of thy laughter, gave him a spirit
Free, unbounded, whose fiery temper breaks
Through all the clouds of danger, dares even heaven,
Swells and bears high, when with one little prick
This buble breaks, displaies a vanity,
Ridiculous vanity, this building
That has been twenty and odd years a rearing,
One blast thus lays it flat, I could en'e tremble,
To think that such a coward I bear about me,
As is this flesh, that for so small a wound
Betrays our life.

Ferd. This shows sir, nature near intended man,
Other then as she sent him to the world,
All vnoffensiue, vna^n'd: when unto be asts,
She gave the means to hurt as to defense,
The armor she gave man was innocence.

War. True, there was some other end in our creation
Then to be that which men term valiant.

Ferd. There was.

Enter Gismond. Gism. Courage brave sparks the slaves begin to faint,

Ferd. It is his evil spirit sure that in this likeness hants him

Ward. See where he lies.

Gis. S'foot we shall share the more sir, I always thought
Fortune had marked him out to dye by the French.
He had so much of the English spirit in him.
Exit
Ward. Fortune* true, the fate of man is fixed,
Immovable as the pole: how idle then were he
Should strive to cross vnuoided desteny?
And think to stay his course, seeing we are swayed
As are the motionary ingines of a clock,
By the dull weight that still does downward tend,
Till it strike earth, and so there motion end.

Ferd. Give me the hearing Sir,

Ward. Persuade no more, we have no will to act,
Or not to act more, then those orbs we see,
And planetary bodies, which in their offices
Observe the will of fate: the difference is,
They are confined, we are not* they are stars fixed,
We wandering Run on thou purple line
That draw'st my lives fate out, thou that do frown
Upon the births of men, now Sa^urne smile.
Those under milder Planets borne live, servile: good;
Mars called our Birth, my race shall be through blood
Exit
Ferd. Abused knowledge that first werst given to man
A light, now helpst to dazell him, and what ere want
Befall through our own imperfect judgment,
Unbridled will the throw on fortune, chance,
I see man's happiness, were his ignorance,
Exit.
Within Gallop. Gallop. A board, a board, a board.

Lor. Dear sir withdraw, you are deprived of sight

Lem. So much the better, I see no fear in fight,
Courage brave countrymen: what is natures part
May fall; what is heavens can never, it is the ods
That just men have of bad, still to the gods
They stand or fall.

G^ll^p. Enter, Enter* Enter.
Zounds the slave winkes and fights.

Ward. A Ward, A Ward, A Ward,
shoute. Down with them, down with them, away let him go ouerbord, where he a
second Alexand'r, there is not a man of them lives, but shall go ouer-board,
we will offer them to our deceassed frindes in sacrifice.


Aliz. My brother, my dear dear brother.

2. Gent. There were no conscience, no religion in it,

Gallop. How? Conscience, were it but to banish those two words they shall go
ouer-board.


War. They shall go ouer-board: suppose I speak the contrary.


Gallop. My Captain, my man of war speak the contrary they are as safe as
the great Turk.


Ward. Now they shall ouer-board.

Gallop. Out-swagered?

Ward. How many French are left?

Gism. There Is only five of four and twenty living.
Never did men with equal spirit stand,
A day so black and stormy: rob not your self then,
Of so brave witnesses of this days valor.

Ward. How? dare you sir give us directions?

Gism. How dare I sir? I am a Gentleman
Equal unto your self.

Ward. Take that now, I am before you,

Gism. You are, I Will not be long behind you.

Ward. Know, that our word shall be a law,

Gallip. That may be, for he has had conscience by the ears already.


Ward. Hoyst me a vessel up of Maligo,
We Will drink a health unto the wandering ghosts
Of our slain followers, and every draught
The Cannon makes report off, a Frenchman
Shall ouer-board, who to our friends may tell,
We drank a rowse to them,

Ferd. As low as hell.

Enter Sailer. Sail. Francisco Captain of the man of war, pursued our prize,
has set a Pinace forth, who according to the custom of the sea, demands half
of the spoil, to your demand he threatens instant fight, force against force,
or if you dare to accept it, he makes you offer of single opposition.


Ward. Accept it? he could not name that honor
We covet more, reward the messenger,
They two shall be the hostages
For the equal trial, what is his weapon?
Where the place of fight?

Sail. His weapons are sword and dagger, the place
Here on our hatches, both our ships being grappled,
The cath on each side given, who conquers the other
Shares the whole boo^y.

Ward. Agreed we seal to his condition,
Francisco call you him? I emulate
His daring spirit.

Gallop. Fortune shapes our reuendge you see.

Ferd. What need you give your self unto this danger,
When in our general strength we have advantage?

Ward. I prithee do not move my patience, I scorn to take
From others to my rising, he is only worthy state
From fortunes wheel plucke's boldly his own fate,
And here is an arm shall do it.

2. Gent. You see his insolence how he contemnes us.

Ferd. No more, we are agreed.

Sis. How shall we hinder their pursuit?

Gallop. When both the ships are grappled, privately
We Will cut their hausers, the wind blows fair
To give our lesser bark advantage, it is not ten league^
To Tunis, where entered, we are as safe
As in a tower of brass.

Sis. How if we shoot him, as we make away?

Gallop. By no means to shall be Franciscoes task
To cut his throat, this makes our revenge full,
We share the prise he fights for

Sis. Rare gull! we are all firm and secret,

Omnes. All.

Gall. So that I rise, let the world sink, heaven fall.

Ward. My merit: shall I thrall them? the sway of things,
Belongs to him dares most, such should be Kings,
And such am I, what nature in my birth
Denied me, fortune supplies: this maxim I hold,
He lives a slave, that lives to be contrould,
But see the man whose ruin crowns me.

Enter Fra^. Fra. Art thou the chief and guider of this Bark?

Ward, The same sir.

Fran. May I impute it to your ignorance
In Marines actions, or the daring spirit,
That bars my right in thy achieved prise.

Ward. This makes you answer, what do you see in me,
Does promise I should be the sutler sir,
Fet^h you provision in.

Fran. A little calmer sir, you are not now in Kent,
Crying herrings seven a penny, nay we have heard of you*
You can baule well, you have served a prentiship
Unto the trade, affrighting of whole streets
With your full Oyster voice.

Ward. Damnation!

Fran. Poor fishers brat, that never did aspire
Above a mus^e boat, that were not borne
Unto a fortune boue two cades of sprats,
And those smoakt in thy fathers bedchamber*
That by a beggar in mere charity
Being made drunk, steed of a mariner
Were stole aboard, and being awake did smell
Worse then thy shell commodity at midsummer,
That desperate through fear were made a Captain,
When to have been a shore again, thou would have turned
Swabber unto a Peter-man.

Ward. By all my hopes thou had been better dig'd
Thy grandsirs Vrn up and have swallowed it.

Fran. Thou bark'st too much to bite.

Ward. Clear the deck there, each man bestow himself

Sis. It Is done, there hauser's cut without descry,

Gall. Away, farewell brave Captain, conquest sits on thy brow.

Ward. Leave me, I say

Gall. Th'wert never gulled till now.
Exit.
Fran. Give a charge there, say your prayers Knight, doom's day is nie


fight. Ward. True it sinks thee to hell, whilst thus it bears me high.
Stand'st thou so long, thou have some enchantment sure,
Or have I lost my wonted vigor?

Fran. Flatter no more thy self, will thou deliver
A moyty of thy prise up?

Ward. Yes, thus thou shar'st it: Damnation! his sword falls.
Oh that my gall could spoute out through mine eyes
A poisonous vapor to put out your lights,
And in a vale of darkness leave the world.

Fran. Will thou yet yield me right?

Ward. Know Francisco,
Were thou an army that imcompast me,
I would breath defiance to thee, and with this arm,
As shot from out a cannons mouth, thus would I make
A way through death and danger.

Fran. I do applaud thee, and that thou well may know
All valor's not confined within thy breast
He flings away his sword, and aftar loses his dagger. I thus oppose thee,
fortune shall have no share
In what I conquer.

Ward. Why, now I envy thee, thy life is mine,

Fran. Take it I dare thy let.

Ward. Not for the world, thus I return thy debt:
Not only in the prise but in my self
Thou have an equal share, henceforth I vow the brotherhood.

Fran. Your love, I ask no more.

Enter Ferd. Ferd. You need not, there is one gone before
Takes order for your share.

Ward. Whether makes the slaves, where is Gallop?

Ferd. Posting as fast as his sails will bear him.

Ward. Incarnate Devil forthwith give them chase,
Why mou'st not?

Sail. They have cut our hausers we cannot budge a foot.

Ward. The death of slaves pursue him.

Fran. You are too violent.

Ward. To be baffled by a Cur, a foysting hound
My Zani: A creature without a soul
Made to mock man with.

Fran. Forbear I say, and let us turn our anger
On the next passenger.

Ward. Might I but live to see the dog-fish once again.

Fran. Near doubt it sir, next prise we take forthwith
We Will make to Tunis, mean time let revenge sleep
Those tides most violent are, which winds back keep,

Ward. For this alone I vow, whom next I meet
Shall feel my fury, nation nor quallity
Shall be their privilege, my sword now vengeance craves,
And who escape this do worse, I Will sell for slaves.

Exeunt. Scoen. 3.
Enter Dansiker, three or four Sailers, Lief: Dansiker reads a letter. Leif.
What news brave Captain?

Dans. Good. These letters from my wife bring certainty
Of our obtained pardons, on condition
We hence forth for the state of France employ
Our lives and service.

Omn. Long live King Henry of France.

Shout Dans. My valiant friends this 4 years Dansiker
Has led you proudly through a sea of terror,
Through deeds so full of prowess they might have graced
The brow of worthiness, had justice to our cause
Given life and action. But since the breach of laws
Of Nations, civil society, justly intitles us
With the hateful style of robbers, let us redeem our honor
And not return into our country, with the names
Of pardoned thieves, but by some worthy deed,
Daring attempt, make good unto the world
Want of employment, not of virtue forct
Our former act of spoil and rapine.

Leif. Set the design down may regaine us credit
Deserve this grace so freely offered us
Weel or accomplish it, or with our lives
Seal the attempt.

Omn. Brave Captain, through death we will follow thee,

Dans. Then thus, that with the same weapon, we may
Our country cure, with which we wounded her,
My purpose is to ruin all the Pirates
Lie in the harbor here.

Leis. Rarelit may be easy done, observe the wind
And firing but of one consume the rest.

Dans. We must not trust to such incertainties.
Thus I have plotted it: we first will set a fire
Some house in the town, to which when each man makes,
As they will be enforced from the haven
To yield their helps, with much facility
We may perform our purpose.

Lif. How? vndiscri'd, shall we attempt the town?

Dans. That charge be mine, the Renegado Jew,
You know gives free and open entertain
To all of our profession. In some out-house of his
I will convey a pot of wildfire to it,
I Will make a train of match, that at three hours
Shall give it fire.

Sailers. Excellent! The time sir.

Dans. To morrow night: mean time make ready
For our departure, but with such secrecy
Suspicions self may not discry it: provide the balls
We must bestow upon the ships.

List. That care be ours.

Dans. The rest leave unto me,
We Will return nobly, or else nobly dye.
Exeunt. Enter Ruben. Ruben, what news?

Rub. My master sir, desires your company,
There Is a new Pyrat landed, his name is Gallop.

Dans. More yet? do they come on so fast?
Your master would in gross his prize.

Rub. He would: and for your courtesy herein,
He will forbear three months the crowns you owe him:

Dans. I Will use my Art sir to his benefit,
And for the Crowns, no longer I Will delay him,
Here is my hand to morrow night I Will pay him.

Exeunt. Scoene. 4.
Enter Rabshake, Agar, Voada, Ag. Speak freely, what think you of the new-come
Captain,
Voada?

Vo. He looks as if his father and mother had got him in fear: his eyes go
like a City Catch-poles, several ways at once, there is no stuff in him. Give
me the Dutch Cavaliere Dansiker.


Ag. Out upon him puffe-paste, he was spoild in his infancy, ill-bied.


Rab. How? spoiled with ill bread? it was ill drink spoiled him. I am of my
masters mind, the new-come Pyrate is a reasonable handsome man of a Christian.


Ag. Why? does Religion move any thing in the shapes of men?


Rab. Altogether. What Is the reason else that the Turk and Jew is troubled
(for the most part) with gowty legs, and fiery nose, to express their
heart-burning: whereas the Puritan is a man of upright calfe, and clean
nosthrill.


Vo. Setting aside your nose, you should turn Christian, then your calfe swells
upward mightily.


Rab. How? I turn Christian? they have Jew enough already amongst'em: were it
but three qualities they have, I Will be none of their society.


Ag. Three qualities? I pri'the tell 'em us Rabshake.


Rab. First, they suffer their wives to be their masters. Secondly, they make
men thieves for want of maintenance, and then hang them up for stealing.
Lastly, they are mad four times a year, and those they call Tearm-times,
and then they are so purged by their Physicians, which they name Lawyers, some
of 'em are never their own men after it. I turn Christian? they shall have
more charity amongst 'em first. They will devour one-another as familiarly as
Pikes do Gudgeons, and-with as much facility as Dutchmen do Flapdragons.


Ag. How? eat up one-another?


Rab. I, eat up one-another: you have an innocent Christian called a Gallant,
your City Christian will feed upon no other meat by his good will.


Vo. But their wives will not feed on 'em too.


Rab. The truth is, they are not altogether so great devourers; mary they will
be sucking at the bones. But see my master, the great thief and the little
thieves, the robbers and the receiver.


Enter Jew, Gallop, Das. Sar. Sis. Ag. He Is come. Thou powerful God of love,
strike through
Those awful darts of thine, whose burning heads (mine eyes
Pierce thorough hearts of ye, melt frostiest breasts,
Make all stoop to thy Deity. Now give thy art,
No God but Cupid pitties mortal's smart.

Enter Dansiker, Benwash, Jew, Gismund, Frederick, Carolo, Alizia. Gis. Five
ducats a Tun, 'shart the Caske is worth more,

Jew. You must remember at what rate you bought 'em.

Das. And at what price you may have more.

Gis. You speak like men that know how the market goes
Your ear Jew.

Aliz. What misery remains to add to mine,
My brother lost his life in my defense;
And with his life, my sex and liberty,
I stand deprived of. Are not these wounds sufficient
To let out my weak breath? Thou flinty breast,
Art thou impenetrable? or is that thing cal^d death
Too great a good for such a wretch as I am? It is, it is,
And that is the cause so many miseries
Do stop the way to it.

Jew. I am your Merchant Ruben Rabshake, my wife, her sister Fetch me three
hundred Dukets for this Gentleman.


Rab. This new-come theefesit?

Jew. Gentleman, slave.

Rab. Why your thief is a Gentleman, he scorns to do any thing, and he lives
upon his commings in.


Jew. Peace dog, you see gallants, we are not Italionat to lock our women
up, we set 'em free, give open entertainment.


Gal. It seems this Jew keeps a Bawdy House, I like his wife well, I could
find in my heart to cast away half a Ducket on her.


Sar. You are of a noble mind sir, courtly and high,
It Is want of merit that breeds jealousy,
From which I know you clear.

Jew. As I am from covetousness: how their eyes strike each other? Rabshake --


Rab. Here sir.

Jew. Captain, your gold.

Ag. He saw our eyes meet, no matter, may I cool my heat Let the world burn.
Thy counsel Voada.


Jew. I do not like this fellows looks, Rabshake.

Rab. He has a hanging countenance indeed sir,

Jew. Tush, my wifeman, thou have forgot how dear
I bought my liberty, renounced my law,
The Law of Moses, turned Turk, all to keep
My bed free from these Mohammedan Dogs.
I would not be a monster Rabshake, a man-beast,
A Cuckold.

Rab. I have not fogotten sir that you damned your self because you would not
be a Cornuto: If every man should fine so dear for his horns, we should have
but a few Christians left: but seeing you fear your vessel has a leake,
wherefore do you put her to sea, man her thus?


Jew. For commodity: thou see rich shopkeepers set their wives at sale to
draw in custom, utter their wares, yet keep that Iem untouched: all for
profit man.


Rab. I am not of your mind sir, there is no profit without some pain.


Jew. No more villain: should I suspect my self to have that disease, I would
run mad, first fury of my horns should light on thee: look to it, thou art no
longer living then my wife is honest.


Rab. I fear my days are but short then, if my life lasts no longer then I
can keep a Woman honest against her will.


Voad. It is a lovely boy, rare featured, would he were mine.


Ag. It is so Voada, he has made the slave my Iaylor.


Voad. I have not seen so much of beauty in a man.


Ag. You loose your self. What man? what beauty? I tell thee I am undone,
Rabshake is made my ouer-seer.


Vo. I would use him like an ouer-seer then, he should stand by whilst the
Executioner opened the bags: I must enjoy his love, though que^ching of my
lust did burn the world besides.


Jew. It Is right Captain.


Gis. Yes, it is right.


Gal. But that is the wrong way sir, your followers expect their equal shares.


Jew. The fellow raues: talk to a Captain of equal sharing, I Will take order
for landing the goods, and be with you presently. Rabshake, thou know thy
doom slave, look to it, thine eyes, villain thine eyes.

Exit.
Rab. I Will warrant you sir, I Will look toot.


Gal. Here, carry'em these two ducats to drink upon receipt of the whole, I Will
deal like a commander with 'em, as men do with their followers: that is, as
you have followed me to earne means, so now you shall follow me as long to
get your earnings, you shall be followers still, I will discharge none of you.


Sares. We took him for a gull, but now I see he has had command, he can
cheat his Soldiers.


Sis. I hope sir you will make better respect of your credit, you know your
oaths and promise.


Gal. My promise, if a Citizen had bought a company, he could but keep day
with 'em: you must pardon him gentlemen, a fresh Soldier wants seasoning.


Sis. Salt us, look to it, we shall hardly relish you sir.


Gall. How? threatens and braues?


Dans. Forbear, give the poor fellow leave to prate, he pays for it.


Sis. Good: you are now upon your guard, we shall meet you upon discharge of
the watch, and knock you down with a bill of accounts, we shall skeld.

Exit.
Gal. Out gull, talk to a commander, a man of war of equal sharing, we have
other use for our money then to pay followers. Shall we acost these Ladies,
gallants?


Rab. It Is the custom of the whole world, the greate^ thief preyes upon the
less still: how is this?


Dans. The happiness of the day besall you I adyes.


Sar. The night equal the dayes-happinesse, say I.


Gall. All content both night and day stand to your (...)


Agar. Our desires equal your wishes sir.


Gal. Your desires are above my performance then.


Rab. I am drawing on, if my life lie upon her honesty, I a^ upon the point of
giving up already.


Agar. That Gentleman is very moving.


Ag. Could you not entreat him stay his pace.


Sar. And trot in your ring, Lady, if you please.


Ag. I purpose not to take a courser of your choosing, lest I be iaded sir.


Sar. You presume the more of your own horsemanship.


Rab. Hoy-day, they are riding already, 'sfoot I am like to go post to the
Devil for this.


Dans. Next night, time of my project, if I prove not as hot a shot as came in
your quarters since the loss of your virginity, let me suffer the pains of S.
Anthonies purgatory.


Ag. He must necessarily be a man of deeds, he is of so few words.


Sar. You shall do well to put him to the trial.


Ag. Without immodesty, may I question the reason you are so heavy sir?


Rab. Nay then it rings out for me, should the Jew see this, I were as good as
speechless: there were but a little gasping between me and the grave.


Gal. The reason of my heauines^e is, that you and I might agree the better:
for women love contra^ies, and you are light I see.


Ag. How Is this? you see me light, true, to be in love With one so far
disdainful.


Vo. What success woman? the Dutchman and I have barterd wares


Ag. I have made exchange too, sold my liberty,
To purchase base ingratitude, I am rejected Voads.

Enter Rabshake. Rab. My Mistress, Gentlemen, did you see my Mistress?


Ag. Your business ^irrah?


Rab. You must make provision to entertain two of the richest Pirates ever
landed here, one Captain Ward and Francis^us, they have brought a prize in
worth three thousand ducats: besides, they sell their prisoners slaves, my
master has ingrost them all.


Ag. Vengeance seize him and them. Back sirrah, say we will expect them: you
sir, attend your master his coming, see you give us notice on it.


Rab. Nay, I hold it the best course too, for mine own safety. My charge is
charged my watch must be now, lest my Master know it. If all the world were
eyes, women I see would to it.

Ex.
Gal. I do but dream sure, Ward and Franciscus?


Dans. What moves this passion?


Sar. Why look you pale?


Gal. Pale? I have a cause, I have less color by 600 Ducats then I had.


Sar. As how sir?


Gal. I Will tell you: I took an adventure to pay this Ward, 600 Ducats at our
two meetings at Tunis, and see how the Devil has brought it about: I must
leave you gallants.


Dans. By no means: we will compound the business.


Agar. I can conceal it no longer.


Voad. You will betray your self to their contempt, by your own forwardness.


Agar. I nea^'r shall have so fair occasion to speak my love again, you know
my husbands watchful jealousy.


Vo. Now by my sex I am ashamed of you, were the lew mine,
I would have no other Pander: be ruled by me
It Is he shall hire the Captain to thy love,
And his own horning. What cannot we persuade?
Man was asleep when woman's brain was made.

Agar. Thou give me a new life, I am thy Scholar.

Voad. I Will prick thee forth a lesson, whose choyser strain,
Shall tell men that all Art against lust and women's vain.

Exeu^t. Rab. As you are men conceal your weapons, here are women in the room.


Gal. Sismund.

Enter three Sailers with Sismund. Sis. We are come to give you thanks for the
2 ducats sir.

Gal. As you are of the sword, draw.
Fight.
Sis. We are fresh-men, we will powder you.

Gal. Murder, murder, I shall be torn in pieces, by my hands.

Enter Ward, Franciscus, Ferd. Al. Page. Sis. Ward, Franciscus, we are betrayed,
away.

Exeunt. Ward. Gall^p.

Gall. My noble general alive, come to my rescue, my ioyaltie to the brave
knight did thus engage me: the slaves could not be content to stow me
vnder-boord, and force me from thee, but would have shared the prize too: but
I have shared with 'em, see here is three hundred ducats, thou shall have them
all brave spark, the Devil to boot with 'em.


Ward Then you think this gold shall purchase your pardon.


Gal. 'Sfoot I am over-ioy'd with the fight of thee: see the heroicke Dansiker,
his Captain Sar^.


Ward. Your loves, gentlemen.


Dans. This is no slave, he pays 600. ducats at their meeting, true, we are
witness on it.


Ward. I will be gul'd for once thus, I will, these ducats shall stop my
mouth.


Gal. 'Sheart there are as many more in Bank, you shall have 'em all, I prize
thy countenance above a second Indies, were they molten in your garbage. The
world runs round with me, Sicut erat in principio, naked I came in, and
penilesse I shall go out.

What stays the Jew so long,

Ward. See he is come.
Enter Jew, Raymond, his two sons bound. Rub^n. You Will give my price sir.

Jew. yes, for these slaves, I will.

Ray. For ever be he servile that so makes 'em.
Hard-hearted; man, I cannot term thee, its
A name that bears too much of pity int,
Compared with so inhumane; creature were thou a father,
These tears would move thee, that bemoane a sons,
Nay all my childrens, worse then funeral,
Their ever thraldom, but nature well denied
Issu^ to thee, least in thy barbarous guilt
She had been a party. When thy affection'd soul
Had felt how much the name of child moves, with what care,
How many jealous fears we view there infancy,
Least having felt all this, thy accursed hand
Should yet have dared to make men childlesse.

1. Son. Can then your marble heart endure these drops?

2. Son. The soil that bred you sir does not bring forth
Such hydeous monsters, that we should imagine
You can be so far cruel to betray
So many innocent lives, for in us bleed
An aged father, a mother, to whose grief
No other misery can be added.
My self contracted to a virtuous maid,
Who ere this has left Marcel,
And in Normandy expects the consumation of our happiness.
You have our goods, our ship, all the substance
Should succor our old parents, you have only left
These arms to erne them bread, and can your eyes
Relentlesse see these chained?

Ferd. Do not they move you sir?

Ward. Yes, as the Jew, art not thou moved Benwash?

Jew. As a hangman at an execution makes no other holiday in the year.


Ray. Inhumaine dog! oh I could tear thee villane,

Jew. I Will give thirty crowns for this old beast to be revenged on him.


Ray. Be gentle, take his money, forgive me sir,
I see you are kind, would not now part us
That twenty and odd years have grown together,
Will you not take it? give him so Jew,
I will deserve 'em, see I am not old,
No wrinkle is on my brow, these are but frowns,
Raised by his unkind refusal of my offer.
See what plump veins I have, no sinews shrunk,
These are not gray-haires, they are only white
To show the lightness of my spirit: come
Manacle these arms, you shall see us threee
Tug the days eye out, there is not a father
And his two boys shall dare to undertake us,
The sun outvied we will set us down together
And with our sadder cheer out-mourne the night,
And speak the happiness we might have lived too:
How by mine own harth in cold wintereues
I might have told my sons some ancient tales,
Which they might one day from their grandsire speak.
We Will add unto our woes thus by compare
Of what our joys might have been, then we will curse,
And when we want a plague, we will think upon
This bloody murderer, we shall have store then:
Be eloquent in bitter execrations,
Our choler vented, then again we will weep,
Till tears glue up our eyes to mock sad sleep.

Ward. Ha, ha, ha.

1. Son. Do laugh at aged sorrow? be just ye powers,
As ye judge innocents causes, revenge ours.

Ward. My money for 'em Jew, so, away with 'em.

Alb. Ferd. We will redeem them, pay their ransom,

Ward. You redeem them? your means?

Ferd. All that we have a board,

Ward. Such another syllable, I Will make a sale of you to.

Jew. I am your first man, I Will give you 400 crowns for 'em

Alb. A sale of us?

Ferd. Know that if all our fortunes will set them free, it is there is.


Ward. I Will try that, give me 400 crowns.

Jew. Hear.

Ward. They are yours, I 'le justify the sale,

Sar. Of your own fellows, countrymen do they not stand Conditioned as your
self.


Gal. Who gave you pattent to examine him.

Ward. Forbear, because you're men of action I Will descend
To give you notice they are my lawful prize,
Such as denied my party, would willingly
Betray me, yea all of us* into the hands
Of our vowed enemies.

Sar. Are you not men of war then?

Ferd. We are no Pirates sir, our country yields us
More honest means of living.

Sar. Om. Away with; 'em more honest means of ^^uing^ make 'em sure,


Alb. Give us the hearing.

Ward. Away with 'em. Zounds I Will set them free else.

2. Son. Let Us take our fathers blessing with us yet.

Ward. All curses under heaven go with you.

Ray. Is there no ear for misery to beat at?
My sons, Frederick, Albert, they are gone, sent
To perpetual vasselladge, I loved you boys
A little better then to out-liue your slaueries.
I will not curse thee monster, I know my thoughts
Cannot arrive unto so black revenge,
As shall attend thee: crack, crack, you ore-loaden strings,
And set a miserable old man free,
So, so, I will appeal for you my sons to yo^ high Court
Here none but beasts of prey Tigers resort.

moritur Dans. I hate this villain, he is all blood.

Page. My heart I think would break
But that in steed of words, mine eyes thus speak.

Ward. How is it my noble spirits dulled with one Tragedy,
Let us digest it with a gig, a catch.
Some wine there, shall we to hazard?

Dans. I willingly would stake my life to thine at that iustgame, there wants
but an occasion.


Sar. What Is your sport?

Gal. Adams game at one whole, every male to his female

Ward. How should we be furnished?

Gall. I Will fit you with an Eve sir, a temptresse,

Ward. What is she?

Gall. Your peer, a beauty that would take you
From out your self to gaze at her,
The Jews wives sister.

Enter Jew, Cross. Agar, Voad. Ward. First sight of her yields thee a 100
Ducats.


Gal. I Will be a conjunction copulative to join you together for the money, it
is a ^ate fallows us soldiers when we are down: the reason is, we hold it
no shame to live upon spoil of the enemy, and a greater foe to man then a
whore is impossible S'hart I am prevented, the Jew panders them himself,
that is she sir, that Turks her brother, his name is Crosman.


Jew. Is it possible?

Gall. The slave has a goat in his looks.

Cross. That Is he in the Judas beard, use but thy art he is thine.

Ag. If I liked not his 30 thousand Ducats, better then is person, I would
never streine my complexion for him.


Ward. She equals thy commends inded, so true a fair I nere beheld till now.


Ag. Nay more to entice me, this well stuffed purse
He did enforce upon me, but it is your sin,
So you have profit, all religious laws
Must suffer violence, your wife be exposed
Unto all vndergoers.

Jew. Forgiveness honest wife, my chaste, chaste, wife.

Ag. Nay, use your pleasure, you had best keep the gold
To guild your shame with, I troe I would give it him,
Tell him he must not think I am the woman
He takes me for, if he will not believe you,
Let him make trial with the ladder of ropes
He vowed to clime my chamber with, this night,
When, as it seems, he learnt you were inforst
To be in the Synagogue.

Jew. Better and better, I cannot but admire thy chastity
A ladder of ropes, would he make that the beginning
Letchery should be the end of, I Will hamper him,
If he have any grace thy honesty overthrows him,

Ag. If he have any wit it will I hope.

Jew. My dull eyed villain Rabshake saw none of this, He Is all for reminre,
he would have me a cuckold by law forsooth, by statute law, I shall put you a
book case, for he shall moote I Will prize him but to the present business. Noble
Captain to express how much you are welcome, my wife and sister, laying all
rites aside, and customary observes, come to inuit you to a mean banquet sir.


Ward, Best thanks sir, your welcomes prodigal,
I am already feasted in this bounteous dish sir.

Dans. But you are not likely to surfeit on it, I Will have a finger in the
platter with you, were you the great Turks self.


Ward. With me, I tell thee Dansiker
Thou do not merit with thy lips to touch
Sar. Dans. against Francisco, Gal. and Cross. parts the^, Jew hides himself.
So choice a rarity, what dare thou for her?

Dans. What thou dare not.

Ward. I Will put that to the trial,

Draw. Voad. As you come of women.

fight Ag. By, all the rites you owe our sex, as you are men enforce them part.


Cross. Respect the place, you are in danger of law.

Ward. You shall oresway me Lady, we shall meet again sir.

Cross. So you are men
Exit.
Jew. Are they gone?
What hard fortune attends me? that none of their throats were cut, I might
have seaz'd their goods, not so much as the flesh biter, but is come of.


Gall. S'hart, this poverty makes a man valiant, when I had my ducats I had no
more heart then a Jew.


Jew. And that was the reason you so willingly parted with 'em sir


Gall. Old, Benwash, where hidst thou thy head in this day of battle man?


Jew. Here under this table, did you think I am so branch^^
No roof would give me covering, I am but a pricket,
A mere sorrel, my head's not hardened yet
Though thanks unto your maistership your fire was not wanting

Gal. You speak in Hebrew I understand you not.

Jew. Yet you can speak the whoore-maisters language passing well; what made you
sir take my wife for a flesh-seller, a whore?


Gall. You are abused sir.

Jew. By thee letcher, you know not this purse, this gold?
You have your tricks to climb up cuckolds haven,
Your ladder of ropes, you had best keep that hour,
My wife this night expects you: my absence
Will be inforst, she bid me tell you so,
Insatiat goat thou think our wives are such,
As are your holy fisters, religious Votaries,
Your spittle nuns, here take your ill got trash,
May I but know thou once more tempst my wise,
You shall not need a ladder, I Will mount you sir a Christians
I will, you oxgall, I will.

Gall. Ha, this is gold.

Jew. Do you hear sir, hereafter know a Turks wife from
You are one of those hold all women bound
Under the domination of the Moon;
All wavering, now you have seen one of the Sun sir,
Constant you slave, and as she is, with us are millions more.

Cross. Benwash, brother, S'foote I have sought each nooke of the house for you.


Gal. It is beyond my thoughts, imaginations drowned int*

Jew. Rare, does she plead chastity?

Cross. Like a baud that would put off avi^ginity, the knight is as good as ours
already, besides I have procured the Governor in person to regreet him

All that art can by ambition, lust, or ^^attery do,
Assure your self this brain shall work him to.

Jew. Nay if the flesh take hold of him, he is past red emption
He Is half a Turk already, it is as good as done
Woman is hell out, in we nere return.

Exeunt Gal. Were not I confident of my good parts, this gold would buy me out
of my five senses, a full purse, a ladder of ropes, and his wife in the tail
on it able to overcome any man breathing, yet what should I fear that have so
many good Angels about me? sure she is in love with me, it is no other, and
out of her honesty it seems she has vowed to do nothing, but what she dares
acquaint her husband with, if she have made him usher his own crest I Will
swear she is a woman of the Sun, she has dazeld his eyes well, this night
makes the trial, I Will take your instructions Jew, climb the matter of
preferment.

It may be 'twas my destiny gave me this crown,
Women and ropes should raise me, that put others down.

Exeunt. Enter Governor Ward. Crosman, Jew. Ward. I am orecharg'd sir with so
high a ^auor
As your descending thus to visit me.

Gou. You are the man we covet, whose valor
Has spoke you, so impartial worthy,
We should do wrong to merit, not gracing you.
Believe me sir, you have injured much your self,
Vouchsafing familiarity with those
Men of so common rank as Dansiker,
Your hopes should fly a pitch above them,

Cross. It may be that our clime stands not to give
That full content, the air you drew at home,
And therefore purpose shortly a return.

Ward. I know no country I can call home
What by your courtesy I might, my desert stands
Not to make promise of.

Gou. Detract not from your self, call this your own
I see there speaks a fortune in your brow
Will make us proud to have acknowledged you.

Jew. I Will gage a thousand Ducats on equal terms,
Iliue to see him the Sultans Admiral.

Cross. Why not as well as the great Customer,
My allied kinsman Governor, neither borne Turks,

Ward. I dare not look so high, yet were I employed,
What a poor Christian could, I durst make promise of.

Jew. Christian or Turk you are more wise I know
Then with religion to confine your hopes.

Gou. He Is too well read in Poesy to be tied
In the slaves fetters of religion.
What difference in me as I am a Turk,
And was a Christian? life, liberty,
Wealth, honor, they are common unto all?
If any ods be, it is on ^^homets side,
His seruit ors thrive best I am sure.

Ward. Is this the ^ooke your golden bait does cover?

Jew. I have often with laughter thought how innocent
My thoughts when first I turned were, how scrupulous
I was, when with one argument I was confirmed; as thus,
If this religion were so damnable
As others make it, that God which ows the right
Profaned by this would soon destroy it quite.

War. That Is easily answered, heaven is merciful,
By their destruction it should take all means
From giving possibility to their change,
And so unjustly damn 'em* but for my part,
It is not Divinity but nature moves me,
Which does in beasts force them to keep their kind.

Cross. But men that have two ends, safety and profit,
Where beasts no farther are transported
Then with the present object, must make their actions.
Turn to those points.

Gou. Both which are in some sort proposed to you.

Ward. As how?

Gou. As thus, for profit, you cannot with your self
Imagine, that your virtue can be smothered,
Might there but be assurance of your trust.

War. How should I give you that? Gou. As we did; turn Turk.

Ward. That were the way to more uncertainty,
Men sooner open foes then fained friends try
And where men's acts from their own ends proceed,
More look unto those ends then like the deed,

Jew. This gudgion will not bite.

Gou. But when there are examples plentiful,
To instance against your words, you need not fear,
Men what they see oppose against what they hear.

War. The cunning fowler to beguile the birds
Brings up some tame, and lets them fly abroad
To draw in others, that their liberty
May be the bait to others misery.
Such is state-policies, somtimea to advance an ill,
When others for less crimes it often does kill.
But to cut off your further argument
What Is mine of prowess, or art, shall rest by you
To be disposed of: but to abjure
My name, and the beliese my ancesters
Left to my being. I do not love so well
The earth that bore me, to lessen my contempt
And hatred to her, by so much advantage,
So oblique act as this should give to her.

Cross. Work in my sister presently.

Gov. You are your self free, nor will I further
Diswade your resolution, nor less esteem
Your merit, and fair worth.

Ward. You engage me to you sir.

Cross. He enioyes too much by promise to be won,
T'must be a woman's act, to whom there is naught
That is impossible: What Devils dare not move.
Men to accomplish, women work them to.
And see, in happy time she is come, we will single them.

Ward. Here comes an argument that would persuade
A God turn mortal, until I saw her face,
I never knew what men term beauty was:
Besides whose fair, she has a mind so chaste
A man may sooner melt the Alps then her.

Gov. We will along with you, when makes she hence?

Jew. The wind sits fair, the slaves are sending down
Whom the next morn bears hence.

Gov. We will aboard with you fair sir, we will leave
Our love exchanged with you, some happier time
May perfect that good work I wish were mine.

Exeunt. Ward. My truest services: nay Lady stay
Though hitherto I have been a hapless Orator,
Your milder measure, or my loue-taught tongue,
May find more fortunate hours: for by that guide,
Which rules and knows our thoughts --

Voad. Reserve your oaths sir to more easy ears,
I understand my self too well to credit 'em.

Ward. Vn-gentle maid to triumph in my torment,
If ever breast did feel the power of love,
Or beauty made a conquest of poor man
I am thy captive, by heaven, by my religion.

Vo. As my beleefe's in that, my faith gives trust
To your protests.

War. Then by thy God, by the great Mahomet.

Vo. To weak a bond to tie a Christian in.

Ward. What shall I swear by? propose an oath to me
The breach whereof would at once sink me lower
Then hell knows being, I Will take it willingly.

Vo. I Will be concealed no longer, know then I love,
But not the man whose daily Orisons
Invoke confusion on me, whose religion
Speaks me an Infidel.

Ward. 'Sheart I am of none, only to feed discourse,
And fill up argument.

Vo. But you must be of one if you will enjoy me,
If then your thoughts answer to what you speak
Turn Turk I am yours.

Ward. Turn Turk?

Vo. Do you demur already? how prodigal your words
Spoke your affection, and with one simple trial
Are you struck mute.

Ward. With patience hear me Lady.

Vo. False knight, I have given too calm an ear already
To thy enchanted notes.

Ward. Should I for ever sell my liberty?

Vo. You need not, it is sufficient glory
You have betrayed a maidens liberty.
But I Will do penance for my so black a sin,
Doting on thee, I Will henceforth hate thy whole sex;
The name of man to me, shall as the rock
From which the ship-wrackt wretch has lately escaped
Bring fear in the name often: keep off false Siren.
Heaven well ordained man should the woman woe,
Should we their hard-hearts prove, we all ill should know.

Ward. Stay, I will enforce thee else.

Voad. Do these my tears delight thee then? cruel
Hard-hearted man, glut thy relentlesse sight
With full-ey'd sorrow.

Ward. She is all amorous, all fair, that she does love,
Behold those tears whose drops would pierce the hearts
Of Tigers, make them pitiful,
They are witnesses she faines not: leave, leave to weep,
Least putting out those lights the world should mourn.
Put on a veil of black, I am thine own.
If there be any Divinity, it has
His seat in beauty: thou art a God to me
My Country, friends, nay being, what would thou have.

Voad. To be no other then my self I crave.

Ward. I am no more mine own, rather then loose
So true a happiness, as thy constant love,
There is no way so black I would not prove,
That lies from heaven to hell. Crosman in vain
Thy arguments were spent would thou prevail?
Here is an Orator can turn me easily,
Where beauty pleades, there needs no sophistry.
Thou have ore-come me Voada.

Voad. And I will raise thee but thou do name a good,
I cannot call mine till I am possessed of 't.

Ward. Call in thy friends, make preparation,
I Will take the orders instantly,
My speed shall give prevention to the prate
Of th'idle multitude: away, the flame does burn
Which sets the world on fire, and makes me turn.

Voad. Thou art all harmony, best love I fly,
I have my ends,
How er'e thou sink, thy wealth shall bear me high.
Exit.
Ward. So, the day leaves the world, chaste Voada
Nothing can make him miserable enioyes thee:
What is 't I loose by this my change? my Country,
Already it is to me impossible,
My name is scandal'd? what is one Island
Compared to the Eastern Monarchy? this large
Unbounded station shall speak my future fame;
Besides, they are slaves stand subject unto shame.
One good I enjoy, out-weighes all ils what ever
Can be objected; to sum my happiness:
That God on earth, to whom all men stand bare,
(Gold) that does usher greatness, lackies me,
I have more then I can spend, what wants
Is in command, and that my valor makes
Due purchase of, I Will rather lead on ^laues
Then be commanded by the power of Kings.
Beauty, Command, and Riches, they are these three
The world pursues, and these do follow me.
Enter Francisco. Speak, what news Francisco?

Fran. The tongues of ravens are too mild to speak it,
The very thought where of methinkes should turn
Your hair to quils of Porcupines, it is the denial
Of your Redeemer* Religion, Country,
Of him that gave you being.

Ward. The slavery of man, how this religion rides us!
Depriues us of our freedom from our Cradles,
Ties us in supersticious bondage.

Fra. Heaven stop mine ears from hearing thy dishonor.
Upon my knees I do conjure you sir,
Sell not your soul for such a vanity,
As that which you term Beauty, eye-pleasing Idol,
Should you with the renouncing of your God
Taking the abhorred name of Turk upon you,
Purchase a little shameful being here, your case
Might be compared to his, who adiudg'd to death
By his heads loss, should ^raue (stead of one stroke)
To dye a lingering torment on the rack.
Even such would be your life, whose guilt each hour
Would strike your conscious soul with terrors.

Ward. No more, this boys words trouble me.

Fran. If none of these move, let the example
Of that contempt is thrown on runnagates
(...) by these Turks themselves, at least move you
To (...) this slavery.

Enter Crosman. Cross. Most worthy sir, now I dare call you brother,

Fran. Too fair a name to cloak so great a foe,
This instant makes a trial of your virtue,
Think on Ulysses constancy.

Cross. Why are you mute sir?

Ward. I am not well.

Fran. Alas! how can he, being so near to hell?

Cross. Are you so weak to have a boys words sway you?

Fran. You have not mine, think it is heavens hand does stay you

Cross. Have you no other but my sister sir,
To make a stale off, did you not vow?

Ward. What er'e, I do recant it, I am now
My self, her looks enchanted me.

Fran. Against a man's own soul, no oath can tie.

Cross. This thy disgrace revenged shall speak in blood.

Enter Voada. Voad. Where is my betrothed husband? All Is ready.

Cross. To publish infamy to thee and us?
The wether-cocke is turned, this boys breath did it*

Voad. Again turned?

Fran. You cast your eyes too much upon the flame
Proves your destruction.

Voad. Vn-gentle boy, do thou requite me thus?
How can thou blushlesse view me, have my tears
Procured me naught but scorn?

Ward. Forgiveness Voada: turn back thy comet-eyes,
Plagues, Devils, poverty, may all ils fall
Man ea'r was subject to, I will enjoy thee.
Force hence, I say, this boy.

Fran. As I from hence, so thou art thrust from joy, eternal joys.

Exit.
Cross. The Muffties here: you know the custom sir,
Some trivial ceremonies, they will be soon ore,
They once performed you are never unhappy more.
Besides, the Captaine-ship of our strong Castle
Shall be my sisters portion, here is the key.

War. Do not delay them then.

Enter the Slaves bound, going to the Port. Cross. They are come sir.

Ward. What mean these slaves, their sights like Basiliskes
Foretells my ruin: 'sh eart make this way.

Fer. Nay, do not shun our sight, hear us but now,
We Will forgive all our wrongs, with patience row
At the unwieldy oar: we will forget
That we were sold by you, and think we set
Our bodies against your soul, the dearest purchase
Of your Redeemer, that we regained you so,
Leave but this path damnation guides you to.

2. Son. Our blood, our Fathers blood, all is forgiven,
The bond of all thy sins is cancelled,
Keep but thy sealfe from this.

Alb. Let us redeem our countries shame by thee,
We willing will endure our slavery.

Ward. The words do rip my heart up: ha?

Vo. Why stand you in this d^lemma: are you deprived
Of sense and being?

War. Thou telst me true: with what brain can I think
Heaven would be glad of such a friend as I am.
A Pirate, murderer? let those can hope a pardon care
To atone with heaven, I cannot, I despair.

Fran. Will you yet hear me? yet heaven has mercy.

Ward And hell damnation: on, zounds on I say,
The way that leads to love is no black way.

Exe. Showt. Fer. But thou will find it black: no hell I see's solow
Which lust and woman cannot lead us to.
Exeunt. Might be compared to his, who adiudg'd to death
By his heads loss, should crave (stead of one stroke)
To dye a lingering torment on the rack.
Even such would be your life, whose guilt each hour
Would strike your conscious soul with terrors.

Ward No more, this boys words trouble me.

Fran. If none of these move, let the example
Of that contempt is thrown on runnagates
(...) by these Turks themselves, at least move you
To (...) this slavery.

Enter Crosman. Cross. Most worthy sir, now I dare call you brother,

Fr^n. Too fair a name to cloak so great a foe,
This instant makes a trial of your virtue,
Think on Ulysses constancy.

Cross. Why are you mute sir?

Ward. I am not well.

Fran. Alas! how can he, being so near to hell?

Cross. Are you so weak to have a boys words sway you?

Fran. You have not mine, think it is heavens hand does stay you

Cross. Have you no other but my sister sir,
To make a stale off, did you not vow?

Ward. What er'e, I do recant it, I am now
My self, her looks in chanted me.

Fran. Against a man's own soul, no oath can tie.

Cross. This thy disgrace revenged shall speak in blood.

Enter Voada. Voad. Where is my betrothed husband? All Is ready.

Cross. To publish infamy to thee and us?
The wether-cocke is turned, this boys breath did it.

Voad. Again turned?

Fran. You cast your eyes too much upon the flame
Proves your destruction.

Voad. Vn-gentle boy, do thou requite me thus?
How can thou blushlesse view me, have my tears
Procured me naught but scorn?

Ward. Forgiveness Voada: turn back thy comet-eyes,
Plagues, Devils, poverty, may all ils fall
Man ea'r was subject to, I will enjoy thee.
Force hence, I say, this boy.

Fran. As I from hence, so thou art thrust from joy, eternal joys.

Exit.
Cross. The Muffties here: you know the custom sir,
Some trivial ceremonies, they will be soon ore,
They once performed you are never unhappy more.
Besides, the Captaine-ship of our strong Castle
Shall be my sisters portion, here is the key.

War. Do not delay them then.

Enter the Slaves bound, going to the Port. Cross. They are come sir.

Ward. What mean these slaves, their sights like Basiliskes
Foretells my ruin: 'sh eart make this way.

Fer. Nay, do not shun our sight, hear us but now,
We Will forgive all our wrongs, with patience row
At the unwieldy oar: we will forget
That we were sold by you, and think we set
Our bodies against your soul, the dearest purchase
Of your Redeemer, that we regained you so,
Leave but this path damnation guides you to.

2. Son. Our blood, our Fathers blood, all is forgiven,
The bond of all thy sins is cancelled,
Keep but thy sealfe from this.

Alb. Let us redeem our countries shame by thee,
We willing will endure our slavery.

Ward. The words do rip my heart up: ha?

Vo. Why stand you in this dilemma: are you deprived
Of sense and being?

War. Thou telst me true: with what brain can I think
Heaven would be glad of such a friend as I am.
A Pirate, murderer? let those can hope a pardon care
To atone with heaven, I cannot, I despair.

Fran. Will you yet hear me? yet heaven has mercy.

Ward. And hell damnation: on, zounds on I say,
The way that leads to love is no black way.

Exe. Showt. Fer. But thou will find it black: no hell I see's solow
Which lust and woman cannot lead us to.

Exeunt. The dumb show, with Chorus of Ward turning Turk. Chorus. Here could
I wish our period, or that our Pen
Might ^peake the fictions, not the acts of Men.
The deeds we have presented hitherto, are white
Compared unto those black ones we must write:
For now no more at men, but Gyant-like
The face of he^uen it self, he dares to str^ke:
And with a blushlesse front he dares to do,
What we are d^mbe to think, much more to show:
Yet what may fall beyond uncertain guess
Your better savours bind us to express.

Enter two bearing halfe-moones, one with a Mahomets head following. After them
the Muffty, or chief Priest* two meaner Priests be^ring his train. The Muff^y
seated, a confused noise of music, with a showt. Enter two Turks, one
bearing a Turban with a halfe-moone in it, the other arobe, a sword: a third
with a Globe in one hand, an Arrow in the other: two Knights follow. After them
Ward on an Ass, in his Christian habit, bare-headed. The two Knights, with
low reverence, ascend, whisper the Muffty in the ear, draw their swords, and
pull him off the Ass. Helayd on his belly, the Tables (by two inferior
Priests) offered him, he lifts his hand up, subscribes, is brought to his seat
by the Muffty, who puts on his Turban and Roab, girds his sword: then swears
him on the Mahomets head, vngirts his sword, offers him a cup of wine by the
han^^ of a Christian: He spurns at him, and throws away the C^pps, is
mount^d on the Ass, who is richly clad, and with a showt Exeunt. Chorus. The
accursed Priests of Mahomet being set;
Two Knights present the wr^tch, who finds no let
To his per^tion: to whom nor shame, nor fear
Give any cur^e. D^smounted from that steed
Did best befi^ the rider: they then read
The Laws of their d^m'd Prophet: he subscribes,
I^roles his name into their Pagan Tribes.
Now wears the habit of a freeborn Turk,
Hi^ sw^rd excepted, which least they should work
Just vill^ny to their seducert, is denied
Unto all Runnagates, unless imployd
Inwarres against Christians. Last, oh be he last
For swears his name! with what, we blush to tell,
But it is no wonder, blackes the way to hell,
Who though he seem yet happy, his success
Shows he exchanged with it, and wretchedn^sse.
Give patience to our Scoene, which hereto tends,
To show the world, black deeds will have black ends.
Exit.
Enter Dansiker, Sares, three Sailers. Dans. Ward turned Turk? it is not
possible.

Sar. I saw him Turk to the Circumcision.
Mary therein I heard he played the Jew with 'em,
Made 'em come to the cutting off an Apes tail.

Dans. I see the hand of heaven prevented mine,
Death was too fair a guerdon for him. But to the present,
Deserving sir, I now am to conjure you
By all the offices of friendship past,
By what my future love, and means may stead you,
To vow performance of one small request.

Sar. What ere it be I Will be as just to you
As heaven to truth: by all that Ward denied,
I vow me yours.

Dan. I accept your faith: know then that I am bound
Unto a desperate attempt, how it may succeed,
Heaven and Fate only know. The circumstance
I do inioyne you further not to enquire.
What on your trust's imposed is the redeeming
Those two betrayed young men, whom Ward did sell,
When to his barbaro^s cruelty they opposed,
And lost themselves, and state: their ransom's here,
gives him a paper. As you prove just, from all mishaps rest clear,

Sar. And if I fail to accomplish your desires,
All my sins haunt me, when my breath expires.
Exit Sa^.
Dans. I am most confident, best sir adieu,
If Dansiker do live, he lives to you.
Enter Leifetenant. Have laid the train to my directions?

Lief. It is done to the undoing of 'em all,
Time calls aboard which spe^ds not half an hour
Before our train do take it rests to be determined
What ships we fire, which bear along with us.

Dans. Danvils makes with us, all the rest give fire to,
Sares ship except, to him we are engaged,
Nor will we prove ungrateful, are all things ready,

Lief. To your own wishes.

Dans. Aboard then instantly, Tunis farewell,
Dansiker bids all pirates now adue.
He Will show you, what you might do, were you true

Exeunt. Enter Agar above in the window Ag. How dull a pace keeps time to
lovers eyes,
And yet to me how swift the nights black horse,
Makes way to raise the morn, whose least of light
Takes all my hopes from me and damps me quite,
clock strik Eleven and yet not come, he was not capable
Of my quaint stratageme, or being possessed
Of what he wanted, gold, contemns my love,
It is no other Agar, he loathes thee,
Man's curse is, things forbid, still to pursue
What Is freely offered not to hold worth their veiw,
Ent. Gal. Ha^ unless my credulous ears deceive me,
Theare one make toward my window,

Gall. The coast is clear, Baude night I do salute thee Thou that do wink
at all faults, that hugst so many sins in thy black bosom, the Sun
growe's pale to veiw them, to thee damnations nurse I make my prayer, conjure
thee by all my lustful embraces thou have been witness to, by all the cuckolds
thou have made ^twixt morn and twilight to add one to the number, but one
thou black ei'd negro, never did woman make such shift to dub her husband,
though many thou do know have made most bare ones, oh let this instrument
that has so many freed from the hell of V^urers, and from the iaws of their
fear, bandogs, has paid so manies debts relieve my wants, I Will never blame
thee, fortune henceforth if I lack, put thy self but this once on my my
back, no false light in the window, no baudy land-marke, no handkerchiefe to
waft me, I Will venture it, Agar, my lovely Agar.


Ag. It Is he who in this dead of night calls on my name.


Gall. Thy friend, thy understanding friend, with the ladder of ropes, here
make them sure above, leave me to the lower parts.


Ag. I hope you mean no wrong sir to me.


Gall. I Will do thee as much right as can be done to one of thy sex, have made
it fast?


Ag. You may adventure sir.


Gall. He that will not adventure for such a piece of flesh, were worthy to
feed upon dumplins all days on's life, nay I will venture, thou warden of the
horned livery, omnipotent Vnlcan, now set my shafts but right,

He goes up the rope. I Will make one freeman more ere it be light.

Enter two Sailers. 1. Sail. There Is no remedy, that which makes
waighting-women puncks, and Captains panders, that causes decayed Gentlemen
become solicitors, and bankeroupt Citizens Serieants, that makes us thieves,
necessity, that which has no law on's side.


2. Sail. We shall have as little conscience anon in robbery.


1. Sail. I, should we rob hospitals, our betters have made that a monoply, but
to steal from a rich Jew it is no more sin then to unload a weary Ass.


2. Sail. By hook or crook you will have it.


1. Sail. We were bred in a country that had the charity to whip begging out of
us, when we were young, and for staruing, manhood denies it, you know what must
necessarily follow.


2. Sail. Nay make your conclusion.


1. Sail. Press her in a dumb show, here abouts should be the house, great
windows and a little wicket, noble manlike, what is here a ladder of ropes,
S'foot we are prevented, S. Nicolas Clearkes are stepped up before us.


2. Sail. Were they ten justices Clearkes we would share with 'em.


1 Sail. There Masters would prevent us for that, yet since our case is
desperate, we will put in with 'em.


2. Sail. Softly for waking the maids.


1. Sail. S'hart, thou art the son of a lapland-witch sure, this is the maids
chamber, one of them is in a dream, she fetches her wind short I ^m sure


2 Sail. How long thou art poking at it, what is it man?


1. Sail. Some light commodity or other.


2. Sail. A woman's lower part, it is altogether in fashion for them to be light
about the bumb indeed.


1. Sail. I have the male part to it, the dublet, your women will have it ever
in request to have the man's part uppermost.


2. Sail. S'hart, a French slop, these are none of the Jews trouses, and they
should be no gallants, for he has money in his purse.


1. Sail. I marry fir, this fellow had good ware about him indeed, upon my life
we are little better then bauds, get money by others Venery, this Jew is a


Enter Jews man. Rab. Fire, fire, fire.


2. Sail. Water, water, water


Exeunt. Rab. Fire, fire, fire, the slaves lie on straw-beds, and yet this cry
will take no hold on 'em, fire, fire, fire.


Gall. Flames and brimstone, I am in hell, Zounds my breeches, the ladder, this
Jew has found us out and fired the house.


Ag. Dear sir contain your self.


Gall. A plague on venery, a hot end comes on it still, is the window high
enough that I may break my neck, dye any death rather then be roasted?


Ag. Here Is a vault leads to the common shower, it being low water the sheets
shall let you down to your escape.


Gall. Those sheets have brought me low enough already. Within Fire, fire, fire.


Gall. Flames stop thy throat.

Ag. Dear sir adu^nture it and save your life.

Gall. Were it to hell I must,
A plague on whoores say, whose vast desires
Begins in watery tears and end in fires.

Exeunt. Enter Rabshake at one door, and Jew at another. Rab. Fire, fire.


Jew. An Ocean ouerwhelme thee, where is the fire slave?


Rab. At the Jews house, Benwash his house, your house sir:

Exit Rabshake.
Jew. My bags, my obligations, my wife Agar I say, I shall run mad, I will
scale the windows, burn for company, my money and my self will go together,
what is here a ladder of ropes, Gallops breeches, burn on, burn on, findge
all the world, consume it with thy flames, thou best of elements, burn on I
say.


Enter Ward, Sailer. Ward. As you are men on this side help to save our goods.


Jew. As you are ministers of Lucifer let it burn on, it is mine own house,
come but on my ground I Will have my action for it.


Ward. He is distracted, help as you are men.


Jew. Dogs, villains, thieves, down with him that lays a hand a to it, be just
you powers of heaven, and throw thy wild fire down upon the heads of these
adulterers, room, room, room, I have it, I have it, room, room, room.


Ward. The Jew is mad indeed, his loss distracts him, speak gentle friend,
does the fire slack.


Rub. The house is saved, but all the ships in the harbor Unquenchable do
burn.


Ward. The ships in the harbor.

Rub. Yours only excepted.

Frans. My thoughts now have their ends,

Voad. Do not thou grieve boy, know I love thee
Thy maintenance shall express it, I have friends
And jewels left for thee, but I hate thee more
Then all thy wealth made me love thee before
Exit.
Ward. False woman, thou shall not shake me off thus
Were all the impudence of thy whole sex,
All there blushlesse impieties confined in thee
I Will move thy flinty heart to sense and shame,
I will thou sorceres: now I do see to late
There is a hand ore-rules our will and fate.
Exit.
Fran. This shows the greatest plague heaven keeps ^in store Falls, when a man
is linkt unto a whore.

Exit.
Enter Benwash, Rab. Agar. Jew. I have it, I have it, here, here, nay come on,
you have come off I am sure, here is evidence looks pale to think but on it, you
do not know the tennant to this cottage, he was an upright dealer, he paid
me to a hair, come forward and be hanged, I shall advance you in a ropes
name, you have made no cuckold of me. I made my self one, pandred my own
horns, now sirrah, you that go to it by art, put your cases one in the neck of
another, your rem in re what think yo^ of this case.


Rab. I think the serpent crept into a narrow hole, and le^t his case behind
him.


Jew. Then I am a Cornuto.


Rab. This make's the naked truth appear so.


Jew. The best is, the crest is mine own, I paid well for it.


Ag. Dear husband pardon me, I will confess,


Jew. What will thou confess? that thou have made a mere Ass of me, to pay
thy iourney-man wages before hand.


Rab. It should seem he labored hard to earne it, he could keep no clothes
about him.


Jew. This slave does not think I Will cut his throat for this, you have watched
nearly sirrah, you have.


Rab. Unless I should have been their baud, I could watch no nearer, me
thinks she has done you a great pleasure, rid you of your disease, iealousy,
now you need sear no more, you are in possession on it, your doubts are at an
end.


Jew. Good, very good, my doubts are at end, but I shall hang you in suspense
for this: you Manticora that plumpe upon raw flesh, here set your hand to this
letter, that I may draw your Captain on again upon the breach, I Will blow you
up else, why move you not, I am sure you laid your hand to the business when
time was.


Ag. Pardon me sir, I know my life is forfeit
To your just anger, nor will I be the means
To shed more blood, mine shall suffice alone,
Since only one is wronged punish but one.

Jew. She loves him still, I am a cuckold
He has out-gon me, do you hear; subscribe
Move me no further.

Ag. The worst can be but death, I will not.

Jew. I tell thee I Will for give thee, give my reuendge
Scope but at him, thou art free.

Ag. Swear it by Abraham's dust, the ashes of our forefathers.

Rab. Dust and ashes it is but a frail oath.

Jew. By that, and all that ties a virtuous mind,
I vow and swear by written writ.

Rab. You Will swear as much to forgive me I hope to sir.

Jew. Why, thou shall be the messenger, nay the actor
In my just vengeance.

Rab. The hangman you mean sir, I am expert at it.

Exe. Enter Ward and Francisco. Ward. Francisco, what news man?

Fran. The worst your ears can hear, our ships

Ward. They are untouched, of all they are only safe.

Fran. You dazell your own eyes, that villain Dansiker
Has grapled them and fled.

Ward. Whirle-winds pursue him, heaven, seas, earth, all at once
Join to his confusion, now I do see too late
There is a hand ore-rules our will and fate.

Enter Voad. and Alizia. Voad. I shall then take your promise, your brother
being redeemed, this night I shall enjoy thee.


Aliz. This Diamond binds me to it, by this I swear.


Voad. It Is thine I will bestow it on thee, to tie thy faith
Thou have his ransom.

Aliz. It Is here.


Voad. About it then, now fortune equal prove
I am happy, yet her lust redeemes my love.

Exit Alizia. Ward. Yet see, midst all my miseries I have a friend,
My constant loyal Voada, could what we enjoy
Make a man happy, I am not miserable.
Thou come to comfott me, I know thou do.

Vo. This fellow raues sure: do you know to who^ you speak?

Ward. Put not a further trial on me, thou best of women:
Know if this arm were barred all other means
From hearts of Christians, it should dig thee food.

Voad. We know you are a bloody murderer, and are repaid
By our just Prophet, that hates false Runnagates.

Ward. How could thou malice man so much, heaven,
As to create a woman?
Thou have forgot me sure: oh look on him
That has denied his faith, sold all his hopes
To purchase thee his bride.

Voad. To match with beggary: know I contemn thee
As a most abject slave, and hate thee more
Then all thy wealth could make me love before.
Exit.
Fran. What mean you sir? could you expect a good,
A happiness from hell? she is a whore.

Ward. Thou lie: this arm shall make it good,
My soul for her I lost, and now my blood.

Enter Rabshake. Fra. Your passion does transport you, here comes her pander,
One that knows all her secrets: examine him,
If she stand clear, let my life answer it.

Ward. I Will put you to the Test.

Rab. I have had a hot night of this, nothing but fire in my mouth two hours
together: mary the old Jew my master I hear has stumbled on a cooler. I
thought this Captain would be coming so long on upon the breach he would
break his neck at the last. This venery is a tempting dish, some never lin
licking at it till they burn their lips. Well, I must go comfort up old
Benwash, he is heavy upon his wives lightness.


Ward. You Jew, a word with you?


Rab. You Turk, I have nothing to say to you: Ha, ha, ha, poor fellow, how
he looks since Mahomet had the handling of him? he has had a sore night at
Whose that knockes at the backe-doore? Cry you mercy, I thought you were an
Italian Captain.


Ward. Zounds, leave your circumlocutions, I Will send your head to your heels
else.


Fran. You parcel haud, all usher, answer directly who it is bears a way the
prize in your Mistresses race, or I Will spoil your footing, cut you off by the
hammes.


Rab. Alas sir!


Ward. Speak, who are her ^uters?


Rab. Voadi's ^uters? oh sir, a Barbar sir.


Fran. I Will make you have need of a Surgian er'e I have done with you. How do
you know he is a Barber?


Rab. He smells strong of Rose Water, and he has never money in his purse but on
Saturday-nights.


Ward. What other suitor, slave?


Rab. An other sweet youth too, I take it a Comfet-maker; and it seems has
rotten teeth, for he dares not come in sight so long as the Barber's in the way.


Fran. This dog deludes us, I Will tear thy throat out villain, vnles^e thou
instantly name him she loves.


Rab. Her Page sir, the little Christian, the good faced Captain gave her,
Fidelio.


Ward. My slave, the French Ship-boy?


Fr. I saw him leave her now. How do thou kow she loves him?


Rab. She makes him sing bawdy songs to her, looks fortunes in his fist, and
babies in his eyes, makes dialogues betwixt him, her little dog, and her
self: lies upon her back, puts his hand in her hand, and wrings it till the
tears come again.


Ward. Insatiate monster, could her swollen blood Reach such a height none but
my Page must suit her.


Fran. Contain your self a while, this slave can speak One of her dialogues.


Rab. It is my practice sir: you shall stand for the Lady, you for her dog,
and I the Page: you and that dog looking one upon another, the Page presents
himself.


Fran. Good.

Rab. The best is behind sir.

Runs away. Fran. Jew, slave, dog.

Ward. The horned Devil follow him. A Skippers boy?
The shame of woman? rather then be baffeld thus
I will betray this town, blow up the Castle:
Francisco, do but second me.

Fran. First repossesse your self of your strong hold,
I fear some treachery: the Governor
With all the Ianisaries of the town
I met in their way thither.

War. Blast them ye powers first. The Governor
Make toward the Castle? I am betrayed, away,
I see that heaven forgets not though I delay.
Thrust out by Ianisaries?

Ianisa. Pack hence false Runnagate,
Slave, Beggar.

War. Disgratious vassals, what mountain covers me?
Wink, wink, thou Day Star, hide my guilty shame,
Make me as if I never had been, whose name
Succeeding times will curse: should I confess my sin,
There Is not an ear that can with pity hear
A man so wicked miserable: should I bear up,
Out-looke my crimes, I want means to support me.
To dye I dare not, the jaws of hell do yawne
To swallow me: live I cannot* Famine threats,
And that the worst of poverty, contempt and scorn.
Never on man Fate cast so black a frown,
Up I am denied to fly, vnpittied down.
Rest restless soul on this accursed soil,
And teach the world into how sad a toil
Ambition and swift riot run, when mean content
Sits low, yet happy: and when their day is spent
All that they get is labor and unrest,
Enter Francis. A hateful grave, and worst, a troubled breast.

Fra. Where shall I find this most unfortunate wretch?
There is a part in him called man, which we should pity
How er'e his merit stands, nor will I leave him,
Though he has left himself. See where he lies
Best suiting with his fortunes, could we our fate for^know
Men were as Gods, nor need we have lain so low.
How fare you brother? why with so sad an eye
Do you behold me, that in your miseries
Bear equal part?

War. Can there remain a soul that will vouchsafe
Compassion on me? thou do but flatter,
Or have forgot, I have lost all, and poverty
When no ill else will do it, makes all friends fly.

Fran. Were you entitled to no other guilt,
How willing for you should my blood be spilt?
Here sir, accept this poor relief
Bootlesse alas distress recounts those errors
To think what might have been cures, not the terror^
Of present suffering.

War. True, true, Francisco, could I redeem the time,
The world should speak my penitence.
Could I call back but one seven years,
Though all my life were servile after,
Were my soul but free
From innocent blood, and fearful blasphemy,
On the condition I might live an age
Tortured upon a wheel.
I tell thee friend,
Were I this Cities Viceroy, I would give
My crown, dispoyle my self of all, only to live
One month with that content this soul did know
When a poor Fisherman possessed it.

Fran. You are too low dejected.
Men that with sufferance their wrongs do bear
Are held but weak, and States more often for fear
Then love unto the right, redress men's ils.
Who stoutly down his enemies, malice kills,
Who basely wounds himself.

Ward. No less then truth, I have been too low indeed
Each one the yielding grass does dare to tread
That flies resisting thorns, falfe Voada,
Thy Lamb is turned a Lion, I feel reuendge
Give a new life to me, I Will only stay
Till I have spoke thy brother, I think he will blush
To hear thy shame, tell thee thou have not played
A woman's part with me, suppose the worse
That he turn villane to, he had better curse
His grand sirs ashes, if once more I fall in
I Will be unparalleled at least for sin.

Fran. Stay see the strumpets love, Fidelio,

Aliz. Captain, you are the man I seek, I have a suit to you,

Ward. Concerning Voada, is it not?

Aliz. Concerning her that hates you for my sake
Neglects your merit, this night gives full reuendge
To all her injuries.

Ward. Repeat that happy word again, I am wholly thine.

Aliz. Know her vassaliat lust has long pursued,
And with such violence attempted me,
That with my oaths this night to sat her heat
I hardly have delaid her.

Ward. What Is this to my reuendge?

Aliz. It fallows, give me but way
Through your Castle there is a Hollander
This evening makes from hence
That gives them passage.
I have tied him to it

Ward. Thou art for ever free, the hour name,

Aliz. I Will speak your worth yet, in spite of fame
About three, watch the word Fidel^o.

Ward. Avoid suspicion and till then be gone.

Aliz. Nay then my joys do flow,

Fran. Whether tends this? what passage, come you for him?

Ward. To heaven I once more must exact
Thy trust and diligence.

Fran. Speak it.

Ward. Make instantly to Voada, tell her
This night a skipper does attend to steal aboard
Her love Fidelio, give her the hour and place
Wish her to pistol him.

Fran. Would have her kill her to.

Ward. I, and run made for it, mean while I Will walk the streets I shall
meet some will know me to whom I will relate my wrongs, wilt do it Francisco?


Fran. My soul to gage.

Ward. This comfort then in spite of hell I Will have,

Ward went not vnreuendg'd unto his grave.

Exeunt. Enter Chorus. Chorus How black a path unbounded riot treads,
Your gentler eyes have veiw'd. Our Scoene now leads
To give him rest, that from his ills had learned
To know his misery, and at least had earned
This lesson from the extremes, that others past
No course that violent is, secure can last.
This clue does wind him back, and Dansiker,
The wealth of Tunis, now is become there fear,
Strives to redeem his infamy and with success,
Makes through their bowels to his happiness.
No sooner he arriues in France, but his sad ears
Instead of welcomes entertain new fears,
The aged Oak that Atlas-like sustained,
The weight of France, that with his bloudregain'd
Her wasted body, like the Pelican
By one that from his life took breath is slain,
This fatal blow, astonisheth the hopes
Of Dansiker, and his, to make return,
Impossible those fires yet fresh do burn,
Would threaten them with utmost tortures here
To make abode, they find themselves beset
With many they by their spoil made foes, yet
Twixt two extremes they chose the better part
Take land and to the Governor present
Themselves and fortunes, show their act, intent
And poenitence, their promised p^rdon, what befell
This show presents, which words deny to tell.

Enter Governor in state, takes his seat, Dansiker and his followers with
ropes about their necks, their weapons with the points toward them, deliver
their petition, the Governor reads and salutes them, put up their swords,
suddenly rush in diverse like Merchants with followers, seem to threaten the
Governor, who defends Dansiker, labors betwixt them, seem pacified, and
Dansiker swears by his sword, offer to go out to meet his wife and child,
they persuade, he delivers them to the Governors trust. Omnes Exeunt. Chorus.
Twixt hope and dread, as suited former merit,
The Governor receives them gives new spirit
Unto their drooping hopes, when with the name
Of Dansikers arrival, swift winged fame
Brings in the o^pressed Merchants, whose spoil
Had f^d his hungry sword, and with their toil
Made rich his rapines, these crave law, his life
The opposing Gou^rnour almost ends the strife,
With his own blood, informs them, the Kings death
Stoo^ only bar to his safety, that his breath
Would recomp^nce all former in^uries,
To approve it gives them notice of the prise
Brought from Tunis, and more to assawadge their ire
Dansiker dare, what act they can des^re
Man to accomplish, to redeem his peace
And their great losses, all their furies cease.
And with one voice demand Benwash the Jew
As his just ran^ome, they need no more renew,
This their request, by oath themselves they tie.
To bring him prisoner, or in the action dye.
No motives from his wife or child diswade,
This his resolve, suppose h^ now has made
His back return and in some apt disguise
Attends success unto his enterprise
His end and strange prevention, briefly show
Designs are men's, their sway the gods do owe.

Exeunt. Enter Ferd. Ferd. This is the place a cold blood thwarts my heart,
My fleeting soul in her disturbed passion
Proclaims some ill near, let me suppose the worst
Aliziaes dead, false tongue how durst thou name
So great a mischief? alas this bracelet speaks it,
This which I tied unto her iuory wrist
The witness of those vows confirmed us one,
The news of my captivity took all her hopes
And life away, and dying she bequeathed
This loyal gift again, with my sad ransom.
'T may be this youth may be Alizia
Her self a prisoner, yet she is to virtuous
To out-liue her honor and her chastity,
Which her captivity must needs endanger:
I hear his foote-steps.

Enter Ward and Voad. Voad. We are not far off from the place, softly, softly.
The night is dark and friendly to mine ends.

Ferd. Fidelio, Fidelio,

Voad. It Is he would rob me of Fidelio,

Ferd. Fidelio I say young Raymond here

Voad. Shoot.

Ferd. So I am slain.

Voad. Thus do thou bear Fidelio back again,

Ward. Ha, ha, ha.

Ferd. Oh false, false Alizia thy watch-words as thy self
Deceiving, did think my slavery
Was not an ill sufficient, but my blood
Must pay thy falsehood tribute, or could not wish
So great a plague to me, that I should hear
Thou were turned prostitute, ungentle cruel woman,

Ward. It Is not the boy sure, his voice, his passion
Speaks him another, more proiects yet, I hear some foot stir.

Aliz. How fearful is the night, heauen's angry sure,
And having drawn the day up, chid her thus
For giving light to men's impieties.
It Is much about the hour of my appoint,
Wh^t sad groan wounds my ear^s, Fid^l^o,
Raymond, friend F^d^lio.

Ferd. Or rather Infid^lio, what ere thou art
Thou needst not doubt thy task, thou have made me sure,
Or if thou doubts it, here dischardge one bullet more.

Aliz. It Is not his voice, thou lie falfe thoughts, Raymond, Fidelio.


Ferd. My name is Raymond, that Fid^lio unjustly murdered.

Aliz. No marvel though thou thundrest heaven;
And darts thy flashes down, oh! why is not
This world a vniuer^all fire? what one good
Keeps back thy ^lames?

Ferd. Oh speak! what art thou? whose sad speech
Mak^s death stay yet to hear thee.

Aliz. My friend, my Raymond by my means murdered
I have lived too long, too long.

Ferd. Oh speak! what art thou whose sad accents force
Pale death to stay and hear thee.

Aliz. Alas I am nothing, nothing.

Ferd. As thou have hope in heaven tell me thy name,

Aliz. I will, my name's Alizia, thy constant loyal, loyal friend, that in
her passage unto thee will not be long


Ferd. Oh save thy life.

Aliz. Wish me not so much ill, I love thee better.
Miracle of thy sex, oh let me embrace thee yet.

Ferd. Here, here, fly hence vain breath,

Aliz. No other good is known to me but death, moritur

Ward. Franci^co you are a villain, forgiveness Voada,
The words of these two innocents with purple eyes
Dart terror through me, Fidelio turned a woman.
Within Follow, follow, follow.

Voad I will rather give an ear to the black shrikes
Of mandrakes, thou knewst I loved him
And that has forc^ his wo^nd, at sight whereof
Methinkes reflecting heaven should spread it self
In a deep crimsome veil, blush to ha^^ created
A wretch so monstrous, but my reuendge sleeps, know boy
I will repay thy death, slave I will famish thee,
And when thy fainting eyelids gin to crack,
My satisfied lust, by him most hates thee,
Shall be thy object.

Ward. You wrong me to suppose I should be guilty
Of such an impious deed.

Voad. Does not thy blood stained poniard speak it
With which thy accursed arm did force his breast
His too too gentle breast.

W^rd. Thy self be witness.

Stabs at him, he beats it back, and wounds her. Voad. That I am reuendge on
thee, murder, murder, the slave will murder me.


Ward. What mean you wife?

Enter watch. Voad. As you are men make rescue of me.

Ward. I am betrayed, out-gon by a she devil.

Voad. He has not only slain his innocent page,
But thus assailed my life, lay hands on him
Dear countrymen revenge my wrongs, my blood
On this false runnagate, I faint, I faint.
Convey me to a Surgeon, make him safe.
Ex.
1. Offi In the Governors name I do command you give your weapons up.


Ward. S'hart Gentlemen, you know Francisco killed him, I Will make it good.


2. Offi. We have nothing to charge you with about your page It is the
wounding your wife with an unlawful weapon.


1. Offi. You have most unmanly thrust in a woman.


Ward. Honest friends, Turks, and Officers, if ever I laid hands on her, may I
never see light more.


1. Offi. We Will take a reasonable order for that, you nere laid hands on her,
out impudence away to the dungeon with him.


Ward. S'hart carry me to the Governor that I may have justice first.


2. Offi. The fellow raues, he thinks men in office have nothing to do but to
give him justice, you must first be punished and then talk of justice when you
have cause.


1. Offic. Away with him, he shall know what it is to marry into a great Tribe,
an honorable Tribe: you use a great woman as if she were your wife, ye'ar a
base fellow indeed. You a Courtier?


Ward. Nay, then I see my end draws, I shall rave,
Run mad: have you er'a Bedlam, that I may not famish
But show tricks to get meat with, or rail against the State:
And when I have eased my gall a month or two
Come out again. Zounds let me beat hemp,
Do any thing rather then famish: That death
She has vowed me, and I Will prevent it: allow me
But every week a Christian, I am content
To feed upon raw flesh, if it be but once a month
A Britain, I Will be content with him.

2. Offic. Nay then you are mad indeed, away with him.

Ward. As you are true Turks, I will put you in sureties,
I know the Devil will provide me bale,
Rather then loose my employment: as you are pitiful Turks.

1. Offic. Nay then we shall be troubled with you.

Ward. Plagues, pestilences, all fall upon my head
Rather then by a whore be famished.
I do conjure you.

Exeunt. Scoena vltima.
Enter Benwash, Rabshake, at several Doors. Ben. Rabshake?


Rab. Here sir.


Ben. Is this child of Adam coming yet? he that will eat of the forbidden
fruit though he loose Paradise fort, is he coming.


Rab. As fast as his legs will bear him, considering the use he means to
put them to. I have provided a Ca^dle to comfort him with.


Ben. That Is my dear precious villain, how sweet art thou Revenge? the
thought of thee turns all my blood to air.


Rab. And your horns too sir?


Ben. All light Rabshake.


Rab. They were begotlight, but methinkes they should be heavy in the wearing.


Ben. I will make them abortiues man, smother them in the womb.


Rab. Though you lop the branches, you will preserve the tree to bear more
fruit, I hope, your wife sir.


Ben. She shall down too, I will let her blood in a new vein she shall turn
up the white of the eye, and dye the death of a sinner.


Rab. How will you dispense with your oaths sir?


Ben. Tush, by equivocation man, I will not hurt her, but thou shall by
equivocation, behind the Arras, my dear Rabshake.


Rab. That word (by equivocation) lies on my stomach, I would be loath it
should make me cast up my gall, I would not have my throat cut by equivocation.


Ben. The game is roused, take thy stand and strike Rabshake.


Rab. Strike you sir? you are the keeper, and have the fees in possession, I
have no money upon this equivocation.


Ben. So the hour of my redemption is at hand, for man's worst hell, a whore.


Gal. You put me to a sweet purgation the other night, 'twas well fear took
away some of my senses, I had smelt for it else.


Agar. You saw the necessity of it sir.


Gal. You may call it necessity. I thought of the day of Judgment, and that
was more then ever I did in my life before: what with the fire above, and the
Ram-headed Devil your husband below, I imagined damnation could not be far
off.


Ben. Good, excellent good.


Gal. And whither is that golden calfe of Horeb, that Jew of the the Tribe of
Israel gone, that it is Iubile with you now, all open?


Agar. He is rid to the Goletto about taking in a commodity.


Gal. And in the mean time thou will utter one at home, I am thy Merchant
Wench, and will deal with the by wholesale.


Ben. Rather by retaile sir, retaile.


Gal. Where is your Pim Rabshake, taking a nap at the staire foot, committing
sin in conceit, whilst we are at it in action? has he the two qualities of an
Usher, a good ear, and to endure cold of his feet? have you given him
instructions?


Ben. I see how it did work, I feel it.


Rab. He Will make the old Jew believe I was his wives bawd.


Gal. The slave was borne Pander, his mother was a Midwife, and then he must
needs be bawd to set his mothers trade aworke.


Rab. You will groan for this anon sir.


Ag. I pray you sir sit down, a small banquet sir.


Gal. Provocatiues and whetters on? one licorous thing draws out another. Who
will not swear Venery is a sweet sin now? Bacchus and Venus, two Gods, the
Devil is far enough off then.


Jew. You are deceived sir, he is at your elbow.


Rab. Is Dunne in the mire? for old acquaintance sake we will dragge you out sir:
you are in travel, I am the son of a Midwife, I Will help to deliver you.


Gall. It cannot be, I am in a dream.


Rab. A good belief does well; were I in your case, I should be past dreaming:
but I Will cast you in a slumber sir.


Jew. You must be at your sweet meats: cannot Mutton serve your turn, but
you must have sauce to it?


Gal. This Whore has betrayed me: now she has wrung what she can out of me,
she hanges me up for a dried Neats-tongue. She is an insatiate Whore sir, has
enticed me by the Pander your man: I was chaste before I knew her sir.


Rabsh. Believe him not sir, he is a meer^ Goat, look on his beard else.


Agar. You may see by his hair he is a man of hot Liver; he came over me with
such violence I had not the heart to resist him.


Jew. I believe you wife, I believe you, and thou shall justify it to his
teeth before the greatest Devil in hell. Rabshake give her a Mittimus,
strangle her.


Agar. Have you forgot your oaths sir?


Jew. I swear as I was a Turk, and I will cut your throat as I am a Jew.


Agar. Villain, keep off, I say.


Rab. You should have said so when time was Mistress.


Agar. Thou betraiest thy self slave, make way to thine own destruction.


Jew. Stop her throat, I say, give no ear to her.


Agar. I do confess my sin, I have wrongfully betrayed thee.


Gal. I find my self in bonds for it Lady, it is some comfort yet, that I dye
not vnreveng'd.


Jew. Thou speak charitably. Is she gone? is her lust satisfied now?


Rab. Do a woman to death, and she will be satisfied, nothing else will.


Jew. Now for you M. Gallop: you gave it me with tilting, and I will return
your courtesy.


Gal. Save my life sir, and I will be your slave, sell my self in open market,
brand me.


Jew. That were Lex talion indeed, one mark for another: but it will not serve
the turn. Have at you.


Rab. Ha, ha, ha, how the Ox goares him.


Kills him. Gal. 'Sdeath villains, treacherous villains, the plague, pox.


Rab. He died a true letcher, with the pox in his mouth. Why this was valiantly
done sir, in single opposition.


Jew. why now my brow begins to smooth. How like this Tragedy, Rabshake?


Rab. Rarely, if it do not prove a Tragedy to us sir, i'ts but a Comedy
hitherto: the setting off is all.


Jew. Tush, the best is behind man: doe'st think I do not bear a brain
about me? Beware a politician, man: here, bind me, bind me, hard, hard.


Rab. I mary sir, I like this well, a man may trust you when your hands are
tied behind you.


I^w. I cannot choose but laugh to think how happy I am in my project: it will
amaze thee when thou hear'st it Rabshake, we shall so gull the innocent world,
laugh at the silly world.


Rab. If you gull me now, I Will give you leave to make mummy of me: what is next
sir?


Jew. Here, take this dagger, stabbe me an ynch into the breast and arm.


Rab. Do you call this gulling of the world?


Jew. I cannot but laugh at the gentleman's lecherous voyage to Lucifer: there,
there. Now Rabshake let me bind thee.


Rab. How? bind me?


Jew. Thou art not capable of the mystery, thou art shallow Rabshake.


Rab. I do not desire to wade deeper in I thank you sir, I am no politician,
bear no brain about me sir; yet I can diue into a knaves pockets as well as
any man, your worship knows.


Jew. What do thou mean by this?


Rab. To rob you as I am a Turk, and cut your throat as I am a Jew, you have
forgot your equivocation; I Will chop logic with you. Come, your rings, your
chain: do you not laugh? have you not gul'd the world fairly?


Jew. Thou have mistaken me: know thou art all my care.


Rab. And you would be rid of me, I conceive you sir, though I am no
politician: I have seen the play of Pedringano sir, of Pedring^no sir.


Jew. Dear Rabshake, upon my knees I do entreat thee hear me.
For whom have I taken thought, out-watcht the night
Out-toyl'd the day, but for my Rabshake? what friend,
What kinsman, what heir had I but Rabshake?

Rab. Yes, you meant I should have been your heir.


Jew. Nay, thou should have had all in possession, my purpose was to have
lived a private life, done penance for my sins, and given thee all.


Rab. You would have parted with this chain, these rings and gold.


Jew. They are thine own, on whom should I bestow the^ else?


Rab. And you have a trick to come off clear with this business.


Jew. In spite of jealousy, without suspicion man: you being bound, your head
thrust in this circle, as if tied up for starting, I had cried out thieves,
murder, raised the street, transferd the act upon some stranger.


Rab. And I should have been your heir.


Jew. Thou wrongst me to make question often.


Rab. If I should try him, it is beyond my compass if he out-saile me: this
chain and gold is mine.


Jew. 'Sfoot my self too.


Rab. For once Il^e try you: here bind me, if you do outreach me, I Will never
trust Jew more.


Jew. Here, here: Is thy head in?


Rab. It is sir.


Jew. Have I caught you? are you in the noose? you have seen the play of
Pedringano sir, I Will play with you.


Rab. 'Sheart I am your slave sir, I did it to make your worship merry.


Jew. Tush, you are my heir, I Will hang you up a airing.


Rab. As you are a man hear me sir.


Jew. You must have your chains, you shall be chayn'd, I could even crack my
sides with laughter. This will afford me mirth unto my dying day. The play of
Ped^ingano? how the wee^ell hangs! Ha, ha, ha. Thieves, thieves: Murder,
murder. I shall betray my self with laughter. Were you caught Rynard? are you
in the noose? Murder, murder, thieues murder.


Enter Muffty, Mulli, and Officers. Mul. Break open the doors, the voice
speaks from this room.


Jew. Murder, murder, murder.


Muff. Inhumane deed! what hand could b^ so bloody?


Mul. Speak, who was the murderer?


Jew. Help me to a Surgean.


Muff. Run for a Surgean. Tell by what monster was this act (so full of
horror) done?


Jew. Three strangers rusht in suddenly, we being at supper, all my servants
forth, save honest Rabshake: and having rifled us, did act this horride murder.


1. Off. Here is a Surgean.


Muff. The Prophet Mahomet reveal the homicides.


Enter Governor, other officers, Sare, Ferd. Alb. Dansiker disguised. Gover.
What moves these outcries?


Mul. Behold a bloody murder, Benwash, his wife,
This Captain, and his servant.

Jew. My honest servant, honest Rabshake.

Dans. Benwash murdered? he has saved me a labor.

Gov. Is there any hope of life in him?

Surg. His wounds are slight, sir, only his faint-heart makes them dangerous.


Gov. Take courage man. Speak, have thou any knowledge of the Murderers?


Muff. Only he says they are strangers, men of the sea.


Sar. Can thou remember in what habit, what men of person and complexion they
were?


Dans. What means the slave to eye me so?

Jew. That fellow in the stammell hose is one of them.

Gov. Lay hands on him.

Dans. On me? Villain, thou buy'st my blood
At a dear rate. O thou immortal God
Who know my innocence! that for his former sins
Have guiven up, Dansiker into the hands
Of these damned miscreants.

Omn, Dansiker?

Dans. I Dansiker, that would with all your deaths
Have cancelled his former infamy,
Left to the world a president of valor,
Writ in your sad confusions: but heaven is just,
Christians did fall by me, by slaves I must.

Gov. Call forth the common Hangman, by this time he has done his office on
Fra^ci^c^. Dansiker? unlooked for?


Jew. Hear me before I dye, I do confess
Mine own hand did these murders. Dansiker
Has justly done me vengeance.

Gov. How Is this? thou done these murders thy self, being bound and hurt?
Thou rau'st sure.


Jew. I did them sir: the cause my wife proved false, untrue,
Bear witness, though I lived a Turk, I dye a Jew.

Omn. Out Dog, Devil.

Gov. Unheard of Monster! Cast his loathed carcass
Unto the common air. Never did day discover
Two such inhumane Caitifes, stretch out his arms,
You have your trains and fire-workes, apply your Torches
Unto his breast. We Will know what project now
Lead you unto this second venture.

Dans. I will confess it willingly: It was to have conueid
This Jew from hence, have made a massacre
Of the whole Town, dashed out the miscreant brains*
Of your young Infidels.

Muff. And art not sorry, Dog?

Dans. Yes Dog, I am sorry, and confess my crimes
Prevented such a merit: I was not worthy
To do heaven so good a service.

Gov. Pull off his hateful flesh, dig out his heart
By peece-meal.

Muff. Will thou turn Turk, and save thy soul yet?

Dans. Yes Pagan, villain, I will. Forgiveness heaven,
Let my example move all Pirates, Robbers
To think how heavy thy revenging hand
Will sit upon them. I feel thy justice now,
Receive my soul, accept my intended vow.

Moritur* Gov. So, convey his hateful body to the same place,
The Jew does lie unburied.
Enter at sever all doors Voad and Ward.
Voad. Justice, let me have Justice, worthy Governor.

Ward. Give her no ear, she is all woman dissimulation.
I am a Turk, and I do crave the law.

Turk. He has wounded here a Turk, a Lady, and
We crave sentence ac^ording to his merit.
He may receive the Bastinado, pay a fine.

Ward. Pay a fine, what fine, from one that is famished,
For want of a poor asper, set me to sea again,
The tenth of what I Will bring you in, shall connteruaile
The reuenew of the Indies.

Gou. The slave is mad, we will send you far enough,
Lady depose the for it, you shall have justice.

Voad. By our great Prophet Mahomet.

Ward. You do me wrong, let me in private speak to her
Ere she betray my life, it is no less
Then your own law affoords me.

Turk. The weakness of her body brooks it not.

Gou. How say you Voada, can you afford him speech?

Voad. I Will give his vain words hearing, though to much pain
Oh my deep wound let all remove from hence.

Ward. Had she a heart of brass IN de pierce it, leave us all.

Voad. Now sir your motion,

Ward. Wherein has my desert stro'd so much ill
To strain thy hate, to this a high beyond,
What we seem malice, I loved that face so well
To purchase it I exchanged my heaven with hell.
And to be barred what I so dearly paid for,
Is It not a plague sufficient? but thy faith
Must now be sold, to be a vengeance greater,
To pay me ungrateful hire, can thou behold
These eyes stroke inward, as ashamed to view
The fires which first betrayed them, this mind, body,
That does contain a soul more black and dismal
Then is the raven night, these arms, that have so often
Made to thee rules of love, now famished
For want of what thou surfets on, can without tears
Behold my miseries?

Voad. Ha, ha, ha.

Ward. Prodigy of woman, do laugh?

Voad. This is true music, could I enjoy these tunes
My self would be thy Iaylor.

Ward. Why then thy wound is not dangerous?

Voad. A mere scratch, know that I am revenged
Of my Fidelios death, and as thy tortures
Each hour increase, so shall my harmony
Till vengeance period give unto thy destiny.

Ward. I will discover thy hypocrisy.

Voad. You are prevented, help, I sound, I fall.

Ward. As low as hell there keep thy festival.

Gou. Hold murderous villain, all tortures man ere knew,
Shall be inflicted on thee.

Omn. Inhumane dog.

Ward. Ha, ha, ha, I laugh at you.
Here Is a preservative, against all your poisons
True Balsamum for villainy,, who will soar high
First lesson that he learn's, must be to dye.
Here Is precedent for him, you're slaus of Mahomet
Ungrateful curs, that have repaid me thus
For all the service that I have done for you,
He that has brought more treasure to yuor shore
Then all Arabia yields, he that has shown you
The way to conquer Europe, did first impart,
What your forefathers knew not, the seamans art;
Which had they attein'd, this vuiuerse had been
One Monarchy: may all your seed be damned
The name of Ottaman be the only scorn
And byword to all Nations; may his own slaves
Tear out the bowels of the last remains
Unto his bloud-propt throne, may ye cut each others throat^*
Or may, oh may the force of Christendom
Be reunited, and all at once require
The lives of all that you have murdered,
Beating a path out to Jerusalem,
Over the bleeding breasts of you and yours.

Omn. Unheard of monster.

Ward. Lastly, oh may I be the last of all my country
That trust unto your tret cheries, seducing tretch^ries*
All you that live by theft and Piracies,
That sell your lives and ^oules to purchase graves,
That dye to hell, and live far worse then slaves,
Let dying Ward tell you that heaven is just,
And that despair attends on blood and lust:

Omn. Down with the villain.

Gou. Tear the wretch peece-meale, throw his accursed limb^
Into the raging bowels of the sea.
His monument in brass we will thus ingraue,
Ward sold his country, turned Turk, and died a slave.

Epilogue.
Who writes and thinks to please the general taste*
Where eyes and ears are fed, shall find he has pla^^
His work with the fond Painter, who did mend
So long, that striving to please others, gave no end
To his own labors; for us, and if not all
We know we have pleased some, whose judgments fall
Beyond the common rank, to whom we humbly yield
Our selves and labors, they best deserve to sheeld
The worthy works of Time, and with their view
To grace choice Pens, and such we hope are you,
To whom we owe our toil, and willing give
All right in this, your favor makes it live.
Stand fair unto our ends then still, and crown
With gentle hand this work which now is your own.
FINIS.

