TRVETH TRIVMPHANT, OR The late conversion of a learned Doctor of Sorbon, D.
FRANCIS CVPIF, DOCTOR OF DIVINITY; From Popery, to the profession of the TRVE
RELIGION. With the degradation of the forenamed Doctor, for the cause
fore-sayd, by the Faculty of Divinity at Paris, in Iulie lust, 1637. And the
said D. FRANCIS his Answer to the Decree thereof, most learnedlie and
succcinctlie set down. Faythfullie translated into ENGLISH, out of the Latin
print Copy,

By WILLIAM GUILD, D. D. Minister at ABERDENE, and Chaplain to his Majesty.

1. ESDRAS, 4. 41. Truth is great, and strongest.

Printed in Aberdene, By E. Raban, 1637.



To the truly Noble, Right Honorable, and Religious Lady, DAME IEANE KEITH,
LADY PETSLIGOE.
MADAME,
LOng ago has Babylon, Revel. 16. 19
that Great City, come in rememberance before GOD, and since that fyft Angel
powered out his vial upon the seat of the Beast, verse, 10
his kingdom has lost its former luster by far, which it had before; which
makes them to gnaw their tongues for sorrow: Revel. 16. 12.
And those waters, whereon the Whore (which their own Jesuit Ribera expounds
to be the City of Rome) does sit, and which the Apostle interprets to be
Peoples, Revel. 17. 15.
and Multitudes, and Nations, and Tongues, subject unto her, (blessed be GOD)
they are dried up greatly, and run now in a far narrower Channel, than
they were wont of old, when, like Nilus, they did overflow their Banks.
Which thing has come to pass, to GOD's Glory, Revel. 2. 9.
and His Servantes joye; because the Sun of that bright Light of the Gospel,
which was darkened, for a time, by the smoke that came forth of the
bottomless Pit, has dissipated those foggie mistes of Error, and shyned,
now, a long time, most brightlie, to all such who will fully do not close
their eyes at midday. Revel. 18. 4
So that GOD's People, which were in Babell, being forewarned, to come out of
her, have obeyed accordingdlie, and do obey daily.

Amongst whom, it has pleased the Lord, very lately, even in this present
year of God 1637. by that Eye-salue spoken of in the Word, Revel. 3. 18.
to open the eyes of a most learned Doctor of Sorbon, FRANCIS CUPIF; Genesis
12. 1
that, as Abraham left Ur, and Paull his Pharisaisme, Acts 9 and 12
so he has left that Idolatrous Profession of Popery, and Traditions of men;
that he might be a member of the true Church of Christ, and here-after follow
only the voice of that Great Shepherd; John 10. 4.
Choosing rather, Heb. 11. 25. 26
with Moses, to suffer affliction with the people of GOD, than to enjoye the
pleasures of sin for a season; and, esteeming the reproach of CHRIST greater
riches, than the treasures of Egypt, or any thing that can be had in the
tents of Iniquity. Of whose conversion to the Truth, his old Associates,
with the Sorcorers of Egypt, may justly acknowledge, Exodus 8. 19
that this is the finger of GOD: and we may truly affirm with the Psalmist
of this work of Mercy, Psalm. 118. 23.
that this is the LORDS doing; and, it is marvelous in our eyes.

As the malicious Pharisees then spoke of those who believed in CHRIST, John 7.
48.
Have any of the Rulers, or of the Pharisees, believed on Him, but this
people, who knows not the Law* So let not the Romanists in like manner now
say, Did ever any of our learned Doctors convert, or turn Protestants? For
lo, here one, who has done so, brought up at the feet of Gamaliell, Acts 22.
and honored with the highest Title which that Faculty, or any famous
Universitie, could confer upon him, in testimony, and acknowledgement of his
worth and literature. The contrary whereof (amongst other their injust
Aspersions) they do not, nor dare impute unto him: and the proof whereof, in
his modest and short Reply, he does express sufficiently.

Accept, then, (Noble and Religious Lady) these small payns, which I have
taken, in translating this ensuing Pamphlet: that so, the more general notice
may be given to all, Psalm. 110. 2
of the powerful Grace of GOD, ruling in the midst of His enemies, Revel. 2. 13
and where Satan has his throne; in pulling this Man, as a brand, out of the
fire* and making him, with the Apostle, an elect Vessel, to bear His Name
before His People: Acts. (...)
whereby all zealous Professors may rejoice, as the believing Christians did,
when they heard, that he who made havocke of the Church, was then preaching
the Gospel; and, all such who profess the Truth, may be confirmed in the
Faith; and beseech GOD, more and more to add daily to His Church; To the
Glory of His Grace, the joye of His Sayncts, the confusion of His foes, and
salvation of Souls, in Jesus Christ, our Lord; in whom I am ever

Your Ladyships, in all humble duty, WILLIAM GUILD.

Reverendo Ecclesiastae D. D. WILHELMO GVILDO, S. S. THEOLOGIAE DOCTORI, and
ECCLESIASTAE ABREDONENSI VIGILANTISSIMO, Hujus Palinodiae interpreti.
CUM CHRISTVS superum repetisset limina, missa
Coelica linguarum dona fuere polo.
Gentibus vt cunctis notescat semita vitae,
Et tenebris pulsis regnet vbique DEVS.
Hinc quod apud Gallos gestum, jamjamque BRITANNIS,
Tu Patrio reser as suaviloquoque stylo.
Perge Vir Illustris, sed (quod facis) usque Prophetas
Hos lauda, mediam qui tenuere viam.
D. W.

The Decree of the Sacred Faculty of Theology, at Paris: Against FRANCIS
CVPIF, of ANIOV, promoted, a-before, to the Degree of Doctor, and now a
Desertor of the true Faith.
According to the Copy imprinted at Paris, by Antonie Vitray, Printer to the
King and Clergy of FRANCE, 1637.
IVstlie, and deservedly, does the Apostle number Heresies amongst sins of
the flesh; to wit, into which, by the secret judgment of GOD, we see those to
run head-longes, who either through the vanity and confidence of their own
free will, being puffed up, or walking according to the flesh, neither suffer
themselves to be led by the Spirit of GOD, nor to be held by any certain
rule; but favor only that whereof the carnal man does smell. The example
whereof, (to be deplored from our very inward bowels, and to the great
scandal of all the Godly, and the applause of the enemies of the Cross of
CHRIST) one FRANCIS CUPIF, borne in ANIOU, lately* has given, by an unhappy
chance; sometime received into the bosom of the Sacred Faculty of Divinity;
and, at last, promoted to be one of the number of the Doctors thereof. Who,
thereafter, being forgetful of that Law received from his excellent Mother,
which should have added to his head, favor both with GOD and Man; in like
manner, he being forgetful of the Oath so oftentimes by him reiterate,
whereby, both these who are to be promoted through every degree, as also these
who are newly made Doctors, according to the custom and institution of that
Order, use to bind themselves; yet miserably contrary thereunto he fallen
into that perverse sect of Calvinists; which amongst other Sects, in express
words, he had formerlie condemned: whereby he has acquired, unto himself,
destruction from GOD, disgrace amongst men, and a curse from both; being made a
foolish son, and the grief of his Mother; while as by a perfidious
prevarication (abjuring the true doctrine of the Catholic, Apostolic, and
Roman Church) he has openly, and avowedlie, fled to the society of
Heretics, and has given up his name to impiety and lies.

But what is the cause of his being so bent unto so great and headlongs a
destruction? But the inbred pride of his mind, and his unbridled lust,
wherewith he was ever seen by them who knew him best, to be inflamed, with an
undaunted burning: whence being blinded, and according to his lusts, being
still kindeled, having shaken off the sweet yoke of Christ, he has become the
bondslaue of Heresy; which of all sins, is the very accomplishment.

Seeing, therefore, (as Christian Emperors do speak) that, that which is done
against divine Religion, is an injury done unto all; by far greater right,
then, has that sacred Faculty esteemed that contumely done by a degenerated
son against Christ, and the faith of Christ, to be done against her; and,
that so it belongs unto her, according to the grievous and great haynousnes
of the crime, by her censures, to chastise the same, and by a public
detestation, to remove the same from her. Although it is not to be feared, that
these bastard plants will root deeply, or have any stable fastening.

Woe unto thee, then, who has proven a deserting son, and back-slyder, that
thou should take counsel, but not of me, and thou should begin a web, but not
by my spirit; that so thou may join sin unto sin; who walks so, that thou
may go down into Egypt, to the synagogue of satan, and did not ask counsel
at my mouth, nor was mindful of my commandementes. Thou have cast away my
discipline behind thee, hoping for help in the strength of Calvin, and his
followers, and placing thy confidence in the shadow of Egypt, that is, in the
conventicle of Heretics: but that imaginary strength shall be unto thee to thy
confusion; and thy confidence in that shadow which thou followest after,
(having disdayned the body of the orthodox Church) shall be unto thee, to thy
ignominy, and shame.

WHEREFORE, The sacred Faculty of Theology, at Paris, according to the
appoyntme^t of the Apostle, by common consent, has condemned the forenamed
Francis Cupif, as a wicked, perjured, sacrilegious Apostate, and Heretic; and
consequently (by his own judgment against himself) condemned, and for ever
has blotted him out of our number, degraded him of all degree, honor, or
Title, which ever he had amongst us; and decreed, by a publik Programe, or
intimation, a curse to be denounced against him. Done at Sorbon, in their
solemn meeting, the first day of Iulie, and confirmed the fourteenth day
thereof, in the year of our LORD 1637.

By the command of the D. D. Deane and Masters of the foresaid sacred Faculty
of Theology, at Paris. PH. BOVVT.

The Answer of the said Francis Cupif: OR, A necessary Gloss upon the Decree
of the Faculty of Theology, at Paris, made against Francis Cupif, doctor of
the same Faculty.
To the Venerable Magister nosters, Colleagues in the College of Sorbon,
Health.
VEnerable Masters, here does return unto you, your Decree against Francis
Cupif, sometime a Doctor of your Order, but now a Disciple and Professor of the
Truth. But it returns not without an enlargement. All your speeches are
faythfullie expressed. But such a Magisteriall Text should not long remayn
without a condign Gloss: therefore there is one found out, who has laid all in
broad band, and

That care which so into your Breasts does boil,
Discovered has, Truth giving you the soil.
He has also laid back in your lap, in part, what was due to the iniquity of
your Decree; yet, in somthings, as yet, he has spared you; lest that your
spleen stirred up again, were hurtful to your health; which he would not wish:
but he only essayeth, (except ye be incurable) that it may repent you of the
calumnies that ye cast forth upon the innocent Churches. And, at last, being
better taught, imitating your sometime fellow-doctor, ye may give glory to God,
and join hands with the Truth; against which ye have denounced war.
Farewell, and do this.

The Gloss upon the Decree it self.
Unto this Decree does Doctor CUPIF oppone, the Decree of the most holy and
blessed Trinity, whereby, as he confideth in the Lord, from all eternity he
was chosen by God, in his own time to embrace his true and uncorrupted faith.

2 He rendereth thanks unto the mistres faculty, which by this her Decree
would have it known to all men, that he usurped not falsely the title of a
Parisian Doctor, whereof perhaps some did doubt (even of these amongst whom he
did profess) that the title and ground of that style did displease himself,
after that he counted all these things l^sse for the excellency of the
knowledge of Jesus Christ his Lord, Phil. 3. 8. 9.
for whom he has suffered the loss of all these things, and does (...) them
but d^^g, that he may gain Christ, and may be found of him, not having his
own righteousness which is of the law, but that which is through the faith of
Christ, that is, the righteousness which is of GOD by faith.

3 Whereas ye call him, the deserter of the true faith. Indeed he
acknowledges himself to be the deserter of your faith, because it cannot
subsist with the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, Non ver^, sed vestr^.
whose faith if it be not true, then he shall be thought to be the deserter
of the true faith, who now acknowledges all other faith but that of theirs,
(even the Romish faith it self) to be only perfidie, or a false faith.

4 Whereas ye object his being puffed up by the vanity and confidence of his
own free will; it is answered, that they follow the vanity of their own
freewill, who attributes their salvation to their freewill, and ascrybeth
thereunto the whole efficacy of divine grace: which thing lest he should do,
he would depend wholly upon the good will of God, Aug. de correp. and gra.
cap. 14
and the powerful motion or instigation of his grace, to whose will of saving,
no man's will (says Augustine) is able to resist.

5 As for walking according to the flesh, they do walk according to the
flesh, to whom flesh and blood has revealed their doctrines and rites, whose
fear toward GOD (as says the Prophet) is taught by the precepts of men,
Isai 29. 13
but Doctor CUPIF knows that he consulted not with flesh and blood therein,
Gal. 1. 16
which if he had done, he had remained as yet in the bosom of the Roman
Church.

6 He also knows that the holy Scripture (as says Chrysostom) is the
most exact ballence, Chrysostom. Hom. 13. in 2. ad Corinth Iren. lib. 4. cap. 69.
cannon and rule of all, and (as Ireneus speaks) the inflexible rule of
truth, and by this rule he knows he is bound to hold, and thereunto
wholly does submit himself.

7 As for his Scandalezing of all the godly, there is a scandal which is
given, and another which is taken, If the Pharisees were scandalized having
heard Christ's speech, they are to be let alone, because they are blind
themselves, Matthew. 15 12. 14
and leaders of the blind, and this Doctor CUPIF has done hitherto, being
obedient unto Christ therein.

8 Such also as are truly the enemies of the Cross of Christ, (according to
the Apostle) are these whose god is their belly, Phil. 3. 18. 19
and whose glory is their shame, caring for earthly things. And who these
be, the thing it self speaks: for surely that cannot be ascrybed to him,
who, that he might follow Christ, has denied himself, and has cast away
from him the Revenewes of these Benefices which he enjoyed, 2. Cor. 8. 9
that he might give up his name to Him, who when He was rich, became poor
for our sake that by His poverty we might be enriched: and who choosed
rather to be an abject in the house of GOD, Psalm. 83 Hebr. 11. 26
than to dwell in the tabernacles of sinners.

9 Whereas it is called, an unhappy chance, or lot, that he was received into
the bosom of that sacred Faculty, and at last promoted to be one of the
Doctors therein; Surely, it had truly been an unhappy lot or chance to
him, except by the grace of GOD he had departed from them, who in the
Apostolical business have neither part nor lot: Acts 8. 21 Coloss. 1. 12
that so he might give thanks to GOD the Father, who make him fit for the
participation of the lot of the Saynct^ in light.

10 If by that excellent Mother ye understand either the Roman Church, or
your Sorbon School, it was his duty to reject those laws wherewith (against
Gods word) he was intrapped; and according to the Prophets commandment, Hosea
2. 2
Contend with his mother, that she is not the wife of God, nor that God is her
husband, til the remove away her whoredoms from before his sight, and her
adulteries from the midst of her breasts. Deuter. 23.9
And if by his excellent Mother, ye understand her, that is his mother
according to the flesh, he knows that they were praised in the cause of God,
who said of their Father and of their mother, I have no regard to them, and
who did not know their brethren: he did know also that Ass, king of Judah, was
praised, who removed his mother Maacha, that she should not be chief in the
worship of Priapus, and in the grove which she had consecrated, and who
overthrew her cave, or lurking place, as the vulgar edition has it (3 King 15.
13) or as Arias M^^ta^us translateth it out of the Hebrew. He removed her,
from that hou^e that she had made that terrible thing, that is, the Idol (1
King 15. 13) according to the Hebr^w. Neither was he ignorant of that speech of
our LORD, Matt. 10. ^7.
He that loves father or mother better nor me, he is not worthy of me.

11 Neither is Doctor CUPIF unmindful of that Oath, in the words whereof ye
made him to swear, and whereof now he heartily repents, and beseeches
GOD, that He call not the same to His remembrance; which he not only hops
for, but trusts assuredly in the LORD, that it will not be imputed to him;
because (as the Apostle says) he did it ignorantly, 1. Tim. 1. 13.
Also, he has read in your own decretalls, in these promises that are evil,
break thy says; and in vowing that which is filthy, change thy decree; and
that which thou have vnadvysedlie vowed, d^e not p^rforms; for it is as
v^godlie promise which is kept by committing of sin. Out of (...), as also
out of Beda, If it has befallen us, perhaps, to have swo^ne any thing rashly
which being observed, tends to some evil ^nd^, we are to know, that by a
more wholesome counsel freely we may change the same. And again; The e^ill
(says he) which by an Oath one has bound himself to perform, let him not
do at all. For it is great wisdom, for a man to retreat that which he
has spoken wickedlie, (as Augustine holds the opinion) Let the Doctors of
Sorbon read this, In their own Grat^an, Causa. 22. q. 4.

12 As for his condemning the sect of the Calvinists, he did indeed condemn
before, that which ye call that perverse sect of the Calvinists; 2. Peter (...)
at what time he conversed amongst you, who like brute beasts, destitute of
reason, and carried by the force of nature, speaks evil of these things
(says the Apostle) which they understand not, but since that time he does
now acknowledge true Christianity to be with them; John 10. 4.
who, although they follow none other except Christ as their guide, 1. Cor. 1. 13.
nor were they baptized in the name of Calvin; yet they are defamed by the
reproachful name, of the p^rverse sect of Calvinists, herein then he greatly
rejoices, that according to that way, Act^ (...)
which ye^ call a se^^, he so serves the God of his fathers, believing all
things which are written in the law and the prophets. And unto these he
adds, that he believes all things which were committed to the Church in
writ, by the ^^angelists, and Apostles of Christ.

13 As for that disgrace amongst men, which he has drawn upon himself, Heb.
13. 13.
he counts that his honor, and willingly (...) bear the reproach of
Christ: neither refuses he with S. Paul the Apostle, to profess His Name
amongst those, who being defamed, do pray; ^ Cor. 4. 13.
being made the filth of the world, and the off-(...) of all things, (...) to
this day.

14 Your cursing he seareth not, who turns himself unto God, saying with
David, Psalm. 109. 28.
Let them curse, but bless thou: And they who have risen up against me, let
them be ashamed; but let thy servant rejoice. Hither are all your speeches to
be referred, which ye say of a foolish son, of perfidious prevarication, of
his being upon the heretical side; and which vnjustlie ye mutter forth, of
wickedness and lies, which ye impute to him. And as for the Roman Church, he
acknowledges the same to be neither Catholic, nor Apostolic, but a
particular Apostaticke and disorderly church. Which which Epithets your own
Genebrard has adorned many of your Roman bishops before in his Chronology,
lib. 4. ad ann. 901.

15 And if any imbred pride, (as ye say) or unbridled lust, had made him bent
unto any such headlong destruction, then he ought to have remained still
amongst your selves, who rejoice in the proud titles, to be called, Magister
^^ster, and despise all others in comparison of your selves. Neither surely
was it needful to a Doctor of So^^on, and a parson, to renounce your society,
that he might satisfy his lust, seeing ye account the whoredoms of the
Clergy, but amongst light offenses. For he had read in the gloss of your
Decre^all, (on the canon lator. cause. 2 quest. 7) that simple fornication is no
cause worth^e of deposition: he had read an other gloss (on the canon,
Maximianus did. 81) saying, Commonly it is said, that for simple fornication
one ought not to be deposed, because there are ver^^ few to bes ^^und that are
^^ee of that vice. Seeing then that such indulgence of that good mother the
church of Rome was not unknown unto him, wherefore should he have left her,
if he would have walked according to his lusts? Likewise he had read another
gloss (Extra. de digamus cap. 6. (...) c^rca) saying, Note, that he who ^ath
more concu^ins than one, incurreth not ^rregularitie. Note also a marvelous
thing, that it is dispensed with him who sins, but it is not dispensed with
him who sins (...). Note also a marvelous thing, that here lechery has
more priveledge nor chastity (says the gloss) Doctor CUPIF also knew by the
witnessing of Espenseus the great ornament sometimes of your College,
Espenseus in ^pist. ad Tit. cap. 1. p. 67.
that there were Bishops who suffered their Priests not only to ^^habit with
Concubins, Lemmans, and Whores, and to beget children, receaving from them
therefore, a certain yea^ lie duty; but also they exacted that duty from
them who were continent, saying, Let them have them of they please. He then who
was so well informed concerning these things with you, why should he elsewhere
sought the opportunity of satisfying his lust, chiefelie where they who are
given to lust, are not suffered unpunished with a most sharp censure.

16 As to your woe which ye pronounce against him, he opponeth to you that
which was pronounced against your predecessors; Woe be unto you, Scribes and
Pharisees, hypocrites, because ye close the kingdom of heaven against men,
and neither enter ye in your selves, nor suffer ye others to enter in. Read
what follows (Math. 23. 13) etc. and think that these things now adays are
spoken unto your selves.

17 As for going down to Egypt, etc. They go down to Egypt, and to the
Synagogue of Satan, and inquire not at the mouth of the Lord, Ezekiel. 10. 18.
who have not left the filthy gods of Egypt, which defyle (as speaks the
Prophet) who say that they are Jews, Revel. 3. 9.
and are not; that is, as ye expone it your selves, who are Jews only in
name. Even as ye are Catholics and Apostolickes only in name, but indeed
ye are not, because ye are not so in the hid man of the heart, being so
addicted to the doctrines and commandments of men (Gods word being postponed)
that neglecting the holy Scriptures (I use the words of Cornelius M^^, In
epist. ad Romans cap. 6. page 279.
Bishop of Biten^^) that which is in request and use amongst you, is a thornie
and troublesome, (I wot not what) sort of Theology, of instances, relations,
quidd^ties, formalities. Also, all these are handled in Syllogismes made up by
(...), and humane subtilties only: which truly by that same authority may
be refuted by which they are received (says he) A man's whole age also is
spent in men's decretals, which foster a perpetual strife: and he is thought a
sublime or deep witted divine, who can devise the greatest monsters, for
defense of his traditions. This is also a part of his vain glory and (...)
not to be understood. etc. And all men do swear unto the words of their
masters, whence there is six hundredth sects, Thomists, (...), Occamists,
Baccomists, Albertists, etc. O great wickedness, (says he) marvel not then
if your sometime Doctor CUPIF has preferred the simple school of Christ unto
all these sects that are amongst you, by your own bishops confession.

18 As for for any help he hops for in the strength of Calvin, Psalm. 1^1. 2.
God forbid he should do so, Ephesians. 3. 16
but (as the Psalmist says) his help is from the Lord, who made heaven and
earth, God has given to him according to the riches of his glory, 1. Tim. 1.
12
to be might^lie strengthened by his Spirit (as the Apostle speaks) in the
inner man: and now he gives thanks to Him who has strengthened him, that is,
unto Christ Jesus our Lord. This is not the shadow of Egypt, Colos. 1. 11
nor an imaginary strength; but it is that power (as S. Paul calls it) (...)
the faithful^ are (...) with all might according to his glorious power, (...)
suffering, with joyfulnesse. By that strength imitating the Apostles, after
that he has seen the excrement of your wrath and indignation, he accepts
the furious decree of your Council; rejoicing, that he is found worthy to
suffer reproach for the Name of JESUS. Acts 5. 41.


19 In that ye have blotted him out of your number, he counts nothing
thereof, Revel. 2^. 27.
so that he be written in the Lambs book of life. Surely they are not
excluded out of the kingdom of heaven, who are not written in the Sorbon
book^, but he who is not found written in the book of life, Revel. 20. 15
he shall be cast into that (...) of fire: and that book is not kept in the
register of Sorbon. Cause. 11. q. 10 c. quid ob est. ex Augustin^.
What hurt, then, is it to a man, that the humane ignorance of the Sorbonists
will not have his name rehearsed in that book of theirs, if an evil
conscience blot him not out of the b^oke of the l^ving? If ye therefore degrade
him of all degree, honor, and title, he had with you, yet he will still
remain learned as before, if he be such as sometimes he was judged by you to
be: and more willingly will he now sit amongst the Disciples of the Truth,
than in the Chairs of such Doctors; who (as the Apostle speaks) (...) turned
aside to vain ^angling, 1. Tim. 1. 6, 7.
desiring to be teachers of the law, understanding neither what they say, nor
whereof they affirm.

20 As for your cursing of him, he prays to God, that it fall not back upon
your own heads; and gives thanks to Christ his Lord, that he has bestowed
upon him that honor, that ye should cast him forth of your synagogue,
according to that of the gospel; And they shall cast you forth of their
synagogues. John 16. 2.
Christ received him to whom he restored his sight, after that he was cast
forth by the Iowes: therefore him in likemanner whom ye have cast forth for
that cause, that he acknowledges Christ to be the only mediator between God
and us, and the only Savior, him (I hope) he will account amongst his
domesticke servants, who has read in your own Decretals; Cause. 11. q. 10.
can. Temera^um can. etsi^
A rash judgment of times nowise (...) him who it (...), but him who rashly
does judge, the rashness it self of his judgment of necessity must hurt, as
likewise a little after, (says another canon) The earthly ^ench it (...)
thing, and the Tribunal of Heaven another thing, FRANCIS CVPIF has received
his sentence only from the lower judgment seat, but from that which is above,
if constantly he go on in the Truth, and study of pieti^, (which he hops
God-willing to do) at last he shall recea^e the crown. AMEN.

The (...) of Sorbon, pass not over the Seyne, an old (...), which (...) the
Jesuit Sole^ius objected to the sch^ole of Sorbo^, in his (...) Epistle,
printed at ^oytiers, anno 1611, p. 3^.


