THE COSMOGRAPHIcal Glass, conteinyng the pleasant Principles of Cosmographie,
Geographie, Hydrographie, or Navigations. Compiled by William Cuningham Doctor
in Physic.

Excussum Londini in officina Joan. Daij Typographi. Anno. 1559.

In this Glass if you will behold
The Sterry Sky, and Earth so wide,
The Seas also, with winds so cold,
Yea and thy self all these to guide:
What this Type mean first learn a right,
So shall the gain thy trauaill quight.


DROICT ET LOYAL



TO THE RIGHT HONORAble the Lord Robert Duddeley, of the most noble Order of
the Garter Knight, Master of the Horse, to the Queen's most excellent
Majesty: and his singular good Lord, and Master. etc.
DAEDALVS THAT EXcellent Geometrician (right honorable) whanas with the eyes of
knowledge, he did behold that horrible Mo^ster Ignorance, he therewith
praesently conceived such intollarable grief, that he daily sought occasion
either how to banish her his praesence and company: or else by what means to
escape, out of her loathsome Labyrinthe. At length, perceiuinge she could not
be banished, he praepared wings (through Science aid) and so did fly out
of her most filthy Prison: according to the pleasant Poet.

Daedalus fabrifactis alis Coelum ipsum adiuit.
He made him wings where with to fly:
Ascending to the Sterrye Sky.
Yea this Monster have in all ages been accounted so deformed and Vile, that
those whose company she frequented, were reputed not in the number of
reasonable Creatures: but of brute beasts. For what does man differ from a
beast in nature, if he (leaving reasons rule) follow his sensual appetite as
they do? Or wherein does he so near approach unto God in likeness: as by
Science, and Knowledge? for this thing is proper to God only, to know all
things: and unto beast to be in all things ignorant, except in such as there
senses and custom teach them. Which has engendered such immortal hate
toward this loathsome wight, least man should lose his name and dignity, that
he invented all Arts, sought out all Secrets, and labored through curiouse
works, to bring her into perpetual exile. But now in these days, lest she
should return again (admonished by these examples) I though one of least
strength and force, yet not of least good will, have devised this mirror, or
Cosmographical Glass. In which, me^ may behold not one or two personages, but
the heavens with herplanets and stars, th*Earthe with her beautiful Regions,
and the Seas with her merueilous increse. So that she shall not (if men be
diligent) creape into any of these places, without espyeng. Yet considering
with my self, how that Ignorance has left no small number of her friends
among us, which seek to deface both science and her servants, I have no other
refuge to keep this my Glass from perishing, then to be an humble suter unto
your honor (which does not only favor Science, but also have given her
within your breast a reastinge place) that it may come forth under your noble
protection: and be defended as Teucer was under the shield of mighty Ajax,
against two sorts of men especially. Of which, the one will dispraise and
despise such things as they never red, and are utterly ignorante in. The other
sort will of mere arroga^cy il report al men's travails, how exact and
perfect so ever they be, they them selves (like Dracns) remaininge without
profit. As for the learned, wise, and modest, I am sure will not rashly give
sentence: but if faults escape, either friendly admonish: or else with pen
spedely amend it* unto which suit I am the more bouldened, remembering as well
your excellent virtues, and gifts of nature, which for fear of suspicion of
flatterye I ouerpasse, as to all men evident: as also your Lordshippes
incoragement of me to knowledge, both in words and most liberal rewards.
Wherefore, if it shall please your honor to take this simple work into your
tuition, and be Patron unto it: I shall be bouldened (God grauntinge life) to
present you also with other of my labors, the Titles of which follows.

1 An Apology Lib. ij. 2 A new Quadrat, of no man ever published. Lib. ij. 3
The Astronomicall Ring. Lib ij 4 Organographia. Lib. iij 5 Gazophilacion
Astronomicum. Lib. xvj 6 Chronographia. Lib. xij 7 Comentaries in Hippocrates
de Aere, Aquis, and Regionibus. Lib. iij
With diverse others, whose names I omit for sundry causes. Thus I leave at
this present, to trouble your honor with my rude Letters, prayeng God to
grant you long life, continual health, increase of honor: and after this life,
a place of Joy, and comfort.

Your Lordshippes most humble Servant, VV. Cuningham Physician.

Gilberti Barcklei Grimbiens. sacrae Theologiae Profess. in Speculum
Cosmographicum (...).
Machina conspicui variis pulcherrima mundi
Digna modis homini cognitione venit.
Mira Creatoris patet hinc Sapientia, Virtus,
Et Bonitas, cui sit semper habendus honos.
Quod grauis Aegyptus, quod Athenis Graecia rerum,
Quod docuit Musis aemula Roma suis:
Hocce Cuninghamus studijs Gulielmus acutis
Anglus in hoc libro Nordouicensis agit.
Thomae Langlei Cantabrigiensis ad Lectorem Carmen.
Si totam toto diuisus ab orb Britannus
Noscere Tellurem, si Mare percupiat,
Climata, quinque Plagas, Circlos, positusque Locorum,
Sydereos cursus, Tropica Signa, Polos,
Quaeque Dies tenebris aequant, quae tempora mutant,
Lumine cur Phoebus, Lunaque deficiant,
Gadibus occiduis ater quam dissidet Indus,
Et quantum distent a Scythe, Maurus, Arabs,
Spacia metiri, terras describere, and vrbes
Praestantes charta pingere in exigua,
Nomina ventorum, Classes maria omnia circum
Ducere, and ad portum quamque, refer suum,
Qui quibus (...), quique (...),
Vmbras qui varient: haec docet iste liber.
En Strabo, Sollinus, Plinius, Mela, and Ptolomaeus,
Libris ac tabulis quae docuere suis,
Vnus cuncta tibi monstrat liber iste legenti:
Aere potes paruo, discere multa breui.
Haec Cuninghamus sparsim diffusa coegit
Sedulus instar apis, quo tibi prosit Opus.
Effecit and primus, vt (...) nostras
Effingat voces: Momus hic esse cave.
Dystichon eiusdem.
Hic mundi tractus, terras, Mare, Sidera, Ventos,
Vmbras, atque situs, spacia quanta, scies.
Authoris (...).
Vis Terrae Tractus? Pelagi vis noscere fluxus?
Hoc tibi descripsi (candide lector) opus.
portrait

THE PRAEFACE OF THE Author, setting out the dignity, and Ample use of
Cosmographie.
IF EVER THERE were Art for all men's use invented, Science set forth wherein
consists Sapience, or Treasure worthy to be had in estimation: no doughte
(loving Reader) either Cosmographie is the same, or else it is not to be found
upon The Earth. For if we do well consider with our selves what her office is,
there is no man I suppose, so mean witted, but will confess her ample use,
nor yet so simply learned but must acknowledge her manifold benefits. And if I
shall begin with the defense of our Country, which ought to be more praecious,
the^ Parents wife Children or Consanguinitie, Cosmographie herein do so much
profit, that without it both valeaunt Courage, Policy and Puisaunce oftentimes
can take no place. For by her we are taught which way to conduct most safely
our ooste, where to pitch our tents, where to winter: yea, and where most
aptlye to encounter with them in the field. Which thing Alexander the mighty
Conqueroure understanding, accustomed to have the Map and Carte of the
Country, by his Cosmographers set out, with which he would war. Commanding
it also to be hanged in open markets for all men to behold, whereby the
Capitaines did for see, and seek out where was the easiest places to arrive,
and the Soldiers allured with the commodities of the Countries, were made the
willinger to the thing. This was it which got him so many victories, and made
him so great a Co^queror. This was it which obtained the Romans their fame,
more then there force and strength. This has been to all men profitable, and
injurious to no man. On the contrary part, what damage, yea utter subuertion
has followed to most noble Princes, and valeaunte Capitaines through
Ignorance of this Art, histories full well can testify. And that among many,
I may resight one Example, was not the mighty pertian King Cyrus (who had
brought Babylon, and all the East parts in subjection) vanquished withal his
army of Tomyris the Scythia^ Queen, at the River Oaxis, as he should have
passed over? what shall I speak of Agamemnons army in the Trojan wars: of
the Persians, against the Leonidians: or of Crassus, against the Partheans:
which ware them selves destroyed, or made captive, their wives children and
family spoiled, and their country most ruinously subverted, for want of
Cosmographie. Also, as touching the study of divinity, it is so requisite, and
neadfull, that you shall not understand any book, either of the old law or
Prophets (yea I had almost said, any part of a book, or Chapter of the same)
being in this Art ignorant. For what number of places, Islands, Regions,
Cities, Towns, Mountains, Seas, Rivers, and such like, is there to be found in
every Book? How often does father Moses in his. v. books, make mention of
Babylon, Sinehar, Armenia (in whose hills, Noe his Arc stayed after the
universal deludge) Assure, Charan, Caphdorim or Caldaea, Aegipt called of the
Hebrews Mizraim, Syria (divided into three parts, Mesopotamia, Arabia, and
Aethiopia,) with infinite like places, which without Cosmographie can nether
be rightly understand, or yet truly expounded? What contention, and strife,
have there spronge in all ages among the Interpreters of the scriptures,
touching the situatio^ of Paradise: their own works most euidentlye bear
witness. All they agree in this point, that it is a place of joy, reast, and
abounding in all kind of pleasures, but yet as touching the situation, some
understand it spiritually: some imagine it either in heaven or in the hearts of
the quiet and faithful: other affirm it a place in The Earth at this praesent
yet remaining, but is so kept with Angels that no man may come to it: some
say it is in the East part of the world, above the middle reagion of the Aere,
and so is free from the violence of all winds. Other suppose it to be in the
burning Zone, under the Equinoctial: So that not two in this point do accord.
But yet of all the rest, there opinions seems most fond, which place it in the
middle region of the Aere, and also those, that understand it spiritually, for
that the scripture affirms it to be in the Earth, and the. iiij famous
floudes (Euphrates, Hidekel now called Tigris, Gihon, which many interpret
Nilus, and Phison at this day named Ganges (to come from thence. These things
I bring in only as example, to prove the necessary use of it in deuinitie, and
not to dispute either of Paradise or his situatio^, seeing it belongs not to my
profession, and office. Moreover man's health (without which Honor, Fame,
Richesse, Friends, and Life it self, seems both troublous, and noisome) can
not be conserved in perfect estate, or once lost be recovered and restored
without Cosmographie. For how greatly herein it profits, to consider the
temperature of Regions, Cities, and Towns, in what Zone, and under what
Clymate and Parallele they are situated: Hippocrates does plainlye set out.
Yea it might seem superfluous, to show how both he and Galenus, commanded
there pacients to remove from one place, to an other (especially in long
sickness) because of the alteration of the Aere. What it avails also, to
know the natures of waters, the quality and pertition of winds, the manners and
complexions of the inhabitants all Physicions right well do understand. And to
conclude, in the election of simples, as stones, treis, rotes, herbs, gummes,
earthes, metals, beasts, fowls, and fishes, what light springs by
consideringe the country from whence they are brought: I suppose no man of
that profession, is ignorant. In the making, and ordaining laws, for brideling
man's froward appetide, Cosmographie is not unfruitfully. For she sets out the
natures of all people, the laws and statutes by which they are governed, and
the sequel of every decre established. Grammarians also, can not fullye
understand the pleasant invention and perfect sense of the witty Poets, but
by Cosmographies aid, because of the names of Regions, Cities, Towns, waters,
fluddes, mountains, ceremonies, people and monsters, which every Poet do
commenlye introduce, in all their writings. I omit for brevity, the
incredible benefits, which spring by reading of Histories: the beautye, and
ornature of which, consists in the description of countries, names of people,
and nature of the inhabitants: which remain as unknown of the inexperte of
Cosmograghie. Moreover, the famous marchaunts, have by it not only enriched
them selves, but also their country: fineding out such commodities, as without
it should remain, as not known. Yea and that is daily more and more perceived,
for what country, or Island, is not in our age searched out? what shall I
herein speak of Vesputius Americus, who (by his knowledge in Cosmographie)
found out America, the.iiij. part of the world, (unknown in all ages before
our time) to the great benefits of all Europe. I may seem to utter that all
men know, in making rehersall of the Indians, Calicute, Ginea, the. v. Islands
Moluccae, also Porne, Sololi, and infinite other, which are the fruits of
Cosmographie in this our age. Mariners and trauailers on the seas (without
which no realm can long stand, or man's life be sustaind) are bound to
acknowledge Cosmographies benefits. For it sets forth there ports, it
shows there course, it declares the order of winds, it warns them of
rocks, shaloues, sands, and infinite like dangers. In travailing by land, her
tables poynteth which way to follow, that thy iornay may be spedier, safe,
short, and pleasant, where you shall ascend up to hills, where to pass over
waters, where to walk through woods, and where most aptly to remain at night.
If al these were not (as it serves to infinite uses more then time will permit
to repete,) yet this one were sufficient to keep it in honor, that by it, in so
small a lump, or piece of clay, beholding such strange forms of men, beasts,
fowls, and fishes: such diversity of times, such burning hills, such
merueilous stones, metalles and plants, we are enforced to confess the
omnipotency, and wondrous work of God. This is it, that provoked Dioscorides
to leave cities, and towns, and trauail into deserts, and wods, to search the
nature of herbs This caused Atlas, Ptolomaeus, and Alfonce, to be so dilligent
in setting out the heavens course, and form of this earthly mansion. The
vtilitye of this, alured Orpheus, Solon, Democritus, Pythagoras, Eudoxus,
Plato, Hipparchus, Polybius, Strabo, and an hundredth more of the ancient
Philosophers, to leave their country, friends and acquaintance, not doubting
perel of the seas, dangers of enemies, loss of substance, werines of body: or
anguish of mind. Yea the sweatnes thereof was so great that Strabo after his
trauails said, that if any art were requisite for a Philosopher: it was
Cosmographie. And Homer called Ulysses the wi sest among the Graecians, because
he knew the natures of people, and the diversity of nations: Adding, that his
eloquence, prudence, fortitude, constancye, and other like virtues (mete for a
man) insued of his perigrinations, and trauails, which remaining at home, he
should never have learned by any precepts, discipline, or teacher. But seeing
diverse in our age are desirous of knowledge no less then the Philosophers
were, and yet can not travail for the discord of nations, the sondrye sects
of people, and diverse other impedimentes, our refuge is, to say with
Propertius.

Cogor et e Tabula, pictos ediscere Mundos. In Tables set out, Countries to
decerne
Constrained am I, and eke for to learn.
In which, I had almost (through making over much have) forgotten to resight
the benefits we receive of Cosmographie: in that she delivers us from great
and continual travails. For in a pleasant house, or warm study, she
shows us the hole face of all the Earth, withal the corners of the same. And
from this perigrination, thy wife with sheadinge salt tears, thy children
with lamentations, nor thy friends with words shall dehort and persuade the. In
travailing, thou shall not be molested with the inclemencye of the Aere,
boisterous winds, stormy shoures, hail, Ise, and snow. Coming to thy
lodginge, thou shall not have a churlish and unknown host, which shall
mynister meat twice sodden, stinking fish, or watered wine. Going to rest,
thou shall not fear lowsy beds, or filthy sheates. In Somer, the son with
his fierye beams, shall not vex thee: nor yet in winter, stormye Saturnus
shall make thy beard frosen. In sailing, thou shall not dread Pirates, fear
Peries and great winds, or have a sick stomach through unwholesome smelles.
Therefore these things considered, who is not incoraged to acheue such an
interprice, as shall redounde to his countries fame, and his perpetual
memory? what wise man does not delight to read such things, as Emperoures,
Kings and Princes have painfully travailed in, esteming there labors
plentuouslye rewarded, with the fruit of this Art? But least these my words,
should stir up the greadye appetides of diverse to this knowledge, and then to
want herein that might satisfy the same, behold I have compiled this my
Cosmographical glass. By which, such as are delighted in travailing as well by
land, as water, shall receive no small comfort (If I be not deceived) and the
other sort, by it may also protract, and set out particular cards for any
country, Region, or province: or else the universal face of the earth in a
general Map. First if they describe Parallele circles in the Map,
answeringe to the like circles in the heavens: and by the right or crooked
Horizont, the equinoctial, polary circles, and altitude of the pole, to limite
out the Zones, Climates, and Paralleles of Longitude, and Latitude: which being
once praepared, you shall place there in the countries, hills, fluddes, seas,
fortresses, Islands, cities, deserts, and such like (according to the
praecepts of the art) as are placed on the platte form of the earth. And that
the praeceptes might seem the more facile and plain, I have reduced it into
the form of a Dialoge: the names of the personages in deed fained, but yet
most aptly serving our institution. In which Spoudaeus (repraesenting the Scho
ler) makes doubts, asks Questions, obiecteth: yea, and some time,
digresseth not from the fond imaginations of the gross witted. Unto which,
Philonicus (supplying the office of a teacher) answers to to all
th'obiections, and gives praeceptes. What diligence I have given in time of
the Printing, to the correction hereof, and also in diuisinge sundry new
Tables, Pictures, demonstrations, and praeceptes: that you may easily judge by
readyng the same work. Also what charges the Printer has sustained, that his
good will might not be wanting, that shall be evident conferryng his beautiful
Pictures and letters, with such works, as herto has been published. And thus
I leave the with my Cosmographicall Glass, requiryng that these my trauayles
and labors, be not rewarded with ingratitude, or ill report. And if for the
difficulty of the work, any error escape: remember I am the first that ever
in our tongue have written of this argument, and therefore am constrained, to
find out the pathe. which if it be not at this time made plain, smothe and
pleasant: if God grant life, and leisure, I trust so to tread it again,
that both night and day (walking in the same) thou shall not miss of the
desired Port. Again fare well, and favor me, as I wish thy furderaunce in
knowledge.

At Norwich, the xviij. of July. 1559.
THE FIRST BOOK OF THE Cosmographicall Glass, conteinyng the necessary
Principles required in this Art: and therefore is an Isagoge, or Introduction
unto the hole work.
The Interloquutors* Philonicus. Spoudaeus.


Spoudaeus. LATELY Calling to my remembrance the Race that every man in this
his tra^sitory life have to run: and that faults committed in this course,
for want of time, can scarslye with great difficulty, Men happiest
labor, and diligence, any thing be amended: I was of force compelled, to
confess Time the grea test treasure.
those most happy, which use this time (being so great a treasure) as
repentance may take no place. And on the other part, those most miserable me^
(yea, rather Images, Men most unfortunate.
and pictures of men, then very men in deed) which employ their busy cure and
care, in stealing, Idleness, vayn pastimes, long sleapes, dronkennes, lascivious
toying, swe ring, scraping and gatheryng of Plutos corn together, as though
they had more time, then might be well spent in the exaltyng of Virtue,
suppla^ting of Uyce, and profiting their Country, Frindes, and Consanguinitie.
In time past, following only nature as Ruler and guide, men did more earnestly,
(and as it wear with an insatiate mind) seek Uertu for her self, and abhor
Uise, for the horrible name thereof: the^ we do in our days, having both
Nature, Gods precepts, and politic laws, as our Capitaines and lodesmen.
Which abuse of time, is the greatest cause, that men in our age, are not
comparable Why men in our age, are not so learned as they were in old time.
in any thing to those of times past. For how many sundry Arts, secret
Sciences, and wonderful Ingens, throwgh well spending of time, did the
ancient Philosophers in their days inuente? Archimedes deuisyd glasses, with
which the Siracusians might burn their The fruit spri^ ging of well spent
time.
enemies far distant, on the seas from them. Ptolomaeus, Atlas, and Alphonsus
(being kings) found out the marvelous course and sundry motions, of the
supercelestiall bodies: writing sundry volumes of them, to the great comfort of
such, as ar living at this present. Appollo, first found Physic the
repayrer of health. And in like manner, some one thing, and some an other, of
whose Godly trauelles so many precious monumentes yet remain: yea and the
Authors them selves (being dead so many hundred years sense) are as fresh in
the mind of man, as it were but yesterday, such is the reward of virtuous
travel. But whom do I se walking in yonder grene place, among the pleasant
birds, flowers, and trees, is it not Philonicus? It is he: I will go and
salute him. God the giver of all sapience and science, save you (right reverent
Philonicus.) I account my self happy, that I have found you: for now my hope
is, to be delivered (although not of all yet) of some of the bonds, and
chains, of Ignorance.


Philonicus. You are unfeignedly welcome to me at this present: and like as your
name is Spoudaeus: so you What Spoudaeus signifies
do in no point degenerate from the same: but are dilligent in seking knowledge,
eschewing idleness, and vain pastimes.


Spoudaeus. That I learned, taking at you example: for you ever keeping
perpetual war with ignorance, The interpretation of Philonicus.
and vise of every kind: (for reward whereof virtue also gave you that name) do
use to read, and reuolue the tree sure of Sapie^ce, I mean, the secret works
of Nature shut up, or rather contained, in the worthy and ancient writers. And
in reading certain of them, I have found not only matters of great
difficulty: but also (as to me it seems) of much untruth.


Philonicus. You must judge well of their labors which have before our days
written: for time brings The old writers excused.
things to their perfection. If we without any ground, should by our
vigilancie, find out such mysteries, yea and (as I may term them) hid
secrets of Nature: I assure you, we should have left many more errors to our
posterity, then they have in their writings unto us. Yea and there are many
things which seem false and untrue: because the gross capacities, of
unlearned persons, can not redely comprehend the same. But whereof do those
Authors entreat, in which you have so latelye traueled?


Spoudaeus. They be writers of Cosmographie, Geographie, Hydrographie, or
Navigations. But because that either they observe no order, or Method in their
teaching, either that they digress from that they take in hand (and fill their
volumes with other sciences, rather then Cosmographie.) I have very little
profyted by my travel.


Philo. I rejoice that your fortune was to take in hand such authors. For
Cosmographie in my judgment is mete for every estate, and most excellent of
all other natural science. Wherefore be you nothing discomfortid, and amasyd
with the difficulty of their writing. For how much the thing transcende in
worthynes other knowledge not so plausible: so much the more it is companion
with dificultie. And where as you allege, that the most part of them observe
no Method, and order: in that I will do my endeavor, (as also in the other,
where place shall require) to suplie that want in that behalf.


Spoud. You shall meruailouslye encourage me, and take away the greatest
trouble in this my study, if you do not only show me the knowledge thereof in
such order, as I may best conceive it: but also explicate, and open such
placis, as are obscure and dark for me to understand.


Philo. Yet before we take in hand this study, there is one thing, of which
I must have knowledge (that is) whether you have read any authors of
Arithmetic, Arithmetic and Geometry necessary for this art.
and Geometry: else you had best read some of them, and resort to me again at
some other convenient season.


Spoud. Yes sir I have read the ground of Arts, The whestone of wit, and
the path way.


Philonicus. That I am glad to understand: so shall it be the easier for me to
instruct you, and you better to conceive, and also retain the surer, such
things as shall be taught. For he that will cover the roufe of his house, before
he have made the foundation, and buildyd the walls: beside the loss of his
cost, shall be thought scarce a wytty builder. But I will exhort you as time
shall seem mete also to read with great diligence Orontius Orontius.
Scheubelius. Euclide. Theodosius.
Arithmeticke, Scheubelius Algeber, Euclides Eleme^taries, and Theodosius of
spherike Demonstrations: not only for this studies sake which you now have in
hand: but for all other arts (which taste of the Mathematicalles) that you
shall here after travel in. But now to the scope that you desire. And because
that you may know, whereof the matter depend of which we shall entreat, let
me here what you call Cosmographie.


Spoud. That seems unto me to be none other thing, What Cosmographie is.
then the art which do set forth, and describe the universal world.


Philo. You have said rightly, for so the Etymology of this word Cosmographie
does sound. But is there no dife rence betwixt this word Cosmographie, and
Geographie?


Spoud. It should so seem to me, for both do describe the world.


Philo. Then define you Geographie, after such authors minds as you have
read.


Spoud. That will I do gladly. Ptolomaeus in his geographie Lib. 1. cap. 1.
defines it in this sort.

(...). What Geographie is.


Which sentence I turning into Latyne soundith in this sort.

Geographia est vniuersarum terrae partium cognitaru^, vna cum hiis, quae ei
veluti vniuersaliter coniuncta sunt, picturae imitatio.

Which in our tongue is as much to say as.

Geographie is the imitation, and discriptio^ of the face, and picture of
the earth, with her parts known, and of such things as are to it co^nected and
joined.


Philo. You have truly repetyd Ptolomaeus words. Now I will prove by your
difinition, that you have erred two ways, in putting no diference betwixt
Cosmographie, and Geographie. First Cosmographie teaches The diference of
Cosmographie and Geographie.
the discriptio^ of the universal world, and not of the earth only: and
Geographie of the earth, and of none other part.


Spoud. Why sir, make you a diference betwixt the world, and the earth?


Philo. Yea verily, and that as much as betwixt a man, and his little finger,
but of that, you shall hear more or we depart. The second way you erryd in
the order of dividing the earth: for albeit Cosmographie describes the face of
the earth, yet it is by noting and observing certain divisions, answering unto.
v. principal paralleles or equidistant circles in the heavens. As they dwell in
the mids of the earth that inhabit under th'equinoctiall line, and the like of
the dwellers under the other circles, is said On the other part, Geographie do
deliniat, and set out the universal earth, no respect had unto the forna^ed
circles of the heavens: but by Hills, Mou^tayns, Seas, fluddes, and such other
notable things, as are in it contained.


Spoud. Then by your words I also gather, there is some diference betwyxt
these two, and Chorographie.


Philo. Yea and that Ptolomaeus in the place of you What Chorographie is and
how it difereth from the other two.
alleadgid, do plainly express. For like as Cosmographie describes the
world, Geographie the earth: in like sort Chorographie, shows the parts of
the earth, divided in themselves. And severally describes, the ports, Rivers
Havens, Fluddes, Hills, Mountains, Cities, Villages, Buildinges, Fortresses,
Walls, yea and every particular thing, in that part contained. And is in
respect says he, of Cosmographie and Geographie, as if a pai^ter should set
forth the eye, or ear of a man, and not the whole body, so that Chorographie
consists rather in describyng the quality and figure, then the bigness, and
quantity of any thing.


Spoud. Although by your words, I have received more commodity at this
present, then by all my readyng touching the true diference of these three
names: yet if it Things seen are longer in mind, then only hard.
may please you to give me the figures of every of them, I shall so steadfastly
printe it in my mind, as I trust not to forget them, for it is truly said,
things seen have longer impresion then only hard.


Philo. I will gladly fulfill your request. Mark now this example following.
Here first you do see the heavens contain in them the earth. Which earth is
divided into five principal parts, according to the five Circles in the
heavens: the names of which for brevity I omytte until convenient place,
lest through often repeting things they at length seem tedious. The This figure
repraesent the form of Cosmographie.
other figure without circles, represents the earth, set forth with Waters,
Hills, Mountains, and such like.

This Picture answers unto Geographie.


And finally for Chorographie, I have placed th'excelle^t City of Norwyche, as
the form of it is, at this present 1558. Now that you have learned their
difference, declare in which of the^ you most delight to be instructed.


Spoud. I thank you sir, I shall never be able (more then with prayer) to
recompense your pains. But sense Cosmographie excels Geographie and
Chorographie.
Cosmographie is more excellent then the other two, both for the manifold use,
and that it co^teineth and comprehends the other in it self: I would imploye
my whole industry herein.


Philo. Then seeing that Cosmographie describes the world as you have said,
(and that rightly) it is necessary to know what the world is, what the parts
of it are, The argument of the whole work.
and how many, yea and finally, by what means, as well the world, as also the
parts of it, ar described. This perfitly lernyd, have you then for this
present, your whole desire?


Spoud. Yes verily.




THE DECLARATION OF THE PRINCIPAL places in the City, after the order of
th'Alphabete.
A Thorpe Wood. B S. Leonardes. C. The place where men are customablie burnt.
D. Bishops Gate. E. The Cathedral church, called Christ's Church. F. S.
Martins at the Pallis Gate. G Pokethorpe Gates. H. The Suburbs called
Pokthorpe. I. Magdalene gates K S. Butholdes. M S. Clementes. N S. Augustines.
P. S, Augustines Gates. Q. S. Martines Gates. R. S Martines at th'Ooke. S. The
new milles. T. Hellgates, the Suburbs joining to it, called Heiham. V S. Benets
Gates. VV S. ^les Gates. X. S. Stephens Gates. Y. Brazen door. Z. S. John's
gates. and. Lakenam Wood. AA Chapel in the field. BB Eaten Wood. CC The
Castle. DD The hospital. EE The market place. FF S. Peter's permantigate. GG
S. Martines on the hill. HH. S. John's on the hill. II S. Michaels. LL S. John's
at the gates. MM S. Stephens. NN Thorpe. QQ In the righthand is that part of
the river Yerus coming from Yermouth, and renneth through the City. QQ The left
hand the other part of the forsaid river going hier into the country.
This Picture must be placed before the 9. leaf.

Philonicus. Then let us begin with the definition Lib. primo in initio.
of the world, which the ancient Cleomedes definith in this manner.

(...). What the World is.


And I do translate it into Latin as follows.

Mundus est ex caelo, terraque, ac naturis denique in eis compraehensis,
compages. Is autem corpora in se singula continet, nec extra eum, prorsus
quicquam cernitur.

That is, the world is an apt frame, made of heaven, and earth, and of things
in them contained. This comprehe^deth all things in it self, nether is there
any thing without the lymites of it visible.

Which definition differith not from Aristotle and other Aristotle.
famous writers. So that what so ever is betwixt the seat of the almighty
governor of all living creatures, and the center of the earth: is called the
world. And is compared to a round ball and globe.


Spoudaeus. Then all that we either by sight may decerne, or by art conceive,
that same is the world. And conteyneth in it what so ever the eternal
Creater, by his wounderfull work have in this circuit blessed, and made.


Philonicus. True it is.


Spoud. Then I perceive my error before committed, The World and the earth not
one thing.
wheare I applied this word world, only to the earth.


Philonicus. So in like sort it is otherwise abused, but note you diligently
that is said before of Cleomedes and it shall be sufficient.


Spoudaeus. And is there nothing beyond this world? my imagination, leads
me to the contrary.


Philonicus. Indede Pythagoras following imagination, more then Reason affirms
sumwhat to be, Pythagoras error.
which is not comprehendid with in the world: and names it Vacuum. But
Plato, and Aristotle, do overthrow Plato. Aristotle.
this assertion. And seeing that it transsendith the knowledge of man let it
pass, and return we to our matter.


Spoudaeus. What be the parts of the world?


Philonicus. The world is made of two parts, that is to say, of the
Elementary Region, conteinyng in The World made of two parts.
it the four Elements, Fire, Air, Water, and Earth: and what so ever of them
is compounded and made, of which hereafter we shall entreat: and of the
heavenly region, of which at this present time we will make mention. This Type
do represent the world, deuidid in to his two peculiar parts.
This region do in it contain. x. spheres, in such sort The number of the
heavens.
as the greater comprehendith in him the lesser, as the. x. heaven or Primum
mobile, comprehendith the. ix. heaven callid also Cristalline. This heaven
compasses the viij. heaven, called in greek (...) because the sterres keep one
uniform distance in moving, and for that cause are namid fixid. And so this
receive in this compass the sphere of Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, the Son,
Uenus, Mercurius, the Moon, and the four Elements.


Spoud. Why should not the spheres of the Son, and An objection
Moan be above the other Planetes, as well as in that order, you have rehearsed
them?


Philo. This serves not for our purpose, but it is excellently proved of
Ptolomaeus, Alphraganus, Tebitius, Archimedes, and other, with such inuinsible
reasons as can not be denied. But me think the pleasant Ptolomaeus.
Alphraganus Tebitius. Archimedes.
Poet Ouidius, makes a good reason to prove the Son to have his sphere, in
like order as is aforesaid, when as he speaks under the parson of Phoebus,
unto young Lib. 2. Metamorphos.
Phaeton (entering into his Chariot) in this manner.

Altius egressus, caelestia signa cremabis:
Inferius terras: medio tutissimus ibis.


In our english tunge, the meaning of these versis is thus.

Direct thy Chariot in a mean, clymbe thou not to bye:
Lest thou do burn the heavenly Signs, set in the sterry sky.
Or descending to low the earth, of heat shall feel the flame.
But keep the mean, y^ shall be fre, from fear, and eke from blame



Spoud. The cause is so manifest, that it need no longer declaration. So that I
suppose these excellent writers aforesaid, have found out the true order of the
spheres as you have repeted them. And that Crates with his company, The error
of Crates Albetragnius Democritus and Plato.
have no less erred, placing the luminaries above the eight heaven: then
Albetragnius which supposes Venus: and Democritus, which affirms Mercurye,
to be higher then the Son.


Philo. Yea and Plato, (which otherwise is a grave Philosopher) did no less
err then the other, imagining the luminaries to have their course under all
the other Planetes.


Spoud. Well let them pass, and now to the number of the heavens, which you
affirm to be. x.


Philoni. You have ryghtly spoken.


Spoud. I remember among other things that I have The Aegiptia^s found out but
8. heavens.
read in Diodorus, how that the Aegiptians supposed there were but eight
heavens: and that by this persuasion. They gave to the seven Planetes. vij.
heavens. And because they perceived that heaven (which you call the firmament)
to carry the fixed sterres in it, and to keep one uniform order and distaunce
in rising, none steed, and going down: to circuit the earth also in. 24.
hours: and finally, to carry the heavens of the Planetes, by his swiftnes about
the earth with him, contrary to their natural motion, they supposed (of whose
mind I also am) that there ware but eight heavens. And that, which you call
the eight heaven, they name primum mobile.


Philo. You may not to rashely adicte your self to any of their opinions,
before you are certain they are either true, or else received as most
probable. For by the like Ptolomaeus found out the 9. heaven.
reason, I can compel you to confess there are. ix. heavens, as Ptolomaeus
affirms. But for shortness of time, and that it sumwhat swaruith from our
purpose, I will omytte it: and lean to the authority of the famous king,
Alfonsus first found the. 10 heaven out.
and grave Philosopher Alphonsus: whose name by his travel, is made immortal.


Spoud. Thus I perceive your saiynge to be verified (when you excused the old
writers) that time, bring all things to their perfection. But I have read
also of an heaven, which in greek is named (...), Empyreu^.


Philo. It is so named of the wonderful brightness, and beauty. But because it
is imoble, and without any moui^g I exclude it out from the number of the
mouable heavens: and that, as not serving to our purpose. And thus you have
learned what the world is, and also the heavenly region. But for the redier
conceiving of that which is now spoken, behold the figure ensuing.


Spou. Will it please you now to proceed with the eleme^tarye region, which you
declared to be the other part of the world?




Philo. Before we shall take this part in hand (for the easier avoiding often
repetitio^ of one thing) I will give you some introduction into the celestial
sphere, touching such circles as must of necessity serve in this art.


Spou. And that fault have troubled, yea right excellent authors, for they
obserui^g no method, were compelled to repete one thing diverse, and sundry
times. But because you made mention of a sphere, may it please you to make
definition of it?


Philo. All such as have written hereof, do accord in one as Theodosius,
Proclus, Euclyde, Orontius, John Theodosius. Proclus. Euclide. Orontius. John
Halifax
Halifax our worthy countryman, (called also John de sacrobosco.) etc. But as
well for the authority, as also elegancie, I will repete unto you Theodosius
definition, who says in this wise.

(...). Lib. 1. prop. 1.


Sphaera est figura solida co^prehe^sa vna superficie, ad qua^ ab vno eoru^
pu^ctoru^ quae i^tra figura^ su^t, oe^s rectae lineae ductae sut inter se
aequales

A sphere is a sound body, contained within one platte form and bound, unto
which all right lines drawn from the Center, (they being contained within the
figure) are found aequal among the^ selves.

To the understanding of which definition, is requisite to know both what the
center, axe tree, and diameter of a sphere is.


Spoud. Now I perceive the reading of the pathway does not a little help me, in
understanding this definition of Theodosius: as also such words, which are
usual in Geometry. But what is this axe tree of the sphere? for I understand
that by a center is nothing me^te, but a prick What a ce^ter is.
in the mids of any circumference.


Philo. Theodosius, calls the axe tree, a certain right Lib. 1. prop. 3.
line drawn by the center, both ends of it ending in the plat form of the
said sphere, the sphere being turned about What the axe tree is.
it: and yet this axe tree to remain fixid and without motion. As in example.
Here you se A. B. C. to represent the half sphere, the axe tree also drawn
through it is A. D. C. which being fixid, and the half sphere turnynge round
about, makes a parfait round body. As this figure here placed makes true
mention.


Spoud. I pray you what difference is there betwixt the diameter of a sphere
and the axe tree.




Philo. I will show you, omitting the auctors names What a diameter is, and how
it difereth from the axe tree aforsayd.
for briefnes. A diameter of a sphere, or globe, is any line drawn through the
same, going by the center of the sphere, or globe. And so there may be (yea and
you will). xx. diameters, or as many as you please in a sphere: but there can
be but one axe tree, on which the sphere, or globe, is reuoluid. And this axe
tree is void of all motion.


Spoud. I will (and it please you) make a proof whereby you shall perceive, if I
rightly understand your meaning.


Philo. do you so.


Spou. Here I will make a sphere, in which I draw right lines, from the one
part of the circu^fere^ce, by the ce^ter, and so to the other. Such right
lines, or diameters, are AD: CF: BE: but I do imagine only A. D. to be the axe
tree, and imoble.




Philo. Very well wrought. Now proceed we forth. You must also consider that the
sphere is divided, into a right sphere and into an oblique or crokyd sphere.
they only have a right sphere which dwell under the equinoctial, The sphere
is taken two ways. A right sphere The poles of the world what they are.
and have both the pole arctike, and antarctick in their Horizont.


Spoud. Do you not call the two points or ends of the axe tree, the fornamed
poles?


Philo. It is so, and for firmer printing it in memory, behold here the type
of them that have a right sphere. As A. D. C. represents both the axe tree,
and the right Horizont: and A. C. the two poles: Yea and B. D. the half part
of the equinoctial.




Spoud. So that a man inhabiting under B. D. which is the equinoctial, do
perceive both A. which is the North pole, and C. which is the South, level
with the earth, and his vertical point, in the for said Aequinoctial.


Philo. You do well perceive it.


Spoud. Then it follows, that where either of the poles, is elevated above the
earth, they dwell not under the An oblique or crooked sphere.
aequinoctial, and so have a crooked, and an oblique sphere.


Philo. And that do this figure perfitly prove. Here C. E. is the half of the
axe tree above the earth, B. E. is the half of the equinoctial. C. the one
pole above the earth. Which makes the half sphere. A. B. C. D. to be
oblique, and crooked, according to my first meani^g.




Spou. I understand this perfitly


Philo. Then is it expedient for you to consider, that this sphere does in it
contain many Circles.


Spoud. Your words bring me in a doubt. For I perceive that a circle, and a
sphere are both round, and have like Centers, and Diameters.


Phil. They have no less, yet they do as greatly differ as the world, and
the earth (of which we made mention) as this definition of Euclid, do manifest
plainly. (...). Lib. 1. defi. 14.
which Scheubel. excelle^tly (after his manner) tra^slateth.

Circulus est figura plana, vna linea compraehensa, quae circumferentia
appellatur, ad quam ab vno quodam puncto eorum, quae intra figuram sunt posita,
omnes cade^tes rectae lineae inter se sunt aequales.

And is thus much to say with us.

A Circle is a plain and flat figure comprehended within one line, which is
called a circumference: unto which, if lines be drawn from the Center, or
point of the circle, unto the circumference, they being contained within the
same, are found to be equal one to an other.

As in this example. A. is the center of the Circle: B. C. D. E. the
Circumferent line. etc.




Spou. By these words I find a two foulde difference How a sphere and a
Circle differ.
betwixt a sphere, and a circle. First, that a circle is a plain, and flat
figure, and a sphere of round form, like unto a Ball. And then that a Circle
is co^praehended within one line, and a sphere within one plat form* But now
I pray you declare such Circles, as are imagined to be in the sphere of the
world, and most necessary for an introduction.


Phil. In This sphere chiefly x. Circles are imagined: The principal circles
in the Sphere of the world are x. in number.
Of which 6. be great, and 4. be small: which in order I will set out. And
therefore answer me: Have you not read among your authors of the Horizo^t
circle? we will begin with that first, because necessity inforseth such
order.


Spou. Yes sir: Proclus defines it in this sort.

(...). What the Ho rizont is.


Horizon est circulus qui diuidit nobis mundi partem, quae videtur, ab ea quae
non apparet: and qui ita in duas parts aequales ^otum discindit mundi globum,
vt eius dimidia pars altera supra terra^ extet, dimidia altera sub terra sit.

Which sounded in our language in this manner.

The Horizont is a Circle which deuideth, and parts that part of the world
which we see, from that which do not appere^ and which par teth the world in
two equal parts, in such facion, as the one half is ever above the earth,
the other always under.


Phil. The use of this Circle is right excellent, for by it we find out the
rising, and going down of every Planet and Star. In this Horizont the day
and night, have also their beginning, and end.


Spou. So that this Horizont is a line imagined to go round about by the face
of the earth, parting the heavens in two parts, and is said of (...), which
signifies to decerne, or end. But standing on an hie Mountain, A question.
steple, or such like thing, shall I se but half the heavens,


Philo. Yes verily, you shall see more then an Hemisphere (for so call they the
half sphere) as also being in The answer.
a valley and low place, you shall not see your Hemisphere totally. And
although you may obiecte, that this Horizont deuideth not the heaven in two
equal portio^s, yet it is proves nothing: for the Astrologians allow no such
Horizont.


Spoud. And is this Horizont a fixed Circle or not?


Philo. It is fixed, and without motion. An objection



Spou: It should seem contrary. For I being at London have one Horizont, and
going to Andwerpe, have an other, and so at Colein an other, and at Heydelberge
another. etc.


Philo. I confess no less, but that proves nothing The answer.
that the horizont moves, for look into what error you should fall: you
must grant (if the horizont move) that with the turning of the heavens, your
horizont Circle must come over your vertical poi^t, once in 24. hours.


Spoud. Nay, I will not grant such absurdity in any case: wherefore I see
that it is my chau^gyng that makes me to have a new horizont, and not the
horizont to move with me.


Phil. You hit the nail on the head (as the saying is) The Horizont divided
into two parts.
Now your author deuideth the horizont, like to the sphere: that is, into a
right horizont, and into a crooked or oblique.


Spoud. What be they that have a right horizont? A right Horizont.



Phil. They have a right horizont, when as this circle crosses the
equinoctial rightely in two parts, and they have a crooked horizont, when
either of the Poles A crooked Ho rizont.
is above the Earth, and the other under: such is our Horizont which inhabit
Europe. But for the better understanding, I have made here a figure, in which
C. A. and E. is the equinoctial. And because B. A. D. crosses it rightely: It
is the right Horizont. Also B. D. are the two Poles of the world: and because
B. is elevated above the earth, it makes F. A. G. to be the oblique Horizont,
as these ij. pictures here placed do show.

This Picture shows the form of a right Horizont.
This Figure represent a crooked or oblique Horizont.



Spoud. Seeing that the Horizont seems only necessary for to know the true
risinge, and going down of the Son, Moan, Planetes, and fixed sterres, it
can not any thing help for to know when any of them are at the hiest above
the Horizont for that day, in which place when as the Son comes: it is
midday. For I perceive every Planet, and Star, to ascend by little, and little
above the earth, until they be at the hiest: and then in like manner do
continuallye descend, until they come to the Horizont in the West.


Phil. For this and diverse other occations (in times past) they imagined a
circle which they called the meridian circle and Proclus, in this sort
sets it out.

(...). What the Me ridian is.


Meridianus circulus is est, qui describitur per polos mu^di, and per verticis
punctum, in quo cum fuerit sol, facit diei noctisque dimidium.

The meridiane or middaie circle (says he) is describid and drawn by the
poles of the world, and the point directlye over our heads called Zenit
Zenit is that point or prick imagined to be directly over our heads and is
always. 90. degrees from the East, South, Weast, and North. Lib. 1. prop. 3.
in which when the Son enters (which is twyse in a natural day) it is
mydday, or mydnight.


Spoud. Yea and this meridiane by Theodosius probation, shall in all places
cross rightly the Horizont, and is also a fixid circle as the Horizont is.


Philo. And that was one of the greatest reasons (if I be not deceived) which
provoked the Astronomers to make their computation from midday. And as many as
dwell either plain North, or South, have the same meridiane that you have: and
such as are either East, or West, have an other meridian, and not the same
which you have.


Spoud. Then by your words I gather that the inhabitants which be directly
under us (the Geographers Antipodes.
name them Antipodes) are under the same meridiane line, that we be.


Philo. Verily it is true. But we will omyt the declaration of them until our
next metinge, and I will give you example of the meridiane circle, joined with
the Horizont. Here you se A. E. C. represent the vertical point, B. D. the
poles of the world, by which and A. (being the vertical circle) is the
meridia^ circle A. B. C. D. delineated and drawn. Which crosses also B. E.
D. F. being the Horizont circle.


Spoud. This circle I do well remember, but I do further perceive that the Son
rises not always at one time, and therefore is sometime longer or he come to the
meridian, and sometime shorter, so that the days increase and decrease
continually, except twyse every year. (Which is to say the. x. of March, and
the. xiiij. of September) and then the days, and nights are equal, and he
ryseth directly East, and sets plain West: which in other times, he do
not, as we may daily understand.


Philo. The diference of the times, engendered by the course of the Son, you
shall easily find by the quinoctiall.


Spoud. you renew that, which almost was out of my memory. For I reading the
for said Proclus, remember he makes mention of the equinoctial circle in this
wise.

(...). What the quinoctiall is.


A equinoctialis autem circulus est horum quinque paralleloru^ maximus, ita ab
horizonte in duo sectus, vt eius dimidia pars altera sit supra terram, altera
vero lub terra: in quo cum fuerit sol, aequinoctia facit duo, vernu^ and
Autumnale.

The equinoctial is a circle greatest of all the other. v. Paralleles, and is
so divided, and parted of the Horizont, that the one half is ever above the
earth, and the other half under: into which, when the Son enter (which is
twyse yearly spring time, and harvest) the days and nights are equal through
the whole earth.


Philo. Moreover you must further consider that this circle difereth from the
other two before said because it is mouable, and carried about with the heavens,
where the other are steadfast and fixid.


Spoud. It must needs so be. But are not the poles of this circle, the poles of
the world?


Philo. Yes verily, and they that dwell under the equinoctial have the signs
equally ascending, and descending, which should not be, if the poles of it,
did vary from the poles of the world. That they do ascend, and also descend
equally, Lucan the excellent Poet, do aptly set out, where he describes Cato
his voyage into Lybia, Lib. 9.
which is toward the equinoctial, in these versis annexid.

Non oblique meant, nec Tauro rectior exit
Scorpius, aut Aries donat sua tempora Librae.
Aut Astrea iubet lentos descendere Pisces.
Par Geminis, Chiron: and idem quod Carcenus ardens
Humidus Aegoceros, nec plus Leo tollitur Vrna.


The meaning of which versis in English meater is,

The signs in equal times, do ascend and descend:
The Balance and the Ram, the Scorpion and Bull.
The Twins and Archer eke, the Crabe and Goat defend:
The fearse Lion, the Pot with water that is full.
The Virgin with her branch, sooner cannot apere:
Then the Fysshes by course approach to the west nere.



Spoud. I shall and it please you make a prove hereof as I did in the other,
whereby you may correct my error, if any shall follow: and then you may proceed
with the other circles.


Philoni. Do you so.


Spoud. I have here made a figure in which C. E. do represent the
equinoctial. B. A. D. the axe tree of the world. B. the north pole or
arcticke, and D. in like sort the antarcticke, which are also the poles of the
equinoc tiall.

The use of the Horizo^t, Meridian, and aequinoctiall Circles.



Philo. I do much commend you. Now further more you may consider, that like
as the rising, and going down of the Son, Moon, and Planetes, is found out
by the help of the Horizont: their true height by the meridian circle: and the
variety of time by the equinoctial: (comparing the quantity of the day
present, unto the quantity of the day when as the Son is in the equinoctial)
so there is also a proper path, or way, in which the other Planetes, as well
as the Son do finyshe their reuolutio^, and course, according to their true
time. Which circle is very needful for Geographers, as hereafter you shall
understand.


Spoud. I pray you sir, is not that the circle, which I have in a starry night
decernid like a broad gyrdle full of stars, in which also in some part is
the mylkey way called as I suppose (...) of Ptolomaeus, and of Tully lacteus
orbis?


Philo. It is the very same, and Proclus describes it in these words.

(...). What the zodiac is.


Circulus autem obliquus est zodiacus, qui duodecim signa continet, ipseque ex
tribus circulis parallelis constituitur: quoru^ duo latitudine^ eius definiunt,
tertius vero per media signa ducitur. Hic attingit duos circulos aequales and
parallelos, ne^pe Aestiualem tropicu^ in prima part Cancri, and Hiemalem in
prima part Capricorni. Latitudo autem Zodiaci est partium duodecim, and
dicitur obliquus hic circulus, propterea quod parallelos secat circulos.

The crokyd, oblique, or thwarte circle, is called the Zodiac, which in it
conteyne the. xij. Signs, and is made of three parallele cir cles, of which
two do conteyne in them the breadth, and latitude: the third This line is called
the ecliptic, becau se in it is the continual course of the Son and that all
Eclypses as well of him as of the moon can not be but in this line.
do divide the Signs equally in the mids. This Zodiac, extendith unto two
equidistant circles, or paralleles. That is to say the somer tropike, in the
beginning of Cancer: and the winter in the beginning or first degree of
Capricorn. The latitude and breadth of the Zodiac is. xij. degrees, and it is
called thwarte or crooked, because it crosses the parallele circles.

And here you must note for eschewing further error, that the author menith by
crossinge the parallele circles, that the zodiac goes ouerthwarte them, and
not rightly as the equinoctial, and the right Horizont does.


Spoud. And this circle, is divided into. xij. equal parts which you call
signs. What a sign is.



Philo. You have truly spoken: yea and every sign, is divided into. xxx.
parts, which they call degrees: and every degree, into. lx. minutes. etc. But
this serves What a degree is.
rather for Astronomers.


Spoud. By your words I gather the length of a degree What a minute is.
to be the. 360. part of the heaven (for. xij. times 30. makes. 360.) and not
any determined, or appointed measure, as a yard, a forlong, a mile. etc.


Philo. Unto this circle and the equinoctial, all the moving of the Planetes,
and fixed stars is referred. For by them we find out their longitude,
latitude, and also the elevation of either poles, which is so necessary in this
art, as without it you shall little or nothing profit. But now I will set
before your eyes the signs, with their names in Greek, Latin, and English,
adding also certain characters of every one of them, which the Astrologians do
use both in their writing, also in their instruments.

1 2 3 4 5 6 (...) (...)* (...), (...) (...) (...) Septemtrional signs.
Aries, Taurus, Gemini, Cancer, Leo, Virgo, Ra^me, Bulle, Twins, Crabbe,
Lion, Virgyn, 7 8 9 10 11 12 (...) (...) (...). (...) (...) (...) Libra, Scorp.
Sagitta. Capricor. Aquari. Pisces. Meridionall signs.
Balau^. Scorpio^, Archer, Goat. Waterma^. Fishes.


Spou. These names I have often red in Homer, Sophocles, and other greek
Poets: and the latin, in Virgil, Ouide, Horace, Palingenius, and every other
Poet well near do make of them mention: and I do perceive the use of this
circle to be very expedient. For of it consists the The use of the zodiac.
quantity of the year, the. iiij. times of the same, as the Spring, Somer,
Harvest, Winter. But I perceive also other configurations, and forms, as well
out of the zodiac, as also in it. And the Poets make mention of many of
them, as Charles wayne, the Dragon, Boots, The egle, the flieng Horse, the
seven Stars, the great Dog, and others: of which you make no mention.


Philo. No, nether do I intend, lest that I shall seem to epsy a mote in an
other, and not a beam in mine own eye. For I will digress as little as
possible I may, from our A TABLE OF MANY NOT ABLE FIXED STERRES WITH THERE
TRUE LONGITVDE, LATITVDE, AND DECLINATON, faithfully rectified unto the year
of our Lord. 1559*
The names in English The names in Latin The names in Greek. The Longitude.
The Latitude. Declination. and Magni. S D. M. D. M. P. D M P M The Whales back
Dorsum Caeti, 6 6 15 40 M 12 11 M 2 The Whales belly Venture Caeti. 16 2 20 0 M
12 20 M 2 Aries horn. Cornu Arietis. 27 42 7 20 S 17 19 S 3 The Rams head.
Caput Arietis. 1 46 10 0 S. 21 16 S 3 The Bulls eye. Oculus Tauri. (...) 3 42
5 10 M 15 42 S 1 Orions left foot. Orio. pes sinist. 10 12 31 30 M 9 14 M 1
Orions left shoulder. Orion. hu. sini. 11 20 17 30 M 4 37 S 2 First in Orions
gyrdle. Cing. Orio. pri. 16 22 24 20 M 1 19 M 2 Second in Orions gyrdle. Cing.
Orio. se. 18 22 24 50 M 1 49 M 2 Orions right shoulder. Orio. hu. dex. 23 6 17
0 M 6 18 S 1 The great Dog. Canis Ma^or. (...), 8 42 39 10 M 15 50 M 1 The
lesser Dog. Canis Minor. (...). 20 12 16 10 M 6 4 S 1 Brightest in Hydra.
Lucida Hydrae. 21 2 20 30 M 4 47 M 2 The Lions neck. Ceruix Leonis. 23 16 8 30
S 21 59 S 2 The Lions heart. Regulus. (...). 23 32 0 10 S 14 3 S 1 The Lions
back. Dorsum Leonis 5 16 13 40 S 22 31 S 2 The Lions Tail. Cauda Leonis, 15 32
11 50 S 16 49 S 1 The Crows head. Caput Corui. 5 0 19 40 M 19 53 M 3 The
Crows right wyng. Ala dextra Cor. 9 36 14 50 M 17 8 M 3 The Virgins Spike.
Spica Virginis. (...). 17 42 2 0 M 4 54 M 1 Betwixt Boots thyghes. Inter cox.
Boo. 18 6 19 40 S 22 9 S 1 South Ballaunce. Lanx Merid. 9 2 0 40 S 1^ 44 M 2
North Ballaunce. Septemtriona. 13 12 8 30 S 7 33 M 2 The Scorpions heart. Cor
Scorpij. (...). 3 42 4 0 M 24 47 S 2 Hercules Head. Caput Herculis 8 42 37 30 S
15 20 S 3 The Serpents head. Caput Ophi. (...) 15 52 36 0 S 14 7 S 3 The Egle.
Aquila. (...). 24 52 29 10 S 7 27 S 2 Capricornes Tail. Cauda Capri. 17 22 2
10 S 14 13 M 3 In Aquarius leg Crus Aquarij. 2 20 7 30 M 15 52 M 3 Pegasus
shoulder. Hu^. Pegasi. 17 42 29 40 S 13 0 S 2 first institution. But I will give
you here a table of many notable fixed stars, which are profitable for the
trieng out of the latitude of any country and place.


Spoud. This table seruith unto small use (if my authors deceive me not) unless
that I have in like sort the declination of them.


Philo. You say ryghtly, and to satisfy your expectation, I will also place
here a table of declination of theclipticke line from th'equinoctiall, which
shall extend unto. 23. digrees. 28. minutes, the true declination of the
son, of this our age.


Spoud. I pray you sir, what call you the declination of the son, or other
planet and sterre?


Philo. It is no other thing then the distaunce of any sterre from
th'equinoctial unto his true place in the zodiac. And here mark that every
sterre has two decli Every Planet have two decli nations.
nations, the one is having there course in the zodiac from the beginning of
Aries, unto the end of Virgo, and they are North from th'equinoctial. The Other
from the beginning of Libra, unto the end of Pisces, and they are said to have
their declination south from th'quinoctiall.


Spoud. have this declination of the son, been always one, or it does vary?


Philo. I will show you, in the time of Ptolomaeus as (his works do testify)
the sons greatest declination from th'equinoctiall was. xxiij. degrees. lj.
minutes, and The diversity of the Sons declinatio^, from Ptolomaeus time,
unto our age.
xxx. secondes. Almaeon found it.xxiij. degrees.xxxiij. mynutes, and.xxx.
secondes. Johannes de monte Regio, tried it to be.23. and but.30. minutes. And
George Pour bachius.23. degr. and.28. mi. which agrees with our time


Spoud. This diversity of observation, may arise rather of the instruments
not exactly made, then that he do so vary in his declination.


Philo. Nay verily. I attribute the cause here of unto that moving of the
heaven which is called of Tebitius and Alfonsus, motus trepidationis.


Spoud. How may I find this variety of declination, by mine own diligence.


Philo. Although it vary not in a man's life any thing sensible, yet because you
may both know the observing of it exactly and also teach other that hereafter
shall learn as you are now instructed your self: I will in few words open the
whole labor. Take a quadrant (the making of How to find out by Instrument the
Sons Declinatio^
which you shall see among the other instruments) and and set it directly
upright upon some plain in the meridian line (the finding of which you shall
see in the next treatise) and is here marked A. B. as also C. A. door present,
the zenit or vertical point, then raise up and down the ruler (having two
sight holes made in it) unto the son, when as he is in the meridian line: and
observe diligently that height, in the circle of degrees noted in your
quadrant, from B. to C. the.xi. or.xii. day of Dece^ber, which is B. D. until
you find he goes no lower: and again in like case the.xi. or.xij. of June,
until you perceive he increases nothing in height, and is noted here B. E.
and so the distaunce of D. E. is the distaunce of the.ij. tropic Circles.


Spoud. What mean you by those tropic circles?


Philo. You shall know, our conclusion ended. This distaunce in our days is
found.46. degrees.56. minutes, which being parted in two equal parts, and
reconed from the Equinoctial. B. F. shows the Sons greatest declination
Northwarde from the forsaid Circle, 23. degrees.28. minutes. And in like case
Southwarde in Winter. And thus shall you always find his declination.


Spoud. This rule will I put in practice when the time of the year does
insewe.


Phil. Well now behold this table of Declinatio^, which shall serve thy use
more largely the^ Orontius, or D. Records Table: and is not so proplixe, as E.
Reignholdes.


A TABLE OF DECLINATION of the Ecliptike, in Degrees, Minutes, and Seco^des,
from the Equi. noctiall, answeryng to the Sons greatest Declinatio^.23. Degrees.
28. Minu.
Degrees. Aries. Differe^. Taurus. Differe^. Gemini. Differe^. Libra. Scorpius.
Sagittarius. Degrees. Mi. Degrees. Mi. Se. Mi. Se. Degrees. Mi. Se. Mi. Se. De. Mi. Se. Mi.
Se. De. Mi 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 12 14 48 20 36 15 30 0 0 20 0 8 41 12 21 17 20 40 2 29
40 0 40 0 17 22 12 29 6 20 43 47 29 20 1 0 0 26 2 12 26 12 14 1 20 47 29 29 0 1
20 0 34 43 12 43 16 20 51 8 28 40 1 40 0 43 24 12 50 18 20 54 45 28 20 2 0 0 52
4 12 57 19 20 58 20 28 0 2 20 1 0 45 1 9 13 4 17 21 1 52 22 1 27 40 2 40 1 9 26
13 11 14 21 5 21 27 20 3 0 1 18 6 13 18 10 21 8 48 27 0 3 20 1 26 46 13 25 3 21
12 12 26 40 3 40 1 65 25 13 31 54 21 15 34 26 20 4 0 1 44 5 13 ^8 42 15 6 21 18
54 26 0 4 20 1 52 43 13 45 28 21 22 11 25 40 4 40 2 1 22 2 19 13 52 13 21 25 25
25 20 5 0 2 10 (...) 13 58 57 21 28 37 25 0 5 20 2 18 39 14 5 37 21 31 46 24 40
5 40 2 27 17 14 12 16 21 34 53 24 20 6 0 2 35 53 14 18 53 21 37 58 24 0 6 20 2
44 30 3 9 14 25 27 21 40 59 23 40 6 40 2 53 6 14 31 59 16 0 21 43 58 23 20 7 0
3 1 42 14 38 31 21 46 56 23 0 7 20 3 10 17 14 44 59 21 49 51 22 40 7 40 3 18 52
14 51 25 21 52 42 22 20 8 0 3 27 27 14 57 50 21 55 31 22 0 8 20 3 36 0 4 8 15 4
12 21 58 17 21 40 8 40 3 44 33 15 10 32 22 1 1 21 20 9 0 3 53 6 15 16 49 22 3
43 21 0 9 20 4 1 38 15 23 4 22 6 22 20 40 9 40 4 10 9 15 29 18 22 8 59 20 20 10
0 4 18 40 15 35 30 17 2 22 11 33 20 0 10 20 4 27 10 5 6 15 41 39 22 14 4 23 1
19 40 10 40 4 35 38 15 47 46 22 16 33 19 20 11 0 4 47 7 15 53 51 22 19 0 19 0
11 20 4 52 34 15 59 53 22 21 24 18 40 11 40 5 1 1 16 5 53 22 23 45 18 20 12 0 5
9 27 16 11 52 22 26 4 18 0 12 20 5 17 51 6 4 16 17 47 22 28 20 17 40 12 40 5 26
15 16 23 41 22 30 34 17 20 13 0 5 34 39 16 29 33 22 32 45 17 0 13 20 5 43 1 16
35 22 18 1 22 34 54 16 40 13 40 5 51 23 16 41 9 22 37 0 16 20 14 0 5 59 43 16
46 53 22 39 3 16 0 14 20 6 8 2 7 0 16 52 35 22 41 4 15 40 14 40 6 16 21 16 58
15 22 43 2 15 20 15 0 6 24 39 17 3 53 22 44 59 15 0 15 20 6 32 55 17 9 28 22 46
52 14 40 Pisces. Diffe. Aquarius. Diffe. Capricorn Differ. Degries. Virgo. Leo.
Cancer THE SECOND PART OF THE Table of Declination of th'ecliptick, from
th'Equinoctiall.
Degrees. Aries. Libra. Differe^. Taurus. Scorpius. Differe^. Gemini.
Sagittarius. Differe^. Degrees. Mi. Degrees. Mi. Se. Mi. Se. Degrees. Mi. Se. Mi. Se. De.
Mi. Se. Mi. Se. De. Mi 15 20 6 32 55 17 9 28 22 46 52 14 40 15 40 6 41 10 17 15
1 22 48 43 14 20 16 0 6 49 25 17 20 33 22 50 31 14 0 16 20 6 57 37 17 26 2 22
52 17 13 40 16 40 7 5 49 8 5 17 31 29 22 54 0 13 20 17 0 7 14 1 17 36 52 22 55
41 13 0 17 20 7 22 11 17 42 13 19 4 22 57 18 12 40 17 40 7 30 19 17 47 33 22 58
54 12 20 18 0 7 38 26 17 52 50 23 0 28 12 0 18 20 7 46 31 17 58 4 23 1 59 11 40
18 40 7 54 36 18 3 16 23 3 26 11 20 19 0 8 2 41 9 8 18 8 26 23 4 52 11 0 19 20
8 10 43 18 13 33 23 6 15 10 40 19 40 8 18 44 18 18 38 23 7 36 10 20 20 0 8 26
44 18 23 41 23 8 ^3 10 0 20 20 8 34 42 18 28 42 23 10 8 9 40 20 40 8 42 38 18
33 40 23 11 20 9 20 21 0 8 50 34 10 0 18 38 35 23 12 31 9 0 21 20 8 58 28 18 43
28 20 0 23 13 39 8 40 21 40 9 6 21 18 48 19 23 14 44 8 20 22 0 9 14 13 18 53 7
23 15 46 8 0 22 20 9 22 2 18 57 53 23 16 45 7 40 22 40 9 29 50 19 2 36 23 17 43
7 20 23 0 9 37 38 11 0 19 7 18 23 18 38 7 0 23 20 9 45 23 19 11 57 23 19 30 6
40 23 40 9 53 7 19 16 33 23 20 20 6 20 24 0 10 0 49 19 21 7 23 21 7 6 0 24 20
10 8 29 19 25 38 23 21 51 5 40 24 40 10 16 8 19 30 7 23 22 33 5 20 25 0 10 23
47 19 34 33 23 23 13 5 0 25 20 10 31 23 19 38 56 23 23 50 4 40 25 40 10 38 57
19 43 18 23 24 25 4 20 26 0 10 46 29 12 6 19 47 38 23 24 56 4 0 26 20 10 53 59
19 51 55 21 1 23 25 25 3 40 26 40 11 1 29 19 56 9 23 25 52 3 20 27 0 11 8 58 20
0 21 23 26 17 3 0 27 20 11 16 25 20 4 30 23 26 39 2 40 27 40 11 23 48 20 8 37
23 26 58 2 20 28 0 11 31 10 13 1 20 12 41 23 27 14 2 0 28 20 11 38 30 20 16 42
23 27 28 24 0 1 40 28 40 11 45 49 20 20 41 23 27 39 1 20 29 0 11 53 7 20 24 39
23 27 48 1 0 29 20 12 0 22 20 28 34 23 27 54 0 40 29 40 12 7 36 20 32 26 23 27
58 0 20 30 0 12 14 48 20 36 15 23 28 0 0 0 Pisces. Virgo. Diffe. Aquarius. Leo.
Diffe. Capricorn Cancer Differ. Degries.

Spoud. I pray you learn me the use of this table.


Philo. That I will reserve unto his necessary place?


Spou. Then or we proceed any further, show me what the poles of the zodiake
be, for every circle have his proper poles: yea and whether they be all one
with the poles of th'equinoctiall.


Philo. I will fulfill your request. The poles of the zodiac, do much differ
from the poles of th'equinoctiall, as you may easily perceive by this figure
here placed. In which I have made C. H. E. I. for th'equinoctial: ^. H. G. I.
for the zodiac, and A. for the earth. Now if I make B. D. the poles of
th'equinoctiall as they must needs be: the^ can they not be the poles of the
zodiac, as herafter you shall hear, but K. L. being the ends of th'axe tree
of the said zodiac, shall be the poles.




Spoud. I understand your mind. Will you now declare unto me the meaning of
the two tropikes, of which you lately made mention.


Philo. Yea and that right gladly, using Proclus autho ritie as in the other
circles which says.

(...). What the some mer tropic is.


Aestiuus Tropicus, e^ circulus oi^m quos sol describit, proxime Septe^triones
vergens, in quo cum fuerit Sol, reuersionem aestiuam facit: Vbi omniu^ totius
anni lo^gissima dies, nox vero breuissima habetur. Nam post reuersione^
aestiuam, non vltra ad septe^triones progredi Sole^ videris, sed ad alteram
mu^di partem reuerti: vnde circulus hic, Tropicus appellatus est.

The Somer Tropic (says Proclus) is the most northely circle which the Son
describes, in to which when as he enterith, it is the longest day, and
shortest night in all the year. For after this somerlye reuerting, the Son
is not perceived to decline farther North, but directly to the contrary coost:
for which cause this circle is called a tropike (or circle of reuerting and
turning back.)


Spou. And what calls he the other tropicke?


Philoni. The winter tropike or circle of retorning from the South: as these
his words following do testify.

(...). What the winter Tropic is.


Hyemalis vero tropicus circulus est omnium, quos Sol per mu^di co^uersione^
describit, maxim australis, in que^ cu^ sol puenerit hyema lem reuersione^
facit: vbi maxima oi^m totius anni nox, dies vero minima conficitur. Na^ post
hyemale^ reuersione^, sol vltra no^ pergit austrum versus, sed ad altera^ mu^di
parte^ reuertitur, vnde and huic quoque circulo tropici nomen inditum est.

The tropic of winter, is the furdest south circle of al other that y^ son
by the tournynge of the world does describe: into which when he does enter, he
makes his wynterly return backwarde, at which season it is the lo^gest night
in all the year, and shortest day. For after this return, the son goth not
further south, but does approach to the contrary part of the world: for which
cause, this circle also was called a tropicke circle.


Spo. Proclus here means (as by the repetitio^ of his words I gather) that
these two tropikes, ar as it were the bounds, and length of the Sons iournay.
For going from the Summer tropicke in the beginning of the Crabbe, he directs
his course in the zodiac toward Libra in th'equinoctiall: and so leuing it,
draws unto the Winter Tropicke in the beginning of the Goat, beyond which
he can not go, but retourneth backward again, until he cum to the head of
the Ram.


Philo. It is so, and by these words you may also gather, The four times of
the year whereof they take beginning.
that the. iiij. times of the year, Spryng, Summer, Harvest, and Winter, have
their beginni^g in these. iiij. points (that is) the two Aequinictiall
points, and the tropickes.


Spoud. You have here just occation to speak of the diversity of days, and
nights, and it please you.


Philo. Yet that shall be omittid until we make mention of clymates, and the
paralleles: and at this present will speak of these circles which do divide
as well Th'equinoctiall, as also the zodiac, into. iiij. equal parts: so
that the Son being in any of them do make one of the forsayde times.


Spou. These circles also are necessary, but what are their names?


Philo. They are called Colures, of which the one is drawn by the beginning of
Aries and Lybra, and of that is named th'quinoctiall Colure, and the other by
the beginning of cancer, and Capricorn, and called thereof the solstitiall
Colure, and are definid of Proclus in this manner.

(...). What the two colors are.


Per polos mu^di ducu^tur circuli, quos aliqui coluros voca^t: quibus accidit,
vt in sua circu^fere^tia polos mundi habea^t. Coluri vero dicti sunt, propterea
quod eoru^ parts quaeda^ non videa^tur. Na^ reliqui circuli per mu^di
co^uersione^ toti cernu^tur coluroru^ vero parts quaedam nunquam videntur, eae
scilicet, quas sub horizonte nobis condit circulus Antarcticus. Caeterum
ducu^tur hii circuli, perpuncta tropicorum, and in parts duas aequales
diuidunt eum circulum, qui est in zodiaci medio.

There are circles drawn by the poles (which some men call) Colures: and
contain in their circumference the Poles of the world, and they be named
Colures, or trunckid circles, for this consideration, because that some parts
of them are not at any time seen. The other circles by the turninge of the
world are all apparently seen: but some parts of the colures, be never
decernyd. Such are these parts as are under our Horizont in the circle
Antarctike. These circles also are drawn by the. ij. tropike points, dividing
the eclipticke in two equal parts.


Spoud. Is there yet more circles to be observed?


Philoni. Only Th'arctike, and Antarctike circle remains, and then you have
learned all such circles of the sphere, as shall serve for our purpose at this
present, What the are ticke circle is.
and therefore I will make definition of them.

(...).

Arcticus circulus omnium maximus orbiu^, qui nobis semper videntur, qui
attingens vno puncto Horizontem, totus extat super terram: inter que^ inclusa
sydera, neque oriuntur, neque occidu^t, sed tota nocte mundi lustrare polum
spectantur.

The Arctike circle is the greatest of such circles as do at all times totally
apeare: which touching in one point only the Horizont, is in all parts
above the earth. And all sterres with in this circle included, do nether rise,
nor yet set, but turn round about the pole, all the long night.


Spoud. What calls Proclus the antarctike circle?


Philo. I will repete his words. What the An tarctickcircle is.


(...).

Antarcticus circulus, est ac parallelus aequalis Arctico orbi, attinge^s
Horizo^tem vno puncto, and totus sub terra conditus: intra quem, co^plexa
sydera nunquam a nobis cernuntur.

And may aptly be translated into English as follows.

The Antarctike circle, is an equal parallele with the circle Arctick,
touching the Horizo^t in one only point, and is totally under the Earth: and
the Sterres which are within it comprehended, do never rise above the
Horizont.


Spou. Yet I have hard, that such as inhabit the South parts of Spain, and
in Calecut, Guinea, and diverse other cu^treis, do see many goodly and bright
Serres, yea and the southe Pole figured with sterres like a Crose.


Phi. It is as you have said. But of that we will speak in the treatise of
Nauigatio^, and to return to Proclus, he means not that the Antartictick
Circle and pole of the same is under the Horizo^t to all men: but to us that
are on this side th'Equinoctiall, and therefore it is spoken no less trewly,
then pleasantly of the sweet Poet Virgilius.

Hic, Vertix nobis semper sublimis, at illum Lib. 2. Geor.

Sub pedibus, Stixatra Videt, manesque profundi.
The north Pole, Still we have in sight:
But under The Earth, the South sterre right.



Spou. And what is the Axe tree, and poles of this circle?


Philoni. The same, that are of th'Equinoctiall, and the two tropike circles.
For seeing th'Equinoctiall, the ij. tropikes, and the circles Arctike, and
Antarctike, be equididistant paralleles (as Proclus affirms) it must the^ of
necessity follow, that they are reuolued, and turned upon the same Poles, and
have all one Axe tree. Theodosius also confirms the same in these words.

(...)

In Sphaera, paralleli circuli circaeosdem polos sunt. Li. 2. Theor. ^


In a Sphere the parallele or equidistant Circles, have all one Pole.

But I will not burden you (and especillye in a true cause) which such grave
authority, but give you the figure of these. vj. last Circles, and then
proceed further herein. In this figure is set all the. v. Paralleles, the ij.
Colures, and the Zodiake. And first B. D. is the Equinoctial. E. F. the
tropike of Cancer. H. G. the tropike of Capricorn. K. M. the Circle Arctike,
and L. I. the circle Antarticke, A. B. C. D. the Solstitial colure, A. N. C. O.
th'Equinoctial colure, E. G. the Zodiake, and A. C. the Axe tree, which goes
through the Center of The Earth directly, and ends at the Poles.




Spoud. I must confess the words of Theodosius, and Proclus, to be true: but
yet musinge with my self, I can not conceive by what reason this Axe tree
should stey the Earth. And it standing fixed, the heavens as well under it, as
also above The Earth, should be turned, and reuolued in like manner, as we see:
and I ever fear lest The Earth, being so heavy, and ponderous, as it is,
should fall to the other part of the Heavens, which is under it.


Philo. I perceive you are not yet free from the fond imaginations of the
gross witted people, but yet you are the more to be excused, seeing Lactantius
being so learned Lactantius petulancy.
a man, was so folishe (whether it sprung of petulancye, or ignorance, I know
not) as to affirm the Heavens to be flat, and not to go under The Earth. But
now to your doubt, I answer: if God by his wonderful providence, and power,
did not steye it in the place where it is, there could be no axe tree which
might sustain so unknown a burden, and weighte: and therefore you must
rather imagine a straight line, to be the forsaid axe tree, (as also the
Circles of which we have intreatid, being void of Latitude, and Profunditie)
then to believe any such circles, or yet axe tree to be in the Heavens visiblie:


Spoud. I perceive your meaning right well.


Philoni. Now you have learned what the vj. great circles of the Sphere ar, as
the Horizo^t, the Meridian, th'Equinoctiall, the zodiake, th'Equinoctiall, and
the solsticiall Colures: as also the iiij. lesser Circles, which Why sum
Circles are called greater, and some lesser.
are the tropicke of Cancer, the tropic of Capricorn, the circle Articke, and
the circle Antarticke.


Spoud. I have so, I thank you sir. But for what cause be the vj. called the
greater Circles, and the iiij. the lesser?


Philo. John de Sacro Bosco, does answer your question in these, or like
words. We call that a greater Circle of a Sphere (says he) which being drawn
in the compass of the Sphere upon his Center, do divide it into two equal
portions: and that a lesser Circle, which being drawn as the other, do not
divide the Sphere into equal parts, but inequall portio^s, such ar the iiij.
lesser Circles.


Spou. If I shall for the better understanding such things as herto are
spoken, make a Sphere of Hopes, and apply your precepts to the instrument, by
what order may I gather the true proportion of one of them, to an other?


Philo. Because the time does so fast ro^ne, and I have also other matters to
entreat on: I will reserve the making of the Sphere, until I show you the
composition of other instruments required in this Art, in my Organographie.
But now for this present, let this figure (representyng the form of the
Sphere, with all the principal Circles to it belonging) satisfy thine
expectation.


Spoud. Then will it please you to take The Other part of the division of the
world.
in hand the second part of your division of the world, for hitherto (if I
be not disceiued) stretches the declaration of the heavenly Region.


Piloni. True it is, for our talk as yet either was of this regio^, or else
of things giuynge light to the same: and now let us convert our style in
like manner unto the Eleme^tary Region. This in it self, co^teineth the iiij.
Elements, Fire, Aere, Water, and Earth, (these are not corruptible) also
whatsoever is contained within the circuit of the heaven of the Moon, as well
bodies perfect, as also imperfite, made of the forsaide Elements (the
Latinistis call them) corpora mixta.


Spoud. And wherefore are there but iiij. Elements? Why there can be but iiij.
Ele mentes. Lib. 2. de gene ratione.



Philo. Aristotle does give a sufficient reason: saying, there are so many
Elements as there is combination, and mixture, of the simple and first
qualities, which can be but four: hoot, and dry, propre to the Fire: hoote
and moiste, of the Aere: could and moist, which is resembled to the water: and
could with drynes, to the Earth. As for heat and couldnes, are so repugnaunt
that there can be no mixture of them: no more then of moisture and drynes. There
is also an other reason made of Aristotle, taken Lib. primo de Coelo.
of the diversity of motion, which I do at this time wyllingly over pass.


Spou. We are agreed of the number of the Elements, but what is their order,
which of them is higher, and which of them lower?


Philo. That Element is higher then the rest, which is lyghtest, most fugitive,
and subtle. For it is a general A general mayor.
mayor among Philosophers, that al light things contend upward: and all
gross and po^derous, to the Center of the Earth.


Spou. By this proposition I gather, The situation and place of the Elements.
that the Fire being more subtyl than the other three, shall ascend above them,
and be next the Globe of the Moon. For you said, that there may be no place
empty, and void. And then next him the Aere, then the Water, and last of all
the Earth.


Philo. It is in like order as you have said. And the Fire, conteyneth in him
the Aere: The Aere, in his compass the Water: and the Water also does compass
and inuirone

The Earth, not round about as the other do, but in diverse parts, so that the
water, and the earth, rather make one vnifourme Globe: as this Figure here
annexid does plainly declare.


Spoud. There seems in your description to be five distinct Regions, How may
that be, seeing that there are but iiij. Eleme^tes?




Philo. There are as you have said, but the Aerie Regio^, is deuidid into iij.
parts, springing through Heat, and Cold: as the hier The Aere deuidid into
three Regions.
part of the Aere signified with A. being nere to the Orb of the Fire, and is
daily carried about, (as Cometes and Where Cometes and blasing Sterres are
engendered.
blasing Sterres there engendered, do apparently declare.) and is made more hoote
the^ the middle Regio^ is: again, the lower region next us, markid with C. is
through the reflextio^ of the Son beams rebounding from the earth also made
hoote, therefore the middle region B. being void of heat, is always could:
yea and so much the coulder, how much the heat is more vehement in the other
two regions.


Spou. Then in this middle region I suppose all Hail, Where Hail and Snow is
engendered.
Snow, and such like is ingendrid.


Phil. It is so, but I let that pass, and entreat of the use of them, touching
our first meaning.


Spoud. Because the Fire, and Aere, should seem litell to profit in this place,
will you somewhat speak of the Water, and Earth?


Philo. I will speak nothing of the Water (but refer it until we entreat of
Nauigatio^) but only in this place, make mention of the earth, and so depart
until to morrow.


Spou. And it wear not more for troblynge you, then any werines that I have, I
would wish the day to be. x. days in length, I have received such pleasure
in your instructions. But sense the Son sumwhat declineth to the weste
Ocian, I will give diligent ear unto your words, for the short time there is
yet remaining. What th'Erth is.



Phil. I rejoice much to understand your fervent desire to knowledge, which I
will to my uttermost further. And now touching The Earth, consider you that she
is lowest of all Elements: black, ponderous, and round, inuironid, and
enclosed within the other three. She is called the mother of fruits, the root
of all plants, the norishe of living creatures, the foundation of all
buildinges, the sepulcher of the dead, the Center of the beautiful frame of
the world, the matter and substance of man's body, and the receptakle of
heavenly influence. She is also garnished with fragra^t flowers, of Man, Beast,
and Foul, inhabited, and comfortablie quickened by the norishing beams of the
Son, Moan, Planetes, and fixed Sterres. Diversity of opinions touching
th'Erth his form.
But you shall note for all that here is spoken, that there is great
controversy touching th'Earthes form: which must be descidid and put away,
or we can safely proceed further. As th'opinions of those which affirm
The Earth not to be round, like a Globe or Boule. Those that affirm it to be
of pyller form. Those that will not have it to be the Center of the heaven.
Those that suppose the Earth to move: with other like. But the greatest of all,
is the error of those that speak against the roundnes of The Earth. Wherefore
I will touch it principallye, which thing done, the other are manifest of them
selves.


Spoud. You enter into that question, in which of all other I desire most
especially to be satisfied, for I also am in that error (if it be an error
to say the earth is not round.)


Philo. Bring forth such reasons than, as inforseth you so to judge, and I
will answer them.


Spou. It seems sufficient to An objection, against the round form of
The Earth.
credit The Earth not to be round, if we consider the great deep valleis, that
are in it: the Cities, Towers, Castles, and Trees, with such like placed upon
the face of the Earth: but most of all, the hougie and hie Mountains, and
Hills: Of which, some of them are supposed to be These Hills are the
greatest in all the Earch.
60. miles in height. As the Hille in th'Iland Teneriffa, (which Ptolomaeus
names one of the fortunate Islands) and is beyond Hercules Pillars. Also an
other in Thessalia, called (of Solinus) Olimpus, This is the fa mous Hill of
which Poets so much entreat: in the top of which the Gentiles builded an aul
ter making to Iuppiter Sacrifice.
being of such height that the ashes (there days of Sacrifice being ended)
remain a whole year in the top of the same, not moved with troublous
te^pestes, or vehement blastes: but through his great height, is free from all
violence of winds. What shall I speak of the Hill Caucasus, which divides
Albania and Colchis, from Sermatia (as does appear in the second Table of
Asia, in Ptolomaeus Geographie) which Aristotle does esteem to be of such
hight, that it may be seen at the mouth of the river maeotis. The distaunce of
which, is from theforsaid Hill. 620. English miles. Moreover you shall see no
place, but either flat, or else full of Hills, Dales, Valeis, or such like,
which is far from a Globe form, and figure.


Phil. Yet do all these words nothing conclude. Do you not consider, that the
sight is deceived in things from it, Th'answere to the first objection.
far distaunt. And therefore I will in few words answer you, that these
Hills, Mountains, and Valleys, are no more in quantity (respect being had to
the whole Earth,) the^ the Pittes and holes of a rough polished Gu^stone, to
the stone: which although it be not smoth, yet it argues nothing less then
this gunstone not to be round, and like a Globe in form: yea, and then the
body of the The Earth is a stone.
Earth being a rough stone, hard, and not so apt to be polished, as the body
of the Water, does remain with such valleys and Hills as you have said, and
in many places these valleys ar filled with water, to the more apt proportion
of a Globe. Moreover, Nature considering the necessity of th'inhabitauntes in
this Center, left such form unto it as might for there use most conveniently
serve.


Spou. For what cause suppose you The Earth to be a stone?


Philo. If it were not a stone but Sand, or Clay in substance, then the water
being mixed with it, they both should be confounded in them selves: yea and the
hie Hills, and Mountains, (of which you made mention) should sink, and
settle down to the Center of The Earth: seeing, they are so ponderous, and
heavy, and not be sustained, and borne up as they are in the face of The Earth.
But for the further co^firminge you in that, which is spoken, answer me.
Imagine there were a great round trunk of Timber, which went through the whole
Earth directly by the Center, and then there were a great heavy stone put in
at this Tru^ke: how far suppose you this stone should descend?


Spoud. Until the center of The Earth, and mids of the Trunk.


Philo. In like case, if the earth were not an hard, and stony substance, but
Clay or Sa^de (as to our sightes does appear) these Hills, and rocks being
much heavier then any stone, should in like sort go to the Ce^ter of the earth.
But have you any other doubts?


Spou. Yea verily, and that is, The Earth to be flat. The 2. objection



Philo. What provoke you so to judge?


Spou. This reason, that The Earth must be in form most agreeable to the
Heavens. And that the Heavens be flat, I can prove by the authority of
Lactantius Firmianus. Th'answere.



Philoni. It is truly said, that knowledge has no enemy but ignorance.
There are now at these days, no small number of Lactantius sort, not
scrupulous enemies only, but also Physicians, of whom I am ashamed to speak,
and they do contempne that knowledge (which is the greatest and suerist token
of Gods providence for mankind) either by perverse interpreting the scripture,
or else of mere folly, dispisinge that, of which they never tasted, and are
utterly ignorant in. But such were very ill to be Judges, for they would
condemn the man, or they knew the crime of which he were accused: but let
that pass. As touching your opinion, that The Earth is flat, I will prove it to
be round from The East to the West: and in like manner, from the North, to the
South.


Spou. Then must I needs grant that it is in like sort round in all parts.
In lib. 1. de Mundo.



Philon. I will use the same arguments that Cleomedes does. If The Earth were
flat, then the sterres should rise at the same moment to us, that they do to
them which dwell in The East parts of the world: and it should be midday with
us, and them at one instaunt: yea and the same Stars should set in the Weast
in like manner with the^, and us.


Spoud. That they do not, I am most sure: for at Alexandria, a city in Egypt,
it is day iij. hours sooner then with us: and night in like sort. Yea and at
Compostell in Spain (which is West from us) the day begins with us sooner
by one hour and a half, then with them: and is day with them, after the
Son is set with us, in like sort one hour, and xxx. minutes.


Philo. And all this comes, because The Earth is round, causing us and them not
to have one general Horizont. The like reason is to be said of the diversities
of times, in the beginning of an Eclipse, either of Son, or Moan. As for
example, th'Eclipse of the Moon, which was 1556. Example of ij. Eclipses of the
Moon.
the 17. day of Noue^ber, at one of the clock in the morning, with us at
Norwiche, (and for the most part of England) which in the Horizont of
Calicut, began at vij. of the clock. In like sort, there shall happen an Eclipse
of the Moon, in the year of Christ our savior. 1562. the 16. day of July, at
two of the clock, iiij. minutes in the morning: at which time she shall be
totallie darkened, and continue from the beginning to the end iij. hours, and
yet th'inhabitauntes at Calicut, shall not see any part thereof: which most
evidently shows the roundnes of The Earth to be the cause, as this Figure here
following do more plainly set out: in which, E. signifies The Earth: A. the
East: C. the West: D. the vertical point for Norwich: and B. in like manner,
the Zenit of Calicut. Whereby it is manifest that the Moon shall be perfitly
separated from the Son, or she shall appear in the Horizo^t of Calicut. And
yet we in England, and diverse other places East, shall se both beginning, and
end of her Eclypsing.




Spoud. These are sufficient probatio^s to declare The Earth round, from The East
to the West: but by what argument can you show it to be also round from the
South to the North?


Philo. That is very easy to prove. For if The Earth were flat from the South,
to the North, then we should se the south Sterres under The Earth: as well as
those that be North always in our sight. And again, the Son, Moan, and
Sterres, at midde day through the universal year, should be ever in one height:
which also is false.


Spoud. Yea, for I have had practice of that thing, saylinge in a ship, for
we going from th'Equinoctiall Line northwarde, did see the North, and south
Poles, equal with the Water. But directing our course more to the north coast,
and leaving th'Equinoctial, we reared the north star in short space. xij.
degr. and at length, 30. degrees. and loking south, we could not se the southe
Pole, nor yet many other sterres which in th'Equinoctial, were visible to us.


Phi. Yea, and where your north star was elevated xxx. degrees, your south
Pole was xxx. degrees depressed in like manner: But for the firmer fixynge it in
your memory, behold this Figure: in the which C. signifies both The Earth, and
water, A. the north Pole, and B. the south, therefore if one go from B. to A
(the earth being round) he must have B. so much under him, as A is above his
Horizo^t. There are besides these many, and sundry reasons, to prove this
thing: which I may omit (as I suppose) to you, which need no longer probatio^,
in that which is most manifest.




Spo. Yet these arguments shall not only stay my mind in a truth, but also
with the same I shall co^ fute th'errors of other, if any shall spring about this
matter. Ptolomaeus. Cleomedes. Philo. Aristotle. E. Reignholt. Orontius.



Phil. Then I will exhort you, where these shall not seem sufficient, you will
gather more and stronger out of Ptolomaeus Almegiste, Cleomedes de mundo, Philo
de mundo, Aristotle, Erasmus Reignholt, Orontius, Hic canet errante^ Lunam,
Solisque labores
Arcturu^que, pluuiasque hyad. ge^inosque trio^es
John de Sacrobosco, and our countreyman master Record, which does almost
repete all their arguments, in the Castle of knowledge. And now behold the
Type of the world, conteinyng in it, as well the heavenly Regio^, with such
Spheres, and Circles, as have been in sundry parts before set forth in this
treatise: as also th'Elementarie region, comprehendyng the Fire, Aere, Water,
and Earth: in such order and form, as is co^sonant and agreyng both with
Reason, Practice, and Authority of most approved authors. And for this time we
will depart: for behold the Son is gone to rest, and Hesperus do show in
the West very brighte, all other living things also do apply them to take
rest: therefore let us go down this Hill into the City, refreshyng our selves,
and quickening memory, and to morrow I will mete you in this same place again.


Spoud. I thank you hertly.


Philoni. Let me here and you can repete the sum of such things, as we have
taken in hand this day, as we walk downward.


Spoud. With a right good will.

1 First, you showed me what Cosmographie was, what Geographie, and what
Chorographie, yea, and wherein every of them differs from other. 2 Next, what
the world was, with his parts (that is to say) the Heavenly Region, and
Elementary: with a brief Discourse, touching the Parts, and order of the
Heavenly Region. 3 Thyrdly, what a Sphere is, how it is divided into a Right,
and Crooked Sphere: And how it differs from a Cirle. 4 Forthly, what a Center
was, what an Axe tree, what a Diameter, and of their difference. 5 Fiftlye, of
the Principal Circles which are said to be in this Sphere. As the Horizont,
Meridian, Aequinoctiall, Zodiake, two Colures, the two Tropickes, the Circles
Arcticke, and Antarctick. Also that the Horizont; and Meridian Circles be
stable, and without motion, with diverse other things herto belonging. 6 Last,
you proceeded to the second part of the world, which is the Elementarie Region:
In which you refuted sundry opinions, touching the form of the Earth.



Philo. Now I perceive both your apt nature in conceiving such things as
are spoken, and also your firm memory in reteining the same. Wherefore you
shall encourage me, to give you further instructions. But for this time I must
bid you fare well.


Spou. God preserve you, and grant you life to accomplish your desire, in
profiting your country, as you do entende.


Amen.
THE SECOND BOOK OF the Cosmographicall Glass: in which is plainly expressed
the Order, and Number, of Zones, Paralleles, and Climates. Also sundry ways
for th'exacte findyng out of the Meridiane Line: The Longitude, and Latitude,
of places: with many other precepts, belongyng to the making of a Carte, or
Map.
Spoudaeus. MORPHEVS THE God of dreams, with his slepie rod, so much this
last night frequented my company, that (my body taking rest) my mind was much
more busily traueling in such conclusions as I had learnid of Philonicus, the^
it was in the time of his teaching. For some time Morpheus showed me the Son,
in the tropicke of Capricorn, Wha^ the Son is in the Tropic of Capricorn.
In both Aequi noctiall points.
far in the South, among the cloudye skies, as he comenly is the. 13. day of
December: And next he appeared in the Equinoctial points, as it is the tenth
day of March, and the. 14. of Septe^b. willing me with great di lige^s to note
that parallele circle. Shortly after the son appeared in the tropicke of
Cancer, in which place he is In the Tropic of Cancer.
the. 12. day of June, causing in our region the lo^gest day in the year. and
imediatly the time seemed as it were midnight, and Charles Wayne, with Boots,
and diverse other sterres, turned about the Pole. But as he would have carried me
about the heavens, to have shewid me the North Crown, strong Hercules,
Cassiopeia, the Egle, the flieng Horse, mighty Orion, the two Dogs, and the
famous, and great ship Argo. etc. Mercury the messenger of the Gods came to
my bed side, and said, Aurora did appear, and Phoebus with his golden
beams, was entered his chariot, minding to finishe his diurnall Arcke: so that
it was a reproach for me, any longer to play the sluggard: declaringe more over
that Philonicus was in the fildes. And surely I suppose no less, but I shall
not from him be long absent. I am justly reprehended of Mercury, because the
time that is consumed with sleep more then nature requires, is all lost: for
there spring no profit thereof, but sickness and disquietnes, both of body and
mind. But what is he that calls Spoudaeus, and beckneth with his hand? It is
Philonicus. I will make speed to mete him.


Philon. God save you Spoudaeus.


Spoud. And you also, most hertilie I require the Gods: you know the occasion
(I trust) of my resorting into this place.


Philo. For to be further instructed in the knowledge of Cosmographie. what is
taught in this second Book.



Spoud. It is verily my desire, and specially to know the Longitude, Latitude,
and circuit of the Earth, and of the division of it into Climates, to know the
meaning of Zones, and paralleles: to find out the Meridiane line, the
longitude and latitude of any place: because they have a singular use in this
Art.


Philo. You have repeted matter enough to consume this day in, and I will if
time permit, willingly satisfy your request. But seeing this thing does
depend chiefly of dimention, and measuringe: it is requisite to know that
first, yea and the principal parts of it.


Spou. Dimention is no other thing, then a lo^gitude What Dime^tion is.
known, and practiced: by which we may in like manner, measure th'vnknowe^
distaunce of places by the same experience.


Philo. True it is. And there are three things only which may be measured. For
either it is a line, as Longitude: or else a Plat form, as Latitude: or last, a
body, as thicknes, or profunditie.


Spoud. Glarianus has the like saying, and Campanus shows whereof these three
do spring, in this manner. A What a Point is. What a Line is.
point (says he) is that which have no parts, yet by the mouyng of it, a line
is described. And a line, moved because it has length (being void of breadth
and depenes) ca^ but describe a plat What a Plat form is.
form. This plat form, is both a round plat form, and also a flat, as in
these figures. And a plat form moved, because it has length and breadth,
describes a Body, having both What a Body is.
length, breadth, and depenes.


Philo. Hereto agrees your Pathway. Now proced we further. Because in this
Art, the chief measures we use, is a Pase, a Forlo^g, a leque, A round plat
form.
A plain plat form.
a Mile, a Degree etc. I will set before your eyes in this Table both the
diversity of miles, and also their exact length, placing a Barley corn (being
the least measure) as the rule, whereby other measures shalbetried. And like as
progression is made from the least unto the most, as from a point, to a line:
from a line, to a plat form: and from a plat form, to a body: even so in the
quantity of measures, we do go from a barley corn, to a finger breadth: from a
finger breadth, to an vnch: from an vnch, to an hand breadth: from an hand
breadth, to a spanne: from a spa^ne, to a foot: from a foot, to a pase: and so
forth to a perch, a furlong, a leque, a mile, as in this Table is manifest and
plain.

A Barley corn is the least mea sure, yet from it do all other mea sures
proceed, as

A Finger breadth, An Vnche. A Hand breadth. A Spanne. A Foot. A Geomtricall
Pase. An English Pearche. A Furlonge. An English Furlonge. A Leque. An
Italian mile. A common German mile An English mile.


Conteyninge in it.

4 Barley corns in thicknes. 3 Fingers. 4 Fingers. 3 Hand breadth. 4 Hand
breadth. 5 Five foot. 16 Foot and a half. 125 Pase. 660 Foot, or 132. Pase.
1500 Pase. 1000 pase, or 8. furlo^gs 32 Furlonges. 8 Furlonges.


There is also diversity what a Furlong should contain in length, and it
should appear that Ptolomaeus, Strabo, and Plinius, do not agree herin. Lib.
2. cap. 23. Natura. hist.



Spou. What call you this word Furlong?


Philon. That which the Grecians call (...) and Pliny name it stadium (...).
That is, a statione. And it is usurped, for a place where men exercise there
horse, ronnyng a raze, which length Pliny determines to be 125. pases, or.
625. foot, by which reason. 8. of these furlonges do make an Italian or
English mile, which being multiplied by 4. makes. 32. furlonges, the length of
a common Germany mile, I call it a common German mile, for that in Heluetia
not observing any true distance Heluetian mi les.
in their iorneis, they use 40. or. 50. furlo^ges for a mile.


Spou. Those are Robin Hodes miles as the proverb is.


Phi. There is also a diverse order in measure observed, as the Aegiptians by
signs: the Gretians by furlonges: the Spaniardes, and French men by leques:
the Italia^s, Germans, and Englishmen, by miles: which I thought mete to
declare, more for that it may further you in reading their works, then that I
entende to introduce in place any of there ways, but will use only the English
mile, The quantity of an English mile.
writing to English men: the quantity whereof as I said, is 8. furlonges:
every furlonge containing 132. pases: every pase 5. foot: every foot, 4.
handbreadthes: every hand breadth, 4. fingers in thicknes: every finger, 4.
Barley corns round and dried. So that an English mile contains in length.
253440. Barley corns, as by the rules of Arithmetike, is manifest and plain.


Spoud. This seems very strange, yea rather incredible, yet surely to be
true, I am assured.


Philon.. You shall understand matters, both more strange, and pleasant then
this, which is found out by the infalible rules of Arithmetik, and Geometry:
and now proceed we to our purpose, beginning with this word Lo^gitude.


Spoud. I take it for no other thing then the distaunce of a Star, or part
of a sign, from the beginning of Aries the first sign, in the Zodiake. As the
Virgins spike, in the xvij. degree. xlij. minutes of Libra: is vj. signs,
xvij. degrees, and xlij. minu. or 197. degrees. xlij. minu. from the head of
Aries.


Philo. That signification of Lo^gitude, is used among Longitude taken two ways
the Astronomers: but in Cosmographie it is otherwise. For they call the
Longitude of any Region, the portion of the Equinoctial Circle, which is
included betwixt the Canarian Islands, (in the West being the first degree of
Longitude) and the Meridiane of the Regio^, that thou will describe. Such
portion of the Equinoctial in the mids of England (from the fornamed
Islands) is about xxij. degrees.


Spoud. Then in describinge the face of the Earth, Cosmographers do place the
first degree of Lo^gitude in the West fortunate Islands, and so proced through
the whole face of the same, until they come to that place again.


Philo. It is so as you say. So that the mids of the Earth is 180. degrees,
from the West. Such are the East Indians, and 360. is the furdest that one can
be from the West.


Spou. But could not the degrees of Longitude be accounted from some other
part of the Earth, as well as from the Iandes before said?


Philo. Yes verily: but Ptolomaeus the restorer of this Ptolomaeus.
Art, placed the first degree of Longitude in them, as the furdest point of the
confines and bounds of Afrike, and Hercules Pillars.
Europe: as the famous, and excellent pillars of Hercules (called of Diodorus
(alpe, and Abyle) does declare. The cause which moved Ptolomaeus thus to do,
you shall find In Prologo li. 2. Geographiae
in his Geographie.


Spoud. And is there the like difference, betwixt Cosmographers and Astronomers
concerning the signification of the Latitude of a region, as there was in the
Longitude?


Philo. No verily: For they mean nothing else by the What Latitud is.
Latitude of a region, but the Arc, or portion of the Meridiane circle,
contained betwixt the Pole of the world, and the Horizont of the same region.


Spou. And is not this Latitude, reconed from the Equinoctial unto either of
the Poles?


Philo. It is, as in like manner the Longitude, from the West to the East.


Spoud. Yet Glarianus acco^pteth Glarianus error.
the Latitude from the North to the South, and not from the Equator toward
either of the Poles.


Philon. It is a small error, and you your self are able to refute it. But
now will I show unto you how much the circuit of the Earth is, and then
make mention of the Zones.


Spou. Sir, never take it in hand, for the common people will judge you mad:
seeing you neither have gone about the viij. part of it, neither yet for want
of years you might acheue such an enterprise, although you had so long life
given you, as Nestor had, because of the hougie Seas, great Rivers, and deep
Lakes, besides Wodes, Rocks, deserte places, and innumerable perils: which I
can not repete.


Philon. You have trewly said, if there were none other way to atteine to it,
the^ by traueling about it: but it shall be sufficient to have traueled any
portion of this great circuit. For Ptolomaeus shows How to find out the
Circuit of the Earth.
how to find out the Circuit of the Earth, by searching the distaunce of a
great Circle, comprehended betwixt the vertical points of two (or more) places,
distau^t a sunder.


Spoud. By what mean shall I find out the vertical point The vertical
Point, Zenit or Pole of the Horizont, is so much distance from the
Equinoctial, how much the Pole is elevated above the Horizo^t. And like as the
meridian, ever do describe the North and Southe costs: so does the vertical
Parallele, the East and West.
?


Phi. It is equal to the Pole Arctike (the finding of which, hereafter I will
teach you) and you may use the one for the other: the^ you also in like manner
must know the distaunce in miles of these places, after diuid the distaunce of
the two places, by the difference of the two vertical points, and the
quotie^t shall show you how many miles do answer to one degree of the said
Circle in the Heavens. But or we further proced, mark this figure, in which C.
is the earth, A. B. the distaunce of two placis in the Earth, D. E. the space
of the great Circle in Heaven, betwixt the two vertical points.



Now dividing the space, A. B. by D. E. the quotie^t shall show the number of
miles. As for example: I take the eleuatio^ of the pole at Portsmouth, which
is the furdest place on the south shore of England, and find it, 51. degr.
20. minutes: and in like An example.
sort at Barwike, the furdest place North, whose Latitud is 56. degrees. 50. mi.
The difference of these. 2. eleuatio^s is. 5. degrees, 30. minutes. Also the
direct distau^ce from Portsmouth to Barwicke, is 330. miles. Therefore
dividing the. 330. miles (which is the portion of the Earth, answering the
difference of these 2. Eleuatio^s) by the 5. degrees, and 30. minutes, which is
the difference: I find the quotient to be. 60. Wherefore in all places in
England 60. miles, answer to one degree of any great Circle in the heaven.


Spoud. Then I pray you return to your figure again, and confer it with
your example.


Philo. I will so do. First. A. do represent Barwike. B in like manner
Portsmouth, whose eleuations of the pole Arcticke is set over their heads. The
distance from. A. to. B. 330. miles, the portion of the heaven betwixt the ij.
eleuations is. 5. degrees. 30. minutes: by which I did divide the distance of
the Earth. A. B. findinge the quotient. 60. And in like sort you may work
with any other places in the Earth.


Spoud. This serves well for to know what portion of the Earth in England,
answers to the Arc of any great Circle contained betwixt the Zenit of two
several places. But what is this in respect of the Circuit and compass of the
hole Earth?


Philo. Yet by this you are able to declare how many miles answer to. 30.
degrees?


Spou. Yea verily, and that easily.


Philo. And by the same order you may find that. 21600. English miles, answer
unto. 360. degrees which is the compass of the heavens.


Spou. This is so evident that all men must needs confess it, but it seems
very meruailus.


Ph. What say you then (which is more) if I make you presentlye to find how
many barley corns in thicknes will go about the Horizont, if they might be
placed equally?


Spo. It seems impossible to be brought to pass by any man's devise, and
therefore you had best omit the work.


Phi. You know how many barley corns will extend the length of an English mile.


Spo. Yes sir, you said. 253440. makes a mile in length.


Phi. The^ if. 253440. corns make a mile: shall not 5474304000. barley corns
answer to. 21600 miles.


Spo. And is there any difference Diversity of opinions touching the earth his
circuit.
towchi^g the compass of the earth?


Ph. Yes for Ptolo. says 22500. mil. the circuit of the earth. Tibitius and
Alphraganus but. 20400. Eratosthenes. 31250. and Hipparchus 34625.


Spo. And you differ from the^ all: but whereof does all this diversity spring?


Phi. Either of the diversity of the measures, or else that the places Latitudes
were not exactly known. As Ptolom. making example of Alexandria and Rodia,
calls Rodia 36. degrees. and 50. mi: Where it is 38 degr. and. 30. min. now behold
the Figure. And seeing you have learned sufficiently what the Lo^gitude,
Latitude, Circuit, or Compass of The Earth is: it should seem very requisite to
make plain relation, which places of The Earth are habitable, and which be not.


Spoud. That thing is very expedient as well, for the conservation, as also
reperation, and restoring a man unto health lost. For by that invention the
temperature of th'Aere, is easily found out.


Phil. You have well spoken, and therefore we will convert our talk unto the
zones.


Spou. It should seem first requisite to declare the nature of Paralleles, for
by the distinction of them (as I remember) the Zones are found out.


Philo. It is so, but here note that there are Paralleles which divides the
Longitude of Regions, and are called Paralleles of Longitude, and also
Paralleles of Climates (which in there place I will declare) making here
mention but of v. only, which have principal use in the distinction of zones.
As th'equinoctial, the ij. tropikes, the What a Zone is.
circles Arcttike, and Antarctike. And these divide the face of The Earth in
five portio^s, or parts, and are called zones, in French be^des, and we may
aptly call the^ equidistaunt places, or Girdles.


Spou. And how is The Earth divided into five Zones according to the v.
parallele Circles?


Phi. I will show you after Parmenides Parmenides. Possidomus.
mind, unto who^ Possidonius (as Strabo witnesses) ascribes th'inuentio^.
First directly under th'equinoctial in the heavens, there is also in the mides
of the earth an Equino. imagined, and under the tropic in the heaven, two
tropike Circles in the Earth: and finallye, under the two polary circles in the
Heaven, two circles in the Earth answering in like proportion: so that the
Earth is parted in v. equal portio^s, which are called zones, as this Figure
does manifestly set out.




Spoud. Do you not in this Figure call every portion betwixt two paralleles: a
zone?


Phil. Yes verily, as the space betwixt the tropike of Cacer, and Capricorn, in
Graeke is called (...), with us the burning zone, The burning zone.
because the son goes over the inhabitauntes heads continually. Also
betwixt the tropicke of Cancer, and Temperate zones.
the Circle Arctike, (...). or the temperate zone.

And the portion betwixt the circle Arctick and the north Frose^ Zones
Pole (...) we call it Frosen. In like manner with the other two zones southe
from the Equinoctial, the temperate south zone is called (...), and the frosen
zone, (...).


Spou. Yet by my computation your table shows sex zones: Two frosen zones,
two temperate, and two burninge zones: for the space betwixt the two Tropicke
Paralleles, is divided equally of the Equinoctial.


Phi. You are in the same error that Polybius was (as Polybius error.
testifies Strabo) but Proclus hereto do aptly answer, where he speak of
zones, and I will repeat his words of this burning zone only, omitting the
rest, whereby it (...).
shall be evident unto you, that there are not two, but one burning zone, his
words are these.

(...).

Reliqua quae inter memoratas quatuor medium locu^ tenet, quod sub ipso
Solistransitu iacet, torrida nuncupatur: a terestri equatore in duas parts
diuisa.

The other zone (says Proclus) which is in the mids of the. iiij. aforesaid,
because it lies under the course of the son, is called burning: and is
divided of the earthly Aequinoctiall, in two equal portions.


Spoud. But what compelled Proclus to say that it is but one zone: Saying it
is divided in two, by the aforesaid earthlye Aequinoctiall? I will tell you,
because there is no alteration of the quality, and te^perature of the heavens
betwixt the space and distance of the. ij. Tropikes, but continuallye hot all the year (by reso^ of the sons iornay in the zodiake as in the figure you may
se) therefore not only Proclus but also Plato, Aristotle, Strabo, Ouide and
Uirgil yea and al authors do make their account but of. v. zones. An objection.



Spo. It should seem that this burning zone, for the fervent heat, and the. ij.
frosen zones so far distant from the sons course, should not be habitable, as
Ouide does right Lib. 1. Metamorphos.
excellently in these verses set out.

Vtque duae dextra coelum, totidemque sinistra
Part, secant zonae: quinta est ardentior illis:
Sic onus inclusum numero distinxit eodem
Cura dei, totidemque plagae tellere praemuntur:
Quarum, quae media est, non est habitabilis aestu.
Nix tegit alta duas, totidem inter vtrasque locauit,
Temperiemque dedit, mista cum frigore flamma.


Like as the Zones into v. parts do right the Heavens divide,
Even so, for the Earth a nu^bre like, nature did well provide
The midst of the^ all men eschew, the burning is so fell.
In the zones next the Poles through could, no creature long may dwell.
Bitwixt these, and the burning Zone, two other se you may,
For tempratnes replenished with living things always.



Philo. Well, because I will not have you to err with The Answer.
Poets, and other that suppose these not habitable, I will take the more
diligence to drive this Heresy out of your Ptolomaeus. Auicenna.
head, and although Ptolomaeus, and Auicenna were of sufficient authority,
to make you credit this thing, affirminge that they have seen men which did
inhabit betwixt the Equinoctial, and the tropike of Cancer: yea, and that,
there ar many notable Cities, and Villages: yet I will use other reasons then
testimonies in this behalf. And first answer me: Is not the heat of the Son
cause (that in the Su^mer ceason he inclining toward our habitatio^) that men's
color in there faces and hands are made blacker, then naturally they are?


Spoud. Yes verily: and I have seen some dwellers in little Vilages, as Plowmen,
Heardmen, and Shepehards maruelously sonneburnt.


Philon. What will you conjecture then of those people that are black, face,
body and all externe parts of them, does it not come of the heat of the
Son?


Spoud. It must needs so be, and I have seen men of that color, and we call
them Aethiopians.


Philo. Very well, and do not you believe that the country where they dwell,
must of force be under the beams of the Son?


Spou. Else it could not follow that there color should so much differ from ours.


Philon. And there is no place under the perpendiculer Son beams, but only
this burning Zone: and Ara bia (sumwhat from the Son beams situated) is the
cause that the inhabitauntes, are not so black as the Aethiopians: nor the
Spaniardes, as the Arabians: or Fre^chme^, as the Spaniardes.


Spoud. And the Germaynes have their skin whiter then the Frenchemen: and we
here in England, then all these: so that the further from this burninge Zone,
the whiter the sky: and the nerer the Equinoctial, the blacker, and more
adust and burnt.


Philo. Moreover the Nauigatio^ to Calicute, (of Vesputius Columbus.
which voyage Vesputius, and Columbus were the first authors, and now more
frequented of the spanierdes, then sailing into countries nie adiace^t to us)
do witness bear, that under this burning Zone there are inhabitau^tes.


Spou. by these words it is manifest, that the burning Zone is not habitable
only, but also inhabited. And as touching the temperate Zones, no man is so
folishe, or mad, as to deny them to be replenished with all living creatures
abu^dantly: wherefore if you can prove that the two Zones, next the Poles are
also habitable, you shall as far banish this error from me, as the Son
does darkness.


Philoni. Although Ptolomaeus do not describe any parallele beyond Thylim,
which is two degr. and more of this side of the Circle Arctike. And that for
the situatio^ of it, far distant from the beams of the son, and therefore
the Waters continually frosen and The Earth with Snow covered: Yet Erasmus
Reignholt Erasmus Reignholt.
(and that truley) describes a Parallele by Hielso, an Ila^d in Norway which
is. 9. degrees beyond the polary or Arctike circle. Also the grene land, and
in diverse countries there inhabited, and the inhabitants are called in Greek
(...) in Latin Periscij, and we may call them aptly inhabitants which have
there shadow daily declininge unto all parts of the Horizont.


Spo. Then I perceive that both the burning zone, and also the frosen are
habitable and not that only, but also inhabited, although not so plentifullye
as the temperate zone. But now sense there is offered good occasion to entreat
of shadows, and their diversity* yea and the place serves aptly for it, or
we do further proceed. Wherefore I require you, to turn our co^municatio^ to
this matter.


Phi. With a right willing mind. You must first understand that of the
diversity of shadows, there ar. iij. diverse distinct habitatio^s of people
found, that is to say, (...). which names also the latinest use, Amphiscij,
Heteroscij, Periscij, and we want apt English terms for them, yet I will make
it plain though I use the more words. And first I will speak of those which we
call Amphiscij. You do mark well that the sons course, and Amphiscij.
recourse continually in the Zodiak makes the shadow long, and short?


Spou. I know that well, and the nerer he comes toward us, the shorter is the
shadow, and the further he goes from us, the longer he gives a shadow.


Philo. It is so as you say. But how think you, is there not some place that
has no shadow?


Spoud. There can be no such.


Philo. If the greatest declination of the Son from th'Equinoctiall nere to
the zenit, and ver ticall point, make the shadow shortest that can be in thy
region: then where he goes over any zenit, there must be no shadow.


Spou. It should seem to follow.


Phil. Yea it must of necessity so be.


Spoud. But where is there any such, over whose heads the Son directly goes?


Philo. Such be those that dwell in the burning Zone, which (as I said) is
betwixt the two Tropikes, so that when the Son is in the beginning of Aries,
and Libra, they have no shadow, and therefore Ascij has two Summers and two
Winters. lib. 9.
Plinius calls the^ (...), Ascij, or people without shadow. And because he
is twice yearly in these points, they have two summers, and in like case two
winters, for that he declineth to the Tropikes of Cancer, and Capricorn.
Libro. 9.
Wherefore Lucanus spoke of such inhabitants very aptly, in this these verses
following.

Depraensum est hunc esse locum, quo circulus alti
Zolstitii, medium signorum percutit orbem.


This is the place where th'Equinoctiall diuides
The Zodiake in twain, causinge two Somer tides.



Spoud. I remember that Ptolomaeus in his Almegist Lib. 2. cap. 4.
makes mention of such inhabitants, and names also such as dwell under the
tropikes Ascij, but yet I should not have called it to mind if you had not given
th'occatio^.


Philo. Yet this people when as the son declyneth Northward from them, have a
shadow, which shadow falls at none stead directlye southe (for of other
shadows I make no account).


Spoud. It must neades so be, for the son is North from that thing which
gives the shadow.


Philon. And when the son is in the winter point, unto what cost do the
shadow decline?


Spoud. It shall fall directly North by the reason of you aleaged.


Philo. Here then you se the cause where of these inhabitauntes were called
Amphiscij, and we may call them double or two fold shadowed.


Spou. I understand your meaning.


Philon. The Heteroscij.
second be those, which have the shadow continuallye, toward one cost, either
North or South.


Spou. Then we be in the number of those, for we have our shadow directly
North.


Phi. And such be those that dwell in the opposite place of Antipodes.
the earth against us (and therefore called Antipodes. For the so ne never
coming over their zenit, they have the shadow into the South cost
perpetually declining, as we have into the North.


Spou. This must needs be certainly true, but yet I do much marvel thereat.


Phil. What so ever is rare, and not commonly seen and hard, is ever marvelous.
And the Arabians coming into Europe, meruailed as much to see the shadow
Northwarde, as you do to here it is declined (with the aforesaid inhabitants)
toward the South cost, and therefore Lucanus speaks of them in this sort. Lib.
3.


Ignotum vobis (Arabes) venistis in orbem,
Vmbras mirati nemorum non iri sinistras*


A Region unknown (Arabians) you find:
Musing that the shadow, is still North declinde.



Spou. There remains yet to speak of the third sort of people which you
named Periscij.


Phil. They took Periscij.
that name because they (dwelling within the circles arctike and Antarctike)
have the shadow going round about the Horizont.


Spou. But yet the shadow moves not so swiftlye about the Earth with them,
as it does with us (and those you call Amphiscios) for with us it goes about
from the West by the North, and so to the East in the space (that the son is
in our Hemisphere, and above the earth, which at the most is in. xvij. hours.


Phi. It is so.


Spou. The^ seeing the son goes not out of there sight for the space of. 182.
dais, and xij. hours, which is there continual day: then it should go about
the horizont but in that long place.


Phi. That is false. For how think you, does not the son circuit the earth in
xxiiij. hours continuallye?


Spou. Yes verily.


Phil. The^ does the shadow go about their Horizo^t in the same space of time,
except you imagine those Periscios, to dwell without the circuit of the earth.


Spo. That were a point of demency or madness: so that as often as he circuith
the earth, so often in lik case do there shadow turn about the place of their
horizont, which must neades be 182 times.


Phi. I am glad you understand the reason of it, and now behold the table of
shadows.

A TABLE, OF SHADOWS, SHEVVING THEIR PROPORTION UNTO THE GNOMON (it being
divided in 60. parts) for every degree of the Sons altitude: and also the
quantie of the Shadow in every Country, Region, and City, through the
universal Earth, when the Son is in the Aequinoctiall, and Solsticiall
points.
The Sons Altitude. The Sha dow. The eleuatio^ of the Pole. Shadow solstitial
in somer Aequinoctiall Shadow Shadow Solsticiall in wi^. The Sons Altitude.
The Sha dow. The eleuatio^ of the Pole. Shadow Solsticial in So^. Aequinoctiall
Shadow Shadow Solstitial in wi^. par. Mi^ par. Mi^ par. Mi^ par. Mi^ par. Mi^
par. Mi^ par. Mi^ par. Mi^ 1 3437 24 1 24 49 1 3 27 18 46 57 56 46 24 53 62 8
160 16 2 1718 10 2 23 36 2 5 28 35 47 55 57 47 26 7 64 20 169 12 3 1144 52 3 22
24 3 8 29 53 48 54 1 48 27 22 66 38 179 4 4 858 2 4 21 13 4 11 31 12 49 52 9 49
28 39 69 1 190 0 5 685 48 5 20 3 5 15 32 32 50 50 20 50 29 56 71 30 202 14 6
570 51 6 18 53 6 18 33 54 51 48 35 51 3^ 15 74 5 216 0 7 488 39 7 17 44 7 22 35
18 52 46 52 52 32 37 76 48 231 35 8 426 55 8 16 36 8 26 36 44 53 45 12 53 33 59
79 37 249 26 9 378 49 9 15 29 9 30 38 11 54 43 35 54 35 23 82 34 270 5 10 340
16 10 ^4 22 10 34 39 40 55 42 1 ^5 36 48 85 41 294 15 11 308 40 11 13 16 11 39
41 12 56 40 28 56 38 15 88 57 322 57 12 282 16 12 12 10 12 45 42 45 57 38 57 57
39 45 92 23 357 35 13 259 53 13 11 5 13 51 44 21 58 37 29 58 41 16 96 1 400 16
14 240 38 14 10 0 14 57 46 0 59 36 3 59 42 50 99 51 454 12 15 223 55 15 8 56 16
4 47 41 60 34 38 60 44 26 103 54 524 34 16 209 14 16 7 52 17 12 49 24 61 33 15
61 46 5 108 14 620 17 17 196 15 17 6 48 18 20 51 11 62 31 54 62 47 46 112 50
758 8 18 184 39 18 5 45 19 29 53 2 63 30 34 63 49 30 117 45 974 1 19 174 15 19
4 42 20 39 54 56 64 29 15 64 51 17 123 0 1360 36 20 164 50 20 3 38 21 50 56 53
65 27 58 65 53 8 128 39 2253 44 21 156 18 21 2 35 23 2 58 54 66 26 43 66 55 1
134 45 6547 56 22 148 30 22 1 32 24 14 61 0 67 25 28 67 56 59 141 21 Infinite
23 141 21 23 0 29 25 28 63 10 68 24 14 68 59 1 148 30 number. 24 134 45 24 0 33
26 43 65 25 69 23 2 69 61 6 156 18 25 128 39 25 1 36 27 58 67 45 70 21 50 70 63
17 164 50 26 123 0 26 2 38 29 15 70 11 71 20 39 71 65 32 174 15 27 117 45 27 3
41 30 34 72 43 72 19 29 72 67 52 184 39 28 112 50 28 4 44 31 54 75 21 73 18 20
73 70 18 196 15 29 118 14 29 5 48 33 15 78 7 74 17 12 74 72 51 209 14 30 113 54
30 6 52 34 38 81 0 75 16 4 75 75 29 223 55 31 99 51 31 7 56 36 3 84 2 76 14 57
76 78 15 240 38 32 96 1 32 9 0 37 20 87 13 77 13 51 77 81 9 259 53 33 92 23 33
10 4 38 57 90 34 78 12 45 78 84 11 282 16 34 88 57 34 11 8 40 28 94 5 79 11 39
79 87 23 308 40 35 85 41 35 12 14 42 1 97 49 80 10 34 80 90 44 340 16 36 82 34
36 13 19 43 35 101 45 81 9 30 81 94 16 378 49 37 79 37 37 14 25 45 12 105 56 82
8 26 82 98 0 426 55 38 76 48 38 15 32 46 52 110 23 83 7 22 83 101 58 488 39 39
74 5 39 16 40 48 35 115 8 84 6 18 84 106 9 570 51 40 71 30 40 17 48 50 20 120
11 85 5 15 85 110 37 685 48 41 69 1 41 18 57 52 9 125 39 86 4 11 86 115 23 858
2 42 66 38 42 20 6 54 1 131 30 87 3 8 87 120 28 1144 52 43 64 28 43 21 16 55 57
137 49 88 2 5 88 125 56 1718 10 44 62 8 44 22 27 57 56 144 40 89 1 3 89 131 48
3437 24 45 60 0 45 23 39 60 0 152 7 90 0 0 0 138 9 Infinite

There may many co^clusions by this table be wrought as you shall know or we
depart: but now let us further proced co^cerninge our talk of zones, in which
you must consider that these zones of which we have entreated, ar divided into
climates, and regions.


Spo. How does a climatand a zone differ, they both were for this cause first
invented, to make division of the face of the earth into so^dry parts.


Philo. I confess no less, but they differ in this point, How a Zone and a
Climate differ.
that a Zone does in it co^tain the fifth portion of the earth, and a climate
but only so much of the earth, and the lo^gest day in that place, do differ
from the equinoctial. xxx. minutes, or half an hour, and are named. vii. in
number, of all the ancient Geographers.


Spoud. Then the first climate shall be in latitude. xvi. degrees. xliiij.
minutes from the equinoctial, and the lo^gest day, shall excede. xij. hours
(which is the quantity of the day under the equinoctial) one hour: for so
says Ptolomaeus.


Philon. It is true, but hear you must consider, that Ptolomaeus de uision of
Climates.
Ptolomaeus deuideth every climate in. iiij. equal portions, and names them
Paralleles: every one of them co^teining in latitude. iiij. degrees, xviij.
min. incresing the quantity of the longest day. xv. minutes: so that Ptolomaeus
(making the first climate xvi. degrees, xliiij. min. in Latitude from the
equinoctial) means the mids, and not the beginning of the climate.


Spou. I pray you or we any further proceade show me the signification of a
Parallele.


Philo. (...) in Greek (which What a Parallele is.
we also do call a Parallele) is a Circle equally distaunt, from that which is
drawn next him, and are described by the course of the son and stars, of
which the greatest is the equinoctial: for that he is furdest from the Poles,
so that the nerer the poles, the less is the parallele: and the number of them
Ptolomaeus makes. xxj. as in this figure, in which I have made. xxj.
paralleles from the equinoctial, unto both the poles Arctike and Antarctike,
and now to our matter again from whence we did digress. You shall consider
that every Climate has a proper name, for the suerer difference of one from
an other: and takes his name of some notable City, Mountain, or River, over
which the mids of that Climate is drawn As for example.

The mids of the first Climate goes over a notable Island of Nilus, called
Meroe and of that we name it Dia Meroes, that is, the climat going over Meroe.
The second Climat is called Dia Syenes of a city in Egypt called Syenes. The
mids of the third climate is drawn over Alexandria, an other City also in
Egypt and therefore called Dialexandrias. The fourth goth over the Island of the
Rodes, now in subjection to the great Turk, and is named Diarhodou. The fifth
climate Dia Romes going over Rome sometime the head of the world, at this preset
the sinck of sin. The sixte Climate is named Dia Pontou, because it goes over
the Pontike seas named Euxinus. The seventh is drawn by Boristhenes a City so
called and therefore named Diaboristheneos, and not by the Ri^hean Mountanes as
the unlearned sort suppose: seeing that they are at the lest. x. degrees. from this
climate distaunte.



Spou. And what was the cause that they described no places, beyond the. 7.
climate: seeing that there are many inahbitants, (as by your words do appear)
where you made mention of the habitable places in the earth?


Philo. It was, either because they supposed those places sca^t, or with much
pains habitable for the extreme cold: or else, that they knew not the parts
North from the^ situated, as now we do,


Spou. And do they not make mention of Climates drawn South from
th'equinoctiall as of the North, of which you have spoken?


Phi. They do in like manner divide that portion, into vij. Climates: but for
that they knew no notable places, South Climates.
(as in the north parts from th'equinoctiall) they gave them the names of the
North Climates, with this addition Anti (that is to say oppositie or against)
as Antidiameroes, the Climate Southe from th'equinoctiall, opposite or against
the north Climat, drawn by Meroe. And so in like sort with the other, as this
figure shewith, in which.A. B. C. D. do represente the meridian circle, A. the
North Pole, and.C. the Pole Antarctike.B. D. th'equinoctiall.E. F. the Tropike
of Cancer: G. H. the Tropike of Capricorn: the Polary circles.I. K. and.L. M.
The Climates of themselfes are evident, having their proper names, to them
joined: and are drawn from B. D. th'equinoctiall, toward the poles.A. C.


Spou. Now I pray you declare the co^tinuation of the Climates, and paralleles.


Philo. I will fulfill your request. The parts of The Earth Northwardes being
by painful, and dangerous nauigatio^s found out, are divided also into
Climates, we following the same order that Pto lomaeus, and th'aunciente
Geographers used: tbat is, every parallele to be distaunt from an other. 4.
degrees, 18. minutes: and every climate one from an other 7. degrees The
quantity of climates and Paralleles.
27. minutes: giving them in like sort apt names of the places over which they
are drawn: so that in our time, there is found after the same invention 96.
Paralleles, of which are made 24. climates, and for that it shall not easily be
breuied in the poke of Obliuio^, behold I have drawn out a Table, containing
in it the paralleles and Climates with the places over whicb they directli are
described: as also th'eleuation of the pole Arctike, unto 90. degrees: and the
quantity of the longest day, answeringe unto every one of those degrees,
which Table shall much pleasure you, as hereafter it shall be evident.


A TABLE CONTAINING THE NVMBRE OF PARALLELES, AND CLIMATES, WITH th'Eleuation
of the Pole Arcticke, and quantity of the longest day and night answering
hereto.
Paralleles af ter Ptolomae us. Paralleles more certain and exact. The number
of Climates after the old Graecians use. Climates after th'inuen tion of
Geographers in our time. The names of Climates and Paralleles after some notable
place in them. Th'Eleuation of the Pole arctick. The quantity of the lon gest
day. 1 1 1 Under Th'Equinoctiall. 0 0 12 0 2 2 4 18 12 15 3 3 2 8 34 12 30 4 4
12 43 12 45 5 5 1 3 By th'Ilande Meroe^. 16 44 13 0 6 6 20 34 13 15 7 7 2 4 By
Sy^ne under the Tro pick of Cancer. 24 11 13 30 8 8 27 36 13 45 9 9 3 5 30 48
14 0 10 10 By Alexandria. 33 46 14 15 11 11 4 6 By the Rhodes. 36 30 14 30 12
12 39 3 14 45 13 13 5 7 By Rome. 41 23 15 0 14 14 43 32 15 15 15 15 6 8 By
Ponte Euxine. 45 31 15 30 16 16 47 ^1 15 4^ 17 17 7 9 By Boresthenes. 49 1 ^6 0
18 18 50 34 16 15 19 19 10 By VViteberge. 51 59 16 30 20 20 53 17 ^6 45 21 21
11 By Grypsualde. 54 30 17 0 22 22 55 36 17 15 23 23 12 By Moscouia and
Irlande. 56 38 17 30 24 24 57 34 17 45 25 25 13 58 27 18 0 26 59 15 18 15 26 27
14 59 59 18 30 28 60 40 18 45 29 29 15 61 18 19 0 30 61 ^3 19 15 28 31 16 62 25
19 30 32 By Orcades. 62 55 19 45 29 33 17 63 22 20 0 34 63 47 20 15 35 18 64 10
20 30 36 64 31 20 45 30 37 19 All these Paralleles following are drawn by
places 64 49 21 0 38 65 6 21 15 39 20 in Norwey, and Sweuela^d etc. 65 22 21 30
40 65 ^5 21 45 31 41 21 65 47 22 0 42 65 58 22 15 43 22 66 7 22 30 44 66 15 22
45 2 45 23 66 21 23 0 46 66 25 23 15 47 24 66 29 23 30 48 Under th'Arct.
Circle. 66 31 23 43 33 49 66 32 24 0 Paralleles after Ptolomaeus. Paralleles
more certain and exact. The names of the Paralleles after the notable places,
by which they are described. etc. Th'Eleuation of the Pole Arctik. Continual
day in somer. Continual night in winter. 50 67 0 23 11 22 1 34 51 67 30 33 17
31 13 52 68 0 41 14 39 2 53 68 30 48 6 45 8 54 69 0 54 3 50 22 55 79 30 59 12
56 0 35 56 70 0 64 ^1 60 16 57 70 30 69 4 65 2 58 71 0 73 13 69 6 59 71 30 77
17 73 5 60 B^ Laponia and the grene Land 72 0 81 17 77 1 61 72 30 85 14 80 17
62 which after the opinion of sundry 73 0 89 8 84 6 36 63 Authors do
continually without separation Join with west India. 73 30 92 22 87 18 64 74 0
96 10 91 2 65 74 30 99 21 94 9 66 75 0 ^03 5 97 14 67 75 30 106 11 100 17 68 76
0 109 16 103 19 69 76 30 112 20 106 20 70 77 0 115 22 ^09 20 71 77 30 118 22
118 ^7 72 78 0 121 22 118 14 37 73 78 30 124 21 118 11 74 79 0 127 19 121 7 75
79 30 1^0 17 124 2 76 80 0 133 13 126 20 77 80 30 136 8 129 14 87 81 0 139 3
132 7 79 81 30 141 21 135 0 80 82 0 144 14 137 17 81 82 30 147 7 140 9 82 83 0
150 0 142 23 83 83 30 152 16 145 13 38 84 84 0 155 8 148 4 85 84 30 158 0 150
18 86 85 0 160 15 153 9 87 85 30 ^63 5 155 22 88 86 0 165 19 158 12 89 86 30
168 9 161 2 90 87 0 170 23 163 15 91 87 30 173 13 166 4 92 88 0 176 2 168 16 93
88 30 178 16 171 6 94 89 0 181 5 173 19 95 89 30 183 19 176 9 96 90 0 186 7 178
22

Spou. Can they not in like manner, draw paralleles from th'Aequinoctiall
Southward as they do North yea and give them the same names of the North
paralleles, with the Greek proposition anti, as they do in climates?


Phi. Yes verily, and they so do, until by their travels South Paralle les.
they have found out the Regio^s, Islands, Hills, Rivers and such notable
things, of which in like sort the south cli mates and paralleles may take
denomination. As at this present there ar South paralleles, which are opposite
to the North, and places found out, of which they may very aptly take name.

As the parallele (opposite unto the North parallele, which goes by the
Canarian Islands, is drawn by the River Nilus, and Mons Lunae, the Mount of the
Moon. The parallele opposite to that which is drawn by Syene, goes by the
Islands Mendacascar, Peuta, Necura, the greater Iaua, Candin, and the kingdom
of Coilum. The parallele opposite to that which is drawn by Damascus, goth by
the promontory of good hope, called promontorium bonae Spej. The opposite
parallele, to that goes over the Rhodes, is described by th'Ilands Seilan, and
Augama. and they are antipodes unto Italy, which dwell in Iaua Antipodes.
the lesser. The antipodes to the Lucitanians, are those in the Isle of Seila.
There be also diverse other places toward the south coast, of which neither I
have heard of any credible person, nor yet red: and therefore can not affirm
any certain truth: and will omit it until an other ceason.



Spou. Yet or we proceed further, I must trouble you with one doubt: and that
is gathered of the Arabian Phisician Auicenna, who says, that th'Aere is of
best Auicenna.
temperature under th'equinoctiall, and they are more fre from infirmities of
the body then we are, whom you affirm to dwell in the North temperate zone.
For if the paralleles be of this nature, that how much the nearer we are
th'equinoctiall, so much the greater is the heat: and how much the further
removed from th'equinoctiall, so much the colder the quality of the air is:
there must seem a manifest repugnancie, betwixt Auicenne, and the Geographers.


Philo. I will answer you. Auicenna means not that Auicenna defended.
the temperature of th'Aere is in a mean, neither vehement hot, nor yet
extreme could under th'Equinoctial, for that were an evident error, but
because the Son declineth not more then. 23. digrees. 28. minutes from the
vertical point, therefore there can be no contrary quality engendered: as
horible could, so that th'Aere is not subject to alteration, and contrary
qualities, as ours is. and that is the cause why Auicenna thought it most
temperat, and Aphoris. 3. proposi. ^
hereto agrees Hippocrates: (...). Mutationes temporum maxim pariunt morbos,
and in ipsis temporibus magnae mutationes aut frigoris, aut aestus, aliaque
congruenter ratione eodemmodo. that is. The mutation of times do chefely
engender sickness: and in the same times, great change either of heat or
cold, or other qualities in like sort.

Then seeing there is no mutation of quality of the Aere, it is thought
temperat. And for that this place is judged most temperate, there be some that
suppose Can Eden, that is to say, Paradise, to be situated under the
Equinoctial, Pardaise where.
as a place of pleasure, voluptiousnes, void of Alteration, and contrary
qualities: Yea, and Lira, interpreting Lira.
Genesis, (where Moses speaks that Adam, being expulsed from this place of
pleasure and joy, for breakyng the commandment: Cherubyn kept it with a
fiery Eratosthenes. Polybius.
sword) says that the fiery sword is no other thing then the burning zone.
And Polybius with Eratosthenes (as Strabo witness) does affirm the
temperatest dwelling to be under the equinoctial.


Spoud. Saying you have made mention of the place most excellent of other in
the Earth for pleasure. I pray you let me hear your mind Hell where.
concerning Hell the place of all other most horrible, and painful, as both
Christians and Ethinckes do confess.


Phil. I will not much of that thing speak, but if Hell be in that place which
is furdest from the heaven, as pain and grief is furdest from pleasure, and
joy: then it must needs be in the center of the Earih, which is to say that
part that is in the mids of the same, for that is of all other parts furdest
from the heaven. Which is the cause that not only we, but also the Poets in
their tragedies, introduce persons coming out from under the earth and call
that place Hell, among other, Senica introduces Thyestes, coming out of hell,
in this manner speking.

Opaca linquens Ditis inferni loca, In Agamemnone.

Adsum, profundo Tartari emissus Specu*


Leuing the dark places, of infernal Pluto,
Sent out from Hell pit deep, here am I praesent lo. etc.


But we will leave such curious questions, and spend the day (which so fast
consumes) in more necessary talk: for behold by my Astrolabe the son (being
in the xxj. of Gemini) is elevated. 54. degrees, above the Horizo^t with us
here in this plain, and therefore he will shortly approach to the meridian line.


Spoud. Then I must earnestly require you, to teach me some way how I may find
him being in this line, as also other stars: for my authors make mention
hereof, affirming also that it is one of the chief things wherwyth to find out
the Longitud, and Latitude of places.


Philo. I will gladly, keeping not back such ways as I also have devised to
find out the aforsaid line. And first I will begin with the invention To find
out the Meridian Line after Glarians manner.
of Glarian to find this none stead line, which is in this manner. In any
level and plain place, with your compass make a circle: in what qua^titye
you please, in the center of which, you shall place a right Wire, directlye
standing up, that it may give a shadow on the circle aforesaid. Then mark the
shadow which the son in his rising and going down in thy Horizo^t gives, as
for example. A. Is the Wier reared right up in the center of the Circle: C. the
East, and B. the West. The longest shadow that the Son makes above the
Horizont is A.D: The^ he ascending hier, makes his shadow shorter. A.E. the
None stead or Meridian shadow, which is shortest is A. F. and the other
shadows G. A: H. A. are in the like sort the shadows which the son casts
into the East, after he is past the meridian circle, descending into the West.


Spou. Shall it be necessary for to observe the shadow of the thing erected as
well th'after noone, as I do from the sons risinge until noone?


Philo. No verily, for when the shadow does no longer decrese, you drawing from
the center to the circumference a straight line, shall have your own desire.
Other willing to exchew the tediousnes of time in observation, The second way.
do provide a Plate of Meatall, well pullished, or some thick planke smothe,
and plained, in which is drawn a circle as in the other aforsaid, with a Wire
or like thing set up right in the center, and do diligently before none
observe when the shadow of the Wier in length is equal with the circumference:
and at the end of it make a prick. In like sort after noone when as the shadow
comes unto the circumference, and make there also a prick, the^ with the
compass, divide the space betwixt these two pricks in the mids, and make
there a note or prick: after draw a right line from the center, to that middle
prick, and it shall always show the when as the son is in the meridian or
middaye line, for that elevation of the Pole as in this example.



A. Is the Center B. E. C. F. the Circle drawn in the planke or plate of
metal A. D. the Gnomon, or thing which gives the shadow, AE. the shadow
before Noone. A. F. the shadow after none: now deuidinge the space E. F. in
the mids, which is.C. and drawn a right line from A. being the Center,
unto C. and that is the true Meridian line.


Spoudeus. This way seems much easier, and facile then the other.


Philo. Yea and it is also as certain as the other, and it was invented as I
suppose of Johannes de monte regio, or Vitruuius. But Uernerus uses no other
way to find The. iij, way.
out this Line, then only a Dial having a perfaite nedle, placinge it on
some plain, and smothe place: and when the nedle stands stedfastlye in the
right Line within the Dial, it does as it were point directlye North and
South.


Spoud. This way in my judgment does excel all the rest, both for the
easines thereof and also (which you can not do by the other) that you may by it
find the Meridiane, or middaye Line, at all times both day, night, and hour.


Phil. You may so, but the neadle does sometime err from right north, and
south, as has been observed, and I will show you in the treatise of
Navigations: Yea, and how you shall also correct your neadle. but I also have
The iiij. way.
invented two ways, the first is, I make a plain and round plate, in the
mids of which I fix a ruler, having two sightes to look through, then when the
son risith half above the Horizont, and half under, I (placing my Instrument
flat on the earth) do direct the ruler unto the same, so that I may see him
through the sightes: then my ruler not moved, I draw with a Chalk, or like
thing, a right line from the Center, unto the Son, and when the Son goes
down I do in like manner draw an other Line: then I draw a right Line from the
Line of his rising, unto the Line of his going down, and divide this Line in
the mids: after I draw a right Line from the Center, unto the mids of the
ouerwart Line, the^ I fix in the Center an upright wier, the shadow of which
at all times shall show when as the Son is in the Meridiane Line in that
habitation: but or we further proceed, I will give you hereof an example, in
which I do make A. for the Center, then putting upon it a wire, or prick, I do
fasten the ruler there on: this being done, I place my instrument flat, and
apply the ruler with his sightes. G. F. unto the Son, and draw there a Line
A. D. in like sort, when he is going down, and make an other Line A. C. then
I draw a right Line from C. unto D. which I divide in the mids E. and cross
it with a Line A. B. which is the Line at midday. But in place where I cannot
have this, or other The v. way.
like instrme^t (when as I se the son to draw very nere the south) I prick
upright in the ground a knife, or such like thing, marki^g diligently how long
the shadow does decrease, and wha^ as I perceive it decreaseth no more, but
rather wax long again, I draw a line from my knife, to the shadow which
serves for the Meridian line.


Spoud. I thancke you sir, for this, your gentleness, in beating these things
into my gross, and dulhed: And I will put them all in practice when convenient
time shall To find the Noonesteade Line by night.
serve, but in the night (I mi^ding to take the true height of any Planet, or
fixed sterre in the nonestead line) what order shall I observe, for then there
is no shadow, which will do pleasure.


Philo. Therefore with some Quadra^t, Astrolabe, or Ptolomaeus ruler (the fation
of which I do here place, and the making you shall find among the other
Instruments) and mark what his It is made of 3. peaces, being 4. square: As
in the Picture where A. F. is the first peace or rule.

A. D. The second.

G. D. the third rule.

E. The Foot of the staff.

C. F. The Plumrule.

C. B. The joints, in which the second and third Rulers are moved.

K. L. The sight holes.

I. The Son.

H. The Zenit, or ver ticall point.

M. N. The Noonestead Line.

altitude is, then you may stay a season: after a while observe his hight
again, and so from time, to time, until he increase no hier, which is a
perfect token that then he is in the Meridian line. The same you may do also
with the son. And for that nightlye travel hearein seems somewhat combrous
and painful, behold here is a Table of the sons height, for every degree of
the signs in the Zodiake: his greatest declination being. 23. degrees. 28.
minutes, and th'eleuation of the Pole arctike, above the Horizont. 52. degrees,
10. minutes.

As concerning the use of the Table, I will speak nothing, but will reserve it
for his due place, only admonishing you at this present, that first you find
out the place of the Zodiake in signs and degrees, (by some Ephemerides,
Gazophilacio^ Astronomicu^.
or out of my tables in the Gazophilacio^ Astronomicum) then look in the
ouerpart of the Table, and if that sign be there mensioned, descend downward
in the first column and find out also the degree, and directly against it,
shall thou have the sons Meridian altitude. But and the sign be found in the
lower part of the Table, then you shall search out his degree in the last column,
and against it toward the left hand, you shall in like manner find the Altitude
answering hereto.


Spoud. I pray you give me example hereof, or you do take in hand any other
matters.


Philo. The thing is so easy, as it need no farther working* yet I will not
refuse in so little a request, to satisfye your desire. I find the son, the
first day of the new year 1558, in the sign of the Goat. xx. degrees) the.
37. minutes A TABLE OF THE SONS MERIDIANE, Altitude above the Horizont.
Calculated for every digree in the Zodiake, Respecting the Elevation of the
Pole Arctike, a^ Norwich 52. Digrees: 0. minutes, and the Sons Declination
23. Digrees 28. minutes.
Capricornus Aquarius Pr^ces. Aries. Taurus. Gemini. Digr. Digr. Min Dig. Min
Dig. Min Dig. Min Dig. Min Dig. Min Dig* 0 14 22 17 ^4 25 36 37 50 50 4 58 ^6
30 1 14 23 17 26 25 57 38 16 50 26 58 37 29 2 14 23 17 38 26 19 38 42 50 47 58
48 28 3 14 24 17 50 26 42 39 8 51 8 58 58 27 4 14 25 18 3 27 4 39 34 51 28 59 8
26 5 ^4 27 18 16 27 27 40 0 51 48 59 18 25 6 14 29 18 29 27 50 40 25 52 8 59 27
24 7 14 32 18 43 28 ^3 40 51 52 28 59 ^6 23 8 14 35 18 57 28 36 41 17 52 47 59
45 22 9 14 38 19 12 29 0 41 43 53 6 59 53 21 10 14 42 19 27 29 24 42 8 53 25 60
1 20 11 14 46 19 42 29 48 42 34 53 43 60 9 19 12 14 50 19 58 30 12 42 59 54 1
60 16 18 13 14 55 20 14 30 36 43 24 54 19 60 22 17 14 15 0 20 30 31 1 43 49 54
36 60 29 16 15 15 6 20 47 31 26 44 14 54 53 60 34 15 16 15 11 21 3 32 0 44 39
55 10 60 40 14 17 15 18 21 21 32 16 45 4 55 26 60 45 13 18 15 24 21 48 32 41 45
28 55 42 60 50 12 19 15 31 21 56 33 6 45 52 55 58 60 54 11 20 15 39 22 15 33 32
46 16 56 13 60 58 10 21 15 47 22 34 33 57 46 40 56 28 61 2 9 22 15 55 22 52 34
23 47 4 56 43 61 5 8 23 16 4 23 12 34 49 47 27 56 57 61 8 7 24 16 13 23 31 35
^5 47 50 57 11 61 11 6 25 16 22 23 51 35 40 48 13 57 24 61 13 5 26 16 32 24 12
36 6 48 36 57 37 61 14 4 27 16 42 24 32 36 32 48 58 57 50 61 16 3 28 16 52 24
53 36 58 49 2^ ^8 2 61 17 2 29 17 3 25 14 37 ^4 49 43 58 14 61 17 1 30 17 14 25
36 37 50 50 4 58 26 61 ^8 0 Digr. Digr. Min. Dig. Min Dig. Min Dig. Min Dig.
Min Dig. Min Dig Sagittarius. Scorpius. Libra. Virgo. Leo. Cancer. I omit, as
not requisite in this business) then first I found in the hier part of the
table, Capricornus, therefore I descending downward (in the second column
against the. 20. degree of Capricorn) found. 15. degrees 39. minutes, the
altitude of the son for the mids of that day. In like manner the same year,
the. 6. day of Septembre the son had his course in the. 24. degree of the
virgin, and because I find Virgo in the lower part of the Table, ascendinge
in the last colunme upward, find the 24. degree, and against it in the column
of Uirgo. 40. degrees 25. minutes, the Meridian altitude of the son,
answering that degree: in like sort, do with any degree of the other ^gnes, when
as occasion is ministered.


Spou. This now shall I always keep surely in memory, and because you have
hear apt place to give me some precepte for th'eleuation of the Pole
Arcticke, I desire you herein to show me some instructions.


Phi. I will so do, and the rather for that without it you can little prevail
in this Art: and with knowinge it, and the longitudes of regions, you shall
meruelouslye profit.


Spou. I pray you then begin first with the finding out of the latitude of
any place.


Philo. When as the son is in either Aequinoctiall To find out th'eleuation
of the Pole above the Horizont.
points, by the help of your none stead shadow, you shall find when he is in
the meridian line: then with your instrument take his altitude, which you
shall subtracte from. 90. degrees, and the remanent shallbe the just elevation
of the Pole, as for example.

At Norwich. 1557, the 10. of march, I found the meridiane An observation.
altitude of the son by my Astrolabe 37. degrees and 50. minutes, which I did
subtract from 90. degrees, and there remained 52. degrees 10. minutes, the true
height of the Pole, and latitude of Norwich.


Spou. And do you not mark his declination at that time?


Phi. I cannot mark that, which is not. For in Fol. 31. and 32.
these points he has no declination, and that you might se in the table
serving that use which is in the first book. But although this way is very
perfect yet carries it this discommoditie with him: that you can but twice
yearly, take th'eleuatio^ of the Pole. And therefore I will show you also how
to find it when he is in the Tropic points.


Spoud. That is in the beginning of Cancer and Capricorn.


Phi. It is so, you shall find out (as before) with your instrument the sons
height at middaye, when as he is in the first degree of Cancer.


Spou. That time can I find out by the help of an Ephemerides.


Phi. From this height, you shall take away, as your table shows 23. degrees
28. minutes: this number you shall subtract from 90. degrees, and the remanant
shall be th'exacte Elevation of your pole, as for example. I find the height of
the son at midday in the beginning of Cancer. 61. degrees. 18. minutes, from
which I take 23. degrees 28. minutes, and there shall remain 37. degrees 50.
minutes, this number I take from. 90. degrees (being an hole quadrant) there
remains 52. degrees 10. minutes, th'eleuation of the pole.


Spoud. I will prove by your license, and I can do in like case when as he is
in Capricorn.


Phil. Do you so.


Spou. I imagine his none stead heighte to be. 14. degrees. 22. minutes, for
because he is far from our Zenit: from which I cannot substract the greatest
declination of the son, answering the first degree of Capricorn, in the table
of declination.


Phi. Nor you shall not make any subtraction. For like as when he declineth
North, from th'equinoctiall (which is from the beginning The Sons de
clinatio^ north.
of Aries unto the end of Virgo) you shall subtracte his declinatio^ from his
altitude: so in like manner, having The Sons de clinatio^ south.
his declination South (which is from the beginning of Lybra unto the end of
Pisces) you must add his declination to the meridian altitude: and subtract
the^ both from. 90. degrees.


Spo. Then I will end my example. I do add. 23. degrees. 28. min. unto 14.
degrees 22. min. (the nonestede height) which make 37. degrees. 50. mi. and I
take this from. 90. degrees, as you commanded, and there remains 52. degrees.
10. minutes as before.


Phil. You have truly wrought.


Spou. But is it not possible to find th'eleuatio^ of the Pole every day? for
in traueling it should pleasure me.


Phil. It is possible to find it not only every day, but al so every hour: but
I will reserve that until an other season, and will show you how to find the
height of the Pole every day, for which thing I will give you two sondrye
wais: the one without any other instrumente more then a staff, or other thing
erected to give a shadow (which I have invented) the other way is by the help
of an instrument, The third way
with which I will begin. Take the sons heighte as before being in the
Meridian line, then take out of some Ephemerides his place in the Zodiake, in
degrees, and minutes, with which you shall enter into the table of declination,
and there find his declination from th'Equinoctiall, answering to the said
degrees, and minutes. And if it be North, the^ subtracte it from th'Altitude
Meridia^: or if it be South, add it to the said Altitude: then addyng, or
subtracting that number from 90. Digrees, there shall remain the true
Elevation of the Pole.


Spoud. Will it please you to let me prove this rule by an example?


Philo. Right gladly.


Spou. I find the Son in the sixth Digree of Gemini, whose heighte as you see
is 59. Digrees 28. minutes, well nigh. And now I find in the Table of the
Sons declination under the 6. Digree of Gemini. 21. Digrees. 37. minutes 58.
secondes. Which I subtracting from the sons height, there does remain 37.
digrees 50. minutes, this I take from 90. digrees, and find the place in
height 52. digrees 10* minutes.


Phil. Let not this slide out of your memory, because it has a singular use in
this art, and by it you may in all pla ces where you travail, find out the
height of the Pole. And now I will show you my way how to find
th'aforesaide The. 4. way.
elevation.


Spou. And shall your way serve in like manner for every day in the year?


Phi. I find out the height of the North star by the shadow either. iiij.
times in the year, or else every day the son being in the meridian line.


Spou. Then I require you show me first how to find the latitude of any City
or town.


Philon. right willingly. You shall proueide a staff, or any rightwand, in
what length you please, this you shall divide into. 60. equal portions. Then
take out of some Ephemerides, or Almanach, the day when as the Son enters
into the first digree of Aries, Cancer, Libra, and Capricornus. At which times
set your staff upright in some place: And mark the shadow how long it does
decrease, and wha^ it is at the shortest, the son is in the noonstead place.
Then at that instaunt take the length of the shadow, and enter into the Table
of shadows: and there thou shall find th'exacte Latitude of thy City. As for
thy better instruction: I find in an Ephemerides the son to be in the first
Digree of Aries, 1558. the 12. day of March. Therefore when as the son
approach toward the south, I set my staff directly up, and find the shadow at
midday 77. parts, 13. minutes, with which I enter the Table of shadows (under
this title, Aequinoctiall shadow) and can not find my number expressed,
therefore I find next under my number seventy six, 48. unto which 52. digrees
in Latitude do answer, wherefore I workinge by proportion, find correspondent
unto 77. parts, 13. minutes: 52. digrees, 10. minutes.


Spoud. Then your mind is, that I shall use the rule of proportion, in all
Tables, where as the perfect number is not expresedly found.


Philo. Yea certainly.


Spo. Now show how I may work every day the same co^clusio^.


Phi. It differs in no point from the former order, sauinge that in the table
of shadows, you must only have respect to the column of the sons altitude,
and the shadow answering hereto. Then to find the degree he is in at that
present: next in the table of declination to seek out the declination of the
same degree, and if it be North, subtract it from the altitude, so the remanent
from. 90. degrees, and you shall have your own desire.


Spoud. But and I find him to decline Southe, must I add it to his altitude,
and subtract both from. 90 degrees, as you did in the other?


Philo. In the same manner in all points. There is also The Astronomy* Ringe.
an other way to find the latitude of Regions and Cities by the help of the
Astronomy Ringe, which you shall find in my book touching that matter, in
which I show the making, as also the use of the same.


Spou. But in the night season, how may I find the said Elevation of the Pole
in any place.


Philo. The Mariners use to find out the latitude of the place by findinge the
height of the North star, which they call the lode star, esteming a degree,
or two, in observation as no error. But you shall work in this manner: first
find out any notable star (that you know perfaitly) in the table of fixed
stars, and with Ptolomaeus rule, or other instrumente, observe his heighte in
the meridian line: then in the table of declination, you shall find how much he
declineth North or South, from th'equinoctiall, and observing the order, as you
do with the searching out of the Pole by the sons altitude Meridiane, and
declination: you shall have your hole desire.


Spou. Will you now show the findyng out of the Lo^gitude of any place from
the Canariane Islands?


Philo. It is not so easy, and facile a thing, to try th'eleuation of the
Pole: but it is as hard, and laborus, to get the Longitude, which was the
cause that the Ancient Geographers had only one way, and that is by observing
of th'Eclipses of the Moon.


Spoud. I remember Strabo affirmith the same. Lib. 1. fol. 6.



Phi. There is in deed no way so parfit, and suer, as by th'Eclises: therefore
king Atreus is worthy eternal fame, Atreus found first out the time of
Eclipses.
which was the finder out of th'Eclipses of the Son, and Moan, (1205. years
before Christ our Saviors incarnation) by whose travail we receive this
benefit.


Spoud. Not we only, that are presently living: but also such as have been
before us, and also those that shall here after follow. But what is the cause
of her obscuration, does not she at that time lose in deed her light?


Phi. No verily: For it is directly against Aristotle, Aristotle.
and all Philosophers well near, to confess that the supercelestiall bodies
are subject to alteration, yea or to affirm, any color in them. But I will
let that pass, and will show you the cause of her eclipsing, which is no other
The cause of the moon Eclipsed.
thing, the^ the moon being (in oppositio^ of the son) either in the head or
tail of the dragon: the shadow of th'erth is be twixt the moon, and our sight.
So that as long as she is in perfect oppositio^ and without latitude, so long
does she continue in darkness.


Spo. And is she not Eclipsed at no other time then only at the Full?


Phil. No certainly and there fore Lucan does aptly in his first book open the
cause, and time of the mones Eclipsation, in these versis.

-- Cornuque coacto,
Iam Phaebe toto fratrem cum redderet Orb,
Terrarum subita percussa expalluit vmbra.


When as the moon unto the world, her brother Titan bright
In form would represent, shining with face both full and round:
She suddenly was sore wounded, and there with left her light,
Titan causing th'earthes shadow, her beauty to confound.



Spou. These verses are short, and very full of eloquence.


Phil. Yea and they are also easy to be vndarstand, for she never resembles
the figure of the son (who^ Poets call her brother) but only wha^ she is at
the full, at which time being in th'opposite place to him, th'earthe (as I
said) shadoweth her from our sightes. But let that pass, and behold to
serve thy use in this behalf, I have calculated such Eclipses of the moon, as
shall happen from the year of our Lord. 1560. until the year. 1605:
Applying the time of there beginning, in years, days, hours, and minutes, unto
the meridia^ of Norwich exactly, which is. 22. degrees, and. 30. minutes, from
the Canarian, or West fortunate Islands.

1560.
March. Day. 11 Hour. 16 Minute. 6

1562.
July. Day. 15 Hour. 14 Minute. 4

1563.
July. Day. 5 Hour. 7 Minute. 34

1565.
November. Day. 7 Hour. 11 Minute. 36

1566
October. Day. 28 Hour. 2 Minute. 44

1567
October. Day. 17 Hour. 13 Minute. 53

1569
March. Day. 2 Hour. 14 Minute. 57

1570
February Day. 20 Hour. 5 Minute. 20

1570
August. Day. 15 Hour. 9 Minute. 5

1572
June. Day. 25 Hour. 9 Minute. 10

1573.
December. Day. 8 Hour. 7 Minute. 25.

1576.
October. Day. 7 Hour. 9 Minute. 12

1577.
April. Day. 2 Hour. 6 Minute. 29

1577.
September. Day. 26 Hour. 10 Minute. 37.

1578.
September. Day. 16 Hour. 12 Minute. 24

1580.
January. Day. 31 Hour. 8 Minute. 36

1581.
January. Day. 19 Hour. 8 Minute. 38

1581.
July. Day. 15 Hour. 15 Minute. 0

1584
November. Day. 8 Hour. 11 Minute. 18

1587.
September. Day. 6 Hour. 8 Minute. 54

1588
March. Day. 2 Hour. 13 Minute. 22

1588.
August. Day. 25 Hour. 14 Minute. 47

1589
August. Day. 15 Hour. 6 Minute. 8

1590
December. Day. 30 Hour. 7 Minute. 15

1591.
December. Day. 19 Hour. 14 Minute. 48

1592
June. Day. 14 Hour. 8 Minute. 7

1592
December. Day. 8 Hour. 6 Minute. 31.

1594
October. Day. 18 Hour. 17 Minute. 8

1595
April. Day. 13 Hour. 14 Minute. 15

1596
April. Day. 2 Hour. 7 Minutes. 57

1598
February. Day. 10 Hour. 16 Minute. 31

1598
August. Day. 6 Hour. 5 Minute. 28.

1599
January. Day. 30 Hour. 16 Minute. 30

1601
Nouembre. Day. 29 Hour. 5 Minutes. 9

1602
May. Day. 25 Hour. 4 Minute. 56

1603,
May. Day. 14 Hour. 10 Minute. 39

1603
November. Day. 8 Hour. 7 Minute. 7

1605.
March. Day. 24 Hour. 7 Minute. 15

1605.
September Day. 16 Hour. 14 Minute. 49



When as thou will find the longitude of any Region, How to find the
Longitude of Regions by an Eclypse.
Country, or Uillage, by an Eclipse, do in this manner. Observe diligently the
perfaite time, when as she begins to be eclipsed (either by some perfait
Dial, or clock, or else by the heighte of some fixed sterre) and if the time of
her beginning, do agree with that which thou shall find here calculated, know
certainly that thy Meridian and longitud, is all one with Norwich: but if they
differ, do in this order. Subtract the lesser time, from out of the greater,
and the difference turn into degrees, and mi. of the Equinoctial. The^ if the
time in the beginning of her obscuration be more, then that which I have hear
placed: add this difference in degrees, and minutes, unto the lo^gitude of
Norwiche, (because the place is East from it, and you shall have the perfait
lo^gitude. But and she begin sooner with the, to be Eclipsed then is here
mentioned, subtract the difference aforesaid in digrees and minutes, from the
Longitude of Norwiche (because thou art West from it) and you shall have the
Longitude desired.


Spou. How shall I torn the hours, and minutes of the day into digrees, and
minutes of the Equinoctial?


Philo. You must give to every hour, 15. digrees: and How to turn the hours
of the day into degrees and minuces.
to every 4. minu. of an hour, one digr. of the Equinoctial: and every minu.
of an hour, 15. minu. of the Equinoctial: as this Table following shall always
declare. And now I will give you a twofould example. Anno. Christi. 1558. An
observation of an Eclipse.
the second day of April, there was a great Eclipse of the Moon, so that she
was darkened x. points well nere, and began to come under the shadow of the
Earth at Norwich, at x. a clock 37. minutes at night (as by taking the height
of a fixed sterre, called the virgins spike, did evidently appear) now willing
to note men's observations in other places, I find that Leouitius Cyprianus, in
his book of Eclipses, apoynteth it to begin at Augusta in Ger many 23. min.
after xi. a clock at night. Then to find the longitude of Augusta from Norwich
I subtract. x. hours 37. min. from xi, hours 23 min, there remain 49, minutes,
A TABLE, SERVING TO THE Converting the hours, and minutes of the day: into
digrees, and minutes of the Equinoctial.
The ark of the equinoctial in The arc of the Equinoctial in Hou. of the day
Digre. Mi Second Mi. of hou. Digrees Min. Seco^. Third. 1 15 2 30 1 0 15 2 3 2
30 5 0 2 0 30 5 0 3 45 7 30 3 0 45 7 30 4 60 10 0 4 0 0 10 0 5 75 12 30 5 1 15
12 30 6 90 15 0 6 1 30 15 0 7 105 17 30 7 1 45 17 30 8 120 20 0 8 2 0 20 0 9
135 22 30 9 2 15 22 30 10 150 25 0 10 2 30 25 0 11 165 27 30 15 3 45 37 30 12
180 30 0 20 3 0 50 0 13 195 32 30 25 6 16 12 30 14 201 35 0 30 7 31 15 0 15 225
37 30 35 8 46 27 30 16 240 40 0 40 10 1 49 0 17 255 42 30 45 11 17 1 30 18 270
45 0 50 12 32 5 0 19 285 47 30 55 13 48 2 30 20 300 50 0 60 15 2 30 0 21 315 52
30 22 330 55 0 23 345 57 30 24 361 0 0 with which I enter into this tahle, and
find answeringe to. 46. minutes of time. 11. degrees. 30. minu. of the
equinoctial, and because that the beginning of the Eclipse, is later at
Augusta* then at Norwich, it shows the situation to be East from it. Wherefore
I add the difference of time turned into degrees unto 22. degrees 30. minu.
(the longitud of Norwich) and there arises. 34. degrees the longitude of
Augusta. In like manner 1559. the. xvi. day of September, at 3. of the clock
19. min. after dinner, the moon shall begin to be darckened at Norwich, which
at Tolet in Spain shall happen at 2. of the clock. 22. minutes. The difference
in time is 47. minutes. I convert them into degrees, and minutes of the
equinoctial (as before) and find 11. degreet 50. min. And because that the Moon is darkened sooner at Tolet, then Norwich, I subtract this difference from
Norwich and find. 10. degrees, 40. minutes, the longitude of Tolet which is
West from Norwich.


Spo. But this Eclipse of the Moon, shall not be seen in the beginning, nether
end at Norwiche, or Tolet?


Phi. True it is, because the Moon being in the perfect opposition of the son,
can not show her self above our Horizont, before the son be under the Earth,
which is not unto. 6. of the clock.


Spou. How can you then show the true time of her beginning at Norwiche, or
Tolet, when as she is not seen of their inhabitauntes?


Philo. right perfetlye. Conferring the meridian of Norwich, or Tolet, with
other places East from them, whereas the beginning shallbe plainly of these
inhabitants perceived. But in this place it is brought in only for example.
And although this way of finedinge the true longitude be both certain, and
most easiest of all other: yet it has this discomodity, because th'eclipses
happen rarely, and seldom, as twice in a year at the most, and sumtime but once
in.ij. year. Furthermore there hapeneth sumtime impedime^ts that at the time
also of her Eclipsing, we cannot observe her beginning or end, either because
the clouds are betwixt our sight, and her, and so is shadowed: or else that she
is under our Horizont, at that present season. Wherefore P. Apia^ practiced an
other way, how to find out th'aforsaid Apians way to find out the Longitude of
places.
Longitude, yea and that every night and hour of the same, so that the Moon be
above the Horizont, and the air clear and fair.


Spou. We are bound to have him in much estimation, which by his labors, has
supplied that we did want: but what is his invention?


Phil. I will show you, there are three things required unto this business, the
Astronomers Iacobes staff.
staff, also called Iacobes staff (the making of which you shall find among
the other instruments) the second is the true place of the Moon in the Zodiake,
in degrees, and minutes, for the hour you make observation, (which you may
take out of an Ephemerides) and the iij. is the longitude of a fixed sterre,
which you may take out of the Table of fixed sterres in my first book. These
Fol. 27.
had, you must take your staff with the Cross on it. and apply the one end
of the Cross to the Center of the Moon, and the other unto the sterre: which
thing to do, you shall remove the Cross up and down, until the ends of the
staff touch both the center of the moon and also of the sterre. This ended,
the cross shall show you what the distaunce of the Moon, and star is in
degrees and minutes. Then take the distaunce in degrees, and minutes of the Moon, and fixed sterre, which you had before the observation: And substract
these.ij. distances, the one out of the other, the remanet divide by the portion
that the moon moves in one hour, And that shall show you the time, when as the Moon was joined with the star (if the star be West from her) or when she
shall be joined with the star, if it be East from the Moon. This time being
had, you shall turn it into degrees, and minutes of th'equinoctiall, (as I
said in the other precept before, and the table shows) and if the moon be West
of When the Moon is West of the Star What is to be wrought.
the star, do in this manner. Marcke whether the difference of the moon, and
star found by thy observation, be greater then the difference found by the
ephemerides, and the lo^gitude of the fixed star: if it be lesser, the^
subtract the time turned into degrees, and mi. from the meridian for which
th'Ephemerides are Calculated, because thy place is west from it: but and the
difference be greater, then add the degrees, and mi. to the Longitude (for
which th'Ephemerides ar supputated, because thy place is East from it) and so
shall thou have the true Longitude desired. Moreover thou must consider if the
Wha^ the moon is East of the Sterre.
Moan be East from the Sterre, then thou shall work contrary (that is to say)
if the distau^ce found by observation, be lesser the^ the other, you shall
subtract it from the lo^gitud known, because thy place is west from it, but
and this difference be greater, then add it to the fornamed Longitude, because
thy place is East from the other: and so without error, thou shall have thine
own desire. And this way also, is excellent to correct the course of the Moon, and amend the tables, out of which her mouinges are taken: if they do
err at any time.


Spo. I must neades confess your words true, wha^ you said how much any thing
excelled other in knowledge, so much the more it was companion with
difficulty. For except you give me an example, I shall never attain the
perfait meaning hereof.


Philon. I will give you an example of that time, which I observed my self to
find out the lo^gitude of Norwich.

Anno. 1558. the second day of February, at. x. a clock An example,
at night, I found the place of regulus (called also the lions heart) in
longitude degrees. 23. 32. minut. in Leo: the Moon also at that present, in
the.xxi. degree.xl. min. of the same sign (her place being calculated for
Anwarp, which is xxvi. degrees. xxxvj. minutes) I subtracte the place of the moon, from the longitude of regulus, the distance.j. degree.lij. min. that she
is West, from the sterre. Then I take my staff and (with one eye closed) I
move the cross up and down, until the one end was equal with the Center of
the Moon, the other end with the Star. Then I find by that observation, the Moon to differ from regulus, j. degree. 43. min. This number I take from the
first difference, there remains 9. minutes. The^ inquire I out, how many min.
of time, answer unto. 9. min. of the Mones course, (making the Moon to move in
one hour xxxv. minutes, and find.xvj. minutes of time: which turned into
degrees of th'equinoctiall, make. 4. degrees: and because the Moon is West of
the sterre, and the distance found by the staff less in number, therefore I
subtracte the. 4. degrees from the longitude of Anwarpe, and there remain. 22.
degrees. 36. minutes, which differ littel from the other observations.


Spou. The difference of. 6. minutes in Longitude, is small or no error, when
as. 15. minutes of th'equinoctiall, make but one minute of time.


Phil. True it is.


Spoud. By your example, the precept seems more evident, and I mistruste not,
but with diligence to make in other places, the like observation.


Phi. I will open unto you an other way to find the Another way.
Longitude of any region, in every place, as well day, as night, and that
every hour, most necessary for the^, which either sail, or travel.


Spou. But you do then observe the distaunce of the places, in miles.


Phil. No verily, for if I were carried by land into places unknown
(blindfilded, as they term it) or by the violence of troublesome wether, on
the sea, driven from my course, I can declare how many miles I am from my
country, and how many leaques from my proper course.


Spoud. Then surely, it must have in it much difficulty, seeing that there
springs of it so much utility, and profit.


Philo. The way is very facile, and without great labor, and I will no
longer make you muse thereon. You shall prepare a parfait clock artificially
made, such as are brought from Flanders, and we have the^ as excellently
without Temple bar, made of our countrymen.


Spoud. Do you not mean such, as we use to wear in the facion of a Tablet?


Phi. Yea truly, when as you travel, you shall set the nedle of your Dial
exactlye on the hour found out by the son on the day, and by some star in
the night: the^ traueling without intermission, when as you have traueled.xx.
yea.xl. miles or more (if your next place, whose longitude you desire be so far
distant) then mark in your Dial, the hour that it shows: after with an
Astrolabe, or Quadrant, find out the hour of the day in that place: and if it
agree with the same which your clock shows, be assured your place is north or
South from the place you came from, and therefore have the same lo^gitude, and
meridia^ line. But and the time dif fer, subtract the one, out of the other, and
the difference turn into degrees and minut. of th'equinoctiall as before, then
add or subtract, as in the other.ij. precepts, going before. But now behold the
sky is over cast with clouds: wherefore let us haste to our lodgings, and end
our talk for this present.


Spoud. With a right good will.


THE THIRD BOOK OF THE Cosmographicall Glass: in which is uttered the making
and protracture, of the Face of The Earth, both in Carts Particular, and also
universal, with diverse necessary things, incidente hereto.
Philonicus. SAYING THAT in our last days talk, it was made euidente unto
you, what the Longitude, Latitude, and Circuit of The Earth was, how you also
might find the same by diverse and sondrye ways: moreover the division of
The Earth into zones, by the help of Paralleles: it should seem now
conueniente, to show you the cause wherefore all these are learned, and to
what final end they are desired. Therefore, least you should be left
destitute of The principal part of Cosmographie.
the principal tresure of Cosmography, that is to delineat, protract, or set
forth the platform of th'vniuersall face of the earth: or else perticulerli any
one portion of the same: I will this day also do my endeavor, to show you the
way how to attain hereunto.


Spo. Would to god, that fortune had unto me given of her tresure, that I might
so^what (al though not reco^pe^ce) yet show forth my good will for this your
great pains, and travel. For in deed silver and gold, The noble reward, of
learning in times paste.
is to base to recompense knowledge with, and that did the famous kings and
princes in the old time well perpende: When they did not only give th'inuentors
(of any new Science, Art, or profitable thing for a public weal) abundance
of treasure: but also for perpetual memory, made an Image to represente such
a person, and called him a God for his invention. So was Neptunus Neptunus.
called God of the seas, for that he found the Art of sailing. Aeolus, the
God of winds, because he invented Aeolus.
the true use of them. Ceres a Goddess, for finedinge Ceres.
out tillage. But what make I discourse in these things to you, which know
them much better then I.


Ph. Hear by I gather your good will to th'aduancemente of learning. But it is
not treasure which at your hands I crave, but only that you show your self
enemy unto ignorance, through your industrious labor, both in profitinge your
self, and also your native country. But or we proceed further in this our
business, I will brieflye open unto you certain names, which we use in
Geographie, with th'interpretation of the same: and histories with Poets
abound also with them. And first you must consider that th'Earthe being
environed, and compassed about with the great Ocian seas, seems as it were
an Island (after Strabo his mind) notwithstanding there is a great
difference betwixt an Island, What an Island is.
and th'Earthe: for an Island, is a portion of th'Earthe separated from the
hole, by waters which do circuit it on every side, so that you can not
journey by land, either from Europe, Asia, or Afrike unto your country, but
must use herein Navigations.


Spoud. Unto your description do agree, America, Sicilia, Iaua, the Rodes,
Candie, Delos, Therasia, and England, in which we inhabit.


Philon. It it true, now you shall further note that the seas divide The Earth.
4. sundry ways, for either it is an Island, or little differing there from (and
therefore called Peninsula) or Isthmus, or Contine^s.


Spoud. So that Peninsula, differs from an Peninsula.
Island, because in some part, it is joined to a greater portion of The Earth
without separation: as Taurica, Thrasia, Cherronesus, also Cymbrica and Aurea,
in India.


Philo. Isthmus, does differ from them both Isthmus.
and signifies a portion of th'Earthe, having of either sides the raginge
Seas: such are found agreeable to this description properly, Corinthiacus, and
Thrasius.


Spou. But how does Continens differ from these Continent.
three?


Ph. I will show you, it is a portion of The Earth, which is not parted by the
Seas a sounder, but is continually in length, so that you may go from one part
unto another without navigations: as Saxony, Bohemie, Sueuelande, etc.


Spod. By these I gather there is no portion of The Earth, but it is either an
Island, or that which you call Peninsula, Isthmus, or Continens.




Philon. No verily, but now behold the figure. Yet there remains to show you
what this word, Ocea^ Sea, means, what we call Promontorium, Fretum, Lacus,
Stagnum, Fluuius, Palus, etc. which I reserve until we speak of Navigations:
And now we will turn to our scope. You shall consider that the face of
The Earth is protraste, and drawn two sundry ways: either on a round plate
form, for which invention the Globe most aptlye serves: or else on a plain
plat form, as a Card in which we draw th'vniuer sall Earth, or else but the
half, or the one part: yea, and you please but one particular Region: which is
proper to Chorographie (as I said to you in the first book.


Spo. Th'inuention should seem much better An objection against the te
restriall Globe.
to draw The Earth in a plain plate form, thereon a Globe, for in it, we may
behoulde the whole face of th'Earthe, without any remouynge or tournynge of
the Card: and on the Globe you shall be compelled to turn first one part,
and then another, or you can view any great portion of it.


Phil. Yet because it does most evidently in figure, Th'Answere.
represent the form of The Earth, it should seem more apt for this institution.
But I will leave his composition until I show you the making of it among
other instruments. And your cause alleged against this form, as I suppose,
did minister occation to Ptolomaeus, to delineat, and describe The Earth in a
plain form. And because that right lines only used in this business, did carry
error with them (as the fornamed Ptolomaeus noted in Marinus the Geographers
invention) therefore he used in this protraction, such lines as might answer
proportionallye, the lines discribed in a Globe: But now I will leave to use
more words herein, and will begin the work it self. And least that the
difficulty of the thing might somewhat discouragie you, I will first nosel and
train you up in making a cart for a Region. But here note that a A particular
card, made. ij. ways.
particular card is made by knowing the distance of places: without Longitude
and Latitude of Regions, which form of working I will here after open: or by
Longitudes, with which first we will begin. And then show you the making of a
Card, for the eight part of The Earth, after The argument of the third^ book.
for half The Earth, and last for the hole universal face of The Earth.


Spoud. I thank you sir, and now I perceive your great care in observing a
method, and order in teaching, with the manifold utility springing of the
same: But seeing you will begin first with the descripsion of a Regio^, I pray
you let your diligence that way bend, to the setting out of our country. So
shall the example be the more familier, and your pains nothing the greater.


Phil. I will accomplish your desire, in describinge a particular Regio^,
Country, or Province, First you shall draw a right line in such length (in
the mids of your The manner of making a particular Carte for any Regio^.
parchement, or paper) as it will aptly receive. This line shall represent the
meridia^ Line for the mids of that Regio^. Then divide this line into so many
equal portio^s, as the latitude of the regio^ is: drawing right Lines, or
paralleles, in every of the same diuisio^s, according to the capacity ^f the
plat form of thy paper, or parchement, and write on th'endes of these
paralleles, 32. 33. 34. or 40. 41. 42. according to their distaunce from
th'Equinoctall. after you shall consider how many digrees the north part of
your regio^ is from th'equinoctiall, and entringe into this Table following
(which is entitled the quantity and proportion of th'Equinoctall, or any
great Circle, unto every parallele both North and Southe from them) search
how many minutes, and secondes answers to the furdest of these degrees in
latitude, and with thy compass, take the like space in any of the divisions
of latitude: and then beginning at the hier part of the Carte (for that shall
represente the North part) make pricks with this compass from the Meridiane
line, on both A PROFITABLE TABLE, SHOVVING THE quantity, and proportion of
th'Equinoctiall, unto every Parallele, both toward the Pole Arctick, and
Antarctick, making every digree 60. minutes.
Latitude of Paralleles. Latitude of Paral. Latitude of pural. Dig. Mi. Se.
Their Dig M S. T. De. Mi. Sec. Th. 0 60 0 0 31 51 25 48 62 28 10 6 1 59 59 27 32
50 52 58 63 27 14 22 2 59 57 18 33 50 19 13 64 26 18 8 3 59 ^5 4 34 49 44 32 65
25 21 26 4 59 51 14 35 49 8 57 66 24 24 15 5 59 46 18 36 48 32 28 67 23 26 38 6
59 40 17 37 47 55 5 68 22 28 35 7 59 33 10 38 47 16 50 69 21 30 7 8 59 24 58 39
46 37 44 70 20 31 16 9 59 15 41 40 45 57 46 71 19 32 3 10 59 5 18 41 45 16 57
72 18 32 28 11 58 53 51 42 44 35 19 73 17 ^2 23 12 58 41 20 43 43 52 52 74 16
32 18 13 58 27 20 44 43 9 37 75 15 31 45 14 58 13 4 45 42 25 35 76 14 30 55 15
57 57 20 46 41 40 46 77 13 29 49 16 57 40 33 47 40 55 12 78 12 28 29 17 57 22
42 48 40 8 52 79 11 26 55 18 57 3 48 49 39 21 49 80 10 25 8 19 56 43 52 50 38
34 2 81 9 23 10 20 56 22 54 51 37 45 33 82 8 21 1 21 56 0 53 52 36 56 23 83 7
18 44 22 55 37 52 53 36 0 32 84 6 16 18 23 55 ^3 49 54 35 16 2 85 5 13 46 24 54
48 46 55 34 24 53 86 4 11 7 25 54 22 42 56 33 33 6 87 3 8 25 26 53 55 40 57 32
40 42 88 2 5 38 27 53 27 37 58 31 47 43 89 1 2 50 28 52 58 37 59 30 54 8 90 0 0
0 29 52 28 38 60 30 0 0 30 51 57 4 61 29 5 19 both sides: then account how
far distaunte the south part of thy Region is from th'Equinoctiall, and by
the help of the Table you shall know how many minutes answers to one
digree: then with your compass take the like proportion of the digrees of
Latitude, and your compass not opened wider, make pricks from either side of
the meridian line in the lower part of the Card, for that signifies the south
coast of that regio^. After draw right lines from the pricks in the hier part
of the Table, unto the Pricks in the lower part. And write in them the degrees
of Longitude, as. 10. 11. 12. or. 20. 21. 22. and then is thy card made ready
to serve thy necessary use.


Spou. This being ended, what is then requisite to be observed to the perfait
finishing of this card?


Phil. Only to seek out of Ptolomaeus Geographie, or my fifth book, the
latitudes of Cities, Towns, Villages, Hills, Rivers, or other notable things
in that Region contained, and according to those no^bres, to place the^ in
your card, or map.


Spou. I do not so much fansye Ptolomaeus, in lo^gitudes and latitudes, for he
was not able being so mighty a Prince to travel into those countris, that to a
private person (for the great distaunce a sunder) was impossible. And therefore
receiuinge (as he confesses) observations at other men's hands, did in many
sundry places swerve from the truth.


Ph. And that was not to be imputed unto Ptolomaeus Ptolomaeus ex cused.
as a crime, seeing the error ensued by other men's observations. But for this
cause I have made my fifthe Book, in the which, I have followed Ptolomaeus in
certain points touching his native Country, and places to them adjacent. In
the other, I have used later writers trauelles, not omitting my own as you
shall evidently perceive.


Spoudeus. I pray you give me an example of these things spoken.


Phil. Here minding to describe the plat form of An example.
England, I draw (as you se) a right line in the mids of the Map. And
because I find in my fifth book, that it is from the Weast part of the same to
The East. 11. digres: I divide this streght line (being the Meridian Line, for
the mids of this Regio^) into xj. equal parts, or portions: Then do I
search how much the Pole Arctik is elevated above th'Aequinoctiall, in the
furdest north part of England: and find it 61. (for under the name of
England, I comprehend the whole Island co^teyning also Schotlande, and
Irelande.) Therefore I enter into the Table going before, and find answering to
61. digr. 29. minutes, 5. secondes, 19. thirdes. Which space, I take with my
compass in one of the diuisio^s of Lo^gitude, that I made in the meridian
line, and so my compass not opened wider, I begin at the Meridian Line in the
higher part of the Card, and make on either side 5. pricks (that is to sai) v.
on the left hand, and v. on the right hand. in like ma ner I find the south
part to differ from th'equinoctial lj. di. wherefore entering into the Table, I
find answering to lj. dig: 37. min. 45. seco. 33. their. And with my compass I
take the like portion in one of the divisions of the Meridian line, and then
with my compass I divide the lower part of the Table, as I did the hier. Then
draw I right Lines from the Pricks in the hier part of the Table, unto the
pricks in the lower part: and wright at th'endes of them, the Digrees of
Lo^gitude, as also in the diuisio^s of the Meridiam line, I wright the digrees
of latitude. The^ seek I in the fifth book for the notable Cities, Towns,
Villages, and such like, and place them in this card, according to their true
Longitude, and Latitude, as in the card of England following you may well
perceive.


Spoudeus. Now I perceive by the making and describyng of this only Map,
that the whole work does chieflye depend upon the Meridian Line, appointing
by them the longitudes of Regio^s: and by Paralleles of Climates, whose use in
a Card, is to limite the Latitude from th'Equinoctiall. So that observing this
order of you prescribed, I may in like sort at my pleasure, draw a Card for
Spain, France, Germany, Italye, Graece, or any particular regio^: yea, in a
warm and pleasant house, without any peril of the raging Seas: danger of
enemies: loss of time: spending of substance: werines of body, or anguishe of
mind. Oh how precious a Jewel is this, it may rightly be called a
Cosmographicall Cosmographicall Glass.
Glass, in which we may behold the diversity of countries: natures of
people, and innumerable forms of Beasts, Fowls, Fishes, Trees, Fruits,
Stremes, and Meatalles.


Phi. You shall have just ccasio^ to affirm, when as you understand the whole
commodity of the same. But I will show you to describe iij. or iiij. Regio^s
in one Map: yea, or so many as are contained in th'eyght portion of
The Earth. And therefore I call it a Card, containing th'eyght part of
The Earth, whose compass, in what quantity you please (the greater the better)
and note, it with A. B. C for the easier understanding, un till you are
exercised herein. Then divide the compass of this Circle in iij equale parts,
and mark the points of the division, with A. B. C. After place the one end of
the compass in A. and stretche out the other end unto B. or C. and with thy
compass draw an arcke, or portion of a Circle, from B. to C. Then set the one
end of the compass in B. and draw the like arcke from A. unto C. After place
the one end of thy compass in C: and describe the like arck from B. to A. And
here note that A. does signify the North, or south Pole. And th'arke B. C. the
quadrant, or iiij. part of th'Equinoctial Circle. This arc B. C. you shall di
uide equallye in the mids, and at that point place D. Then draw a right line
from A. unto D. this shall repraesent the meridiane line for the mids of this
card. This line shall you divide into 90. parts, and every one shall
repraesent a digree: or into 18. portions, and every one shall answer unto v.
digr. Or (if the Map be small) into 9. portions, and every such division
shall signify. 10. digrees. Then placing the one end of your compass in A.
extend, or stretch out the other unto every of these divisions, and draw
arkes, or portions of circles, from th'arck A. B. unto th'arck A. C. These
ended, you shall write in every division from B. to C. th'equinoctiall, unto A.
the Pole Arctik 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. or 5. 10. 15. 20: or 10. 20. 30. according to
the division of the meridiane line. After you shall account in this division
23. digrees. 28. minutes from the quinoctiall, which is the sons greatest
declination, and draw there a double arc which shall serve for the Tropicke of
Cancer, or Capricorn, noted with E L, and in like manner account. 23. degrees.
28. minutes from the North or South pole, and in that space draw in like sort a
double arc, which shall be in stead of the polary circle, either Arctike or
Antarctike, and set th'endes of it. I K. and so are all the paralleles of
latitude, (answering your map) perfaitly finished.


Spou. I understand the protracture of them very well. But shall there be but
one Meridiane line for all this Map?


Phil. Yes verily, there shall be so many, as there are paralleles of latitude,
whose nombre as I said was. 90.


Spou. Now I perceive the reason of this artificial working, for like as the
circuit of the heavens is distributed into. 360. parts: so in like manner the
compass of the earth is also into 360 portions divided, both toward the Poles
and also from West to East. Therefore I pray you show me the way how to draw
these meridiane lines.


Philo. You shall divide the arc B D Cinto. 90. or. 18. or else 9. portions
equally, as I did the latitude from A unto D. In like sort you shall divide the
polary Circle. I K. then drawinge in these divisions from th'equinoctiall (by
the divisions of the Polary Circle) unto A, Arkes or portions of Circles, you
shall have the frame preparid in which you shall (in the same manner that you
did for England) place such portion of the world, as it can aptly receive.


Spo. But may I not describe here the paralleles, and climates (taking the^ out
of the table in the second book) as Ptolomaeus does in his Geographie?


Phi. Yes verily, and it shall adorn the map, not omitting the principal
winds serving for that part of the earth, nor yet th'inhabita^ts called for the
diversity of shadows, Periscij, Heteroscij, Amphiscij, but now behold the
frame of whose composition we have made so many words.




Spou. This map does lively express your meaning so that there is none (I
suppose) so ignorant or dull, but that without great difficulty he may practice
the like, and there fore I require you proceed in the description of a Card, for
half the face of The Earth which (as I conjecture) will conveniently serve for
our Hemisphere.


Philo. Not for our Hemispere only, but also for any one half portion of
the earth, as well serving the use of the^ that dwell under us directly (and
called therefore Antipodes) as also any other. But I will leave to speak of
the use of it, because of it self it is manifest, and will make plain un to you
the composition, and artificial praeparatio^ of it. First with your co^pase
describe a Circle as great as your card shall be, within which draw an other
Circle, a finger breadth distant, and just to this, also an other. Then part
these Cir cles in the mids with a right line, th'endes of which are A. C.
cross this line in the mids, with an other right line B. D. So is your
Circle parted into 4. equal portions Then divide every portion in the compass
of the circle into 90. parts in this manner. First into 3. then every of the^
again into 3. after into 2. and last into 5. After write in them 5. 10. 15.
20. 25. 30. etc from B. C. unto D A. and so is the whole compass of your card,
parted into 360. portions.


Spoud. Unto what use serves the cross lines drawn through the face of the
Map?


Philo. The line A. C. repraesenteth the meridiane: as the line B. D. The half
Aequinoctiall circle. Also A. C. repraesenteth the Poles of the world, and the
plages, or parts of the same, north and south: as B. signifies the weast, and
D. The East.


Spou. I perceive your mind, therefore proceed.


Phi. The^ apply the ruler to the digr. of the circle of A. B. C. and note
th'intersections of the ruler in th'Aequinoctiall and in like manner do in
the other half Circle A. D. C. this ended, you shall describe from A. unto C.
Paralleles, or half circles, by these divisions in th'Equinoctiall: then write
on them from B. to D. 10* 20. 30. 40. etc. Also you shall apply the ruler to
the circle, dividing the Meridiane line A. C. as you did th'equinoctial B. D.
and describe in th'interfectio^s in like manner, half circles, which shall
serve for Paralleles of Latitude. Then account in the circle from B. toward A.
xxiij. digr. 28. min. and describe an arcke, which shall repraesent the half
tropic of Cancer, also from A. toward B. acco^pte xxiij. digr. 28. min. and
draw with your compass another arcke, which shall signify the half Articke,
or polary circle: in like manner do with the tropike of Capricorn, and
th'Antarticke circle. After place the half part of the earth in the map thus
praepared, and describe the Climates, Paralleles, inhabitau^ts, and winds, with
their proper names, and the map shall be perfaitlye finished, as for example,
you may behold the frame of the Hemisphere of The Earth, before placed.


Spou. This card should seem to give a great light and knowledge unto
Navigations. And if I do praepare me an other Map, for the other Hemisphere, I
shall in these two co^praehende, and contain th'vniuersall Earth.


Phil. True it is. but as touching the light, it brings to Navigations, we
will make mention of, at our next meting: and now I will show you, how in one
card, or Map, you may describe all the earth, in such wise, as shall be most
perfait, and in that form, and figure, which shall be right pleasant.


Spou. I pray you then begin, and The making of a Card conteininge the whole
Earth.
I shall give diligence.


Phi. First describe on some plain place, an half circle A. B. C. upon the
center D. so great as thou will have the card, after divide the right line A.
D. into 90, portions equally. Then place the one end of your compass in A.
stretching forth the other end un to 86. degr. xv. min. and xx, secondes, in
the line A. D. and so with your Compass, draw an arc from D. unto the half
circle A. B. C. which shall cross it in B, (for by this way th'arke A. B.
being extended right forth, shall be as long as the right line A. D.) Then you
shall divide this arc A. B. into 90. equal parts. After with your compass
take the quantity of th'arke A. B. and placing the one end in B. take the like
quantity in the half circle toward C. which in like manner you shall divide
into 90. portio^s, and so th'arke A. B E shall be parted into 180. parts. Again
with thy compass take the length of the line A. D. and the one end being
placed in A. take the like proportion from A. to F. so that A. F. shall be equal
to the line A. D. Then divide the line A. F. into 90. parts equally, as you
did A. D. after placing the one foot of thy compass in the Ce^ter D. thou shall
draw arkes in every of the diuisio^s, or else every fifth, or x. division only
and note the hiest Arc next with G. H. then enter into the table following,
and find out how many degrees in lo^gitude answers to. 80. degrees of
latitude, north from th'equinoctiall (which in the table are. 140. degrees. 40
minutes) that number you shall account in the half circle from A, unto E. and
applying your ruler unto the end of this number, and unto the ce^ter D. drawa
short line, which shall exte^d unto H. again enter into your table with 70.
degrees of Latitude, and you shall find. 138. degrees 23. minutes (which I
account from A, toward E as before, and applying my ruler to the short line,
and the degrees in Longitude, with my pen I draw an other short line. In like
manner I do with the other paralleles of Latitude. 60. 50. 40. 30. 20. 10.


Spou. So that by entringe into the table, and accompting the degrees in
Longitude from A. toward E, and drawing short lines one at the end of an
other, there arises as it were a portion of a circle from D to B. and if I could
in like manner find the proportion of th'equinoctiall unto the South paralleles
(which in like no^bre are. 90.) the^ the whole form would repraesent the
figure of half an heart.


Phi. The Other part of the Table containing Southe paralleles, shall serve
herein your use sufficiently. For entering into it with. x. degrees of latitude
which is the next south parallele from th'equinoctial, I find. 79. degrees. 46.
min. which accompting as before in the half circle A E. I draw an other
short line at the end of the other, and so in like sort with. 20. 30. 40. 50. A
TABLE, CONTENING THE SEGMENTES and parts of th'equinoctiall, drawn in a
plain plat form, answering unto the circumference of Paralleles. etc.
The North Latitude of Paralleles Paralleles drawn South from th'Equinoctial
Di Dig M. Di Dig 40 Di. Di Mi Di Di Miunt. 89 141 20 44 126 40 1 88 59 46 41 22
88 141 20 43 126 2 2 87 59 47 40 19 87 141 19 42 125 22 3 86 58 48 39 16 86 141
16 41 124 44 4 85 59 49 38 12 85 41 12 40 124 4 5 84 53 50 37 8 84 141 7 39 123
16 6 83 55 51 36 4 83 141 1 38 122 44 7 82 52 52 35 0 82 140 55 37 122 4 8 81
51 53 33 56 81 140 47 36 121 20 9 80 17 54 32 53 80 140 40 35 120 38 10 79 46
55 32 2 79 140 27 34 119 55 11 78 44 56 31 2 78 140 22 33 119 10 12 77 41 57 30
0 77 140 4 32 118 55 13 76 38 58 29 0 76 139 58 31 117 41 14 75 33 59 28 5 75
139 46 30 116 58 15 74 31 60 27 0 74 139 30 29 116 9 16 73 27 61 26 1 73 139 14
28 115 21 17 72 25 62 25 2 72 138 45 27 114 33 18 71 19 63 24 2 71 138 38 26
113 45 19 70 16 64 23 3 70 138 23 25 112 56 20 69 12 65 22 5 69 138 13 24 112 6
21 68 7 66 21 6 68 137 56 23 111 17 22 67 3 67 20 9 67 137 32 22 100 27 23 65
50 68 19 12 66 137 15 21 109 35 24 64 55 69 18 16 65 136 55 20 108 55 25 63 50
70 17 20 64 136 33 19 107 52 26 62 45 71 16 23 63 136 10 18 106 58 27 61 40 72
15 27 62 135 47 17 106 9 28 60 36 73 14 31 61 135 25 16 105 13 29 59 32 74 13
37 60 135 0 15 104 19 30 58 41 75 12 43 59 134 35 14 103 22 31 57 23 76 11 49
58 134 6 13 102 29 32 56 18 77 10 55 57 133 41 12 101 34 33 55 13 78 10 1 56
133 12 11 100 39 34 54 8 79 9 8 55 132 43 10 99 42 35 53 5 80 8 17 54 132 15 9
98 45 36 52 0 81 7 26 53 131 48 8 97 49 37 50 55 82 6 35 52 131 16 7 96 51 38
49 51 83 5 44 51 130 44 6 95 53 39 48 44 84 4 55 50 130 10 5 94 52 40 47 43 85
4 2 49 129 37 4 93 58 41 46 39 86 3 13 48 129 2 3 92 58 42 45 34 87 2 24 47 128
29 2 91 58 43 44 31 88 1 35 46 127 52 1 91 0 44 43 28 89 0 47 45 127 16 0 90 0
45 42 25 90 0 0 60. 70. 80. 90. where the Pole Antarctike is, and makes the
Figure as you said of half an heart.


Spoud. This can I practice by my self at an other season: wherefore I pray
you proceed to the finishinge of this Map.


Philo. Then taking the Clothe or Parchemente, in which you will describe the
Paralleles, and Meridiane Circles: you shall reduce all the Circles with their
divisions, which you made in A. B. C. into this second Map, the Center of
which is. K. by the healpe of your compass, first drawinge a right line. K.
L. the mids of which shall be M. and this line must be in length equal to
the Line. D. F. in the first Map. Then placinge the one end of the compass
in. K. extend the other unto. M. and protracte a Circle, which shall
represente th'Equinoctiall, and shall be equal unto the Circle. A. B. C. after
take with your Compass the distaunce of every Arcke described in the first
Map, and with the one foot of your compass, (placinge the other foot in. K.)
draw Cyrcles in such circuit, as one of these shall be four times the quantity
of one of the other in the first Map.

Moreover you shall divide th'Equinoctiall line into. 360. equal portions,
such as are in the Line. A. B. C. In like sort the other Paralleles, both
Septemtrionall, and Southe from th'Equinoctiall, and drawinge from every
division of one Parallele unto an other short lines as you did from. D. to. H.
in the first Map, your Card will not only grow to the form of a heart,
but also of a double heart one within an other, as this demonstration, and
figure shows. Last you shall draw the Tropickes of Cancer and Capricorny, the
Circles Arcticke and Antarctike, making them double lines for the easier
knowinge them from the other paralleles.

Then place in this Map the Face of th'Earthe, according to his parts in
Longitude and Latitude, as it is set fourth in my fifth book, vsinge in every
Country, to place only the Meridiane Line, for the mids of the same, where
as your Map is of no great quantitye. Then place the degrees of Longitude,
and Latitude unto the Paralleles, and Meridiane Circles, with Climates, Winds,
diversity of inhabitaunce, and other necessary things.


Spoud. But may I not describe the Planet and sign under which every nation
is, also in this Map? for Ptolomaeus makes mention of them in his
quadripartite, as also every Astronomer writing of the reuolutio^s of the world.


Phi. Yes truly, and by that reason, you shall make it an Astronomical Glass
also, and serve your use profitablye therein.


Spoud. I pray you give me a table of the principal winds, of which you
have hitherto made no mention, and also of the Planets and signs, under whom
every region and Country is governed.


Phi. As touching the winds, and there nombre, because it requires a longer
time then now is offered, you shall find in the table of the^ where we make
mention of Nauigatio^: but as for the Planets and signs governing every
region, because you have not always Ptolomaeus, I will not refuse to make
mention of it in this place, adding furdermore unto Ptolomaeus the names both
of Regions, and Cities, which either were not known of him, or else willingly
omitted. As in this Table you may easelye perceive, co^ferri^g it with that
which is of him described.

Regions and Cities, subject to the signs and Planets, and first of those that
be under Aries, and Mars..
Basternia, Syria, Palestina, England, France, Germany, Burgundy, Sweueland:
and of Cities with Towns, Naples, Ancona, Ferrariae, Florens, Verona Capua,
Lindauia, Cracouia. etc. Under Taurus, and Uenus..
Parthia, Media, Cyprus, the lesser Asia, th'Ilandes named Cyclades, Irelande,
Heluetia. etc. Of Cities and towns, Bonony, Tigure, Lucerna, Herbipolis,
Lipsia, Posna. etc. Under Gemini, and Mercurius..
Hircania, Armenia, Cyrene, Marmarica, the lower Aegipt, a part of Lombardie
and Fla^ders, Brabant: and of Cities and Towns, London, Louain, Brigys, Mence,
Hasford, Norinberge. etc. Under Cancer, and the Moon..
Numidia, Africa, Bithynia, Carthage, Phrigia, Hollande, Seland, Scotland, the
kingdom of Granat* etc: And of Cities and Towns, Constantinople, Uenice,
pise, Millan, Treuers, York, S. Andrews, Lubeck. Under Leo, and the son.
Italy, Sicilie Apulie, Boheme, Phaenicia, a part.
of Turkey, Sabina. etc. And of Cities with towns, Damascus. Rome, Confluence,
Rauenna, Cremona. Prage. Under Uirgo, and Mercurius. Mesopotamia, Babylon,
Assiria, Greece, Achaia.
Crete: and of Cities and of towns, Jerusalem, Corinth, Rhodes, Papia,
Tolose, Lions, Paryce, Heydelberge,.
Basile. Under Libra, and Uenus. Bactriana, Caspia, Thebaida, Aethiopia,
Lyuonia, Austrige, Oasis. And of cities and towns, Caieta, Lauda, Suessa,
Placentia, Friburge, Argentine, Spiers, Francford. etc. Under Scorpius and
Mars..
Iudaea, Cappadocia, Getulia, Mauritania, Norway, Cathalonia. And of Cities and
Towns, Ualentia, Padua, Messana, Aquileia. etc. Under Sagittarius, and Libra..
Spain, Arabia the happy, Ungary, Slauonia, Celtica, Misnia. And of Cities and
Towns, Tolet, Collein, Narbona, Stutgardia, Rotenburge, Buda. etc. Under
Capricornus, and Saturnus..
India, Arriana, Macedonia, Thracia, Greece, Saxonye, Hessia, Orchney Islands,
Machline, Oxford, Bra^ denburge, Constantia, Fauentia. Augusta vindel. etc.
Under Aquarius, and Saturn..
Arabie desert, great Tartarie, Denmark, Segdiana, Sarmatia. and of Cities,
Hamburge, Brema, Salisburge. etc. Under Pisces and Iubiter. Lydia, Pa^phylia,
Calabria, Normandy, Portugal.
Sicilie. and of cities and towns, Alexander. Hispalis, Co^postel, Ratisbone,
Worms.



Sp. There now remains to speak of the describing a particular card for any
regio^ or country, without knowinge their lo^gitudes and latitudes.


Ph. That is well remembered, and there be diverse, and so^dri ways to perform
this work, of which I will show you but one: that is by an instrument, serving
properly to this use. But like as this way is more easier then that which is
performed by longitude, and Latitude, and may be put in practice at all times:
so in like condition, the work is not so exact, and perfaite, as by
Longitudes and Latitudes, which require long and diligent observation.


Spou. In what form is th'instrume^t made by which so much utility may spring,
as to describe by it, a country.


Philonicus. It is made much like the back part of an Astrolabe, conteininge
in the circuit. 360. degrees, An Instrument seruinge the use to describe a
country
and has a ruler with two sightes, which we move to and fro, as occasion is
ministered, until through them we see the place desired. But it differs from
an Astrolabe, in that it has a Dial, with a Nedle fixed in it, and also that
th'Instrument is divided into two and thirty parts, like as a Shipmans
compass. As this figure before placed, does apparently set out.


Spoudeus. This Instrument is easy to be provided, To make a Carte without
knowing Lo^gitude, and Latitude.
yea, and that without great expense, and is not troublous in carriage: but in
what sort may I by it describe a Country?


Philon. I will in few words make it to you evident. With your Instrumente
you shall ascend on some hie tower, Steaple, or Mountain, so that you may on
every part se the towns, and Uillagies, about you adjacent in your Horizont.
Then placing your Instrument (which I name a Geographicall plain Sphere) Flat,
and level, The Geographicall plain Sphere.
tourninge it from one part unto an other, until the nedle fall on the
Meridian Line, in thy Geographicall plain Sphere, then it remaininge
steadfast: direct the ruler with his two sightes unto any one place that you
do see, and mark diligently the Angle of sight, (Gemma The Angle of sight.
Frisius calls it) Angulus positionis.


Spoude. I pray you be not offended although at this present I interrupte
you, and or you further proceed show me what you call the Angle of sight.


Philonicus. I am nothing displeased, but much rejoice that you will not
negligentlye suffer things to escape you, until you be satisfied touching
their true meaning. You shall note that the Angle of sight, is that Arc or
portion of the Horizont of any The Angle of sight.
place, comprehended betwixt two Meridiane Circles and drawn by the vertical
Circle of the first place, unto the Meridian of the second, whose distaunce
you seek out.


Spou. Then you in this place call that Arc A perfect Angle.
of the Horizont, the Angle of sight, which is lesser then a perfait angle,
conteininge. 90. degrees.


Phil. I do so, for if it be. 90. degrees, the place is under the same
Parallele of Latitude, but yet differs in Longitude, and therefore is
directly East or West, as also if there be no Angle of sight, it has the
same Longitude and meridiane Line, and is plain North or South from you.


Spoud. Then I pray you proceade with your precept, you say I shall take the
Angles of sight of every place that I can see in the Horizont of my place
where I begin my work.


Phil. Yea verelye, and then you shall make in some Paper a great Circle, and
divide it into. 360 parts, as your Geographicall plain Sphere is, writing
the four coasts of the country East, South, West, and North, in your paper,
then draw right lines from the Center of your circle, (which represents your
place where you take the Angles of sight of other towns, and villagies
adiace^t) unto such Angles of sight as you have found out by your
Geographicall plain Sphere.


Spou. But this shall little (as I conjecture) avail: yea although I might
have the Angles of sight of all the places in a Regio^, from my place, if I
have not the true distaunce of them?


Philon. I confess no less: for if you have not the Angles of sight from ij.
places, you can not gather the distaunce of the third. Therefore when as you
have placed in the Paper all the Towns, Uillages, or notable hills, that you
can se in that Horizont: you shall take your instrument and Paper, trauelinge
unto some other town, where in like manner you shall go up into the hiest place
of the same, and there placinge your instrumente as before, observe the Angles
of sight of such Towns and Villagies as are in that Horizont. Which ended,
you shall describe in the Paper an other circle as before (as far distaunte
from the other, as you think conueniente, marking diligently that the Center
of the second Circle, be in the line of sight, drawn from the Center of the
first Circle, it being also divided into. 360. parts) drawing such Angles of
sight as you can find. And so proceed from place to place, until every Town
or Uillage have come twice in your sight. And where that any line of the
second Circle, Crosses the like line in the first Circle, make there a
Sterre, or like mark, for that third place (so call I the town observed
twice) and so in like manner you shall do with other places, until you have
drawn the hole region you desire.


Spoud. Than it is expediente for me to observe the Angle of sight of every
Town, from ij. several places, so shall I find out the distaunce of one of
them from an other, or of the third from the^ both, as it must be placed in
the Card.


Phil. Yea, and not only in the Card, but that being known, you shall easily
find out the distaunce in To find the distaunce in miles of diverse places.
miles of one of them from an other.


Spou. That seems very marvelous, seeing that you have not their Longitudes and
Latitudes.


Phil. Yet the work is right easy) as I doubt not but you will confess) for
knowing the distaunce in miles of any Towns, or Uillagies, you shall know
the true distaunce of all the Towns in an Region, one from an other, as for
example.

Swarston in Norfolk, is from Norwich. iij. miles: I divide as you se the line
drawn from Norwiche to it with my compass, in three equal parts, and after
apply my compass to the line drawn from Norwich to Windham, and from Windham
to Swarston, and find. vi. miles betwixt Norwich and Windham, and. iiij* miles
from Winda^ to Swarston.


Spo. By this way, I can find out the distau^ce of two towns nie together,
and by that to find out the distau^ce of all towns in a Card.


Phi. I do greatly commend you, and you may also make a scale, or ruler,
conteininge in it the quantitye of miles from one, to an hundredth if you
please, and by this menes How to find the distaunce of places.
you may take with your compass the distance of ij. places, and then apply the
compass to the foresaid scale, or ruler, and you shall find the perfaite
distance. And now sense I have fulfilled your mind for the chief and
principal matters belonging to Cosmographie, and Geographie, I will at this
present return to my lodginge again.


Spou. When shall it be your pleasure, that I shall repair unto you to be
instructed in the Terestriall Globe, because you said that it do most aptlye
represente the form of th'Earthe.


Philo. Being required by certain of my friends, I do entend, to make a longer
and more ample discourse therein, then this place will permit: And therefore will
at this time omit it. As touching my fifth book you shall receive it of me to
morrow, which day also for your furderaunce, I entende to consume in teaching
you necessary principles for Hydrographie and Navigations. And therefore again
fare you well.


THE FOVRTH BOOK OF the Cosmographicall Glass, setting out such necessary
principles, and rules, as are to be observed in Hydrographie, and Navigations.
Spoudaeus. THERE IS NOthing under the Globe of the moon contained, which Time
tedious.
unto man, beast and every living wite, seems more tedious, more ickesome,
and long the^ time, when as they once feel the want of that they most desire.
Which saying to be true (although many do confess) yet I above all other
must of force affirm, remembringe your promise, touching th'Arte of
Navigations. For sense your departure, the greadye Greyhounde (I assure you)
never more desired his pray, nor the thirstye heart, the flowynge fountain, or
the languishinge sick paciente, the recovery of his health: then my mind
wanting her fode and Nutrimente, thought long, wished, and thirsted, after
your presence and company.


Phi. It is the proper nature of such in whose mind knoweledge have once
builded her Boure, ever more and more (like a covetous man) to labor and
travel after science: for there is no other ways, how to expel that foul, and
ugly beast Ignorance, out of the mind of man: and to place knowledge in the
same, but by all possible means, to embrace Science and Cunning. Wherefore,
lest that your pain should with Tantalus increase: I will no longer occupy the
time with other kind of talk, but will begin somewhat to entreat of necessary
things belonging to Na uigatio^: for I do not intend to set out the differe^s
of one vessel from an other, as th'Argousie, Hulke, Ship, Craer, Pincke,
Pynice, Gally, or what so ever name they have, nor yet of their takling: but
will leave it to such as are Pi lotes and masters of that faculty, and will
show the^ a way how they shall both correct their errors, and also guide and
direct their Uessels, according t'Arte and Science.


Spo. The^ first I pray you begin with the division of the water, expou^ding
such names as they take of there place.


Phi. That was my meaning: and first as touching the seas you shall note that it
is diversely called: either according to the hole, or else according to the part.
According to the hole, as the seas by this general name Ocea^, because they
circuit The Ocean sea
the earth round about. according to the parts, as the seas breaking into the
land, and making ba^ckes on either Sinus, what it here signifies
side is called Sinus, taking also the name of the place it flows into, as
Sinus Adriaticus, sinus Arabicus, Sinus Indicus etc. Also the great seas which
divides Afrik and Europe is called the middle earth sea: taking that name Mare
medite^ ranium.
because in the Weast of Spain, it breaks into the mids of The Earth. The Red seas where proud Pharo The red Seas.
and all his bend were drenched: is not far distante from the midde Earth
Seas, for there is but a certain Mare Mortu^.
hill, which they must needs go over that go by land from Egipte to Arabia
Petrea, that parketh them. Also the Sodomiticall or dead Seas (so called
because that Sodo^e and other Cities were there burnt with fire coming from
heaven) is not far from Iordane, it is also called the dead sea, because the
water moves not, no not with most vehement tempests, because of the pitch in
it, nether ca^ any ship sail, or any fish live there. The seas which Mare
Cagelasum.
are under the Poles Arcticke and Antarcticke are called the congeled or frosen
Seas. There are also the English, German, Spanishe and other seas, of which
I neade to make no mention, no more then of the notable rivers, as the Themes,
the Rhine, Confluence, Neccarus, Danubie, Tyber, Nilus. etc. Because they are
manifest unto such as travel in any of them.


Spoud. I read also in diverse writers these words, Fretum, Lacus, Stagnum,
Palus, Fluuius. But their difference I know not.


Phil. Fretum is contrary to that pease of The Earth, that What Fretum i^.
is called Isthmus. For like as that is a straight portion of The Earth, having
the Seas on both sides: so Fretum is a narrow and streit arm of the Seas,
being betwixt two shores. Lacus, and we may call it a lake, is that which
continually What Lacus is. What Stagnum is.
has water. Stagnum do differ from it, because it conteyneth only water
gathered by inundations, and rain in the winter season. Palus is a water
merueilus What Palus is
deape, and broad, and Fluius, we name it a fludde, and is called so of
flowyng.


Spoud. Your words gives me occation to demand the cause of ebbing, and
flowing, and also whether the time may by any mean be learned?


Philon. And I will gladly answer you, for this is not the least thing that
Pilotes, and Shipmen ought to have regard unto, both for going out, and also
coming in into any Port, or Haven, and other necessary matters. and as
touching the Seas how that they raise, and Eleuate up them selves, as though
they would touch the firmament, and there with fills other Arms, Havens, The
cause of spring and ebb tides.
and waters: and also, that they wax shallowe, and as it were emptye again: I
can conjecture no other cause then that, which the Noble Philosopher and
Physician Gale nus citith, in his book De diebus decretorijs: in which he
affirms that when as the Moon increse in light, al moist things in like case
increase: and when as her light decrea seth, they in like sort decrease. Whereby
it is evident that spring, and ebb tides, take their beginning and end of the
mones course in the Zodiac. Galenus words are these.

(...) Li. 3. de Dieb. decret. cap. 2.


Omnia siquidem quae facere nata est, vbi falcis figura^ repraesentat languida
fiunt: inualescunt omnia cum plena fuerit.

All things which are under the power of the Moon, when as she resembles the
since in likeness, they are feeble, and decrease: but al things wax and
increase, when she is at the Full.


Spou. Then by these words I gather a repugnancie An objection.
betwixt his authority, and daily experience: for it is more manifest, and
clear the^ midday, how that the seas ebb, and flow every natural day, that is
in 24. hours twice: and Galenus says, how but twice in a Month the Seas ebb
and flow: for because she is but once at the full, and once at the change in
this circuit of time.


Phi. This objection nothing infringeth Galen his authority, Th'answere.
nor yet experience. For in the spring, and ebb tides, the seas do increase,
and decrese meruelously: which happen but twice every mo^th, and this is that,
which Galenment. And as for daily ebbing, and flowinge, the seas do not
increase, or decrease therewith. And therefore is properlye called fluxus,
etrefluxus, but the other Augmentum et Decrementum maris.


Spo. And what is the cause of this dailye ebbinge and flowinge so orderlye, as
often and sundry times I have well noted?


Phi. The moon also, for when as she rises in The East, The cause of Ebbyng and
flowing.
the seas begin to increase more and more, until she comes to the Meridian
Circle, and is full Southe: and then causes full Sea. And so as she declineth
from the South, so the sea decrease, until she go down in the Weast Ocean, at
which time again the Seas begin to increase, until the Moon be in the
foresaid Meridian Line, under the earth, and then she is full North, making
also full seas. So they decrease by little and little as the Moon aprocheth
toward The East.


Spou. Then I pray you teach me some brief way how I may at all times
find the age of the Moon without any tables of her diurnall course, or
Ephemerides: for having that, I shall easlye find out the spring and
ebbetides.


Philon. With a right good will, you shall account the days, that are past of
thy month, and add thereto the Epacte, How at all times to find the age of the
Moon.
And to this number you shall also add for every month past (beginning at
March) 1. These 3, numbers you shall add together, and that shall show you
the age of the Moon. As for example 1559, the 24. day of An example.
August, I would know the mones age. First I add 24 days to th'Epact which
is 22, the number of them is 46, then from March to August, there are 5. Months
past, therefore I add to 46. the number of 5. and the hole number is fifty
one, from which I take thirty, (for so must you do, if your number be more
then xxx. and under sixty) and there remain, one and twenty, which is the age
of the Moon.


Spoud. And what if the number be 30. or 60. what must I then do?


Philonicus. There is no thing to do, for that number shows the Moon to
change that present day.


Spoude. And how may I find the true Epacte, for on that is all the
difficulte of the work?


Philon. That is so easy, as I count it but lost time to make many words
there in. For having th'Epacte for Th'Epacte.
one year: you shall for the next year add xi. and so yerelie xi. and cast
away xxx. as often as you can: and the remnent, shall be your Epacte. But
because I will not make more words in trifles, behold the Table, and when the
years are expired, begin again at the first number, and so continue for ever
without variation.

The year of Christ The gol de^ number. Th'Epacte The year of Christ The gol de^
number Th'Epacte 1560 3 3 1570 13 23 1561 4 14 1570 14 4 1562 5 25 1572 15 5 1563
6 6 1573 16 26 1564 7 17 1574 17 7 1565 8 28 1575 18 18 1566 9 9 1576 19 29
1567 10 20 1577 1 11 1568 11 1 1578 2 22 1569 12 12


Spou. Now if I could know, how long the Moon does every night shine, me
think it should be very pleasant and comfortable, especially being on the
troublous seas.


Philoni. And to that thing also, you shall easily attain by the help of the
Table following.

A TABLE OF THE SON RISINGE and going down, through the whole year.
Ianua^us. Februarius. Martius. April. May. June. Da. of themo^ Son rise.
Son go do. Son rise. Son go do. Son rise. Son go do. Son rise.
Son go do. Son rise. Son go do. Son rise. Son go do. H M. H M. H M. H
M. H M. H M. H M. H M. H M. H M. H M. H M. 1 7 47 4 13 7 5 4 55 6 16 5 44 5 23
0 37 4 36 7 24 4 7 7 53 5 7 42 4 18 6 59 5 1 6 9 5 51 5 16 6 44 4 31 7 29 4 5 7
55 10 7 36 4 24 6 50 5 10 6 0 6 0 5 8 6 52 4 25 7 35 4 4 7 56 15 7 30 4 30 6 42
5 18 5 51 6 9 5 0 7 0 4 9 7 41 4 4 7 56 20 7 24 4 26 6 34 5 26 5 42 6 18 4 51 7
9 4 14 7 46 4 6 7 54 25 7 17 4 43 6 24 5 36 5 34 6 26 4 43 7 17 4 11 7 49 4 9 7
51 Julius. August. September. October. November. December. Da. of the mo^ Son
rise. Son go do. Son rise. Son go do. Son rise. Son go do. Son
rise. Son go do. Son rise. Son go do. Son rise. Son go do. H M. H M.
H M. H M. H M. H M. H M. H M. H M. H M. H M. H M. 1 4 12 7 48 4 48 7 12 5 39 6
21 6 32 5 28 7 22 4 38 7 53 4 7 5 4 15 7 45 4 55 7 5 5 46 6 14 6 39 5 21 7 28 4
32 7 55 4 5 10 4 20 7 49 5 3 6 57 5 54 6 6 6 47 5 13 7 34 4 26 7 56 4 4 15 4 26
7 34 5 11 6 49 6 4 5 56 6 55 5 5 7 40 4 20 7 55 4 5 20 4 32 7 28 5 18 6 42 6 13
5 47 7 4 4 56 7 45 4 15 7 54 4 6 25 4 38 7 22 5 26 6 34 6 21 5 39 7 12 4 48 7
49 4 11 7 51 4 9

First you shall seek out the Monthe in this table, with To know how long the
Moon does shine every night.
his day which if it be not there expressed, take that which is next it. And
it shall show you what time the son sets: after, seek out the age of the Moon by th'Epacte, or otherwise, and against that number in this table
(entitled the time that the moon shines. etc.) You shall find hours, and
minutes, which add to the going down of the son, and that number shall
manifestly declare how long she is above th'Earthe, as for example. The. xx.
day of An example.
March. 1559. the Moon is xj. days old: against which number in the Table of
her shining, I find viij. hours, 48. minutes. The^ do I look at what time the
son sets the. xx. day of March, and find it at vi. of the clock xviij.
minutes. These I add together, and the number is xv. hours vi. minutes: so
that the moon shows unto iii. of the clock in the morning, and vi. minutes
after. and hear you must note, that before the Full, and after the change,
she shines presently, the son being set. But after the Full moan, you shall
subtract out of the sons rising, so many hours and minutes, as you find in
the age of the moon: and the remanent, shall show when as she do rise as for
example. The xxvij. day of March, the moon is An example.
xviij. days old, the time of her shining, is x. hours xxiiij minutes: the
son rises that day, at v. of the clock. xxx minutes. Now subtract the
shining of the Moon, out of the sons rising: there remain vii. hours vi.
minutes, the time when as the Moon shall show her self above the Horizont.

A TABLE SHEVVING HOW LONG the Moon shines in our Horizont.
The Age of the Moon. The time she shines. The Age of the Moon. The time she
shines. Days. Hovr. Min. Days. Hour. Min. 1 0 48 16 12 0 2 1 36 17 11 12 3 2
24 18 10 24 4 3 12 19 9 36 5 4 0 20 8 48 6 4 48 21 8 0 7 5 36 22 7 12 8 6 24 23
6 24 9 7 12 24 5 36 10 8 0 25 4 48 11 8 48 26 4 0 12 9 36 27 3 12 13 10 24 28 2
24 14 11 12 29 1 36 15 12 0 30 0 48


Spoudaeus. There yet remain to set out, at what time daily ebbing and flowing
shall be in every cost or you further proceade: for you have declared the division
of the seas: with the cause of the spring and ebb tides, also of dailye
ebbinge, and flowinge, moreover, the age of the Moon, and how long she shines*
whereby I can conjecture the tides aforesaid: now therefore if you do instruct
me, whereby I may know the perfect time of Ebbinge and Flowinge: then you may
with other things at your pleasure proceade.


Philon. That you may do without any labor or study, if you do, but only know
what Moan in that coaste make full seas: which thing this Table following shall
lead you unto, in which, I have placed the principal towns on this shore of
England, and of other costs, with the Moon that in every one of them make
full seas.

FVLL SE AS IN THESE PLACES FOl^wynge by the cost of the Moon, as when she is
at
London. S. VV. Graves end. S. VV. S. Poperelle. S. Lands end. S. E. Marget.
S. S. E. Gulles. S. VV Sandwich S. E. S. Dover. S. E. S. Rhie. S. S. E.
Porchmouth. S. Portland. S. E. Dartmot VV. S. Plumot VV. S. Famot. VV. S. Mous
bay. VV. Scilli. VV. S. Milford. VV. S. The lands end at Gulf. VV. S. VV And
all the coasts up to bristow, yea and the coasts of Irlande, from
VVaterforde, unto Holdhe^de of Kinssael. w. S. Calys. S. S. E. Boleyne. S. S.
E. Deep. S. E. S. New Haven S. E. S. The coast of Lions. S. s. w. Conquit. S.
w. All the coast a long, till you come to Poell head S. w. From Poell head til
you come to the streit of Malgate. S. w. Grauelin S. E. Dunkerk S. E. Host
End. S. S. w. Blanke Borow. S. S. w. Sluse. S. s. w. Ramkinse s. s. w. At
Anwerpe. E. Newporte s. s. w. Harwich s. s. E. Yermouth s. E. All the coast a
long to VVintertone. s. E. Humber. E. Scarborrow, and a long the coast to
Newcastell. s. w. Castle. s. s. w. Holly Island. s. s. w. Barwike s. s. w.
South Ha^pton. S. Black Deppes S. Read Bancke. S. Tyne Mouth. s. w. Hartle
Poule. w. S. w. Feylene. VV. S.


Spo. This I understand very well.


Phi. Then when you will learn the time that it shall How to know th'exacte
time of ebbinge and flowyng.
be full sea, seek out the town with the coast of the moon. After, enter into
this table (having the age of the moon) and there stay your finger. Then seek in
the hier or lower part of the Table, for such a coast as you found written To
the Reader.
Hear should come into this Page (friendly Reader) the table of the Mones
ebbinge and flowinge: but because the space is not sufficient, you shall find
it, in an open sheet, which must here to be annexid.

A PROFIT ABE TABLE FOR FINDINGE OVT EBBES, AND FLVDDES IN THE COASTS of
England, Scotland, Irelande, Duchelande, and France.
THE COATSES OF THE MOON BEFORE the Full, and after the Change.
The age of the Moon East. East and by S. East. S. E. S. e. and by Ea. S. Ea.
S. E. and by So. S. S. East. S. and by Ea. Sou. S. and by we. S. S. weast S.
we. and by s S. we. s. w. and by w. we. S. weast we. and. by So. H. M H. M H M
H. M H M H. M H M H. M H M H. M H M H. M H M H. M H M H. M. 1 6 48 7 33 8 18 9
3 9 48 10 33 11 18 12 1 12 48 1 31 2 18 3 3 3 48 4 33 5 18 6 3 2 7 36 8 21 9 6
9 51 10 36 11 21 12 6 12 51 1 36 2 21 3 6 3 51 4 36 5 21 6 6 6 51 3 8 24 9 9 9
54 10 30 11 24 12 9 12 54 1 39 2 24 3 9 3 54 4 39 5 24 6 9 6 54 7 39 4 9 12 9
57 10 42 11 27 12 12 12 57 1 42 2 27 3 12 3 57 4 42 5 27 6 12 6 57 7 42 8 27 5
10 0 10 45 11 30 12 15 1 0 1 45 2 30 3 15 4 0 4 45 5 30 6 15 7 0 7 45 8 30 9 15
6 10 48 11 33 12 18 1 3 1 48 2 33 3 18 4 3 4 48 5 33 6 18 7 3 7 48 8 33 9 18 10
3 7 11 36 12 21 1 6 1 51 2 36 3 21 4 6 4 51 5 36 6 2^ 7 6 7 51 8 36 9 21 10 6
10 51 8 12 24 1 9 1 54 2 39 3 24 4 9 4 54 5 39 6 24 7 9 7 54 8 39 9 14 10 9 10
54 11 39 9 1 12 1 57 2 42 3 27 4 12 4 57 5 42 6 17 7 12 7 57 8 42 9 27 10 12 10
57 11 42 12 27 10 2 0 2 45 3 30 4 15 5 0 5 45 6 30 7 15 8 0 8 45 9 30 10 15 11
0 11 45 12 30 1 15 11 2 48 3 33 4 18 15 3 5 48 6 13 7 18 8 2 8 48 9 33 10 18 11
3 11 48 12 33 1 18 2 3 12 3 36 4 21 5 6 5 51 6 36 7 21 8 6 8 51 9 36 10 21 11 6
11 51 12 36 1 21 2 6 2 51 13 4 24 5 9 5 54 6 39 7 24 8 9 8 54 9 39 10 24 11 9
11 54 12 39 1 24 2 9 2 54 3 39 14 5 12 5 57 6 42 7 27 8 12 8 57 9 42 10 27 11
12 11 57 12 42 1 27 2 12 2 57 3 42 4 27 15 6 0 6 45 7 30 8 15 9 0 9 45 10 30 11
15 12 0 12 45 1 30 2 15 3 0 3 45 4 30 5 31 16 6 0 6 45 7 30 8 15 9 0 9 45 10 30
11 15 12 0 12 45 1 30 2 15 3 0 3 45 4 30 5 31 17 5 12 5 57 6 42 7 27 8 12 8 57
9 42 10 27 11 12 11 57 12 42 1 27 2 12 2 57 3 42 4 27 18 4 24 5 9 5 54 6 39 7
24 8 9 8 54 9 39 10 24 11 9 11 54 12 39 1 24 2 9 2 54 3 39 19 3 36 4 21 5 6 5
51 6 36 7 21 8 6 8 51 9 36 10 21 11 6 11 51 12 36 1 27 2 6 2 51 20 2 48 3 33 4
18 5 3 5 48 6 13 7 18 8 2 8 48 9 33 10 18 11 3 11 48 12 33 1 18 2 3 21 2 0 2 45
3 30 4 15 5 0 5 45 6 30 7 15 8 0 8 45 9 30 10 15 11 0 11 45 12 30 1 15 22 1 12
1 57 2 42 3 27 4 12 4 57 5 42 6 27 7 12 7 57 8 42 9 27 10 12 10 57 11 42 12 27
23 12 24 1 9 1 54 2 39 3 24 4 9 4 54 5 39 6 24 7 9 7 54 8 39 9 14 10 9 10 54 11
39 24 11 36 12 21 1 6 1 51 2 36 3 21 4 6 4 51 5 36 6 21 7 6 7 51 8 36 9 21 10 6
10 51 25 10 48 11 53 12 18 1 3 1 48 2 33 3 18 4 3 4 48 5 33 6 18 7 3 7 48 8 33
9 18 10 3 26 10 0 10 45 11 30 12 15 1 0 1 45 2 30 3 15 4 0 4 45 5 30 6 15 7 0 7
45 8 30 9 15 27 9 12 9 57 10 42 11 27 12 12 12 57 1 42 2 27 3 12 3 57 4 42 5 27
6 12 6 57 7 42 8 27 28 8 24 9 9 9 54 10 30 11 24 12 9 12 54 1 39 2 24 3 9 3 54
4 39 5 24 6 9 6 54 7 39 29 7 36 8 21 9 6 9 51 10 36 11 21 12 6 12 51 1 36 2 21
3 6 3 51 4 36 5 21 6 6 6 51 30 6 48 7 33 8 18 9 3 9 48 10 33 11 18 12 1 12 48 1
31 2 18 3 3 3 48 4 33 5 18 6 3 west. w. and by N. w. N. weast N. we. by we N.
w. N. w. by N. N. N weast N. and by w. Nor. N. and by Ea. N. N. East. n. c. and
by N. N. E. n. c. and by ea. E. N. East. N. and by E.

THE COASTS OF THE MOON from the Full unto the Change.

Place this Table before the leaf. 153.

with your town, and over against the age of the Moon you shall have the
day, and hour; when as in that cost it is full sea. As for example, I find
at Yermouthe. S. E. An example.
Whereby I say that a Southeast Moan, make a full sea with them: the^ I Imagine
the Moon to be. xij. dais old therefore in the first row I seek the age of
the Moon, and in the hier part of the Table, find S. E: then descending until
I be directly against the age of the Moon, I find vi. hours. xxxvi. minutes,
which is the exact time, when as it is full sea at Yermouthe. So in like manner
you may work with any place, about this our Ocean sea, as in the table going
before it is evident.


Spoude. This I do right well perceive.


Philon. Now order inforseth, that we convert our talk unto the winds,
because of the necessary use of the^ in Navigations, and first you shall
understand that the wind is no other thing, then a hot and dry exhalatio^,
engendered What the wind is.
in the bowels of the Earth, which once breaking forth, is driven round about
the face of the same.

This both Homer, and the old Graecians, divided Four Principal winds.
only into iiij. East, Weast, North and South. But those that followed them
next, after a more exquisite sort, divided the Horizont into. viij. equal
portions.


Spoud. And what names did they devise for them?


Philon. I will show you, they called the East: Subsolanus, for that the sun
rises there being in the equinoctial points. The Weast wind also they called
Fauonius, of norishinge: the wind which comes out of the North, Septentrio:
the South wind Auster. Then the wind that blows betwixt the east, and the
South, named South East. Also that which comes out of that place betwixt the
east and the north, they called it northeast. The space directly betwixt the
north, and the west, they named northwest: as betwixt the south, and the west
southwest, as in this, figure A. B. C. D. represent the Horizo^t, A. the east,
B. the north: C. the weast, D. the south: E. the northeast: F. the nortwest: G.
the southeast: and H. the Southeast.


Spo. Yet there is another kind of partinge the Horizo^t, the^ you have
declared: for I remember that I red in Marcus Manilius, how the Horizo^: was
Marcus Manilius.
parted in 12. parts: but the reason of it I could never understand. His
versis as I remember, are these.



Asper ab axe ruit Boreas: furit Eurus ab Ortu:
Auster amat medium Solemn: Zephyrusque profundum.
Hos inter binae mediis e partibus aurae.
Fxpirant similes, mutato nomine, flatus.


From the North, rough Boreas come: and Eurus, from the East:
Auster, from the South blows: and Zephyrus, from the West.
Betwixt either of these quartes, two other winds brost out:
In nature like: their names changed, whistling all the earth about.



Phi. Manilius does very aptly show the order of parting the Horizo^t in to
12. parts. For (says he) there com meth two winds from those parts of the
Horizont, where the equinoctial crosses it equally, of which, the East he
calls Eurus: And the Weast Zephyrus, or Fauonius. The^ the meridia^ circle
crosses also the Horizo^t equally in the mids. And so by these intersectio^s
there are two other winds described: the North, he calls Boreas, The Southe
Auster.


Spoud.. These. iiij. are the Principal winds, and agrees with Homer and the
old Gretians.


Philo. Yea, but in the rest it differs both from the^, and also the second
sort. For these parted the Horizont in. 8. equal portio^s: but Manilius into.
12. inequal parts for he described. iiij. collateral winds by the. ij.
Tropic Circles, which are the places where the Son rises and goes down in
the mids of Somer, and Winter. And also other 4. winds at the Circles Arctick
and Antarctick.


Spou. I reme^her that in our first days talk, you showed me what
th'equinoctiall, the Tropickes, and the circles Arctik and Antarticke were:
notwithstanding I shall the more spedely conceive your meaning, if you vouch
safe (as hitherto you have used to give me some example and picture hereof.


Phil. That I will not refuse to do, or any other thing, so that the more
vtiliti hereof may unto you ensue. Where fore behold the tipe before placed in
which. A. B. C. D. E. F. G. H. Is the place of the Horizont. H. the North. A.
The East: L. the Southe: and. B. the Weast. From which the Principal winds
does blow. C. is the place where the Son rises in the Summer, and E. where in
the same time of the year he sets: Also. D. do represent the place, where
as the son rises in the winter point, and F. the coaste where he goes
down. Also that part of the Arctick circles, which is most easterly marked
with G, and the other part furdest Weast, noted with I. also the part of the
Circle Antartike furdest East, is marked The Horizont parted into 32 parts.
with M. And the other portion furdest west with K. But now in our time, the
learned Hydrographers, and Trauelours on the Seas, have yet gone beyond them
all, partyng the Horizont in 32. equal portions, as sufficiently answering
unto every viage through the hole Earth, and they have given them very apt
names, as in this Instrument following more largely appears.


Spou. Thus I see, that by diligence, and labor, small things have great
root, and increasing. For first there were found out but iiij. Cardinal,
and chief winds: after they were made viij. in number, then xii. And now in our
days 32. so that I believe we be at the furdest, and that those which follow
us, shall not be able to add The number of winds infinite.
any thing to this pertition of winds.


Phi. You are much deceived, if that you so do think, for the number of ^indes
be infinite, and break out of every part of the horizo^t. But like as 12. in
number seemed not suffice^t: so 32. ar thought to answer in all parts, that is
in Nauigatio^ required, and the deuisinge of a greater number, shall rather
cause confusion of memory: then help in this behalf. Also by this Compass
(the Son shynynge) you shall perfitly know the hour of the day by the coast
he is in. As when he is right East, and West, it is always six of the cloak:
also, a Southe Son makes xij. of the clock. So in like manner, a southeast
son, makes ix. of the cloak, and a south weast son, iij. of the cloak
after noone. The Other hours are manifest by the compass.


Spou. This is very necessary also in trauilinge. And now return to that,
from whence we did digress.

There are certain qualities applied to the winds, whereof does that spring?


Phi. There are so, and that comes of the te^perature North winds cold.
of The Earth, so that the North winds be called could, because they proceed
from the frosen Zone, and these south winds hot, because that they come from
the burnt zone. South winds hot.
But this belongs more to Physic, the^ Nauigatio^. For we seek herin, to
learn th'apt wind which shall carry us, unto the desired Port, and not
health, which is the Physicians chief care.


Spou. I confess no less, but yet sense we have entered in to this matter, I
will be so bold, as to trouble you herein further. And where as you say, the
qualities of the winds An objection
spring of the te^perature of the earth, do you mean the zones, and Climates?


Phil. I do no less:


Spou. The^ seeing the North wind is called cold, because it comes from the
north frosen zone, why by the like reason shall not the South winds be of like
quality, coming from the south frosen zone?


Philoni. I will answer you in few words. The Th'Answere.
North wind comes from the North frosen zone, and is felt in our Climate,
because we are situated, nerer that, then the South frosen Zone: which being
under our fete (as you have heard before declared) is kept from us, and the
couldnes of the wind, not only mitigated, but also greatly altered, through
the heat of the burninge Zone. And therefore the South winds are called hot.


Spou. This does very well agree both to reason, and experience. So that in
th'Equinoctial, where both the north, and South winds meet, there the winds
are called te^perate, Winds temperate under th'eqninoctiall
because the couldnes of them is taken away by the heat of the burninge Zone.
And by this also I gather, that such as dwell in the temperate Southe Zone,
((...) Proclus call it) beyond th'Equinoctiall, they call the South wind cold,
and the North wind hot.


Phi. It must neades so be, for that the burninge Zone qualifieth the coldness
os the North winds, through his heat, as to us, he does the South.


Spou. There is now an other dout entered into my head, of which to be delivered
I must (or we further proced) require your ientill aid. And that is, whether in
describing A question.
the. iiij. Cardinal winds, you call the North Pole, the furdest North point
or not: and th'Antarctick Pole the South point.


Philon. No verily, respecting our climate, but I call Th'Answere.
North, and South, the place of the Horizo^t, which the meridia^ circle rightly
does cross, as also the east, and west, where th'Equinoct. crosses the horizo^t.


Spo. The^ under th'equinoctial, where the Poles are equal with the earth the
Poles them selves are the north and South points.


Phil. It must of force so be. But now saying these instructions seem
sufficient unto you, touching the order, number, division, and names of the
winds: I will pass from that, and convert my talk, unto the desired scope,
(that is) how to direct any ship, from place to place, from Port to Port,
exactly by Art:


Spou. And that is a thing, which seems merueilous. For it is thought praise
worthy to go by land, directlye without error, from one place to an other,
far distant a sonder, having no path, or way whereby to be guided. But in
the wide Ocean, to find a direct way, and to conducte his vessel unto the
port desired, is much more commendable. If Ulysses had known this Art, he
should not have hene so long tossed on the troublous seas. If Diomedes,
Ulysses.
or Aeneas, had been herein learned, they had not so Diomedes. Aneas.
many years been driven from place to place: knowinge not by what means, to
attain to their so long desired Region. What thing more commodious for
Princes, was there ever invented: more profitable for a common weal: and more
necessary for all men? And that considering the worthy Princes in time paste,
called Neptunus th'inuentor hereof, a God: as also Aeolus, which found out the
use of winds: For it is truly said, honor norisheth arts. Neptunus. Aeolus.



Philon. I would in these days, they would reward the learned, and painful
(which either invent, or add to that which is invented) with a necessary
living, and as for calling the^ gods, let that pass, it is to great a title
for mortal men. But omit we these things, as touching the directing of any
ship, you may do it two ways: the one by the compass only, which was to
the old Hydrographers, The compass unknown to the old Hydre graphers.
unknown: the other by longitudes, Latitudes, and the compass, of which her
after we will show the manner. As touching the first way, I will not labor
to write much of, because it is known well nie to every Mariner. But yet I
will show them certain observations, by which there is found many errors in
the nedle: that done I will also declare, how they shall correct the same, and
sail more exactly then the most part are able?


Spou. This is a merueilous nedle, which being touched, The praise of the
neadle.
(as I hear only with the Magnes) should know to turn always to the North
pole, and that only by the same, the. iiij. Plages, and quarters of th'Earthe,
are presentlye found out. But what be th'obseruations of this neadle, by
which you affirm that it does not exactlye point North, and Southe.


Phi. They are of Iofrancus set forth, in this wise. Observations of the
nedle where it has erred.
In the Island called Insula Corui, it declined Easterlye. xv. degrees. Also in
the place which shipmen call (Le Cap d'espoir en terre neuue) it declineth
toward the Weaste. 33. degrees, and. 45. minutes. Again at Deppe, (says he)
it poynteth Easterlye to much, by. 11. degrees well nie.


Spo. If this be certain, then in deed th'error is not tolerable, but admit it
be not so much, yet error in all things (as much as is possible) is to be
eschewed, and verity to be followed. Wherefore I pray you, show me how to find
out a perfait nedle, and to correct it, if it be not perfect.


Phi. Both the chosing of a nedle that is perfect, and also to correct the
false, consists all in one precept. For if I How to correct the nedle
can correct a false nedle, I can also choose a true, and perfect: the way how
you shall do that, is on this wise. when you will verify your nedle (if it be
in the day) you shall use the healpe of the Sun (and on the night) of some
fixed sterre, marking diligently wha^ they are in the nonestead line: and then
direct your nedle unto the Son, or sterre, and if the flower of the nedle be
right North from it, your neadle is perfect: or if the flower be toward the
son, and the other part of it North, it is also true, and this your nedle
corrected, you shall perfitly direct your ship, without error.


Spou. I can with my Astrolabe, or Quadra^t, observe the height of the son,
and sterre, until that he come to the meridia^, or nonestead line (as you
taught me in the second dais talk) and at that instant, place my nedle Fol. 91.
92. 93. 94.
right toward him.


Phi. And this will serve as well on the seas, as on the la^d. But on the la^d
you may draw a meridiane line, as I taught you, and set your compass on the
meridian Line, which you have drawn, in such manner, as the line North and
South in the compass, stand right in the same, and it is of all other
th'exacte way: and this having your line made, you may at all times, verify
any nedle, not tarying for the sons coming to the Meridian Circle.


Spou. But then my Meridian line which I have drawn, must ever be fixed in
some place without remoui^g


Philo. It must neades follow. There is also great error committed in describing
the shipmans Cart, because they use right lines in the place of Parallele
circles, of which at this time I will no further entreat.


Spoud. Then I pray you begin the way how to sail by Longitudes, and
Latitudes.


Philon. Unto this way are required the circles of the Sphere, the meridian
altitude of the son by day, and sterre by night, the heighte of the Pole,
the longitude of Regions and Ports, and the use of the shipmans quadrat, whose
inuentor was worthy D. Gemma.




Spou. As touching the Circles of the sphere, you gave me instructions in our
first days talk: also to find th'altitude of the Pole, son, and sterre in
the second days meting: the longitude of places you promised to set forth by
themselves and give me at my departure: therefore there, only remain, to show me
the use of the quadrat, in this art.


Phi. The^ I will herin satisfy your expectation and finish our talk for this
present. This Quadrat as you se contains. 32. points, with their names in
them written.


Spoud. I perceive it well, but what is meant by those degrees of Lo^gitude, and
Latitude, in that order placed?


Philon. I will show you, opening the whole Art of directing How to direct a
ship to any Port.
your ship. First you must seek out the longitude and Latitude both of the
place from whence you sail, and also of that unto which you intend to
travail. Those you shall for the most part find in my book (which I will
deliver you at our departing) then subtracte the smaller number of Longitude
and Latitude out of the greater, and with the difference of Lo^gitude and
Latitude, do in this manner. First if the Longitude of the place unto which you
travel be greater then that from which you depart, entering into the hier part
of the Quadrate (and toward the left hand under this title, the greater
longitude) you shall seek out in degrees and minutes, this difference. And do
in like manner in the lower part of the table directly under it, and this
difference so found out, apply a thride, or ruler, to the number found in
the hier part of the Quadrat, and also in the lower part.


Spou. But and if the Longitude of the place unto which I travel, be less,
the^ that from which I depart shall I not then account the difference of
Lo^gitude from the middle Line, toward the right hand?


Ph. You must so do, but now as touching the difference in Latitude of the two
places, if the pole of the place (unto which you direct your ship) be
greater, then the Pole of the place, from which you losen then accomptinge from
the middle line upward, under this title, the greater Latitude, and in like
case toward the right hand, then draw and extend a third, or apply a rulers,
unto this number of latitud, and where the. ij. thrides or rulers cross one an
other, there make a mark for it is the place which you desire.


Spou. But where shall be placed the port from which I must depart?


Phil. In the Center, or mids of the Quadrat. So that if you apply a ruler
from the Center of the Quadrate, unto th'intersectio^ of the two thrides or
rulers, it shall be manifest what point or wind, you must use, until you have
finished your course.


Spoud. But admit the lo^gitudes be not trewly observed, and so I shall be
deceived, how shall I know when we have sailed the differences in lo^gitude of
these ij. places?


Phil. That you may at all times without difficulty bring to pass, by finding
out the height of the pole: which you may do in the day, by the height of the
son, at midday, or on the night, by some fixid Sterre: or (that sterre which
Shipmen call) the Lode Sterre.


Spou. How may I know the form of this lode star?


Phil. Because the form of it shall much better make you know it, then the use
of many words, behold here the Figure following, in which you shall see the
configuration both of the Pole Arctick, and also Antarctick. And now again to
our former talk: having the height of the Pole found out by instrument, you
shall enter into the Quadrat with this number, findinge out the Latitude, from
the midline, upward or downward, as before it was declared: and apply a ruler
unto the same place, noting diligently where this ruler, touches the line
which was drawn from the center, unto the intersectio^ of the difference of
Lo^gitude and Latitude first taken. The^ account the like number in the
difference of Lo^gitude, that you did of Latitude, and applying the ruler there
unto, it shall show plainly the lo^gitude of that present place, like as the
line from the center, do certainly declare the cost of the world.

A. I^ the Southe Pole, D. C. th'Equi noctiall. ^. the North.




Spou. This seems to have a singular use in rectifying the longitudes of
places. Now that, which here is spoken* touches only th'exacte course (and
as it were) the pathe, in which we must sail. But if great winds, How to
know in what place they are, being driven from their course.
tempests, and storms arise, so that we are utterly driven from our course,
tossinge up and down, the Seas, how may I know, in what Parallele, and
Climate, we are, that thereby we may come again to our right course. Fol. 77.
78.



Phil. That shall you do by the help of the Table of Clymates, and Paralleles,
in the second book, and by the Eleuatio^ of the Pole, the findyng of which I
have so often set forth, that I am ashamed to make thereof any more mention.


Spou. Then you will that having the height thereof, I shall enter into that
table of Climates, and seek there the eleuatio^, and directly against it, I
shall find the name of the Paralleles, and Clymates.


Phil. You do rightly understand my meaning. And these things parfaitly kept
in memory, and put in practice, when as occation shall be ministered: there are not many other things in this business requisite. Wherefore, seeing that I have
satisfied your request, in all such things as you at our first days meting
desired, I think it a convenient place, at this time to make an end touching
this Argument of Cosmographie, Geographie, and Navigations. And therefore depart
with me, and you shall receive the Book, which I promised, conteinynge in it
the Longitudes, and Latitudes of the famous Regio^s, Countries, Cities, Towns,
Villagies, and such like, as ar placed on the face of The Earth. And when you
find any other doubts, either in this Art, or any other belonging to my
profession, if you do to me resort, I will therein willingly help you to my
power.


Spoud. I thank you most heartily, and thus have I kept you (for my vtilities
sake) from your urgent, and necessary business, this long season, and that
without receiving at my hand again any recompense. But sense I can not do
herein what my good will is, I shall refer the whole unto God, who
ple^tiously rewards the good trauelles of every man.


THE FIFTHE BOOK OF THE COSMOGRAPHICAL GLASS, IN WHICH the parts of
th'Earthe, perticulerlye (according to the late observations of Cosmographers
in our age) are exactlye described. With the Longitudes and Latitudes of
Regions, Provinces, Islands, Cities, Towns, Villages, Hills: also the
commodities of every Country, the natures of th'Inhabitauntes, Laws,
Rightes, and Customs, with diverse other things coincident to the same.
PERCHANCE, there may arise sundry sicopha^ts (reading this my labor following)
which will not let to accuse me of arrogancy, in that I take this part in
hand, sense Ptolomaeus that famous King has of that argument left to us his
Geographie. Unto whom I answer, confessing me not worthy to kiss his
fotesteppes, as well for the majesty of his person, when he lived, as also for
his excellent Learning, Science, and diligence. But saying the hougienesse of
the labor, did far transcend not only his, but al so the diligence of any
one man (having none other beginning then he had) he is to be excused, though
he have not expressed throughoute his hole work the true situation of places.
For as touching this part it is requisite, either to travel much him self,
or else to take observations of the most learned, which dwell in the Regions,
for which he will wrighte. But the other part of his labors touching the
heavenly motions (because remaininge in one place) he might behold the
Heavens, tourninge and showinge them selves, he has most exactlye not only
laid the foundation, but also brought it to perfect end, as the noble
Almegist does testify. But as touching this my book of Longitudes and
Latitudes, I have for the chief places of England used both my friends
travails, and also mine own observations. And where as any place is taken
out of Ptolomaeus, that shall you find noted with a star*. In which also
this I have diligently observed (having. vi. sondrye examples and Copies) that
where the most part of them agree, that I have only used. Also in
describinge other Regions, I have followed th'obseruations of th'inhabitantes.
As in France, I have used authors, which are French men: For Spain,
Spaniardes: in Germany in like case Germans: And in the late found Islands,
such as do of them most probably treat. Moreover, I have for the most part,
placed to every City, Town, and Port, two names, the one Latin for the
co^munitie of the tongue, the other as it is properly of th'inhabitauntes named.
And if I shall not exactly for the difficulty of the work in all places
express the perfect Lo^gitudes and Latitudes: Thou must herein pardon me
(friendly Reader) for the cause aledged, and also take this in good part,
seeing no man (Ptolomaeus except) hitherto have in all parts set out so
large, and ample a work. But now I will commit it to thy descretion and
judgment.

A PERTICVLER DESCRIPTION OF Europe: Which in our days contains
Christendom and part of Turkey.
Seeing that th'Earthe environed, and compassed with the mighty Ocean seas,
seems as it were an Island: the ancient Geographers (for the better avoiding
confusion in the describing of the face of the earth (divided it into. iij.
parts, Europe, Afric and Asia. As for the fourth part, which is called
America or the new world, was unto them unknown. Therefore at this present,
mindinge to follow the same order, I will first begin with Europe. This part
was so called as histories do witness, of an amiable Lady called Europa being
daughter to King Aginor, who^e Jupiter (being ravished with her beuty) espying
among a company of other virgins, playinge by the sea side carried away out of
Afric, saylinge through the Ponticke Seas until he came into Crete. This
story the Poets in this wise do resite, how that Jupiter turned into a white
Bull, did cari her on his back through the seas into Crete, which bull was no
other thing the^ that in their Ensigns, and Flagges, the Crete^tia^s navy bare
the white Bull. This part of th'erth is pleasantly separated from Africa, by the
middle earth Seas, which is so named of sundry Nations, that it norisheth. It
is also parted from Asia, by the notable River Tanais, which from the North
parts with great violence runs into Ponte Euxine. The Heavens in this part
gives temperatnes of Aere: The Earth flowing with abundance of all things
necessary for man's use. As Grains, Fruits, Fish, Foul, Oils, Wines,
Catell, Metalles, and such like. The nature of the people more civil,
frindlyke, wise, learned, and apter unto wars then they of Afrike, and Asia.
And although it may seem much inferior to them, if you do consider the bigness,
and quantity: yet in the commodities to it belonging, it shall be to either of
them equiuale^t. Morouer it is beautified with pleasant Islands, adorned with
notable Rivers, and finally garnished with innumerable Cities, Towns,
Fortresses, and Uillages. The length (by direct distaunce from the vttermoste
confines, and borders of Spain, unto Constantinople in Graece the furdest
place East of all Europe) contains after Ptolomaeus mind 2200. English
miles: the breadth of it to be somewhat lesser Ptolomaeus affirms.
Notwithstanding, if you reke^ the Septentrion all Regio^s, which ware to
Ptolomaeus unknown, as Sueulande, Gothlande, Norway, and other such, you shall
well perceive the Latitude to excede the length of the same. There are also in
Europe many particular Regions, as England, Irlande, Scotland, Spain,
France, Germany, Italy, Polande, Unlgarie, Denmark, Graece, and diverse, unto
the number (as Ptolomaeus affirmith) of 34. Of which seuerallye I will set out
the notable Cities and towns, mountains, and rivers, beginning with Irland
first, as Ptolomaeus does in his Geographie.

OF IRLANDE.
IRland is an Ila^d very fertile, subject to the Crown of England: In it there
ar great ple^tie of wolves, red Alume, sea Cole, also mines of gold, and
silver, and in sundry pla ces Pearls are found. It brings forth very many
herbs necessary for the health of man. It is free from Uenomous beasts, and
Worms, as Ranny, Tode, Edder, Snack, swift, or such like. The people are
savage, wild, and beastly, they are given to sorcerie, superstition, and
witchcraft: their shirtes, and smokes are saffroned, they go with long Mantils,
Their weapons in battle are Darts, and swords, which are brodest at the point:
their musical Instruments in battle, are Bagpipes. They delight in many
colored fring. They are great drinkers of Aqua vitae (which is there only
medicine.) They live unto 60. 70. And (as I here) unto 90. years. The
longitude of it, is supposed to be 280. En glishe miles, and the breadth, 92.
miles. The mids of this Island has in longitude, and latitude. 7. 0. 57. 0.
The chief places are *The north promontorie. 13. 0. 61. 0 *Venicnium
promontorie. 12. 50. 61. 20. Reba. 6. 40. 57. 20. Lamon. 7. 5. 56. 30 S.
Patrickes Purgatory 6. 42. 58. 50 * Diuiline. Eblana. 14. 0. 59. 0

There are ioyninge unto Irlande, five Islands called Ebudae, but of Pliny,
Haebu des. Of which that which is most west, is called properlye *^buda. 15.
10. 62. 0

That which is most East. *Ebuda. 15. 20. 62. 0 Ricnea. 17. 0. 62. 0 Maleos.
17. 30. 65. 10 Epidium 18. 30. 62. 0

Also on the east part of Irlande, are these Islands. *Monarina 17. 40. 61. 30
*Th'Il^ of Man 15. 0. 57. 20 *Adros, a desert. 15. 0. ^9. 20 Limnus, a desert.
15. 0. 59. 0

OF ENGLAND.
England the most famous and plentiful Island in all the Earth of Ptolomaeus
called Albion, afterward Brita^nia secunda: Because that in the days of
Ptolomaeus, Scotland and it were accounted for one Island, It is environed
about with th'Ocea^ Seas, not much unlike to a Tria^gle in shape: it has on
The East part of it, Germany, on the South East, France, on the Weast,
Irelande, and on the North, the 30. Islands, called Orchney. Of England, both
of the finding of it first, and also of the particular description, herafter,
I shall more largly speak (if God grant life.) At this time, I intend but
only to set out the Longitude, and Latitude of the chief Cities, and Towns,
as here follows. *Bathe, Aquae calidae. 17. 30. 53. 40 *Banger, Ganganotum.
15. 30. 57. 30. Berwicke. Tuesis. 17. 0. 56. 50 *Bodnam. Voliba. 14. 50. 52. 20
Bedforde. 21. 0. 52. 0. Bukhingham. 25. 0. 52. 50 Bury. 22. 20. 52. 0 Callis.
Caletum. 25. 10. 51. 40. Cae^rleil. Caturactonium 19. 30. 58. 0 Caemarden.
Maridunum 15. 30. 54. 40

Cambridge, a University flourishing with all kind of good letters. 21. 30. 52.
0 Canterbury. 22. 10. 51. 10 Chester. Vsellum. 18. 30. 52. 10 *Chichestre.
Naeomagus. 19. 43. 53. 35. Colchestre. Camulodanum. 21. 0. 51. 40 Couentrie.
20. 0. 52. 0 Darbie. 20. 0. 54. 10 *Dee. Deua, a river. 17. 0. 60. 0 Doncaster.
Deuana. 18. 30. 55. 0 *Doram. Dunum Sinus. 20. 45. 57. 30. Elye, an I Will. 21.
36. 52. 16 Excestre. Isca. 17. 30 52. 15 Gloucestre. 18. 0. 54. 30 Harforde 20.
0. 52. 50 Humber. Abus, a river. 21. 0. 56 30. Huntington. 21. 0. 53. 20 Hulle.
21. 10. 54. 34 Kirkby. Olicana. 19. 0. 57. 30 Lancastre 19. 0. 55. 0 Leicestre.
19. 40. 52. 50 Lincoln. Lindum. 18. 20. 55 10.

London of Ptolomaeus called Lo^dinium, is the chief and principal city of
all th'Iland, it is exceeding populous, it is inhabited with men of every
faculty, it was builded before Rome. 420. year, before the reign of Alexander
the great. 811. years, and before Christ our sauiors incarnation 1136. so that
from the first buildinge of it, the years are 2735. And whereas Cities
through process of time do come to ruin and decay: this City contrariwise do
more and more beautifye and increase. the Longitude and Latitude. 19. 52. 51.
30. Manchester. Mediolanium. 16. 45 56. 40. S. Micha^ls mount. 12. 0. 51. 30
New Castle. Orrea. 19. 20 58. 55 North Hampton. 21. 0. 52 15

Norwiche an healthful and pleasant City, having a fair River called Yerus,
ronning through it, which comes out of the seas, from Yermouthe cost. It is
much subject to fires, which have not a little hindered the beuty thereof. The
picture of it you shall find lively set out in the first book: the longitude
and Latitude. 22. 30. 52. 10.. Notyngham. Hrate. 18. 0. 55. 30.

Oxenford called (of Pto lomaeus) Caleua a norishe of learning, and a famous
university it is in Longitude and Latitude. 19. 0. 51. 50. Penbrouch. 16. 0.
53. 40 Peterborough. 21. 0. 53. 20 Portsmouth, 19. 0. 51. 20 Richmunde 19. 0.
55. 20 Sandwich. 21. 45. 54. 0 Salisbury. 19. 0. 51. 50 Seuerne, a river. 17.
20. 54. 30 Sudburie. 21. 20. 51. 55 Winchester. 21. 30. 50. 15 VVight, an
Island. 19. 20 52. 20 Yermouth. 22. 20. 52. 20. York. 19. 0. 54. 20 Ypswich.
22. 0. 52. 40 Tynemouth. 24. 0. 58. 30 Tenet, an Island. 23. 0. 54 20.

OF SCOTLAND.
SCotland being reconed of Ptolomaeus, but for part of Albion is parted by two
arms of the seas, which mete not from England. The East arm begin about. ij.
miles from the minster of Eburcuring: the weast arm on the right side, a
strong City Aclynd (which in the Britishe tongue, was called the River Clynt.

The chief cities, and towns, are these following. S. Andrews. 16. 40. 57 55.
Dunber. Varer 17. 0. 59. 30. Dundie. 19. 20. 59. 30 Dunkel. 19. 20. 58. 0

Edenbrugh called Alata castra is the chief City in all Scotland. 17. 15. 59.
20 Saint John's 15. 40. 59. 15

Also the mids of the 30. Islands adjacent to Scotland, called Orchney. 30.
0. 61. 40

OF ISLANDE.
ISland called of Ptolo. Thyle, is an Ila^de subject to the king of Denmark:
it is full of maruailous things to behold.

Among which there are iij. mountains of an incredible height: the tops of
which are continually covered with snow. The first mountain is called Helga:
the second, the mount of the Cross: the third, Hecla, which continually
(like to the mountain Aetna) does burn, casti^g with violence (as it were
out of a Gu^ne) great stones from it. And this fire can not by water be
quenched, and that which is to be wondered, although the fire be marueylus
great, and of force, by reason of the Sulphur, yet hay straw, or read, is not
of it co^su med. Sulphur is there so ple^tifull that you may for the 4. part
of a ducate, have a thousand weight. There are also 4. Fou^taines of a diverse
nature, and quality. The first, if you cast in a stick, man, beast, or what
soeuerit be, it torneth it presently into a stone, yet it reteineth the
natural form still. The second is of an intolerable could. The third is
much sweter then Honey, and most pleasatly aswageth drines. The fourth is
Pestilent, Poisonable, and deadly. Wha^ as the Son is in the beginning of
Cancer, it is continual day with them, and when he is in Capricorn, also
continual night, and darkness. They are a simple people, and hold the the
faith of Christ. They have no king, but all obey the Bishop as their king.
Their merchandise are Fish, wadmoll, and sulphur. There are found Falcons,
Sperhaulkes, Crows, Bears, and Wolves, both white and black. Round about
this Ila^d, for the space of 6. or 7. mo^thes, th'Ise swim meth, making a
miserable sound, and noise, so that th'inhabitauntes suppose that in the mount
Hecla, and in this Ise, the souls of men and women, are tormented. The fro
sen, and congelid Seas begin at this Island. It is now much travailed to of
english me^, and Danes, and that in the So^mer only, because of the horrible
cold, and abundance of Ise. The mids of this Island 7. 0. 65. 30. Harsol, a
City 7. 40. 60. 42 Thirtes, a City. 5. 50. 64. 44 Nadir, a City. 6. 40. 57.
20

OF CORSICA.
COrsica, an Island whose chief places are Istria. 30. 30. 40. 15 Mariana. 30.
10. 40. 20 Nebia. 31. 0 40. 40 Aleria. 31. 35. 40. 20

SICILIA.
SIcilia, an Island. Palerna. 35. 30. 36. 10 Marsara. 35. 20. 35. 30 Gergentum.
36. 20. 35. 10 Terminae. 35. 55. 36. 5 Pula. 36. 0. 36. 0 Siracusae, 37. 20.
35. 30 Cataua. 37. 40. 36. 0 Messina. 38. 0. 36. 40 Aetna, the burning hill. 37.
10. 35. 20 20.

OF THE CHIEF Cities, and towns, in th'Ilande of Sardinia.
SArdos. 30. 20. 38. 58 Galea. 29. 40. 37. 50 Argetara. 29. 30. 36 30 Arestana.
29 45. 36. 50 Aquilastrum. 31. 20. 37. 30 Cambonara. 31. 30 36. 30 Stira. 30.
30. 36. 40

OF TH'ILANDES called Maiorica, and Minoria.
MAiorica, and Minorica, be Ila^des adjacent to Spain, and Maiorica contains
in Lo^gitude, and Lat. 17. 40. 38. 30 Minorica. 20. 0. 39. 0

GADIRA AN Island.
GAdira, which is also called the Gades, in the west Ocea^ under 5. digr. 30.
34. 0.

EVBOEA, AN Island.
EUboea, now called Nigropont: Is an Island to Achaia joining. 54. 0. 38. 0.

CRETA, AN Island.
CR^ta, now called Candie, an Island famous. 55. 0. 35. 20.

CYCLADES.
CYclades, are Islands about Delus. 56. 10. 37. 20

SPORADES Islands.
THese Islands are also ioynynge to Delus, they ly scatered about in the seas,
of the^ read Plinius lib. 4. capite. xij. their Longitude, and Latitude. 56 10.
37. 20

Thus ends the particular description of the chief Islands in Europe.
OF SPAIN.
SPain as it appears in the Table thereof in Ptolomaeus Geographie, it
compassed about with the seas, except it be in that part which touches
France, and is parted from France by the Pyrenean mountains. And it is the
first Region, Weast betwixt Afric and France. It brings fourth such
abundance of pleasant fruictes, that it serves not only the necessitye of
it self, but also of Italy and diverse other parts. They do not boil their
salt, as they do in Selande, but dig it out of The Earth. The men go all for
the most part in short clokes, and commenlye black. This Region in time
paste, was divided into five Kingdoms, that is to say, Gallicia, Nauarra,
Castille, Catalonia, unto which is joined Aragonie, Portugale and Granate. Of
which we will perticulerlye touch the chief Cities, and towns, beginning
with Castilla, whose principal Cities, and Towns are.

Tolet, where the famous king Alfonsus made his astronomicall Tables,
containing the mouinge of the heavenly Bodies. 10. 49. 37. 0 Salamanca 7. 20.
38. 20 Valeria now called Concha. 11. 34 43. 5. Alcala de Enares. 10. 20. 41.
40 Logronyo. 12. 10. 44. 0 Valladolit. 10. 10. 42. 0

GALLITIA.
Compostella, where S. James is 7. 0. 42. 15. Lands end. 4. 23. 44. 2 Almoisa.
4. 40. 44. 45 Bilbao 11. 45. 45. 25 Fontarrabie 13. 13. 44. 15 S. Sebastianus
15. 30. 45. 5

NAVARRE.
Pompelon 13. 15. 42. 0 Vaganna 12. 15. 43. 0

CATHALONIA.
New Carthage 15. 57. 38. 0 Tarragone 16. 12. 41. 0 Gerona 17. 42. 42. 12
Barsalona 17. 0. 41. 35 Valentia 14. 38. 36. 10

ARRAGONIE.
Sarragossa 13. 45. 41. 45 Burges. 10. 33. 42 48

PORTVGALE.
Lysbona 5. 0. 36. 40 Portugallo 4 56. 41. 35 Arcobriga 5. 40. 36. 35 Badaioz
5. 20. 39. 0 Cabo de. S. Vincentio. 2. 32. 38. 15 Braga 6. 0. 43. 40 S. Maria
de Guadalupe. 8 30. 39. 30

GRANATE.
Granate 8. 34. 34. 20 Hispalis. 5. 42. 37. 0. Corduba 7. 4. 37. 50

Calpe, both one of the Pillors of Hercules, and also a mountain called at
this day Gilbalter where the streit is named Zibalter. 7. 30. 36. 15 Vama 6.
15. 38. 25 Malaga 8. 50. 37. 30

OF FRANCE.
France being separated from Spain, by the Pyrenean Moun taines follows
next. It is parted from England, by the English Seas. It contains many
dukedomes. It is garni shed with pleasant Cities, and towns, of which I will
set out the principal: beginning with the weast part first.

NARBONAHATH*
Vienna. 26. 0. 45. 0 Ebredunum. 28. 8. 43. 30 Briansonum. 28. 30. 45. 0
Gratianoposis. Granoble. 27. 0. 45 30. Tarantasia. 29. 0. 45. 0 Gebenae. 28. 0.
45. 45 Mauriana. 28. 30. 44. 30 Vapincum. 27. 15. 43. 30 Dinia. 27. 35. 43. 5.
Valentia. 26. 0. 44. 10 Romonum. 26. 0. 44. 30 Sistarica. 26. 45. 43. 20
Viuarium 25. 45. 43. 45. Aurasicum 26. 30. 43. 30 Auinio. 25. 45. 43. 15
Carpentorate 26. 5. 43. 15 Tritastra 25. 45. 43. 0 Arelatum. Arles. 25. 50. 42.
45 Massillia. 26. 30. 42. 5 Tollona. 27. 30. 42. 0 Barcellonna. 28. 30. 43. 15

AQVITANIA.
Burdigala. 18. 0. 44. 30 Baiona. 17. 30. 44. 30 Vasaticum. 18. 15. 44. 0
Tarba. 19. 15. 42. 15 Lorona. 18. 10. 42. 0 Lebretum. 18. 30. 43. 10 Auscus.
20. 15. 43. 0 Lombarium 21. 20. 42. 40 Tholossa. 22. 10. 42. 50 Rinum. 21. 45.
42. 15 Conserana. 22. 15. 41. 50 S. Pontius. 23. 0. 42. 15 Narbona. 23. 30. 42.
0 Agata. 24. 0. 42. 10 Mirapiscae 22. 45. 42. 15 Lodeua. 23. 45. 42. 50
Beserium. 23. 30. 42. 20 Mons pessulanus, Monpeleier. 24 30. 42. 50.
Astrericum. 23. 0. 43. 0 Vabra. 23. 15. 42. 45 Varinum. 22. 15. 43. 15 Albia.
22. 30. 43. 40 Montalbanum. 21. 30. 43. 30 Cadurcum. 22. 0. 44. 0 Rhodium. 23.
15. 43. 30 S. Florus. 23. 30. 44. 0 Anicium. Lepny. 24. 30. 44. 15

CELTICA GALLIA.
Lugdunum, Lions. 26. 0. 45. 15 Niuernium. 24. 0. 46. 40. Lamouica. 21. 30. 45.
45 Petragoricum 21. 15. 44. 40 Engolisma 20. 30. 44. 50 Xantona 19. 0. 45 0
Luxiona 18. 30. 46. 30 Nanetum 18. 15. 47. 15 Rhedona 17. 30. 48. 10 Turonia
Tours. 20. 15. 47. 30 Aurelia orleans 22. 0. 47. 30 Constantiae 18. 40. 49. 35

Lutetia Parisiorum. Paris the head City of all France in which is a
florishinge university, the fame where of is spread through all Europe. 23.
30. 48. 40. Seno. 24. 0. 47. 45 Cathalanum 25. 30. 48. 30 Lingo 26. 30. 47. 30

GALLIA BELGICA.
Rothomagus, Roan. 21. 30. 49. 30 Catalaunum, Chaalo^ 21. 30. 48. 30 Rettena.
Rethe. 22. 26. 49. 0

GERMANYE.
GErmany, the most ample, and large Regio^ in in all Europe, sometime divided
from france, by the Rhine: from the Pannonians by the river Danubye, and from
Sarmatia and De^marke, by mountains, and Hills, and in all other parts having
The Ocean Seas. But in our days, it exten- it self more largely. It may
compare at this time with Spain, France, or Italy, in commodities to it
belonging. For it is beautified with most plea saunt Cities, Towns, and
Castles, it has great woddes, abundance of fruits, and hills replenished with
ple^tiful Vines. There are also these famous, and helthfull rivers, the Rhine,
Danuby, Moganus, Albis, Neccarus, Sala, Odera, with diverse other. It is parted
into the hier Germany and into the lower, of which we will first set out the
princi pall cities and Towns.

Seela^de, an Ila^d the furdest co^fines of Germany the mids of it, in
Longitud, and Latitude. 25. 0. 52. 0. Middlebourgh. 25. 26. 51. 48

HOLLANDE.
Traiectum, Vtrick. 27. 15. 52. 20.

BRABANT.
ANtuerpia, Antwerpen, the noblest Town in all Europe. 26. 36. 51. 28 Louaine,
a university. 20. 36 50. 59. Bruxella* Brussell 20. 16. 51. 28 Mechlinia
Machelen 20. 20. 51. 15 Lira. Liere 20. 24. 51. 21

FLAVNDERS.
Gandauum Ghent 25. 30. 51. 15 Bruge brugge 24. 30. 51. 20 Tornacum. Tornay 25.
15. 50. 10

PICARDIE.
Ambianum Amiens 16. 40. 49. 49 S. Iodocus 16. 52. 52. 0 Samarobriga 22. 20.
52. 10

LVCENBVRGE.
Lucenburgum 25. 30. 50. 0 Creutznacum Creutz 24. 34. 50. 2 Sarbruccu^.
Sarbruck 23. 47. 49. 16 Key serluterna 24. 44. 49. 22

GVLICH.
Bonna bonne 23. 23. 50. 47 Iuliacum Gulich 22. 44. 51. 8 Leo dium Ludich 21.
48. 50. 51 Aquisgranum Achen 28. 45. 50. 55

GELDRIA.
Geldria Gheldere 23, 48. 51 42

CLEVIA.
Cleuis. Cleff. 22. 6. 52. 0

HELVETIA.
s. Gallus 27. 6. 47. 8. Constantia 26. 43. 47. 30 Tigurum Zurch 26. 36. 46. 48
Badena Baden 25. 16. 48. 44 Lucerna 26. 0. 46. 34 Friburgum 37. 30. 51 50 Berna
24. 18. 46. 25

ALSATIA.
Colmaria 24. 3. 48. 12 selestadium schletstad. 24. 6. 48. 22 Caesarmontanum
Key sersperg. 23 48. 48. 14 Hagenoia Hagenau 24. 36. 49. 7

CITIES OF BASSE Germanye.
Colonia Agrip 29. 45. 51. 0 Campena Kampen 28. 30. 52. 50

Confluence, commonly called Coblentz, where two fair rivers the Rhine, and
Mosell mete. 30. 15. 50. 20 Andernachum Andernacke. 30. 0. 50. 25.

CITIES, AND Towns of hie Germany.
MAguntia, Mentz, the Bishops seat. At this City was the Art of Printing
first found (by John Faustus) in the year of Christ our savior. 1453. The Lon.
and lati. 31. 15. 50. 0 VVormatia, worms. 31. 30. 49. 40 Spira Spier 31. 30.
49. 15

Arge^tina, Strausborough a notable city, in which John Sturmius, and D.
Seuenus excellent Orators flourished 1559 30. 15. 48. 45. Basilia. Basile 29.
45. 47. 45 Schathusa 28. 0. 47. 28 Curia chur. 32. 0. 47. 30 Vesalia 26. 20.
51. 30 Francofordia 31. 40. 50. 10 Curia 32 0. 47. 30 Marburgum 32. 10. 51. 0
Bremen 32. 10. 53. 40

Heydelbergu^, called Heydelberge, is a flourishing University, maintained by
the Palsgraue, by it there runs the river Neccarus: there flourished 1559 in
Physic, D. John Langius, the Princes Phisician, Jacob Curio, Thomas Erastus,
Petrus Lotichius Secundus, all Doctors in Physic: And D. Balduinus the Reader
of the Civil Lector, with diverse others, of whom I was very gentely
interteined at the time of my Commensment. 32. 0. 49. 30. Vlmes 33. 0. 48. 30
Herbipolis wirtzpurgk 33. 30. 50. 0 Amberga 34. 0. 47. 15 Augusta 34. 0. 48. 15
Brunsuiga 34. 40. 52. 40 Ingolstadium 34. 45. 48. 30 Hamburgum 34. 0. 54. 30
Limeburgum 34. 45. 5. 45 Ratisbona 35. 40. 49. 0 Erdfordia 35. 0. 51. 10
Lubecum 35. 20. 54. 50 Liptzigum 36. 30. 51. 30 Magdaburge 36. 10. 54. 50
Salisburgum 36. 30. 47. 30 Brandenburgum 37. 20. 52. 40 Rostochium 37. 10. 54.
36 Misna 37. 20. 51. 50 Peurbachium 37. 35. 48. 15 Berlinum 38. 30. 52. 50
Praga 38. 20. 50. 6 Gripsualdia. 38. 55. 54. 20 Vratislauia 41. 20. 51. 5 Gran
42 50. 47. 15 Posna 42. 0. 52. 45 Buda 43. 0. 46. 50 Lonreth 43. 20. 52. 30
Thorn 43. 30. 53. 30 Cracouia 44. 30. 50. 15 Mons Regius 49 0. 45. 0 Dantiscum
46. 0. 54. 55 Caralostadium 33. 25. 50. 0 Noribergum 34. 40. 49. 30 Munster 32.
0. 52. 5 VVitenberga 32. 10. ^3. 40

MOSCOVIA.
MOscouia is a long and ample Regio^, the people miserable, suspicious, and
crafty, the chief city of there Empirour is also called Moskaua. 69. 0. 57. 0.
Thither sailed out of England. 1553 Chancelour, and diverse other. The nature of
th'inhabitantes, commodities of the country, and a perfect description of all
the parts of the same you shall se at large set out by Sigismunde Liber baron
etc.

ILLIRIA, AND Dalmatia.
I Lliria, which is called Lyburnia, has on the North parts Pannonia, on the
west Istria, on the South the Uenice seas, and on The East Dalmatia the chief
Cities, and towns are Sara 40. 5. 44. 9 Stridona the country of Saint Jerome
42. 20. 43. 20 Flauona 37. 0. 44. 45

DALMATIA.
Ragusia 45. 0. 42. 20 sibinicum 43. 0. 43. 20 scutara 45. 30. 41. 30 saloniana
45. 0. 43. 20 Durazo 45. 55. 40. 55

ITALY, AND LOMbardie.
Brundusium 41. 0. 39. 30 Tarentum 40. 30. 39. 15 salernum 37. 20. 39. 30
Naplis 38. 50. 39. 55 Capua 36. 40. 40. 5 Aquilea 36. 40. 41. 10

Roma, a City famous through all The Earth. 36. 40. 42. 0 Sena 34. 10. 42. 0
Florence 34. 15 42. 45 Viterbia 35. 0. 41. 15 Pisa 33. 0. 42. 15 Luca 33. 30.
42. 45 Ancona 36. 40. 42. 30 Bononia 33. 30. 43. 40 Rhauennae 35. 0. 43. 15
Farraria 34. 10. 43. 50 Parma 32. 30. 43. 50 Verona 34. 0. 44. 25 Venice 35.
30. 44. 45 Padua 35. 0. 44. 45 Mantua 33. 10. 44. 10 Vincentia 34. 39. 44. 20
Cremona 32. 45. 44. 20 Placentia 32. 30. 44. 20 Myllan 31. 45. 44. 15 Tortona
31. 30. 44. 0 Genua 31. 30. 43. 15 Taurinum 30. 40. 43. 45 Nisa 29. 30. 42. 40
Secusia 29. 45. 44. 0 Grassa 29. ^0. ^2. ^5 Albinga 3^. 40. 42. 5^ Vercellae
30. 30. 44. 30 Nouaria 30. 15. 45. 0

A PERTICVLER DEscription of Greece, and first of Macedonia.
MACEDONIA.
MAcedonia has on the North part Thrasia and the hier Misnia: on the West,
the Venetian seas: on the south parts Epirus and Achaia: On the East the Seas
called Egiu^ Pe lagus. The principal Cities, and towns of it are
Thessalonica, now Salonica the seat of the chief Bishop of the Philippians,
unto whom S. Paul wrote two Epistles, the first from Athenis, the second from
Laodicia the chief bishopriche of Phrygia, where also S. Paul preached the
Gospel. 49. 50. 41. 0 Apollonia 45. 6. 40. 10 Aulon 44. 50. 39. 56 Bullis 45.
0. 39. 45 Arethusa 50. 10. 41. 0 Panormus 54. 404. 1. 0 Hadrianopolis 50. 55.
40. 55 Ampelus 51. 15. 40. 30 Ioleos 51 3. 39. 15 Demetrias 50. 30. 38. 56
Larissa 51. 20. 38. 50 Thebae Thebs 51. 10. 38. 30 Arnissa 45. 20. 40. 40 Elima
45. 40. 39 40 Amantia 46. 0. 39. 40 Albenopolis 46. 0. 41. 0 Europus 46. 30.
41. 20 Apsalus 46. 20. 41. 5 Parocopolis 48. 40. 41. 40 Amphipolis 50. 0. 41. 30

Philippis a City where the great Alexander was born, and from this City S.
Paul sent his second Epistle to the Galatians. 50. 45. 41. 45 Heraclia 47. 40.
41. 30

EPIRVS WHOSE chief places are
Nicopolis 47. 30. 38. 30 Cassiopa 47. 0. 38. 45 Ambracia: larta. 48* 8 38. 20

ACHAIA, WHOSE chief places are
Athenae sometime the fountain and wellspringe of all good letters, hear did
Plato and Aristotle teach, it is now destroyed. 52. 45. 37. 15 Megaris 52. 15.
37. 30 Peloponesus. Morea. 51. 10. 37, 30 Modonam. 48. 30. 26. 0 Parnassus, a
mount. 50. 20. 38 0

Helicon the holy Hill of the Musis, at the foot, whereof is a founteine of the
Houe of Pegasus foot. 51. 0. 37. 45 Pythia, the place where Apol logaue Oracles.
50. 30. 37. 45

Constantinople, sometime a city under the Christian Em pire, but now the
chief seat of Solymanus The Emperor of Turks, which he wa^. 1453. 56. 0. 43. 5.

Corinthe, the Bishops seat in Achaia. Hither sent S. Paul two Epistles, the
first from Philippis, a city in Ma cedonie by Stephan, fortunatus, and
Achaicus: The second Epistle by Titus, and Luke. 51. 15. 36. 55 Stymphalus.
50. 20. ^6. 20

Thus ends the particular description of Europe.
A PARTICULAR DESCRPTION OF AFRICA.
AFRICA, which also in Greek is named (...) is the second part and portion of
The Earth. And was first so called of Jupiters daughter bering that name. But
Festus says it came of the quality of th'Aere, in that country, deriuing it
of (...), as who should say, (...) that is, without horror of coldenes: other
affirm that it took name of Afer, one of the posterity of Abraham, which
ouercomyng his enemies, remained in this part. It begins at Gaditanum Fretum
(a narrow straight coming out of The Ocean into the middle Earth Seas, and have
Spain on the north shore, and the Mores on the South) And it does end at the
Egiptia^ Seas. On the North it have the middle Earth seas, on the south shore
the great Ocean, on The East the sea, which stretche almost to the middle earth
seas.

Afric is divided into two parts by the hill Atlas, of which the lesser
extends to the middle Earth seas: the greater part goes beyond this hill unto
the south Ocea^. The greater part of it is not inhabited for two causis: one is
for th'extreme heat, being under the burning zone, the Son draws all the
moister of the earth from it, so that for want of water no man ca^ there live.
The second is for the innumerable multitude of venamous worms, and wild
beasts, which are naturally ennemies unto mankind. As the Lion, the Olephant,
the Tiger, and such like. Also, Dragons, Chrocodile, Cocatrice, and sundry
other venomous Worms, in such sort that th'inhabitauntes are compelled to
put on botes, for better avoiding their sting, and poison. The part that is
inhabited, is frutful enough. The people black, Savage, Monstrous, and rude:
yet in those countries, cities, and towns where the Spaniardes, Portugalles,
Italians, and other do frequent, the people are sumwhat more civil, modest,
and reasonable. Diverse also (yea right grave authors) make mention of certain
deformed that dwell in Africa, as men with dogs heads, called Cynocephali,
some with one eye and that in the forehead, named Monoculi, others without
heads, and their face in the breast, with diverse such like which I sup pose
rather fables then any truth. If you desire a longer descoure Towching Africa,
her inhabita^tes, and commodities, read Strabo, in his 2. and 17. books. And
also Plinius his 8. book, with diverse other writers, which at large do hereof
entreat, and now I will (following my order begun) set out the notable regio^s
(which Ptolomaeus numbreth to be 12.) with their chief Cities, Towns, hills,
and rivers, with in Afric: and first we will begin with Mauritania, which is
divided into Mauritania Tingitana, and Mauritania Caesariensi.

OF THE PRINCIPAL PLACES IN Tingitana or Barbarica Mauritania.
Fesse 10. 0. 30. 0 Tingis caesaria called commenlye Tanger 6. 30. 35. 30
Abilis one of Hercules Pillars, is a hill against Calpe an other Hill in
Spain 7. 50. 35. 40 Baba 8. 10. 34. 20 Banasa 6. 30. 34. 20 Septa 7. 30. 35.
55 Sala 6. 55. 34. 0 The Sons Mount 6. 45. 31 15 Benta 9. 30. 33. 40 Dorath.
10. 10. 31. 15 Tamusida 7. 15. 34. 15

MAVRITANIA CAesariensis.
Apollos promontorie 15. 30. 33. 40 Iulia Caesaria. 17. 0. 33. 20 Tucca. 20. 0.
31. 30 Hippa. 20. 15. 29. 50 La Guardia. 12. 0. 34. 20 Cissa. Cerlel. 18. 45.
32. 10

IN AFRICA THE less.
Colops the greater. 27. 40. 32. 20 Colops the lesser. 29. 20. 32. 35 Hippon
30. 30. 32. 15

Utica, where Cato died, now called Bensert. 32. 0. 32. 45. Carthage. 34. 40.
31. 50 Clupea. 35. 0. 33. 20 Sabatra. 41. 0. 31. 0 Vsanum. 33. 15. 32. 20 Dabia
33. 0. 29. 40

NVMIDIA.
Culuca. 28. 30. 31 0 Tucca 29. 30. 31. 20 Bizancina 37. 50. 30. 40 Capsa. 37.
30. 29 45 Calatha. 31. 0. 53. 40 Sabrata 41. 15. 30. 50 Ammon. 65. 30* 28. 0
Oasis the great. 59. 20. 26. 55

MARMARICA.
Alexandria. 60. 30. 31. 0 Memphis 62. 50. 29. 50 Cayrum 62. 15. 30. 0 Syene.
62. 15. 23. 50

LYBIA INTERIOR.
Tagaza 7. 0. 15. 40 Tuchorora. 12. 30 16. 0 Tambutum 15. 30. 15. 40

MEROE.
Meroe is an Ila^d of Nilus, sometime called Saba, and now Elsaba, where S.
Matthew did preach the Gospel. From hence came the queen of Saba, to here
Salomo^s wisdom. From hence also came Ca^daces, the queen's Enuche, which was
baptized of Philip th'Appostle. But at this present it is the seat of the
mighty prince, that we call Preter John. 61. 30. 16. 25

QVIOLA.
Quiola, or Cayla, is a region, in which great plenty of Cinamome grow, the
chief cities are Hamaharica. 65. 0. 9. 10 Masta. 67. 30. South Pole. 4 15
Beritis. 60. 40. 21. 31 Quiola. 76. 30. South pole. 7. 30 Sabath. 67. 30. 12.
30 Mombaza. 79. 0. South Pole. 6. 0. Melinda. 82. 30. 2. 0 Ca^uaquin. 80. 0. 9.
50

Babell mendap. There are the streightes of the red seas. 74. 50. 11. 0.

OF CITIES OF Sundry Regions, in Southe Aethiopia.
Goia 60. 50. South Pole. 19. 50 Garma. 57. 0 South Pole. 24. 0 Bali 70. 0. 21.
40 Meli 33. 0. 16. 30

OF THE NOTABLE Islands about Afric.
Porto Sancto. 0. 35. 31. 30

Medera an Island, first inhabited of the Portugales, it abou^deth with Sugar,
Honey, Wax, and sundry Herbs. 358. 40. 29. 50 The Canarian Ila^des being x.
in number. 1. 30. 23. 30 S. Thomas Ila^d. 32. 30. 0. 30 Madagascar, which is
also called Saint Laurence Ila^d, there the North Pole is not seen, and the
nedle in sailynge will do no service. Therefore they are co^streined to use
Astro labes, and other Instruments. 85. 30. South Pole. 20. 0,

Thus ends the Description of Afric.
OF ASIA THE THIRD part of The Earth.
WHAT Asia is, and whereof it was first so called, there is no controversy.
For all writers, as well Historiographers, as also Geographers, make it the iij.
part of The Earth, and to take that name of Asius, son to king Cotis. And
although they call it the iij. part of The Earth, yet it is not because it
conteyneth but the third part, but because it is so divided by the seas, for
of it self it is as much as Europe, and Afric, and contains (after
Ptolomaeus account) 48. Provinces. It is parted into Asia the greater, and Asia
the lesser. Notwithstanding diverse writers use this word Asia the lesser, more
largelye than Geographers does. For they call all that portion which is within
the south shore of the ponticke seas, and the east seas Pelagus Aegeum, and the
North part of our Ocean, and the West part of the River Euphrates to be Asia
the lesser. Asia conteyneth in her circuit, Bythinia Po^tus, the lesser Asia,
Lycia, Galatia, Paphlagonia, Pa^philia, Capadocia, the lesser Armenia, and
Cilicia. And all these after the manner of the old Grecians, is comprehended
within this one word (...) Anatolia, that is to say the east plage or coaste.
Asia does far excel both Europe and Afric. For it is so fruitful, has
so pleasant fildes, such ple^tie of foder and pasture, the heavens giving
moisture to The Earth in due season. It has abou^da^ce of gold mines. It
brings forth plenty of Cinamome, Ginger, Aloes, and diverse aromaticall
spices, and Gu^mes. There are diverse strange beasts bred in Asia, as
Unicorns, Camelles, Liberdes, Mermosites, Mercattes, Grippes. Yet one thing is
to them unfortunate, that there are terrible and many Earthquakes, in so much
that there have been x. and xij. Cities at one time subverted, and overthrown.
Th'inhabitauntes are sundry, and diverse: for some are Anthropophagi, which
eat the flesh of men: and drink their blood. There are also Pygmeans (men but
a cubite in height) which riding on Goats, and Ra^mes, do keep war with
Cranes. There ar diverse other forms of inhabitauntes resited of Plinius, which
at this present I willingly ouerpasse. The spirits in this country, by many
illusions seek to bring trauailers into dangers, sumtime by calling them by
their names, other times by musical noise, as it were alluringe the^ by the
swetnes of the sound, until they be brought into danger through wild beasts.
But now these things omitted, (which would make a great volume of them
selves) I will briefly set out the chief and principal places of Asia*
beginnynge with Pontus, and Bythinia.

PONTVS AND Bythinia.
Chalcedon. 56. 20. 43. 5 Olbia. 57. 0. 42. 40 Nicode^a 56. 0. 42. 40

Clauciopolis, where S. Luke di^ write his Gospel, and the

Acts of The Apostles. 59. 30. 42. 45.

Nicaea, where the Nicene counsel was. 58. 0. 42. 15

Caesaria, smirdiana. 56. 40. 41. 40

Olimpus, an Hill of which I spoke in the first book. 57. 0. 41. 40.

THESE FOLOVVINGE are properly called Cities of Asia.
Lampsacus. 55. 20. 41. 25

Illium, sometime called Troie now Ruinous. 55. 50. 41. 0

Dardanu^, Dardanellu^. 55. 25. 40. 5. Alexandria. 55. 25. 40. 40 Autandrus.
56. 30. 40. 20

Smyrna, the country where Homer was borne. 58. 25. 38. 25.

Assum. 56. 30. 40. 15

Ephesus, the chief city in Ionia, in which S. John wrote his gospel. 57. 40.
3740

CITIES OF CARIA.
Heraclea. 58. 50. 43. 30 Miletus 58. 0. 37. 0 Nysa 59. 0. 38. 15 Antiochia.
59. 30. 38. 20 Neapolis. 59. 25. 38. 35

Trallis, which is also called Ema^thia, at which place cer teine suppose
Pygmeans inhabit. 58. 40. 38. 5

OF BOTH LYDIAS
Philadelphia 59. 0. 38. 50 Sardis 58. 20. 28. 15 Sala 60. 15. 38. 20 Sanis 61.
0 38. 20 Hierapolis 55. 20. 38. 15 Apamia 55. 30. 42. 0

CITIES OF LYCAOnia or Lycia.
Carya 59. 50. 35. 55 Patara 60. 30. 36. 0 Olimpus a City 61, 30. 36. 10
Xanthus, Patara 60. 30. 36. 40 Migra 61. 0. 36. 45

CITIES OF GALAtia.
Sinopa stala 63. 30. 43. 0

Pompeiopolis so called because Pompey builded it. 62. 0. 42. 0

Claudiopolis 63. 15. 42. 20 Ancyra 62. 40. 42. 0 Laodicaea 60. 15. 38. 40

OF PAMPHILIA.
Olbia 62. 0. 36. 55 Magydis 62. 40. 36. 55 Seleusia 62. 0. 38. 30 Antiochia
62. 30. 39. 0

CITIES OF DORIS.
Alicarnassus 57. 50. 36. 10 Cadmos an hill 59. 40. 37. 40 Phaenix an hill 58.
0. 36. 30 Apollonia 57. 0. 39. 45

Pargamus, here was the noble Physicion Galenus born, which made Physic
perfaite, and expoundes Hippocrates. 57. 35. 39. 45.

CAPADOCIA.
Trapezus Genech. 68. 50. 43. 5 Sebastopolis. s. Greg. 66. 0 41. 20. Zama. 65.
0. 40. 45 Archelais. 64. 45. 39. 40

Caesaria. Maza, here was Basilius magnus Bishop. 66. 30. 39. 30

Derba. 64. 30. 38. 15

OF ARMENIA THE lesser.
Satala. 96. 50. 42. 10 Nicopolis. 69. 20. 41. 40 Ispa. 70. 30. 40. 20 Camana.
68. 0. 38 0 Claudia. 71. 0. 38, 45

CILICIA.
Antiochia 64. 40. 36. 50 Agaeae 69. 0. 36, 30 Seleucia 66. 10. 36. 45 Tarsos.
S. Paul's country. 67. 40. 36. 50 Epiphania 69. 30. 36. 0

OF COLCHIS.
Neapolis. Negapotimo. 71. 30. 45. 40. Geapolis 72. 0. 45. 30 Phasis 72. 30.
45. 0. Madia 74. 15 46. 15

OF IBERIA.
Sura 75. 0. 45. 20. Zalissa 76. 0. 44. 40 Varica. 75. 20. 46. 0

ALBANIA PART of great Tertarye.
Gelda. 83. 0. 46. 30 Albana, 81. 40. 45. 50 Bacchia. 77. 0. 44. 40 Baruca. 79.
20. 44. 40

ARMENIA THE greater.
Lala. 76. 10. 44. 0 Brizaca 74. 50. 45. 30 Babila. 73. 15. 40. 45 Anarium. 76.
50. 41. 30 Belcania. 73. 50. 39. 40

OF SYRIA, THE CITIES
Alexandria 69. 30. 36. 10 Selutia 67. 30. 32. 50 Laodicea, Ramatha 88. 30. 35.
3 Posidium 88. 30. 35. 15 Myriandrus. Alapso 69. 30. 35. 50

PHAENICIA.
Tripolis 67. 30. 34. 20 Biblus 67. 40. 33. 55 Sidon 67. 30. 33. 30 Tyrus 67.
5. 33. 18

Sor, commonly called Sur, a city after the ruin of Alexa^ der christened:
now destroyed of the Turk. Of the ij. cities, Sido^ and Tyrus, Christ our sa
auior in his gospel speaks.

Ptolomais, Acon. 66. 50. 33. 0

Berytus, but of our travelers now called Barut, it is the Port of Damascus.
67. 0. 33. 20.

Botrys, Botrus. 67. 50. 34. 5 Dora. 66. 30. 32. 40

Antiochia nigh the mount Tau rus, the Country of S. Luke Evangelist. 69. 0.
35. 30

Laonia. 70. 30. 36. 20

OF CVRVA, THE CISIES.
Abila Lysanium. 68. 45 33. 20

Damascus, here did Cain, sle his brother Abel. 69. 0. 33. 0

Adra. 68. 40. 32. 10 Hippus, Scphet. 68. 0. 32. 30 Capitolia Suueta 69. 45.
32. 30 Philadelphia 68. 0. 31. 20

LAODICINA.
Paradissus 69. 45. 33. 35

IVDEA OR PALEstina.
Ioppa, Ioppen or Iaffa a port which was builded before the diludge. 65. 45.
31. 55

Ascalon, hibelis commonly called Escolona. 65. 0. 31. 40 The dead seas or lake
of Sodom. 66. 50. 31. 10

OF GALILAEA.
Iulias or Bethsaida, the country of s. Peter, and s. Andrew. 67. 5. 31. 15.

OF SAMARIA.
Neapolis, Sichen here did Christ convert the Samaritane. 66. 50. 31. 50

IVDVA.
Gaza 65. 25. 31. 15 Sebasta, Samaria 65. 40 31. 30 Lydda Rama 66. 0. 32. 0
Ericus, Ierico 66 15. 31. 25

Nicopolis sumtime called Emaus, here was Christ known by breaking of bread
65. 45. 31. 50.

Jerusalem which is now called Capitolia: and have diverse other names: here was
our savior Christ Jesus crucified, and paid the ransom for our sins in the
beginning of the 34. year of his bodily age. 65. 45. 31. 22.

IDVMAEA.
Berzamma 64. 50. 31. 15 Maps. Massa 65. 40 30. 50

MESOPOTAMIA.
Porsica 72. 0. 37. 30 Soleucia Mosell 79. 0. 35. 40 Edesse. Raze 72. 30. 37.
30 Zama 75. 20. 36. 30

Carre, Charan, here did the holy Patriarch, Abraham dwell. 73. 45. 36. 10.

Babylon, Baldach the chief Bishops sea in Chadea here (building the tower
Babel) spra^g the confusion of tongues. 79. 0. 35. 0.

Bilba 79. 0. 35. 0 Caesa 76. 40. 32, 50 Thelma 77. 40. 32. 0 Orchoe 78. 30.
32. 40

ARABIA WHICH IS parted in three parts: Arabia deserta, Petrea, and Felix.
Erupa 72. 30. 30. 15 Sora 75. 0. 30. 20 Choca 72. 3^. 32. 40 Salma 78. 20. 29.
20 Lysa 65. 50. 30. 15 Petra 66. 45. 30. 20. Lydia 69. 0. 30. 40

The red seas through which

Moses, and th'Israelites went 63. 30. 29. 50.

Adra 6^. 40. 31. 40

Mount Sinay, which is also called the mount Oreb, or Choreb. Here received
Moses the x. commandments. 64. 0 30. 0.

Thebae 69. 40. 21. 0 Muza 74. 30 14. 0 Sanina 75. 30. 11. ^0 Arabia. Aden 80.
0. 11. 30 Moscha 88. 30. 14. 0 Cabana 85. 0. 23. 0 Istriona 80. 0. 25. 40
Badea. Gydda 70. 0. 20. 15

Mecha. Here is the Sepulcher of Mahomet, which the Turks go to visit with
great devotion, and yet straun gers coming thither se no other thing the^ a
golden shoe, hanginge in the rouffe of the Temple. 72. 15. 23. 0 Saba, the
seat of Gaspar the king, which brought gold of Arabic, to offer unto Jesus,
being a Child. 76. 0. 13. 0

ASSIRIA.
Ninus, Niniute, a great Ci tie, but now desolate unto which Jonas the
Prophet was sent. 78, 0. 36. 0

Ctesiphon 80. 0. 35. 0 Arbila 80. 0. 37. 15

MEDIA.
Zalaca 86. 15. 41. 0 Mandagara 87. 45. 39. 30 Ecbatana 88. 0. 37. 45 Veneca
93. 20. 38. 15 Gariauna 91. 0. 37. 20 Trauaxa 92. 0. 37. 40 Rapsa 90. 10. 35.
40 Aradripha 93. 20. 34. 45

SVSANA.
Asia a City. 80. 10. 31 40 Susa Sambragata 84. 0. 34. 15 Tariana 84. 0. 32.
30 Agra 80. 30. 33. 45

PERSIA.
Axima 87. 45. 33. 50 Persipolis 90. 0. 35. 10 Diodorus 91. 0. 33. 20 Niserga
90 15. 34. 0 Tragonica 87. 40. 32. 40 Bassara 81. 20. 29. 50

CARMANIA.
Agris 96. 30. 23. 0 Gerniana 100. 0. 2^. 0 Thaspis 98. 0. 27. 40 Armusa 94.
30. 23. 30

PARTHIA.
Hecatompylon, a City which have an hundredth gates. 96. 20. 37. 50.

Rhoara 98. 30 38 20 Ambrodax 9^. 30. 38. 20 Rhagaea 98. 20. 34. 20 Appha. 98.
0. 35. 20

HIRCANIA.
Hercana 98. 30. 40. 0 Adrapsa 98 30. 41. 40 Saca 94. 15. 39. 30

MARGIANA.
Sena 1. 2. 30. 42. 20 Iasonium 103 30. 41. 30 Antiochia margiana 106* 0 41. 40
Nigaea 1^5. 0. 41. 10

BACTRIANA.
Chomara 106. 302 4. 40 Menapia 113. 0. 41. 20 Bactra 116. 0. 41. 0

SOGDIANA.
Prepsa 130. 0. 45. 0 Alexandria oxiana 113. 0. 44. 40

Scythia within the Mount Emaus.

Aspabota 102. 0. 44. 0 Dauaba 104. 0, 45. 0

Scithia without the mount Emaus.

The kingdom of Chatay is under the great Cham, king of the Tartarians, the
chief Cities are Issedon scithica 150. 0. 48. 30 Soeta 145. 0. 35. 20

SERICA.
Issedon serica 162. 0. 45. 0 Sera 177. 1^. 38 35 Dama 156. 0. ^1. 40

In this country breed the Worms which make silk, we call them in English
Silk Worms, of which at this day the Spaniardes have great Plentye.

ARIA AND ARIANA.
The iniddes of it 106. 0. 3*. 30 Namaris 105. 40. 36. 10 Articaudna 109. 20.
36 10 Alexandria Ariae 11^. 0. 3^. 0

DRANGIANA.
Asta 107. 30. 30. 40 Bigis 1^1. 0. 29. 20 Agriapsa 108. 0. 34. 0

GEGROSIA.
Cuni 110. 0. 23. 50 Parsis 106. 30. 23. 30 Arbis 105. 20. 20. 30

INDIA WITH IN the river Ganges.
Bardaxima 213. 40. 20. 40 Monoglossum 114. 10. 18. 20 Mandagara 113. 0. 14. 30
Nitria 115 10. 14. 20

Colchi now called Cuchina, unto which the Lucitanians are very friendly 123. 0.
15. 0

Salur 125 0. 15. 0 Bizantium 113. 40. 14. 40 Tyndis 138. 30 16. 10

Calicutium, Calechut. The most fimous City of Marchaundise in all India,
they have a proper King of their own: but the Crown come not by succession
unto their children for this cause. For they have this use that when any manne
marieth, he must commit his wife to the priest to be defloured. Unto this city
is brought from al India al kind of spice, Cloves, Nutmegges Gi^ger, Cinamome,
Rubarbe, Musk, Sa^ders, Aloes, Cassia. Also praecious stones of diverse kinds,
and al manner of silks. There ar diverse sorts of inhabitants in this city:
Christians, Turks, Mahomites, Caffranans, Idolaters. And this last kind do
often (as it ware in token of Friendship) lend their wives one to another.112.
0. 5. 0

Simylla 110. 0. 14. 45 Hippocura 120. 30. 4. 0 Caticardama, Corimandel. 136.
20. 12. 40 Sambolaca 132. 15, 31. 50

PRASIA.
Palibotra 143. 0. 27. 0 Tamalitis 144. 30. 16. 30 Sambalaca 141. 0. 29. 30

COUNTRIES AND CIties without Ganges in India.
Pcntapolis 150. 0. 18. 0 Baracura. Bangella 152. 30 16. 0 Sabara 159. 0. 8. 30
Begynga 162. 20. 8. 26 Tacola 160. 30. 4. 15 Sabana 160. 0. 3. 0 Colipolis 164.
20. 0. 0 Balonga 167. 30. 7. 0 Synda 167. 15. 13. 40 Thagora 168. 0. 6. 0

Eldana, hither came S. Thomas to praeche the Gospel. 152. 0. 13. 0

Trygliphon 154. 0. 17. 0 Gorgatha 167. 0. 12. 30

CHATAY, A REGION.
Chataio 222. 0. 43. 50 VVeast Ciamfu 222. 0. 37. 17

Quinsay, the greatest City in all th'Earthe, and is as much to say with us,
as the heavenly City, in the mids of it, is a Lake, which in the circuit,
have 1200. Bridges. 226. 0. 37. 40.

Geiten 259. 0. 25. 15 East Ciamfu 231. 0. 3^. 5 Focho 240. 55. 7. 0 Tingrei
236. 0. 35. 0

MANGI, THIS Contain in it. 9. kingdoms.
Taygni 224. 15. 31. 0 Sygni 232. 0. 29. 20

Thebet, a Province in which the great Cham, lord of the East, and south
Indians have his seat, and all the kings of India are under him. 204. 10. 3.
20.

CYAMBA.
Cyamba 208. 10. 25 30

These use Coral in the stead of money, they have great plenty of Nutmegges,
Aloes, and all kind of Spices.

SOVTH INDIA.
The inhabitants are all Idolaters, and have these kingdoms following.

Lamia 202. 10. 11. 40 Morfuli 285. 0. 13. 0 Thime 180. 0. South Pole. 3. 10.

MOABAR.
Nar. The inhabitants do worship Oxen 276. 0. South Pole. 20. 10 Malaqua, here
was S. Thomas slain 260. 6. South Pole. 15 30

THE KINGDOM of Lac.
Lac, a city, the inhabita^tes worship Oxe^, and ar great Idolaters, yet just
in their affairs, and haters of lies, and liers. 166. 30. 21. 40.

OF THE ISLANDS adjacent to Asia, and India, and new Regions of this iij. part
lately found out.
CYPRVS.
IT is an Island in the middle earth Seas, in which Iaphat, one of Noe his
sons, first inhabitid. 65. 30. 35. 10

SCOTORA.
Scotora, in Arabi^ the happy now it is called Scoyra. 86. 20. 12. 0.

ORMVSA.
Ormusa is an Ila^d in the narrow Persick seas. 96. 20 19. 0

TABROBANA.
It is also named Samotra, it is a great Island. 151. 15. It is without
Latitude, because it is under the Equinoctial.

COO.
Coo, an Island, in which the the prince of Physicians Hip pocrat. was born.
57. 0. 36. 25.

THE GREATER Iaua.
Iaua. 17^. 0. the south pole. 7 ^0

BORNO.
Borno, an Island. 178. 0. The South pole. 2. 30

THE LESSER Iaua.
Iaua. 188. 9. Under the equinoctial.

AMBICON.
Ambicon. 166. 0. The south pole 7.0.

GELILO.
Gelilo, also Solor, one of the greatest Islands of Moluck.

204. 0. The south Pole. *1. 0

ISLANDS OF Moluck.
The other Islands are under 193. 0. 9. 0. digrees.

IVCATAN
Iucatan. 257. 30. 19. 0

CVBA.
Cuba. 269. 30. 23. 30

It is under the Tropicke of Cancer.

IAMAICA.
Iamaica. 270. 0. 19. 30.

VASANDREA.
Vasandrea. 3^1. 30. 40. 0.

Thus ends the particular description of Asia.
A PERTICVLER DESCRIPTION OF such parts of America, as are by travail found
out.
RIGHT order inforseth that (the iij. parts of the Earth, being set out
according to their notable parts) I shall direct my Pen to speak of
America, which is named the fourth part, and was to Ptolomaeus, and the
Ancient Geographers unknown: as also at this praesent great part of it is not
yet found out. It takes the name of America, of Americus Uesputius, who by the
commandment of Ferdinando king of Castle, found it out, in the year of
Christ our Savior. 1497. about the end of June, as does appear by his
own testimony. The people both men, and women are naked, neither suffer they
any hear to grow on their bodies, no not on their brows, the head except.
They are excellent in swiming, both men and women, so that they without werines
can swime ij* leaques. Their weapons are bows, and arrows, which they
praepare, and head with stones, and the teath of Fish, for that they want
Iron, and all metal (gold except.) They have war with the inhabitauntes of
the country next them, which have an other language. But it is not for
richesse, for enlarging their segniory, or election of a king: but for to
revenge the deaths of their praedicessors. There is no law or order observed
of wedlock, for it is lawful to have so many women as they affect, and to put
them away with out any danger. They be filthy at meat, and in all secret
acts of nature, comparable to brute beasts. Their bread is rotes, and their
meat man's flesh, for all their enemies, which they overcome, they with great
bankettyng devour. Their houses are builded like the shape of Belles, and
covered with leaves and palms of trees. they use no kind of Merchandise, and
as for gold, Pearl, stone, and that we have in great prise: they have in no
esti mation. For their richesse is in feathers of diverse colors, and stones,
which they hang on their ears and lips for an ornatur. They do honor the
Son, Moan, and Sterres. There is also in the weast part of America, a region
call led Peru, most rich of all other that hitherto have been found both of
meatalles, and praecious Drugges. Their sheep be of such fertility, that they
twice yearlye have Lamb. The inhabitants are civil, wise, prudent, skilful
of merchandise. But yet they know not Christ. The mids of America is in
digrees. 330. 0. The pole Antarctik 10. 0. The breadth of it is 2100. English
miles, the length 3000. miles. There are diverse and sundry Islands about
America, in our days found out of which hereafter shall follow the
principal.

PERV WITH THE shore toward Spain.
Peru. 290. 5. 0. south pole. Archay Cherson^sus. 303. 0. 5. 0 Caput de Stado.
317. 0* 2. 30

Sinus aquae dulcis, here are vij. Islands found, in which are great plenty
of Pearl, and praecious Stones. 322. 0. South Pole. 5. 0.

Rio grande 329. 0. South pole. 4. 30 S. Rochi 341. 0. South pole. 8. 15

Caput S. Crucis, here Magelanus found a Giaunt x. foot in length. 345. 0. 140.

Rio. s. Iacobi 356. 0. 23. 30 Rio d^. s. Lucia 341. 0. 27. 20

ISLANDS Adjoining to America.
Riqua the lesser 296. 0. 10. 0 Riqua the greater 300. 0. 9. 0 The Island of
Giants 308. 7. 5. 0 The Island of Brasil 305. 4. 6. 10 La ponto 318. 30. 4. 0

Spagnolla, here is found, Gua iacu^ that heals the Neapolitane sickness. And
the mids of the Island co^teine. 305. 0. 23. 0.

ISLANDS TOVVARD Afric, are innumerable of which these are found out.
Todosanctos 332. 30. 17. 0 Deforana 323. 0. 18. 0 Degadalupo 331. 10. 15. 30
Caput de bonauentur 294. 10. 4. 10 The grene Island. 347. 0. 14. 0

FINIS.
A PLENTIFVL TABLE CONTAINING the principal matters of the whole work,
reduced into the ordor of the Alphabete, for the spedier finding of such
things, as you require.
A
ABILE, one of Hercules Columns. 58. 187 Egyptians first founnd the 8.
heaven. 12 Aequinoctiall Circle what. 22 His use. 24
Ae^r divided into iij. Regions. 42 Aeolus, God of winds. 112. 159 Aetna, a
burning Hill. 176 Afric, and her description. 184 whereof it took name. eodem.
Albania. 193 Albetragnius error in placing Venus above the Son. 11
Alexander the great were borne. 183 Alfonsus. 2 He first found out the x.
heaven. 12 Where he dwelt. 178
Alphraganus. 11 Ambicon. 198 America, and her description. 200 Amphiscij. 68
(...) 190 Angle of Sight what. 137 what a perfect Angle. 138
Andwarpe. 180 Antarctick circle what. 37 Antiochia. 193 Antipodes. 21. 70. 80
Apians way to find the Longit. 106 Apollo first ^ounde Physic. 2 Where he
gave Oracles. 184
Arabia. 195 Archimedes devised Glassis to burn with all. 2 Arctick circle
what. 36 Argentina, look Strausborough. Argument of the whole work. 8 Aria and
Ariana. 196 Aristotle. 9 Arithmetic neadfull in Cosmographie. 4 Armenia, and
^yr chief places. 193 Armusa. 198 Asia, the third part of the Earth, and ^yr
Adescription. 190. 191 scij. 69
Assiria. 194 Atlas. 2 Atreus first found the Sons Eclypse 97 Auicenna
defended. 81 Axe tree what. 14 (...) 64
B.
Babylon. 194 Bactriana, and her Cities. 195 Bagpipe used in War. 172
Barbarica Mauritania. 185 Barley corn the least measure. 56 Blasing Sterres
engendered, where. 42 Body, what it is. 55 Bononie. 182 (...) 64 Barno. 198
Brasil, an Island. 202 Burning Hills. 176. 175 Burning zone. 66 Polybius
error herein. 65 That it is habitable eodem
Bythinia. 19^
C.
CAdmos, an Hill. 191 Caesariensis Mauritania. 187 Calicute, and the nature of
the inhabitauntes. 196
Calpe, one of Hercules Pillars. 58. 178 Cambridge. 173 Canarian Islands the
first digr. of Lon. 58 Their number. 188
Capadocia. 193 Cards particular made ij. ways. 115 And how to make them.
116. 117
Caria, and her Cities. 191 Carmania. 195 A Carte for tl^ ^ight part of the
Earth. 122 For the half part of the Earth. 125 For the whole face of the
Earth. 127
Cayla, look Quiola. Center: what. 14 Ceres Goddess of Corn. 112 Chatay. 197
Chorographie, what. 6 How it differs from Cosmographie, and Geographie. 7
Cilicia. 193 Circle what, and how it differs from a Sphere. 17 Circles
Arcticke, and Antartik. 37 Circles greater and lesser. 39 Circuit of the Earth,
how to find it out. 60 How many English miles it conteyneth. 61. Cities
governed of the Signs and Planetes. 134 Cleomedes. 9 Climate, what. 73
Division of them after Ptolomaeus. eodem. Their number. 74 Their names. 75
South Climates. 76 Their Table. 78. 79
Cooblentz. 181 Colchis. 193 Collen, where the Pilgrimage is to the three
kings. 181 Colure circles ij. and their definition. 36 Cometes engendered
where. 42 Constantinople. 184 Contents of the first book. 51 Continens what.
113 Coos. 198 Corsica, an Island. 176 Cosmographie mete for all estates. 4
Cosmographie most excellent of all Sciences. eodem. Cosmographies definition. 5
How it differs from Geographie. 6
Cosmographie excels Geographie, and Chorographie. 8 The principal part of
it. 111
Cosmographicall Glass. 120 Crates error placinge the Luminaries above the
eight heaven. 11 Crete an Island. 177 Cuba. 198 Cumpasse unknown to the old
Hydrographers. 160 The Country of Pygmeans. 191 Curua, and her chief cities.
163 Cyamba. 197 Cyclades Islands. 176 Cyprus. 198
D.
DAlmatia. 182 Damascus 193
Declination, what 28 Declination how to be sought out by instrument. 29 A
Table of the Sons declination. 31 Democritus error in placing of Mercury.
11. Destinction of Zones. 65 (...) 64 Diameter of a Sphaere what, and how it
differs from the Axe tree. 15 Digree, what. 25 Digrees of Longitude of
places, from whence accounted. 58 Dimention, what it is. 55 Distaunce in miles,
of diverse places, how to find out. 140 Distaunce of places how to find
out. 141 Diversity of opinions, touching the earth bis circuit. 62 Diversity
of the Sons declination from Ptolomaeus, to our time. 28 Doris, and her
chief places. 191 Drangiana. 196
E.
EArth, what. 43 Opinions of her figure eodem The mids of it. 6 Objections
against her roundnes. 44 And the answers. 45
Earth, and the world, not one thing. 10 The Earth a stone. 45 Of the Earths
circuit, diverse, opinions 62 The Earth, how to describe it in a universal
card. 127 Or half the Earth. 125 Or the eight part. 122 Or one particular
Region. 121
Ebb tides. 145 The cause of it. 146 Their time. 151
Ebudae, Islands joining to Irlande. 172 Ecliptic line, what. 25 Eclipse of
the Son who first found out 97. The cause of the Moon Eclipsed. eoda^
Figures of Eclipsis. 98. 99. 100. 101. 102.
Elementary Region. 40 Elements, why but iiij. 41 Their situation and place.
eode^.
Elevation of the Pole, how to find it. 91. 92. 93. 94. 95. Emantba. eodem
(...) xi. Heaven. 12 England, and her principal cities. 173. 174. Englshie
miles, what they contain in the length. 56 How many barlie corns thereto
answers. eodem.
Epact how to find it. 148 Ephesus. 191 Epirus, and her chief Places. 183
Eubae, an Island. 177 Euclides Elementaries. 5 (...) 64 Europe, whereof it took
that name. 170 The description of it. 171 The Bigness of it. eodem.

F.
FIgures of the Moon Eclipsed. 98 Florence. 182
Fountaynes of marvelous nature. 175 Fortunate Islands, the first digree of
Longitude. 58 Their number. 188
Fourlong, a kind of measure, and his quan titie. 56 France, and her
description. 178 Fretum, what. 144 Frosen zones two. 66 Fruits of well spent
time. 2
G
GAdira, an Island. 177 Gaditanum fretum, where 184
Galenus country 191 Gelilo 198 Galitia, and her Cities 191 Gazophilacion
Astronomicum. 89 Gedrosia 196 Gemma Phrisus way to find the Longitude of
places 109 Geographie, what it is. 5 How it differs from Cosmographie. 6
Geographicall plainsphere. 137 Geometry ned full in Cosmographie. 4 Germany,
and her description. 189 Germane miles, both commen and great, and the
quantity. 56. 57 Giantes Island. 202 Glarians error. 59 His way to find the
Noonesteade line. 82.
Grene Island. 202
H
Happy men. 1 Hayle engendered where. 42
Heavenly Region contain x. Heavens. 10 The eyghte, nine, and ten Heaven,
who found them out. 12
Hecla, a burning Hill. 175 Hell, where. 82 Helga, an Hill in Islande. eodem
Helicon, the holy Hill 184 Heluetian miles. 57 Hemisphere of the Earth, how to
be drawn in a Carte. 125 Hercules Pillars, or Columns. 58 Heydelberge. 181
Jerusalem. 194 Hippocrates cuntry. 198 Hircania, and her chief cities. 195
Hills, the greatest in all tb' Earth. 44. Heteroscij. 70 Homerus cuntrye. 191
Horizont Circle, what. 18 Divided in two parts. 19 The use of the Horizont. 24
Horizont divided into. 32. Parts. 156 Hot winds from the South, and the
cause. 158. Hour of the day known by the coast of the Son. 157. 158
I.
IAcobus Staff. 105 Iamaica. 198
Iberia, and her chief Cities. 193 Idumea, and her Cities. 194 Island, what.
112 Islands in Europe from. 172. unto. 178. In Afric. 188
In Asia. 198 In America. 201. 202 Illium. 191 Illyria. 182 Unfortunate men. 1
India within Gangis. 196 Soutb India. 198 An Instrument serving to the
describing of a Country. 136 An Instrument serving to Navigations. 162 John
Faustus first found out Printinge. 181. John Halifax called, De sacro bosco.
14 Irlande, and her description. 172 It has plenty of Alume, sea Cole, and
Wolves. eodem
It is without venamous worms and beast eodem. Island and her description 175.
176 Isthmus what. 113 Italy and her chief Cities. 182 Italian miles. 56 Iucatan
198 India. 194 Iaua the greater. 198 Iaua the lesser. eodem
L
LAc a kingdom. 198 Lacus. what. 144
Lactantius petulancye. 38 Laodicina and her cities. 194 Laponto. 202 Latitude
of regions, what. 59 Latitude of Regions how to find out from 91. Unto. 95
Length of miles. 56 A leque what it contains. eodem Licaonia and her Cities.
191 Line what it is. 55. Line Eclipticke. 25 London, how long builded before
Rome 173. before Cbristes Incarnation. 174 Longitude taken two ways. 58 Of
Longitudes of places, where the first degree is placed. eodem Longitude of
regions how to find out sundry ways from. 103 Unto. 108
Loode sterre and his configuration. 166 Louaine. 180 S. Lukes Country. 193
Lybia interior. 187 Lydia. 191 Lyra. 82
M
MAcedonia and her description. 183 Madagascar an Island. 188
Mahometes Sepulcher, where. 194 Making of particular cards, by Longitude and
Latitude. 116. 117 Without Longitude and Latitude. 137. 138. Mangi. 197
Maiorica and Minorica Islands. 176. A Map for one Region. 120 A Map for the
eight part of the earth. 122 A Map for half the earth. 125 A Map for all
the earth. 127 Mare mortuum. 144 Mare congelatum. eodem Marmarica. 187
Margiana. 195 Mauritania Tingitana, and her description. 185 Mauritania
Caesariensis. 187 Measures of diverse sorts and quantitye. eodem. Medera an
Island. 188 Media and her cities. 195 Men most happy. 1 Men most unfortunate.
eodem Mentz. 181 Meroe and her description. 187 Meridian circle, what. 21 The
use of the Meridian. 24 Meridian line how to find it. 83. 84. 85. 86. 87. 88.
Meridionall signs. 26 Mesopotamia. 194 Middle earth seas. 143 Miles of diverse
countries, and their quantity. 56 Myllan. 182 Minute, what. 25 Moabar. 198
Moons age how to find it at all times. 147. Moons shining every month. 149
What cost of the Moon make full Seas in the chief costs of this our Ocean.
151 Of Moan Eclipsed, what is the cause. 97 Figures of her Eclipses. 98
Morfuli. 198 Moscouia and the nature of the people. 182 Mount Sinay. 194
N
NAplis. 182 Neadle and his praise. 160 Where it have erred. 160 How to correct
it. 161
Neptunus God of the seas. 112. 159 Nicaea. 191 Niniue. 195 North Pole and his
configuration. 166 Norwich subject to fire. 174 Her picture set out. 8
North winds cold and the cause. 158 (...) 64 Numidia and her chief places.
187
O
Ocean seas. what. 143 Olimpus a famous hill. 44. 191 Oracles where given to
the Gretians. 184. Orchney Islands. 171 Orontius. 5 Observations of the Neadle,
where it have erred. 161 Ouides versis for the placing of the Sphere of the
Son. 11 The North Pole to be above the Horizont. 37 The signs to ascend and
descend equally under the equinoctial. 32 The division of Zones. 66
Oxford. 174
P
PAdua. 182 Palus, what. 144
Pamphilia. 191. Paris. 189 Paradise, where. 82 Contention of the deuines
touching it. Look in the praeface.
Pargamus. 191. (...) 73 A Parallele what, and their number. 74 Their Table.
78. 79
Persia. 195 Parthia. eodem Peninsula what. 113 Particular cards made. ij.
ways. 115 Peru. 200 Phaenitia. 193 Phaenix an hill. 191 Philonicus what it
signifies. 3 Places dictaunce how to find out. 140. 141 Planets have. ij.
declinations. 28 A plat form what, and how many ways spoken. 55
Plato. 9 His error in the placing of the luminares. eodem. A point, what. 55

Point vertical, what. 60 Pole of the Horizont. 21. 60 Poles elevation how to
find out. 91 92. 93. 94. 95. Polybius error touching the number of Zones.
65 Pontus and her chief places. 191 Porto sancto an Island. 188 Prasia. 196
Printing first found, where. 181 Ptolomaeus. 2 He first found out the. 9.
heaven. 12 His rule serving to the observing of altitudes. 88 He excused. 118.
169
Pygmeans country. 191 Physic who first found it out. 2 Pythagoras error,
touching vacuum. 9 Pythia. 184
Q
QVadrate an instrumente of Navigations. 162 Quality of winds. 158. 159
Quantity of measures used in demensio^. 56 Quiola. 187
R
REd seas. 143. 194 Region elementary. 40 The heavenly Regio^ co^tein. x.
spheres. 10
Regions governed of the signs and Planets. 134 Regions Longitude, how to find
it out. 103 Unto. 108 Regions Latitude, how to find out. 91 Unto. 95 Reward of
learning in old time. 111 Rome. 182 Rio de grande. 202 Rio. S. Iacobi. eodem
Rio de. S. Lucia. eodem Riqua the greater. eodem Riqua the lesser. eodem
S
SAmaria. 194 Sardinia with her Cities and Towns. eodem.
Sheubelius Algeber. 5 Scotland, and her description. 174. 175 Scotora. 198
Scythia without the hill Imaus. 195 Seas and her division. 143 Sepulcher of
Mahomet. 194 Shipmans Neadle when it err to correct it. 161 Shipmans compass
unknown to the old Hydrographers. 160 Ship out of her course how to come
in it again. 166 Shadows and there diversity. 69. 70 A Table of Shadows. 72
Sicilia an Island with her chief places. 176 Sidon. 193 A sign, what. 25
Signs Meridionall. 26 Signs Septentrionall. eodem Sinus, what. 143 Smyrna.
191 Snow engendered, where. 42 Sogdiana. 195 Somer Tropicke. 33 Sons sphere in
what order placed. 11 Errors touching the same. eodem The Son have. ij.
declinations. 28. 93 A Table of his declination. 31. 32 When he is in the
tropic points, or Equinoctial. 53
Sons rising and settinge through all the year. 148 South India. 198 South
Pole and his configuration. 166 South winds hot, and the cause. 158 Sparades
Ilandei. 177 Spagnolla. 202 Spain and her description. 177 Sphere, what. 14
Divided in two parts. 16
Shere have. x. Circles. 18 Spoudaeus, what it do the signify 3 Spring tides.
145 Strausborough. 181 (...) what and whereof so called. 56 Stagnum what. 144
Sulphur where great plenty. 175 Syria and her Cities. 193
T
TAble of fixed sterres. 27 Table of the sons declination. 31 Table of
shadows. 72 Table of Climates. 78. 79 Table for tourninge hours of the day
into degr. and min. of the equinoctial. 104 Tabrobana. 198 Terestriall globe.
114 Theodosius. 5 Things seen longer in mind, then only hard. 7 S. Thomas
Island. 187 Tides both spring and ebb 143 There cause. 146 Time the greatest
treasure. 1 The fruits of time well spent. 2 Time bring all things to
perfection. 3 Times of the year, where they take their beginning. 35 Time
tedious. 142 Times of ebbing and flowing. 151 Tingitana mauritania. 185
Trallis. 191 Tropicke circles. 33 Somer tropicke, what. eodem Winter Tropicke.
34 Tyrus. 193
V
Venomous beasts and worms not in Ireland. 172 Afric abound therewith. 184
Vertical point, what. 21. 60 Vesandrea. 198
W
Winter tropicke, what. 34 Winds what. 153 And there number. 153. 154 Winds
te^perat under the equinoctial. 159 World what it is. 9 The world and earth not
oue thing eodem The world made of. ij. carts. 9
Z
Zenit, what. 21. 60 Zodiac, what. 22 Zodiakes use. 26 Zone, what. 63 There
number. 64 There qualities. 66. 67. That they are all habitable. 67. 68 Zones
divided into climats and paralleles. 73
FINIS.
Faults escaped in the Imprinting.
Fol. 2. the vi. line, Ingens, read Engeins.

Fol. 25. the eightene line, goes overthwart them, read, goes overthwart the
Sphere.

Fol. 69. the xxi. line, Zolstitii, read Solstitii.

Fol. 121. the last line, whose compass, read whose compositio^ is in this
wise. Describe a Circle with your compass.

Fol. 189. the ii. columbe, the last line, it exten- read, it extends.

AN EXTRACTE OF THE QVENES highness gracious Privilege, and License.
ELIZABETH by the grace of God Queen of England, France, and Irelande,
defendour of the faith etc.

To all manner of Printers, Book sellers, and other our Officers, Ministers,
and subjects: greatyng. We do you to understand, that of our grace especial,
we have granted, and given privilege and license: And by these presents for
us, our heirs, and successors do grant and give Privilege and License, unto
our well-beloved subject John Day, of the city of London, Printer, and
Stationer, and to his assigns for the term of his life, to Imprint, or cause
to be Imprinted, as well the Cosmographicall Glass, compiled by William
Cuningham Doctor in Physic, as also during the time of vij. years, all
such Books, and works, as he has Imprinted, or herafter shall Imprint,
being divised, compiled, or set out by any learned man, at the procurement,
costs, and charge, only of the said John Day. Straightly forbiddyng and
commanding by these presents, all and singular our subjects, as well
Printers, and Bookesellers, as all other persons within our Realms and
Dominions, what so ever they be, in any manner of wise, to Imprint, or cause to
be Imprinted, any of the aforesaid Books, that the said John Day shall by
authority of this our license, imprint, or cause to be imprinted, or any part
of them: But only the said John Day, and his assigns, upon pain of our high
indignation. And that every offender therein shall forfaite to our use forty
shillinges of lawful money of England, for every such Book or Books, at any
time so Printed contrary to the true meaning of this our present License, and
Privilege: Over and besides all such Book, or Books so Printed, to be
forfayted to whom so ever shall sustain the charges, and sue the said
forfaiture in our behalf. etc.

Given at our Palice of Westminster the xxviii. day of October, the first
year of our Reign.


Imprinted at London by John Day, dwelling over Aldersgate, beneath Saint
Martins. 1559.


