A CONFESSION OF CHRISTIAN RELIGION.

Apoc. c. 18. ver. 2. Cecidit, cecidit Babylon illa magna.

Senec. in Troas. -- Hae manus Troiam erigent?
Nullas habet spes Troia, si tales habet.
Hill. de Syn. adversus Arrianos. Vere Drum nesciunt, atque vtinam nescivent, cum
procliviore enim venia ignorarant.
Sisciens fallo.

At Oxford, Printed by Joseph Barnes. 1609.

(...).
I Unfeignedly believe that there is one, immortal, vncompou^ded, unlimited
Essence, which created this world and furnished the shop thereof with wonderful
variety: who since does guide and govern the same by a prescribed and regular
order, taking immediate notice not only of Angels offices and men's actions, but
of every yea the smallest and basest thing in the world, not permitting any
thing to the lust of fortune, or command of destiny; this supernall power I
call God, and avow him to be the maintainer and rewarder of virtue, the
revenger and judge of wickedness, and I ascribe unto him heaven for his throne,
and the bal of the earth for his footstool, and I subject unto his absolute
command all the powers of heaven and earth, and render unto him obedience,
prayer, and thanksgiving for his tribute.

That there is such a God (beside the arguments which we have from the book of
Nature S. Antonies Book (liber meus o philosophe! est (...)) in which it is
true of every several which S. Augustine has of the heavens, Clamat coelum
Deo, tu me fecisti.) I appeal to the conscience of the most desperate forlone
wretch in the world, tell me whosoever thou be, that have thy conscience most
deaded and scared with a hot iron, when thou committest a sin, and think
that thou have a veil cast before the eyes of God, and resoluest thus in thy
heart, Who sees me? I am compassed about with darkness, the walls cover me,
whom need I to fear? the most high will not remember my sins; Nec
conscientia nostra nobis tam ^e^e diem diceret, nisi ali^m Iudice^, alia
subsellia reformidares. Mor. ^. ^ie ver. c. 34.
yet tell me I say, why is thy heart so disquieted within thee? why is thy
countenance cast down for shame? why do thy knees smite together, and thy
ioints shiuer for fear? If there be no power that does know, or can punish thy
fault, what need this anguish? But I wot well that these stirring motions
within thee, are as so many summons to put thee in mind that there is a God in
thy conscience which sees thy sin, and will arraigne thee for the same, and
awarde condemnation against thee, if thou prevent not his judgment by
repentance.

I believe this God is one, as it is said in Deuteronomie, Audi Israel, Deus
tuus Deus vnus este there is not for every kingdom a God, a God for Zidon, a
God for Amon, a God for Moab, and a God for Ekron, but one alone God manageth
the affairs of the whole world, for if it be true in government of an earthly
kingdom, (...), much more in the being of a Deity, for a multitude of Gods
would cross and incu^ber the designs one of another, and none should be
omnipotent, and so there should be a tumultuous disorder in the government of
the world, which Ovid points out unto us saying, Mulciber in Troiam, pro
Troia stabat Apollo.
And Homer in the 21. of his Jliades,
(...),
(...).
And therefore it is well said of Tertullian. Si non est vnus, non est. lib. 1.
aduers. man. cap. 3. St. Bernards word is vnissimus.


This God is simply one in nature and essence, yet this one God does subsist in
three persons, each of them severally communicating in the whole of that one
nature and essence: yet so as we cannot say that there are three Gods, but one
God, Alius personaliter non aliud esse^rialiter (...)
for though the persons be distinguished in number, yet they be not divided in
Essence: which is a mystery to which man's understanding must veil, seeing that
it has not pleased God wholly to reveal it to the sons of men, and that the
Cherubins do cover their faces before it, as being not able to apprehend the
perfect view thereof. Wherefore let us say with holy Moses, Hidden things belong
unto thee o Lord, but revealed things unto us and our children; and let us only
learn as much of this unity, and Trinity, as it has pleased God to reveal
unto us in his word, always remembering that saying of Arnobius -- De Deo loqui
et iam vera periculosissimum est.
and that of another, De Deo cu^ dicitur no^ potest dici.

(...).
That there are three persons in the Deity, the Father, the Son, and the holy
Ghost, as it may be proved by many pregna^t places of scripture, so it is
evide^t from the baptism of Christ in Jordan, where the Son was baptized by
John, the holy Ghost descended in the visible form of a Dove, the Father gave
witness from heaven that this was his beloved son, etc: upon which place S.
Augustine gives the note, Qui nescis triuitatem, ito ad Iordanem; And an other
Father, Conveniat men's tua Sanctum Ioha^nem in Iordane. And yet that there is
likewise an unity of Essece, of which without inequality the whole Trinity does
participate, may be proved by an usual form of speech in the Hebrew
original, when speaking of God, a nowne of the plural number is joined with a
verb of the singular, as in the beginning of Genesis. 1. In principio creavit
Elohim (1) Dij coelum and terram-Dij for the persons in the plural number and
creavit to note the unity of the Essence in the singular number.

This Trinity of persons thus co^spiring in the unity of Essence, is
notwithstanding distinguished by attributes, and proprieties.

These attributes or properties are twofold 1 Incommunicable. and 2
Communicable.


Incommunicable proprieties are, 1. Of the Father, to be unbegotten. 2. Of the
Son, to be begotten, the curious search of whose generation is sealed up
with that saying of Gregory Nazianzene, (...). And Irenaeus, Si quis dixerit,
Quomodo filius a patre prolatus est? Dicimus et, Quia prolationem istam sive
generationem eius Inenarrabilem existentem nemo novit, non Valentinus, non
Marcion, neque Saturninus, neque ^asilides, neque Angeli neque Archangeli, nee
principes, neque potestates, nisisolus quigenerauit pater, and qui natus est
filius. 3. Of the holy Ghost to be proceeding.


How the generation of the Son, and the procession of the holy Ghost do
differ, I cannot tell, only I say with S. Augustine that they do differ, sedego
distinguere nescio, non valeo, no^ sufficio.

The communicable proprieties are, simple, infinite, immutable, eternal, just,
merciful, only wise, omnipotent, of which the three persons do inseparably
communicate.

Out of these proprieties do issue Apotelesmata, and actions, in which the
Trinity do likewise severally, yet inseperably, communicate, I say inseperably
according to that Rule of the Schools, Opera Trinitatis ad extra sunt
indivisa: by which we may learn to understand that other of S. August:
Trinitas inseperabiliter operatur, to be spoken only of such works which God
does without his Essence in his Creatures These outward actions of the Trinity
do belong unto one of these three heads.

viz 1. Creation, 2. Redemption, 3. Sanctification.


All comprised in that hymn of St. Augustine Gloria patri qui ereauit nos,
Gloria filio qui redemit nos, Gloria Sp. S. qui sanctificauit nos. Med. 33. cap.

Creation is 1. Of the world in general. 2. Of man in special.


God created the fabric of the world of nothing; Nothing but nothing had this
Lord Almighty
Whereof, wherewith, whereby, to build this City.
bestowing but six days for the making and adorning of it, and ever since by
his watchful eye of providence has and does carefully govern the same. Which
Plato could teach us, who avoweth it to be one, and the self same supreme
powers office to be (...), and (...). We condemn therefore the blasphemy of
the Epicures, which make our God an idle and careless God, like unto Baal in
the book of Kings which was a sleep and must be awaked; as also the opinion
of Averroes (upon how goodly pretense soever builded*) who hemd the providence
of God with in the circle of the Moon, saying as it is in Job, The clouds hide
him that he cannot see, and he walks in the circle of heaven; thinking it
absurd ad hoc deducere Dei maiestatem, vt sciat quot culices nascuntur.

Non vacat exiquis rabus adesse Iovi --
-- Nunquam sic cura Deorum
Se premit, vt vestrae morti vestraeque, saluti
Fata vacent -- says Lucan of some vile persons.
-- (...)
(...).
For we concerning our God have learned of a better Master, that although he
has his dwelling on high, yet he abaseth himself to behold things in heaven
and earth, that he is a God not only of the mountains, but of the valleys
likewise, lending his providence to the examination of things of the least
consequence, as feeding of Ravens, lighting of sparrowes upon the ground,
clothing of Lilies, and numbering of hairs. A doctrine not fully believed of
them, who, when they see the wicked to build heaps of sin as high as Babble,
and yet to escape the vengance of God, when otherwise the godly are under his
rod and punishment, do break out into blasphemy, and some out openly, that
which David's fool did but say in his heart. Non est Deus. Morn. de ver. Ret.
Chapter cap. 12. Pompeiumque, dijs obicis. Luc. 9. lib.
Hence Cato would feign have God to give him a reason-why Caesar overcame
Pompey; and Hercules in the Poet complains in the extremity of torment, that
he which had freed the world of robbers, and savage beasts, and been
profitable to all men, had lived in misery, and should die in shame: when on
the contrary, Euristeus a tirant did live in the ruff of pride, and was
liues-like, and the rod of God was not upon him. Et sunt qui credere possunt
esse Deos? Neither did the minds of heathen men only, but of Gods Saints also
totter and reele in their judgments concerning providence, for there was a
time when Ecclesiastes complained, Behold the tears of the oppressed, and none
comforts them: and likewise Habacuck, Thou art a God of pure eyes, and can
not see evil, thou can not behold wickedness, wherefore do thou look upon
the transgressors, and hold thy tongue, when the wicked deuours the man
that is more righteous then he? But to stop the mouths of heathen men, and the
better to settle the struggling thoughts of all Christians, I will say no more
the^ that which Ecclesiastes, and Habaouch, upon better advise of Gods always
righteous judgments, and after the tempest of their thoughts was alaid, have
avowed before me; to wit, that howsoever God does seem not to see or to wink
at the wicked, yet indeed if we suspend our hasty judgment a while, and wait
his patience til he has whet his glittering sword, and his hand shall take
hold on judgment, we shall find that of Moses to be true, That he rewards to
their face them that hate him, to bring them to destruction; for so speaks
Ecclesiastes. If in a Country thou see the oppression of the poor, and the
defrauding of judgment and justice, be not astonished at the matter, for he
that is higher then the highest regards, and there be higher then they, and
Habacuck likewise o Lord Thou have ordained them for judgment, and O God thou
have established them for correction, if not in this world, yet undoubtedly in
the world to come. For J remember that the Apostle gives it for a note, that
because the Thessalonia^s were afflicted with persequutions by wicked men, that
this was an argument, (...). 2 Thessalonians. 1.5. That there is a judgment to come,
in which it should go well with them and as ill with their enemies. Recepisti
bona in vita tua and Lazarus similiter mala. Luc. 16.

Abstulit hunc tandem Rufini poena tumultum,
Absoluitque Deos, iam non ad culmina rerum
Iniustos creuisse queror, tolluntur in altum,
Vt lapsu grauiore ruant. Claud. l. 1. in Rufin.
This God having created all things in the stage of the world by a word only
of his mouth, being come in the 6. day to create man, as being a work of more
excellency, and therefore more difficulty, does as it were call a council, and
advise with the other persons of the Trinity, Venite, faciamus hominem, nor
simply so, but a more excellent creature the^ the rest, In similitudinem
nostram, (...), Naz. Not only let us make man, but let us invest him with
liberties and privileges above other creatures, and make him a Nonesuch in
the world, to rule over fishes of the sea, birds of the air, and beasts that
walk upon the plane of the earth.

So then man was created of the dust of the earth, and God breathed into him
the soul of life, Diuinae particulam aura. Hor. and had infusde from above
such supernatural graces, that he was indeed the mirror of Gods creatures,
and minion of the world, like unto God, upon who^ the alone God had conferred
in abundant measure, all his special ornaments; for he had no darkness in
his understanding, nor perverseness in his will, nor Rebellion in his
affections, no sickness nor crasines in his whole body, nor never should have
had, if never mispending this rich dowry of God, he did never run bakerupt
beyond the bounds of Gods commandments. But this man thus highly exalted in
the love of God, Peacock-like taking a view of his own glory, discontinued his
wonted obedience to his Sovereign, nor only so, but having all that he could
ask or thought he should receive from God, Qui mandu canerunt vt essent quasi
Dio, perdiderunt quod erant facto homines immorrales. August.
betook himself to the Devil to serve him upon credit only of better pay,
Eritis sicut Dij, thinking by violence to break into heaven, and to exalt his
Throne by the Throne of the Almighty.

But foolish man, by this his Apostasy and wilful disobedience, forfeited his
former more blessed estate, and was stripped of his Masters livery, and all his
excellent graces, dispossessed of Paradise, and sent unto the Devil to pay him
his wages for his former service, and all his posterity by the guilt of his
transgression have their nature defiled, and are abandoned of God, and entitled
to the Devil for his children and offspring, a wicked seed, witches children,
and sons of Beliall.

And now o ye sons of men, says God by his Prophet Micheas, c. 6. v. 5.
Remember what Balak king of Moab had devised, and what Balarn the Son of Beor
answered him, that you may know the righteousness of the Lord, for so I hope I
may apply this prophecy. O ye sons of men now at this time, during our
bondage under the devil, remember what the Prince of darkness had devised
against us, and how Jesus Christ the son of the living God, has answered
him, and stopped his mouth with a voice of blood, and nailed his accusation to a
Cross, that ye may know the righteousness, nor that only, but the exceeding
love and rich mercy of the Lord to mankind: for there being no way to free us
out of the power of the Devil, but by satisfying the justice of God for the
former transgression, God the Father in the fullness of time sent his beloved
Son made of a woman, and clothed in our flesh, by the shedding of his precious
blood to redeem out of the power of the Devil all those, that by faith apply
the merit of his passion unto themselves, and do afterward show their
thankfulness unto God for so great Redemption. I believe then, that Jesus Christ
the only Son of God coessential to the Father and the holy Ghost was
incarnate of the substance of the ever-blessed Virgin Mary, by the operation of
the holy Spirit; that as Sampson married a wife in Timnah, of the daughters of
the Philistines, that he might seek an occasion against the Philistines, for at
that time the Philistines reigned over Israel. Iud. 14.4. So he by espousing our
flesh, and by being become the seed of the woman, of Abraham, of David, and
our brother might condemn Sin in the flesh, and by his power shrouded under
this veil overthrow and dispoile the strong man of his possession, then was
fulfilled that of St. Augustine, Christus pectatumest, and nos Iustitia. Christ
is made sin, and we the righteousness of God in him.

So that in the person of Christ, I confess 2. natures, the one Divine, the
other Humane, by the Divine nature, I do not understand the Divine nature,
simply and absolutely, as it is common to all the three persons in the Trinity
(for we may not say, that the whole Trinity was incarnate) but I understand
these words, Divine nature, Relatiuely of the Nature only of the Son of God
who is the second Person in the Trinity, as also by Humane Nature, I do not
mean ths General or special nature of man, but the nature considered in the
Iudiuiduum only, to wit, that substance of the humane nature which in the womb
of the Virgin Mary, the Son of God did assume into the unity of his person.
And these 2. Natures I confess, to be united in one person, (...) truly and
(...), perfectly, and (...) indiuisibly, and (...) distinctly, in which 4.
words, 4. principal heresies touching the person of our Savior of the Arians,
Apolinarians, Nestorians, Euticheans, were confuted in 4. several counsels,
Nice, Constantinople, Ephesus, Calcedon. Yet in this doctrine we must heedfully
beware of 2. extremes.

The first, that we do not think that the Deity assuming is changed into the
Humanity assumed, assumpsit quod non erat, non amisit quod erat, says S.
Augustine: nor the manhood assumed into the Deity assuming, but each
remains entire in his essential properties, yet without division of the
person; Salva proprietate vtriusque naturae suscepta est a maiestate humilitas,
a virtute infirmitas, ab aeternitate mortalitas, Leo ep. ad Flau: The second,
that yet notwithstanding we hold for good all such propositions where that is
attributed unto the subject in concreto, which is to be understood (...) (as S.
Cyrill speaks) in the same subject; especially if the Attribute be (...) and
an effect of the office of Mediatorship, As God redeemed the world by his
blood, the God of glory was crucified, and we condemn for Blasphemous that
saying of Nestorius, Noli gloriari Iudee, non enim Deum crucifixisti, sed
homine^, as denying the two natures in 1. Hypostasis, and implying that the man
Jesus was assumed into the society only of the Divinity, and that (...) as one
speaks of the same Heresy. To deliver all this more plainly, Christ Jesus the
second person in the Trinity assumed our whole nature both body and soul (
Totus totum assumpsit me, vt toti mihi salutem gratificaret, quod enim
inassumptibile est, incurabile est, Pet. Lomb. lib. 3. did. 2.) into the
unity of his person, and therein performed the whole work of our Redemption,
Non Mediator homo praeter Deitatem, non Mediator Deus praeter humanitatem, sed
inter divinitatem solam and humanitatem solam mediatrix est humana divinitas
and diuina humanitas. Aug.

Which work of redemption consists of two parts.

1. Satisfaction for sin both in culpa and poena. 2. Intercession.
The one performed by him in the state of Humiliation by his 1. Incarnation. 2.
Passion External. Internal.
3. Crucifying. 4. Death. 5. Burial. 6. Descent into hell.


The other in his estate of Exaltation and glory.

I believe that God, I do not say approved, or suggested, or furthered, but
permitted, and directed, and J may truly say, willed and ordained the fall of
Ada^, that thereby he might take occasion to manifest his glory, and that in
two respects.

1 In erecting a consistory and tribunal for his justice.

2 In exposing to the view of all me^ the inexhaustible treasure of his rich
mercy, or that I may speak in the words of a Prophet. In opening of a
fountain of mercy to the house of David, and to the Inhabitants of Jerusalem,
and to all the Israel of God, for sin, and for uncleanness.

Concerning the first, I confess that there ca^ no other reason be assigned of
the reiection of the wicked, but that of Christ in the Gospel, Etiam pater
quia sic placuit tibi: Non dicit, qua ratione sic patri placuit, sed tantu^
gratias agit patri, quod sic illi placuit. Chrysostom. Or to speak to the capacity
of the ignorant, but the alone absolute will of God ordeining, and as I may so
speak adiudging to destruction the wicked before they were presented upon the
stage of the world, or had done either good or evil. For has the Potter power
of a lump of clay, to make a vessel to dishonor, and shall not the Almighty
Jehovah by his unlimited and transcendent power, ordain vessels of wrath for
the evil day, and for destruction? Seeing he is the Lord in the parable of
Matthew, who said, An non licet mihi quod volo facere in meis? Yet again I
confess that God condemns not into hell any man, but for sins and
trespases, for I hold this to be a true position in Divinity, that sin is
not the cause of reiection, yet may be, and indeed is the meritorious and
impulsive cause of damnation; wherefore whosoever thou art that set thy face
against heaven, and openest thy mouth in blasphemies against God, lay thy hand
upon thy mouth, and look back unto the fall of Adam, Look unto the Rock
whence ye are hewn, and to the hole of the pit whence ye are dug. Is.
51.1. v. and consider what thou broughtest with thee from thy nativity, and
from thy Fathers house. Do not censure God in thy blasphemous thoughts, as if
upon lust only, and not of deserved justice he did award sentence of
condemnation against thee: and I could also wish that many men would be more
sparing to scan this doctrine, and chose rather to admire and magnify, then
strictly to examine by the Canon of our reason, the secret and hidden will of
God; saying with St Paul, O the deepnesse both of the wisdom and knowledge of
God, how unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding out. And
with St Augustine, Disputare vis mecum mirare mecum, and exclama, o altitudo!
Ambo consentiamus in pauore, ne in errore pereamus.

Concerning the second I believe, that al me^ being infected from Adams sin
(not only with imputative guilt, as Pighius would have it, but by natural
corruption also, as St Paul avoucheth) have just cause inhering and residing in
the^ at their birth, for which they should be rejected of God, and left
weltering in their filthy blood to the contempt of their person, yea to be sent
into hell to have their original impiety expiated with brimstone: but that God
for the glory and riches of his mercy, being loath to wreak his fury in the
general perdition of al mankind, not of foreseen either works, or faith, but
of his good pleasure, and only mere mercy has called some out of the cursed
estate of all mankind, on who^ to bestow favor, and the kingdom of his love,
ordaining them in his secret counsel, to be Citizens with the Angels of the
heavenly Jerusalem, and heirs of bliss and coheires with Christ, And does
call them at due time, some at the third hour, and some at the eleventh, if
not outwardly all by his word, yet inwardly all by the hidden virtue, and
efficatious power of his holy spirit, out of the power of darkness, to be of the
household of God, and in the bosom of the Church, there to be consecrated by
Baptism, nourished at the Lords table, instructed by the word, governed by his
spirit, and even then he bestows upon them his Beloved, and with him (...),
he gives remission both of sins, and punishment, and all the benefits and
merits not of his passion only but of his incarnation also: and has given us
the hand of faith, to reach and apply them unto our selves, yea to own, and
possess them, as truly, as if ours, not by imputation only, but originally
and by inhaesion; so that before God all the company of the faithful are
accounted as only one Numerical body with Christ. Sicut corpus vnum et membra
habet multa, sic and Christus. 1. Cor. 11.12. where by Christus is meant
Ecclesia Christi, the Church of Christ head and body, the vine and branches;
for the spirit of God by his sanctifying power by little and little does work
away the old man of our corruption, and does put on us a new creature, making
us really partakers of the substance of the flesh, yea of the whole person of
Christ, and his proper ornaments and graces, as righteousness and
sanctification. The which great blessing of our every way undeserved
redemption, when I seriously revolue with my self, I cannot but break forth
into praise, in the words of Zachary, Blessed be the Lord God of Israel,
because he has visited and redeemed his people, etc. And to use those words of
admiration otherwise applied I confess in the book of Numbers; According unto
this time, it shall be said of Jacob and Israel what has God wrought?

Man having received these rich favors of God in his creation and redemption,
has nothing charged upon him for his tribute, but only to show a good
faithfulness to adorn his christian profession, and to be careful to show
forth good works. Wherefore I confess unto the glory of God, that every one
of Gods children, which has his sins washed away in the blood of the Lamb,
Extra causam Iustificationis nemo potest b^na opera ^atis magnifice commendare.
Luth.
has it not left unto him as Arbitrary, but has a necessity laid upon him to
do good works, and that in these respects following.

1. In respect of God, it being his will and commandment that they should be
done, by such our obedience to testify our thankfulness for his great mercies
of Creation and Redemption.

2 In respect of our selves, that we by these fruits of Sanctification, as by
certain marks in the Kings high way, for they be viae regni, Ber. may know
whether we be in the way of salvation or no, and be led backward to a
certainty of our Justification, and effectual Vocation, and Election, and so
finding our names written in the book of life, may be persuaded Certitudine
fidei, cui non potest subesse falsum, of our future glorification.

3 In respect of others. 1. Ne quis de nobis conqueri possit. Philip. cap. 2.

2 That other men seeing our good works, may be allured to glorify our Father
which is in heaven, and to say as the Gentiles to the Jews, in the prophecy
of Zachary, Ambulabimus vobiscum, for we have heard that God is with you. This
truth being always resolved on, that our best works are not perfect in their
own esteem and value, if examined according to the precise rule of the
Decalogue (lex spiritualis est, ego autem homo carnalis) and in the district
judgment of God, and therefore away with merit, and let us say with S.
Augustine, Vae laudabili etia^vitae hominum, si re, mota misericordia discutias
eam Domine: and assuredly every one of us may confess with Anselmus, Terret me
vita mea, nam diligenter discussa apparet mihi aut peccatu^, aut sterilitas,
tota vitae mea: and I conclude this point with the words of Petrus a Soto a
Papist in his Scholia upon this Article in the Confession of Wirtenberge, O si
cognoscant se homines, and qui gloriantur in domino glorientur.

God makes his will known two manner of ways. 1. By his works (...), of
which I have spoken in the Creation,

2. In his word.

Of the word of God.

Not (...), the substantial word of God, of whom before, Verbum Christum and
lumen.

But (...) and (...), the enunciatiue, and created word of God Verbum Christi
and Lucerna, called sometimes simply the Scriptures, sometimes with an Emphasis,
the Holy (Romans 12) and Sacred (2. Tim. 3. Ch.) Scriptures

That they are 1. The word of God, 2. Sufficient to salvation. 3. Plain and
therefore to be translated. 4. By whom they are to have their sense.


I acknowledge all these books which make up (...) as S. Chrysostom speaks,
The Canon and Body of holy writ, which we call the holy Scriptures, to be
inspired by the holy Ghost, and to be undoubtedly the true word of God, of
which I am persuaded not so much by the judgment of the Church, as for these
reasons following.

1. From the Majesty of God, speaking in the scriptures, for in them nothing
is set down in so easy and simple form of words, but I do perceive
characters engrave by the finger of God, and genium humano maiorem.

2. From the efficacy of the scripture, for me thinks, while I read, my heart
does burn within me, as the hearts of the two disciples that went with Christ
to Emaus: so that I confess with the Prophet. Surely as the reign comes
down, and the snow from heaven, and returns not thither again, but waters
the earth, and causes it to bring forth and bud so is my word, etc. This I
confess against all those Vatican Rabsakes, who having adamant hearts, the
which the spirit of the Lord cannot pierce, do impeach the power of this
word: Hosius that does call it, or approues it to be called, egenum quoddam
elementum; Stephen Paletus, rem inanimatam, Melchior Canus, mortuum iudicem;
and Eckius more blasphemously, atramentariam scripturam; and I condemn Angelus
Politianus, as blasphemous, that preferred Pindarus his Odes before the Psalms
of David. Quid palea ad triticum? Nonne verbum meum est instar ignis (dicit
Jehovah) tanquam malleus conterens petram?

3. From the event of prophesies, every one co^pleat in his proper time,
although foretold long before, to wit, The people of Isreal's bondage in Egypt,
and delivery from thence. The kingdom to continue in the line of Judah, until
Christ came in the flesh. The prophecy of Josias, given by name three hundred
years before his cradle. The captivity into Babylon, and freedom by Cyrus. The
time, place, and manner of Christ's birth, The reiection of the Jews, and
calling of the Gentiles. So that God might well proclaim of himself, as it is
in Isay, I am God, and there is none other, and there is none other, and there
is nothing like me, which declare the last things from the beginning, and from
of old the things, etc: saying, my council shall stand, and I will do,
whatsoever I will, eve^ so, good Lord, thy word, is the word of Truth, yea as
one of thy Apostles has it more Emphatically, (...) it is truth itself, and
one iod thereof shall not fall unto the ground unfulfilled, for though the
Scheme of the world wear away, and the Prophets do not live for ever, yet
thou o Lord with thy Angels wilt come to perform their prophesies in their
moments.

4. And especially from the testimony of the spirit of God, which persuades
unto our souls and consciences, the undoubted truth of that word, which some
do contemn and deride as foolishnes; and hence I judge it to be, that martyrs
being resolved by the powerful persuasion of this spirit, of the truth hereof,
do boldly offer to seal the same with their blood, protesting that nothing
shall remove them from profession of this truth, Vius. Lirin.
non minae, non blandi menta, non vita, non mors, non palatium, non satellites,
non imperator, non imperium, non homines, non demones.

2. I believe that almighty God has made known unto us in his written word so
much of his will, as is sufficient for the instruction of the faithful,
without the patching too of Traditions; So that I account that Canon of the
Council of Trent to be blasphemous, by which it is provided, that Traditions
are to be received pari pietatis affectu, with the written word of God, and
concerning Traditions, I am wont to say with Saint Ambrose, Quod non legi
vsurpare non debeo. That which I find not in the scripture either expressed, or
deducible by easy consequence I ought not to use, and again, Coeli mysterium
me doceat Deus, qui me condidit, non homo, qui se ipsum ignoravit, and with
Origene. Non sum aliorum sermonum discipulus nisi caelestium.

3. This Scripture so sufficient, I acknowledge to be easy, and facile, fitted
to the capacity of the simplest, whose understanding God has not shut up in
that judgment, vobis non datum est nosse misteria regni: so that the weakling
in faith thence may draw milk for his weak stomach, and the more able
Christian, may have stronger meat to better his groath in the mystery of faith:
wherefore I could wish that the Scriptures were permitted to every nation, and
language under heaven, in their own familiar tongue, that so every man may
have and read them to his comfort: for why should I not with that the spirit of
God did not only rest upon Moses, and the seaue^ty ancient men in the book of
Numbers, but that Eldad and Medad, yea and all the Lords people were prophets,
and that the Lord would put his spirit upon them.

That we might say of the whole world, as S. Hierome of Bethlehem, Quocunque te
verteris arator stiuam tenens alleluiah decantat, and sudans messor psalmis se
auocat, and curva attondens vitem falce vinitor aliquid Dauidicum cantat.

But since Scripturae non sunt in legendo sed in intelligendo, as S. Hierome
contra Luciferianos well observes, and Apices, sine crimine, sensus in crimine;
Hill:de Trinitate: and seeing in the^ some things are so difficulte, as that we
may truly say with the Eunuch to Philip, Quomodo possum intelligere, si non
aliquis viam praemonstret mihi? I would have you for the sense of scripture
not to advise 1 with humane reason, which is blind in matters of piety: nor 2
secondly with any Swenfeldian Enthusiast, that vaunts of immediate revelations
from the spirit of God: a lying spirit may speak in the mouth of such
Prophets. Nor 3 with the Pope, that Tarpeian oracle, for I find not warranted
by Scripture any infallibility in his judgment, seeing he may err. Gerson
in his Treatise, An liceat a papa apellare in causis fidei says papam
deuiabilem a fide esse: and Catharinus in his Comment upon the 2 to the Galat.
Nihil prohibet papam errare posse etiam in fide and deficere, etiamsi quidam
nouitij Scriptores ausi sint oppositu^ defendere praeter communem sensum
Doctorum. Nor 4 with Counsels, for 1 they cannot be called so often as the
Church may want decision for sense 2 they are oftentimes an assembly of
malignant persons against the godly, as the council at Carmell against Elias,
and at Gilead against Micheas, and at Trent against the Protestants, howsoever
Campian be hyperbolicall in its commendation, Bone Deus quae Gentium varietas,
qui delectus Episcoporum totius orbis, qui regum and Rerumpub: splendour, quae
medulla Theologorum, quae sanctitas, quae lachrymae, quae ieiunia, qui flores
Academici, quae linguae, quanta subtilitas, quantus labor, quam infinita
lectio, quantae virtutum, and studiorum diuitiae, Augustum illud sacrarium
impleuerunt?

* Quae gentium varietas, qui delectus Episcoporum? In all but 270. Bishops and
of them out of Italy 187. and to make up this rabble Olaus magnus was entitled
Arch: of Vpsala in Gothia, and Robertus Venantius Arch: of Armah in Ireland,
whence they never received penny of commodity.

* Qui regum and Rerump: splendour? Yet Henry the second, the French King next
neighbor to Trent, all the time of Julius the third was not summo^ned thither,
and therevpo^ protested by letters against the said Council, which letters
being thus indorsed, Sanctissimis atque in primis obseruandis in Christo
patribus Conue^tus Tridentini, by reason of offense taken at the word Conuentus
were like not to be read in the Council, they fearing, says Amiot imployd in
that business, that the King did esteem them all for Monks.

* Quae Sanctitas? Yet two Bishops were there taken in Adultrery and stabbed,
Illvr.

* Qui flores? Quos ego no^ Synodi flores sed potius vrticas nominarem. Humf.

* Quae ieiunia? There is nothing true in this Hyperbole, but this, for the
Ambassadors of Charles the 9, the French King Du Ferriers, and Faber, to the
said Council held the third time under Paul 4, began an expostulatory oration
in these words. Liceat P. S. nobis Oratoribus Regis Christianissimi ijsdem
nunc verbis vobiscum agere quibus olim egerunt Iudaeorum Oratores cum Aggeo
Malachia, and Zacharia postremis Prophetis and alijs Dei Sacerdo tibus, qui tum
Hierosolymis conuenerunt: Number Ieiunabimus and stebimus quinto adhuc and septimo
mense? The reason of this Exordiu^ there follows, Centum quinquaginta anni
sunt and multo amplius, ex quibus Reges Christiani petierunt a pontificibus
Romany Ecclesiasticae disciplinae iam tum labentis restitutione^, etc.

* Quantus labor? To reform nothing, Queen Mother her self in a letter could
complain that in 18 years space nothing was there done, in which time and
less Rome and Carthage in the second Punick warke did actions remarkable.

Nor 5 with Fathers, for they are men, and may and do err; and again they
abrogate this authority from themselves, for so St. Augustine, Talis ego sum in
scriptis aliorum, quales ego esse volo intellectores meorum, and how did S.
Augustine read other Fathers writings, he will tell you himself, Cypriani
literas non vt Canonicas habeo sed considero ex Canonicis. But with any of Gods
children, I say, with any who has the gift of Prophecy, which gift is not of
man's wisdom but of the holy Ghost, and the holy Ghost we know is free, and not
tied to any condition of men, and did inspire Amos a heardsman in Tekoa. Whom I
would have not upon any Praetorian authority to command men to believe
whatsoever he list, as they in the Poet, Quod volumus sanctu^ est: but to prove
the Spirit, and to examine Scripture by Scripture, and to follow these rules
following.

1 To be acquainted with the words and Phrases of Scripture.

2 To humble himself in prayer unto Almighty God? upon this hope.

Qui dedit, vt quaeras, addet vt invenias: 3 To mark Antecedents and
Consequences.

4 To observe heedfully the occasion of the Text, the maine scope, and
circumstances thereof.

5 To parallel like places: Ipsa verba Euangelica secum portant expositiones
suas. Aug.

6 To have always before his eyes, for his (...), the measure of faith in the
Articles of the Creed.

7 To advise with more the^ one single Co^me^tary; and if the general stream
of Fathers run one way, not easily to be swaied by any private ^eoterick
opinion to the contrary. The learned Zanchius has said it for me, Tollat Deus
ex Ecclesia has Idololatrias, nam colere homines and eorum placita Idololatria
est, and yet mistake me not, I have heard a learned and most judicious Doctor
say, and I subscribe unto him, that he would not willingly give the sense of
any Scripture until he had advised with Calvin.

Of the Church 1 The authority thereof. 2 The matter. 3 The form. 4 The
affections. 5 The head. 6 The Notes.


1. I confess that by this immortal seed of the word, God has begotten him
a Church. So that the Scripture is the mother of the Church, and the Church the
daughter of the Scripture: how preposterous then, I will not say, blasphemous,
is the judgment of the Church of Rome, who set Hagar above Sara, and the
daughters foot in the neck of the mother, and subject the oracles of God to
the censure of men, avowing the authority of the Scriptures to be such, and
such only as the Church does afford it; yea more blasphemously, that the
Scripture without the censure and approbation of the Church is in it self no
more, and no more to be esteemed, then Aesops fables: know ye not ye Vatica^
Rabsakes, that blasphemers, and all liars shall have their part in the lake
which burns with fire and brimstone? Yea they debase the authority of the
Scripture so far below the Church, as, that they say expressly -- Non omnem
(...) esse peccatum: that every obliquity to the law of God is not a sin: and
yet Andradius erecting himself upon his Porting all buskin, proclaims,
Quicquid a Praelatorum Ecclesiae, ac maxim a Romans pontificis iussu dissidet,
immane esse peccatum; and again, maiori scelere inuolui eum, qui pontificias,
quam qui diuinas leges perfregerit: and they account none to be obedient sons
to their Sea, but such as will say with Erasmus, that although indeed he did
know another sense then that of the Pope of Rome to be more consonant unto the
Text of Scripture; yet, Sed tamen, si hoc Ecclesia iusserit, credam:
captiuaebo. n. intellectum meum in obsequium Ecclesiae. And Bellarmine
himself, lib. 4. de Roman. pont. cap. 5. Si papa praeciperet vitium, aut
prohiberet virtutem, Ecclesia teneretur credere, virtutem esse malam and vitium
esse bonum, but it should seem this troubled him afterward for in his
Recognitions he endeavors to excuse it.

The matter of this Church is 1 Angels 2 Men


1 Angels, for not to conceal any thing I know, I like not the sentence of
M. Beza, and M. Perkins, be it spoken with reverence to so worthy men, but
choose rather to tread in the path of Antiquity, Et nemo bibens vetus Vinum
statim vult nouum, dicit enim vetus melius est. Luc. seeing the learned Zanch.
is persuaded that Angels be parts of the mystical body of Christ, and members
of the Church, seeing they receive by the mediation of Christ, these benefits
ensewing.

1 To be confirmed in their blessed estate.

2 To have a more perfect Revelation of the will of God touching the calling of
the Gentiles.

3 To be reconciled to man, from whom they were averse before, as being
executioners of Gods wrath upon our sins, and hence is their joy for our
several conuersions.

And I believe that this opinion is strongly maintained, and abetted with these
places of Scripture: Ephesians. 1.10. Coloss. 1.20.

2 Men. 1. Non Hypocrites, or wicked men, for howsoever they carry an outward
profession of Sanctity, and the livery of Christians, yet indeed are they not
true and living members of Christ's body: for otherwise this would follow, that
the Hypocrite being to receive his portion in the fiery lake, that Christ
should condemn into hell, his own members; only I must advise you, that in the
judgment of Charity you do esteem al those for true members of Christ, which
fashion themselves to an outward conformity in the Church, always remembering
what S. Augustine answered Petilian charging him to be a reprobate. In area
domini sum vel frumentum, vel palea: sed huius areae ventilabrum non est lingua
Petiliani.

But 2. holy men, elect children, and Saints of God, for their sins being
washed away in the blood of the Lamb, they only are clothed with the stole of
righteousness, and have palms in their hands, and do follow the lamb
whither-soever he goes, singing honor, and praise, and immortality, to him
that sits upon the throne, and to the Lamb for evermore.

3. The inward form of this Church is the bond of the spirit, by which the
Saints of God dispersed over the whole earth of diverse times, are knit together
and linked in a union to Christ their head, and a communion amongst themselves.

4. I believe this Church to be invisible in respect of this inward form, for
although Momus desired, yet God never granted a window to the breast of man, so
that we cannot enter with a Ca^dle to see their faith, their election, the
Graces of the holy Ghost: and in respect of the better part, to wit, the Saints
blessed in heaven, to whom as we cannot extend the torments of malice, or the
scourge of our tongue, so neither our bodily eyes: yet visible in some
particular churches, as now in England (for the welfare of which Church my
prayer has ever bin that in the Canticles, Arise o North and come o South, and
blow on this garden, that the spices thereof may flow out) yet so as subject to
change, having a waxing, and a waning like the moon: for sometime we read that
Christ says of his Church, who is she that looks forth as the morning,
fair as the moon, pure as the son terrible as an army with banners.
Sometimes again we read of the church, that she is drive^ by the red-drago^
into the wilderness, and has sent after her, a river of water, to swallow and
drown her up.

5. This Church is a body coupled together by ioints. Ephesians. 4.16. and therefore
must have a head, the which head I confess Christ, and Christ alone to be
according to that, Coloss. 1.18. Et ipse caput corporis (i) Ecclesiae: for no
other Creature whatsoever can perform the offices of a head to this body,
which are, vi intus agente, as Paul speaks, Ephesians. 5. To give efficacy, and
quickening to the same, and to power forth oil in great abundance into the
seven lamps, which stand in the golden candlestick in the temple, as it is in
the vision of Zachary: Gregorius Meg none of the best Bishops of Ro^e and
immediate Predecessor to this Boniface, sic eragice declamitat Ego autem
fidencer dico, quia quisquis se Vniuersalem Sacerdotem vocal, vel vocari desi
de^at, in elationae sua Antichristum prectortie quia superhiendo se caeteris
praepo^is.
and therefore the first, and best Bishops of Rome never durst arrogate unto
the^ selves, to be the general fathers, and heads of the Church, Verus
successor Pauli dicet cu^ Paulo, Non quod dominemur fidei vestrae, sed
adiutores sumus gaudij: Petri haeres audiet Petrum dicentem, Neque vt
dominantes in clerum. Ber. in ep. ad Eugen. Nor any in more corrupted times,
until Boniface the 3. about 600. after Christ having absolved from Parricide
Phocas, who had killed Mauricius the Emperor and his Lord, obtained in lieu of
this Cburch blessing, to be called the Oecumenicall and general head of the
Church; which ever since the Bishops of Rome have continued (notwithout their
disadva^tag, for it was not for nothing that Barcklay himself a Catholic
wrote thus to Clement the 8. Hanc potestate^ semper censui omnium fluctuum
fontem esse, quibus body haeresis tuu^ navigium lacessit: He gives instance in
the Navarrens, Grandfather, Father, and Son, who, their kingdom being given
away by Julius the second, revolted) and do seek to mainetaine by a
distinction minted by them. That Christ indeed is the head of the triumphant,
and Militant Church both, and the Pope of the Militant only. Again, That
Christ is the head of the Church by sovereign pre-eminence, in a more divine,
ample, absolute, excellent, and transcendent sort but the Pope is head only
Ministerially. Foolish men, that seek to cover their ambition with such
Figleaues, as these are, for what need Christ of a ministerial head, to supply
his presence in the Church; and if the Pope of Rome be that head, how wisely
has Christ provided, that Error and Heresy shall never prevail in it, seeing
the Pope may err, Non solum actu externo, in quaestione facti, errore exempli,
in declaratione opinionis propriae, inijs quae obiter dicat, in medijs ante
conclusionem; sed etiam in rebus fidei, vt summus pontifex, vt publicum os
Ecclesiae, in definitiua sententia; for many of them have been Heretics,
Anastatius the second is tormented in hell for the Heresy of Photinus, as
Drantes Cant. 11. dell inf: reports (but he was factione Gibellinus says
Bellarmine, and therefore his Testimony against this or any Pope not available,
Zepherin was a Montanist in Tertulliaus judgment: Marcelliuus an Idolater
according to Bellarmine himself, Liberius an Arrian and consented to the
condemnaiion of Athanasius. Yea flat Apostats, witness Liran in Math. 16.
Legimus multos pontifices apostatasse a fide, and this Bellarmine does in some
sort grant, when he faintly denies it, if not rather insinuates the same. Non
est proprie haeretica ista sententia, puta, papam errare posse. Est erronea and
haeresi proxima, it may be an erroneus, a scandalous, an offensive position,
but no^ est proprie Haeretica, They are his own words.

6 The true marks acd badges of this Church are only two, the 1 sincere
preaching of the word, and the 2 lawful dispensation of the Sacraments, not
Antiquity, nor multitude, nor miracles, nor the rest which Bellarmine repeateth
to the number of fourteen.

1. The sincere preaching of the word to which we admit no body but him that is
lawfully called by the Church, and Christian magistrate; we know where it is
written: No man takes this honor unto himself, Nisi vocatus vt Aron; and that
our Savior did not intrude himself into the office of priesthood, Missus sum
a patre, a Meipso non veni; and his letters patens, are in these words, Thou
art a Priest for ever after the order of Melchisedeche: and to that Demand
whether the calling of our first Reformers were ordinary or extraordinary? I
answer, it was in this respect Extraordinary, that when the ordinary Ministry
was corrupted, God raised up some of his better servants to reform that which
was amiss: and I deny that al such who have this extraordinary calling, have
all of them and always the gift of miracles; John the Baptist did no miracles.
Ioh. 10.41. And whereas they reply, that God did a miracle in his birth: and 2.
that he was of the lineage sacerdotal: To the 1: I answer, the miracle which
God did in his birth was known only to few: and 2. was done a great time
before the Exequution of his charge: To the 2. that the charge which he entered
upon had nothing common with the Leviticall Priesthood, wherefore his
extraction could not authorize him to baptize. Neither yet do I see, how the
Papists can object unto Luther, and other ministers in the Reformed Churches to
have no lawful calling, seeing they receive their ordination from themselves,
and we do not deny but the Popish Bishops, in creating Ministers, howsoever
they use more ceremonies the^ need of, truly to confer the office upon who^
they lay their hands.

I profess that Ministers thus called have a right to the use of the Keys.
The keys of the Church are the power of binding and loosing, of retaining and
remitting of sins.

I believe that sins are only remitted by God, for I acknowledge it to be
his incommunicable property to forgive sin; according as he proclaims of
himself, Ego, ego sum, qui deleo iniquitates tuas propter me etc: and that man
has but a secundary and ministerial power, to wit, to publish forgiveness of
sins, to those whom God in heaven has forgive^, for we are but Ambassadors,
and do entreat for Christ sake, Reconciliamini Deo: otherwise if the minister
do take upon him, (...), upon any absolute power resting in himself to
forgive sins, the sinner to be absolved may say unto him, as Augustine has
it: Quid ego homo, nisi aeger sanandus? vis mihi esse medicus? mecum quaere
medicum: for he, sinful man as he is, has need of one to forgive his sins
likewise.

I acknowledge power in the minister to retain sin, and to award
Excommunication, against desperate and scandalous offenders, only I could
advise, they would remember, and practice these few rules following. 1 That
such ecclesiastical curses be denounced according unto the word of God.

2 That they put a difference between private and public sins, between
delicta and scelera.

3 That they be not too sharp in their censures, remembering that of
Chrysostom, Si Deus est tam benignus, vt quid sacerdos eius tam austerus?

Against the first, the Bishop of Rome highly offends, when every Easter day
he excommunicateth the Reformed Churches, before his solemn Mass; for whereas
the Pope denounces his curse against us, Quod haeretici, we know the cause is
false, and therefore the curse not effectual, seeing, as it is in the Proverbs,
A curse causeless shall not come: and Neminem ligare debet iniqua Sententia,
Gelasius: and therefore we say with Tertullian, Dum a vobis damnamur, a Deo
absoluimur.

2 The second note of the Church is the rightful administration of the
Sacraments.

Now Sacraments are only two 1 Baptism. 2 The Lords supper.


I confess Baptism to be a seal of the covenant of grace, and therefore
children being contained in the covenant (promissio facta est vobis, et liberis
vestris) are to receive the seal of the covenant, and to be baptized,
howsoever first the Pelagian, and since the Anabaptist with great fury, and
greater frenzy teach the contrary: and yet when I say Baptism is a seal of
the covenant of Grace, I do not any way extenuat the efficacy of Baptism: For
I confess Baptism to be not only a sign or token what we receive, but also
an instrument or mean whereby we receive Grace: and to be the door of our
actual entrance into Gods house, the first apparent beginning of life, (...)
Bazil. a seal to the grace of election before received, but to our
sanctification here a step that has not any before it. The efficacy of
Baptism I give you in Tertullians words, Homo per aquam Baptismi licet a
foris idem esse videatur, Tert. doc^r. resurrect.
intus tame^ alter efficitur, cum peccato natus sine peccato renascitur and
prioribus perit, succedentibus proficit, deterioribus exuitur, in meliora
innovatur, persona tingitur and natura mutatur. And with the Poet: (...).
(...).
So far am I, which Campian impudently charge upon us, from making Baptism
Adiaphoron, Si habeas recte si careas nihil damni.

Yet do I not avouch that Baptism is simply necessary to salvation, for I am
persuaded, that child may be saved which is prevented in his Baptism, by
sudden death, and that saying of S. Bernard always was of authority with me
Non priuatio, sed contemptus Baptismi damnat; and that of S. Ambrose. Qui
Sacramentum omittunt (to wit, in the case above specified) gratiam tamen, non
amittunt; and I think, that S. August. if soberly understood, is not so much
my enemy in this point, as Papists and some Protestants do believe. For I do
conceive that St. Augustine was more peremptory in this point, thereby to
Euince against the Pelagians, that children were tainted with original sin:
and therefore Extra feruorem disputationis cum Pelagianis, he did somewhat
remit of that severity, and we shall find in his book de Bapt. contra
Donatistas lib. 4. Cap. 22. that he is charitable to those that go out of this
world unwashed in Baptism, Si forte ad celebrandum mysterium Baptismi in
angustijs temporu^ succurri no^ potest: They are his own words: and I am not
the only man of all the world that thus understood S. Augustine, for S. Bernard
in his 77. Epist. (whose judgment of the same point what it was you have
before, adds, Ab his ergo duabus columnis (S. August. is one, S. Ambros the
other) creed mihi, difficile avellor, cum his, inquam, me aut errare aut sapere
fateor.

I confess original sin to be weakened, and bridled by Baptism, yea taken
away, quoad reatu^ and imputationem, but not quoad actum, and totali
abolitione, as the Papists would have it, for it still remains in us, as long
as we walk sub onere carnis, and is indeed a sin, howsoever in Christ not
imputed unto the person in who^ it is: or if you will so have it, I will give
you my judgment of Concupiscence, remaining after Baptism in Saint Augustines
words, Remittitur in Baptismate, non finitur. And again, Sed sufficit (inquis)
quod in Baptismate accepi remissionem omnium peccatorum? Nunquid quia deleta
est iniquitas, finita est infirmitas? Adhuc carnem fragilem portas, adhuc
corpus, quod corrumpitur aggrauat animam, adhuc vtique dicis, donec sanentur
languores mei, Dimitte nobis debita nostra. Baptism is only to be dispensed
by a minister, not by a lay man, much less by a woman: yet I am persuaded,
that if a lay man, or woman have de facto baptized, observing the form of
words, the Baptism is not to be repeated, Nescio an quis pie dixerit esse
repetendum; Aug: S. Augustine was not himself uncertain what to think, but
doubtful whether any well minded man in the whole world could think
otherwise: and I rest in the judgment of a learned father amongst us, whose
words they are, pie fit, si minister tingat solus, at fit etiam, si tingat
alius; and again, male factum est si laicus, D. Abbots loc. de Bapt.
peius si faemina rem sacrosanctam hanc attigerit, sed factum est, and quod
factum est, infectum esse non potest.

We should indeed keep our selves within the limits of our vocations, each sex
apart, and therefore when women Baptize (which I take to be not a permission
by law, but a presumption against law) they are to be censured as usurpers of
an others calling, who by unsanctified hands execute that whereunto the laws
of God, and his Church, have deputed others. But yet far be it from me
hereupon, it being but a personal default, to disanull and annihilate the
Action, and to make Baptism no Baptism to the prejudice of the Receiver, for
delictum cum capite semper ambulat; and factum alterius alteri nocere no^ debet.

2 The other Sacrament is the Eucharist, in which the true body and blood of
Christ is given us under the visible form of bread, and wine, to be received
by the mouth of faith of every believer. And I am persuaded that as truly as
the bread and wine is received by my hand, and conveied into my stomach, so
assuredly the body and blood of Christ Jesus is received by the hand of faith,
and conveied unto my soul, and conscience, and this certainety is assured unto
me by those Emphaticall forms of speeches peculiar in the sacraments, by which
the bread is termed the true body, and wine, the blood of Christ: so then the
body of Christ is present in the sacrament, vere, non imaginary, how be it non
corporali praesentia, sed spirituali; according to that of S. Augustine, Quid
paras ventrem, and dentes? creed, and manducasti.

Away then with the wheaten Idol the Mass, and Popish Transubstantiation, for
that there can be no such (...), or Transubstantiation, I protest upon these
reasons.

1 It crosses the institution of Christ, he bideth us to receive his supper In
mei recordatione^, now we know that Recordatio is Rei absentis, non praesentis.

2 Christians would then be Anthropophagi, and the Lords table should be like
the house of Polyphemus in the Poet, -- Et trepidi tremerent subdentibus artus.

3 This implies a blasphemy, for then Christ being chewed, and eaten, in
ventrem cederet, and therefore according to the doctrine of the Gospel, in
latrinam abijceretur.

4 Then the wicked should eat his flesh, and so have eternal life.

5 We see the Accidents of bread, and wine to remain, and therefore the propper
substances of bread, and wine, must remain, except we would have an Accident
to subsist without his proper substance, which is absurd in reason.

And I do account that gloss which the master of the sentences does set upon
this matter very rediculous, to wit, that therefore the bread and wine being
indeed vanished away, their accide^ts must remain to cover the flesh, and
blood of Christ.

1 Vt fides scilicet haberet meritum; Auerr^es in 12. metaph: Quoniam
christiani manducant Deum quem adorant, fi^ anima mea cum philosophis.
quia fides no^ habet meritu^, vbi humana ratio praebet experime^tu^

2 Ne abborreat animus, si carnem ipsam oculi vsurparent.

3 Ne ab incredulis Religioni Christianae insultetur, as if they did eat man's
flesh. I protest likewise against the (...), and consubstantiation of the
Lutherans, who do feign a Coexistence of the body of Christ, in, sub, or cum
pane, and I could wish that they would use more moderation against their
Opposits.

I conclude my judgment of both sacraments with this doctrine, that neither
sacrament has vim causatiuam gratiae, as the Papists speak, that I may
explicate my self to the capacity of the simple, that there is not in the
corporal elements of the Sacraments any supernatural Grace inherent and
essential, but that the Sacraments are instruments and means, by the which
the holy Ghost is effectually powerful, to offer, exhibit, and apply, the
merit of Christ's passion, to every believer.

That which pessime and pertinacissime Eutyches as I read of him, I hope I may
truly, and from a sober and Christian resolution aver: In hac fide genitus
sum, vsque hodie vixi in ea, and opto mori, Etiam sic sentio sic credo.
I. D.
His qui contradicit, aut omnino a Christi
nomine alienus est, aut est Haereticus.


FINIS.

