THE VIEW OF France.

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE


London printed by Simon Stafford, 1604.

THE VIEW OF FRANCE.
CAESAR in his Commentaries, Caesar Com. lib. 1.
deuideth the people of Gaul, into Belgi, Celtae, and Aquitani, parted the one
from the other by the two Rivers of Seine and Garond: the Aquitani from the
Celtae by the Garond: the Belgi from the Celtae by the Seine, and these
between the two Rivers. According to which division, P. Commines.
Philip de Commines boundeth France with two Seas, the Ocean and Mediterranean;
with two Mountains, the Alps and Pireneis, and with one River, the Rheine.

If I should follow the direction of these two most approved authorities,
Limits.
I must be forced to discourse of such Princes, as are interessed in this large
compass, as namely, the Spanish King, the States of the low Countries, the
Dukes of Sauoy and Lorraine, the Pope himself, the little City of Geneua, and
others: but I only purpose to take a view of that which is directly under the
Crown of France at this day, and thereof to give a superficial relation.

France then is seated under a very temperate and wholesome Clymate, P.
Commines.
En tout le monde il n'y a Region mieux situee que celle de la France, car nous
y tenons de region chaude et aussi de la froid: There is no Country in the
world better situate then that of France: for it participateth of the Clymate
both hot and cold. It is in length from Bologne to Marseilles, two hundred
leagues (after the rate of three English miles a league) and in breadth from
Mount S. Bernard, to S. John de Luze, Cabinet du Roy*
as much; for it is holden by some Authors to be of figure, quadrate: which
notwithstanding Bodin denies, Bodin. lib. 6. La Noue.
avowing it to be in form of a Lozenge, with whom La Noue consents,
measuring it thus: From Calais (for now Calais is French) to Narbone, North and
South, is two hundred leagues: from Rochell to Lions, West and East, is one
hundred and twenty leagues: From Mets to Bayonne Northeast and Southwest, two
hundred leagues; and from Morley in Bretagny, to Antibe in Prouence, Northwest
and Southeast, as much. True it is, that many places within this compass are
holden, but not of the King, as Auignon, and what else the Pope has: Toul,
Verdun, and Mets, of the Empire: Cambray, of the house of Austrich, in like
case of Protection, as Constance in Swisserland, Vtrich in the low Countries,
and Vienna in Austria: and as Lucca and Genoua in Italy, protected by the King
of Spain. So do Lorraine also and Sauoy hold of the Empire. As contrarily,
there be places out of this circuit, which notwithstanding hold of this Crown
in right, and owe him fealty and homage; as the Spanyard for the Counties of
Flanders and Artois, which he has ever since the time of Frauncis the first,
denied to render.

Provinces.
THe diverse Provinces of the Country are very many: the chief are these;
Picardy, Normandy, I Will of France, Beausse, Bretagne, Aniowe, Maine, Poictowe,
Lymosin, Xantonge, Champaigne, Berry, Sologne, Auuergne, Niuernois, Lyonnois,
Charrolois, Bourbonois, Daulpheine, Prouence, Languedocke, Tourraine, and
Burgundy. All which are particularly set down in Mappes, as also in the Book,
La Guide.
called The French Guide, where he undertakes to resemble each Country to
some other thing, as Bretaigne, to a horse shoe; Picardy, to a Neats tongue;
and such like: which are but idle and disproportioned comparisons, as one may
well observe, that sees these Countries in the Card.

But the thing of best note in each of these, Commodities.
is their singular Commodities and fruits, wherewith they are blessed for the
sustenance of the Inhabiter: Insomuch that as they say of Lombardy, that it is
the Garden of Italy: so may we truly say of France, that it is the Garden of
Europe. Picardy, Normandy and Languedocke, goodly Countries of Corn, as any in
Christendom, all the Inland Countries, full of Wine, fruits and grain: in
some, great store of wood; in others, of flax; in others, Mines of salt, in
others, of Iron: Insomuch as one says, Toutes chooses necessaires a la vie
human y regorgent en tell abondance, que seulement du bled, du vin, du sell,
La Noue.
et du pastel, qui se transporte es pais estrangers, il y enter en
contr'eschange annuellement, plus de douze millions de livers: All things
necessary for man's life ouerflow there in such abundance, that in counterchange
only of the Corn, Wine, Salt and Woad, transported into foreign Countries,
there is yearly brought into France twelve hundred thousand pounds sterling.
And another no less approved, and as well practiced in the State of France,
says, Les sources du sell, du vin, et du bled, sont inespuisables: Bod. li. 6.
The Springs of Salt, Wine and Corn, are not to be drawn dry. In which
place, he complayneth, that the Kings of France were wont in times past to
help their need with sales of Wood, which are now of late years so spoiled,
as France shall shortly be forced to have their lard from other countries, as
also wood to build and burn: a complaynt which I have often heard in England.
Other Provinces have also their especial Commodities, wherein they excel
their neighbors: as in Lymosin, the best Beeues; about Orleans, the best
Wines; in Auuergne, the best Swyne; in Berry, the best Muttons, where there is
such store, as thereof they have a Proverb, when they would tax a fellow for
his notable lying, that tells of a greater number then the truth, they say, Il
n'y a tant de Moutons en Berry: As one would say, Fie, there be not so many
sheep in Berry. They partake with us also in sea commodities: Bod. contra
Malatest.
as upon the coast of Picardy, where the shore is sandy, they have store of
flat fish: upon the coast of Normandy and Guyen, where it is rocky, fish of the
Rock (as the French call them) and upon the coast of Bretaigne, where it is
muddy, store of round fish, as Lamprey, Conger, Haddock; so likewise in diverse
seasons, diverse other sorts, as Mackerels in the end of the Spring, and
Maquerelles (Bawds) at all times, Herrings in the beginning of Autumn, as we
have in England, etc.

Bod. contra Mal.
Bodin will needs take upon him, being no more pertinent to his matter, then it
is here, to show the reason why in old time among the most delicate and
toothsome Trencher-men of the ancient Romans, they always feasted with Fish:
because (says he) it is neither so mezzeld as Porke; nor scabd as Mutton; nor
rank as Goat; nor dropsy as Lamb; nor impostumate as Beef; nor subject to
the falling sickness, as Quayles and Turky-Cocks; nor to inflammations, as
Capons; nor to lice as Pigeons: and yet the friand Frenchman, as well as we,
never eats it, but on maigre days (fasting days) and then also by compulsion
of the Laws. But by his leave, I suppose, they in old time did it upon a
vaineglorious prodigality, not for any licorousnes; for Sardanapalus never
made his great banquets of Fish, Justin.
but when he was farthest from Sea: and Aesope the Tragic, that spent 15000.
crowns at a feast, bestowed it all in birds tongues, as of Linnets,
Nightingales, and such others as had been taught to sing, that the price might
be the greater. Give me for all this the good old Bishop of Toledo his Capon,
who upon a fasting day would needs make the company at table believe, that by
the force of certain words of consecration, he had transsubstantiate this fat
Foul into fish, and that there only remained the outward form, Poggio.
as Poggio the Florentine reports of him.

This Country must needs be well stored with fish; for besides the benefit of
the sea, the lakes and ponds belonging only to the Clergy, which at the most
have but one third of France, Cabinet du Roy.
are reported to be 135. thousand.

The rivers also of France are so many, Boterus Relations.
as Boterus reports of the Queen Mother, she should say here were more then
in all Christendom; but we hold her for no good Cosmographer; she had her
other qualities, which shall not be forgotten in their fit place. True it is,
that the rivers here are many, and very fair, Rivers.
and so fitly serving one the other, and all the whole, as it seems, nature,
in the framing of our bodies, did not show more wonderful providence, in
disposing veins and arteries throughout the body, for their apt conueyance of
the blood and spirit, from the liver and heart, to each part thereof, then she
has showed in the placing of these waters, for the transporting of all her
commodities to all her several Provinces. Of all those, these are the
principal; the Seine, upon which stands the City of Paris, Rouen, and many
other. It has his head a little above Chatillon in the northwest of Lingonois,
and receives nine Rivers of name; whereof the Yonne, the Marne, and the Oyse
are nauigable, that is, do carry boats with sail.

The Some, whereupon stands the City of Amyens, Abbeuile, and many other: It
has his head above S. Quentin, divides Picardie from Artois, and receives
eight lesser Rivers. The Loire has standing upon it the Cities of Orleans,
Nantes, and many other: his head is in Auuergne, it parts the middle of
France, his course is almost two hundred Leagues, it receives 72. Rivers,
whereof the chief are Allier, Cher, Main, Creuse, Vienne, all nauigable. The
Garond, upon which stands Bourdeaux, Thoulouse, and other Cities: it has his
head in the Pyreney mountains, it divides Languedocke from Gascoine, it
receives sixteen rivers, whereof Iarne, Lot, Bayze, Dordonne, and Lisle are
chiefest.

And lastly, the Rhosne, upon which stands the City of Lions, Auignon, and
diverse others: it has his head in the mountains Alps, deuideth Sauoy from
Lyonnois, and Dolpheine from Languedocke, it receives thirteen rivers,
whereof the Soane, the Dove, Ledra, and Durance are the chiefest.

All the other Rivers carry their streams into the Ocean, Some at Saint
Vallery, Seine at Newhauen, Loyre beneath Nantes, and Garond at Blay: only the
River of Rhosne pays his tribute to the Mediterranean at Arles.

The Seine is counted the richest, Boterus Relations.
the Rhosne the swiftest, the Garond the greatest, the Loyre the sweetest, for
the difference which Boterus makes of them, where he omits the Garond, and
makes the Soane a principal River, is generally rejected.

When we rightly consider the happy fruitfulness of this soil, and the
exceeding benefit of these rivers, I know not what we should say is wanting,
unless ye will say, Animus, qui his vtatur, deest, wit to use them: Terentius.
for in deed the French has these eight and thirty years abused them with
their civil and intestine wars. Do but conceyt in your imagination the
fair Towns of Italy here seated, and in them, the English Nation planted:
and in my opinion, ye have the right Idea of Platoes happy State: O vtinam! O
si!

But I must remember one inconvenience and discommodity it has.

I have heard some poor Countryman say, He loves not to have his house too
near a Lawyer. It should seem they be ill Neighbors; and it may be that
Themistocles roued at some such matter, when he caused the Sergeant to cry in
public place, Plutarch. in Them.
that besides all the good properties which his Farm had, that he set to
sale, Qu'il auoit bon voisin: That he had a good neighbor.

This is the mischief, that fair France has about her so many bad
neighbors, as Lorraine, Sauoy, and Spain, of whose good affection to this
Country, we may say with the Poet, Vnum cognoris, omnes noris: Know one, and
know them all: Neither of them wish her better then other, as has well
appeared in the late civil wars, wherein each thought to have had his share,
howsoever (now) they love no Grapes.

Haue^s and Ports. La Guide.
The Ports and passages into France, where Custom is paid to the King, were in
times past more then they be now: the names of them at this present, are these:
In Picardy, Calais, Bologne, S. Vallery. In Normandy, Diepe, Le Haure de Grace,
Honnefleux, Caen, Cherbrouge. In Bretaigne, S. Malo, S. Brieu, Breast,
Quimpercorentine, Vannes, Nants. In Poictowe, Lusson, les sables d'Olonne. In
Rochellois, Rochelle. In Xantogne, Zoubisse. In Guyenne, Bourdeux, Blay,
Bayonne. In Languedocke, Narbonne, Agde, Beucaire, Maugueil. In Prouence,
Arles, Marseilles, Fransts. In Lionnois, Lions. In Burgogne, Ausonne, Langres.
In Champagne, Chaumont, Chalons, Trois. In the Territory Metzin, Metz, Toul,
Verdun. In all, thirty seven: Of all these, Lions is reputed to be the most
aduantageous to the Kings Finances, as being the key for all silks, clothes of
gold and silver, and other merchandise whatsoever, which come or go from
Italy, Swisserland, and all those Southeast Countries, into France, which are
brought to this Town by the two fair Rivers of Rhosne and Soan: the one
coming from Sauoy, the other from Burgundy, and here meeting: where, by the
way, me thinks, I may fitly compare these two Waters, to two great Princes of
these two great Countries, coming to be married at this great City, which
within the walls is within ten Toyses as large as Paris. In which allusion, I
make the Rhosne (which in the French tongue is of the masculine gender) the
Sauoyard Prince; and the Soane, which is likewise in this language, the
feminine, the Princess of Burgundy; which conceit is the better warranted,
because le Rhosne is a very swift and furious River, which well agrees with
the nature and condition of the man; and la Sona, a still and sweet water,
which rightly symbolizeth with the quality of a woman.

I would our Poet, Spencer.
that made a marriage between the Medun and Thames at Rochester, had the
handling of this matter; for it becomes a Poem better then a Relation.

For profit, next to Lions, are Bourdeaux, Rochell, Marseilles, Nantes and
Newhauen: But for capability of shipping, I have heard that Breast excels;
and for strength, Calais, especially as it is now lately fortified by the
Spanyard, which was not let long since to be called, Commines cap. 50.
La plus belle Capitainezie du monde, au moins de la Chrestiente: The goodlyest
government in the world, at least in Christendom.

There are requisite in all Ports, to make them perfect, these four things:
Lipsius.
1. Magnarum and multarum Nauiu^ capabilitas. 2. Nauibus tutissima statio. 3.
Ad hostilem vim coercendam habilitas. 4. Mercatorum frequentatio: 1. Room to
receive many and great Ships. 2. Safe riding. 3. Facility of repelling foreign
force. 4. Concourse of Merchants. The most of these French Ports have all four
properties, except only the last, which in the time of these civil broils,
have discontinued: and except that we will also grant, that Calais fayles in
the first.

The Cities in France (if ye will count none Cities, Cities. Bodin. li. 5
but where is a Bishops Sea, are only one hundred and four. There be so many
Archbishops and Bishops in all, as shall in more fit place be showed: But after
the French rekoning, calling every Ville, a City, which is not either a
Burgade, or a Village, we shall find that their number is infinite, and indeed
uncertain, as is also the number of the towns in general. Some say, there
be one million and seven hundred thousand: but they are of all wise men
reproved. Others say, six hundred thousand; but this is also too great to be
true. The Cabinet rateth them at one hundred thirty two thousand of Parish
Churches, Cabinet.
Hamlets and Villages of all sorts. Bodin says, there be twenty seven thousand
and four hundred, Bodin. li. 6
counting only every City for a Parish: which will very near agree with that
of the Cabinet; and therefore I embrace it as the truest.

By the reckoning before set down of two hundred leagues square (which France
almost yields) we must compute, that here is in all forty thousand leagues in
square, and in every league, five thousand Arpens of ground, which in all
amounts to two hundred millions of Arpens: which sum being divided by the
number of the Parishes, shows, that one with another, each Village has one
thousand, five hundred and fifteen Arpens, which measure is bigger then our
Acre.

We may, if we will, abstract a third, because Bodin will not admit France to
be square, but as a Lozenge: For in matter of such generality as this, men do
always set down suppositions, not certaynties.

Of all these Cities and great Towns, I will omit to speak in particular
(though a Stranger must very precisely observe whatsoever he sees in his
travail) affying in La Noue his censure, for their manner of Fortification. La
Noue.
Sion veut (says he) regarder par toute la France, ie cuyde qu'on n'y
trouuera, horsmis quelques chasteux, aucune ville qui soit a demi parfaite,
s^lon les regles des ingenieures: If a man will look throughout all France, I
think that (some Castles excepted) he shall not find any Town half
perfectly fortifyed, according to the rules of Ingeners.

Only I must add, that since his time, which is now above twenty years, many
Towns also have bettered their manner of fortifying: amongst which, none more
(by report) then that of Rochell: and lately, that of Amiens, of which we
might last year, while the Spanyard held it, say (as is said of Decelea, in
the Territory of Athens) which Alcibiades counseled the Lacedaemonians, to take
and fortify, namely, Plutarch. in Alc.
that it did consumet et mettre a bas la puissance de la France, autant et plus
que nulle autre chose: Consume and bring low the power of France, as much as
any thing else whatsoever: And that it kept and scowred all the passages from
Paris to Rouen, like that other from Athens to Eleusina.

But as the loss of this Town wounded the whole body of France, so the
regayning of it, was not only the healing of the hurt received (wherein it was
better then the Pelias Hasta) but also the raising of it to these happy
terms, wherein it now stands.

This Town would give me good occasion to speak of the last years siege,
the Cardinals coming, and the Cittyes yielding, with many other accidents
very memorable and worthy the recounting; wherein I had rather spend an hours
time in talking, then any Paper in writing; for that, to pen it, asks the
judgment of a Soldier, of which honor I am most unworthy: Neither will I also
spend time in the discoursing of other Cities, which we have seen here in
France, as of their situation, building, wealth and fortification, save only
of Paris, because the French say, this is a world, no City.

After that, I will breefly relate of the Castles in France, and of some
reasons why it is prejudicial to the quiet of a State, to have many of them,
except they all belong to the Prince, who ought to have of them in his frontier
places, and Lymitrophes (as they call them) and upon Cities which are strong to
keep the^ in awe, not else; and as that of S. Katherines, which you saw at
Rouen, now rased: and then I will end the first branch of this Relation,
namely, of the Topography of this Country.

Paris.
The City of Paris, seated in a very fruitful and pleasant part of the I Will of
France, upon the River of Sein, is by the same divided into three parts: that
on the North toward S. Denis, is called the Burge: that on the South toward
the Fauxbourges of S. Germans, is called the University, and that in the
little I Will, which the River there makes, by dividing it self, is called the
Ville.

This part, no doubt, is the most ancient; for says my Author, Caesar Com.
li. 7.
Lutece est vne ville des Parisiens, assisse en vne Isle de Seine: Lutecia is a
City of the Parisians, seated in an I Will of the Seine. We may distinguish it
thus: into Transequana, Cifequana, and Interamnis: The part beyond the Seine:
that on this side the Seine, and that in the I Will encompast with the River. It
is reputed not only the capital City of France, but also the greatest in all
Europe. It is about the walls, some ten English miles: these are not very
thick, the want whereof is recompensed with the depth of the ditch, and
goodness of the Rampart, which is thick and defensible, save on the South side,
which, no doubt, is the weakest part of the Town, on which side it is
reported, that the L. Willoughby offered the King in four days to enter, at
such time as he besieged it. Whereunto the King condescended not by the
counsel of the old Marshall Biron, who told him, M. Biron.
It was no policy to take the Bird naked, when he may have her feathers and
all. On the other side, especially toward the East, it is very well fortified
with Bulwark and Ditch, fair and modern, Les Rampars furent faictes es
ports S. Antoine, S. Michel, Antiq. Par.
et S. Jacques et ailleurs, 1544. The Ramparts of the Gates S. Anthony, S.
Michel, and S. James, and elsewhere, were made 1544.

This Bastile of S. Anthony, was built (some say) by the English; and indeed it
is somewhat like those pieces which they have built elsewhere in France, as
namely, that at Rouen: howbeit, I read in Vigner his Cronicle, Vigner. hist.
bib.
that it was builded by a Preuost of Paris, in the time of Edward the third of
England, at what time our Kings began their first claim, and had as yet
nothing to do in this City.

Some other monuments I purpose to speak of, with their Founders, by the
example of Plutarch, Plut. Peri.
who in his discourse of Athens, particularizeth in this manner: Pantheon
Hecatompedon, built by Ictinus and Callicraditas, the Chapel of Eleusine, by
Coraebus: the Lantern, by Xenocles: the Theater, or the Odeon, by Pericles:
the Port Pyraeum, by Muesicles, and the Pallaedium of Pallas, by Phidias. So in
this Town, the Chastelet was built by Julian the Apostata: the University was
founded by Charlemagne, Haillan. li. 1.
Anno, 800. who also erected those of Bologna and Padoa.

The Church of Nostre Dame (Our Lady) was founded Anno, 1257. where are these
verses following engraven, to show the greatness of it: Antiq. Par.
Si tu veux scauoir comme est ample
de Nostre Dame le grand Temple:
Il a dans aeuure pour le seur
dixsept toyser de hauteur:
Sur lae largeur de vingt et quattre, et soixante et cinq sans rebattre, A de
long: aux, tours haut montees trent quattre sont bien comptees, Le tout fond
sur pillotis, anssi vray, que ie te le dis:

If you would know the greatness of the great Church of our Lady, the roof
thereof is 17. fathom high, it is 24. fathom broad, 65. fathom long, the two
Steeples are 34. fathom high above the Church, and al founded upon piles.

The Hostel de la ville (The Towne-House) was finished by Francis 1. Anno.
1533. with this inscription over the Gate, S.P.E.P. that is, Senatui, Populo,
Equitibusque Parisiensibus pie de se meritis, Franciscus primus Francorum Rex
potentissimus, has aedes a fundamentis extruendas mandauit, accurauit,
condendisque public consiliis et administrandae Reip. dicauit, anno vt supra:

For his wel-deseruing Senate, people and Burghers of Paris, Francis the 1.
most puissant King of France, commanded this house to be built from the
foundation, and finished it, and dedicated it to the calling of the Common
Counsel, and governing the City, in the year aforesaid.

This is, as ye would say, the Guild Hall of the town. The Hostel Dieu in
Paris, was augmented and finished in 1535. by Antoine de Prat, Chancellor in
this City, his pourtreict with Francis 1. is upon the door as ye enter. This is
(as we call it at London) the Hospital. The Palai^e de Paris was built by
Philip le Bell, 1283. purposing it should have bin his mansion house; but since,
it has been disposed into diverse Courts, for the execution of Justice, just
like Westminster Hall, which likewise at first was purposed for the Kings
Palace.

Here you have such a show of Wares in fashion, but not in worth, as ye have at
the Exchange. Here is a Chapel of the S. Esprit, built by S. Jews, 1242.
Here are all the seven Chambers of the Court of Parliament (which was first
instituted by Charles Martel, Haillan. lib. 1.
father to King Pepin, anno 720.) but of them all, the great Chamber of Paris
is most magnificently beautified and adorned by Jews the twelfth. At the
entry, is a Lion cowchant, with his tail between his legs, to signify, that
all persons, how high soever, are subject to that Court.

The Chamber also of Comptes, built by this Jews, is a very fair room; at
the entry whereof are five portreicts with their Mots. The first is Temperance,
with a Dial and Spectacle: Her word, Mihi spreta voluptas: I despise pleasure.
Secondly, Prudence, with a looking Glass, and a Sieve: her word, Consilijs
rerum specutor: I prye into the Counsel of things. Justice, with a Balance
and a sword: her Mot, Sua cuique ministro: I give to every man his own.
Fortitude, with a Tower in one arm, and a Serpent in the other: her word, Me
dolor atque metus fugiunt, Both pain and fear avoid me. And lastly, Jews
the King, with a Scepter in one hand, and holding Justice by the other, and
this written for his word, Quatuor has Comites foueo, coelestia dona,
Innocuae pacis prospera Sceptra gerens:
My happy Scepter in calm peace does flourish,
While I these heauen-bred sisters 4. do nourish.


To speak particularly of all other the buildings and Courts of this Palace,
as the Chamber of the Treasurer, the Table of Marble, the Courts of Aides, and
such like, were to be too tedious.

The buildings of this City are of stone, very fair, high, and uniform,
throughout the town, only upon the Port N. Dame, Our Ladies Bridge, which is,
as it were, their Cheapeside: their building is of brickbat, all alike
notwithstanding; the fairest Fabric in the town (and worthily) is the Kings
Castle or Palace of the Louure at the west: It is in form quadrangulare, the
south and west quarters are new and Princelike, the other two very antique and
prisonlike. They were pulled down by Francis. 1. and begun to be rebuilt, but
finished by Henry the second, with this inscription, Henricus 2. Rex
Christianissimus, vetustate collapsum aedificium refigere coepit. The most
Christian King Henry the 2. began to repair this time-ruined edifice.

From this Palace, the King is building a Galery, which runs along the river
East and West, and his purpose is, it shall pass over the town ditch with an
Arch, and so continue to the Twilleries, which is at least six hundred paces,
and so both these buildings shall be united into one: which, if ever it be
done, will be the greatest and goodliest Palace of Europe: This Gallery is
very curiously wrought with Flowers de luce, curious knots, branches, and such
like device, cut in stone; and in every place this word of the Kings, Duo
protegit vnus. Which I suppose, implies, One God maintaynes the two Kingdoms
of France and Navarre.

The building of the Twilleries, begun by the Q. Mother (which is also a
stately work) is now in the finishing: for this Queen Mother began many
things, but finished none (except mischiefs) witness this present house of
the Twilleries, and that other at S. Maur some two leagues from Paris, whither,
ye remember, we went to kiss the young Prince of Condies hand, which then
told us was morgaged to her creanciers (creditors) for 25. thousand Crowns,
and now stands vnperfited.

The next house in state, both for the beauty of the building, and device in
the Gardens, is that of Monsieur Gondy, an Italian, whose father came into
France with Katherine de Medices, and was here by her advanced. There be other
very many and very stately buildings, as that of Mons. Sansue, Mons. de
Monpensier, de Neuers, and infinite others, whereof especially toward the
East end this town is full, in so much as ye may say of the French Noblesse,
as is elsewhere said of the Agrigentines, They build, as if they should live
ever, and feed, La No^e.
as if they should dye to morrow. But among all these, there is none (says
this Author) that exceed more then the Lawyers, Les gens de Justice (et sur
tout les Tresoriers) ont augmente aux seigneurs l' ardeur de bastir: The
Lawyers, and especially the Officers of the Kings money, have enflamed in the
Nobility the desire of building.

I have heard a tale of a President of Parliament, whose friends coming on a
time to see him at his new house, began exceedingly to commend it, as indeed it
deserved, as well for the rareness of the workmanship, as the goodness of the
Stone, Timber, Marble, and such like. No (quoth he) ye mistake the stuff
whereof it is made: this house is only built, de testes des fols: of fools
heads. I think many of our new buildings in England, are made of the same
stuff.

Ye must note, it is not yet one hundred years since this stately kind of
building (or I should rather say, beautiful; for still the most stately is the
most ancient) came first in request. La Noue.
La Noue says, Il n'y a gueres plus de soixants ans que l'architecture a este
restablie en France et au parauant on se logoit asses grossierement: It is not
much more then threescore years since Architecture was reestablished in
France, and before that time, men were housed but homely. He there seems to
commend it, as a great grace to his Country: Marry, says he, Si on co^te
aussi combien tells magnificensez ont enuoye de gens au bissae, on dira que la
merchandise est bien chere: If we reckon withal how many such magnificence
has sent to the we may say, it is very dear marcha^dize. I am for my part, of
Friar John of Antomaure his mind, who seeing in a great Palace such stately
Halls, such goodly Galleries, Rablais
such fair Chambers, such well contrived Offices: and on the other side, the
Kitchen so lean, the Chimneyes so cold, and the Cellars so dry, Un beau
Chasteu dit-il a fair de belles promenades, et me c^rez mes dens a ieun a la
Napolitaine: A fair Castle (said he) to walk fair turns in, and pick my
teeth fasting after the Neapolitane fashion.

The Universities, wherein in times past were wont to be (by report) above
thirty thousand of all sorts, are now by reason of the wars, reduced to a
fourth part, and many of these children, such as our petty schools in the
Countries are furnished withal. The streets both in the City, University, and
Suburbs, are very fair, straight, and long very many of them; the shops thick,
but nothing so full of wares, nor so rich as they of London, in comparison
whereof, these seem rather Pedlers then otherwise: But for number, I suppose,
there be three for two of those.

The Faulxbourges are round about the City, ruined and utterly desolate, except
those of Saint Germaynes, which was very fayrely builded, and was very near as
great as the fair Town of Cambridge.

The benefit of this Town is very great, which it has by the River, as by
which all the Commodities of the Country are conveyed: Whereupon Monsieur d'
Argenton reports of it, C'est la ville, Commi^. C. 15.
que iamais ie veisse ^nuirone^ de milleux pais et plantureux:

Of all the Towns that ever I saw, it is environed with the best and
fertilest Country:

And he there reports, that for twenty months that he was Prisoner, he saw
such an infinite company of Boats pass and repasse, as but that he was an
eyewitness, he would have thought incredible, which he also after proves by
the mayntenance of the three Armies of the three Dukes of Burgundy, Guyenne,
and Bretaigne, which consisted of an hundred thousand men, against the City
of Paris, wherein they had besieged Jews the eleventh, and yet neither the
Camp nor Town had any want of victuals. Commi^. li. 15.
Faut bien dire qu'en ceste Isle de France, est bien assise cette ville de
Paris, de pouuoir fournir deux si puissans hosts: car iamais nous n'auions
fault de viures, et dedans Paris a grand penie s'apperceuoient ils qu'ily eust
iamais bien enchery que le pain, sealement d'un denier: It must needs be
granted, that this Town of Paris is excellently seated in the I Will of France,
to be able to furnish two so great Armies: for we never wanted victuals; and
they within Paris hardly found any thing the dearer, but only bread, a denier
upon a loaf. The Sea flows no nearer this City, then Pont de Larche, some
25. leagues off.

Some say, this Town was builded in the times of Amasias, Annals de France.
King of Judah, by some relics of the Trojan war, and that it was called
Lutece (a Luto) because the soil in this place is very fat, which is of such
nature, as ye cannot well get it out, it does so stain: whereof they have a
Byword, Il gaste comme la fange de Paris: It stayneth like the dirt of Paris.
Other say, it was called Paris of ( Parresia) a Greek word, which signifies
(says this Author) hardiesse ou ferocite, Idem.
valor or fierceness, alleging this verse, Guil A^moritanus
Et se Parrisios dixerunt nomine Franci,
Quod sonat audaces, etc.
And the Franks called themselves Parrisians, which signifies valiant. And by
this Etymology would infer, that the French is a warlike Nation. But he is
much mistaken in the word; for it signifies only a boldness or liberty of
speech: which whether they better deserve, or to be accounted valiant, you
shall see, when I come to speak of the Frenchmans humor and nature in
general. As for the nature of the people of this Town, their Histories tax
it of infinite mutinies and Seditions, matchable to the two most rebellious
Towns of Europe, Liege and Gant; and yet this last is praised in one thing,
Hail. li. 1.
Qu a la person de leur Prince ils ne touchent iamais: That they never harm
their Princes Person: Whereof the Barricades make Paris unworthy. Hail. li. 3.
And du Haillan says of them, when they stood fast to Jews the eleventh
against the three Dukes abouenamed: Iamais les Parrisiens ne tindrent un bon
parti, n'y ne firent rien qui vallut, que ceste fois-la: The Parrisians never
held good side, nor never showed any honesty but then only. But I can read no
such matter in Commines; for I well remember, that even then diverse of the
chief of the Town had practiced secretly with the enemy, and were upon
terms of concluding, when by the Kings wisdom they were prevented.

The Arms of this City were given them, Anno. 1190. by Philip le Bell, who
creating them a Preuost and Escheuins (like Office as our Mayor and Aldermen)
Leur donnoit les armoiries, de guelues a vne nauire d'argent, Antiq. Par.
le chef d'azure seem de fleurs de lys d'or: gave them for Arms, Gules, a Ship
Argent, and a Chief seeded with Flower de Lys Or.

Ye shall hear the French brag, that their City has been besieged a hundred
times by the enemy, and yet was never taken since Caesar's time. The reason
whereof one of their best Writers gives, Bodin. lib. 5.
Because (says he) it is very weak, and therefore always compoundeth.

I compare Paris with London, thus: This is the greater, the fairer built, and
the better situate: ours is the richer, the more populous, the more ancient:
For I hold antiquity to be a great honor as well to great cities, Castles
as to great Families. Besides the Cities and Ports of France, well fortified,
there be also infinite numbers of Castles and Cittadels (which the people
always call, Nids de Tyrans, the nests of Tyrants, and the Prince he calls
them Chastivillains. Idem. l. 6.
) Of the Castles the number is therefore most great, and as uncertain, by
reason that every Noble man's house of any age, is built in defensible manner, as
you have diverse times already observed. An example of one for many hundreds,
ye may take that of Roch-fort belonging to the Seigneur de la Tremouuille,
which in these Civil wars endured a siege and 5000. Canon shot, and yet was
not taken. It is judged by the wisest, that in great kingdoms, such as France,
no places should be fortified but the frontiers: after the example of Nature,
who armeth the heads and heels of Beasts, but never the Bowels nor middle
part. For indeed the strength of a Country consists not in walled towns, but
in the united hearts of the people, as Brutus proves in Liuie, Iunius Brutus.
Tit. Liuius l. 1. Dion. Hallicar. l. 5. Plaut.
and Dionysius Halicarnasseus: to which purpose the Poet also says, Where
there is concord among citizens, Pulchre munitam esse vrbem arbit^or: I think
that Town excellently fortified. But where discord reigns, centuplex murus
vrbi non ^ufficit: An hundredth fold wall is not sufficient. Whereof it comes,
that Histories report of the Tartarians, Aethiopians, and Arabians, that they
have no fortified places: and it is said of Priest Iehan the great king in
Affricke, that he has but one in all his Empire: and we in England, except
frontier places, have none but his Majesty's.

The reasons against them are these: It makes the inhabitants cowards:
Plutarch. in Licurg
and therefore Licurgus forbad the walling and fortifying of Lacedemon.
Secondly, lest the enemy being entered, the Country should stay and possess
himself, of some of these places, whereas otherwise, he only forrageth and
harrieth the Country, and away again. Therefore John Maria della Rouere,
Guicciard. l. 4.
Duke of Vrbin, rased down all his Castles (finding himself too weak to
resist his enemy) and retired to Venice, assuring himself, that Duke
Valentionis could not stay there long, where there was no place to be kept:
which judgment of his, the event well proved. For this cause also, they of
Genoa, after the battle of Pauia, Bodin. l. 5.
where the French King was taken prisoner, having got the French Garrison out of
the Lauterne, ruined it to the very foundation. Plut. Timoleon.
So did they of Siracuse cause the Cittadell of Arradine; the only refuge of
the tyrant Dionisius. Lastly, they give occasions to the possessors, to rebel
and usurp, whereof, both all histories, and among these our own (where, if I
be not mistaken, in King Stephens time were rased eleven hundred Castles) and
these forty years troubles in France do testify.

There be some reasons for the having of these fortified places, which I do
not conceive so good as these, except only I should grant them their Capital
City to be fortified, and none else.

For Bodin thinks it great madness in a Prince, Bodin. l. 6
to suffer his people to have strong Towns, (especially as here in France,
where they will have no Garrison, but of their own Citizens: the effect whereof
was well seen in the loss of Amiens) except the King have therein a Cittadell
to bridle them. Against which, many Cities in this Country pretend
Privileges, as that of Amiens, and some have bought the Cittadell of the King,
to the intent to demolish it, as they of Lions; such eye-sores they be here
in France. In such a Country as Italy, where there be diverse Princes,
fortified Towns are more needful, where notwithstanding ye shall note, that
no great Signore is ever made Captain of the Cittadell, nor has any league
with the Governor, whom they there call The Podesta, and therefore every year
also these Offices are changed throughout the State of Venice, which at this
day, is the most perfect Optimacy in the world; and the rather, because though
the State be Aristocraticall, yet the execution of the Government is mixed,
Offices being conferred, both upon the one sort and other of the Citizens,
which makes that perfect harmony, Pla. de rep. lib. 4.
whereof the divine Philosopher so much speaks.

You must understand, that here in France, all Inhabitants of Cities, are
liable to the common charges of the fortification of their City, reparations of
bridges, fountains, highwayes, and such like. And because the richer sort
should not leuy the money, and then keep it to themselves, or employ as the
list, they must give information to the Chaunceller, Hail. li. 3.
of the necessity of the Leuy, and procure Letters Patents for the same, by
authority whereof they gather the money, and use it, yielding after to the
Kings Procureur their account.

And for their Watch and Ward, it goes by course, as in the City of Embden,
and diverse other in those Low Countries. As for Castles, the Seigneur, or
Captain may not force Vassal ( fair leguet, To watch and ward) except in
frontier places, Ordon. chapter 6.
upon forfayting of their estates.

After this general Survey of the Country it self, Government.
we must observe something of the Government, wherein I will not trouble you,
with fetching their first Pedigree from beyond the Moon, as many of their
Histories labor, nor by disputing the matter, Strabo.
whether it be true or no, that they came from Troy, into the Marshes of
Maeotis, whence, after some small abode, they were chased by the Roman
Emperor, into Bauaria, and after into Frankland, in Germany.

It shall suffice, that from hence, Carrion.
this people came into France, wherein all writers agree: For after the
declination of the Roman Empire, when the Ostrog^thes conquered Italy, the
Visig^thes, Spain; and the Vandalles Affricke: then did the Burgondiens, and
Franconiens divide this Country between them, Haill. li. 1 de l'estat.
conquering it upon the old niquilines, the Gauls, who from Caesar's time,
till then, had not tasted the force of a forrayne power.

The Government was under Dukes, till the year 420. when as Pharamond caused
himself to be entitled King. In this race it remained till 751. when Pepin
suppressed his Mr. Chilpericke and usurped. His line lasted till 988. when Hugh
Capet gave the check to the succession of Charlemagnes line (who was Pepins
son) and invested himself with the Diadem. From him it has lineally
descended by heirs males to the house of Valois, and for want of issue male in
them, is now come to the house of Burbon. In this space of time, you must
observe the three ages of France* Her childhood, till Pepin: her manhood, till
Capet: her old age, till now. For in the first age, the Kings were like
children, content to be taught by others in matters of Religion, (as then ye
may note, that Clouis received the faith, and was baptized) as also in matter
of policy, they were content that others should bear the whole sway, and rule
them also, such were the Maieurs de Palais, whereof Pepin was one that usurped.

In their manhood they did like men, conquer kingdoms, relieve distressed
Christians, overcome Saracenes and Infidels, defend the Church against all
assayles, as ye may perceive by the History of Charles the great, and his
successors.

And lastly now, in her old age she grew wise, erected Courts for justice, made
laws and ordinances, to govern her inhabitants, wherein no Country in Europe
has excelled her: for so says my Author, Il n'y a contre au monde ou la
justice soit mieux establit* La Noue
qu'n la nostre* There is no Country in the world, where Justice is better
established, then ours: which is true (but with this addition of a later
writer,) s'ilny en auoit tant et trop: et s'ils estoient iustement exercez:
Haill. l. 3.
If the Officers thereof were not too too many, and if their places were
rightl^ executed.

This was the reason why many wise men of the world did imagine, that this
Fever of the league, which was entered at Peronne, some 20. years since, against
France, would have shaken the State, from a Monarchy, to an Aristocracy,
considering, that in age nothing is more dangerous; and besides, it was now her
climactetical year of Government (for this is the 63. King) though this be but
a curious and ill grounded conceit, as also that other of the pourtreicts of
the Kings, in the Palace at Paris, where, because all the void places be
fulfilled, they would needs conjecture, forsooth, or rather conclude, that
there should be no more Kings. But this is but an idle dream, and
presupposition: for in the Cathedral Church of Sienna in Italy, all the rooms
for the Popes, are filled up long ago, ever since the time of Martin the 5. and
yet notwithstanding, that Sea of Rome still has a Pope. But Du Haillan says,
Haill. l. 1.
that as virtue was the cause that this State rose from the ground of her base
beginning, to this height; so Fortune has been the cause that she is not
fallen from that high pitch, to her first lowness: For he can see no reason of
her standing, considering these civil wars, the difference of Religion, the
ambition of houses, the conspiracies and reuoltes of the people, the true
causes of falling: Therefore he concludes, La bonne Fortune nous a plus serui,
Ibid.
que nostre virtue: Good fortune has helped us, more then our own virtue. But
without so much talking of the good Genius and bon-heur, good hap of France,
he should have asscribed the first cause to God, and the next to her Majesty:
but this French is ever a thankelesse people.

I must not force this Relation with many notes, of things here happening in
former ages; it is both impertinent, and tedious, only I would wish you note,
that in 482. the Christian Faith was here received, and in the year 800. the
Roman Empire hither translated.

Concerning the Country of France, the State is a Monarchy, the government is
mixed: for the authority of Maieurs, Escheuins, Consuls, Iureurs, etc. is
Democraticall: the Paires, the Counsels, the Parliaments, the Chambers of
Counts, the Generalities, etc. are Aristocraticall. The calling of assemblies,
giving of Offices, sending Embassages, concluding of Treaties, pardoning of
offenses, ennobling of Families, legitimation of bastards, coining of moneys,
and diverse other, to the number of 24. are merely Regal, Haillan. lib. 3.
called of the French, Droicts Royaux.

And sure it is, that no Prince in Europe is a more perfect Monarch then he:
for besides all these privileges named, as we say of the Parliament of Paris,
that it has the prerogative to be appealed unto, from all other Courts, which
they call the ( Dernier ressort, the last appeal) so is it likewise true, that
the King himself has the mere and absolute authority over this. For though
no Edict or Proclamation, no War or Peace which he makes, be good, without
the consent and Arrest as (they call it) of this Court: Yet true it is, that
when he, sending to them for their confirmation and ratifying thereof, if at
first they refuse, and send Deleguez, Deputies, to his Majesty to inform him
of their reasons, and humble suit to revoke the same, he returns them upon
pain of his displeasure and deprivation of their Offices, to confirm it. Sic
volo sic iubeo, Such is my pleasure, and absolute commandment.

Laws.
As touching the Laws of France, we must know, that most of the^ are grounded
on the Civil Law of the Emperor: but so, as this State ever protests against
the^, so far as they be good and equal: insomuch as in former times it was
ordained, Haillan. lib. 4.
that he which alleged any Law of Justinian, should lose his head. Of the
Laws here in force, some are fundamental, as they call them, and immortal,
such as, nor King, nor assembly can abrogate: others are temporal, Quemadmodum
ex his legibus, quae non in tempus sed perpetuae vtilitatis causa in aeternum
latae sunt, nullam abrogari fateor, nisi quam aut vsus coarguit, Plato lib. 4
de leg.
aut st^tus aliquis reip. inutilem facit: Sic quas tempora aliqua ^^siderant
leges, mortales (vt ita dicam) and ipsis temporibus mutabiles esse video: I
confess, none of those Laws which are not Temporary, but established as
eternal for the universal good, are ever abrogated (such only excepted as
either use finds hurtful, or some state of the Commonwealth makes
unprofitable) so I see, that those Laws that are applied to particular times
and occasions, are mortal (as I may call them) and change times with change.
And therefore one says, Quae in pace latae sunt, L. Valerius
plerumque bellum abrogat, quae in bello, pax: vt in nauis administratione,
alia in secunda, alia in aduersa tempestate vsi sunt: War commonly abolisheth
Laws made in peace: and peace Laws made in War: Even as Mariners in guiding
a Ship use one course in fair weather, another in foul.

Of the first sort I will only remember you of two examples: the Law Salique,
and that of Appennages. As for the first, they would needs make the world
believe that it is of great antiquity, wherewith they very wrongfully tromped
the heirs of Edward the third, of their enjoying this Crown of France, which
to them is rightly descended by his Mother, and whose claim is still good,
were the English sword well whetted to cut the Labels of this Law. Of which
Haillan himself confesses, that before the time of Philip le Long, 1321.
Haillan. lib 3.
Iamais auparauant on n'en auoit o^y parler, la faisant (en ce temps la)
approuuer partous les Seigneurs du royaume, les ^ns par promesser, les autres
par force et par menaces: The Law Salique was never heard tell of before this
Kings time, who caused it to be ratified by all the Nobles of his Kingdom,
some by fair promises, and others by force and threats. Hereupon they have
their proverb, Le royaume de France ne peut tomber de Lance en quenouille. The
Kingdom of France cannot fall from the Lance to the Distaffe.

Some say, it is called Salique, of the Saliens, a people anciently inhabiting
about the River of Rhein: but the likelyest is, that it comes of the two words,
wherewith i^ begins ( S^ aliqua) and which are often repeated therein, as in
many of our processes upon some word therein used they take their names, as a
Scire facias, a Nisi prius, a Latitat.

Touching that of Appennages, which is also a Law of great consequent for the
Crown (for by this the Domayne cannot be aliened, and by the other, the
Crown cannot fall into the hands of strangers.) You must note, that this Law
imports, that the yo^ger sons of the King cannot have partage with the Elder,
which till the time of Charelemagne (when this was made) they might, Chapter m. ord.
they must only have Appennage sans propri^te. By which Charter of Appennage
is given all profits arising of the said Apannes, as Domaine, the hundredth,
Haill. li. 3
rents, rights of Seigneurie, parties casuelles, lots, sales, hommages, right
of vassallage, Forests, ponds, ryuers, jurisdictions, patronages of Churches,
provisions, and nomination of Chapels, goods of Main-mort, fifts of Lands
sold, and all other profits and commodities whatsoever, to return to the
Crown, for want of heir male: But the leuying of taxes and aids, the minting
of money, and all other things of regality reserved. Some are so curious to
derive this word from the Greeks, of Apan, totum, and Agnon, sanctum: Because,
forsooth, the French returning from the holy Land by Greece, saw there the like
course used, which they brought home with them. Others say, it comes of Pain,
bread, because it was for their sustenance: much like the Law of the old
Romans, Plut. Nu. Pom.
for the maintenance of their daughters, to whom they allowed a yearly
pension out of their lands. But others say, it is derived from the Almaigne
word ( Abannage) which signifies a portion excluded from the rest, that,
because they have this particular allowance, they can make no claim to any
other of the Princes states. This Appennage has often been so great, as it
has bred many inconveniences; as that of the Duchy of Burgondie, by Charles
the fifth, to his brother Philip, which did often after, much prejudice the
Crown of France. And that of the Duchy of Normandy, by Jews the eleventh,
to his brother, which was after changed for Guyenne, and that again for
Champagne, and again at last for Berry, whereabout were great troubles, for
many years in France, as by the History appears. Commines
Oftentimes also the younger brothers are content to take yearly pensions, and
quite their said Duchies or Counties holden in Appennage.

Concerning the other sort of Laws, in this Realm they are infinite, which
argues ( a consequente) that they be ill kept: for gens humana ruit per
vetitum nefas: and ( ab Antecedente) that the people of this Country have
been ill inclined: for evil manners cause good laws.

These French laws are too full of preambles, processes, interims, and
prouisoes, as by all their ordinances and edicts appears, Nihil mihi
frigidius videtur, quam lex cum prologo: Sen. Epist.
iubeat lex, non suadeat: There is nothing (me thinks) colder, then a Law with
a Prologue. Let a Law command, and not persuade. Of all these Laws I will
only name you this one, Que la minorite du Roy soit assistee d' un Conceit
esleu par les Estats de France, auquel les Princes du sang doiuent tenir le
premier lieu, Dern. troub.
et les estrangers esolus: That the minority of the King shall be assisted with
a Council, chosen by the States of France, wherein the Princes of the blood
ought to hold the first place, and strangers to be excluded: which was enacted
at Toures, by Charles 8. anno. 1484. I tell you of this, as of the true source
and spring of all these late civil wars, because the Cadets of Lorraine by
insinuation with the young Kings, Frances the second, and Charles the ninth,
under the favor of the Q. Mother, took upon them to manage all public
matters at their own pleasure, and thrust out the first Princes of the blood
of the house of Burbon. Whereupon Navarre and Condie, the Princes of this
family, assisted by many of the French Noblesse, embarked themselves in the
action of reforming such an abuse, and displacing the Guysard out of this
authority, took it upon themselves, to whom it rightly belonged.

Of these civil broils, I mean by way of digression somewhat to speak, A
digression to the Civil Wars. Der. troub.
to give you better taste thereof, as also to see in what miserable terms,
this present King found the State, of whom, by order of this relation, I am
next to remember: La France a souffert s^pt guerres, et a veusix edicts de
pacification, en leursguerres ciuiles: France, in these civil broils, has
suffered seven wars, and seen six Edicts of Pacification. The first was in
sixty three, at Paris: the second, in sixty seven, at Longemeau: the third in
seventy, at Paris: the fourth in seventy six, at Ienuile (when first began the
League at Peronne:) the fifth, at Poicters in seventy seven: the sixth in eighty
one. Not one of these Proclamations which was not broken, and new flames of
war kindled; the imputation whereof, the French Writers lay most upon the Q.
Mother; Haill. 1.
by whom she is compared to Fredegunde and Brunhalt, two damnable Queens of
France, and the Firebrands of their time.

She came from the Family of the Medices in Florence, in which City ye may
note, that in three several years (but not much distant) were borne three
several Monsters: Alexander Medices, that spoiled Florence of her liberty, the
fairest City in Italy: This woman, that ruined France, the fairest Kingdom of
Europe: And Machiauell, that poisoned Europe, the fairest part of the world.

She bare too great love to her old friends of Lorraine, and too little to her
young sons of Valois: her hate was too hot to the reformed Religion, and her
care too cold to reform the State: She had too much wit for a woman, and too
little honesty for a Queen: for where one is without the other, a little is
too much.

Next her, are charged, the Cadets of Lorraine, in three ages, the Grandfather,
the father and child, and al of their houses: for he that will rightly compare
the times, shall find, Commines
that the drift of the Count S. Paul in Jews the 11. time, was al one with
this of the Guises in these late troubles; namely, for that the wars only
maintained them in their greatness, and forced the King to stand in need of
them, whereas the peace might be much prejudicial to them, and bring them to
their accounts, for many matters ill carried in their charges. Hereupon the
Count set on his King, to enbarke himself in a war, against so great an
enemy, as the Duke of Burgogne: and these even forced their Master, to war upon
his own Subjects, against so good a cause as true Religion. And as he desired
nothing less, then that the Duke should condescend to his Majesty, and so
make a peace: so did these only wish, that they of the Religion might still
stand stiff in their profession. Likely also it is, that at the first, they
did not so much as dream of obtaining the Crown, as having four Princes, of
the house of Valois, al young, besides the house of Burbon, standing in their
way: But when these, one after another, died, and the times grew so favorable,
through their popular carriage (the only sign of an ambitious mind) as that
all the eyes of France were bent upon them, then they raised their thoughts, as
high, as the highest place, and the rather, because the Religion of the next
Prince of the blood (who should be served before them) was so contrary to the
general liking of the French State. Their only cause, they said, was Religion:
Haill. 1.
but true it is, that Haillan says, that Religion is only the cloak and
pretext, selon les esprits des pais, ou selon les menees et practiques des
grands, qui donnent cette opinion aux peuples: According to the humors of the
country, or the driftes and practices of the Grandies, who possess the people
with that opinion.

And in another place, Divisions sont comme fatales a la France, et enter les
causes qui l' ont trouble toutes les fois qu'il a este la division de grands, a
este la premiere et la principale et tousiours couuerte du nom du bien
public, et de la Religion: Divisions have been (as it were) fatal to
France, and of all the causes of her trouble at any time, the division among
the Grandies has ever been the first and principal, and always cloaked with
the name of the public good and Religion.

The only pattern and Mirror, whom the last Duke of Guise followed in these
his dangerous deseignes for the obtaining of the Crown, was Pepin, Annal. Fran.
who to depose his Master, and to prefer himself, found no way more
compendious, then to profess himself the Protector of the Church, and Rooter
out of heresies. For which good service, the Romish Church invested him with
the Crown of France, and he gave them many Territories in Italy; both, large
caruers of that which was not their own. But the usurpation was most unjust,
as also the attempt it self, howsoever they shadow it with the color of
Religion. Plut. Cori.
For Nulla iusta causa videri potest, contra Remp. arma capiendi: No cause of
taking arms against the State can seem truly just.

It is a pitiful spectacle, to see a happy State brought to ruin by the
division of her great ones: but when it is wrought by such of the Nobility as
are newly infranchised, and ennobled with all preferments, who were but lately
strangers, it is much more lamentable and also insupportable. The three great
States of England, Spain, Hollinshed Turquet Histo. de Spag.
and France, can instance herein, and give you examples of Piers Gauestone,
Aluaro de Luna, and this house of Lorraine. These are they, of whom all the
late writers complain. Haill. 1.
Les Francois esloient lois (speaking of former times) vrays Francois,
n'auoyent point succele laict de Lorraine, qui done les humeurs de toutes les
sorts de Trahisons: The French were then true French, they had not yet sucked
the milk of Lorrayne, which breeds humors fit for all sorts of treasons.

And as it is said of Lalain a gallant Gentleman in Commines his time, Commines.
Estoit d'une race, don't pens'en est trouue, qui n'ayent este vaillans, and
quasi touts morts en servant leurs Seigneurs en la guerre: He was of a race,
whereof few can be found that have not been valiant, and almost all of them
slain in the wars in their Princes service.

So may we say of these, that it has bin a valiant race, and most of them have
dyed in the wars, but with this difference, that it has still been against
the good of their Country, howsoever they covered their treasons with the
veil of bien public: public good: as one says of the Duke of Guyenne and
Bretagne, Idem. cap. 20.
Mais en fin le bien public estoit conuerti en bien particulier: But in the
end, the public good was turned to private profit.

The chiefest supporter of these Guisards, and that still gave oil to the fire
of this rebellion, was the King of Spain, who, (the comparison of the State of
France with the game of Primero says) that he stood by and looked on,
following that Machiauellian maxim, or lesson, which he had learned of the
other Philippe of Macedon, to suffer them to ruin one another, as did the
Cities of Greece, and then himself to take the advantage, and win all; for
it is no question if Guise had won the game, but this would have had the
rest. He had this advantage also, while they were together by the ears, to be
in quiet himself: for so says the principle in the Mathematickes, Du Fay.
Ce qui faict mouuoir altruy, est necessairement tousiours en repos: That which
gives motion to other things, must needs it self be in rest.

The third cause I impute (especially of the later troubles) to the timorous
nature and pusillanimity of Henry the 3. Ce qui done volunte et moyens aux
hommes de grands Esprits de conspirer contre leurs princes, Haill. 1.
et d' attenter a l' usurpation de la coronne, est l'imbecillite et la nea^tise
d'iceux Princes: That which gives both will and means to men of great Spirits,
to conspire against their Princes, and attempt the usurping of their Crowns, is
the weakness and worthlessenesse of the Princes themselves. For in his time,
Commines
the Crown of France was like the daughter and heir of Burgogne: and the
poor King, like the crafty Duke, made every wooer and suter that she had,
believe that he should speed: the King, for fear lest by these corriuals he
should be brought lower; the Duke, in hope by intertaining them all, to have
their aids to raise himself higher. Marry, neither of them would gladly,
while they lived, that this fair daughter should be married.

It is a dangerous thing in a State, Haill. 3.
when the King dare not punish the ambitious desseignes of his Subject: Voyla
le mal-heur d'vn siecle miserable and unjust, de cognoistre l' injustice, and
ne l'oser dire; n'y en fair la punition: voila comment les Princes souuent
cognoissent le mal and iugeans au contraire, donnent l' absolution, estans a
cela contraincts par le temps: aux que^^s le plus souuent par leur injustice
ils donnent cette license, and apres en recoyuent les premiers, le mal: Behold
the mischief of a miserable and unjust time; to discern the offense, and not
to dare take notice thereof, nor punish it. Behold how Princes do often know
the mischief, yet giving sentence quite otherwise, (being enforced by the
necessity of the time) absolve them, whom they themselves first emboldened by
their own unjust proceedings, and are after, the first to smart for it.

This emboldened the Guise to drive his King out of Paris, whence (they say) to
save his life, he fled in his doublet and hose, and one boot off for haste: so
that now was verified the prophecy of Fran. 1. Poet. Fran.


Le Roy Francois ne fallit point,
Quand il predit que ceux de Guise
Mettroyent ses Enfans en purpoint,
Et son pauure peuple en che mise:
King Francis prophecide aright,
That Guizes race would strip his race
Into their hose and doublet light,
And's people to their shirts uncase.
In this attempt he so far engaged himself, and so irreconcileably incurred
the kings hate, as he must either be Roy ou ruin, Caesar aut nullus, Corona
aut Cadauer. Wherein he was much mistaken, to think again to win his good
opinion, and by this means to expect a better hour. A man must never trust a
reconciled enemy, Du Fay.
especially his King, against whom when ye draw the sword, ye must throw the
scabberd into the river. He felt the smart of this, not long after at Bloies,
where, Plut. Solon
in the assembly, like Caesar in the Senate, he was dispatched. In Solons time
there were first the Cilonians and the Banditi, and after one of these was
extinct, there arose a division of three heads: they of the plains would have
an Optimacy; they of the mountains, a Democracy, and they of the seacoast, a
mixed State. So in the Duke of Guises time, there was a division of Catholics
and Protestants: but after his death, the monster grew to have four heads. The
Royaux: the Huguenots: the Ligueurs: the Confrers du petit Cordon: these last
were a fraternity, who had co^spired to bring in the Spaniard, their chief
head were the Seize of Paris, (A Council of 16. the most seditious Burgers of
the Town) who strangled M. Brisson a President of the Parliament, the rarest
man of his time, and two other Lawyers, the one an Advocate, the other a
Procuror: of these the Duke de Mayenne hanged four for their labor. Each of
these had diverse driftes: The Royaux were for the King, and then for the
extirpation of the Religion. The Huguenots were likewise for the King, and then
for the liberty of their conscience. The Leaguers, for the ruin of the King,
and house of Burbon, and then for the reducing of the land to an Aristocracy,
which they meant to share among themselves: The Confrerie were against the
King, for his title; against the Protestants, for their Religion; against the
Leaguers, for their partage: and like Traitors falsely hearted, or Frenchmen
truly Spaniolized, complotted only how to bring in their Patron and Benefactor
the King of Spain. See here the many-headed Hidra that rauaged al over France.
See here that France, where neither her King could save his life from the
impoisoned knife of a bloody hearted Friar, nor the people their goods, from the
pillage of a bloody ha^ded Soldier. See here the times, Bodin. l. 6.
when the 3. fair daughters of Themis; Eunomia, Epieikia, and Eirene; Law,
Equity, and Peace, are banished their native Country. See here a Country in an
extacie, distracted in her self, and transported out of herself, ready to
fall into a falling sickness, like the soul of a distempred man, where
neither Nous, the King, is obeyed; nor Logos, the Law, observed; nor Epithumia,
the people, governed, by reason that Thumos, which possesses the heart (and
therefore I interpret the Gensilarmes of France) through an ambitious thought
to rule, or a deuillish desire to revenge, has robbed the one of his authority,
the other of her force, and given the third the reins of Liberty to do what
they list. Hisp. cuius dam Oration paraen.
Mon Dieu gens sans discourse: O gens aueugle: Nation sans consell et sans
prudence! O people void of judgment: O blinded people: O Nation without
Counsel, and without wisdom! See here a people, among whom it was a slander
to do well, and glory to excel others in cruelty: therefore says a Poet of
theirs, Si les mauuais Francois sont bien recompensez,
Si les plus gens de bien sont le moyns aduancez:
Soyons un peu meschant, on guerdonne l' offense,
Qui n' a point faict de mal, n'a point de recompense.
If the worst Frenchmen now are best of all rewarded,
If the most honest men are now the least regarded*
Let Us turn Traitors a while, this time rewards offenses:
Who has no mischief wrought, can get no reco^pe^ces.


See here a Tragedy, where were no lookers on, but all Actors, where, for the
most part, the poorer sort were plagued: Delirant Reges, plectuntur Achiui:
Horat.
For dotages of Kings
The people always wrings.


As for the great ones, they had a course many of the^ to save their own
stakes, and get also by the bargain.

Says another, Pour estre bien venuz et fair nos affairs,
en ce temps fascheux plein d' horribles miseres:
Agnoste mon amy, scais tu que nons ferons?
Surprenons quelque place, et puis noustraitterous:
If we will thrive, and rise, and be much made of too,
In this most wretched Age, and this confused State,
( Agnostus my deer friend) know thou what we must do?
Let us surprise some Town, and then capitulate.


As ye have heard of Monsr. de la Chastre, an Arch-Leaguer, who would not make
his peace, nor render his Towns to the King, except he might have the
Government of Orleans, and fifteen thousand crowns, which he presently
enjoys. Like capitulations were made with other of that faction. Phaebidas,
Plut. Pel^.
General of the Spartane forces, surprised upon the Thebanes the Castle of
Cadmus, without Commission from the State: which Castle the Lacedaemonians would
not render, but fortified the place, and kept there a strong Garrison: and yet
they discharged the General of his Office for this only fact, and fined him
at ten thousand crowns: a strange course, to punish good service: but this of
France more strange, to reward ill service. It is, I confess, good policy to
condemn the Traitor, and yet love the Treason: but to condemn the Treason,
and reward the Traitor, I never but here heard of. But such was the necessity
of the times: Sic fuit in fatis, So did the Fates ordeine. But these gayners
were those that betted by; for the chief Gamesters had their heels blown up:
the Duke of Guise stabbed at Bloies; the Cardinal strangled in the Castle: the
Duke of Parma, poisoned at Arras: the Duke Ioyense, slain at Coutras: the Duke
de Mayenne ruyned at Iuery: the Duke de Mercaeure, come in this March, who
lately marched before his troops in Bretaigne, a capalto, with an erected
countenance, now walks up and down Paris, Plat. Cor.
like Dionisius in Corinth, Capo chino, hanging the head. This was just such an
Hexarchie, as Charles Duke of Burgogne wished in France, who* had he lived
till now, had seen what he wished. When Mons. Durfe charged him, that he
loved not France, but sought by all means possible to disturb the State
thereof: ^ush, sir, says he, you are deceived, l' aim mieux le bien du
royaume que vous ne pensez, Commines.
car pour un roy qu'il y a ie y en voudroy si^: I wish better to the Kingdom
then you imagine, for one King that there is now, I would there were half a
dozen. All these, forsooth, agreed, that the Commonwealth was sick and out of
temper, and each one pretended with his Physic to cure her. The D. of Guise,
to ease the pain which was at the heart, meant (as he does, that gives the best
remedy for the tooth-ake, to pull them all out) to strike off the head: To
which purpose, at the Barucadoes of Paris, he had the King fast in the Castle
of the Louure, but yet most unwisely, having the bird in the cage, let him fly
away.

The Cardinal, that should by his calling have ministered the most gentle and
lenitiue kind of Physic, and if it had been possible, have cured France with
good counsel, and prescribing a good diet, ministered nothing, but corrasiues,
and bitter pills of disdain among the Nobles.

The Duke of Parma, like a Doctor of good practice, brings with him a whole
shop full of Physic, enough to purge all France, he applies his receipt of
the Low Country Soldiers, to ease her of her malady: but the weak stomach
of this Country could not brook so strong an ingrediens, and therefore she
vomited them out again, before they had done the deed. The Duke Ioyeuse like a
desperate young Doctor, that would get credit in his trade, upon his first
patient, by putting all to the hazard, without using any preparatiues, or
observation of critic days, gives the potion, before Monsieur Matignon could
come at him, who came with other good physic to assist him in this practice:
but at that time, they say, that Mars, a maleuolent Planet, was retrograde in
Aries, or entering into Taurus: and so it should seem: for one of the King of
Nauarres troops, called Monsr. Taurin (as they say) gave him a Pistolade in
the head. Ioyeuse was not so precipitate, to break the Impostume before it was
ripe, but the Duke de Mayenne was as much a dreamer to forslow the occasion:
for when his brother Guise was stabbed, and all the great Cities revolted to
him (Ioe, then was she sick at the heart) he should then have plied, to have
applied his medicines: but then had he his Physic to seek: And after, when
the party was pretily recovered, and began to refuse Physic, (having a little
relished the wholesome diet of good counsel) then comes he in such haste, that
he brake his bottels by the way, and so was a loser by the bargayne.

As for Monsieur de Mercaeure, he played the good Kitchen Doctor, of whom
Rablais speaks, Rabl. l. 2.
who gave his patient the neck and bones to tire upon, and kept the wings
himself: for he left them all France, tired and tewed, as bare as a birds
bone, and kept Bretaigne, one of the fattest wings of the Country, to
himself, purposing to have entitled himself Duke thereof. But these were all
pretended Phisicians: the poor King Henry the third meant well indeed, but
wanted skill, who found by experience, after he had slain the Guise, and left
the rest of his house (that were then in action) how dangerous a thing it is,
in matter of execution to do it to the half, and that in ministering physic,
a violent potion is not so dangerous, as one that is too weak, which only
stirs the humors, and is not able to expel them. Among so many Phisicians,
we must needs have one woman to look to the patient: this was the Queen
Mother, of whom and her Son Charles 9. that consented to the Massacre of
Paris, we may say with the Poet: Vergil. Eglog.
Crudelis matter magis an puer improbus ille?
Improbus ille puer, crudelis tu quoque matter:
Which has poor France more ruinde and undone,
The cruel Mother, or her wicked Son?
A wicked Son was he,
A cruel Mother she.


This Queen, who, with the two other Queens, with whom she is before
compared, may be called the Alecto, Tesiphone, and Megera, the three Furies of
France, in stead of being a Nurse, and cherisher of her Infants and family,
which she should have been by all law of reason, became a Stepdame, as she
was by nature, being an Italian: Who for more (as it is thought) then honest
love to the Guisard Doctors, desired still to have her people kept low and
sickely, that they might be advanced by their practice. These were they that
left France in such pitiful taking, under a false pretext of reformation of
the State; as we might well say of it, as is said of the abandoned French
Constable in Jews 11. his time, Commines
Il ne scauoit a quel Saint se vour, se tenoit comme pour perdu: He knew not to
what Saint to vow himself, but held himself for a lost man: or as their
proverb is here, Il ne scauoit de quel bois fair ses flesches: He knew not
of what wood to make his arrows.

But leaving France for a while, in this grievous sickness (till the Hercules
that now reigns, conquered this monstrous Hidra, and like a skillful
Esculapius, recovered her of this pestilent fever) ye may observe this one
Epiphonema here necessarily employed, namely, That Division in an Estate, is
the most compendious way to her downfall: Discordia res magnae dilabuntur: By
discord great matters melt away to nothing: as has well appeared by this great
State of France.

Here is also a good lesson for other to beware by: Tum tua res agitur, paries
cum proximus ardet: Horat.

The burning of your neighbors Towers
Concerns you near, next turn is yours.


And as Rablaies says, Un fol enseigne bien un sage: Rabl.
A fool may teach a wise man wit. And if you would have yet more instances of
the miserable effects of Factions, read Guicciardine, Guicciard. lib. 4.
and you shall be plentifully furnished: as with the Colonni, and Vrsini in
Rome; the Bianchi and Neri in Florence; the Adorni and Fregosi in Genoa: and so
almost through every particular City: and in general over all Italy, the
Guelphi and Ghibellini. Machiauel hist. flor.


Here was also one here in France, about no greater cause then a matter of
love, between Orleans, and Burgogne. And we had one in England, about no
smaller a matter then the Crown ( impatientes consortis erant, Commines
maiestas and amor:) Both Majesty and love,
Do no Corriuals love.
Between the houses of Lancaster and York, wherein Commines says, were
between three and fourscore of the blood slain. How true that is, I remember
not, but as I take it, Holinshed.
there were fought ten battles between them, one hundred Barons and Knights
slain, ten Princes, Dukes and Earls, and an hundred thousand natural English.

Virgil.
Animus meminisse horret:
My mind does tremble yet
But to remember it.
That division was the only cause, why we not only lost all we had in France,
but also the means to recover all which we ought to have had: for in those
times France her self also was miserably distracted, and brought to so low an
ebb, Commines Cap. 27.
as one says, Dieu fit ce bien en ce temps-lae, que les gueres and divisions
d' Angleterre esloyent encores en nature les vns contre les autres: So may they
now thank God and our late Queen, The Nurse of Peace, and refuge of the
afflicted, who (as is said of the great Earl of Warwick, That he thought it
as great an honor to make a King, as to be a King) to cancel with the Spears
point the forged law of the Saliens, took not such opportunity, but raised the
afflicted lowness of the desolate King of Diepe, to the peaceable possession
of the great Realm of France.

But it is a thing ever observed in great States and Kingdoms, that they never
rise to any greatness, except in their rising they meet with many lets, and
are sometimes even brought to such low terms, as they are thought past all
hope; as Athens, by the Persians; and Rome by the Gauls: the like is to be
said of great Princes; as of Edward the fourth of England, and this Henry the
fourth of France, of whom we may truly report, as Plutarch does of
Camillus, Plut. Came.
Si Camillus n' eust este perdu, Rome ne se fust pas retrouuee: If Camillus had
not been lost, Rome had not been found again. Possidonius calls Marcellus the
(sword) and Fabius the (buckler) of Rome: The King.
but we may call this King both the one and the other to France: to one, to cut
off all disturbers of the State; the other, to defend his Subjects in the
liberty of their conscience, and enjoying of peace. This office he now
executes in his quiet reign; that other he used in time of the civil wars,
when as always they of the Kings part sent for his aid to the suppression of
the Leaguers, though after that done, they cared not for him. So says Plutarch
of Themistocles, Les Atheniens n'y honoroyent, Plu. Them.
n'y ne l' estimoyent point en temps de paix, mais quand il leur suruenoiel
quelque orage de guerre, and qu'ils se voyoient en danger, ils recoureyent a
luy: ne plus ne moins qu' on fait a l'ombre d'vn Platane, quand il suruient vne
soudaine pluye, and puis apres quandle beau temps est venu, on l' esbranche and
luy coupe l' on ses rameaux: The Athenians neither honored, nor esteemed him
in time of peace: but when they were overtaken with any storm of war, and
that they saw themselves in danger, then they had recourse to him; as men use
to run in a sudden shower to the shelter of a Plane tree, and as soon as
it is fair weather again, they break and cut off his branches.

This King then, of whom now by course I am to relate, is about 48. years of
age, his stature small, his hair almost all white, or rather grisled, his
color fresh and youthful, his nature stirring and full of life, like a true
French man. One of his own people describes him thus, Du Fay.
De son naturel il est si extremement vif et actif qu' a quoy qu'-il s' adonne,
il s' y met tout entier ne faisant tamais gueres qu' vne seule chose a la fois.
Deioindre vne longue deliberation auec un faict press cela luy est malaise. Le
fair et le deliberet se rencontrent en mesme temps. Mais aux conseils qui ont
traict de temps a la verite, il a besoigne d' estre soulage. Vne promptitude
admirable d' esprit. Aux affairs de la Justice, des finances, aux negotiations
estrangeres, aux depesches, a la policy d' estat il croit les autres, il ne s'
en mesle point: He is of such an extremely lively, and active disposition, that
to whatsoever he applies himself, to that he entirely employes all his
powers, seldom doing above one thing at once. To join a tedious deliberation
with an earnest and pressing affayre, he cannot endure: He executes and
deliberates both together. But in Councels that require tract of time, to say
the truth, he has need of help. He has an admirable sharpness of wit. In
affairs of Justice, of his Revenues, forrayne Negotiations, Dispatches, and
government of the State, he credites others, and meddles little himself.

He says there farther, that though by his Phisiognomy, his fashion and manner
of behavior, ye would judge him ledger and inconstant, yet is no man more
firmly constant then he. He confesses it were hard for him, not to be
sparing, considering the profuse and lavish spoil that his predecessor made
before him: yet to salve the matter, he makes this difference, That the other
gave much to few, this gives a little to many. If you remember when we saw him
play at dice, here in Orleans, with his Noblesse, he would ever tell his money
very precisely, before he gave it back again.

I will not spare in this discourse (which is only for your self private) to
speak the truth, though of a King: we are here in a Country, where ye daily
hear his own Subjects speak of him more liberally.

And besides, his Majesty has generally this commendation, which is very
laudable in a Prince, he can endure that any man should tell him the truth,
though of himself. Which I will interpret to wisdom, though perhaps some
will impute it to a facility of nature. Concerning this thriftie virtue then of
sparing, we must note that he is a very good mesuager. Il fait d' argent auec
ses dens: He makes money with his teeth, says the Frenchman, meaning his
sparing of great and superfluous expense at his table. And for his gifts, we
may call him by an Antiphrasis, as Plutarch says they used to call Antigonus
in scorn (doson) that is, Plut. Pau. Aemil.
qui donnera: pour ce qu' il promettoit tousiours and iamais ne donoit: One
that will give: because he always promised, but never performed.

For my part, I think he gives S. P. Q. R. not Senatui populoque Romano: that
is, to all sorts of people but Si Peu Que Rien, so little, as scarce any at
all. They say, that the chamber of Accounts, is to examine the Kings gifts: and
if they find any unmeasurable, to shorten them: to which purpose, there is
written in great letters in the same court, Trop done soit repete: Bod. li. 6.
Let gifts too great be revoked. It should seem he saues them this labor.
Such a parsimonious sparer was Jews 11. of whom in the said chamber of
Accounts (as Bodin says) it is recorded, that he wore a greazy hatte, and
clothes of the coursest stuff; and there likewise ye shall find a reckoning
of 20. sols* that is, ii. s. sterling, for a new pair of sleeves to his old
dublet: an another of 15. deniers, that is, three halfe-pence, for grease to
liquor his boots. This was he, that made his Tailor his Herald of Arms, his
Barber his Ambassador, and his Surgeon his Chancellor, of whom Commines
reports many virtues, Commines
and as many faults, and yet it should seem, that Commines his servant would
not tell all; for so says another of the French Historians, discoursing
impartially of this Jews, Haill.
Nous auous librement dit ce que Commines n' a osc et volu dire, et ce que les
autres n' ont sceu: We have freely spoken what Commines durst not, nor would
not speak, and what others knew not. Though he himself protests, that he
left none of his trumperies, Commines
and double dealings, unrevealed, Non pour en vser mais pour en gardez: Not to
practice, but to prevent the^: As we desire to know the poison, in the
Apothecaries shop, from his other good drugges, not to use, to the hurt of
others, but to shun, for the safety of our selves.

And howsoever Haillan tax him of impartialitie, true it is, Q. Mother of
Commi.
that the Q. Mother did not like him, of all others: For (said she) he has
made as many Heretics in Policy, as ever Luther made in Religion, by
discovering the secrets of State: Which should be kept as secret, as the Caball
of the Jews, or verses of the Druides. But neither the sparing of this Prince,
that now reigns (of whose virtues I will presently speak) nor the faults of
Jews the 11. make them the only two Kings of this Realm, taxable above the
rest: For one of their writers says in general, H^ill. l. 2.
that France has fatally been subject to this, malheur (desaster) to have
Kings, imbecilles et estroppiez de l' entendement, (weak and lame in
judgment.) He reckons up many, as Charles the great, a paillard (a wencher:)
Pepin a usurper, Jews the first lasche et mol, (faint-harted, and effeminate)
and after these three other Charleses, the bald^, the gross, and the simple,
which no doubt, if they had deserved better Epithites, should have had them:
Insomuch as one concludes of the good Kings of France, as Suetonius did of the
Princes of his time, Se pouuoyend bien touts grauez en un anneau: Suetonius.
they might al be graven in one ring. But I had rather conclude with Bodin,
Bod. l. 6.
There is no Prince without his fault. Howbeit those few that are in this
Prince, are recompensed with many very heroical and princely virtues, both of
body and mind. For those of the mind, let me only commend the excellency of
wit, and suddenness of answer, whereof we may take acknowledgeme^t in these
three, which I will here recount, answerable in my opinion, to any of those
Apophthegms of the old Kings, or Philosophers, which history has commended to
us. At his being here at Orleans, this June last past, the Mayor and Burgeses
of the Town came to his Majesty, to desire they might be eased of certain
extraordinary taxes and impositions, wherewith in the time of the league, they
had been burdened by Mons. de la Chastre, their Governor. Says he, M. de la
Chastre vous a liguez, qu'il vous desligue: M. de la Chastre has tide you, let
him untie you. At his being at the siege of Amiens, amongst others of the
Noblesse, which he summoned to that service, he sent also for the Count
Soissons, a Prince of the blood, and one of the rarest Gentlemen of France, to
whom the King gives (as is said) 5000. Crowns pensio^. The Count, at that time
discontented, returned the King answer, that he was a poor Gent. and wanted
means to come to that service, as became one of his birth and place, being a
Prince of the blood, and Peer of France: he therefore most humbly craved
pardon, and that he would pray for his Majesty's prosperous success, which
was all he could do. Well, says the King, Dautaut que les prieres ne seruent
point sans ieusne, il faut qu' il ieusne de la pension de ses 5000. escus:
Seeing prayer is not acceptable without fasting, my couzin shall hereafter fast
from his pension of five thousand Crowns.

After the death of the Duke of Guise, when almost all France had revolted from
the late King, and like a poor ( Roy d' Iuidot) as the French proverb is, he
was chased of them of the League, from all places of France, to Toures, and was
there, as it were besieged of Charles Duke of Mayenne: After that this King
present came thither with his small forces, to the distressed Kings succor,
the King of France, whose name was also Henry, would needs persuade Henry King
of Navarre, with those small forces, which they both had, to march out of the
Town, and encounter the Dukes forces, who were double the number. Sirs (says
he) ne hazardons point un double Henry contre un Carolus: Let us not play a
double Henry, against a Carolus: (that, is a piece of gold, of 14 shillings,
and this, a piece of brass only of 10. deniers.) For his valor and
princelike courage, it is such, to say truly, as never any of his Predecessors,
Kings of France, were matchable to him, who, for the space of almost thirty
years, has, as one would say, never been unarmed, without his foot in the
stirrup, and his lance in the rest, has been himself in person, the foremost
in all perils, and last out of the field: A Prince not long in the resolving,
but once resolved, quick to perform, and himself always, one in the
execution; though perhaps some will tax this hazarding of his own person, as a
matter of imputation, and better befitting a young Prince of Navarre, then a
great King of France. For as I read, Plut. Ep.
Epamin^ndas was fined for having been too forward, and serving without good
armor, after a great victory, which he had upon the Lacedaemonians.

This forwardness indeed is most honorable, and praise worthy in all
Nobility, and Commanders whatsoever, excepting only the chief. Iphicrates
an Athenian Captain, said, the Vant^urrers, resembled the hands, the
Gensdarmes, the feet, the Batallion on foot, the breast, and the General, the
head: which (says he) must best be armed, and carefullest be guarded. And
therefore, the answer of Callicratidas is disliked, who, when it was told
him, that in the battle he was ready to give the enemy, he should have great
care of his own person, for that the Sacrifices had foreshewd some danger:
Sparte dit il ne depend pas d' un homme seul: Sparta depends not upon one man
alone. Plut. Pel.
This Plutarch reproved in Pelopidas. And Homer in his descriptions, makes
always Achilles, Ajax, and the best and chiefest Commanders, best armed:
Stetit sub Aiacis clipeo septemplice tectus:
The shield of Ajax seuen-fold Homer.

Did shroud him safe, and make him bold.


And the laws of Greece punished that Soldier, that threw away his buckler.
But I will end this discourse with the answer of Timotheus, to Chares, a
General, talking of his many wounds of the body, and hackes in his shield;
and I (quoth he) quite contrary, am ashamed of this, that when I besieged
Samos, I came so near the walls, that an arrowe from the Town lighted hard
by me: For that Ie m' estois trop advance en ieune homme, and hazard plus
temerairement, qu'il ne conuenoit a Chef d'vne si gross armee: I went too
far, like a forward young fellow, and hazzarded my self more rashly, then
became the General of so great an Army. For the chief Commander is the moity
of the whole force.

When one told Antigonus, that the enemy had more shipping then he, at the I Will
of Andros: Et moy dit-^l ponz combien de vaisseux conte tu? I pray you, for how
many ships count you me?

If then one General be in stead of many ships at sea; and many troops at
land, it behooves he be careful to keep those forces well (that is, him
self) if he will do his Country good service. You must note therefore, that
there is no man so great by birth, or Noble, whom it well becomes not to be
as valiant and forward as the best, even though he were a King: and indeed the
greater he is, the more his honor is engaged to be valiant; provided always,
that he be not the chief Commander of the Army. As the King of Boheme dyed
in the field, Vigner. hib. hist.
on the French Kings side, fighting against the English in France, with more
honor, then the French King Francis the first, at Pauie in Italy, where, by
his too great forwardness, he was taken Prisoner.

Therefore it is that one says, Un bon and say General doit mourir de
vieilesse: A good and discreet General should dye of age.

But to return to the King. He is naturally very affable and familiar, and
more (we strangers think) then fits the Majesty of a great King of France. But
it is the fashion of this Country of France (as Bodin says) though he seem
much to misse-like it, Bodin. li. 4
and prefers the fashion of England, Suedon and Poland, where the Princes
have more Majesty and reverence among their subjects: For as Plutarch says,
Plut. Peri.
C'est bien difficile de maintenir vne severe grauite pour garder sa
reputation, en se laissan^ familierement hauter a tout le monde: It Is a hard
matter for a man to keep a severe gravity for the upholding of his reputation,
if he familiarize himself with every body. Whereupon he there shows, how
retyredly Pericles lived from the common view of the vulgar sort. So we
likewise read of the Kings of Borny, Aethiope, Tartary, the grand Signor
himself, and the great Duke of Moscouy, that they seldom come abroad in
public to be seen of the people. We may therefore say of the Frenches
liberty, as Artabanus, Lieutenant General to Xerxes, said to Themistocles, Plu.
Them.
Quant a vou^ autres Grecs, on dit que vous estimez la liberte et l'egalite sur
toutes autres chooses: mais quant a nous enter plusieurs autres belles constumes
et ordonnances que nous ^uous, celle-la nous semble, la plus belle de reuerer
et adorre nostre Roy, comme limage de Dieu de nature, qui mantient toutes
chooses en leur estre, and leur entier: It Is said, that you Greeks above all
things esteem liberty and equality: but among many other our excellent
customs and ordinances, we judge this to be the best, to reverence and adore
our King, as the Image of the God of nature, that maintaynes all things in
their being and perfection. And we may well infer as Haillan does,
Familiaritas parit contemptum, Terene^. Haillan.
and contemptus, coniurationem: le mesprise est la cause de coniurations contre
le Prince: Familiarity breeds contempt, and contempt, treason.

You saw here in Orleans, when the Italian Commedians were to play before him,
how himself came whifling with a small wand to scowre the coast, and make
place for the rascal Players (for indeed these were the worst company,
Terence. Regem familiarem ^arras.
and such as in their own Country are out of request) you have not seen in
the Innes of Court, a Hall better made: a thing, me thought, most derogatory to
the Majesty of a King of France.

And lately at Paris (as they tell us) when the Spanish Hostages were to be
entertained, he did Usher it in the great Chamber, as he had done here before;
and espying the Chair not to stand well under the State, mended it handsomely
himself, and then set him down to give them audience.

It follows, I speak of his descent and Pedigree; wherein you shall see he
is lineally descended of the house of Burbon, His Pedigree.
from Robert, Earl of Clermont, younger son to Jews, surnamed the Saint,
from whom (for default of heirs males in the house of Valois, descending of
Philip le hardi, the elder brother) he is now rightly entitled to the Crown
of France. The lineall descent of this house of Burbon, whose word is Esperance
(Hope) is this:

Saint Jews had two sons, namely, Philip le Hardy, King of France. YOu may
observe in this waste space of paper, that in the year 1328. Philip, who was
son to Charles, Count of Valois, came to the crown, by the name of Philip
the sixth of Valois: since when, all the Kings of this elder house are called
(de Valois) not that it is the sur-name of their Family, which most writers,
and even the French themselves have thought, Haillan, lib. 3. d' Estat.
Robert, Earl of Cleremont, married to Beatrice, daughter to Archibald of
Burbon. Jews, Count of Cleremont, and first Duke of Burbon, married to Mary,
Countess of Heynalt. Jacques, Duke of Burbon, married to Jane de S. Paul. John,
Duke of Burbon, Count of March, married to Katherin, Countess of Vandosme.
Jews of Burbon, Count of Vendosme, married to Jane of Lauall. John of Burbon,
Count of Vendosme, and Isabel his wife. Francis of Bur. Count of Vendosme, to
Mary of Luxembroughe, Countess of S. Paul. Charles of Burbon, to Francis of
Alencon. Anthony of Burb. King of Navarre. Henry 4. K. of France and Navarre,
3. base children. Caesar D. de Vandosme. Henryette a daughter. Alexander, Count
de Foix.
Katherine, Princess of Navarre, now presently to be married to the Prince of
Lorraine.
Francis Du. of Anguie^. Charles Card of Burbon. John, Du. of Ang. Marguerite
married to the D. of Nener. Jews of Bur. Prince of Conde. Henry, P. of Conde.
Henry Prince of Conde, heir apparent to the Crown of France.
Francis, P. of Conty. Charles, Count of Soissons.











NOw ye see from what Ancestors he is come: ye must also observe what issue
is come of him. In the unfortunate and inhumane massacre at Paris, His children.
wherein the old Admiral, the greatest Soldier in France, and many thousand
of other of the Religion were murdered, the same time was this King married to
Marguerite de Valois, daughter to Henry the second, and sister to the last
King: With her these many years past, he has not lived, neither has by her
any issue. I have heard, the reason of their living apart, is her
incontinencie. By Madame Monceau his Mistrisse, whom of late he has made
Duchess of Beaufort, he has three children living: but by reason of their
illegitimation and incapabilitie to succeed, the apparency of Inheritance as
yet bideth in the young Prince of Condie, a towardly Gentleman, of much hope,
and very well favored, of the age of 11. years, whom ye saw at S. Maur.

Concerning the Coronation of the Kings of France, I read, that in the first
race, His Coronation.
they used no other solemnity, but only to lift him up upon a shield, and
carry him about the Camp; crying, Viue le Roy: God save the King: Haill. l. 3
for thus du Haillan out of Gregory de Tours reports of the crowning of
Clo^is, the first that was christened. Since in the year 1179. Philip Augustus
ordained the Coronation to be always at Rhemes in Champaigne: for before that
time, they were crowned (but not here) as Jews the Gross at Orleans 1009.
Pepin at Soissons, and Charlemagne at S. Denis. And since then also, upon
occasion, they change sometimes the place, as ye see in this King for example,
who was crowned at Chartres.

The ornaments heretofore used at this solemnization, are these: A great crown
of gold, wherewith he is crowned: a less crown, which he bears that day at
dinner, made by Philip Augustus. The Camisoles, Sandales, Tunicke, Dalmaticke,
and Mantel of blue Satin, made by Henry 2, who also garnished of new, the old
Crowns, the Scepter, the Sword, the Spurs. All which were ordinarily kept in
the Church of S. Denis: whence in these late civil wars, they were taken by
the League, and money made of them. Haill. l. 3.
La Ligue un monstreinsatiable, un gouffre qui devour tout, un feu qui consume
tout, un torrent qui ruin tout, a volle, brise, cesse, fondu, tous ces
ornements royaux: The League, a Monster that eats all, a Gulf that deuoures
all, a fire that consumes all, a Torrent that ruins all, has stolen, bruzed,
broken, melted all these Royal ornaments.

The King of France present has made new ornaments for the Coronation, which
you saw at S. Denis. The Princes and Peers of France have these Offices in
that solemnity. Hail, li. 3.
The Archbishop of Rhemes does anoint him King. The Bishop of Laon bears the
Ampulle. The Bishop of Beauuais bears the Mantell Royal. The Bishop of Noyon,
the Girdell. The Bishop of Chaalons, the Ring. The Duke of Burgondie, the
Crown. The Duke of Guyenne, the first Banner. The Duke of Normandy, the
second. The Count of Toulouse the Spurs. The Count of Champaigne, the Banner
Royal or Standard. The Count of Flanders, the Sword royal. Thus crowned, he
holds the Sword in his hand, and turning himself four times, East, West,
North, and South, protests to defend the Church, and maintain Justice
against all persons of the world: For which he has the Title of Most
Christian King, and first Son of the Church: His Title.
and is in right to have precedence next the Emperor, before all Princes
Christian; though the Spanish Ambassador of late, has thrust for the place,
and sometimes had it, as namely, at the Council of Trent: which wrong afterward,
the Pope and College of Cardinals confessed, and disauowed the fact.

The Spaniard also once since at the Emperors Court took the place, and in
Polonia likewise they lately striued, where it was ordained (as our law is at
the Ordinaries in London) that he which came first, should sit first. The
Turk, when he writes to him this Title, Bod. li. 4.
Le plus grand, et le Maieur des plus grands Princes Chrestiens, The greatest
and chiefest of the greatest Christian Princes.

And whereas Haillan, but with no great ground out of Histories, would needs
inf^rre, that all other Christian Princes hold of the Empire, he alleges for
a singular preeminence and prerogative, that this King holds nothing either
of the Empire, or Church of Rome, but that he is next and immediately under God,
supreme, both over the Civil and Ecclesiasticke body of France: because
(says he) he can impose taxes and payments upon the Church, without asking the
Pope leave; he cannot only present, but also confer benefices; he has in
right the Election of the Pope, as Charlemagne had, though Jews Debonnaire,
his son, renounced again this authority: for, Ha^^l. l. 4.
Un l'oy ne peut quitter son dr^ict: A King cannot give away his right.

But Charles the Great had not this power, as he was King of France, but as he
was Emperor: I think therefore he does the Empire wrong (to whom doubtless
this right still belongs) to bestow it upon France. For when the Empire was
translated out of France into Germany, which was in the year 880. then were
also all rightes and privileges, thereto belonging, of necessity to leave this
Country, together with the Empire, to which they are inseparably annexed. As
for the Pope, over whom the French writers will needs give their King a
privilege of Election, he desires them (for ought I can learn) to have an
oar in their boat rather.

Concerning the Arms of France, His Arms
they have diverse times, as it appears by history, been altered. For the
first Arms were three Toades. After that, changed to three Cressants, then to
three Crowns, and lastly, in the time when France embraced the Christian
faith, there were sent them from heaven (say their fabulous writers) Les fleurs
ae lys d'or enchamp d' azure. The flowers de Luce Or, in a field Azure, Hail.
li. 1.


With these arms of France, the King now present quartereth his Arms of
Navarre, which, whether it be a wheel or a chain with a Carbuncle in the
midst as some say, or what else I know not, I cannot yet be satisfied of any
Frenchman that I have asked.

His Court.
I should now by course speak of the French Court, wherein, having yet spent no
time, I have little to say. I make no question, but at our return into these
parts, you will sufficiently instruct your self therein, as with the diverse
offices, the number of the Noblesse that ordinarily follow it, and their
several humors and fashions, which is a thing very fit for you to observe. I
can only remember you of that, which your self have read in the book of the
late troubles, (which you may well call an Historical declamation, or
declamatory history) where it is said, Iamais la Cour de nos Roys, qui estoit
autres-fois, Dern troubl.
le seminaire des vertus de la Noblesse Francoise, ne regorgea en plus de
desordres des luxes and d' exces, que sous le regne du Henry 3: Never did the
Court of our Kings, which was heretofore the seede-plot of virtues for the
French Noblesse, more abound in all disorders of wantonness and excess, then
under the reign of Henry the third. But that was a censure of the Court, in
the days of a Prince given over to pleasures, and excessive spending, insomuch
as I have here heard say, that the only solemnizing of the marriage of Duke
^oyeuse (his Mignion) cost him two hundred thousand crowns. But it is likely,
that now the humor of the King being otherwise, the fashion also of the Court
is changed: for, Claudian.
Regis ad exemplum totus componitur orbis:
Look in what mould the King is formed,
To that his subjects are conformed.


Whereof you may have two very fit examples here in France; of Jews, the 11.
and Frances the 1. without seeking further.

King Jews would have his son Charles learn no Latin, forsooth, but only
this sentence, Qui nescit dissimulare, nescit regnare, He that knows not how
to dissemble, knows not how to reign. Hereupon all the Court began to despise
learning, and to say, that Latin was for a Priest, not for a Gentleman: And
that it was learning enough for a Nobleman, if he could write his own name,
yea, and I have heard of an Admiral of France, that could not do that neither.

The second example is, of Frances the first, who cut his hair short, because
of a hurt he had in his head: and presently all the Court and Noblesse
followed that fashion, Bod. li. 4.
cutting (says Bodin) their long locks, qu' estoit l' ancienne marque de
beauty, et de la Noblesse* Which was the ancient badge of beauty, and
Nobility. Which old fashion, I doubt not but they had from the Lacedaemonians,
whose youth were all of them commanded to wear long locks, because (says
their Lawmakers) Les cheueux renaent ceux qui sont beaux encore plus beaux,
Plut. Lycurg.
et c^ux qui sont laids plus espouuentables et plus hideux a voir: Long hair
makes such as are lovely, more lovely, and such as are hard-fauoured, more
dreadful and hideous to behold.

The carriage of a Prince, though it be a natural defect, and disgraceful, is
oftentimes imitated of the Courtiers by affectation. Philip of Macedon, and
Ferdinand of Naples, held their heads awry upon the one shoulder, and both
their Courts followed, Tell Maistre, tell vallet: Like Master, like man. You see,
in that thing wherein you would most be instructed, I am least able to satisfy
you, by reason we have not seen the Court at all, save only two days, while
it staid here at Orleans. Howbeit, out of that which I there saw, which I have
heard of others, and read in Authors, I will adventure to relate, concerning
the Officers of this Court; Officers of Court.
for as for other great Offices, as of Constable, Admiral, Marshal, Grand M.
of the Eaues and Forests, Grand M. of the Artillery, and others, I shall
speak of them, when I come to relate of the Kings Forces ingenerall, to which
place these Offices especially appertain.

Grand Mr. of France: Great Master. Hail. li. 3.
The first Office then of Court, is that of the Grand Maistre, Great Master,
which in elder times was called Comte de Palais, Earl of the Palace, and after
changed into the name of Grand Seneschal, and now lastly into Grand Maistre.
The Count Soissons, youngest Son to Jews of Burbon, Prince of Condie, does now
enjoy this place. It was not long since, in the house Memorency: but the French
King, to favor the D. of Guise, upon whom he bestowed the place, caused the
other to quit it. It is his office, to judge of matters of difference, between
other Offices of Court. He had also the charge to give the word to the Guard, to
keep the keys of the Kings private lodging and to determine in disputes among
Princes, that followed the Court, for their lodgings. In asse^blies he sits
right before the K. a stayre lower, as you read in the Dern. Trobl. Grand
Boutellier, Der troub. lib. 4.
or Eschancon, Great Butler or Taster, was in former times, a great Office in
the Kings house, they had place in the Courts of Justice, as Peers. This
Office was long in the house of the Countes of Senlis* Grand Panetier: Great
Pantler.
it is now vanished, and only there remains that of the Grand Panetier. This
Office is ancient: he has besides the Kings house, superintendence over all
Bakers in the City and Suburbs of Paris. Gentils-hommes seruiteurs de la Cour
Gentlemen Waiters of the Court. Gentils-hommes de la Chamber: Gentlemen of the
Kings Chamber Grand Escuyer: Great Esquier, or Master of the horse Hail. li. 3.
They which were wont to be called Panetiers, Eschancons, and vallets
trenchans: Pantlers, Tasters and Caruers, are now called Gentils-hommes
Seruiteurs de la Cour: Gentlemen Wayters of the Court.

The Office of grand Chambellan, great Chamberlayn, was long in the house of
Tankeruile* he lay at the Kings feet, when the Queen was not there. His
privileges are now nothing so many as in times past. Those which were then
called Chambellans, Chamberlaines, are now Gentils-hommes de la Chamber,
Gentlemen of the Chamber. The office of grand Escuier, great Esquier, is not
very ancient, though now it be very Honorable, and is the same that M. of the
Horse is in the Court of England: for it is taken out of the Constables office,
to whom it properly appertained, and thereof he had his name, Conestable, quasi
Comes stabuli, Count of the stable. It was first instituted in the time of
Charles 7. In the K. entrance into the City, he carries the Sword sheathed
before him, The cloth of Estate carried over the King by the Mayor and
Sheriffs, belongs to his Fee. No man may be the Kings Spur-maker, Mareschall,
and such like Officer, but he must have it of him, as also all other inferior
offices belonging to the stables. He had in times past, the command over
stages of Posthorses: but now the Contreroller, general of the said Posts,
has it. This Office is now exercised by Monsieur de Thermes, Maistre d'
Hostel: Master or Steward of the Kings house.
Seigneur de Bellegarde, a gallant Gentleman, and one of the finest Courtiers
of France. The Office of Maistre d' hostel du Roy, Master or Steward of the
Kings house, has charge over the expense of the Kings house: For a mark of
his authority, he carries a Truncheon tipped at both ends with Silver and gilt,
and marches before the Sewer, when the Kings dinner comes to the Table.

No Sergeant can arrest any of the Kings house, without their leave. They serve
quarterly: they were wont to be but four, but now I have heard it credibly
said, they be 80. in name, but all of these do not execute the Office. Grand
Preuost de France, etc. Great Prouest of France etc. Haill. l. 3. Grand
Fauconnier et grand Venneur. Great Faulconer, and great Hunt. Gentiles hommes de
sa guard Gentlemen of the Kings Guard.
The Grand Preuost de France et del hostel du Roy, Great Provost of France, and
of the Kings house, so called, since Charles the ninth: for before, he was
called, Roy des ribauds, King of the Raskals: His Office is to stickle among
the Servants, Pages, Lacqueis, and Filles de joy (Punkes or pleasant sinners)
which follow the Court, and to punish all offenses in these people.

I should have named before these last, as a place more honorable, the Office
of Grand Fauconnier, and Grand Venneur, Great Faulconer, and great Hunt, who
have authority over all Officers of chase. They of the Kings chamber, are
either Gentils-hommes de la Chamber, Gentlemen of the Chamber, of whom I spoke
before, or Vallets de la Chamber, Grooms of the Chamber, which are but base
Grooms and Roturiers, yeomen.

Les cent Gentils-hommes de sa Guard, The hundred Gentlemen of his Guard (though
there be two hundred of them) they hold and use a weapon, called Le bec de
corbin: They match two and two before him: they are part French, and part
Scots: The Scot carries a white Cassocke, powdered with Silver plates, and the
Kings devise upon it: The French wear the Kings colors. There is also a Guard
of Swisse, attired in parti-colored Cloth, drawn out with Silk, after their
Country fashion: these follow the Court always on foot, the other on horse.
Where, by the way ye may observe, that the reason of the entertainment of
Scots in the Kings Guard, is (as one says) because they were Anciens ennemys
des Anglois, Comment. de l' Estat.
Ancient enemies to the English: and ever since the house of Austrich matched
with that of Burgogne, the King has had also his Guard of Swisses, Commines
cap. 119.
Ennemys hereditaires de la maison d' Austriche, Hereditarie enemies of the
house of Austria.

There belongs to the Court also the Mareschaux des logis, Marshals of
Lodgings, and Fourriers, Haruingers: they have like Offices as the Haruengers
in the English Court: there be also diverse others which are here needless to
be spoken of, and wherewith your purpose is to be better acquainted hereafter.
I will therefore proceed to speak of the order of France, which was
instituted by Henry the third, His order.
Anno 1579. and is called, L'ordre du S. Esprit, The Order of the holy Ghost.
The reason of this institution, was, Dern. trou. Of the S. Esprit: Or holy
Ghost.
Comme vne autentique declaration, qu'il ne pouuoit ny aymer, ny fair bien aux
Heretique^, obligeant par un serment solemnel tous les Cheualliers, a des
conditions qui ne platsent qu'aux ames toutes Catholics: As an authentical
declaration, that he could neither love, nor favor the Huguenots, binding by
a solemn oath all the Knights, to conditions suitable only to minds entirely
Catholics. Whereby ye may note, that none of the Nobility of the Religion
are of this order, neither was this King himself of it, till 94. when being
crowned at Chartres, he took it upon him.

Among many other statutes of this order, this is one, That none are capable
thereof, except he can prove his Nobility, by three descents, from the Fathers
side. You have many in France, that are called Cheualliers des ordres dur^y:
Knights of the Kings orders: that is, both of the order of Saint Esprit, Of
Saint Michael Antiq. Par.
and Saint Michael also. The order of Saint Michael was instituted by Jews the
11. in the year 1469. the statutes whereof are comprised in 98. Articles;
amongst which this is one, That there should never be above thirty six of the
order. But says La Noue, this Article was so ill observed, that at one time
there have bin 300. whereof 100. shortly after, by reason of the great charges,
and train they kept, were forced (as he there says) Serrer le colier dans
leurs coffres: La Noue. Coment. de l' Est.
To lock up their collers in their Cofers. In the year 60. were 18. created of
this order. A thing not before heard of, that so many should be made at once:
which the Constable disliking, said, Que l' order estoit mis en disordre: the
order was disordred. Bodin. l. 5.
Against which, Bodin also inueigheth, and against the number of Barons made in
France, without either desert, or living. And another complains, that the
honorable orders of France are exposes a l'ambition, Haill. l. 3.
qui estoyent destinez au merit: Exposed to ambition, which were dedicated
only to deserts.

You must note* that of S. Michaels order, there were 2. sorts, du grand
order, et du petit: the great and the small order: Those wore a collar of
Massy gold; these only a Ribbon of silk. Before these was the order De l'
estoille, Of the Star.
of the Star; or as others call it, De la vierge Marie: of the Virgin Mary,
instituted by John the French King, anno, 1365. which after, growing too common
(a fault generally noted in all Countries, where orders are erected, that they
be bestowed upon too many, and some unworthy, except only in the most noble
order of the Garter, which by the confession of all writers, maintayneth still
his ancient glory) the order of the Star, I say, growing too common, and
therefore the Princes, and nobler sort, disdayning to wear it, it was bestowed
upon the (Archers du guel) who still wear it, Haill. l. 3.
the Nobility having long since quitted it. But the most ancient order of
France, is that of the Genette, Of the Genette.
instituted by C. Martell. The Knights of this order, wore a Ring, wherein was
engraven the form of a Genette. The cause of instituting this order, is not
known: Id. li. 3.
it endured till S* Jews his time.

Besides these four forenamed orders, which have been instituted by Kings, I
read also of two others in France, which had their erection by Princes of the
blood, and were only taken by Knights of their party.

The order of the Porc-espic, Of the Porcespi^
rased by the Duke of Orleans, in envy of the order of his enemy, the Duke of
Burgogne.

The order of the Croissante, or Halfe-Moone, by the Duke of Aniowe, anno, Of
the Croissante.
1464. with this Mot (Los) as who would say, Los en croissant, Praise by
increasing. The Knights of this order, had in the midst of the Cressant, a
Truncheon, to signify he had been in the wars: (for else he might not be
of that order) if twice, then two Truncheons; if thrice, three; and so orderly.
His Habillement was a Mantle of Crymosin Velvet, and a white Velvet Cap.

It is not much impertinent, here also to observe, what orders have been
erected in other Countries: whereof, the most Noble and renowned order of S.
George of England, is the chiefest, and therefore first to be remembered. Of
Saint George.


It was instituted in King Edward the 3. time, before any of these of France,
Hall. li. 3.
except only that of the Genet, which (no doubt) was some obscure Order, as
appears by the place where it was worn; and by the little, or rather
nothing, which the French Writers speak thereof.

The Golden Fleece.
The next is the order of the Toison d' or, The Golden Fleece, erected by Philip
the second, Duke of Burgogne. The collar of this order has a Golden Fleece
hanging at the end, Confer. des Ordon.
in memory (some say) of Gedeons Fleece: others (which is most likely) of the
Golden Fleece of Colchas, which Jason with his gallants of Greece ventured for.
The feast of these Knights, is kept upon Saint Andrews day. The habillements,
a mantle of Crymson Velvet, and a cap of violet color: It was instituted anno,
Of the Anunciation.
1430. There is also the order of the Annunciade, erected by Amadeus Duke of
Sauoy: In the collar hereof is written in Letters of gold, or stone, this word,
( fert, fert, fert) thrice, in honor of Amade le grand, his Predecessor:
signifying ( Fortitudo eius Rhodum tenuit: His valor kept Rhodes) for that he
helped the Knights of Jerusalem to win Rhodes, upon the Turks, which is since
again reconquered, and they driven into the Isle of Malta: At the end of the
collar, hangs the partreict of the virgin Mary, and the Angel saluting her.

Of the Knights of Malta Of Saint Stephen. Of the band or scarf.
Of the order of the Knights of Malta, ye shall see a whole Book written, when
ye come to Italy: As also of that of Saint Stephen, instituted by Cosimo
Medici, first Duke of the united forces of Florence, and Sienna. I will
therefore omit to speak, either of the one, or other. As also of the order of
the Band or Scarf, instituted by Alphonse, King of Arragon, whereof I want
sufficient matter to relate. I will end this discourse of Orders of knighthood,
with this one observation, that is, that in times past, there were (as with us)
Knights, which notwithstanding, were not of the Order. Of these, Tillet.
recueil.
were three sorts, Cheualliers Bannerets, Cheualliers Bachelors, and
Cheualliers Escuyers: Knights Bannerets, Knights Batchelers, and Knights
Esquires, or Armor-bearers. The first had twice as much pension as the second,
and they twice as much as the third. His Forces.
It follows I speak of his Forces, as well horse as foot, of which this
Country is very well furnished, and indeed vanteth (and I think worthily) to
be the best and greatest Gensdarmerie of any Realm in Christendom: but on the
other side, their foot have no reputation; insomuch as the last year before
Amyens, we should hear the Spaniard within the Town, speak over the walls
to our English Soldiers in their Trenches, after we had saved the Kings Canon,
from which the French were shamefully beaten by them within sallying out upon
them:

You are tall Soldiers (say they) and we honor you much, not thinking any
foot to come near us in reputation but you, and therefore, when you of the
English come down to the Trenches, we double our Guard, and look for blows:
but as for these base and unworthy French, when they come, we make account
we have nothing to do that day, but play at Cards, or sleep upon our
Rampart. Of both these Forces of horse and foot of France, you are to note
this which follows.

It is reported of the great Turk, Paul. Iouius.
that when he conquereth any Province or Country, he divides the Lands upon
his horsemen to each his portion, with an exemption of paying either rent,
tax, or tallage whatsoever: only they are bound to serve the Grand Signore,
(Great Turk) with a proportion of horse at their own charge, and in their
own person in his wars, except either age or sickness hinder, which are the
two only excuses admitted. Bodin li. 5
These are called his Timars: of like nature as are the Calasyres of Egypt. You
shall find this that Iouius says, La Noue.
confirmed by La Noue speaking of Greece, Ou (says he) ils tirent leurs
meilleurs hommes de guerre sur leurs terres conquises, qu' ils leur departent,
a la charge de se tenir en squepage, pour venir seruir au mandement de grand
Seigneur: From whence he draws his best men of war, dwelling upon the
conquered Lands which he divides among them, upon condition that they shall
always be ready to serve at the commandment of the great Turk.

So did the Kings of France in former times bestow upon Gentlemen, diverse
lands and possessions, freeing them likewise from taxes and aides, upon
condition to have their personal service in time of need. These lands were
called ( Feifs: Haill. 3.
) instituted before Charlemagne his time, but till then, they were given only
for life (as at this day are those of the Turks:) but since, they be
hereditary. The word Feif, has his Etymology of ( Foy) Faith: signifying
lands given by the King to his Nobility or men of desert, Ordonn.
with Haulte et basse justice, with an acknowledgement of fealty and homage,
and service of the King in his wars at their own charge. Some Feif was bound
to find a man at arms: some an Archer, some the third, and some the fourth of
a man at arms, according to the quantity of land he held. He that had land
from the value of five to six hundred Livers rent (that is from fifty to
sixty pound sterling) was bound to find, Ord. H. 2.
Un homme de cheual en habillement d' hommes d' arms: A man on horseback,
1547.
furnished for a man at arms: And from three to four hundred, Fera un bon
homme de cheual ledger: A good light horseman; Who, if it please the Prince,
and upon occasion of service, shall quitte his horse and serve on foot,
provided that he have with him a vallet Harquebutier. But they that had less
then three or four hundred, had a less proportion of charge. There be four
exceptions where a man is not bound to serve in person: If he be sick, if
aged, if he bear some Office, if he keep some Frontier place or other Castle
of the Kings; for in this case he may send another.

Publica militiae vassallus munera iustae, Tillet. recu^ill.

Non renuat, dominique libens in castra vocatus,
Aut eat, aut alium pro se submittat iturum.
Arbitrio domini vei quem laudauerit ille,
Compenset, redimatque suum mercede laborem.
They are bound, upon forfeiture of their (Feif) to serve three months within
the Land, and forty days without, not counting the days of marching. You
must observe, that as the Seigneurs hold their ( Feif) of the King in Haute
justice, so other Gentlemen hold of them in Basse justice, upon charge to
follow these Seigneurs at all times to the wars. Hail. li. 3.
For Le feif est la chose par l' acceptance de la quelle ceux qui le tiennent
sont tenuz du serment de fidelite enuers leurs Seigneurs. The Feif is the
thing, by the acceptance whereof, they that hold it, are bound in oath and
fidelity to their Lords: And therefore are called their Vassals of (Wessos)
the old Gaul word, which signifies valiant: for to such were the Fiefes
given. As for ( serfs, slaves or villains) these are domestike, and serve upon
baser condition, for wages and victuals. There is also the (Subject) that is,
the poor paisant that labors and tilleth the (fiefs) and therefore ye
shall hear Monsieur le Gentleman speak of ses terres, ses hommes, and ses
subjects: His lands, his men, and his Subjects: and yet himself is vassal to
the Seigneur, that holds in haute justice. But ye may note, that no word of
service whatsoever in this discourse, does prejudice the liberty natural of
the vassal. The Subject, nor serf, villain, are bound to go to the wars,
but only the vassal. The mustering and gathering together of these forces, is
called the Ban, and Arrier-ban, Confer. des Ord.
of the Alman words (Here) exercitus: An army: and (ban) conuocatio: A calling
together. This Ban and Arrierban consisted anciently of twelve, sometimes
fifteen thousand Gensdarmes: But after the corruption thereof, when the fiefs
came to be in the hands of unable and unworthy men, the Kings of France were
forced of later times, to erect the Gensdarmes des ordonnances: His Gens-d'armes
The Gens-d'armes, or men at Arms of his Ordinances, in Charles 7. time. For
ye must consider, that there have been four principal causes of the
overthrow of this Ban and Arrierban. The first was the gifts to the Clergy,
who it is reported have the sixth part of these fiefs in their hands, and
contribute nothing to the wars: for as one says, Ils ne veulent rien
perdre, Haill. l. 3
rien payer, rien contribuer pour leur guard, and neantmoins veulent estre
gardez: They will lose nothing, pay nothing, contribute nothing toward their
garding, and yet notwithstanding they will be guarded. The next was the voyages
to the Holy land: for when one had made a vow to go thither, to serve against
the Saracens, and Infidels, he sold his Fief, to furnish him for that purpose.
The third was the wars with the English, wherein by force they lost them. The
last cause is the sales of them to all sorts of people, without exception, as
to the Lawyer, the Yeoman, and any other unable person whatsoever, that will
buy them: which till Chapter 7. they might not do. Ye see then, how necessary it
was, this old institution being corrupted and quite decayed, to erect a new:
which they called Les gensdarmes des ordonnances: because at their first
erection, there were diverse laws and ordinances made for them to observe,
which who so brake, was surely punished. They were at first only 1500. But
after, they were increased to a hundred Companies, and given to diverse Princes
of the blood, and Nobles of France, to conduct and command, with an honorable
pension: In these Companies should be 6000. (for in some there is 100. in
others but 50.) howbeit, it is thought, in each company there wants some, for
the benefit of the Officers, and that in truth, there be not above four
thousand in all. For the maintenance of this Gensdarmerie, there is a tax
yearly leuyed upon the people throughout all France, called the Taille.

Concerning both the number of the Gensdarmes, and their proportion of
allowance, by the Taille, it is thus, as La Noue judges: La Noue.
Les gens de cheual du temps du Henry 2. passoient six mill lances: mais else
ne sont maintenant que quattre mill. Et il me semble que quattre regiments d'
Infanterie se doinent entretenir en temps de paix, reglez a six cens hommes
chacun. Et 15. mill escas per mois y suffiroit: The Horsemen in the time of
Henry 2. exceeded the number of 6000. Lances; but they are now but 4000. and in
mine opinion, it were fit to entertayne in time of peace, four Regiments of
Infantery, of 600. men apeece.

Antiq. Pa.
As touching the Infantery, Francis the first was the first that instituted the
Legionaries, His Infantery.
which were in all, 8. Legions, and every Legion to contain six thousand,
according to the rate of the ancient Romans. The first Legion was of Normandy.
The next of Bretagne. One in Picardy. One in Burgundy. In Champagne and
Niuernois one. In Dolpheny and Prouence one. In Lyonnois and Auuergne one. And
one in Languedocke. These companies were shortly after ca^^ed: and again,
within eighteen years erected; and are now again of late years dissolved,
and in their place, the Regiments now intertayned, which are five in number:
The Regiment of the Guard, The Regiment of Picardy, The Regiment of Champagne,
The Regiment of Piemont. And lastly, the Regiment of Gascoyne, commonly called
the Regiment of Navarre. In each of these is twelve hundred.

These are all now in time of peace bestowed in Garrison Towns and frontier
places, except those of his Guard. Bodin. l. 6.
Bodins opinion is, that four Legions of 5000. apeece, would suffice to be
maintained in this land: for (says he) the Roman Empire, which was twenty
times as great, Tacit. l. 1.
had never but 11. Legions in pay: but this is to be understood of them which
were in pay ordinary in Italy, besides those Legions which they had in other
their Countries, as in England, Spain, Low Countries, etc. For otherwise we
read of those Emperors, that had 31. Legions; and Bodin himself confesses,
that Augustus had at one time entertained in pay forty Legions, at 11. millions
charge the year. But this writer, though he be approved, as he well deserves;
yet I think, if he failed in any of his discourse, it was in matter of War,
the profession whereof did ill agree with his long Robe; ye shall therefore
take the judgment of a discreet Soldier of France, for your direction what
force the French can make, or intertaine of others, which is this, Si nostre
Roy sentoit qu'vn voisin luy v^lust veni^ mugueter sa frontiere, La Nou^.
^'estime qu'il pourroit aisement composer v^e Arm^s de soixante co^pagnies de
gensdarmes, vingt Cornettes de cheuaux legiers, et cing co^pagnies
d'Harquebusiers a cheual, le tout faisant dix mill cheuaux. A quoy un pourroit
adio^ster trois ou quattre mill Reisters plus, cent Enseignes d' Infanterie
Francoise, and quarante de ses bons amys les Swisses. Et cecy n' empescheroit
que les autres frontieres ne demurassent suffisament po^rueues d' hommes: If
our King perceived that any Neighbor of his meant to invade his Frontiers, I
think he might easily compose an Army of sixty companies of men at Arms, 20.
Corners of light Horse, and five companies of Harquebusiers on horseback,
amounting all to 10000. Horse. To which he might add three or four thousand
Reysters, and one hundred Ensigns of French foot, and forty Ensigns of his
good confederates, the Swissers, and yet mayntaine his other frontiers
sufficiently manned.

So that ye may conclude, that four thousand men at Arms, well complete, and
with a proportion of light Horse and foot answerable, shows the whole
Flower, Beauty, and force of France. Howsoever the Author of the Cabinet
confidently auoweth, that there may easily be mustred, and maintained
fourscore and odd thousand horse of one sort and other, that is, Lance and
light horse. But I fear me, we may say of them, as Plutarch says of the
Noblesse of Athens, having usurped upon the Democratie of that City: Plut.
Alcib.
Ils estoyent que quattre cens, et toutesfois se faisoient appeller les cinq
mill: They were indeed but 400. and yet caused themselves to be styled, The
five thousand. So I fear me, he reckons after the Athenian rate, ten for
one.

Cabinet du Roy.
The Cabinets reason is this: There be in France fifty thousand Gentlemen that
are able to bear Arms: for (says he) rate this proportion at a Gentleman in
each league, by the measure of France (where are forty thousand in square) and
it wants but a fifth. Howbeit, says he, in some Countries, ye shall have
thirty or forty, within the compass of one league, besides their children. Out
of these, if the King would, he might compose a Gendarmery of 8000. men at
Arms, and 16000. Archers: which body of 24000. Gentlemen, would represent in
the field 60000. horse. He might also have a cauallerie Legiere, of four or
five thousand Gentlemen. He might also furnish the Ban and Arierban, according
to the old fashion, with twelve or fifteen thousand Gentlemen. And yet might
he have besides all this, four or five thousand for the State of his Court,
and government of his Provinces. This is his computation. But you shall see it
proved, when we come to speak of the Nobility of France, that it is
exceedingly shortened in number, and decayed in estate, and therefore nothing
able to come near this number. As good a consequent it were to say, that
because ye have two or three millions of men in England, able to fight, that
therefore our State can bring so many into the field: without considering the
provision of Arms, and all other things necessary. But this Cabinet was made
by one of the Religion, that was transported out of himself, by the heat of
his zeal, and hate to the temporal livings of the Church: Whose proiects and
driftes are much like those of the Supplication of Beggars (a book made in
King Henry the eights days) where he frames in his fancy an Vtopia and
felicity, not to be hoped in France, building Castles in the air, and
concluding, that if it would please the King to aliene the Church temporal
livings, and unite them to the Domaine, nihil est dictu facilius: (a thing
easily said, but not easily done) that over and besides the forces of
fourscore thousand horse abouesaid, he might also maintain an Infantery of
the French Gentlemen of twelve thousand. Item, another of the populare, of
forty eight thousand. And lastly, yet another Infantery legionaire of 48.
thousand.

The Supplication was answered by Sir Thomas Moore his book, called The
Pitiful complaint of the puling souls in Purgatory: How well I know not, but
of this I am sure, that if such a number of horse and foot should either be
maintained upon the Church living, or upon the poor people (upon whom all
these charges of the Gend'armes lies, here would be many more puling souls,
and pitiful complayntes in France, then are Sir Thomas Moors Purgatory.

It then remains, that we hold our selves to the judgment of La Noue, before
set down, who also confesses, that in Charles the sixth his time, La Noue.
there were in the field, twenty two thousand Lances, but since the
Gendarmerie was instituted, were never but once at Valenciennes above ten
thousand. For as for that great number, whereof ye read in M. d' Argenton,
that besieged Jews the eleventh in Paris, Commines
they were the Forces of three great Princes, and the better part Burgognons.

There is yet one thing you must note, why the French have quit their Lances,
and serve al with the Pistol, whereof ye shall read somewhat in La Noue, and
hear more of others by discourse, but nothing of me by writing: for I dare
not deal, Vltra crepidam, in a matter I understand not fully.

Officers of war.
I must now remember you of the Officers for the war in France: and because
war is made both by Sea and by land, I must also reckon the Sea officers: for
as for the French Kings forces at Sea, I have not yet learned that he has any,
and therefore can say nothing thereof.

The first and principal, and which commands all in the Kings absence, even
the Peers and Princes of the blood whatsoever, Conestable.
is the Constable: Who, as has before been remembered, has his name of Comes
stabuli, Count of the stable. For in former times the Kings chief Officers
were called Counts, with an addition of their office, Hail. li. 2.
as Comes palatii, Comes praesidii, Comes rerum priuatarum, Comes sacrarum
largitionum, Comes castrorum, Comes nauium, Count of the Palace, Count of the
Guard, etc. And though he has not now the command of the Kings horse, yet
keeps he still the name: This office was erected in Jews le Gros his time.
It was bestowed upon the house of Memorencie, in Francis the first his time,
and remains still in the same.

The ancient device of the house of Memorency, is this, Dieu aid le premier
Chrestien, et premier Baron de France: God aid the first Christian, and
ancie^^st Baron of France. He has the keeping of the Sword royal. And as the
Grand Escuyer: Great Esquire, has the Sword in the scabberd D' Azure, seem de
fleurs de Lys d' or: Azure seeded with flowers de Lyce, or added to his Arms,
so bears the Constable for an Honor, the naked Sword, the Mareschals bear
the Hache, Battel-axe: and the Admirals the Anchor. The Constable and Mareshals
give the oath to the King: He sits chief Judge at the table of Marble, upon
all persons, Suits, Actions, and complaints whatsoever touching the wars.
When the King enters a City, in his greatest pomp, or upon a delivery, he
goes before with the sword naked: and when the King sits in Assembly of the
three States, he is placed at his right hand. He that kills the Constable, is
guilty of high treason. The Mareshals are named, as some say, Mareshall.
of (Marc.) Cheual, a Horse: and (Schal.) maistre, Master: Qui command aux
cheuaux, Commander of the horse. Others, Co^. Ordonn.
of Marcha. i. limite ou frontiere, March or frontier: quasi Prae^ectus
limitum, as it were Governor of the Marches. Till Francis the first, there
were but two in all France; after, four, and now ten: for as is said before,
when any that held either some strong Town or place of importance, came in to
the King, he did always capitulate, to have some one of these Offices,
besides sums of money and Governments also: such was the necessities of the
times, says Haillan. These, Haill. l. 4. Ibid.
under the Constable have the command over all Dukes, Earls, Barons,
Captains, and Gensdarmes: but may neither give battle, make proclamation, or
Muster men, without his commandment. They have under them Lieutenants, which
they call Preuosts Marshals, who have the punishing of mutinous soldiers, such
as quit their colors, Rogues, and such like. Admiral
There is the office of Admiral, Ce que les Mareschaux sont en vne Armee de
terre, l' Admiral est en vne nauale: Dern. trou.
and ces offices sont distinguez d'autant que le subject est different and
diverse: Look what the Marshals are in a land-Armie, the same is the Admiral
in a Sea-Armie: and these two offices are several, because the subject of
their employment is differing and unlike.

This office is the most ancient of all France: for Caesar speaks thereof,
Caesar. com lib. 2.
Les Admiraux de la Prouence, de Bretagne and Narbonne sont loves pour la
pratique and dexterite des guerres nauaies: The Admirals of Prouence,
Bretaigne, and Narbon are much commended for their practice and skill in
sea-seruice.

I marvel therefore, why du Haillan reports, that they were first made in
Charlemagnes days, and that one M. Ritland was the first that was made. There
are now four Admiralties, France, Bretagne, Guyenne, and Prouence. This last
is always annexed to the gouernourship of that Country: So that of Guienne
likewise, till the King that now is, came to the Crown, who before was
Governor and Admiral of Guyenne: but since he has divided the commandes. Ye
may observe in histories, that all the while the French voyages were upon the
Leuant Seas, either to the Holy Land, Sicile, or Naples, or whithersoeuer, the
French always had their vessels and Commanders out of Italy. La France
empruntoit ses Admiraux de Genes, Dern. trou.
Pise, de Venise, and de Luques: France borrowed their Admirals from Genoa,
Pisa, Venice, and Luca. These have the tenth of all wrack, prize or prisoners,
that are taken at Sea.

Before the invention of Shot, there was an Officer in France, called, Grand
Maistre des arbalestiers, Grand Master of the Artillery.
et Cranequiners, Great Master of the Crosse-bowes and Ingines: (for Cranequin,
is a general word for all instruments of battery) which Office is now called
The Grand Maistre de l' Artillery, Great Master of the Artillery, who at
first also, immediately after the invention of Shot, was called Captain
General de l' Artillery, Captain General of the Artillery.

You have also Treasurers for the Wars, Treasurers for the Wars.
which are either ordinary, or extraordinary: Those pay the Gensdarmes, and
these the Regiments of the Infanterie. Treasurers ordinary are so many, as
there be places where they Muster: Of extraordinary, there be always four.

The Heraults of France are six, Normandy, Guyenne, Heraults.
Valois, Bretagne, Burgogne, so called of the Countries (as with us in
England) and Mont-ioy, who is the chief of the rest. Their ancient Office was
to be present at all Iusts, and Tournements, to carry war or peace, to
summon places, to defy enemie-Princes, to give arms to men new ennobled: But
now they be only used at Feasts, Coronations, Solemnities, Funerals, and
such like; for they are no more used in the treaty and negotiation with
foreign Princes. I think the reason is, because the Office has of late
years been bestowed upon unworthy and insufficient persons. It shall here be
needless to name all other his Officers of the Wars, which are all one with
those of other Countries, as Collonell, Captain, Sergeant, Lieftenant,
Ensign, Capporall, etc. I will only remember in a word the French manner of
Mustering, March, Charge, and service ingenerall, and then proceed to the next
branch of this relation. We must observe, that (excepting the gens d' arms,
and the Regiments abouenamed) when any Soldiers are taken up for the wars,
they are not pressed, as with us, but the Captain having his Commission,
Press of Soldiers
gathers them up by sound of Drum, entertayning only such as will (which
may be some cause of the badnesse, and baseness of the French foot) for being
commonly the rascal sort, and such as have no other means, there cannot
settle in their abject minds, that true and honorable resolution requisite in
a Soldier. This Commission must first be showed to the Governor,
Lieutena^t-generall, Bailiffe, or Seneshall of the Province, upon pain of
death. Neither is it good, except it be signed by the King* and one of the
Secretaries of estate, and sealed with the great Seal. The Soldiers leuyed,
are at the charge of the Province, where they be taken up, till they depart the
same. March.
Their March it should seem, is somewhat more sharp then ours; For I remember
I have heard say, that upon a time, the old Marshall Biron should bid Sir
Roger Williams bring up his companies faster, Sir To. Will.
taxing the slow March of the English. Sir (says he) with this March our
forefathers conquered your Country of France, and I mean not to alter it, A
memorable answer of an honorable Soldier, For the French Charge, Charge. La
Noue.
ye shall hear the Spaniards opinion out of La Noue, L'infanterie Francoise
escaramouche brauement de loin et la Cauellerie a vne furieuse boutee a l'
affront, puis apres qu' elle s' accommode: The French Infantery skirmisheth
bravely afar off, and the Cauallery gives a furious onset at the first
charge: but after that first heat, they will take eggs for their money. And
indeed this is that which all writers give them, and which best agrees with
their nature: for we may say of them, as is said of Themistocles, he was so
hot at the onset, Plut. The*
que perdit le souffle au mileu de la carriere: That he lost his wind in the
midst of the carriere. Or say of them, as Fabius of Hannibal, Id. Fab.
His valor is comme un fe^ de paille, et vne flamme allumee en vne matiere de
peu de duree: Like a fire of straw, and a flame kindled in matter of small
continuance.

Concerning the French discipline, Discipline. Caesar. Com. l. 6.
Caesar himself says they had it first from us, Gallorum disciplina in
Britannia reperta, atque inde in Galli^m translata esse dicitur, et nunc qui
eam rem diligentius cognoscere volunt, plerunque illo discendi causa
proficiscuntur: It Is said, the discipline of the Gauls was first invented in
Britanny, and from thence translated into Gallia; and now such as desire to
attain the perfection thereof, commonly travel thither to learn it. But they
have long since degenerated from their old discipline of war: and they
themselves confess, that since the beginning of these late civil wars, where
Soldiers, in all disordred and dissolute manner, have bin given to pillage, and
volleries, (the every) that it is very much abbastardie, abastardized: Whereof
La Noue co^playneth in his discourses, La Noue*
Quant a la discipline Militaire, i^ faut confesser qu'elle est gisante aulict
tourmentee d'vne griefue malady* As for the military discipline, we must
confess, that she keeps her bed, sick of a very deadly disease. The Noblesse
fight always on horse, and think it a dishonor to serve on foot. Commine^
But Com. says of the Nobility of Burgundy, in the wars with Jews the
eleventh, that they all quit their horses, car lors ils estoyent le plus
honorez qui descendoyent, a fin que le peuple en fust plus asseure et
combattist mieux, et tenoyent cela des Anglois* For they were then most
honored, that lighted on foot, to the end the people might be the more
encouraged, and fight more valiantly: and this they learned of the English. And
it is no question, but if some of the French Nobility would do so, it would
much confirm their foot, by the example of their valor and abiding, and
recover that reputation, which now their foot have lost in the world. Neither
do I think this the least reason, why our Ancestors have won so many
battelles upon them, namely, for that we ever have had men of Noble houses, to
lead and serve on foot with our forces. A notable cause to confirm and assure
the unsteady headiness of a multitude.

And for the opinion that the world has of our foot, ye shall observe what the
same writer elsewhere says, Bonnes gens de pied, Id.
et meilleurs que leurs voisins, comme nous pourrions auiourd' huy dire les
Anglois et les Suisses: They be good foot, and better then their neighbors,
as we may say now adays of the English and Swissers.

And in another place, where he opineth of the manner of service, he says: Mon
aduis est, que la souueraine chose du monde es battaille sont les Archers, et
la fleurdes Archers sont les Anglois: My opinion is, that in battles, Archers
are the weight that turns the balance, and of Archers, the English are the
flower: where he likewise discourses, how dangerous a thing it is to abide a
battle, except your foot be much the better: which in my opinion was no little
cause why the French King fought not with the Cardinal this last year 97.
before Amiens, because the enemies foot were holden in number eighteen
thousand (though I hardly think they were so many) a number full as great as
the French, and the Soldier far better, they being all French, except some
three thousand English, and Swissers, and theirs the choice men of all his
Garrisons, and experienced Soldiers in those Low Countries. For true it is,
that the Kings Gensd'armes were two for one, and holden also much the better
men, as well because there was in a manner all the Nobility and Flower of
France, as also that they had the advantage in the manner of weapon, for that
the French serves with the Pistol, and the Spanyard still holds him to his
Lance. But I make no question, that the consideration of the odds on foot,
was not the chief cause why we fought not that day: for we had a goodly fair
Field, and plain as might be possible, as also large: a singular advantage for
him which is strongest in horse: So had we the wind and Sun in our backs,
which are holden no small helps.

But this was the reason: the King thought it no policy to play all his Rest at
once, where he might have lost more at one game, then he had got in eight
years: he had no reason, but to make the Card that was now going, a Bridge of
Gold (as the Proverb is) considering, that by this means he should gain the
Town of Amiens, reassure other Cities that then stood wavering, and recover
his reputation in the world, which by the loss of that Town was much disputed.

Of this somewhat has been said before: I therefore leave to speak further
thereof, as also of the French forces, or service in wars, with the only
remembrance of a French man's reason, who thought himself no small wise man,
that would needs prove that the French service, and Soldier also, was better
then the English: Because (says he) we have more old Captains in France,
then you in England. Much like the reason of Rablais, Rablais.
who would needs prove, that drunkenness was better for the body then
Phisike, because there were more old drunkards, then old Phisicians.

It now remains I speak of his Expense, which chiefly consists in these
two things before spoken of, His Expe^ce
namely, his Court and his Forces: wherein it is very hard to relate an exact
proportion, considering not only the variety and difference of writers, but
also the uncertainty of the numbers of Pensionai^es, or prouisioned: And
lastly, the change and alteration of their allowance, not continuing always
the same. Howbeit, that which is most commonly reported, and seems nearest
the truth, is this: The maintenance of five Regiments of foot, at six Crowns
the month, comes to four hundred sixty eight thousand Crowns the year,
besides the pension of 5. Colonels, at two thousand Crowns a piece; thirty
Captains at one thousand pension a man; as many Lieutenants at five hundred,
and Ensigns at three hundred the piece; which is in all seventy four
thousand: which added to the first sum, makes the whole charge of these
Regiments, yearly to amount to the sum of five hundred forty two thousand
Crowns. This proportion differs not much from that of Bodin, Bod. lib. 5.
where he says, The King might maintain in ordinary twenty thousand foot, at
the rate of three millions, and five hundred thousand livers, which if you
reduce to Crowns, and to one number of six thousand foot, comes to a less
rate then that other, namely, to four hundred eight thousand, three hundred
thirty three Crowns: but I think, that former is nearer the truth. For the
allowance of his Gensd'armes, which are reckoned at six thousand, as is before
said (though in truth there be but four) for he pays thus many, I follow the
proportion of them that say, that 51750. crowns, is the ordinary allowance for
one company of a hundred yearly: for where are six thousand men at Arms in
the field, are eighteen thousand horse in all. After this rate then of the
hundred before set down, the whole Gensd'armery amounts to 3105000. crowns.

For the expense of his Court, Cabin^t du Roy. But I doubt of this Authors
report, etc.
you shall hear it to be thus rated: The Table of the King, and those of the
Gentlemen of the Chamber, at 112000. crowns: for his menus plaisirs, petty
pleasures, a thousand crowns a day in all 165000. (But this was a proportion
for the last King, who was a great giver.) For the grand and petite Escuyrie,
great and little Stable, 190000. For the Constable, 24000. For the grand
Maistre, great Master, 20000. For the Mareshals of France, 18000. apeece, when
they were but four; for now it is a Title only, without either pension or
command, save only in the four chief. For the Admiral, 15000. for the grand
Veneur, great Hunt, 16000. For the Governors of his Provinces in all, 188000.
For the Gentlemen of his Chamber, their pension 1200. crowns apeece, in all
six hundred thousand. For the Captains of his Gards, a cheual, on Horse, two
thousand apeece. For their Lieutenants, eight hundred. For two thousand Swisse
of his Guard, ten crowns a month, 24840. For all other domestical Officers,
one hundred thousand. For Heraults, six thousand. For Mareshals of lodgings
and Fourriers, 4600. For Preuost Marshals of Provinces, a thousand a piece, in
all twenty four thousand. For twenty four hundred Archers to attend these
Preuosts in the execution of their Office, seven hundred and twenty thousand
Crowns. For his Ambassadors in diverse Countries, two hundred and fifty
thousand. For his Officers of Finances, Treasurers, Receivers, Controlers, and
such other like Offices through France, an infinite and incredible sum: As
also for such numbers of horse and foot as the Cabinet sets down, besides
these Gensdarmes and Regiments, which ye hear provided for, and in the Kings
pay.

But ye must observe, that of all these Court charges and others here
beforemencioned (except those of his Forces) ye are not to make any ground as
of a truth: they being only the supposed charges, set down by this said
Author, who for his errors in other matters, has also lost his credit in this.

Howbeit, I thought good to remember them, that ye might thereby have some
understanding of the difference of those Offices, and how one exceeds
another, as well in pension and benefit, as in precedents and honor.

To speak either particularly of the Court expenses, or generally what they be
certain, I cannot, not having heard any thing thereof, but only that it is
supposed, the charge of the Kings house, is five hundred Crowns a day. But
sure it is, that these late Wars have forced the Crown of France to be at
infinite charge: for ye shall read in La Noue, that above twenty years since,
Nos roys ont dependu aux guerres ciuiles soinant dix millions d'or. La Noue.
Our Kings have spent in the civil Wars, sixty millions of Crowns. And it
is said that Monsieur Gobelin, Treasorer d' Espurgne, Treasorer of the
Exchequer, passed his accounts this last year, for twenty one millions d' or,
of Crowns: so dear was the recovering of Amiens: for no question, there was
his greatest expense, (except the pay of Financers wages.)

What then has been the expense in these eight and thirty years space of the
Civil wars, may easily be coniectured to be infinite, considering withal
the lavish prodigality, and immeasureable spending of the Princes, especially
of the last: who some let not to say, that he left the state engaged by one
means and other; as namely, the sale of his Aides, His Dets.
the alienation of his Domaine, and money taken up to usury, not much less
then two hundred millions of Crowns in debt.

So that we may say, this King finds France, after Charles the ninth, and
Henry the third, as Vespasian found the Empire after Nero, and Caligula,
whereof the one had given away five and fifty millions, Bodin. l. 6.
and the other had spent sixty seven in one year. Whereupon he protests in
open Senate, Quadringenties millies. i. 1000. mill. opus esse vt resp* stare
possit. But no marvel, though the Crown of France grew far into debt,
considering that even before these Civil wars, when was no such necessity
of expense, Henry the second ought more in 12. years, says Bodin, Bodin. l. 3.
then his predecessors had levied upon France in forty years before by all
means.

And the Chancellor auoweth to the Court of Parliament, in Francis the second
his time, Com. de l' estat.
that the King could not quit his debts, which his Grandfather and Father left
him in, in ten years: Which debts, Bodin in particular proves, Bodin. l. 6.
to be about the sum of forty three millions, which in the same place he
sets down, namely, 2312610. De prests gratuits, (of loanes or privy Seals,
Don't il ne payoiet point d' interest, 15926555. for which he paid interest:
and 775979. which he was yet owing in arrerages, of the vsance behind to be
paid. Besides, to the Duke of Ferrara, and other debts for marriages, to the
sum of 8514592. Besides other debts to particular Merchants, of 1564787. As
also the sum of 14961778. for which his Aides, Domaine, and Gabelle of Salt
was engaged. And lastly, 3000000. which he ought to the Hostell de Paris, to
the Chamber or Towne-house of Paris.

But the beginning of all this is imputed to Francis the first, who having in
his Coffers, one million, and seven hundred thousand Crowns in ready money,
would notwithstanding take up great imprests of money at great vsance, to
enable himself to go through with his wars in Italy. A course very ill
taken: and (if we may compare great things with small) much like to a covetous
and greedie-minded man, who will venture upon a purchase of his neighbors land,
before he be well provided for such a purpose, but takes up money to loan,
which so eats into him, as he is at last forced not only to sell his new
purchase, but his ancient inheritance also.

For by these great interests, a Prince is brought to one of these two
extremities, either utterly to overthrow his Domaine and Finances, whereof the
Kings of France are good examples: or else to play Bankrupt and pay no body, as
now of late the King of Spain has done, with the Merchants of Genoa,
Florence, Ausburghe, and almost all the Banks in Christendom: insomuch as the
last year, when I was in Italy, ye should hear them say in derision, that the
King of Spain had made more ill faces upon the Exchange, in one day, then
Michael Angelo, the famous Paynter and Caruer, had ever made good faces in all
his life.

King Philip learned this kind of borrowing, of Charles the fifth, his father,
who at one time was indebted fifty millions, for which his Domaynes, and
Revenues of Naples, and Millaine were morgaged, and once also in twenty years
discharged all his debts on this fashion. And surely so they may, and yet the
Creditors be no losers (so unreasonable is the interest they take) insomuch,
as the King of Spain pays thirty, or forty, Bodin. li. 3
at the least, in the hundred, for all the money he has of the Genoueses,
before his Soldiers receive it in the Low Countries.

The French Kings, not being able to cry quittance with their Creanciers
(Creditors) in like manner, but running on further, and further, these forty
years, as having great troubles, and by consequent great charges, and little
or no benefit by their Finances, and ayds (by reason of the former alienation)
wherewith to defray the^: It must needs be thought, that now the Crown of
France is infinitely indebted, but whether to the sum of two hundred millions
or no (though it be generally reported) I dare not say.

Monsieur Bretagne, in Charles 9. anno, 1562. in his Harangue (Oration) for the
third estate at the assembly of Saint German, Com. de l' estat.
after many ways disputed how to pay that Kings debts, concludes this as the
best: The temporal livings of the Church (says he) are four millions of
rent, yearly: this sold, would amount to one hundred and twenty millions. Of
these, forty eight millions may be put in sure hands, to interest, for the
Clergy, which would yearly yield them their four millions, a denier douze,
at 8. and one third of eight in the hundred, as commonly they let in France.
Then would remain for the King seventy two millions: wherewith forty two
millions he might pay his debts, and redeem his Domaine and Finances
morgaged: And with the thirty that remain, he might fortify his frontiers,
entertayne his Garrisons, increase his Ban and Arrierban, and furnish himself
with Shipping. If in those days, so wise a Counselor, as was any in the land,
could not devise possibly how to pay the Kings debtes, without selling the
Church lands, you may imagine it will be a hard matter, to devise how to
discharge them now, that they be grown five times so great, as then they
were. For all his Domayne is morgaged, as before is said, or at least the
greater part, and (as La Noue says) that is engaged for 15. millions, La Noue.
which is worth 50.

His rents of his Aids are also gone: for they are engaged to each Generallity
in France, as of Paris, Rouen, Caen, etc. to the number of one and twenty of
them, and each has his portion therein: which would be too tedious to set
down in particular. His Offices are all sold, and many thousand erected, over
and besides the ordinary, and money also made of them. His poor people are
already with these civil Wars so spoiled, and impouerished, as there is
almost nothing to be had.

I see not therefore, but we should say of this King, as the Recueil de l'
estat de France says of the Duke of Sauoy, Recueil.
Quant-a son argent, pour fair bonne chere en sa maison il y en a assez, mais
pour fair me si grande guerre, non: As touching his money, he has enough to
make good chea^e at home, but not to maintain so great a war. So he, to
make merry with his friends, in this merry time of peace, has money enough:
mais pour payer vne si grande sum, non: But not to pay so great a sum of
debtes.

It now remains to speak of his Entrade, or Revenue: For a Prince cannot
have peace without war, no^ war without men, nor men without money, His
Revenue.
nor money without means: nor are there any means but these, viz. First,
Domaine. Secondly, Conquests. Thirdly, Dons des amys. Fourthly, Pension des
allies. Fifthly, Traffic. Bodin. l. 6.
Sixthly, Imposts sur les Marchandisez apportes ou emportes. Seventhly, Imposts
des Subjects: First, Domayne. Secondly, Conquests. Thirdly, Gifts of his
friends. Fourthly, Pension of his Confederates. Fifthly, Traffike. Sixthly,
Impositions upon Merchandise, brought in, or carried out. Seventhly,
Impositions upon his Subjects. And yet one other, which the Kings of France
have lately invented to help, when all other failed, which is, Eighthly, the
sales of Offices, more dangerous and prejudicial to the State, then any other.

Of these 8. means I will give you particular observations, and then conclude,
what is generally holden to be the whole Revenue of the Crown of France, by
all these means.

First, the Domayne is, as it were, The Domaine.
the Dowre which the State brings to the King her Husband, for her tuition,
defense, and maintenance: And therefore one says, n' est au Roy ains a la
Coronne: Belongs not to the King, Haill. l. 3.
but to the Crown.

There are 2. sorts of Domaines, First, the rent which the King holds in his
hands, of the Feifes given for service: Secondly, that which is united and
incorporate to the Crown. The rights of the Domaine are these: Rents, Fifts,
payments at alienations, tributes, peages, toll, of whatsoever enters or comes
out of Cities, woods, forests, and diverse other.

This is the most ancient and most lawful ground and foundation of Finances:
For ye shall observe in Liuy, Liuy li. 1.
that at the first there were in the territory of Rome, only eighteen
thousand Acres of land, whereof one third was for the Church and sacrifices,
another for the Resp. and the rest for particular men. This is also confirmed
by Dionisius Halicarnasseus, Dion. Hali. lib. 2. Pliny.
who lived with Master Varro, the true Register of the Roman antiquities, as
Bodin calls him. A Citizen of Rome had but two Acres, but after the expulsion of
Tarquinius, they had 7. apiece. This division among the Romans, was derived
from the Egyptians, who did divide their whole land into three parts: Diod li.
2.
One for the Church, another for the King, and the third for the Calasyres.

That is Domaine, which belongs to the Crown: First, either by Possession,
time out of mind: Or secondly, by Reunion, for want of heirs males, as the
Appennages when they return: Thirdly, or by Confusion, for want of such as can
make just claim, much like our concealed lands in England: Or lastly, by
Confiscation of offenders inheritances.

Comment. de l' Estat.
Of this last sort we read, that in the time of Saint Jews, there were
confisked to the Domaine, the Counties of Dreax, Bray, Fortyonne, and
Monstreuil, Languedocke, Guyenne, Aniowe, Maine, Turraine, Auuergne: And after,
in the time of Philip, the Duchy of Alencon, the Counties of Perch, Perigort,
Poutieu, La March Angoulesme, and Marquisate of Saluzzes. But Bodin says,
most of this came to the Crown by force: La sieur de la serre: He says, it
came by way of exchange or purchase. But the Author of the Comentaries, of the
estate of the Religion, and policy of France, is of the first opinion. Thus
great was the Domayne in former times, that of it self, without oppressing the
people with Impositions, it was sufficient to maintain the State and
greatness of the Kings of France, but it is now utterly wasted. Dern. troubl.
On scait bien que le Domaine qui seul entretenoit la splendeur et le luster de
l' estat Royal, n' est tell qu'il estoit de temps du regne des roys Loys, 11.
Chapter 8. et. Lo. 12. La continuation des guerres l' a faict engager en plusieurs
mains, entelle sort qu' il faudroit plus de quinze on seze millions des livers
pour rachepter ce qui en vaut plus de c^nquante millions: It Is well known, that
the Domayne, which alone maintained heretofore the beauty and luster of the
Royal Estate, is not now such, as it was in the reigns of King Jews 11.
Charles 8. and Jews 12. The continuance of our wars, has caused it to be
engaged in many hands, in such sort, that there is need of more then fifteen
or 16. thousand pound Sterling, to redeem that which is worth above 5.
millions of pounds. And Bodin says, that almost all the Counties, Baronies,
and Seigneuries of the Domaine, are aliened for the ninth or tenth part of that
they be worth. Ye must observe, that the lands of the Domaine are not
alienable, but in two cases. 1. Pour l' Apennage des freres. 2. Pour les
guerres. Haill. l. 3.
1. For the Ape^nage of the Kings brother. 2. For the wars: and these must be
confirmed by the Arrest of the Parliament. For in all other cases, all Lawyers
and Historiens of France agree, that it is inalienable, and many Arrests have
been made of late years to confirm it. I have read, that the Charta magna of
England says, the Kings when they are crowned, take an oath, not to aliene it:
so do they here in France. And there is no prescription of time, to make such
sales or alienations good, but that they may be recovered and repurchased,
whenever the Crown is able.

Plut. Cato Cens.
To this purpose Plutarch says well, Men cannot prescribe against God, nor
particulars against the Respublique.

Conquest.
2. Concerning the second means of raising money by Conquests, the present state
of France can yield no example, it has been long on the losing hand: but ye
shall read, that the Turk daily, when he conquereth a Province or Country,
gives the Lands to such as shall serve him in the Wars, whom he sends
thither as it were Colonies, to enjoy each one his portion of some four and
twenty Acres of our measure, or as other reckon, thirty. He gives them also
Wheat to seed their land, upon condition to pay him half the fruits of the
seventh year, and half of the twelfth: and when the party dies, his goods go
to the Turk: so that the parties casuelles, Parties Casuelles in France, is
only sale of Offices.
casualties (as they here call them) is a great revenue to him.

So the Spanyard has sent of his people into Peru, there to inhabit (much like
this course the Turk takes) and from thence yearly receives to the value of
two millions, that is, the fifth of such Gold and silver, and other commodities,
as are there found.

3. For the third means, it is now out of season: it was used in that good
old world, when on se mouchoit sur le manche: Men wiped their nose on their
sleeue, (as the French man says:) for now Princes are so far from giving, as
they hardly pay that they owe.

Of these gifts ye shall read in Polibius, Florus, and others: As of the King
of Egypt, who sent to the City of Rome, when it was distressed by Hanniball,
Liuy. l. 38
the sum of 400000. Crowns. And Hieron of Sicili sent them a Crown of gold,
of three hundred pounds weight. They of Rhodes had an old ruinous Colosse
fell down, which stood hard by the Key, and in the fall brake three or four
Ships: to repair which loss, the King of Egypt sent them 1800000. Crowns
in gold, besides a great quantity of silver, and three thousand muyds of
wheat: Hieron sent them 60000. Crowns. Polib. l. 4.
So did Ptolemey send great gifts to them of Jerusalem: And ye shall read of
six kingdoms given to the Romans, by testament: and the Duchy of Guelderland
given to the Duke of Burgogne, Commines.
not much above an hundred years since.

4 The fourth means also of Pension, which Princes have upon some
consideration of their Allies, Pension
helps the French Kings Cosers nothing at all: for they rather give then
take: As for example, to diverse cantons of the Swisses, to whom at first they
paid not above one hundred and twenty thousand livers yearly: but for these
fifty years, they never pay less the year, then two millions. For says
Commines, Jews 11. entered league with the Swisses, and they into his Pension:
to whom he yearly gave forty thousand Flourins, whereof twenty to the
Cities, and twenty to particular men, upon condition to have a certain
proportion of their forces to serve him in his Wars upon all occasions. An
aduantagious alliance for the Swisse in my opinion, who by this means enrich
themselves, clear their Country of many idle and bad members, and lastly,
breed good Soldiers, to serve themselves upon need, at another man's cost. The
Turk has also a pension of the Emperor of Germany, Bodin. li. 5
for certain Lands he holds in Hungary: which he notwithstanding vanteth to
be a Tribute. Many examples might be alleged of this kind, as of Philip of
Macedone, that by pensions got all Greece partial on his side: Plut. Lysander.
and the Kings of Persia by pension, got ever the Forces of Asia diuerted.

Traffic.
5 The fifth, which is of Traffic, avails nothing the French Kings: for they
hold it here a base and sordid kind of profession for a Gentleman, much more
for a King, Bodin. li. 6
to trade by Merchandise. And by the Laws of England, France and Germany, he
loses the quality of a Nobleman, that does traffic. The Law Clodia forbad a
Roman Senator to trade, or have Ship of burden, ^iuy li. 21.
Quaestus omnis patribus indecorus visus est: The Senators esteemed any kind
of trade or traffic unworthy of their rank. And the Emperors Law forbad all
Gentlemen and Churchmen to use it.

Notwithstanding these Laws, and the disparagement that it brings to Nobility
(for says Tully, Cice. offic.
Mercatores sunt sordidum genus hominum, Merchants are a base kind of people)
yet so sweet is the savor of gain, that many have used this as no small
means to increase their Finances. The great Duke of Tuscaine present, gains
infinitely this way, and the more by his most unlawful and tyrannous
Monopolies: for he commonly buyeth up all the grain of his own Country, at
his own price: yea, and that which comes from other places also, and then
sends out a Bando or Proclamation, that no man shall sell any Corn
throughout his State, till his own be sold, forcing also all Bakers and other
people to buy thereof. This manner of engrossing Alphonsus of Arragon also used,
by the testimony of Bodin. The Kings of Portugal also, and the Seignoria of
Venice, have been great traders by Merchandise, but it has been in an
honester fashion, at Sea, and not to the grinding of their poor Subjects. The
Nobility also of Italy, in all Cities (except Naples) hold it no dishonor to
traffic in gross, as ye shall generally observe when ye come into that
Country.

6 The sixth means of raising money upon all wares and Merchandise, Impost upon
Merchandise.
that come in and go out of the Country, is the most ancient and best
agreeing with reason, and used by all Princes in the world. The late troubles
have made the benefit hereof very small to the Crown of France, for these many
years past. The particulars comprised under this branch, are these: Le haut
passage, ou Domaine foraine, and La traicte foraine. Customs inward, and
outward: Bodin. li. 5
By these the Prince is to have Impost, Cinq pour cent, five in the hundred: so
much just had the Romans, Test Cicerone in Praetura Siciliensi, As Cicero
witnesses in his Pretorship of Sicilia. The Turk takes, Dix ^our cent, Ten in
the hundred of the stranger, and cinq, five, of the Subject: the French quite
contrary. You must observe, that that which here I call the Domaine foraine, is
generally called the Aides: first, granted by the Estates to Charles Duke of
Normandy, when John his Father was prisoner in England: which was the payment
of 12. Deniers, the liver, Haill. l. 3.
sur toutes les merchandises et denrees qui seroyent vendues en ce royaume
except sur le vin, lebled, le sell, et autres breuuages: mais depuis il s' est
faict perpetuel et augmente, par l' imposition du vin vendu en gros par tout,
and en Normandy en detaille: Upon all marcha^dizes and wares which should be
sold in this Kingdom, except upon Wine, Corn, Salt, and all manner of drink:
but since it has been made perpetual, and augmented by the imposition upon
Wine sold every where, and in Normandy by retaile.

This is like the Gabel upon all manner of food, which the Princes take of
their Subjects through Italy, or the Assise upon bread and beer which the
States have in the Low countries* a grieuance, whereof we smart not in England,
as also we are free from many other burdens, which the people of these
Countries are forced to bear: and yet ye shall hear our people (therefore
ignorant of their own happiness, which they enjoy under the blessed
Government of our gracious Sovereign, because they knew not the miseries of
others) murmr and grudge at the payment of a Tax or Subsidy, as a matter
insupportable, which, in comparison of the impositions laid upon others, is a
matter of nothing.

Touching the Gabell of Salt (which is also comprised under this head) Some say
it was first erected by Philippe le Long: Others by Philip de Valois, 1328.
True it is, that the ordinance of Francis the first, 1541. sets down an impost
of twenty four Livers upon every Muy: And in the year 1543. an ordinance was
made for Gabell, to be taken upon all Seafish salted. And in 1544. it was
ordained, that all Salt should be sold and distributed into the Magazines, or
Storehouses of every several generality. The benefit of this one commodity,
has been very commodious to the Crown, Dern. trou.
till the year eighty one, when the King was forced for want of money to let
it out to others: whereby he lost, as is in my Author proved, eight hundred
thirty six thousand Crowns yearly. Here is also a kind of tax, called the
Equiuallent, that is, an imposition laid upon some persons and places (but not
generally) to have liberty to buy and sell Salt, and to be exempt from the
Magazines.

The Impost of Wine is laid upon all, without exception or exemption
whatsoever, it is the twentieth part to the King: besides all other rights, as
of Billots, entering into Cities, passages by land or river, and such like:
Besides, a later imposition of five Sols upon every Muy, levied by Charles the
ninth 1561.

Concerning the ( Traicte foraine) it is of like nature with the Aides, save
that it is leuiable upon more particular sorts of Merchandise: besides, the
Aides is an Impost upon things spent in the Land: and the Traicte foreign, is
of such commodities as are transported out: As of Wheat, Rye, Barley, Oats,
Wine, Vinegar, Veriuice, Cidre, Beefes, Muttons, Veales, Lambs, Swine, Horses,
Lard, Bacon, Tallow, Oil, Cheese, Fish of all sorts, Drougs of all sorts,
Metals of all sorts, Silks and clothes of all sorts, Leather of all sorts;
and finally all other merchandise, as Fruits, Parchment, Paper, Glass, Wood,
Roopes, etc.

7 The seventh ground or foundation of Finances, Imposition upon the Subject.
is the Imposition upon the Subject: that is, not upon the Wares or
commodities, but upon the persons themselves, according to their ability, and
it is much like the leuying of the tax and subsidy in England, where every
one pays rateably to the lands and goods he possesses. And therefore Haillan
judges well, to say, they be neither personal, Hail. l. 3.
nor real, but mixed, imposees au lieu du domicile, ayant esgard a tousles
biens du taillable, en quelque part qu' ils soyent assis et posez: Assessed in
the place of their dwelling, according to all the goods of the party assessed,
in what part soever they lie or abide.

These ( tailles) were first raised by Saint Jews (but by way of extraordinary
Subsidy.) Charles the 7. made them ordinary for the maintenance of his
Gendarmerie. And whereas at first they were never leuyed but by consent of the
three States, and to endure but while the war lasted, he made them
perpetual. Therefore says one, Haill. li. 3.
Ce qu'estoit accord par grace, est depuis venu patrimonial et hereditaire aux
roys: That which was at first yielded of favor, is become since patrimoniall
and hereditarie to our Kings. (But this is a common course, I think there is
no country in Europe but can give instances thereof.) There is yet to be
observed, that these tailles are only liable upon the Plat pais (the County)
all Cities are exempt, as also all Officers of the Kings house, all
Counselors, Lawyers, and Officers of Courts of Parliament, all the Nobility,
the Gensdarmes, the Officers of war, the Graduates of Universities, etc.

The ( taillon) is another imposition, raised by Henry, 2. anno, 1549. which
was to amend the wages of the gensdarmes, who by reason of the smalnesse of
their pay, lay upon the poor villages, and ate them up; for the ease whereof
this imposition was devised, which also lies upon the poor Countryman:
whereby at first he was somewhat eased: But now all is perverted; the poor is
still oppressed, and yet he pays still both taille and taillon.

Lastly, there is the sold, or pay of 50000. foot, which ye may remember were
erected by Jews the eleventh, in eight legions, six thousand to a legion,
which with their Officers, come about this number. To maintain these Legions,
there was a tax leuyed upon all sorts of persons privileged in the ( taille)
but only the Nobles. (There are also the Decymes (Tenthes) leuyed upon the
Church.) For the leuying of the taille, taillon, Idem. li. 3
and sold de 50000. gens a pied, wages of 50000. foot. Ye must note, that the
King sends his Letters Patentes by Commissioners, to the Treasurers of each
Generality: these, according to the sum, rate each Election, (this is, as
ye would say, a hundred in a shire, or a Bailywike) and then send to these
Elections, to have the said sum gathered in their several Towns, and
Hamlets, according as they be rated.

So do they to the Maieures, Consuls, Escheuins, and chief Officers of every
City, that are liable to any of these payments, who rating every man according
to his ability, give these Rolls to certain Collectors to gather it up:
These are bound to bring it quarterly to the Receivers. These carry it to the
Receivers general, in the same species that they received it: and from them to
have an Acquittance, after the Accounts have been perused by the Controler
general.

And these are all the means, by which Princes raise their Finances, whereof
ye see some, nothing to pertayne to the French King, but to others; and some
to him only, not to others.

Sale of Offices
8 There yet remains one other means (though extraordinary) to a Prince, to
get money, which the necessities of the times, and the want of other means,
have forced the French Kings of late years to use. This is the vent or sales
of Offices, a very dangerous and hurtful Merchandise, both for the Prince and
subject. This Lesson (says Bodin) the French Kings first learned of the Popes,
Bodin. l. 6.
with whom it is still as familiar, as old, to sell Bishoprics, livings, and
Ecclesiastical promotions. A course, Dern. troub.
says one de gra^de consequence and tres-perilleuse, mais couuerte de
necessite: of great and dangerous consequence, but cloked with necessity. It is
indeed thrice dangerous, because sales of offices cause sales of Justice: for
what these Purchasers pay in gross, they must needs get in retayle, forgetting
what was said to Sophocles, the Governor of Athens, Il faut qu'vn Gouerneur
ait non seulement les mains nets, mais les yeur aussi: A Governor must not
only have his hands clean, but his eyes also. They cannot say, as Pericles
did on his deathbed, Plut* Peri.
Que null Athenien pour occasion de luy, n' auoit onc port rob noire: He had
never made any Athenian wear mourning robe. For these, by selling Justice, and
robbing the poor of their right, give the fatherless and oppressed Widdowe
just cause to complain, and of wearing that mourning robe that Plutarch
speaks of.

Saint Jews, among many other good Laws, and reuocation of diverse impositions
extraordinary, made also an Edict against the sale of Offices. And it is
reported of Alexander Seuerus* Haill. l. 3
that he should say when one offered a piece of money for a certain Office,
Non patiar mercatores potestatum: I will suffer none to traffic Offices.
Spartian.
Therefore says the Athenian Orator to Timar^hus, That the lives, not the
Purses of them that stood for Offices, were to be looked into. Demosthenes.
And ye shall read in Plutarch, that he which anciently stood for an Office
in Rome, was to show himself certain days before the Election, in the Forum
or open streets, apparelled in a thin Robe, that through the same, the
people might see the wounds he had had in the Wars for his Countries service,
and thereafter as he had deserved, Plu. Cori^.
to choose him. And lest any man should by briberie, corruption, or any such
indirect and unlawful way, seek to get any Office or Authority, these old
Romans made many good and wholesome Laws, against such manner of proceedings
(which they called Ambitus) i. an Ambicious seeking of preferment. This the Lex
Petilia forbad: Bodin. li. 5
The Lex Calphurnia declared them that were detected of any such course, to be
incapable of that Office for ever. Cicer. pr^ Muraen.
And the Lex Tullia banished them that were convinced ( Ambitus) for ten
years: so hateful were such purchases in those days.

And in the time of Ferdinand, Turquet. hist Sp.
they had the like law in Spain, against the buying of any Office, whether of
War or Justice: Que use quedam vender ny trocar, officios de Alcaldid, ny
Algnaziladgo, ny Regimiento, ny vientes quatria, ny fid executoria, ny
iuraderia.

Thus you may observe, how hurtful soever it be to Commonwealths, and how
much so ever forbidden, yet that necessity oftentimes forces Princes, to that
which is most loss to themselves. La pauurete quelques fois contraint le Roy
de casser bonnes loix pour subuenir a se^ affairs: et depuis qu' vne fois on a
faict ceste ouuerture il est presqu' impossible d' y remedier: Poverty
sometimes constrains the King to break good Laws, to help his affairs,
and when once this hole is made in the Laws, it is almost impossible to keep
it.

It is a strange thing to consider, and incredible to believe, what infinite
masses of money have been made here in France by these sales, where there is
not that Collector, Co^troller, Treasurer, Sergeant, or subalterne Office
whatsoever, but he has bought it of the Prince, and at no small rate: for I
have heard it credibly reported, and ye shall read also in late writers, that
these Offices are bought in France at a dearer rate then our Lands in England
of twenty years purchase. Ye must observe they have them for term of life,
and after, to return to the King who is again to sell them. A man in his
sickness, or in danger of death, or upon any need whatsoever, may sell this his
Office, or resign it to his Son or friend whatsoever: which sale is good, if
the party live forty days after the sale or resignation is confirmed,
otherwise not. Now we are to consider, what Entrade or Reuenew, the French King
yearly makes by any or all of the means abouesaid.

The estate of the Finances, Domaine, and al in Charles the sixth time, Bodin.
l. 6.
Anno 1449. was but 1400000. Livers. Henry the second, leuoit sur son people
par voye ordinaire quinz^ millions des francs tous les ans: La Noue.
d^nt quelque party a depuis este engagee pour les dettes: Non obstant
lesquelles nostre Roy en tirs autant auiourd huy* raised upon his people by way
of ordinary Reuenew, fifteen thousand pound sterling a year: whereof some
part has since been aliened for the debts of the Crown, which notwithstanding
the King rayseth as much now.

But ye may observe, that this sum is of late years grown much greater, (by
two thirds) as is generally believed: for whereas in those days, some three or
fourscore years, since the ordinary sum was fifteen millions of Francs or
Livers, it is now so many of Crowns. And Monsieur Riuault, Treasurer to the
Duke of Mayenne, shamed not some eight years since to say, that his Master had
improued the Realm of France to a better rent, then any Prince had done
beforetimes: For says he, Muheustro et Mana^t
Au lieu qu' il ne vallait que dix huict ou vingt millions, il en vaut auiour
d'huy cinquante: Whereas it was worth but eighteen or twenty thousand pound
sterling, it is now worth five millions sterling.

And another says, that only by the sales of Offices in twenty years space,
Dern. troub.
Le Roy en a tire cent trent et neuf millions: The King has raised one hundred
thirty and nine millions, which is after the rate of seven millions the year.
So that it is probably to be inferred, that the Revenues are at lest fifteen
millions of Crowns; wherein all late writers agree: Neither must we think,
that men are mistaken, by counting Crowns for Livers (considering that Bodin,
and La Noue, and most elder writers speak only of Livers, not of Crowns.)
For the manner of Account of France, is by especial ordinance commanded to be
made by Crowns, and that of Livers to cease: So that whenever ye read in
the Stories of France, of any sum of thousands, millions, or such like,
without naming either francs or Crowns: you are to respect the times when it
was written: for if it was above twenty years past, they mean Livers or
Francs: if of latter years then twenty, it is always to be understood they
speak of Crowns: this rule will not fail you.

Having briefly spoken of his Entrade, and sufficiently of the means by which
he raises it, as especially by the last, which is not the least: namely, the
sales of Offices, which are now bestowed, not upon them which can execute them
best, but such as can give the most; of whom we may say, as Commines of them
of his time, Commines.
presently after the Battle of Montlherry, Tell perdoit ses offices et estats
pour s' en estre fuy, et furent donnes a autres qui auoyent fuy dix lieues plus
loing: Some lost their Offices and estates for running away, the which were
bestowed upon others, that ran ten leagues further: So these Offices were
taken from them that pilled the people much, and bestowed upon others that pill
them ten times more.

Officers of his Finances.
Having, I say, spoken sufficiently of these, it remains I keep the same
course I have done hitherto: that is, after the relation of the Court, to
reckon up the Officers of Court, and after the discourse of his Forces, to
speak of his Officers of war: So here likewise after mention made of his
Finances and Revenues, to remember his Financers and Officers, used for the
Collection, keeping and disposing of the same. Of which officers, we may say,
as the Philosopher says of wives, that they be Mala necessaria: Necessary
evils. And as he says of them, The less of evils is the best: so say we of
these, The fewer the better. But when we read, that the old Romans had of
these but one in a Province, you shall observe here in some Province not so
few as one thousand.

The chief of these is the Treasurer d'Espargne, Treasurer d' Espargne. Treas.
de parties casuelles. Treas. generaux. Treas. de menus pl.
of the Exchequer, instituted in Francis the first his time, in place of the
Receyuer general. There is also another Treasurer of the parties casuelles,
Casualties. The third sort are the Treasurers generaux des Finances, whom also
they call Treasurers of France; (for as for the Treasurers ordinary and
extraordinary of the Wars, we have already spoke of them in the relation of
his forces, and of the Treasurer de menus plaisirs, of his petty pleasures,
when we spoke of his Court.) The number of these Treasurers general, as also
of all other Officers of Finances, ye may partly conceive by the number of
Generalities which are in France, and the several Offices of each one of these.

Of these Generalities are twenty and one in all France, Generalities.
Paris, Rouen, Caen, Nantes, Toures, Burges, Poictiers, Ag^n, Toulouse,
Montpellier, Aix, Grenoble, Lion, Ryon, Dyon, Chaalons, Amyens, Orleans,
Soissons, Lymoges, Moulin.

In each of these Generalities are diverse Elections, Elections
that is, diverse places for the Receipt of the Finances: As in that of Orleans
are eleven Elections, in the rest some more, and some less, to the number of
170. in all.

In every Generality are ten Treasurers; Receivers.
three Receivers general of the Finances; three Receyuers general of the
Taillon; one Receiver general of the Dismes; two Receyuers general of the
Woods: And for every Receiver, so many Controlers general: Controlers.
two Treasurers general of the extraordinary of the War, for the payment of
Garrisons and Soldiers in time of War.

Besides all these general Officers, there are also in each particular
Election, three Receyuers of the Taille, three of the Aides, two of the
Taillon, and as many Controlers, besides all other inferior Officers. If then
there be thus many in one Election only, ye may judge the infinite number in
all France, upon which they lie, as thick as the Grassehoppers in Egypt.

Chamber of Accounts.
I must here also remember the Chamber of Accounts, the chief Court of the
Finances: wherein are four Presidents, twelve Masters, eighteen Auditors,
four Correctors, one Procuror general, one advocate, one greffier, six
huissiers, or Sergeants, and other inferior Officers, Bodin. l. 5.
to the number (as Bodin says) of two hundred, besides servants (and it is
likely, the number is not lessened since his time.)

In conclusion, the Officers here, and of other places, are so exceeding many,
as a President of this Court showed the Estates of France, in the assembly at
Blois, that of the Escu, six shillings, which was paid by the Subject, there
came but a teston, 1. shilling 8. pence to the Kings Cofers.

Many motions have been made, from time to time, for the redress hereof, but
the faction of Financers is so strong, and the sum so huge, which the King
owes them, that it is remediless.

The Court of Aides also is as full of Offices, as that other. Court of Aides.
Haill. l. 4
These Finances (says one) ont este brouillees, alterees, changees, et
reduictes en art si obscure, que peu de gens y entendent, ou peuuent y
entendre, s' ils ne sont nourrys en la Caballe, de ceux qui l'ont obscurcie:
have been so shuffled, altered, changed, and reduced into so obscure an Art,
that very few either do, or can understand it, except they have been brought up
in their Cabale that have obscured it. No marvel therefore, though there be
much difference among men, about the certayntie thereof, either for the truth
of the sum, or number of the Officers.

Howbeit, having now wound my self out of the laborsome Laborinth thereof,
directed by the clew of the best writers, and most judicious Informers, that as
yet I could meet withal, I will proceed to relate of the rest, and first of
the Kings Coin, for that ye know these Financers are never without money: and
next that, I will remember the Administration of Justice, and so by consequent
speak of the Courts, Judges, Lawyers, and such like, who, of all people in the
world, hunt after it with greatest greediness.

The Coins of France, are either of Gold, Silver, His Coin.
or Brass. In those of Gold I must be better instructed my self, for I know
not but the Crown, which is of three or four sorts, whereof that of the Sun
is the best, and the half Crown. Those of Silver are these, the Liver or
Franc, which is 2. shillings sterling: The quart d' escu, which is 1. shilling,
6. pence. The Teston, which is half a soubs less: The piece of ten soubs,
which is 1. shilling sterling: the half quardescu, the half teston, and the
piece of five soubs, that is six pence sterling. Those of Brass, is the piece
of six Blanks, which is three pence: that of three blankes, three half pence.
The soubs of 12. deniers: the liard of four deniers, the double, of two: and
lastly, the denier it self, whereof ten make 1. penny sterling. This baser
and smaller kind of money, has not been used in France, but since the
beginning of the civil wars. The Teston is the best silver. It is a general
and a true complaint, that the Coin is much less in France, then it has
been, and that there is the better half of French Crowns gone out of the
land within these twenty years: whereof is no marvel, considering that
merchandise has almost lien dead, the Country unfruitful, because untilled,
and many troops of forrayne Soldiers, especially of Swisses and Reisters, here
all the while paid.

Howsoever it decrease in France, true it is that Bodin says, that it
increases generally in all these West countries of the world; as also that
they have less and less in the East parts: Strabo.
For so he reports out of Strabo, that in former times the Kings of Egypt
raised yearly upon their people seven millions and a half. And Plutarch
says, Plut. Scyl.
that Scylla taxed Asia minor at twelve millions of Crowns, which is little
more then the sixth part of that the Turk holds, who notwithstanding at this
present rayseth not above so much in all his dominions. But in these Countries,
as ye see by this Realm of France, the Revenues still grow greater and
greater: of this the abundance of money is no little cause: So is it also the
cause, that the prices of all wares are grown, not that things are now more
scarce, or people more plentiful, which some will needs persuade themselves to
believe.

Bodin. li. 6
And therefore one reasons well, that says, The Revenue of Charles the sixth,
which was but fourteen hundred thousand Francks, was as sufficient to
maintain the greatness of a French King, as that of Charles the nynth, which
was fifteen millions, considering the price of all things, and pension of
Officers enhaunced. And so by consequent, the ransom of the Sultane of Egypt,
of five hundred thousand Livers, which he paid the Turk, not much less then
the three millions of Crowns, which Francis the first paid to Charles the
fifth.

It remains I speak of of the Administration and Execution of Justice,
Administration of Justice. Assemblies.
and of those places and persons where and by whom it is done: I will
therefore begin with their Assemblies, as the highest and greatest Court of al,
which well resembles the Parliament of England, the Diet of the Empire, or the
Counsel of the Amphyrthions in Greece. We may say of these Assemblies of
France, where matters are concluded by the multiplicitie of voices, not by the
poyze of reason, as was said of the Romans elections, where the Consul
propounded, and the people approved by suffrage, or disprooued: or as the
Philosopher Anacharsis said of Solons Commonwealth: Es consultations et
deliberations des Grecs, P^ut. Solon
les sages proposent les matieres, et les fols les decident: In the
consultations and deliberations of the Greeks, wise men propound the matters,
and fools decide them.

There are three especial causes of calling these Assemblies. The first, Dern.
troubl.
Quand la succession a la Coronne estoit douteuse et controuerse, ou qu' il
estoit necessaire de pouruoir a la Regence, durant la captivity ou minorite des
Roys, ou quand ils estoyent preclus de l' usage de leux intendement: When the
succession of the Crown was doubtful and in controversy, or when it was to
take order for the Regencie during the Kings captivity or minority, or when
they had not the right use of their wits. Hereof ye have examples, Anno 1327.
S. Jews an infant: and Charles the sixth, Anno 1380. lunaticke: and 1484. John
prisoner. For all which occasions, Assemblies were called, to determine who
should have the Regencie of the Realm in the mean while.

Ibid.
The second cause is, Quand il est question de reformer le Royaume, corriger les
abus des Officers, et Magistrates, ou appaiser les troubles et seditions: When
there is question of reforming the kingdom, correcting the abuses of Officers
and Magistrates, or appeasing troubles and seditions: Hereof ye have examples,
14.12. when a peace was made between the Infants of Orleans and Burgundy, whose
houses had long warred one with another, and distracted all the Nobility of
France, to their parts taking. Also anno, 1560. when Frances the second called
an assembly at Orleans, for the different of Religion: where the Prince of
Condie was arrested, and condemned of treason, and where this young King died,
before he could see the execution. And anno, 1587. an assembly called at
Blois, for the reformation of the State, and punishment of diverse abuses in
Magistrates (as the Duke of Guise pretended) and for the deposing of the King,
as some thought that he intended: others say, that he had here plotted to kill
the King, and that the King had but the start of the Duke one day: for if he
had deferred the death of the Guise till the next day, the lot had fallen upon
himself. Mr. du Fay.
There is a very judicious late writer, who discoursing of this assembly at
Blois, where the three Estates excepted against the Kings ill Government,
complayneth, that of late they are grown too insolent in their demands. Ye
shall read in our Histories of such a like Parliament as this, Hollins^ead.
in England, called by Henry of Derby, against Richard the second.

The third cause is, la necessite du Roy ou royaume, ou l' on exhortoit aux
subsides, Der. troub
subuentions, aides, et octrois: The want and necessity of the King or
kingdom, in which case the Estates are exhorted to give Subsidies,
subuentions, aides, and gratuities. For in former times, the Kings contenting
themselves with their Domaine, and impost of such wares, as came in, or went
out of the land, (the two most ancient, and most just grounds of Finances) were
not accustomed to leuy and impose upon their Subjects any tax whatsoever,
without the consent of the three States, thus assembled. They did not say, as
of later years Jews the eleventh was wont, La Noue
Que la France estoit un pre qui se tondoit trois fois l' annee: That France
was a Meddowe, which he mowed thrice a year.

The next Sovereign Court (for so the French call it) is the Court of
Parliament, Parliaments. Com. de l' estat* Haill. li. 4.
le vray temple de la Justice Francoise: Seige du Roy et de ses Paires: The
true temple of French Justice: Seat of the King and his Peers: And as Haillan
calls it, L'archbouttan des droicts: the Buttresse of equity. This Court very
much resembles the Star Chamber of England, the Areopage of Athens, the Senate
of Rome, the Consiglio de' dieij of Venice.

There are no laws (says Haillan) by which this Court is directed: it judges
secundum aequum et bonu^, according to equity and conscience, Comm. c. 4
and mitigateth the rigor of the Law: Les nom des Parlements sont appliquez
aux compagnies de Course Sovereigns, qui cognossoient en dernier ressort de
matieres de justice: The names of Parliaments are given to the bodies of
Sovereign Courts, which determine without appeal, in matters of Justice.

Of these Courts of Parliament, ye have eight in France. That of Paris, the
most ancient and highest in preeminence, which at first was ambulatory (as they
call it) and ever followed the K. Court, whither soever it went: but since
Philip le bell, it has been sedentary in this City. That of Grenoble was
erected, anno, 1453. That of Toulouse, Haill. li. 3.
anno, 1302. That of Bourdeaux, anno, 1443. That of Dijon, in the year 1476.
That of Rouen, in the year 1501. That of Aix, the same year. And lastly, that
of Bretaigne, in the year 1553. Anciently all Archbishops, and Bishops might
sit and give voices in this Parliament of Paris: but in 1463. it was decreed,
that none but the Bishop of Paris, and Abbot of Saint Denis might sit there,
except he be of the Blood: for all these are privileged.

The Presidents and Counselors of the Court of Parliament of Paris, may not
depart the Town, without leave of the Court, by the ordinance of Jews 12. in
the year 1499. Senatores semper adesse debent, quod grauitatem res habet, ^.
Cic. 3. de legib.
cum frequens est ordo: The Senators ought always to be present, because
things are carried with more majesty, when that Court is full.

To this Parliament, they appeal from all other subalterne Courts throughout
the Realm, as they do in Venice to the Consiglio grande. Neither can the King
conclude any war, or peace, without the advice and consent hereof: or at
least (as Haillan says) he demands it for fashion sake, Hail. l. 3.
sometimes when the matters are already concluded.

The Parliament of Paris consists of seven Chambers: the Grande chamber, and
five others of Enquests: and the Tournelles, which is the Chamber for the
criminal causes, as the other six be for the civil. It is called the
Tournelles, because the Judges of the other Chambers sit there by turns, every
three months: the reason whereof Bodin gives, Bodin. l. 4.
that it might not alter the natural inclination of the Judges, and make them
more cruel, by being always exercised in matter of condemnations, and
executions. There be of this Court, of Presidents, Counselors, Cheualliers of
honor, Procureurs, Advocates, Clerks, Sergeants, and other Officers of all
sorts, not so few as two hundred.

Besides this Court, there are also other Courts for the administration of
Justice, in this City, Courts of Chatellets
as the Chatellet of Paris, with a Lieutenant civil, and another criminal,
and the Hostel de Paris, with a Preuost, and other inferior Officers, which
is, as ye would say, the Guild Hall of the City. So have ye throughout the
Realm certain places, (as all Cities in general) where there be Chatellets
(like our places of Assise) and in them a Lieutenant, civil and criminal, to
judge and determine all causes, real, or personal, and here many Lawyers and
Procurers (as are our Counselors at law, and Atturnies) who plead before
these Lieutenants, and Preuosts, and certain Counselors, which are the Judges
in these Courts, whereof the number is incredible in France. Insomuch as ye may
well say of them, as is said of Sienna, There be more readers, then auditors:
so here be more Pleaders the^ Clients. This Chiquanerie (pettifogging) and
multiplicitie of pleaders, came first from the Popes Court, when his Seat was
at Auignon (as my Author says) who in the same place calls these Advocates,
Haill. l. 3.
les Sourris de Palais: The Mice of the Palace. These are they that Rablais
(the true Lucian of France) calls Doriphages. i. deuourers of bribes: whose
badnesse he scoffingly taxes, where he says, that the devil was not chayned,
till such time as he did eat fasting one morning, the soul of one of the
Officers of these Courts: whereupon he was so vexed with the Collicke (says
he) finding a worse devil then himself rumbling in his belly, as there was no
stir with the collericke Merchant, till he was bound.

The processes and suits in these Courts throughout France, are innumerable,
wherein we come nothing near them; and yet there is no want of these in
England: for I have heard of 340. Nisi prius between parties tried at one
Assise in Norff. (as many I think, as in half England besides.) But these are
only twice in the year, that causes are tried at Assizes in our Country,
whereas here they are tried every day in the year, that is not festival: So
that it is not much unlikely, that here are as many Processes in seven years,
as have been in England since the Conquest.

Ordon. Henry the second. 1548.
An Advocate must use no injurious words, nor superfluous: he must plead
briefly, and recite summarily: he may be compelled by the Judge to plead a
poor man's cause without fee: He must be a Graduate, and have taken the oath:
He may not buy the lands in question of one of the parties: and besides many
other inhibitions, he may not enter the Pladoye sans fair collation: the
pleading place, till he have broken his fast: which in my opinion is needless,
they are forward enough.

Courts of Bayliwicks and Sheriffalties. Haill. li. 3 Court of Eaues and
Forests
There are besides these Courts of Chatellets in Cities, the Courts also of the
Builliages and Seneschauses; that is, of Bayliwicks and Sheriffalties, who, as
Haillan says, keep Courts in each Province, and judge in all matters civil
and criminal.

There is also the Court of the Eaues et Forests, kept at the Table of Marble
in the Palaice, and infinite others, which to speak particularly of, would be
very tedious, and not very necessary. I will here only remember you of the two
Counsels, which I must confess, not to have their due place: for I should have
spoken of them next after the Court of Parliament, or if ye will, next after
the Assembly.

The chief of these, as being always about the King, is the Conseil prive, or
des affairs: Privy Council, Privy Council.
or Council of affairs: of these Counselors (among which are his four
Secretaries) he calls certain every morning at his rising, to whom he
communicates apart his principal and most importing affairs, where are read
all letters which come from other Princes, and such like public business, and
after a conclusion what is to be done, the dispatch thereof is committed to the
Secretaries.

The other, is the Grand Conseil, or Conseil d' Estat: Grand Conseil.
Great Council, or Council of Estate: which at first was, as it were, a
member of the Parliament, and co^sisted of the Princes of the Blood, and
Nobility, having only to deal in the matters of the policy general of France,
or of wars, or of the enacting and publishing of Edicts. But the faction of
Orleans and Burgundy, caused it to be changed to a choice number of
Counselors, prouisioned of 1000. crowns pension a piece yearly. Of this
Counsel the Chancellor is chief, for neither the King himself, nor any Prince
of the Blood comes there. This is the Court, of which the Frenchman says,
every time it is holden, it costs the K. 1000. crowns a day. And now, says
Haillan, he cannot keep the^ so cheap, so infinite is the number of the^
grown. Where he also co^plaines, that this Conseil d' Estat, which was wont
only to determine public affairs, as the establishme^t of Justice, the
Regleme^t of Finances, and redressing of common grieua^ces, is now so charged
with private contentions, as the glory thereof is much diminished.

Officers for the execution of Justice: over and besides the Lieutena^ts,
Preuost-Marshals, Presidents, Cou^sellers, Aduocats, and.c aboue-named.
Chancellor. Haill. li. 4. Mon. Ragueau. Secretary Procopius.
Ye shall now note in a word, the Officers that execute and administer Justice
through France, wherein I will not be precise to name all, but according to the
superficial course before taken, only to remember the chiefest.

The Chancellor, anciently served as a Secretary, and so were called in the
old Chartes of France, where he is likewise called the grand Referendaire. The
Secretary does sign, and the Chancellor does seal. Some derive this word of
( cancellare) which Haillan reprooueth: others of cancellus. Cuias upon the
Code says, they be the same that Quaestores were in time of the Empire at
Rome. Therefore he is sometime called Quaestor Iustitiae, and legum custos:
Thesaurus famae publicae, and armarium legum: The Judge of Justice, and Keeper
of the Laws, the Treasurer of public fame, and Storehouse of the Laws.

Secretary is the next Office, who at first were called Clerks. Some old
Writers call them Ton aporreton Grammateast. Suetonius calls them Ab Epistolis
or Emanuenses. They are either of the Finances (which have their place among
the Officers of the Finances, before remembered) or of Affairs, which we here
speak of: Of these are four, which are called the principal, Monsieur
Villeroy, Monsieur Geuure, Monsieur de Fresne, and Monsieur de Beaulieu.

Governor and Lieutenant.
Governors and Lieutenants general of Cities and Provinces, are as it were
Viceroyes and Regents of those places committed to them: and indeed the persons
sustaining these charges, are much more Noble then those of the Secretaries, as
being for the most part conferd upon the Princes of the Blood and Peers of
France.

The Governors of Cities were in old time called Dukes, and they of
Provinces, Counts. They were at first only in frontier Provinces, but now
since the troubles of France, they have had the command over Cities and
Countries, even in the midst and bowels of the Land: So that now, says
Haillan, Haill. li. 3.
France is become Frontiere de tous costez a elle mesme, A Frontier to it self
on every side.

There are but few Cities, whereof anciently there were Governors, as Rochell,
Calais, Peronne, Bologne, Mondidier, Narbonne, Bayonne, and two or three
others: Others that had keeping of some small Castle or Fort, was only called
the Keeper, or Captain at most. But now, says Haillan, Haill. li. 4.
lib. 4. every paltry fellow that has the keeping of a Colombier,
Pigeon-house, must forsooth be called Monsieur le Gouerneur, My Lord the
Governor; and my mistress his wife, Madame la Gouernarete, My Lady the
Gouernesse.

The Governor of Daulphenie has greatest privileges: for he gives all
Offices in his Province; in other places they can give none, except they have
it by express words in their Patent. The Governor may not be absent above six
months in a year; but the Lieutenant must never be absent, without leave of
the Prince, except the Governor be present.

There is yet an Office, whereof I must remember you, which is one of the
chiefest in France, either for honuor or profit, Master of the Eaues and
Forests.
called grand Maistre des Eaues and Forests. All matters concerning the Kings
Chases, Forests, Woods and Waters whatsoever, are determined by him, by the
grand M. Enquesteur, and by the Reformateur, at the Table of Marble: under him
are infinite sorts of Officers, as Les Maistres particuliers de chaque forest*
leurs Lieutena^ts: les gr^yers, les grayers, segrayers, maistres des gardes,
maistres sergents, gardes des marteaux, procureurs, greffiers, arpenteurs,
collecteurs des amends, and diverse others: As the particular Masters of each
Forest, their Lieutenants, Overseers of the sale of woods, and the other
Officers here specified.

But I will not load this short Relation, with reckoning up all the diverse and
infinite sorts of Officers, wherewith France her self seems to be
ouerloaden, as partly ye have heard already: and ye shall read in Bodin,
how he complains, not only of the multiplicitie of Offices in general, but
also, that even the Counsel of Estate is surcharged with number: where you may
likewise observe, how he approues the Privy Counsel of England erected some
four hundred and odd years since, Bodin. l. 3.
where are never, says he, above twenty, by whose sage direction the Land
has long flourished, en arms et loix: In arms and laws. And for the
execution of Laws, and administration of Justice, ye may remember what has
been said before, that the Laws are good and just, but they be not, iustement
exercez, justly executed. Haill. li. 2.
Where Haillan comparing the times, Alors (says he) on punissoit les grands:
depuis on n' a puny que les petits, et les grands demeurent impunis, Then great
ones were punished, but since, only petty fellows, and the great ones go
scot-free. So that now, the Laws of France are become like Spiders webbes,
Plut. Solen
which only catch the little Flies, and the great ones break through, I^ue^a^.
D^t veniam Coruis, vexat censura Columbas.
Th'ensnaring Laws let Crows go free,
While simple Doves entangled be.


Having now related of the Topographie and Policy of France, it remains I
speak somewhat of the Economy, that is, of the people of France, comprised
under the three Estates, of the Clergy, the Nobility, and Comminalty: of the
several humor, profession, and fashion of each of them, which is the third
and last branch of this Relation.

The Church Gallicane, His Clergy
is holden the best privileged of all those of Christendom, that have not yet
quit their subjection to the Pope. It has always protested against the
Inquisition; it is more free from payments to the Pope, then the Church of
Spain, as also to the King: for here in France they only pay the Disme: but
in Spain, the King has his Tertias, subsidio, Hisp cui^s^am.
pila, and Escusado: in all, a moytie of the Church living. Indeed it is
reported of this Catholic King, that he has founded many Abbeys and
Religious houses: but what says his Subject? He steals the sheep, and gives
the Tratters for Gods sake.

In this Church of France are twelve Archbishopprickes, one hundred and four
Bishopprickes, five hundred and forty Archpriories, one thousand four hundred
and fifty Abbeys: Bodin. li* 5
twelve thousand three hundred and twenty Priories, five hundred sixty seven
Nunneries, one hundred and thirty thousand Parish Priests, seven hundred
conuents of Friars, and two hundred fifty nine Co^mendams of the order of the
Knights of Malta. There are, Cabinet ^u Roy.
says the (Cabinet du Roy) three millions of people that live upon the Church
of France: where he particularly sets down in each Diocese, the number of
all sorts of Religious people, as also the number of their Whores, Bawds,
Bastards, and servants of all sorts: And why not? (says he) as well as the
Magicians undertake in their Inuentory of the Diabolique Monarchy, to set down
the names and surnames of 76. Princes, and seven millions, four hundred and
five thousand, nine hundred, twenty and six devils?

The Church has, for all this rabble, to live upon, these two things: The
temporal livings of the Church.
First, her temporal Revenues, and secondly, her Spiritual, which they call
the baise-mani. Of her temporal Revenues, diverse men judge diversely.

The Cabinet, who in all his computations makes of a Mouse, an Elephant, says,
that they are fourscore millions of Crowns the year, besides the baise-mani,
which is as much more, and besides an infinite provision which they reserve,
and is paid them over and except their Rents, by their Farmers and Tenants; as
of Wheat, four millions, five hundred thousand septiers, quarters: of Rye, two
millions, three hundred thousand septiers, quarters: of Oats, nine hundred
thousand: of Barley, eight hundred thousand: of Pease and Beans, eight hundred
sixty thousand: Capons, one hundred sixty thousand: Hens, five hundred sixty
thousand: Partridge, five hundred thousand: Beeues, twelve thousand: Muttons,
one million two hundred thousand: Wine, one million two hundred thousand cuues:
Eggs, seven millions: Butter, two hundred thirty thousand quintaux: Cheese,
five hundred thousand: Hogs, one hundred thirty six thousand: Pigges, three
hundred forty thousand: Tallowe, sixty thousand quintaux: Hey, six hundred
thousand loades: Straw, eight hundred thousand: Wood, two millions: with an
infinite proportion of other necessaries, imaginary only, and incredible. And
yet he there avoweth al things, with as great confidence, as if himself had
had the true abstr^ct from all the Books of Accounts in each Monastery and
Benefice in this land. For how is it possible the Church should have two
hundred millions of Crowns yearly rent, when as by the computation, here are
but just so many Arpens of land in all France: which to rate one with another,
at a crown an Arpen, comes to this account, which he allows the Clergy, and
then is there nothing left for the other two States, of the Nobility and
people?

But in as much as the better half of their Revenue is by the baise-mani,
there remains the better half of the land to the other two States: which
notwithstanding is a proportion small enough.

Near unto this reckoning, comes that which we read in Bodin, Bodin, li. 5.
of Alemant, a president of accounts in Paris, whose judgment must carry good
authority in this case, as a thing belonging to his profession, and wherein he
was best experienced: The Church Revenues in land, are reckoned ordinarily, at
twelve millions and three hundred thousand livers: but I dare justify (says
he) that of twelve parts of the Revenues of France, the Church possess seven.

This opinion Bodin seems to allow: But it is rather thought to be true, that
the Comment de l'estat says, who of the two hundred millions of Arpens,
allows the Church forty seven millions, which by particulars of their
Vineyards, Meddowes, Arable, Pastures, and Heathes, with their woods, is there
set down: which here to follow in particular, were too tedious.

The spiritual livings.
Besides this temporal, they have their Baise-mani (as is said) that consists
in Churchings, Christnings, Marriages, Burials, Holy-bread, Indulgences, Vows,
Pilgrimages, Feasts, Processions, Prayers for cattle, for seasonable weather,
for children, against all manner of diseases, and infinite such purposes; for
which the superstitious people will have a Mass said, which they pay the
Priest for, particularly: over and besides all this, there is scarce that Arpen
in all France, upon which there is not some Dirige, or de profundis, some
libera me, Domine, or some reckoning or other, liable.

This sort of people are they, whose life is only spent in speculation, and
their speculation such (as appears by their lives) as that of Guido Caualc.
whereof Boccace speaks, Boccaci^. Nouella. 9 Giornat 6
Queste sue speculatiory erano solo ni cercare, se tro^arsi potesse che Iddio
non fusse: These his speculations were only spent in seeking, whether he could
find that there was no God. These are they, of whom La Noue speaks, when he
shows the three causes of the miseries of France, which he finds in the
three States: Irreligion in those that make profession of Religion: Oppression
in the Noblesse: And dissolution of manners in the Comminaltie. For (says he)
Impiete ruin les conscienses: La Noue
Injustice renuerse les Estats: Dissolution gaste les familles: Impiety ruineth
men's consciences: Injustice overthrows the Commonwealth: And Dissolution
marreth particular families.

The reformed Religion.
Concerning them of the Reformed Religion, whom here in contempt they call
Huguenots, ye may note, that the number is not small, considering that after
the conference of Po^ssie, above thirty years since, here were found 2150.
Churches of them, whereof not one has escaped without some murders, or
massacres: and we may imagine, that since that time, this number is much
increased.

Some say, they had the name of Huguenots, of the words wherewith they began
their Oration, when they protested against the Church of Rome, which began
thus, Huc nos venimus, etc. Hither we are come, etc. As they say, the Wallons
were called of these words, ou allons nous? whither go we? when they were
driven out of their own country, asking one another whither they should go.
But this is not so likely as that of them, who say, that in Toures where they
first began, there is one of the Gates, called Hugoes Port, out of which they
of the Religion used to pass into the fields, to make their prayers in their
private assemblies: whereupon they had first the name: for, that one Hugo
should be the first of that opinion, is generally rejected.

I shall not need to say in this place, that this difference in Religion, of
these Catholics, and Huguenots, is clear from the slander which many lay
upon them, they being the occasion of all these late troubles in France: for it
has been sufficiently already proved, that the ambition of the house of
Guise, and the parts-taking with them, and those other of Burbon, is guilty
thereof.

As for Religion, it has only been the cloak, and shaddowe of their
ambitious pretenses, without the which, they could never have insinuated
themselves so far into the hearts of the people, who are always the gros de
la bataille: The maine Battle: and without whom the Nobility may well
quarrel, but they cannot fight.

Comment. de l' Est.
And therefore ye shall read in some of the same Religion reformed, That there
were Huguenots, as well of Estate, as of Religion.

These have now free permission to profess, and places allotted for exercise,
with all liberty of Conscience possible, save that in the chief Cities of
France they have no Churches allowed, neither can be buried in Christian
burial (as they call it) if any of them dye among the Catholics, with whom
notwithstanding they now live peaceably, throughout the Country. They cannot
have the favor that Xantippus allowed his Dog, Plut. The m^st.
who (as Plutarch says) for following his master from Atticque to Salamine,
and there dying, was solemnly interred, and had a monument raised over the
place. And me thinks, they have here small reason to let them live together in
a house, and not to suffer them to lie together in a Churchyard.

But as for warring any longer for Religion, the Frenchman utterly disclaymes
it, he is at last grown wise, marry, he has bought it somewhat dear: L'
^talten est sage a^uant la main, Comment. de l' Est.
l' Alemant sur le fa^ct, and le Francois, apres le coup: The Italian is wise
beforehand; the Almayne, in the doing; and the French, after the thing is done,
says one of their own Writers. Ictus piscator saepit.

Concerning the Nobility of France, Elle est (says La Noue) tres valleureuse
and courtoise: His Noblesse.
and n'y a Estat en la Chrestient^, ou elle soit en si grand nombre: They are
exceeding valorous and courteous; and there is no State in Christendom, where
they are in so great number.

It has been argued before in this Relation, that there be at least fifty
thousand, able to bear Arms: but that is thought with the most. Du Fa^.
Monsieur du Fay thinks them about thirty thousand: in which number, ye must
conclude all degrees of Gentlemen, from the highest to the lowest that bear
Arms: for so the French call their Noblesse, whereas we in England make two
distinct orders of the Nobility and Gentry (as they call it) Nobiles sunt,
Constable. Nea^
si modo longam annorum seri^m numerare possunt, quafeudum onusque militiae eis
adnexum, in sua familia resea^rit: Those are Noble, which can prove a long
tract of time, wherein a Fee and Knights service thereto belonging, has
recided in their family. And another Writer says, In Gallia Nobiles
aestimantur ex genere and vita milit^ri: In France men are esteemed noble, by
blood, and profession of Arms.

And sure, if there be difference in Nobility, as there must needs be,
because the causes be different; for some are ennobled by their valor and
Martial knowledge, and others by their Offices and prudence in the manage of
matters of Estate: I see no reason, but that these last should be holden the
more noble Nobility, if I may so say: always giving the first place to them
that are of Noble houses by Race.

For of all these three sorts, the French writers speak, when they say: Ily a
difference des Nobles: 1. Les vns par race, 2. Les autres par annoblissement:
Cuias de feud.
et deux sorts d' annoblissement: les vns sont annob^is par lettres deu^ment
verefies en la Cour de Parliament, les autres par ^e moyen ^es offices don't ils
sont pourueus. There is a difference of Nobles: The first, by Race: The second,
by ennobling: and of Ennobling there are two sorts: One, by Patent duly
proved in the Court of Parliament: The other, by means of Offices to which
they are advanced.

And howsoever Turquet hereof infers, that it is la virtue que fait la
Noblesse, Turq. hist. Spag.
car il y a de nobles vilains, et de vilains nobles: Virtue which makes
Nobility, for, there are noble Peasants, and peasantly Nobles. Yet sure it is,
that the degenerating of one from the virtue of his Ancestors, cannot prejudice
the Nobility, nor eclips the glory of his succeeder, who, as Histories show,
many times excel all the former of their house.

Peers of France.
The highest degree of honor in France, is the Pairrie, in which order have
been, sometimes 7. sometimes 11. never above seventeen, and most commonly 12.
Whereupon they are called the Twelve Peers of France. These have the
precedence before all the rest of the Nobility, and of these, they of the
Blood, although they were latest called into the Pairrie. Haill. li. 3.
Of these Peers, there be six of the Clergy: 1. Archbishop and Duke of
Rhemes. 2. Bishop and Duke of Laon. 3. Bishop and Duke of Langres. 4. Bishop
and Comte of Beauuais. 5. Bishop and Comte of Noyon. 6. Bishop and Comte of
Chaalons.

Of temporal, 1. Duke of Burgundy. 2. Duke of Normandy. 3. Duke of Guyenne.
4. Comte of Toulouse. 5. Comte of Champagne. 6. Comte of Flanders. Since these
were first instituted, many other houses have been admitted into the Pairrie,
by the Kings of France, and the old worn out: As to them of Burgundy and
Flanders, were added the Dukes of Bretagne, Burbon, Aniow, Berry, Orleans, the
Comtes of Arthois, Eureux, Alencon, Estampes, all of the Blond in Charles the
fiftes time.

Since also, in the times of Charles the ninth, and Henry the third, have new
Pairries been erected, as Neuers, Vandosme, Guise, Monpensier, Beaumont,
Albret, Aumal, Memorency, Vzes, Pentheur, Mercoeur, Ioieuse, Espernon, Rets,
Monbason, Vantadoure, and others.

Ye must observe, that the five ancientest Pairries of the temporaltie, are
returned to the Crown, the sixth which is of Flanders, does recognize it no
longer, as now being Spanish.

Some say, Tille^.
these Paires (quasi pares inter se) as much as equal among themselves, were
first erected by Charlemagne: others, by Hugh Capet, and others (which is
holden for the truest) by Jews le ieune, 1179. to aid and assist the K. in his
Council (says Bodin. Bodin. l. 3.
) And therefore this Session of the King with his Paires, was called Le
Parliament sans queue: The Parliament with addition: as the Kings brothers and
sisters are called Monsieur, and Madame sans queue: Whereas all other
sovereign Courts are named with an addition, as Le Parliament de Paris: le
Parl. de Rouen, etc.

Ye may also observe, that they of the Laity have the right hand of the King,
and the Clergy the left, in all assemblies or solemn Sessions whatsoever.

I think, this division of the Pairrie, into these 2. sorts, was derived from
that ancient order of the Gauls, of whom Caesar speaks, Gallorum Nobilium
genera duo, Caesar. Comment. l. 6.
Druides, Equites: Of the Nobility of Gallia, are two sorts, the Druides, and
Gentlemen: Where he likewise discourses of their diverse Offices.

This honor of Pair of France, was at first given for life only, afterward
for them and their heirs males, and lastly, to the women also, for default of
Males: who likewise are called to sit in Councils and assemblies (as are the
Queens of France) as at the Assembly at Blois, Dern. trou.
and at the Arrest of Count de Clermont, in the time of S. Jews, where the
Countess of Flanders is named present among the other Peers.

Privileged. Haill. li. 3.
Ye must note, that Peers and Princes of the blood, Ont privilege de n' estre
point subjects a la cire verte, si non au cas du premier chef de leze Majesty:
They be privileged from being subject to any Writ, or Process, but in case of
high Treason: and then also no Process can be commenced against them, before
any other Judges whatsoever, Sig. du Planche.
que par le Roy seant en sa Court de Parliament suffisamment garnie des Paires
de France: But by the King sitting in his Court of Parliament, sufficiently
assisted by the Peers of France. All other Judges are incompetent.

But to leave the discourse of this highest honor in France, and to speak of
the Noblesse in general, ye shall read in History, that at the end of the
second Race of Kings, they began to take their surnames of their principal
Feifs: Since when, of later years, some have contrarily put their surnames
upon their Feifs, which has so confounded the Noblesse (says Haillan) as it
is now hard to find out the ancient and true Nobility. Haill. li. 3.


Unlettered La Noue.
These are they, among whom the proverb is still current, Un homme de guerre
ne deuoit scauoir, si non escrire son nom: A man of War should have no more
learning, but to be able to write his own name: And therefore their
profession is only Arms and good horsemanship, wherein if they have attained
any perfection, they little esteem other virtues, not caring what the
Philosopher says, Plutarch.
Vne seule anchre n' est par suffisante pour tenir ferme vne grande nauire: One
only Anchor is not sufficient to hold a great Ship. Nor considering that the
old Gallants of the world were wont to join the one with the other: and
ancient Painters were accustomed to paint the Muses altogether in a troup, to
signify, that in a Nobleman they should not be parted.

Bodin says, it is reported of Cato Censorius, Bodin.
that he was a valiant Captain, a sage Senator, an upright Judge, and a great
Scholar. The world reputes Caesar to have been a Politician, an Historian, an
Orator, a Warrior, excellent in all. The Poet of Greece says, Homer.
that Agamemnon was Amphontros basileus to agathos, cratotrosto aichmetes: that
is, a good Governor, and a tall Soldier. Dante.
And the Italian Poet says of his great Captain, Non so se miglior Duca o
Caualliero: Resolve I cannot whether he,
A better Chief, or Soldier be.


Just the same with that other verse of Homer. And our most worthy English, Sir
Philip Sydney.
not Poet (though he well deserve the title) but Captain and Scholar, both
excellent, and titles which better become the nobleness of his heart and
house, of whom the world has the good name, and all Soldiers the loss: he, I
say, when he would commend his Arcadian Gallant to the full, and yet in few
words, says, that he durst and knew: which well symbolizeth with those former
commendations of others, and compriseth all requisite virtues in a Gentleman:
for if he have not valor to dare, and wisdom to know how and when, he wants
one of the principal supporters of his honor.

The former of these, is, as it were, hereditary to many Noble houses, and
continues therein many descents; but the other is not natural; it is gotten
by study and exercise, by reading books, and seeing of Countries, and therein
curiously observing what ye see. So then, if by this your travel, you add
knowledge and understanding to that other virtue, which is hereditary to your
house, you shall resemble those your Ancestors, by whom it has been raised
to this greatness, and be most unlike this French Nobility (that this may not
seem a digression) of whom, for the most part, we may say, Plut. Themist.
as Plato said of Cleophantus, Il estoit bien bon homme d' arms, mais au
demeuy ant il n' auoit rien de bon: He was a very tall man at arms, but he
had no good quality besides.

And sure, it is a lamentable case, or at least, misbeseeming, in a goodly
Country, and full of Nobility, that the State should be governed, and all
matters managed by them of the robbalonga, Advocates and Procureurs, and Pen
and Inkehorne Gentlemen, and the Noblesse themselves for want of learning, not
to have employment. I count him therefore a very lame Gentleman, that cannot go
to serve his Country both in peace and war.

La Noue.
Says La Noue to a Gallant in Court, that was ever talking of wars, and
making Hidalgo-like Rhodomontades, as being unfit to talk of any matter of
learning, or undertake any Office of government: Sir (says he) when the time
of war is come, it is like ye shall be employed, mean while, having no
quality fit for this time of peace, you shall do well, to lock your self up
till the wars, that ye be not rusty when you should be used.

The occasion of this French humor, so much to esteem Arms, and nothing at
all to regard learning, or it may be oftentimes to contemn both, is imputed to
the careless indulgence of Parents, by Commines, Commines.
Ils nourissent leure enfants seulement a fair les sots, en habillements and
en parolles: de nulle lettre ils n'ont cognoissance: They bring up their
children only to play the fondlings both in apparel and words, but of
learning they have no knowledge at all.

And therefore they cannot communicate with P. Aemilius, Plut. Aemilius.
in the commendation which Plutarch gives him, Il ne tenoit seulement de
picqueurs and dompteurs des cheuaux, mais aussi des Maistres de Grammaire, de
Rhetorique, and Dialectique, etc. He kept not only Riders and Horse-breakers,
but also Teachers of Grammar, Rhetoric and Logic, etc. And whereas the
first instruction of the Nobility, should be, as one says, Turquet.
La Religion, la virtue, les lettres, les Ars, Religion, Virtue, learning, and
the Arts: And then, L'Escuyrie, l'Escrime, la venerie, la Fauconerie:
Horsemanship, Fencing, Hunting, Hawking: they skip the first form, and spend
all their time in the practice of the last: they prize at a high rate the
lesser, and let pass the more worthy. Much like those Strangers in Rome, that
carried young Whelps and Monkeys in their arms to play withal: What, says
Caesar, do these men's wives bear them no children? wisely taxing the folly of
those, that leave the better for the worse.

Hereof it comes, that the French Noblesse glorying in their Arms, call
themselves, Le bras de la patrie, les gardiens des arms, and la terreur des
ennemys: mais iamais ne s'appellent les professeurs de virtue, says la Noue:
The Arm of their country, the Gardians of Arms, and terror of their enemies;
but they never style themselves the Professors of virtue.

Du Fay.
This Estate of the Nobility, says one, is Le moindre en nombre des hommes, le
moins rich de tous les trois Estats: of all the three Estates, the smallest in
number of men, and poorest in living. Which no question must needs be true,
after so long a civil War: and heerewith accords he that wrote the late
troubles: says he, La Noblesse Francoise est decheue de ses anciennes
richesses, Dern. troubl.
don't leurs maisons estoyent ornees sous les regus du Lois 12. and Francois 1.
The French Noblesse is fallen from their ancient wealth, wherewith they were
adorned in the times of Jews 12. and Francis the first. To this purpose says
La Noue, Ie oserois affermer, que si tous ceux qui portent ce titre estoyent en
dix parts on trouueroit que les huict sont incommodez par alienations de leurs
biens, La Noue.
engagements, ou autres debts: I durst affirm, that if all they that bear
this Title, were divided into ten parts, eight of them are impaired by Sales,
Morgages, or other debts.

The same Author yields five reasons of the poverty of the Noblesse of
France. 1. Les guerres ciuiles. 2. depenses superflues en habits. 3. depenses
en meubles. 4. depenses in bastiments. 5. depenses de bouche and gross train:
First, the civil wars. Secondly, superfluous expenses in aparrel. Thirdly,
household stuff. Fourthly, building. Fifthly, Diet and Followers. And in another
place, taxing the extreme prodigality, and superfluity of the French in their
aparrell, building, and diet, he says, Si les guerres nous ont apperte 4.
onces de pauurete, nos follies nous en ont acquis douze: If the Wars have
brought us four ounces of poverty, our own follies have gotten us twelve. I
will not herein be mine own Judge (says he) but let us do as players at
Tennise, be judged by all the lookers on, and they will confess, that by these
excessive expenses, bon nombre de la Noblesse vont au pas, les autres au trot,
et plusieurs en post, droict aux precipices de pauurete: A great number of the
Noblesse go a foot-pace, others trot, and many run post to the downefals of
poverty.

You had an example hereof in this your late voyage down the River of Loire,
at the Castle of Bury, a very goodly house, as any ye have yet seen in France,
where ye heard it credibly reported, that Monsieur D'alluye, the owner of that
place, had consumed above twenty thousand Crowns Revenue the year, only in
diet and apparel, who now is forced to make his own house his prison, and
stand watchfully upon his guard, for fear of Sergeants, as we well perceived by
his ielouzy of us, when we came to see his house, until he was assured that we
were strangers, and came for no such purpose.

These three at this present, are reputed the richest in all France, the D.
Monpensier in lands, the D. a' Espernon in Offices, and the Chancellor in money.

I should in this relation of the French Nobility, do them great wrong, to
believe and report for truth, what the Cabinet du Roy, one of their own
Country, Cab. du roy
says of them, who according to the several Provinces, gives them several
Epithites.

The Noblesse of Berry (says he) are Paillards, leachers: they of Tourraine,
are voleurs, thieves: they of Guyenne, Coyners: they of Toulouse, Traitors:
they of Narbonne, covetous: they of Prouence, Atheists* they of Lionnois,
treacherous: they of Rheimes, superstitious: they of Normandy, insolent: they
of Picardie, proud: and so forth of the rest.

I will do them more right, and conclude of them, that for privilege, and
nobleness of Race, they may compare with any Nobility of Christendom. For
proof of the first, Mons. du Fay.
Le Prince ne prendrien sur luy, que le service de l' espee. The King has
nothing of his Noblesse, but Sword-seruice. And for the second, says another
Author: Com. de l' Estat.
La Noblesse Francoise est composee de si illustres maisons, qu' il s'en
trouue, vne douzaine qui viennent de droict ligne de Roys, qui ont posse de
paisiblement royaumes: The French Noblesse is composed of so famous houses,
that there are a douzin of them descended by right line from Kings, that have
peaceably possessed Kingdoms.

Having briefly spoken of the two first Estates of France, the Clergy and
Nobility: It lastly remains I speak of the People in general, His People.
and namely, of their freeness of speech, manner of diet, kinds of building,
sorts of exercise, fashion of apparel, diversity of language, suddenness
of apprehending, rashness in executing, impatience in deliberation, and diverse
other natures and humors proper to the Frenchmen; wherein ye shall not look
for a methodicall and large discourse, but a brief and compendious remembrance
of such things, as I have read and observed in this Nation.

Their liberty of speech.
It is incredible to believe, and odious to hear, how the Frenchman will talk,
and impudently utter what he foolishly conceiueth, not only of all foreign
States and Princes of the world, but even of their own State and King
himself; of whom he will not spare to speak whatsoever he hears, and
sometimes also more then the truth; which insufferable vice of theirs, I here
put in the first place, because I hold it of all others the most disloyal and
unlawful. Hereof the wisest sort of them much complain, and wish reformation:
but it is a thing so familiar and natural with them, as -- Expellas furca
licet vsque recurret. Horac^. Dern. troubl.
Le Duc d' Esperno^ (says one Author) se plaignoit de debordemens de ce
siecle, et de l' infame license des Francois a detracter de leur prince: Duke ^
Espernon complained of the disorders of the time, and of the infamous liberty
of the French, in detracting from their Prince.

This infamous and dissolute liberty of theirs, deserves to be censured and
chastised by some severe Cato, or to be punished as those insolent ^ouldiers of
Aemilius, of whom Plutarch makes mention. Plut. Aemilius.


Boccace in his description of Friar Onion his man, reckons up nine of his
principal qualities, whereof the first is due to the Frenchman, as appears
by this which has already been said, Maldicente, disabediente, negligente,
trascurato, smemorato, scostumato: sogliardo, bugiardo, tardo: First, railing:
secondly, disobedient: thirdly, negligent: fourthly, rechlesse: fifthly,
forgetful: sixthly, unmannerly: seventhly, slouenly: eighthly, lying: and ninthly,
slow: And I believe, by that time ye have read this whole discourse, ye will
bate him but the last Ace of them all. For, that property of slownesse, I must
needs confess, no way is due to the French.

He has besides this liberty of speaking, Their hearkening after* news.
Caesar. Comment. l. 4.
a property incident to such like natures: namely, an inquisitiue listening and
harkening after news, which is an old fashion of theirs, and has continued
with them many hundred years. Est aute^ hoc Gallicae consuetudinis, vt and
viatores etiam inuitos consistere cogant, and quod quisque eorum de quaque re
audierit aut cognouerit quaera^t: and Mercatores in opidis vulgus circumsistat,
quibus ex regionibus venia^t quasq res ibi cognouerint pronunciare cogant: et
his rumoribus atque aeuditionibus permoti, desummis saepe rebus consilia
ineunt: quorum eos e vestigio poenitere est necesse: Id. l. 7.
It is usual with all the Gauls, both to constrain travelers (though
unwilling) to stay, and to enquire of each of them, what he has heard or
understood of every matter: and with the populace in Towns, to flock about
Merchants, and compel them to tell from what parts they come, and what news
they heard there: and led by these rumors and heare-sayes, they determine many
times of most weighty affairs, of which determinations they must needs
eftsoons repent them.

This vice of his, Caesar taxes in another place, where he says, Temeritas,
quae maxim illi hominum generi conuenit, vt leuem auditionem habeant pro re
comperta: It is a rashness familiar with that sort of people, to take a light
hearsay, for an assured truth.

Concerning the French diet, it is, to keep no diet: for they feed at all
times, Their manner of Diet.
there being among them very few, which besides their ordinary of dinner and
supper, do not gouster, as they call it, and make collations, three or four
times the day, a thing as usual with the women as men, whom ye shall see in
open streets before their doors, eat and drink together. No marvel
therefore, though the Italian calls them the only gourmands: And no less
reason have we to note their disordinate feeding, Commines
then Commines had to tax our nation of drinking, who says of us, that he
entered into a Tavern in Amiens, to observe the English man's fashion, ou ja
auoient este faictes cent et vnze escots, et n' estoit pas encore neuf heures
du matin: Where had been already made CXI. several shots, and yet it was not
then 9. a clock in the morning: For it was no great wonder to have so many
shots (as we call them) or reckonings in a morning, where there were five
thousand English Soldiers in the town, who were newly come from the Camp,
where they endured much want, and entertained with all kindness into the
town, upon a final peace made between our King Edward the fourth, and
theirs, Jews the eleventh.

But we may pay Commines with his own coin, and reply, that a Frenchman of
all other (except the Dutch) has least cause to tax us of drinking: for we
may see by many of their noses, what pottage they love; and they have among
them, a Proverb of their Priests (whom it worse beseems then a Soldier) when
they will note a matter of difficulty, Il y a plus de difficulte, qu' a tirer
un Prestre de village de la Tavern: It Is a harder matter, then to draw a
Country Priest from the Tavern.

A Frenchman therefore of all others, has least reason to find fault with
drinkers, Quis tulerit Grauhos de seditione querentes? Iuuenal.

O who can keep his patience, when
Poor Herringman scorns Fishermen?


The French fashion (as you see daily) is to larde all meats, whose provision
ordinary is not so plentiful as ours, nor his table so well furnished:
howbeit, in banquets they far exceed us; for he is as friand (licourish) as
the Trencher-men of Media, or Aesope the Tragedian, who spent fifteen thousand
Crowns at one feast, in the toungs of Birds only. He lives not like the
Italian, with roots chiefly and herbs: nor like the Lacedemonian, qui port le
poit raze, iusques au cuir, Plut. Lycurg.
se baigne en eau froid, mange du pain bis, hume du brouet noir: That wears
his hair shaven close to his skin, bathes himself in cold water, eats brown
bread, and suppes black broth. Nor like the Scythian, who says, Mihi
pulpamentum fames, cubile solum, vestis ^^rarum cutis: Hunger is my best
cheer; the ground, my bed; beasts skins, my clothing. Plut. Alcib.
But rather of Alcibiades, of whom Plutarch reports, Estoit trop delicat en
son viure, dissolu en amors de folles femmes, desordone en banquets, trop
superflu and effemine en habits: He was ouer-delicate in his diet, dissolute in
love of wanton women, excessive in banquets, and ouer-superfluous and
effeminate in apparel.

As for the poor Paisant, he fares very hardly, and feeds most upon bread
and fruits, but yet he may comfort himself with this, that though his fare be
nothing so good, as the ploughmans, and poor Artificers in England, yet is it
much better then that of the villan^ in Italy.

Their Building.
Of the French building, I have spoken before in the Relation of Paris, both
that it is lately grown to be more magnificent, then it was in former times,
and that many thereby have much weakened their estate.

You may therefore observe, that as I there said, the City of Paris was better
built then that of London: so are in general, all the Cities and villages in
France, fairer then ours in England, comparing the one with the other: which
the fairer they were, the more miserable spectacle do they yield to us now, to
see them in many places defaced and ruined.

As for the manner of building here, how beautiful soever it be to the eye,
the Offices and rooms, me thinks, are not so well contrived as ours, to the
use. One thing there is, by which they are much beautified, namely, the bluish
kind of Tyle, which here they have in great quantity, the which is very hard,
and therefore durable; and very thin and light, and therefore not so
burdensome to a house, as is our Tyle in England.

Concerning the Frenchmans Apparel, Their Apparel.
if ye well observe that of the Citizen, both men and women, it is very seemly
and decent: that of the Paisant, very poor, all whose apparel for the most
part, is of lynnen: As for that of the Noblesse, ye shall hear what La Noue
says, La Noue.
Les despenses de la Noblesse en leurs habits sont excessiues, and fort riches:
The Noblesse in their expense in apparel, are excessive and very rich. And
yet, me thinks, nothing so rich and costly as ours; the only excess whereof,
is the greatest prejudice and hindrance to the Common wealth, and public
benefit of our country.

This Author reprooueth two things in the French apparel. First, that every
Gallant forsooth, must have many suits at once, and change often in the year:
and therefore (says he) if in the Court they spy one in a suit of the last
years making, they scoffingly say, Id.
Nous le cognoissons bien, il ne nous mordra pas, c'est un fruit suranne: We
know him well enough, he will not hurt us, he is an Apple of the last year.

The second thing he dislikes, is this, that De deux ans en deux ans les facons
changent: Every two year the fashion changes. And hereof it comes, that
when ye see all other Nations painted in the proper habit of their Country,
the French man is always pictured with a pair of sheeres in his hand, to
signify, that he has no peculiar habit of his own, nor contenteth himself
long with the habit of any other, but according to his cappriccious humor,
deuiseth daily new fashions.

This variety of fashions a man may well note in the Fripperies of Paris, La
Noue.
whereof says la Noue, if one would make a purtreict in a table, rien ne se
pourrit voir plus plaisant: It would be the most sportfull thing that may be.

I am now by order to speak of his Exercises, wherein, Their exercises.
me thinks, the Frenchman is very immoderate, especially in those which are
somewhat violent; for ye may remember, ye have seen them play Sets at Tennise
in the heat of Summer, and height of the day, when others were scarce able to
stir out of doors. This immoderate play in this unseasonable time, together
with their intemperate drinking and feeding, is the only cause, that here ye
see them generally itchy and scabbed, some of them in so foul a sort, as they
are unfit for any honest table.

Among all the exercises of France, I prefer none before the Palle-maille,
Palle-maille.
both because it is a Gentleman-like sport, not violent, and yields good
occasion and opportunity of discourse, as they walk from the one mark to the
other. I marvel, among many more Apish and foolish toys, which we have
brought out of France, that we have not brought this sport also into England.

Shooting in the Piece,
Concerning their shooting with the Crossebowe, it is used, but not very
commonly. Once in a year, there is in each city a shooting with the Piece at a
Popingay of wood, set upon some high steeple (as also they do in many places
of Germany.) He that hitteth it down, is called the King for that year, and is
free from all tax: besides, he is allowed twenty crowns toward the making of
a Collation for the rest of the shooters. And if it happen, that three years
together he carry the Prize, he is free from all tax and imposition
whatsoever, all his life after.

This custom, no question, is very laudable, whose end tends much to a
public benefit: for by this practice and emulation, he grows more ready and
perfect in the use of his Piece, and so more able and fit to do his Country
service. And I suppose, if in times past we had had like Prizes for the long
Bow (the ancient glory of our English service) we had not so soon quit the
exercise thereof, nor degenerate so far from ancient custom. So do I
think, that in these days, wherein the Piece is only prized, if we had this
fashion of France and Germany in England, to reward him in every place that
should best deserve therein, that our Countreyman would grow more perfect and
expert in the use thereof, at whose unaptness and aukwardnesse in their first
trayning, before they come to have served some time, I have often maruayled.

He has also his sports of bowling, carding, dicing, and other unlawful, and
vnvseful games, whereof I will omit to speak, being too common both with them
and us.

As for the exercise of Tennis play, Tennis Play.
which I above remembered, it is more here used, then in all Christendom
besides; whereof may witness the infinite number of Tennis Courts throughout
the land, insomuch as ye cannot find that little Burgade, or town in France,
that has not one or more of them. Here are, as you see, threescore in Orleans,
and I know not how many hundred there be in Paris: but of this I am sure, that
if there were in other places the like proportion, ye should have two Tennis
Courts, for every one Church through France. Me thinks it is also strange, how
apt they be here to play well, that ye would think they were borne with
Rackets in their hands, even the children themselves manage them so well, and
some of their women also, as we observed at Blois.

There is this one great abuse in this exercise, that the Magistrates do suffer
every poor Citizen, and Artificer to play thereat, who spends that on the
Holyday, at Tennis, which he got the whole week, for the keeping of his poor
family. A thing more hurtful then our Alehouses in England, though the one
and the other be bad enough. And of this I dare assure you, that of this sort
of poor people, there be more Tennis Players in France, then Ale-drinkers, or
Malt-wormes (as they call them) with us.

You observe here, that their Balls are of cloth, which fashion they have held
this seven years: before which time they were of lether, like ours. Much more
might be said of this exercise, but I will not read you a Lecture in the
School of Tennis, whom I confess the better Scholar.

Dancing.
Neither should I speak of Dancing (for my dancing days are done) to you that
are a Master in the Art: (like Phormio the Rhetoritian, to Hannibal, of the
wars) save only, that I presume, ye will give me leave, for methodes sake,
having undertaken to speak of the French exercises, not to omit that of
Dancing, wherein they most delight, and is most generally used of all others.
And I am persuaded, were it not for this, that they of the Reformed Religion,
may not Dance, being an exercise against which their strait-laced Ministers
much inueigh, that there had long since many of the Catholics turned to their
side: so much are they all in general addicted hereunto. For ye shall not
only see the Damoiselles (Gentlewomen) and them of the better sort, but every
poor Chapperonnieze (draggletayle) even to the Cobblers daughter, that can
Dance with good measure, and Art, all your Quarantes, Leualties, Bransles, and
other Dances whatsoever: notsomuch but the Chambriere (Chambermaid) and poor
Citizens wife, Dance usually in the City streets, in a round, like our
country lasses on their town green, about the May Pole, making music of
their own voices, without any instrument. And rather then fail, the old women
themselves, both Gentle and base, who have more toes then teeth, and these that
are left, leaping in their heads, like Iacks in Virginals, will bear their
part. This argues (I will not say a lightness and immodesty in behavior) but a
stirring spirit, and liuelynesse in the French nature: whereof also the Music
and songs they have, is no small argument: Music
For there is not almost a tune in all France, which is not Ionicke, or Lydian,
of five or seven tunes: a note forbidden youth by Plato, and Aristotle,
because, Bod. l. 4. rep.
says Bodin, it has Grande force et puissance d' amollir et lascher les
caeurs des hommes: Great force and power to soften and effeminate men's minds.
The tune Doricke, which is more grave music, and was commanded for the
singing of Psalms in the Primitive Church, their inconstant and stirring humor
cannot brook by any means.

It remains, I speak of their Language, of whom the Italian has a
proverb: Their Language
I Francesi nen parlane, ceme scriuene, nen cantane, ceme netane, nen pensane,
ceme dicene: The French neither pronounce as they write, nor sing as they
prick, nor think as they speak. In which first point, they differ from the
Latin, Italian, Spanish, Greek, who fully pronounce every letter in the word:
whereas the French, to make his speech more smooth, and ceulante (as he terms
it) leaves out very many of his consonants, whereby it now is grown almost as
sweet a tongue to the ear, as the Italian or Greek: which two, by reason of
the many vowels, are questionless the most delicate languages of the world.

Suetonius.
It is written of Augustus the Emperor, that he observed no Orthography, but
wrote always as he spoke, which fashion begins now to be used by late writers:
as ye may observe in many of their late impressions: a thing utterly condemned
by them of best judgment: for says one, Ludo. Regius.
While they divide the custom of writing from the nature of the word, ils ont
tout renuer see l' escripture: They have utterly overthrown their Orthography.

Rob. Steph
That which Scaliger, by the report of Stephanus, says of the Greek tongue,
that it is, redundans, redundant: the same may we say of the French, that it
is babillard, full of tittle tattle, nothing so grave or ponderous, as the
Spanish, nor so stately as the Italian. And hereof I think it comes, that
they say commonly, the French is a tongue d'amours, Amourous: the Spanish, de
la guerre, Warlike: and the Italian, de la Court, Courtly.

Hail^. li. 3.
Much agreeing with this, is that of Haillan, where speaking of the battle of
Agincourt, he says, Les Anglois nous ont souuent vaincuz en batailles, mais
nous les auons vaincuz en nos traictez de paix: tant be^^es et subtiles sont
nos paroles, et pleines de mig^ardises: The English have often overcome us in
battles, but we have overcome them in our Treaties of peace, so fair and
subtle are our words, and so full of entising delicacy. Whereby it should
seem, it is a winning and persuading language. But this is only the opinion
of themselves, who are dotingly more in love with their own tongue, then with
any other: which is the reason, that ye have now almost all Histories, Greek,
and Latin, translated into French, yea, and the Arts also: insomuch as now
the Gentleman reads these things in his own language only: a course in my
opinion most prejudicial to all good learning.

There is one reason, me thinks, above all other, why the Frenchman affects to
have his tongue delicate and smooth, namely, for that rather then he will lose
the nigardise thereof, contrary to all rules of Grammar, and all other tongues,
he observes no gender, where it may hinder the sweetness of the pronunciation
(an Italian fault this, to take the Masculine for the Feminine: the more beast
he.)

It remains (this French tongue being no Mother tongue of it self) that we
observe of what other tongues it borrows. Caesar says, Galli literis Graecis
v^ebantur: Caes. Com. l* 6*
The Gauls used Greek Caracters: which Character, as we read in Histories,
has been changed by three diverse men, Wastaldus, Doracius, Hichius: where the
same Writer says, that Bid, our countryman, invented a particular Alphabet
for the Normans.

Howsoever the letter be changed, true it is, that they have here many words
derived from the Greek, and agree very much also therewith in the phrase and
manner of speaking. And therefore, as Lu. Regius says well of our English, Lud.
Regius.
that it is compounded of the French and Almaine: so judges he rightly of the
French, that it is the daughter of the Latin and Greek: for, as for that
which it has common with the Italian, both in word and phrase (which is very
much) the Italian, no question, had it from hence, this French being the more
ancient Language: and this nation having left in Italy, with the memory of many
great victories, the use also of many of their words, as by all History
appears, without which, at this day the Italian could not serve himself of
his own.

True it is, that now of late, the French, especially in the Court, have gotten
many of theirs in use, for a grace forsooth, not of necessity; wherein they
much resemble us of England, who (they say) send diverse skins into other
countries, which those people use to their necessity, and make toys and bables
of the tails, which they return back again to us, at as great a rate, as
they bought the whole.

Concerning the difference between the language used at this day, and that of
former times, ye are to observe, that all things in this world have their
beginnings, growings, perfection, corruption and alteration: As manners of
living, forms of government, abrogation of Laws, change of Military service,
new-fanglenesse of habit, new fashion of building, diversities of Armor, new
inventions of instruments, etc. And of all these, none more subject to change,
then Language, nor no language in the world more then this of the French.

For as Polibius says of the Romans, that when they should conclude a Peace,
after the second Punicke war with them of Carthage, that they could not read
the Articles of the first, so much was the Character: And as Liuie says of the
song which the Sabin Priests used in their sacrifice, that they were so old
Latin, they could not be understood: And as we may say of our English, that
it very much differs from that of Chaucers time: so says Lu. Regius of the
French tongue, Lu. Regius.
that within these fifty years, it is almost grown a new language, and which
still like the French apparel every year altered.

If you ask me what Authors of the French I most approve? I durst commend
Co^mines, Bodin, Plessie, Bertas, for History, Policy, Divinity and
Morality, with the best: and great pity it is, that the History of the first
is written in no better French. But if you demand the best Authors, for the
language it self, I think, as Tuscaine has a Duute and a Petrarch, Greece an
Isocrates and a Demosthenes, Rome a Cicero and a Caesar, we a Sydney and a
Chaucer: so, France has a Bertas and a Romsart, in this kind most
recommendable. For the place of best language, ye must ever observe, that the
farther from Sea, the better speakers, as Athens in Graecia, Florence in Italy,
Saxony in Almany, Perses in Asia, Castile in Spain, and Orleans here, and
many other places.

It now remains I speak of the French nature and humor: which by the change
of his speech, apparel, Their nature and humor.
building, by his credulity to any tale which is told, and by his impatience
and haste in matter of deliberatio^, 1. In Deliberations. Bezade fra, lingua
whereof I shall not omit presently to speak, ye may judge to be very idle,
wavering and inconstant. Says one, Gallorum vt pronunciatio celerrima, ita
quoque ingenia mobili^ sunt: As the Frenchmens pronunciation is very fast, so
are their wits very wavering. And ye shall read in Caesar's Commentaries very
often, how he taxes them of this legerity and suddenness: His de rebus
Caesar certior factus, et infirmitatem Gallorum veritus (quod sun^ in consiliis
capiendis mobiles, et nouis plerunque rebus student) nihil his co^mittendum
existimauit: Caesar being informed of these matters, and fearing the
unstableness of the Gauls (as being sudden and wavering in their resolutions,
and generally desirous of innovation) he thought fit not to trust them. And in
another place, Cum intelligeret Caesar omnes fere Gallos nouis rebus studere,
Caes. Com. lib. 4.
and ad bellum mobiliter celeriterque incitari, etc. Caesar understanding, that
almost all the Gauls were naturally hungry of change, and inconstantly, and
suddenly stirred to war, etc. And again, Vt sunt Gallorum subita et
repentina consilia: Com. li. 3. Ib.
As the resolution of the Gauls are sudden, and unlooked for, etc.

To conclude, if ye will rightly know the nature and humor of the ancient
Gauls, ye must read the sixth of these Commentaries, and you shall observe how
strange it is, that though all other things in the world are subject to change,
yet the same naturel of lightness and inconstancy still remains in the
French. This is aptly showed by Haillan, Haill. li. 3.
in his description of Jews the eleventh: Auoit ^l vne chose? soudain ill
auoit affection d' vne autre: estaut vehement, actif et impatient: If he had
one thing, he straight casts his affection to another, being violent,
busy-headed and impatient.

To this accords another of their own writers, 2. In matter of war. Com.
cap. 44.
La condition de la France est tell, que s' il n' y a debat par dehors contre
les grands, il faut qu' ell' eust auec ses domesticques, et que son esprit ne
peut estre en repos: Such is the condition of France, that if she have no
Wars abroad against powerful neighbors, she must have broils at home
among her own Subjects, and her working spirits can never remain long quiet.
And therefore Tacitus calls them, Leuissima hominum genera: The most fickle
kind of men; sudden to begin and more sudden to end, apter to apprehend the
action, then comprehend the cause, ready to lay hold, not able to hold fast: as
by the making and reuoking of so many Edicts, Dern. troub. Guicciard lib. 5.
against the Reformed Religion in so few years, by the winning and losing of
Naples and Millaine in so short time, and by many other their actions appears.

For ye must observe of the French, that he enters a Country like thunder,
and vanishes out again like smoke: he resembles the Waspe, who after the
first stroke, loses her sting, and can hurt no more.

He shows this his lightness and inconstancy, not only in matters of
service and war, (whereof I have before made mention) but also even in other
his actions and carriages: But in nothing more, then in his familiarity, 3. In
intertayning of friendship
with whom a stranger cannot so soon be off his horse, but he will be
acquainted; nor so soon in his Chamber, but the other like an Ape will be on
his shoulder: and as suddenly and without cause ye shall lose him also. A
childish humor, to be won with as little as an Apple, and lost with less
then a Nut: Quite contrary to the nature of the Italian, of whom ye shall in
your travel shortly observe, that he is of too sullen and retired a fashion,
and a loup-garou (as the French man calls him) wherein I would have you
observe the virtue of the English man (for virtue is a mediocrity between two
extremes) who is neither so childishly and Apishly familiar, as the French; nor
so scornefully and Cynically solitary as the other.

4. In managing a quarrel.
So are we in matter of duel and private quarrel, in a mean, me thinks,
between these two Nations: for we are neither so deuillishly mindful of
revenge, as to tarry seven or ten years for an opportunity upon our enemy, as
does the Italian: nor so inconsideratly hasty, as we must needs either fight
to day, or be friends to morrow, as does the French. Hereat Rablais scoffingly
glanceth, where he tells a tale of a Gascoigne, that having lost his money,
would needs in the heat of his choler fight with any man that bore head: and
for want of an enemy fell asleep. By that time he was waking, comes me
another Rhodomonte, and upon like cause of loss, would have this fellow by the
ears: but then the edge of this other was off. In conclusion (says Rablais)
they went both to the Tavern, and there for want of money which they had lost
at Dice, drunk themselves friends upon their swords, without farther
mediation, or troubling of others to take up the quarrel.

Of the French carriage and manage of a quarrel, how childish and ridiculous
it is, ye have already seen two or three examples, wherein the parties have
neither showed judgment, to know their own right, nor valor to revenge their
wrong: whereas the English Gentleman, with mature deliberation disputes how
far his honor is engaged, by the injury offered, and iudiciously determines
his manner of satisfaction, according to the quality of the offense: which done,
he presently embarqueth himself into the action, according to the
prescription of the old rule, Postquam consulueris, mature opus est facto:
Salust.
Wise resolutions should be speedily executed.

I will here remember you of one other instance more, wherein our Countrymen
keep the golden mean, between the two extremes of defect and excess, and
wherein these two Nations of Italy and France are culpable, and here worthily
to be taxed.

We may say of the Italian, 5. In Governing his wife. Plut. Themist.
who makes his house his wives prison, as Plutarch says of the Persians, Sont
de nature estrangement and cruellement ialouzes des femmes, non seulement de
celles qu'ils ont espousees, mais aussi de leurs esclaues: and de leurs
concubines, lesquelles ils gardent si estroittement que person ne les void
iamais dehors, ains demeurent tousiours renfermees en leurs maisons: They are
by nature strangely and cruelly jealous of their women, not only of their
wives, but also of their slaves and Concubines, whom they guard so straightly,
that they are never seen abroad, but remain always locked up in their
houses: Whereas the French liberty on the other side is too much: for here a
man has many occasions offered upon any small entrance, to come acquainted; and
upon every least acquaintance, to enter, where he may come to her house,
accompany her arm in arm in the streets, court her in all places, and at all
seasons, without imputation. Wherein, me thinks, the French married man does as
Plutarch reports of Pericles, Id. Pericl.
take away the walls and fences of his orchards and gardens, to the end every
man might freely enter and gather fruit at his pleasure.

No marvel then, the bridle being left in their own hands, though sometimes
they be saddled, and their husbands know not. You may observe therefore, that
in this matter of wedlock also, the English use is better then either the
Italian or French.

6. In aptness to scoff.
It is also natural to the French, to be a great scoffer; for men of light and
vnsteadie brains, have commonly sudden and sharp conceits. Hereto also their
language well agrees, as being current and full of proverbs; to which purpose
I will remember you of two answers, not long since made by two Frenchmen, with
one of which you are well acquainted, wherein also you may observe, how little
esteem they hold of the Roman Religion in heart, though they make profession
thereof in show.

The one of these being very sick, and, as was thought, in danger of death,
his ghostly father comes to him with his Corpus domini, and tells him, that
hearing of the extremity wherein he was, he had brought him his Savior, to
comfort him before his departure. The sick Gentleman withdrawing the Curtain,
and seeing there the fat lubberly Friar with the Oast in his hand, answers, I
know it is our Savior; he comes to me as he went to Jerusalem, C' est un asne
qui le port: He is carried by an Ass.

The other Gentleman upon like danger of sickness, having the Friar come to
him to instruct him in the Faith, and after, to give him the Oast, and then the
extreme unction (it was on a Friday) told him that he must believe, that this
Corpus domini which he brought, was the very real flesh, blood and bone of our
Savior. Which after the sick man had freely confessed, the Friar offered it
him to receive for his comfort. Nay, quoth the other, Vous m'excusere, car ie
ne mange point de chair le vendredi: You shall excuse me, for I eat no flesh
on Fridayes. So that ye see the French will rather lose his god, then his good
jest.

The French humor also (says one) est incompatible auec patience and
modesty: Bold.
cannot away with patience and modesty. And therefore another says of him,
that he is as shamefast and modest, comme un Page de la Cour: La Noue. Plut.
Alcib.
as a Page of the Court. Or as Hiperbolus, who, Plutarch says, for his
boldness and saucy impudency, was the only Subject in his time for all
Satyricks and Commedians to work upon.

He is also such a one, as Theophrastus calls, Duscheres, Uncleanly Theoph.
Character
i. immundus, uncleanly, Qui lepra and vtiligine laborans, vnguesque habens
prelongos inter homines versatur, ac dicit gentilitios esse hos morbos, nam and
patrem and auum fuisse eis obnoxios: Who being leprous and scabby, and wearing
long vnpared nails, thrusts himself into company, and says, those diseases
come to him by kind; for both his Father and his Grandfather were subject unto
them.

He is Adolesches, i. loquax, Talkatiue, Talkatiue
Qui prae quauis Hirundine garrulus videri malit, quam tacere, adeo se irrideri
fert patientem: Who had rather seem more chattering then a Swallow, then hold
his peace; so willing is he to make himself ridiculous. With which people (it
is strange) ye shall talk all day, and yet at night not remember whereof he
has talked; such multiplicity of words he has, and so idle is the matter
whereof he treats.

He is Acairos, i. intempestiuus, Troublesome.
unseasonably troublesome, qui ad amicum occupatum accedens, vult re
incommunicata cum illo deliberare: Who coming to his friend full of business,
will give him counsel, before he have imparted the matter unto him: And
therefore they themselves have here a proverb, Prendre quelqu' un de Gallico:
To surprise one after the French fashion, when they take one of a sudden,
coming unlooked for and unsent for. Of which kind of people, Theophrastus bids
us beware, Id. ibid.
where he says: Id genus homines demissis maenibus gran^ique gradu fugias
oportet, quisquis febre carere voles* difficile est enim cum ijs durare, qui
neque otij, neque negotij tempora distinguere nor^nt: If you will not be
troubled with a fit of Ague, you must run as fast as your legs can carry you
from such kind of men: for it is very troublesome living with fellows, that
cannot distinguish the seasons of leisure and affairs.

He is Microphilotimos. i. Inepte circa res paruas superbus: Proud of trifles,
Vainly proud.
qui, si bouem sacrificarit, solet anteriorem capitis eius partem magnis
redimitam sertis prae^oribus in ipso introit^ figere, vt intelligant qui
ingrediuntur, bouem ab ipso mactatum. Et si minam argenti soluere debeat,
laborat vt solue^ in Aspero: Who, if he have sacrificed an Ox, uses to nail
up the head and horns at his gate, that all that come to him, may take notice
that he has killed an Ox. And if he be to pay forty shillings, will be sure
to pay it in new-coynd money. This is he that comes to the Tennis Court,
throws his P^rse full of coin at the line, which gives a sound, as if there
were no less then thirty or forty Crowns, when as sometimes by mischance,
we have discovered that it was nothing, but Paper, and a few Sols, and doubles
of Brass, that made it so swell, in all, scarce eighteen pence sterling.

He is Alazon. i. Ostentator, A Craker: Qui ad eos accedens qui generosos equos
vendunt, velle se emere simulat: Boasting of things nothing worth.
et innundinis ad tentoria eorum qui merces vaenum exponunt, appropinquans,
vestem sibi ostendi iubet duum talentorum: demum, (cum de precio conuenit)
puerum, quod se sine auro sequatur, grauiter obiurgat: Who coming to such as
have great horses to sell, makes them believe he will buy some: And at great
Faires, drawing to their shops that sell apparel, calls to see a suit of an
hundred pound: and when they are agreed of the price, falls out with his boy,
for following him without his purse. Such a one was the gallant, of whom ye
told me this other day, who in the midst of his discourse with you and other
Gentlemen, suddenly turns back to his Lackie, Fetch me, says he, my
Horologe, Clock, it lies in my lodging in such or such a place, near such or
such a Jewel. The Lalero returns with a non est inuentus. My French gallant
straight bethinkes himself that it is in his pocket (which he knew well
enough before) which presently he pulls out, not so much to show how the time
passes, (whereof he takes little care) as the curiousness of the work, and
the beauty of the case, whereof he is not a little brag and enamoured. To
speak thus particularly of all his several humors and customs, would be
very prolixe, and not much necessary: I will only refer you to the fourth of
Tullies Rhetorickes, Rhet. ad Herren. Satyr. l. 1. sa. 9.
where he speaks of a bragging Rhodomonte, and to the first book of Horace
Satyrs, speaking of an endless and needles prater, a fastidious and irksome
companion, where you shall see the French naturel, very lively and admirably
well described.

I will only speak of his impatience and precipitation in deliberations of
War or Peace, Hasty to conclude a Peace.
and such other affairs of greatest importance, and so end. To this effect
Bodin says of him, Bodin. l. 5
Le naturel du Francois est si soudain and actif, qu'il quitte ce qu'on
demand, annuye des allees and venues, and de longueurs propres a l' Espagnol:
The French is of so sudden and busy a disposition, that he quickly yields to
that a man demands, being soon tired with messages to and fro, and other
delays peculiar to the Spanyard. And in another place, On desire en l'
Espagnol vne promptitude plus grande qu'il n'a: Id. ibid.
and au Francois les actions and passions plus moderees. The Spanyard had need
of a more ready dispatch then he has, and the French of more moderation in his
actions and passions. And whereas Commines says of us, Commines
that we be not si subtiles en tra^ctez et appointements comme les Francois: so
crafty in our treaties and agreeme^ts, as the French. I think, saving the
credit of so great an Author, he might better have said, si estourdez and
precipitez: so headstrong and precipitate. But where he says, that he that
will treat and determine matters with us, must have un peu de patience, a
little patience: I yield unto him, he has good reason so to say; for his
Countrymen, the French, can endure no delay; they must propound and conclude
all in one day. Whether of these be more praisworthy Plutarch thus decideth:
Agatharcus bragged of his ready and quick hand, and that he painted faster then
any other: which Zeuxes understanding, And I, quoth he, quite contrary, do
glory in this, that I am long in the doing: for ordinarily such suddenness and
facility can not give either a lasting firmness, or a perfect beauty to the
work. Seneca.
Therefore says one very well, That should be long in deliberation, that must
be resolved but once. To this agrees the saying of Pericles to Tolmides, Plut.
Peri.
We must tarry the time, which is the wisest Counselor we can have.

By this haste of theirs, they lost more, says Bodin, Bodin. l. 5.
by one Treaty at Cambrey, Anno 1559. to the Spaniard, then he had before got
of the French in forty years by War.

And I see no reason, Of this peace of Fra. and Sp. in 98.
but this present Peace which the French has made, is as adua^tageous to the
Spanish State, as was that other, considering it is as great a gain to save
that we are like to lose, as to get that from another, which is not our own.
For as it is truly said of the Spanish King, that he has not got upon the
French (money by victories, but victories by money: Plut. P. Aemil.
) And as Plutarch says of Philip of Macedon, It was not Philip, but his gold
and silver, that took the towns of Greece: So may we say of his Treaties
which he has had with France, whereunto he has of force been driven,
Ennius.
even as Ennius says of Fabius: Our State, which witless force made wayne,
His wise delays made wax again.


For that this nation will rather yield the enemy what he demands, then be
troubled with long deliberation: a thing so contrary to his nature, as nothing
more.

You may observe by the course of later Histories, that the Spaniards purpose
was to deal with France, Plut. Alcib.
as Alcibiades said, the Athenians would deal by them of Patrae: They will
eat you out by little and little. To which purpose, in all these late civil
Wars, King Philip played the Firebrand, like the Priests of Mars, who, Bodin
l. 4.
when two Armies were met, threw fire between them for a signal of battle,
to set them together, and then retired themselves from the danger. He set the
Popes on also to kindle this fire, who were but Barkers, and could not bite;
their leaden Bulls did but butt; they could not hurt; abler to curse then to
kill: whose force is like that of a Whet-stone, Which though it sharpness
lack,
Plut. Peri.
Yet iron sharp can make.


But when he saw that little England (which is to Spain, as Alcibiades said,
the I Will Aegina was to Athens, Vne paille en l'ail, a mote in his eye) did trump
in his way, and cross his dessignes: and when as he considered, that (as
Henry the second of France, was the only cause of hindering his father Charles
the fifth, from usurping upon all Germany, for which cause he is called in
their public writings, The Protector of the Empire, and deliverer of the
Princes:) So her Majesty, by defending the oppressed, and withstanding his
Forces, deserves the Title of Protectrix of France, and deliverer of the
Estates: He was then content to motion a Peace, and like a false friend, when
he could do no more hurt, to shake hands. Hereupon he did capitulate to render
Cal^is, Durlens, Ardres, Blauet, and other places conquered or surprised upon
the French. A course, no question, wisely taken by the Spaniard, considering
the terms wherein he stood; the want of money he had, the credit he had
lost in all Banks, the decrepit age wherein he was, and lastly, the sudden and
incredible good fortunes of the French King and State, after so many years of
misery and loss. As for the French, what could he have done, more
dishonorable to himself, or profitable to his enemies, or prejudicial to his
late Allies? what less agreeing with the time, with his cause, with his oath,
then to yield to this peace? But it has been an old trick of the French, to
observe neither promise, nor oath, as Clouis the first says, Haill. lib. 1.
We may say of their purpose, as Plutarch of Lisanders: Children are deceived
with chance* Plut. Pelop.
bones, and m^n with oaths. In this school of Fraud, Pope Julius 2. was well
read, who professed to his private friends, that all the Treaties which he made
with the Princes of France, Germany, and Spain, was but to deceive the one of
them by the other. But let the French take heed there come not a day of
payment for this, who are so hasty to abandon their friends, and make peace
with their foes, only upon a foolish naturel of theirs, to desire change, and
to enjoy their present ease and pleasure, not foreseeing future dangers: like
Schoole-boyes, who care not, so they may play to day, though they be britcht to
morrow. When the Dukes of Burgondie, Berrie, and Bretaine, were combined
against Jews the 11. of France (as were lately England, France, and States
against Spain) the counsel of Francis Zforce to the King, was, for the
present, to agree to all things they desired, and after (says he) in short
time, ye shall have occasion when they are disleagued, to deal with them one
by one. And we may well say of this King present, Commines cap. 24.
as the Count Charollois feared of the Duke of Berrie the French Kings brother:
That he was a likely man to be soon drawn to agree, and leave us in the mire:
forgetting the old sentence: Id.
It is the true sign of the approaching ruin of a Country, when those that
should hold together, divide themselves, and abandon one another. And
howsoever for the present, the French brag to be gayners by the bargayn, I am
sure, their Allies have no part of the Gasteau, Cake. It is true therefore,
that Commines says, There was never so plentiful a marriage feast, but some
went without their dinners. Wherein, me thinks, we have great wrong, to bear a
burden with them in their Wars, and not to partake with them in the benefit
of their Peace. Maximilian the first Emperor said, he made Peace for no other
end with Jews the twelfth, but to be revenged of seventeen wrongs he had done
him. The King present, by the policy of this age, and law Talionis, might say
and do the like to the Spaniard, not for seventeen wrongs, but for seventeen
years wrongs he has received: which when he shall have done, it is but
quittance, and the other shall be but justly served: Bod. lib. 4.
for says Bodin, He which is falsely dealt with, having himself first played
false, has no cause to complain. And surely, the French must again shortly
be doing, with him or some other, or at least one with another at home: he
will soon be as weary of Peace, as he is now of war. La Noue
La nation Francoise est insolent en pain, impatiente de demurer long temps en
la maison: The French nation is insolent in Peace, and impatient of tarrying
long at home.

Thus have you a superficial survey of this Country and People of France; of
whom we may conclude with La Noue. Id.
Plus de la moitie de la Noblesse est perie, le peuple diminue, les finances
espuisees les debts accreues, la discipline renuersee, la piete languisant, les
moeurs desbordees, la justice corrumpue, les hommes diuises: More then half
the Noblesse is perished, the people diminished, the Treasure exhausted, the
debts increased, good Order overthrown, Religion languished, manners debaucked,
Justice corrupted, and the men divided.

I make no doubt, but to these slender observations, you will after add better
of your own Collection, using this only as the pattern of a method, how to
discourse of the Cosmography, Policy and Economy of such other Countries
wherein you shall travail.

FINIS.

