A SERMON PREACHED BEfore His Majesty at White Hall, On the 24. of March last,
being Easter day, and being also the day of the Beginning of His Majesty's most
Gracious Reign.

By the Bishop of Elie His Majesty's Almoner.

Imprinted at London by Robert Barker, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty. ANNO 1611.

A SERMON PREACHED BEFORE His Majesty at White Hall, on Easter day last.
PSALM. 118. verse 22. The Stone, which the Builders refused, the same Stone, is
become, (or made) the Head of the Corner.
THE Stone, which the says the Prophet David. This is the Stone, which ye
Builders refused: Act. 4. 11.
says the Apostle Peter. And says it; of CHRIST our Savior, Hic est lapis,
He is the Stone. And says it; to Caiaphas and the rest, that went for
Builders. We know then, who this Stone is, and who these Builders be, to begin
with.

And in the very same place, Act. 4. 10.
the same Apostle tells us further, what is meant by Refused, and what, by
made Head of the Corner. Quem vos, whom ye denied and crucified: that was, His
refusing. And then, Quem Deus, whom God has raised again from the dead; (...)
was His making Caput Anguli. Refused, when ^ Three days ago. Made Head, When?
This very day: for, Hic est dies, follows straight, within a verse, Verse 24.
This is the Day. Which Day, there is not one of the Fathers, that I have read,
but interpret it of Easter Day.

And so we have brought the Text, and the Time together. We know, who is the
Stone* Christ. Who the Builders: Caiphas and those with him. When refused? In
his Passion. When made Head? at his Resurrection: that is, this day* which day
is therefore, (at the 27. verse) said to be, Constitutus dies solennis: made a
solemn Feast day: in condensis, on which the Church to stand thick and full:
vsque ad cornua Altaris* even up to the very Corners of the Altar.

This (I take it) is a good warrant, for our Church, to make this Psalm, a
select choice Psalm, for this Day; as peculiar and pertinen^ to the Feast it
self. And a good warrant, for us, so to apply it. It is the Holy Ghosts own
application, by the mouth of S. Peter: we may boldly make it, ours.

Prophecy, is in it, which is the testimony of Jesus. Apoc 19.
Yet, not the only: for according to the letter, we cannot deny, but that
originally, it was meant of David. He was a Stone too, and in his time refused:
yet after, raised by God to the highest place, even to be King of his people.
The Chaldey Paraphrast,) (the oldest we have) is enough for this; thus, he
turns the verse. (...) etc. The Child, whom the chiefest men oppugned, He
of all the Sons of Ishai, was made Ruler of Israel. A second sense then it
has, of David.

And, by analogy, it will bear a third; and Ours, or with any Prince: in like
manner banded against, and sought to be put by, as He: and yet, after brought
by God, to the same place, that David was. To any such it will well agree, and
be truly verified of him, and rightly applied to him. And, I confess, I
chose it the rather for this third. Because, (as this year falls out) upon
one day, (and Hic est dies, This is the day) We have in one a memorial of two
benefits; of our Saviors exalting, by his Resurrection: and of our Sovereigns
exalting, and making Head of this Kingdom. Both, lighting so together, we were
(as me thought) so to remember the one, that we left not the other out. And
this text, will serve for both. Both, may in one be set before us: and so we
rejoice and render thanks to God for both: For the Lord Christ* and for the
Lords Christ, under one.

Three senses then, there are of the Text and (to do it right) we to touch them
all three. 1. Christ in prophecy. 2. David in History. 3. Our own in
analogy. But will give Christ the praecedence. Both for his Person, He is
Dauid^ Lord, and the head of all Head-stones. It is meet, Col. 1. 18.
He have primatum in omnibus, He (...) all things, have the pre-eminence:
And, for that the truth of the Text, never was so verified in any, as in Him.
We may truly say, None ever, so low cast down: None ever, so high lift up
again as He. Others refused, but none like Him: and their heads exalted, but
nothing in comparison of His.1. First then of Christ's, 2. afte^ of David's
briefly* 3. and last, of Our own.

To apply it to Christ. The Stone, is the ground of all. Two things befall it:
two things as contrary as may be.1. Refused, cast away: 2. then, called for
again, and made Head of (...) Building. So, two parts there are, to the eye,
1. The refusing. 2. and the raising: which, are his two estates, His
humiliation: and His exaltation.

In either of these, ye may observe, two degrees. A quibus, and Quousque: By
whom, and How far: By whom refused? We weigh the word, Aedificantes: Not by
men unskillful; but, by workmen, Builders professed: It is, so much the more.

How far? We weigh the word, Reprobauerunt. vsque ad reprobari: even to a
reprobation. It is not improbauerunt, disliked, as not fit, for some eminent
place: but reprobauerunt, utterly reprobate, for any place at all.

Again, exalted, by whom? The next words are, ^ Domino, by God, as good a
Builder, nay better, then the best of them; which makes amends for the former.

And, how far? Placed by Him, not in any part of the Building: but, in the
part most in the eye, ( the Corner:) and, in the highest place of it, ( the
very Head.)

So, Rejected, and that by the Builders, and to the lowest estate: And from the
lowest estate, exalted in Caput Anguli, to the chiefest place of all; and that,
by God himself. This for Christ.

And David is a Stone, and so is Ours, and so is every good Prince, Lapis
Israel, (as Jacob in his Testament calls them. Genesis 49. 24
) And Builders Caiphas here. Reprobauerunt is, when they devise to put Him by,
Psalm. 62. 4.
whom God would exalt: And Factus Caput, when God, for all that, does them
right, and brings them to their place, the Throne Royal. As, This was the day,
when God so brought David, (as appears by the 24. verse:) And Hic est dies,
This is the day, when he brought His Majesty to be Head of this Kingdom. O^
these in their order.

The Stone that the Builders refused, etc.
THe estate of mankind, as they are in Society, either or Church or Kingdom,
is, in diverse terms set forth to us in Scripture: Sometimes of a Flock:
sometimes of Husbandry: otherwhile, of a Building. Ye are his flock, diverse
times in the Psalms. 1. Cor. 3. 9.
You are Gods Husbandry, You are Gods building, both in one verse* Now, the
Style of this Text, runs in terms of this last, of Building, or
Architecture. For here are Builders, and here is Stone, and a Coin or
Corner, and a Top or Turret over it.

Of this Spiritual Building, we all are Stones: and (which is strange) we all
are Builders too: To be built, and to build, both Stones; in regard of them
whom God has set over us; who are to frame us, and we so to suffer them.
Builders, in regard of our selves first: then, such as are committed to us, by
bond, either of duty, or charity; Every one, being (as St. Chrysostom says
well) de subdita sibi plebe, quasi domum Deo struere; of those under his
charge, to make God an house. As Stones; it is said to us, by S. Peter, 2. Pet.
1. 5
Super aedificamini, Be ye built up, or framed. As Builders; it is said to
us, first, by St. Jude, lud. 20
Build your selves in your most Holy faith. Then, by St. Paul, Edify ye, or
build ye one an other. Be built; 1. The. 5. 11
by obedience and conformity: Build your selves, by increase in virtue and good
works: Build one an other, by good example, and wholesome exhortation. The
short is. This is to be our study, all: if we be, but our selves, every one
in himself, and of himself, to build God an Oratory; If we have an Household,
of them, to build him a Chapel. If a larger circuit, then a Church. If a
Country or Kingdom, then a Basilica, or Metropolitan Church: which is
properly, the Princes Building.

This in the Text (the builders here were in hand with) was a Basilica: for it
was the frame of the Jews Government: but, is applied, to all States in
general. For Jury was the Scene or Stage, whereon the errors or virtues of all
Governments, were represented, to all posterity.

Four words there be in the Text. 1. Aedificantes, Builders. 2. Lapis, Stone.
3. Angulus, a Corner, and 4. Caput, the Head. From the first word Aedificantes;
this we have: That States would not be, as Tents: set up, and taken down,
and remouable. They would be buildings; to stand steddie and fixed. Nothing so
opposite unto a State, as not to stand.

2. From the second, Lapis: that, this building would be, not of clay and wood,
or (as we call them) Paper walls: but, Stone-worke, as strong, as defensible,
as little subject to concussion, or cumbustion, as might be.

3. From the two parts specified; first, Anguli: This Stone-worke, is not a
wall, forthright, to part in sunder, or to keep out: but, it consists of
diverse sides: those sides meet in one Angle: where if they meet, and knit
well: all the better will the building be.

4. Caput. And they will knit the better, if they have a good Head. For, where
they meet, no place so much in danger of weather going in, and making the sides
fly off, if it want a Covering. A head it would have, to cover it: It is a
special defense, and besides, it is a Sovereign beauty, to the whole building.

And that Head, would not be of plaster, to crumble away: or of wood, to warp
or rot, with the weather: or of lead, to bow or bend, and to crack: but of
Stone, and the principallest Stone, that could be. The chief part it is, the
head: the chief care, and consultation would be, what Stone meet for that
place: for indeed, it is all, in all.

That: is the consultation here. Here is Christ, The first sense, Christ.
what say you to him? He is a Stone. 2. a building Stone. 3. a Corner Stone. 4.
a Headstone. A stone. So the Prophets term Him. Dan. 2. 34. Zachar. 3. 9. Esaias
28. 16. And so the Apostles, Peter, Acts. 4. 11. Paul, 1. Cor. 10. 4. 1. In his
birth: Daniels stone, cut forth without hands. 2. Dan. 2. 34
In his passion: Zacharies stone, Zach. 3. 9
graven, and cut full of eyes all over. 3. In his Resurrection: Esays stone,
laid in Sion, Esaias 28. 16
Qui crediderit non confundetur, He that believes in him then, shall not be
confounded, says Saint Peter, 1. Pet. 2. 6. Hic est lapis. He is the Stone of
our faith, says St. Peter, Acts 4. 11
Lapis erat Christus. And Petra erat Christus, says St. Paul. 1. Cor. 10. 4
He is the Stone of our Sacraments, the water of our Baptism and of ou^
Spiritual drink: both issue from him. A Ston: first, for his nature, of the
earth as Stones are, out of Abraham's Quarry (says Esaias) to show his Humanity.
And, out of (...) the very lowest parts of the earth (says the Apostle; Esaias
51. 1
) to show his Humility. Ephe. 4. 9.
Indeed nothing so subject to contempt, to be trodden on, to be spurned aside,
as it. And such was his condition, Vermis, non homo, Psalm. 22. 6
and, Lapis, non homo. A Worm, or a stone, and no man.

Stone will endure much sorrow, nothing more. And, who did ever suffer like
Him? or in his suffering, who more patient, or still, or stonelike, then He?

Stone is: that it is firm and sure; And so is He. Ye may trust Him, ye may
build on Him. He will not fail you. What ye lay on Him, Psalm. 40. 3
is sure. David may have sure footing, Exo. 17. 12
and rest his feet. Moses, his hands. ^^cob, Genesis 28. 11
his head, on this Stone. This, is it he hat^^ his denomination from. He that
trusts in him* nothing, Mat. 16. 18
not the gates of hell, shall prevail against him. Trustines, with non
confundetur, the chief virtue of a Stone: of Christ: and of those, that are
Headstones by, and under him.

But, there are Stone, that lie scattered, that head well, nor bed well, (as
they say) not meet, to build withal: meet, for nothing but to hurl, and to
do hurt with. But Christ is a Stone, to do good with, to build with, Lapis ad
aedificationem. And, He loves not to scatter, or be by himself, Prou. 8. 31.
His delight is, to be with the Sons of men: and to grow with them, into one
frame of building.

A Cornerstone. Of all the places in the building, to make two one, Ephesians. 2. 14.
He loves it above all, stretching Himself, to both walls, that both may
rest on Him.

And lastly, Lapis primarius, a Headstone. For, Building, till He be in that
place; till Christ be (...), Caput, in omni procuratione, The highest and
chiefest end of all. This he is, and in the end, This he will be: if not by
Men, yet by God.

But now, we have to do with Men: and we are to put it to voices, their
voices, with whom he lived, what they think of Christ, for Caput Anguli. It is
returned, Quem reprobauerunt: He is refused. Luke 19. 14.
Will ye hear it, from themselves? Nolumus hunc regnare, We will not have
him King; not in that place; no Head, in any wise.

a quibus, Who were these? These were foolish people, Iere. 5. 4.
that knew not the virtue or value of a Stone: no heed to be taken what they
cry. We will get us, Iere. 5. 5.
with Jeremy, to men of skill; that know, what Stone is for every place,
professed builders, by their trade: But these also, were no better conceited of
Him, then the other: for, do any of the Rulers make any account of him? Ioh.
7. 48. As who say, None of them neither, The very Builders refuse him too.

Head: But, there be more places then that: if not allow him there, yet he may
be in some else. Improbauerunt, it may be, but not reprobauerunt: disalowed,
but not cast aside quite. We ask then, how far? Will ye put him up the
second time, and (to see the Quousque, in kind) will ye put up Barabbas with
him? No^ hunc. John 18. 40.
sed Barabbam. So it went: That was their verdict. Now, by this time it is
reprobauerunt, (as flat as may be) a refuse indeed, and that with a foul
indignity.

But these, were but the vulgar, again. What say the Builders to this? He, or
them, that took himself for a very Vitruui^s, such a workman, as he said, all
the rest understood nothing at all, the Master Builder Caiphas, Ioh. 11. 49. 50.
he was flat, Expedit, It was expedient he should die; be cast aside into the
heap of rubbish, be put out of the building, clean. That, is his doom.

Now, lay these two together. To be refused, refused of Builders, and those the
chief, is much; for, they are presumed to be skillful. Again, to be disliked
for the chief reprobate, (that is,) not refused, for the Head, nor refused for
the Corner, but refused simply for any room at all: not in the tappe, nay not
in the bottom; not in the Corner, nay not in any rank of (...) Building:
that, is as much as may be. And this, was Christ's lot.

Yet this was all but in words, nothing was done to him; But there is, a
reprobation, in deed, and that is yet far worse. And to that, they pro^eeded,
even to actual matters, to real reproba^ion. Before they cast him aside,
(this poor Stone,) they hackt and they hewed it, and mangled it pitiously,
they showed their mali^^ even in that, Zach. 3. 9.
too. Celauerunt Sculptur am ei^s* says the Prophet, their tools walked on
him, they graued him, and cut him with a witness, and made him full of eyes,
on every side. Wh^^ skilled that? What disgrace, or what sorrow is done, to a
Stone, the Stone feels it not. The cry, of Non hunc, or the edge of the
grauing tool, affect it nothing. True: But he was Lapis viu^s, a living Stone,
(as Peter calls him, 1. Pet. 2. 5.) a Stone that had life; life and sense,
and (...) all: Felt his grauing, the edge and point both* felt his despising,
the scorn, and malice both* (of the twain; this the more,) but both he (...)*
When they made furrows on his back, Psalm. 129. 3.
with the scourges: Matthew. 27. 29.
when they platted the Crown (...) Thorns, and made it ^it close to his head;
(...) dug his hands, Psalm. 22. 16.
and feet, he felt all. (...) endured it patiently, tanquam lapis: but he (...)
it sensibly, tanquam viuus. Had quick sense, (...) his pain in grauing: had
lively apprehensio^ of his contempt in refusing.

And these very two words, (in the Text ^ Lapidem, and Reprobauerunt, set out
unto (...) both parts of his Passion fully; As if, he (...) been Stone, so
laid they on him: As if he had been a Reprobate, so powered they all disgrace
upon him. And, even as a Stone he was in his Passion. For, as the Stones give
against the weather: so, was there not to be seen upon him, a bloody sweat?
Luke 22. 44.
Did he not give (as it were) of himself, against the tempest came? And when
it came, was it not so strange, (even that, which this living Stone suffered;)
as the dead Stones, that had no life, as if they had had life, and compassion
of his case rent in sunder with it? Matthew. 27. 51.
Lapidem then, is true.

And, for reprobauerunt, that is, as true. For how could they have entreated a
reprobate, worse then they entreated Him? In his thirst, John 19. 29.
In his prayer, In the very pangs of death, what words of scorn and spiteful
opprobrie? Matthew. 27. 47, 49.
what deeds of malice and wretched indignity? Of himself, it is said, (and by
way of exaggeration,) He humbled himself to death, Phil. 2. 8.
the death of the Cross: of them, it may be no less, Reprobauerunt ad mortem,
mortem Crucis, they rejected Him to death, the death of Reprobates, the death,
whereunto a Curse is annexed, the death of the Cross. And, never gave Him
over, till they brought him, Matthew. 27. 60.
Lapis ad lapidem, into a grave of Stone, and rolled a Stone upon him, and
there left him. And thus much, for Lapis quem reprobauerunt.

Passover; We now, pass over, to His other estate; His Exaltation, ad Caput
Anguli. Were it not strange, the stone should be rolled away, and this Stone
should be dug up again, and set up in the Antes, the place most
conspicuous, (that is) made a Cornerstone: and that, in the very top, the
highest part of all, (that is) made a head-stone? Were not this, a strange
Passover, from death, to life; from lowest reprobation, to highest
approbation; from basest reproach, to greatest glory?

But, seeing builders (we see) may be deceived, and that in Capite, (as we
find here) and that, though Caiphas be one of them; and a stone may have
wrong; would it not be well, we called to scrutinie again? Is there any
builder yet left, before whom, we may bring the matter? Yes, Hebr. 3. 4.
there is. Every house is built of some (...) (says the Apostle) but he that
is the Builder of all, is GOD. He that set up, this great vaulted work, of
Heaven over our heads: that laid the Cornerstone of the earth; Job 38. 6.
He is a builder. Psalm. 104. 3.
But he that lays his Chamber-beames in the waters; Et appendit terram super
nihilum, Job 26. 7.
hangs this great Mass no man knows upon what: He that begins at the top,
and builds downwards, Heaven first, and then Earth: (as he did) he passes
all ours, he is a skillful builder indeed. Is he of the same mind? Offer
Christ to His probation. He will reprobare reprobantes, condemn them, that so
refused Him: And all will turn, 1. Pet. 2. 4.
quite contrary: Saint Peter says it. He was (...) reprobate with men, but
(...), chosen of God: (...) nothing worth, with them, but (...) precious, with
him: Meet to be in the building; Nay no building, meet to be, without him.
And in the building, if any part more object to the sight, then other: there.
And in that, if any place, higher then an other: there. In aedificio, Angulo
aedificij, Capite Anguli. In the building, the Corner of the building, the head
of the Corner: (that is) in the highest place, of the chiefest part of all.
This, he thought him, and as he thought him, so he made him: and made him so
this day, the day of His Resurrection. Whom they cast down, God lift up, from
the grave: whom they vilified, he glorified, glorified and made him Caput
Anguli, The head of the Corner.

How of the Corner? Anguli.
The Corner, is the place, where two walls meet: and there be many two's, in
this Building. The two walls of Nations, Jews and Gentiles: The two, of
Conditions, bond and Free: The two, of Sex, Male and Female: the great two
(which this day we celebrate,) of the Quick and the Dead: above all, the
greatest two of all, Heaven and Earth.

The two first meet in Him: There was a partition, but He down with it: Et
fecit vtraq^^ vnum. Ephesians. 2. 14. So that, there is neither (...) nor Greek,
Gal. 3. 28.
neither bond nor Free, neither Male^^ Female, but all one in Christ Jesus:
Yea, the Quick^ and the Dead, both live to Him. And all these, so many
Combinations, as in the Center, meet in Him: and He in the midst of all,
draws all, and knits all, in one holy Faith; one blessed hope of his Coming;
one mutual unfeigned love, toward each other. Ex te Angulus, well said
Zachary. Zach. 10. 4


And as Unity, Caput.
is in the Angle; so Order, is under the Head, As al, one, in Him; so He is
Head of all. Head of the jews, Jesus, in their tongue: Head of the Gentiles,
Christ in their tongue: Head of the Church: Col. 1. 18.
Head of all Principality and Col. 2. 10.
Power. Therefore this day, Christ that died, rose again, that He might be
Lord, both of Quick and Dead, Romans 14. 9 And of the great Angle of all, Mat.
28. 18
consisting of Heaven and Earth; for all Power was given him in heaven and
earth, and He made Head of both.

Now then: will ye lay these together? there stone, no greater dignity, then,
there to be (in the Head.) To any stone; but it is much increased, by that
Circumstance, that it is not only, Lapis, (barely:) but, Lapis quem
reprobauerunt, in the Head: Not any stone, but a stone so refused (as we heard)
for such a stone, there to be; from that Terminus a quo, to come to this
Terminus ad quem, from so base an estate, there to be; that is a great
increase to it. And thirdly, by such a person, a Builder so matchless, there
to be: that is yet a degree higher: and this triplicity exalts much his
Exaltation. That by God, and not Gods suffering, but his doing: and that,
factum mirabile, his wonderful doing, it came to pas^e. As indeed, wonderful
it is to see, that which all the world now ^eeth: Christ, that for the present,
was so strangely dejected: since, to be so exceedingly glorified: So many
knees to bow to Him, Phil. 2. 9. 10 11.
so many tongues to confess Him, His Name to be above all Names, heaven and
earth to be full of the Majesty of his glory.

Now, from these two words, Caput, Anguli: that which we learn morally, is: to
make much of the two Virtues, commended to us, in these two words: Virtus
Anguli, and Anguli sub Capite.

First, the virtue of two walls united in one Angle, that is, Unity. For
Christ will not be Caput Maceriae, of a Party wall, but of an Angle joined.
He is not of their spirit, that so they may be Head, care not, though it be of
never so broken a wall.

Secondly, not every Unity, but Vnitas ordinata, that has, or is under a
Head. For it is not, Cuiusuis Anguli, but Anguli cui Caput: not of every Angle,
but of an Angle, the unity whereof, is neither in the tail, nor in the sides,
but in the head: That is, commends to us, as Unity against Division, so
Order against Confusion. They that can be content to corner well, but would
be Acephali, Head-lesse, have no head, please him not: no more do they, that
would join, but would be Polycephali, have a Consistory of heads, many heads:
as many as the Beast of Babylon. For sure it is, and Angle can have no more
heads but one. To love an Angle well, but an Angle that has a head, and but
one head. To love a head well, but a head, not of a single wall, but of an
Angle. Both these, and both to be regarded. Zach. 11. 7. 10. 14
They be Zacharies two staves, bands, and beauty, which uphold all government;
break one, and the other will not long be, unbroken. The head without Unity:
Unity without the head: either without other will not long hold.

Both then: but especially unity, for that comes in here, no^ necessarily,
as does the head: but extraordinarily. And therefore extraordinary regard, to
be had of it. For I was thinking, why he should here in this second part, say
that He was made head of the Corner: Why should it not suffice, to have said,
factus est Caput, and no more? Or if more, factus est Caput Aedificij? to have
said, He was made the head: at least wise, made the Head of the whole
Building. Why must Anguli be added? What needed any mention of the Corner? no
occasion was given, no mention was made of it, in his Refusing: The word head,
would have served ^ully, to have set His Exaltation ^oorth. Some matter then
there was, that this word must come in. And sure, no other, but to show,
Christ^ special delight and love of that place. At his rising, Ioh. 20. 19
this day, Stetit in medio: and here he is come to his place again: for
Stetit in medio, and Caput Anguli, come both to one. Therefore, that like love,
like special regard, be had by us, of that place, and of the virtue of that
place, ( unity:) that it be sought and preserved carefully, that the sides
fly not off, the well knitting whereof, is the very strength, of the whole
Building.

By Bid, it is rendered, as a reason, why the Jewish builders refused our
Savior Christ, for the head place, Quia in vno pariete, stare amabant. They
could endure no Corner; they must stand alone, upon their own single wall; be
of themselves, not join with Gentile, or Samaritane. And Christ they endured
not, because they thought, i^ he had been head, he would have inclined that
way. Ioh. 10. 16
Alias oues oportet me adducere. Alias, they could not abide. But sure, a
purpose there must be alias oues adducendi, of bringing in others: of joining a
corner, or else we do not facere secundum exemplar, Heb. 5. 8
build not according to Christ's pattern; our fashion of Fabrique, is not like
his. They that think, to make Christ head of a Single wall, are deceived: it
will not be: They that say, So the head, all is well, it skils not for the
Corner, err too. He is (...) a Cornerstone first, and then (...), a
headstone after. And they that had rather, be a Front in a wall, then in a
meaner place sub Lapide Angulari: And they, that stand upon their own
partition, and will not endure to hear of any joining, care not what become of
Angulus, if it were stricken out: Phil. 2. 5.
the same mind, is not i^ them, in neither of them, which was in Christ Jesus.
His mind we see. He looks to the Angle, as to the head; and to the head, as to
the Angle. And they build best, Luc. 7 35.
that build likest him, Wisdom is justified of all her Children.

And last; the due^y of the whole Second part, this days du^ty, is this. When
the headstone is brought forth, and reared, (as to day it was,) we are to
prosecute it, Verse 25. 26.
with Hosanna, and Benedictus qui venit, (as it straightway follows in the
Psalm) with acclamation of, Grace, Grace unto it. Zach. 4. 7.
For so, (says the Prophet) Lapis primarius, would be laid, with rejoicing.
Rejoicing: as in His regard, that has obtained his due: so, even in the
buildings, that has got such a head; such, and so gracious a head, as could
endure, thus to be refused by them: and yet, admit, yea even those that so
refused him, (if the fault be not in themselves) to be Stones in his building,
for all that: and to be members of the Body, whereof He is the head.

him, head. Actually, we cannot, he is made to our hands: but, in account we
may: Giving him, the highest place in all our respects; Magnifying his Name,
and his Word, above all things: his Word, Psalm. 138. 2.
making it our chief ground: his Name, and the Glory of it; making it, our
chief end. That other considerations carry us not away, as these builders here
it did, of Venient Romani, Ioh. 11. 48.
or, I wot not what; but that ever, (as the Heathen Lawyer said) it be, Potior
ratio, quae facit pro Religione, the best ^eason, that makes best for
Religion, and for the good of the Body of this head (that is,) the peace of His
Church. And this, for, Lapis erat Christus.

But, The second sense* David.
Lapis erat David, is likewise true. Therefore, that we do King David no
wrong, let us David was a Stone. The Jews say, it was his nic-name, or name of
disgrace; that, in scorn they called him so. For that, all his credit
(forsooth) came, by casting a Stone, and hitting Goliath, by chance, right in
the forehead: and so, they thwited him with that name. They gave it him, in
scorn: but he bare it, in earnest. For sure, much sorrow he endured: had, that
property of a Stone. And nothing could remove him, or make him shrink, from
his Trust in God, or from his Allegiance to Saul his liege lord: that quality
also.

And, refused he was: not as Christ, we must refused, as he. As Christ: none,
but Christ. No: but yet, in his degree refused he was, though. A hard time he
had, and many hard terms, and hard vsages he endured, for many years
together; pursued, and followed, and should have been no head, nay, should have
had no head, if He had been gotten.

Refused, and by whom? Even by Saul, all his 2. Sam. 2. 8.
and when Saul was dead, Abner refused him, and set up another against him. And
when he was out of his Country, 1. Sam. 29* 4.
in Gath, refused there too, 1. Sam. 17. 28.
by the Princes of Achis. And even at home, by his own brethren, and fathers
house. Yea Samuel himself, 1. Sam. 16. 6.
had given it away, (the Head-place) from him, to Eliab, and so refused him;
but, for God. And these, went then, for the chief builders in Israel, at that
time. So, the builders refused him.

Stone became the head, (that is) David got the Crown, and was King at last.
For, ( head) is the Kings Name. So does Samuel call the King. 1. Sam. 15. 17.
So does Esaias cap. 7. 4. So does Hose. 1. 11. But especially, so Daniel in
express terms, Chap. 2. 38.
Tu es Caput aureum, speaking to the King, Thou art the head of gold.

Head, and of the Corner: that is (as some interpret it) of Judah, and Israel;
But that is thought somewhat hard. For those two, were not two Kingdoms, nor
ever so reckoned, till Roboams time. And, what if David, had not happened to
have been first King of one Tribe, and after, of all; should he have lost this
name then? Should he not have been (...)? Shall no King be Caput Anguli, if he
have but one entire kingdom? Shall not Solomon as well as David? No question
but he shall.

The better part therefore think good, to give it that sense, which never
fails in any State: and which sundry times ye shall find pointed at by David
himself, as in the Verse. 9. 10 12.
115. before, and in the Ver. 19
135. after. Yea even here in Ver. 2. 3
this Psalm at the beginning, Dom^^s Israel, and Domus Aaron, the house of
Israel, and the house of Aaron; that is, the two estates, Civil and
Ecclesiastical, which make the maine Angle, in every Government. God himself
has severed them, and made these, two: but to meet in one; not one to malign
and consume the other. And, the happy combining of these two, is the strength
of the Head, and the strength of the whole Building. If it bear but upon one
of them, it will certainly decay. It did so in Saul's time: He little regarded
the Arc, and less the Priests. David saw Saul's error, and in his Psalm
(where he sings* Psalm. 75. 3
Ne perdas, to a Commonwealth) promises to have equal care of both pillars,
and to uphold them both.

The first Book of Chronicles, is sufficient to prove, and persuade any, he
dealt in both, as chief over both. Not by right of Priest^hood, for none he
had. And that of his Prophecy, is as cold. Others also did the like, Asa,
Iosaphat, Ezekias, Josias, that were no Prophets, nor ever so accounted.

In the Law, (it is Philo's note) both Tables meet in the fifth Commandment,
(which is, the Crown Commandment,) as it were in an Angle; which
Commandment, is placed (says he) (...) as it were in the middle or confines
of both tables, that of Religion; and this other of Justice Civil: That, with
the right arm, the Prince may support that, and with the left, this, and so
uphold both; Mat. 21. 42
And in the Gospel, Christ applies this very verse, to himself, as heir of
the Vineyard. Heir he was not, but as King, not as Priest; He could not; for
of that Tribe he was not borne but was called to it, Heb. 7. 13. 14.
as was Aaron.

Since then, here we find both, and that David was both, it is no error (I
trust) to call a King, Caput Anguli; no more is it, to call him Lapidem
primarium, or angularem, choose ye whether. The Persian (by the light of
nature) called the King Ahashuerosh (that is) Sovereign head. The Grecian (by
the same light) called the King, (...), that is, (...) the base or Cornerstone
of his People.

Shall I add this? This word ( Stone) which is here affirmed, of David, in
this verse: is, in the new Testament five several times, turned by the Syrian
Translator, Cepha: thrice in the three Matt. 21. 42 Mar. 12. 10 Luke 20. 17
Gospels: once in the Acts. 4. 11
Acts: and once in 1. Pet. 2. 7
Saint Peter. So that he did not think it strange, to ^all King David Cephas.
So Cepha, as well said of David, as of Peter. And 2. Sam. 5. 2 1. Chro. 11 Zach.
4. 10
Tu pasces, as well said ^o David, as Pasce to Peter. And Zorobabel has ^n his
hand, the Line, as well a Joshua the high ^riest, toward the building of the
Temple. The thing, the duty it self, and the bounds of it, let us ^ay forth
and agree of, as we can: but sure, the Name, is not to be stood on; it cannot
be de^ied Him.

ANd now to our selves: The third sense. His Majesty
to whom, as This is touching Christ, and his Resurrection; so is it, likewise,
the day, that he has made the second time, by making ^^n it, his Majesty head
of this Kingdom, the very Name whereof, has affinity, and carries an
^llusion to the term, Anguli, in the sound of it.

And, neither were your Majesty, without refusing, in a kind: but did
partici^ate, somewhat of it, with David, though in a ^esse degree. Good and
firm and sure, though your Right were as any Stone; yet allegations were
studied, to subject it to question, yea, to re^using. For, did no body ever
see, a project drawn, wherein some other stone was marked out, to have been
caput Anguli? Yes, it is (...) known, T^les were raised, and set on foot,
(...) Books written, to that end.

You by, and (...) have had some other Head-stone, of their own hewing out, in
your room.

Christ's case: even the High Priest, he that clai^meth Caiphas place, He and
his crew, had the^^ hands in it. We may no less truly, say to them, then St.
Peter did to Caiphas; Quem vos, Wh^^ ye would have cast aside, if ye might
have (...) your wills. And to that end, had your fir^^ Breues ready drawn,
and sent abroad; and others, in a readiness, to second them.

Breues, and Bulls; this (...) is the Head, for all that. Factus, made he is,
and* made by God: For a Domino, Gods doing it wa^^ evidently, that after so
much plotting, so many years together; at the very time, God bow^^ the hearts,
of so many thousands, as it had be^^ the heart of one man, to agree in one: as
th^^ all that foresaw it, thought it had not bee^^ (...); and all that saw it
confessed it admirable; and all men said, Psalm. 64. 9.
This has God done: for they saw evidently, It was his work.

The head, You were then made: and head, Angle, as You were before (for Caput
Anguli, I hold a King to be, though he have but one Kingdom) but Caput
Trianguli, Head now of three, even of a whole Triangle. So their titles were
dashed, their plots disappointed, and all their devises, Esa. 29. 16.
as the Potters clay. Yours it was of right, and God has brought You to it: So
it is; and our eyes do see it, and our hearts joy in it, and our tongues
bless God for it; and here we are, this day, with all praise and thanks to
acknowledge it, that so it is. It is a part of this Days duty, that so we
should acknowledge it, and give him thanks for it, that brought it to pass.

And, may I not further, put you in mind, of making yet? And it is not
impertinent neither: to this day, especially. For, after the first making or
placing: look, how many after attempts are made, to unmake or displace the
Head-stone again; so many times, as it is heaued at, to that end; and those
attempts defeated: so many new placings, so many new makings, are we to reckon
of (...) was made Head, not only when Soul, and ^^ner sought to put Him down,
and were put down themselves; which was, before he came to the Crown: but,
even after he had it, and had worn it long, when Absalon and Sheba refused Him
(being their head,) and cried, 2. Sam. 20. 1.
No part in David, and so, sought to set him besides the Throne*

And builders there wanted not in that design, Absalon had 15. 31.
Achitophel, and 9. 30.
Amasa* two as principal Master Builders, as then were any. When God brought
David back to his Seat again, and delivered Him from them, that sought to
remove Him from it: He did as good, as place Him in it, anew. David himself
says so, before (at the 13. Verse.) He (...) shrewdly lifted at, and ready to
turn over: but God stayed him, and set him right, in his Seat again^. And in
very deed, the Verse next before (the 21.) where he says, God had heard him,
and was become his deliverer, make the writers to think* this Psalm was
endited rather for this Second* then for His first placing.

Second making, we may well remember: and we cannot do it better, then upon
this day. This day (as we shall see) has an interest in it. That, since Your
setting in the Seat of this Kingdom, Some there were, builders one would have
taken them to be, if he had seen them, with their tools in their hands, as
if they had been to have laid some foundation; where their meaning was, to
undermine; and to cast down foundations and all: yea to have made a right
Stone of you, and blown you up among the Stones, you, and yours, without any
more ado.

And, Master builders they had amongst Seal to hinder it: But disclose it,
that they might not, for fear of breaking a Seal: there was a Seal for that.
And thus did they aedificare ad gehennam: edify their followers to Helward, to
set them forward and Acts. 1. 25.
send them to their own place. That Day, which God That Day, did GOD make you
Caput trianguli, the second time. That Day, that He brought you back (if not
from death it self, yet) from deaths door, from the very gates of
destruction, That Day, was a very Easter day to You, though it were in
November. Heb. 11. 19.
And (...) after a sort, a very Resurrection: as very a resurrection, as
Isaacks was, which the Apostle there speaks of: That Day, the destroying
Angel, (I am sure) past over You, and so, it was truly the Feast of the
Passover. Fit therefore to be remembered this day, Hic est Dies, This is the
day of the Passover, This is Easter day, the day of the Resurrection.

But, to return to the first making of all. By the true course of the year,
this Month being the very Month, this day being the very day, of that, of the
first laying this Head-stone: We are, (as before in Christo Domino, so again
here) in Christo Domini, to prosecute it with David's cry of Hosanna, and
Benedictus: and with Zacharies acclamation, of Grace, Grace unto it, even to
this Head-stone. Grace, in His eyes that so made you: And again, Grace, in
their eyes and hearts to whom he so made you: But above all, the Grace of all
Graces, that you may make him ever your (...), your stone of 1. Sam. 7. 12.
chief trust, and your 20. 19.
mark of highest regard in al^ your Counsels and purposes, that so made you:
And, seek to reduce the disiecta latera, the sides and walls flyen off, of
this great Building (for which the world it self was built) His Church; and
reduce them to one Angle: the greatest service, that can be done him, on earth.

And so: he that, this day made You the Head: so make You, and so keep You
long, and many days. He that refused, them that refused You, (refused them,
with reprobation,) still may he so do, toties quoties, to their continual
confusion; That, the Head over the Triangle; and the Triangle under the Head,
may many years stand fast, and flourish; in all peace, plenty and prosperity,
health, honor, and happiness. And, after all: He that has crowned You
here, with two Crowns, already; crowned You also with the third, of Glory,
and Immortali^ie, in his Heavenly Kingdom*

I have now done. Only I would move one thing, and it shall agree well, with
that has been said of the Cornerstone: and it shall serve to further our
duty of thanks, and be a good closing up of the whole. Many ways, was Christ
our blessed Savior a Cornerstone: among others, especially in this, says St.
Hieron. Quando agnum, cum pane coniunxit, ^iniens vnum, inchoans alterum,
vtrumque perficiens in semetipso. One chief Corner point of his, was: when he
joined, the Lamb of the Passover, and the Bread of the Eucharist: ending the
one, and beginning the other, recapitulating both Lamb and bread into himself:
making that Sacrament (by the very institution of it) to be, as it were, the
very Cornerstone of both the Testaments.

No act then, more fit for this Feast, (the Feast of the Passover,) then, that
act, which is it self the passage over, from the old Testament to the new. No
way better, to express our thanks, for this Cornerstone, then by the holy
Eucharist, which it self is, the Cornerstone, of the Law, and the Gospel.

this verse and Text, set before our eyes: wherein, two poor Elements of no
great value in themselves, but, that they might well be refused: are exalted
by God, to the estate of a Divine Mystery, even of the highest Mystery in the
Church of Christ.

resurrection there is in them, and therefore fit for the day of the
Resurrection, (as ever in Christ's Church, Easter day, has pleaded a special
property in them) Sown, as it were, 1. Cor. 15. 43.
in weakness and dishonor: and (after they be consecrated,) rising again, in
honor and power.

And that, a great honor and power: not only Cornerstone: first, uniting us
to Christ the Head, whereby we grow into one frame of Building, into one body
mystical, with Him. And again, uniting us also, as living stones, or lively
members, omnes in idipsum, one to another, and altogether in one, by mutual
love and charity. Ioh. 6. 56
Qui comedit de hoc Pane, and bibit de hoc Calice, manet in me, and ego in
illo. He that eats of this Bread, and drinks of this Cup, abides in me,
and I in him. There is our Corner with Him. 1. Cor. 10. 17.
And again, Vnum corpus omnes sumus, qui de vno Pane participamus. All we,
that partake one Bread, or Cup, grow all, into one Body mystical. There is
our Corner, either with other. By the same means, expressing our thanks for
it, and by the same, possessing our selves of it; sealing up both ways our
duty to GOD, for making CHRIST the LORD, our greatest and chiefest: and for
making his Anointed this day, under him, either in their several degrees, our
(...) our chief, or head Cornerstone. For which, together with all other his
benefits, but specially, as the time calls to us, for these two, [ Christ's
rysing] and [ Our Sovereigns raising to his Royal place,] render we, as we
are bound, to GOD the FATHER, etc.


