

THE WONDERFVLL VVOORKMANSHIP OF THE WORLD:

wherein is contained an excellent discourse of Christian natural Philosophy,
concerning the form, knowledge, and use of all things created: specially
gathered out of the Fountains of holy Scripture, by Lambertus Danaeus: and now
Englished, by T. T.

Imprinted at London for Andrew Maunsell, in Paul's Churchyard at the sign of
the Parret. 1578.

To the right honorable Sir Francis walsingham Knight, one of the principal
Secretaries to the Queens Majesty, and of her most honorable privy Counsel.
I Have bin desirous, Right honorable, and that of long time, with many other
to whom your most godly disposition has bin often reported, not only to
congratulate, but also to honor the same with some poor testimony of mine
unfeigned good will And now occasion sumdeale favorably grauntyng unto my
request, hope has also pricked me forevvarde to mine attempt, that no study
or traueill vvherby the true knowledge and fear of God is to be learned, can
come vnvvelcome, or seem dishonorable unto your honor. If noneother examples,
yet the undoubted word of life vvorthily Englished and set forth under your
Right Honorable protection, does sufficiently prove: beesides your most
fervent zeal in embracing true Religion, and aduauncing the sincere
worshipping of Almighty God, by means whereof your fame is spread far among
foreign nations. Thus am I not discouraged, but rather hartened, semblably
with duty to offer this my simple travel unto your honor, being the
worthy work of the learned Divine M. Lambert Danaeus of Geneua, concerning
Christian Natural Philosophy, and the vvonderfull vvoorkemanship of this
world. A work doubtless of great auaill, to the knowledge of God in his
creatures. A work of vvonderfull efficacy, to set forth the honor and
glory of God the Creator. A work of merueilous force to stir up men's
minds to the contemplation of true knowledge and learning, which is
gathered out of the holy Scriptures only. A vvoork of rare effect to declare
the praise of God the vvoorkman, and to establishe assured faith, and true
religion. To be short, a work so far surpassing all other works of
like argument, written either by Christian or Heathen Philosophers, as the
proofs and auctorities used by them both be differing: the one being founded
upon the assured ground of Gods word and holy Scriptures, the other
established upon the fickle foundation of man's reason and judgment. This
work therefore, Right Honorable, so profitable, so pleasant, so necessary,
so full of variety of Godly matter, so substancially grounded by vvarrant of
Scriptures, so surely confirmed by authority of Doctors and Fathers, in most
humble and duetifull manner I present unto your honor. Hoping, that as in the
Latin it has bin generally liked of the learned, so likewise you will not
mislike that it now go abroad in the English tongue under the protection of
your Right Honorable name, by him who rests your honors most humble at
commandment:

Thomas Twyne.

To the right honorable, the Lord Friderike of Nachod, Lord of Danouiz and of
Beske, etc. his very good Lord and Patron.
Ancient and noble is the question concerning the original of the world, and
first beeginning of all things, Right honorable Baron, which has not only
long time and much troubled the wits of the Philosophers, but also of
Christians, and in the end by reason of the diverse judgments of men has
rested so doubtful, that many grave writers could not tell what to determine
therein. For among the Christians, Origin, in his books of the beginnings
(which books above the residue most men do judge to be his worthy woork) and
they which after him wrote the Examera, are so divided in opinions, that
nothing may seem certainly to be gathered out of their writings. But among
the Philosophers, men ignorant of God and his truth, there is far more
diversity of opinions, so that concerning this matter a man may better gheasse
than understand by their doctrine what he has to follow. Now touching these
Philosophers, perhaps there is no such cause to wonder at their blindness in so
great a matter, and that they were so deeply drowned in darkness, forasmuch as
they were destitute of Gods word, that is to say, the true light of knowledge.
But among Christians such disoorde and disagreement cannot with like
vprightnes be excused, for that there is but one way of the truth, whereof
they might have found most assured grounds in the word of God, if they had
had regard thereto. What was tha^ the cause of so great disagreement among the
Christians concerning this matter? Forsooth it was the Heathen Philosophy,
with the precepts whereof they were not only then instructed and infected, but
many also of them being stuffed, be witched and deceived therewith, (in
respect that they ascribed mostvnto this art) would grant and admit nothing
which they supposed to be repugnant to the principles thereof. And this
mischief did not only continue in the time of our forefathers, and the first
age of the Church, which many having learned in the schools of the
Philosophers even in their tender years, and afterward being converted to the
faith of Christ, could not easily lay down and change those opinions which
they had received before, and of long time most studiously embraced. Yea now,
since the name of the Philosophers is extinguished, it cannot be plucked out
of the minds of many that would be called Christians: so deeply forsooth the
admiration and reverence of this Heathen Philosophy is imprinted within the
minds of some men, and of so great a force it is, as the Proverb fayeth, in
tender youth, and as it were with the Mothers milk, to accustom a man's self
unto error, as it were unto the precepts of truth. And therefore I do not
doubt, but that this my work concerning Christian Natural Philosophy, that
is to say, how to refourme the opinions of the Philosophers by the word of
God, shall be reproved of many, and therefore has need of some noble and great
personage, that is welbecloued among all estastes, to be patron unto it, by
whose authority being defended, and favor commended, it may safely and
acceptably come abroad into men's hands to be read. You only, right honorable,
are he unto whose name therefore I dedicate the same, how far soever I be
disioyned from you by distance of place. And as for your honor, there wants
nothing in you, that may suffice to discomfite the force of all enemies, if so
be that you can well like of this woork, and do accept it unto your
protection. For if it might please you to oppose that same your most singular
and true Christian godliness of mind, against the old and stubburne crew of
heathen men concerning this part of Philosophy, in respect that you do
syncerely and purely woorshippe God by direction of his undoubted word,
weighyng and examinyng every thing according to that as a most certain rule:
there is no man that doubts but that there is more credit to be given unto
your judgment, than to all the rabble of those blind Philosophers. But as
touching other, I will object your great honor and authority for a shield
beetweene them and me for my defense, which authority of yours being by you
purchased in the sight of all men by means of infinite benefits by you
beestowed upon the Churches of Boheme and Morauia, is far and wide renouined
in the mouths of all people, and known unto those nations that know not your
person: which also is easily able by the excellency thereof to put to silence
the slanderous tongues of certain light persons. And whereas all men which
know you, do grant and confess, that I do not falsely attribute these
praises unto you, then your most noble Sun, and no less heir to your
virtues, than successor to your goods, John George, proves and declares
the same. Who both of his own natural inclination, and by the instruction
and diligence of the right learned and godly man Vuenceslaus Lauanus his
scholemaster, being the express pattern and image of your virtue, how great
the same virtues be in you, may be by every man easily perceived. And truly,
all we that live here, profess that we are mutch beeholden unto you for
this cause, for that you have given us a pleadge of your singular love
toward us, namely your Sun, at whose hands we expect all good things. And
in that you would have this notable testimony of the agreement of your Churches
with ours in the true and ancient faith, to be extant in the sight of all
men: which that it may continually so remain, and never be broken of through
any contention amongst men, we cease not to make our prayers to Almighty
God. And that same desire which is in you to deserve well of all nations be
they never so far of, is not only a singular virtue, but also most worthy of
a Christian, which above all other is most familiar and proper unto you. And
although you do far excel in nobility of birthe, as descendyng from the
most ancient house of the Nachosij (whom I suppose to be the only remainders
of the most renoumed stock of the Narisci) and also of the most stout and
martial family of the Moranians (who are successors to the people called
Marcomanni, that were sumtyme fearful enemies to the Romans, yea when they
were in their most florishyng state) among whom you enjoy very large
possessions: notwithstanding your great humanity and gentleness which is unto
you a peculiare virtue, shall far more excellently advance your name among al
ages. And as touching my book, I had rather it were known by the effect it
self, than by my report, what and how great the commodity thereof is. How
beeit this will I say in few words, that therein I have briefly comprehended
whatsoever I could read to have binne disputed by the ancient and holy
Fathers, either against the Philosophers, or Heretics: and that I have not
intermingled any question which they have not handled before: neither have
omitted any thing which seemed might stand in steed toward the
understanding of their writings. Wherein I will plainly confess unto you, I
have not so mutch studied to satisfy the humor of curious persons, as to
advance the commodity of studious young men. And therefore I hope it will come
to pass, that your honors most noble Sun the Lord John, with other young
Princes, being moved by your authority, will follow such kinds of studies
which they shall perceive to be acceptable, and that woorthily, unto so
great estates. Fare you well.

Written the Calendes of December. 1575. Your honors most assured, and ever
ready: Lambert Danaeus, Frenchman.

AN EXCELLENT DISCOVRSE OF CHRISTIAN NATURAL PHILOSOPHY.
The first Chapter. What natural Philosophy is, and how many kinds there
be thereof.
S. WHat is natural Philosophy?


M. It is the true knowledge or discourse concerning the Creation and
distinction of all this whole world with the parts thereof, of the causes by
which it was so wrought, and likewise of the effects which follow thereon,
apperteinyng to the praise of God the Creator.


S. From whence do you gather this your definition?


M. Specially out of two places of holy scripture, whereof the first is the.
30. chapt. and 4. verse of the Proverbs. The other the first chapter of
Genesis, in which those four poinctes are briefly recited, unto which also
that place may be added which is in the 7. Chapter and 17. and 18. verses,
where it is evidently declared, that such things be handled in this Science.


S. Is this knowledge termed by this name only, or is it called by some other
also?


M. Yea truly. For out of S. Paul it may be called The knowledge of Gods
works, Romans the 1. chap. and 20. verse. Out of the Epistle to the Hebrews,
The knowledge ofseculare things. And finally we may as fitly and
conveniently call it The knowledge of things created, as natural Philosophy
was so called Of the searchyng of Nature, if so be that the use of that name
had bin familiar, and received by the Greeks and Latins.


S. Why then, do you call it natural Philosophy, which is a word used by
the Heathen Philosophers?


M. For two causes. The first is, for that Christians ought not to be so
scrupulous, or rather superstitious, that they should be afeard to use such
common words and names as the Heathen do, for somuche as with them we do
use and enjoy the self same Su^, air, earth, water, light, meats, and Cities.
Neither does the Scripture it self refuse that word as unseemly or
monstrous, as appears in the 2. chapter and 3. verse to the Ephesians, and
the 1. Chapter and 5. verse of the second Epistle of S. Peter. Also the
ancient and Catholic fathers in every place, do term this knowledge of
things by the name of Natural Philosophy, as did Basile, Chrysostom,
Ambrose, Augustine in his Enchiridion to Laurence: Natural Philosophers,
says he, are they that search the nature of things. Secondly, that for as
much as this word, Nature, in the common use of the Greek tongue, is, for
the most part, applied to such things as do consiste, not of essence
only, of which sort GOD is, but are compounded with certain accidents
adioined, such as are all the things that we behold with our eyes, and
whereof this visible world consists: that knowledge seems most properly
to be termed natural Philosophy, which is busied in the handlyng of the
mixed, co^pou^ded, and material things, that it may be distinguished from
Divinity. Wherefore, Natural Philosophy, say they, is the knowledged of
Material and Isntrumental beginnings.


S. How many sorts are there of natural Philosophy?


M. Two: the one General, the other Particulare.


S. Which is the General part?


M. That which entreats of the General and most principal parts of the
world, with their original, nature, and causes: such are heaven and the
four elements, for that these, in respect of the other parts, are, as it
were, the first beeginnynges, and principles, and causes of their being and
compoundyng: And likewise that is the General part of natural Philosophy,
which shows us the general manner and order of preseruyng and increasyng of
all things, because it delivers unto us all things in general. And these
poinctes, for the more part, are comprehended in the first chapter of Genesis.


S. Which is then the Particulare part?


M. That which diligently sets down the peculiare natures, operations,
properties, and effects of every kind, which are severally distinguished in
these created and visible things, as for example: What is the Nature of a Man,
what of an Horse, what of every kind of living Creature, with the operations
also of Trees and Herbs. These things are partly contained in the rules of
Physic, and partly also in those treatises which by the Auctours thereof are
entitled by the names of Histories of living things, and of Plants, and such
like: certain parts whereof and sparks are found shinyng here and there
dispersed in holy Scripture, as it were beautiful precious stones. Howbeit
the whole history and general discourse of these things is not contained in
the Scripture: since that Salomons Books which were written copiously of the
Nature of all things, are, through the negligence of men, perished.


The second Chapter. Whether Natural Philosophy be meet for a Christian?
S. IS there any profit in Natural Philosophy?


M. Yea, manifold. But that I may not run over them all, for they are almost
infinite I will allege five only. The first is, that thereby we know God,
not only to be the Creator of all things, but also to be everlasting,
omnipotent, and merciful, etc. The second, that by it we learn the things
that are created, with their operations and natures. The third, for that
therein we see ourselves and perceive what we are, of what things and parts
we consist, and each part of ours, that is to say, what manner of thing our
Soul is, and what likewise is the state and condition of our body: which all
men do confess to be the best, profitabliest, and most excellent knowledge
of all other. The iiii. that wonderyng at in our minds, and beholding with our
eyes these works of God, so great, so many, so wonderful, being thereunto
helped by none other means than by this Art, we are with great zeal and
affection stirred up to set forth the won^derfull praises of God and to give
him thanks. Which thing happened also unto Galene, yea, although he were a
profane Philosopher, that after he had described the Nature of one of Gods
works, that is to say, of Man, and the parts of his body, he was
enforced, yea, almost against his will, to sing an Himne to God. Heerehence it
comes that such multitude of hymns, so many Epodes and songs of praise, so
many Psalms are written and celebrated. The v. that we understanding these
things, may easily and plainly expound, and freely enter into many places of
holy Scripture, which unto such as be ignorante of these matters, are not
only obscure, but also cannot possibly be attained unto, or by any means
understood. Wherefore S. Augustine writes, that Natural Philosophy is very
profitable and necessary for a christen divine. What shall I speak of the
singular pleasure which this knowledge brings unto ye mind, and of the
great commodities which it ministers unto the life of man?


S. How do you prove these things to be true?


M. Specially out of these places of holy scripture. The whole 104 Psalm. The
136. and 145. Psalm, and 10. verse. The 147. and 148. Psalms. Job the 12.
chapter and verse 8. 9. 10. and the 36. Chapter, and 24. 25. 26. verses. The
14. Chapter of the Acts, and 17. verse. The first Chapter to the Romans,
and 20. verse. Unto these moreover may be added the 7. Chapter of the book
of Wisdom, and 9. verse, with the next followyng: and likewise the 13.
Chapter and 1. verse, and the next followyng. Likewise the holy Fathers S.
Basil, S. Chrysostom, and S. Ambrose in their Exameron, or work of six
days doc teach the same thing: And moreover the holy and absolutely learned
father S. Augustine in his book of christian doctrine, and in the viii. book
of Gene. upon the letter, the viii. chapter.


S. But there be certain objections made, declaryng that the knowledge of
Natural Philosophy is not only unprofitable, but also unworthy for a
christian, yea, that it is hurtful, and dangerous for him.


M. Yea truly. And although many men have gathered sundry, yet all of the^
may be referred specially unto two kinds of arguments, which are alleged
against the knowledge of these things: whereof the first is framed ab
auctoritate, from authority. The second, a ratione and turpi, from reason and
unseemliness, or from a most hurtful consequent.


S. Declare them.


M. First, they gather sundry sentences, partly out of the Scriptures, and
partly out of the Ecclesiastical Fathers, out of which afterward they frame
their reasons, and make their conclusions.


S. Which be they?


M. Out of holy scripture this is specially alleged, which is written in the
Book of Ecclesiastes, or of the Preacher, the 1. Chapter, and 15. verse in
these words: I set my heart to seek and to find out with wisdom,
whatsoever thing is done under heaven. This evil exercise has GOD given to
the Sons of men, to occupy them selves therein Unto which they join that
saying of S. Paul the 1. to the Corinthians, the 1. Chapter, and 20. verse:
God has made foolish the wisdom of this world: with other such places
like unto these: which may easily be answered.


S. How I pray you?


M. Forsoothe, that that in the Book of the Preacher is not spoken absolutely,
but only in comparison of the true woorshippyng of God. Neither does Solomon
condemn or disprooue the true knowledge of the nature of things, which GOD
gave unto him as a great benefit of all other most surpassyng (for then
should he have bin of all men the most vnthankfullest man to God) and in
respect whereof, he was then greatly esteemed of by the Queen of Saba, and
other Princes near unto him. Howbeeit this knowledge of Natural Philosophy,
if it be compared with true Godliness, if with faith, if with the true fear
of GOD, if with inward regeneration of the mind, if with the knowledge of
everlasting life and salvation, surely in comparison of these things, it is
but a light busiyng of the mind, unfruitful, rather weariyng us, then
relieuyng or comfortyng our consciences. For it brings not the true
felicity, as faith to Godwardes does, although a man consume his whole
life in it, and as it were, tire his mind about it. And as touching the place
of S. Paul, I see not how it oppugneth the knowledge of Natural Philosophy,
seeing S. Paul condemns the wisdom of the world, not the wisdom
concerning the world, and things created. But that is called the wisdom of
the world, which is wholly ruled by the counsel and judgment of the sinful
and blind flesh, and thereupon reposeth it self: not that which discreetly
and as far as need requires, discourses of the causes of things.


S. But what allege they out of the writings of the fathers, to drive us from
this kind of ^^^die of Natural Philosophy?


M. It were an infinite thing to go about to report their sayings, but I will
only recite a few.


S. Rehearse them, I pray you.


M. Lactantius in his third book and viii. chapter, writes thus: What
felicity shall I atteine unto, if I know where Nilus rises, or whatsoever
the natural Philosophers do doat concerning heaven? yea, moreover there is no
certain knowledge of those things, but only opinion, which also is variable
according to the variety of men's wits. S. Augustine also is commended, who
in his fourth Book de Trinitate, of the Trinity, in the Preface writes thus:
That mind is more to be commended which knows it own infirmity, rather
than that, which not perceiuyng the same, searches after the motions of the
Planets, and the walls of the world, the foundations of the earth, and the
top of the heavens. And that I may not touch every thing, in his Book de
spiritu and anima, of the spirit and the soul, the 56. chapter, he plainly
also sets down the same.


S. Can you answer these aucthorities?


M. Yea.


S. How I pray you?


M. That these things are also spoken by the fathers in comparion, as it
appears out of the same place of S. Augustine, whom you erewhile commended.
For the Fathers reproved the disordered studies of men, which we see also now
a days to rest in many, and that in Christians: who conte^nyng the doctrine
of salvation and neglecting the study of the verity of the Gospel, which is
set for the in a simple style, convert themselves wholly unto these swellyng and
puffed Arts of Natural Philosophy, addietyng them selves unto them, and
openly preferryng the ambicious name of a natural Philosopher, before
Christian godliness, and Divinity. Wherefore, the Fathers, to the intent to
revoke men from this so great an error, have uttered much matter against
Natural Philosophers, and their Art, and their opinions, and that truly, as
have S. Basil, and S. Chrysostom in their Exameron, or woork of six days.
Howbeeit they do not condemn the true knowledge of those things, which
certain amongst them were very skillful in, and most perfect.


S. Which is the other argument, which you said was taken, a consequenti, of
the consequente, and alleged against natural Philosophy?


M. That truly which S. Basile recites to be alleged by slothful and idle
persons, thereby to color their filthy ignorance.


S. What is that?


M. That the wounderfull miracle of the creation of the world, is debased and
made vile, wherein notwithstanding the great power, majesty, and wisdom of
God appears and is laid before our eyes to be woorshipped: if we be able
to set it down in any art or Method, and if it may be said that so
great a mystery may be comprehended. For what other thing were that (say
they) than to feign our selves not only to be able to comprehend the works
of God, which doubtless are supernatural and Divine, but also to make us
judges, and as it were Censores thereof. And finally to make God, as it were, a
Grammarian, subject unto certain laws of Nature, and Art.


S. What answer you unto that?


M. Truly even that which in the same place, S. Basile the best learned amongst
the Greek writers, answers.


S. What says he?


M. That thereby, this miracle of God, which appears in the Creation of the
world, is more manifestly advanced, and by us more religiously adored, by
how much the more it is distinctly declared, whereby is set forth the greater
commodity and force thereof. And to the end yt you may understand this to be
true by another example, Gods decree concerning our salvation, is it not
commoly termed in the Scriptures, Gods secret and mystery? And verily it is
so, wherein the Majesty and Wisdom of GOD is proposed unto us, no less than
in the creation of the world: and yet notwithstanding Faith or the Gospel,
sets it forth to our view so plainly, so orderly, and distinctly, that
nothing can be more: Notwithstanding the worshippyng of God is nothing thereby
diminished in that we comprehend it by Art, and by a Theological Method,
but rather by so much the more better and ardently we praise GOD, by how much
the more commodiously and distinctly we atteine to the understanding of these
things. And to be short, faith it self through which God will be worshipped,
is not a certain ignorance or a confused imagination concerning God, but a
clear and res^^^te understanding of the mind, which directly answers unto
such questions as are demanded touching God, and his infinite mercy toward
mankind. Unknown things are undesired, as the old Proverb says. Wherefore,
whenas the History of the creation of the world is set forth by art, when the
virtues which God has given unto things are declared Gods: Miracle is not
diminished, but augme^ted. Neither do we set down these things, as though we
did profess that we would allege any other causes of these natural things,
besides the will and wisdom of GOD only: Or that through them we can
acknowledge or contain so much in our mind as is the power of God in
creating, and his goodness in preserving them. Or else as though we went about
to show, that our great and good God, the chief governor of all things,
were subject to any of our laws or decres: but only profitably to busy our
selves in setting forth of Gods works so far as we may be helped by art,
and as it were, through a glass which looks into this school of the nature
of things, to keep such as are less heedefull, in the noble contemplation of
them.


The third Chapter. From whence the knowledge of the General natural
Phylosophie is to be had most safely.
S. THese things I understand, proceed to the residue.


M. The next is, that we discuss from whence this knowledge is to be drawn
and taken, because in this point we disagree from certain, who suppose that it
may more safely and certainly be derived out of ye books of profane
Philosophers, tha^ the holy Scriptures: in that they say that it is not all
set forth in the Scripture, and if happily there be any part thereof
contained therein, it is confusedly handled, not by any art or order.


S. From whence then, do you judge, may the knowledge of natural Philosophy
most conveniently be taken?


M. Uerily of that part which before we termed general natural Philosophy
the knowledge is chiefly to be learned out of holy Scripture. And of that
which we called Particular out of the works of Physicians, or of others
which have written the histories of Plants, and of lyuinge things.


S. How prove you that?


M. First I suppose, this is agreed upon by all men of sound judgment, that
every workman can best and truliest talk and dispute in his own Art, and that
he is rather to be believed therein than any other. But what woorkmans
woorkmanship, think you, is this world? Is it any others than Gods only? so
that we ought to believe none rather than him, who in his word teaches us
the manner and order of framinge his work, that is to say, the world. To be
short, who knows, sees, and understands more truly the causes of all
things, their properties, effects, the manner of their being, and the times
when first they began, then he who is the maker of them all, and the
perpetual governor of them all? who being GOD, and sense he him self
tells these things, what man will at any time be so mad, but to think
that he is rather to be harkened unto in this respect and all other writers
to be neglected? Truly we, as also all other Philosophers, howsoever
surpassing in wit, and abounding in leisure, what soever diligence they
employed in study, yet could never neither we nor they attain unto certain
obscure slender sparks of natural Philosophy. And whatsoever we define
concerning these matters without the word of God, it is so uncertain,
doubtful, variable, and contrary to it self, and many times so contrary to
the truth that in the end we are ashamed that we either learned so, or
taught so: which may appear to be true, if it were but only out of Plutarchus
book De Placitis Philosophorum, Of the opinions of Philosophers: whereas that
excellent learned man, and great Philosopher shows yt never two of them
agreed in the knowledge of the things yt are created.


S. Can you confirm the truth of your opinion, by the auchoritie of Gods
word, to wit, that this knowledge may well and safely be learned out of the
holy scriptures?


M. Yeas verily.


S. Recite them I pray you.


M. The first testimony, is that which is written evidently in the epistle to
the Hebrews in these words: Through Faith we understand, that the world was
made by the word of God. Wherefore we understand these things by Faith. If
by Faith, then by the holy scripture, for there can be no faith without the
scripture. And therefore we must certainly conclude, that the true and
certain knowledge concerning these matters, is declared unto us by the holy
scripture. The second authority is the 1. chapter of Genesis. For Moses, who
at the commandment and appointment of God wrote that history of all other
most excellent and wounderfull, of the beginning of the world, and creation
of all things, is either a vain fellow, or a lier, if the knowledge of
natural Philosophy be not contained in the holy Scripture. For what other
thing does he in that book, than briefly, howbeit truly and orderly, set
down the original of things, and their virtues, natures, and effects, that
is to say, Natural Philosophy? The third is, a place in the Proverbs the
viii. Chapter, and the 20. verse, and the next folowinge, where it is said,
that all things were created by the wisdom of God, and afterward as they
were created, so are they preserved. The fourth authority, is alleged out of
the 42. Chapter, and 17. verse of Ecclesiast. This wisdom has God given to
his Saints, (says he,) that they might recoumpt all his miracles and
works, and search them all, yea hell it self etc. whereunto we may add that
which is written in the vii. chapter of the book of Wisdoms the 22. verse,
and the next following. Finally, let us hear the most holy Martyr of God, and
good Father Irenaeus, who in his second book, and 2. Chapter says thus: To
whom therefore shall we give more credit concerning the framing of the world:
to those that we spoke of before so iangling in folly and inconstancy, or to
the Disciples of the Lord, and the servant and Prophet of God Moses, who first
revealed the creation of the world? The self same thing S. Basell, and S.
Ambrose, and S. Chrysostom in the prefaces of their Exameron or Six days
work, do with one consent, and plainly confirm, so that whosoever shall deney
that the knowledge of Natural Philosophy may not truly and commod^ously be
learned out of holy scripture, gainsaith the sacred word of GOD, and openly
repugneth against the learned Fathers. In conclusion, hearken to ^ertullian,
who in the 46. chapter of his Apologet: does truly and plainly pronounce, that
the sacred word of God, which is most ancient, was as it were, the treasury
and stoarehouse unto all later wisdom. From thence, says he, the Philosophers
have quenched the thirst of their wits. But as men that were over riotous in
the study only of glory and eloquence, if they found any thing in holy
scripture, when they had digested it according to the purpose of their
curiosity, they converted it to their own works.


S. Do they that are of the contrary opinion, bring nothing against this?


M. Yeas, two arguments especially.


S. What be they?


M. This is the first. That the end of every art ought to be distinguished,
and that Natural Philosophy is one thing, and Divinity another: whereof this
last is contained in holy write, but the other is not so.


S. Is that consequent, and assertion true?


M. No verily.


S. How so?


M. For that, although they gather that truly, that arts ought to be
distinguished, and that Divinity, which contains the promises of
everlasting life, teaching also the way thereunto, and the causes thereof,
ought to be separated from Natural Philosophy, which entreats of the
framinge of this visible world, and the natures of all things in the same:
yet do they not say truly, in denyinge that the order of the creation of this
world, the sundry kinds of things, their natures, and manifold sorts are
taught, distinguished, and orderly set down in holy Scripture. All these
things are copiously declared there, which are the peculiar subject and matter
of the Art of Natural Philosophy. Wherefore Natural Philosophy is
comprehended in holy scripture. The same also you may learn by another
example: are not Divinity and the moral part of Philosophy, both of them as
they differ in kind discerned in the holy scriptures? And yet who is so rasbe
and folishe, that he dare deny that the Ethike or moral Philosophy, yea and
that most truly and generally is delivered unto us in holy scripture?
wherefore the distinct ends of Arts and treatises, are no impediment, but
that the General Natural Philosophy, and also Divinity are contained in the
holy Scriptures, for so much as Natural Philosophic is, as it were a part of
Divinity, and an handmaide^ unto the same. For it is a notable mean to know
God by: which thing also S, Ambrose confesses with me. What shall I say
more? The Heathen Philosophers them selves, when they dispute of the world,
and the creation of the parts thereof, and when they entreat of the nature of
things, they say that they play the Divines, and enter into discourse of
Divinity, as Aristotle speaks in his book de mundo of the world: so that
it is no marvel that we have judged that the true and Christian Divinity is
partly busied also in matter of Natural Philosophy, and the settinge forth
thereof, and that for that cause also the holy Scripture is in part occupied
in settinge forth of these things, forasmuch as this knowledge also makes to
the advancement of gods glory. For in these visible things the power,
wisdom, and eternity of God is to be seen lively.


S. What is the other argument of theirs, that are of the contrary opinion?


M. This forsooth, that those things which Moses has written are most
plainly and simply set down, and in such kind of style which is fitted to
our capacity and applied to the weakness of man's sense, and not truly and
exactly expressed according to the truth of things: and finally that Moses
does neither thoroughly, neither subtily search out or set down the things
themselves, and their natures: wherefore, they conclude, that the true,
distinct, and perfect knowledge of the natural part, is other whence to be
drawn, and learned.


S. What answer you unto these things?


M. Uerily, I confess, yt these matters concerning Natural Philosophy, are
not gloriously and in a filed style set forth by Moses although he were the
best learned man that ever lived, but rather in a bare and simple kind of
writing, striped out of all ornament, as it were out of apparel, whereby that
which he writes may the more easily be understood. But, as it is to be
granted that he spoke simply, so can it not be proved that he spoke or
wrote lyingly, falsely, and ignorantly of those things. It is one thing
therefore, to acknowledge that Moses style is bare and simple, which kind of
vtterau^ce is meet for the truth: and another thing to say that he is a false
man and a liar: which no man can affirm, but whosoever is of a corrupt conscience.
Wherefore simply, but truly: barely, but rightly: commonly, but purely, does
he deliver unto us those things which he writes, concerning the world, of
the principal parts thereof, of the causes and effects of things, to be
believed, holden, and taught among men. Uerily, I confess, that Moses
applied himself to ye capacity of our se^ses: Howbeit, I deney yt which they
affirm, yt therefore he did not roue at the truth of ye matter, or had not
regard unto it: for it was his purpose to set down those things in wr^tinge
easily, barely, and truly.


S. But some are of opinion, that all those things which he wrote in the first
chapter of Genesis, are to be interpreted allegorically. So neither do they
think that those six days are the space of time, neither that the woman in
deed was made of Adams ribbe, neither that all the residue are so to be taken
as Moses words do pretend, and sownde. Which opinion if it be true, what
shall be sure or certain in all that whole chapter, and such like writings
of other Prophets, as apperteining to the knowledge of Natural Philosophy,
or that may teach us the same?


M. You say well. Indeed some have benne of that opinion, which
notwithstanding S. Augustine confuteth in his 1. book in the Proheme, and also
in the 8. book and 2. chapter de Genesiad Literam, of Genesis upon the letter.
S. Peter likewise in the 3. chapter, and 5. verse of his second Epistle: and
in the epistle to the Hebrews the 11. chapter, and 3. verse, does openly
impungne this error of the Allegorists, affirminge that those things which
Moses has reported concerning the creation of the world are spoken naturally,
and plainly: and not allegorically, or figuratively.


S. And what at the length, do you conclude of all these things, which you
have recited?


M. That forsooth, which S. Augustine concludes in his 5. book, and 8.
chapter of Genesis. That those things which Moses wrote, are true, although they
can be established by no other reasons. For if a man will dispute to prove that
these things are false, or he himself can say no certentie concerning the
estate and government of creatures: or if he say not true, will he suppose
these things to be false in that he himself understands them not? Who
will believe that Aristotle or Plato, did know any thing concerning the
creation of the world and the causes of things, whereof Moses was ignorant?
who first received the things which he wrote, by most secret revelation from
God. Secondly, who was well learned in all liberal arts specially in the
knowledge of Natural Philosophy, and Physic (which two arts were at that
time specially had in price among the Egyptians) as it appears in ye
Scripture, Acts the 7. chap. and 22. verse. And to conclude, forasmuch as
those yt were ye chiefest Philosophers among the Grecians, traueyled into
Egypt to the intent to learn Natural Philosophy, as histories do rport of
Plato and Pithageras. And most certain it is, (as Diogenes Laertius writes,
in his first book de vitis Philosophorum, of the lives of the Philosophers)
that all that part of Philosophy which entreats of the nature of things,
was derived to the Grecians from strange nations, and from the Syrians, that is
to say, from the Jews. Shall we say the^, against ye assured faith of ye
scripture that any one of the chiefest Philosophers, to wit, Plato or
Aristotle, which were heathen men, were called by GOD to counsel when he
went to framinge and creatinge of the world, that they should know more than
Moses the servant of GOD, whom God himself taught, and showed unto him such
things as he should commit to writing to the behoof of Posterity, and
especially for the instruction of his most dearly beeloued Church? Surely
this cannot be thaught, muchlesse spoken, without notorious blasphemy against
God himself. But rather as S. Augustine teaches in his 5. book and third
Chapter de Genesiad Literam, of Genesis upon the letter: that in that Moses
speaks so plainly, he does it by the assured counsel and judgment of the
holy Ghost: to the intent that, by the hight of the things he may terrify
the proud, by the deapth he may hold them attentive, by the truth he may
feed the great ones, and by his affability he may nourishe the little ones.


The fourth Chapter. The difference beetween Christian and heathen Natural
Philosophy.
S. WHat difference therefore, is there between Moses and Aristotle: y^ is to say,
between Christian and Heathen Natural Philosophers, in this kind of learning?


M. Uery great: which notwithstanding may be especially perceived in three
points.


S. Which be they?


M. The first is, in the end of this knowledge, which they both do
respect and follow.


S. Declare the same.


M. The Christian Natural Philosophers, which entreat of the things that
are created, do refer the sum of their disputation to this end, that our
great and good God, who is the auctour, Father, and creator of them all, may
be known, praised, and extolled: and finally woorshipped the more ardently,
and more feared. But Aristotle and the Heathen Natural Philosophers, do so
dispute of the nature of things, that they may wholly stick unto these
things themselves, as it were, unto certain low and mean degrees, and an
uncertain force, which is respected after their Creation, and which they
term Nature: they do not arise higher, neither do they ascend by means of
these, as it were by a Ladder, unto GOD the Creator of them. Wherefore,
through great blindness of mind, they do place second and only
isntrumental causes, in steed of true and first causes. And as touching the
principal causes, which are God, and his Commandments and precepts, they
altogether let them pass. Wherefore they make the cause of the thing, of that
which they call the thing it self: whereby it cummeth to pass, that this
most excellent knowledge, among them is full of vain ostentation of the
mind, of strife, and of contention: as for the glory of God, it neither
sets it forth, neither once touches it, so that very many of those Natural
Philosophers, do at the length beecome indeed, very naturalles, that is too
say, fleshely men, and Athiestes, not knowing, or regardyng God.


S. But the Italian Philosophers, which have handled matters of natural
Philosophy, were called also Divines, such as were all the Pithagorians for
the most part, who made mention of God the creator. Anaxagoras beegan his
disputation concerning the nature of things, from a mind that disposes all
things. That golden Book de Mundo of the world, which whether it be
Aristotle's, which I do not think: or Nicholaus the Philosophers who lived
before Plutarche: or Alexander Aphrodisiensis of later time: or whosoever
others it was, surely he joined a treatice concerning God, together with his
discourse of natural things.


M. You safe very well. For this was an ancient custom among the first
Philosophers, which wrote also of Natural Philosophy in the Greek tongue,
as having learned the same of the Egyptians, or rather of the Syrians, as
Laertius says, that is to say, the Hebrews, or of their Scholars: but the
Philosophers which afterward ensued, how much they despised, and laughed at
this kind and manner of handelyng matters apperteinyng to Natural Philosophy,
and how far they have expelled it out of the Schools of Natural
Philosophers, you are not ignorant. Aristotle's crew at this present bears the
greatest swaie, and they that would have themselves most truly too be termed
by the name of natural Philosophers, neither do they themselves in their
disputations of Natural Philosophy, entreat of GOD the Creator, neither
think that he ought too be entreated of. So that now, the Natural
Philosophy of the Stoike Philosophers has gotten the upper hand in the
Schools: and the Italians is rejected: which Stoike Philosophers, have
ascribed the chief and principal causes of engendryng of all things, unto
Nature, which is to be found in every thing, and too things created, as
unto Heaven, the Sun, and the Elements.


S. What other difference is there beetween Christian natural Philosophers,
and Aristotelians?


M. In declaryng the causes themselves, whose knoweledge and handlyng does
much beelong unto Natural Philosophy.


S. By what means?


M. First, the Christian Philosophers do both allege such causes as are
true, and also far other than they do. For, who will doubt, but that they
allege such as be true, since they receive them and learn them out of the
fountain of Truth, that is to say, the word of God? And that they make
far other causes, the disputations and discourses of them both do
sufficiently declare. For we profess, teach, and acknowledge that God
himself is the first, and efficient cause of al things: moreover, we have a
special respect unto his voice and commandment as a most mighty cause,
whereby a certain peculiare force is given unto every thing which is the
chiefest and most principal cause of all other, that we can possibly think
of or imagine in our mind. Thirdely, we make for one cause, that force and
virtue which GOD has allotted and ingraffed in all things: howbeit the same to
be only a second and an instrumental cause, and not woorking of it self, as
Esaias teaches in ye 44. chapter, the 3. and 4. verse: not principally but
depending wholly upon another, to wit y^ power and commandment of GOD, without
which God woorketh the same effects, when him pleases, which he is wont to
do by means thereof. So, when a Hen sits upon eggs out of which
afterward chicken are hatched, what is she other than Gods bare instrument,
forasmuch as she frames neither the heart, nor head, nor feet of her chick
within the shell, wherein it is contained, but only keeps it, and warmeth
it? So, when a woman is with child, does she fashion her babe with her own
hands, which afterward she brings forth into the world? No surely: but
is only, as it were, the receiver, nourisher, and keeper of the seed which
the man casts forth into her. For God, and the power and sownd of these
words, Increase ye, and multiplye, and fill the earth which as yet are in
perpetual force, do frame the infant within the woman, facion it, and bring
it forth. The Philosophers do not acknowledge this cause. For they hold
opinion, that this force and virtue which was given unto things after yt they
were created, is the first cause of all things. So that they place ye effected
cause in steed of the efficient, and the isntrumental, for the agent: which is
a very foul error in a Natural Philosopher. Again, in that they do not
submit the capacity of man's wit, which in deed is very simple, unto the
unsearchable wisdom of GOD, but rather make God subject to them and to their
capacity, they devise and dream of the causes of all things and their
original, according to the imagination of their own brain, likeninge GOD
himself the incomprehensible woorkeman, unto some Smith or Carpenter: and also
that the matter whereof he made all things was before prepared and made ready
unto his hand, from everlasting: and at the length, that the form joins it
self unto this matter, (for according to their judgment, this matter is rude
and without form) and so they conclude, that this matter and form is the
first principle of natural things, which comparison of most unlike things
together, S. Augustine woorthily laugheth at, and reiceteth, which as it
thinks nothing honorably of God, so does it also repugne plainly against
the truth of the matter, and the ereation of this world.


S. Which is the third difference, beetweene the Heathen and Christian
Natural Philosophers?


M. That consists in the mean, manner, and order of teachinge, or handlinge
the Art.


S. I pray you declare it.


M. The Christian and godly men, such as were the Prophets of God, although
they diversely recite these visible things, according to the argument of the
matter which they handle, proceeding sometime from the highest to the lowest,
and at another time from the lowest to ye highest, as it appears in ye Psalm.
104. and 136. and in the Proverbs, the 8. chapter, verse 23. 24. and in ye
next folowinge: the 4. of Esdras, the 6. chapter, verse 38. and the next
folowinge: in the song of the three children, verse 53. and the next
folowinge: yet do they evermore acknowledge, that that is the true order and
mean of the creation of all things, which Moses has discribed. But the
Philosophers, imagininge of the beeginninge of this world according to their
own inventions, can by no means agree among themselves, whence to begin
their disputation, concerning natural things. Some of them therefore, beegin
it from a certain first matter, which they bring in amongst us: others from
the four Elements only: othersome from a confusion, and the distinction
thereof: certain, from Heaven: and some from a bottomless deapth always
boylinge forth: to be short, look how many heads so many meanings, and
in this point also every several sect of Philosophers defends something,
wherein they dissente not only from other, but also many times from sundry of
their own profession.


The fifth Chapter. What, and how great the certentie is, of the knowledge of
Natural Philosophy.
S. Hitherto now concerning these matters, discourse I pray you also of some
other thing.


M. Of what?


S. What is the certentie, and surenes of this knowledge.


M. Uerily, there is not one only mean of defininge, and determininge of all
the parts thereof. For those things which in this art and knowledge we learn
out of Gods word, are most sure and most true, as grounded upon a most
certain foundation, which, whosoever will gainsay, we must deal no farther with
him, but give him quite over. But whatsoever other things are recited touching
Natural Philosophy, they are not so sure and firm, because they be only
established by man's sense, and reason: which two things, are no undoubted, and
assured grounds. For man's reason is many times: and his senses are most times
deceived. Wherefore, they do think well, who will have the foundation of
that knowledge of Natural Philosophy which is not learned out of Gods word,
chiefly to rest upon these two grounds, to wit, man's conjecture, and
historical experience: in which two points also, as S. Augustine writes in
the 9. chapter of his Enchiridion, Natural Philosophers do suppose more, than
they know.


S. That part therefore of Natural Philosophy, which is taught without
warrant of Gods word, is it vain and altogether uncertain: and is it, as
some suppose to be contemned?


M. No, not so.


S. Why?


M. Because GOD has not given those two parts of judgment unto men in vain:
to wit, reason of the mind, and sense of the body, as we be taught in the
12. Chapter of Job, the 12 verse, and 34. chapter, and 3. verse: the judgment
of both which, although it be not most certain in all things, and
suffeciently subtle and expacte: yet is it not lyinge, and deceived in
althinges. So that all handlinge of matters, which is established and confirmed
upon those twain, ought not to be condemned as altogether vain and false.
For who will say that the knowledge of so many notable things and arts is
worthily to be despised, which GOD, besides the Scripture of his word, has
given unto men, yea unto Ethnickes? such as Plato, Aristotle, Galene, and many
other Philosophers, both ancient, and of later times, have found out, and
taught. Whosoever despises these, despises the gifts of GOD, Wherewith sometime
godly men also have been endued and blessed by God, unto the notable testimony
of Gods goodness toward us, and miracle of man's nature such as was Moses
himself, and Job, and those four which talked with him, Solomon the king,
Ethan the Ezraelite, Heman, Calcol, Dorda, Jonathan uncle to David, all whom
the Scripture commends and namely makes mention of the^, to the intent we
should imitate them. Acts the 7. Chapter, verse 22. First of the Kings, the
4. Chapter, verse 30. and 31. Psalm. 88. and 89. First of the Cronacles the
27. Chap. and verse 32.


The vi. Chapter. The ends of the knowledge of Natural Philosophy.
S. I Have heard enough concerning the certentie of this science: declare
now what ends, and measure we ought to respect in that knowledge.


M. These two ought to be the ends. The first is, that according to S.
Paul's advertisement, whatsoever shall be disputed of in this kind of
science, all may be referred to the only glory, and knowledge of our great
and good God. For that is the chiefest and truest end of human Philosophy,
that through it, we may attain to the understanding of the truth, and the
nature of GOD, like as also Plutarch writes. The second is, that we follow
not, and affirm uncertain things in the steed of certain. For since to
err and be deceived is always shameful, then it is most shameful to err
in those things which oftentimes are of great importance, and in which a man
may honestly and sittingly enough for him, confess that he is ignorant.
Wherefore, in my judgment, S Augustine said very well in his books de Genesiad
Literam, upon Genesis according to the letter, There be many things, says
he, of this universal creature which we know not, either because they be
higher in heaven than our understanding is able to attain unto them, or
perhaps are in uninhabitable regions of the earth: or lie hidden very low in the
bottom of the deapthes. And this rasshnes in pronouncinge certainly of
uncertain things, has ministered occasion that Natural Philosophers have
been mocked by many, from which we ought to abstain as from a most strong
poison of human ambition. Wherefore, in this Art, especially curiosity is to
be avoided, and sobriety embraced. Let us acknowledge our selves to be far
inferior to GOD, and that we are not able to find out the reason and cause of
all things that he has made, as says S. Irenaeus in his 2. book, 43. and
45. Chapters.


The vii. Chapter. The subject of the knowledge of Natural Philosophy, is a
creature visible and that can be seen: and first how far and in what
respect the world is a certain universality unto them all.
S. I Have already learned what natural Philosophy is, and how manifold, from
whence also it is to be learned, likewise what is the truth and certentie of
this knowledge, and what be the ends thereof: I pray you wade now more
deeply into the matter, and declare unto me what is the obiecte of this
science, about which it is busied.


M. I will do so, and that willingly.


S. Then tell me, what is the matter of this art and knowledge?


M. A creature, and not every one, but that only which may be seen, that
is to say, the same which may be perceived by some one, or by all our bodily
senses.


S. How prove you this?


M. Especially by two places of holy Scripture, whereof the first is in ye 1.
chapter to the Romans, and 20. verse, where Natural things are called
visible creatures, and are distinguished from those things which in the same
place are termed, unvisible. The other place is in the Epistle to the
Hebrews, the 11. chapter, and 3. verse, where the same things are called,
such as may be seen. Although that which is written in the book of
wisdom the 7. chapter, the 17. 18. and 19. verses, and the 13 chapter, and 2.
verse, may expound and confirm the same, if it be joined to the places above
recited.


S. Declare these things more at large.


M. This therefore it is, which I say. Not every thing which subsisteth, and
which the Greeks do call, his sumthing, does apperteine to the handlynge
of natural Philosophy. For God subsisteth, who has not only some being,
but the same also most true and an absolut substance: and farther, I would
add also, if I may be so bold so to speak, a nature also, (for what shall
let me to say with S. Peter in his 2. Epistle, the 1 chapit. and 4. verse.
The divine nature, or, The nature of God?) the declaration and discourse
concerning which, is to be sought by an other Art, and which is of more
price and dignity than this is. For God is the Creator and maker of things,
and not a creature and made. And the force and nature of creatures, is only
considered of in this science and knowledge.


S. Yea, but is the knowledge of every creature considered of herein?


M. No, not so. For Angels are a kind of creatures, but they belong not unto
natural Philosophers, although, it be commonly said by all men that they have
nature, and this kind of phrase also is usually found among the Fathers, to
wit, The nature of Angels. Of which nature therefore Moses entreated not in all
that whole first chapter of Genesis, although in the same he have most briefly
comprehended the whole matter of Natural Philosophy.


S. But in the same first chapter he has entreated of darnesse, which thing
surely can not be seen, and yet it belongs to this science.


M. You judge well for indeed it belongs to the setting forth of the nature
of things, but by accident, as they call it, for neither the means of
gatheringe together the light, neither of other the first things could be
plainly declared, unless they were set forth by their contraries, or
priuations. For darkness, as it is a mere privation, does not properly of it
self beelonge to this art: but so far forth as it possesses an use and
place in the nature of things, and has declared the power of GOD to be the
greater in the creation of this world, it is very well mentioned of by Moses.
Of all which matter, we will speak more hereafter.


S. Gather therefore now together such things as you would, and what you
have proved.


M. Since then, neither God, neither the Angels, do appertain to the Natural
Philosophers, and to this our present disputation: it remains, that the
matter of this knowledge and science be said properly to be that creature
which may be seen, and has a place as S. Augustine speaks, and has a
body, and is subject unto our senses, all, or some of them.


S. But the Philosophers, almost all of them, are of another opinion: For they
think that ye subject and matter of this Art, is that thing which is mouable
in that respect that it is Moveable, not in respect that it is created, or
subject unto our sight.


M. It is true. But therein they err doubly. The first error is, that
forasmuch as the signification of Motion is very large, according to their
own opinion, that it may also be extended to the Angels, since many times
also they move from place to place at Gods commandment, and indeed are
fallen from their first original, (having suffered no small change not
only of their place, but also of their nature:) surely the disputation
concerning them were a part and that proper of the science of Natural
Philosophy, which notwithstanding they do very stoutly, and that also verily
and in deed dency. And this is their first error. The second is that the
knowledge of Natural Philosophy does not beelonge unto the things which we
see, if so be any of them be immovable, as things that neither perish nor
are changed. Which, since it has happened unto man for sin after his creation
and perfect nature: truly, according to their opinion neither should man
before he had sinned, for the most part of him have been a subject of natural
Philosophy, neither should the treaty of him have appertayned to Natural
Philosophy. Which thing, how untrue it is, it appears out of the saying of
S. Paul: who will have althings that may be seen with our eyes, to belong to
this our knowledge, and to the science of Natural Philosophy, and to be a
ready and apt mean and degree, to the knowledge of GOD. It appears also by
the same place, that the nature of man, while he was pure and had not yet
sinned, is by Moses reckoned among Natural things. It appears moreover,
out of sundry Psalms, that Man and the nature of man, as it was first created
by God is most truly numbered among the kinds of Natural things: as in the
8. and 104. and 139. Psalms. the 13. 15. and 16. verses: and also in the 148.
Psalm. To conclude, they that make The mouable body to be the subject of
this science, what other thing go they about, but to teach that there be two
subjects of one Art, to wit, the body, and his motion? when as indeed one
art ought to have but one subject.


S. Why then do Natural Philosophers define and determine those things which
they call Natural by Motion especially?


M. First, because al their knowledge is gathered, as they term it, from that
which is latter, not from that which is first. For things then began to be
known when they were once extant, and by means of man's transgression were
made mortal, that is to say, were by GOD appointed unto misery and
destruction. For when they were destitute of Gods word and light, they
perceived not nor saw, what manner ones they were first created. Wherefore,
when they began to be busied in these natural things which are now corrupted,
they perceived their great and perpetual chaunges, ebbinge and flowinge, and
inconstancy in abidinge in one estate, and they judged that Natural things
should be supposed of according to that their own condition. Moreover,
seeing that Motion and change may most easily and generally be noted in all
these things which we see, and which are in this world: it was an easy
matter to distinguish and determine Natural things by their motion. There is
motion truly in all natural things, and also in other which are not
Natural, as in Angels: where by it cummeth to pass, that Natural things
cannot properly be separated and discerned from things not Natural by Motion.


S. Why do you call a thing, Natural, because of it own nature it may be
seen and perceived?


M. Because, forasmuch as God has created two chief kinds of things to his
own glory, as S. Augustine teaches very often, the one is visible things,
the other is invisible, which is to be seen in the 1. chapter of Genesis,
Moses in his treatice of Natural Philosophy, has comprehended and handled
but one kind, to wit, of visible things only, and those things only does
the Scripture acknowledge for the Natural things. Wherefore Natural things
are to be defined, as we have said, in that they be visible. As for
invisible things, and such as cannot be seen, whether they move or move not,
they are revoked and reduced to another kind of Art as things that are not
Natural. And to confirm this my saying, I could allege the aucthorities
almost infinite of the ancient Fathers, S. Basile. S. Chrysostom S. Ambrose.
S. Augustine, but what should that need in so evident a matter?


S. I understand these things: and as I perceive, this is your judgment and
opinion, that all those things are properly the matter and subject of the Art
of Natural Philosophy, which are the creatures of GOD, and subject to our
senses, and may be beeholden, or seen.


M. You say true.


S. Now therefore, define every one of these, to the end that this whole
disputation may proceed in order and method.


M. I will do so.


S. What is a creature?


M. It is every thing which is neither of it self, neither has been ever,
but was once made, yea and that by GOD. Thus do the learned say, and that
truly in my judgment.


S. But S. Paul to the Romans, the 8. Chapter, and 20. verse, seems to
have taught otherwise, to wite, that a creature is that thing which is subject
to vanity, corruption, and servitude by reason of sin: which deffinition
also S. Hilarious follows in his book of the Trinity.


M. You remember it well. Howbeit S. Paul does not in that place define what
a creature is generally, and of it self, but what it is now after sin, and
so far forth as was the^ necessary for the argument which he had in hand.
Wherefore, he had respect then unto one kind of creatures only: Neither does
Saint Paul define a creature by it own true nature, but only by the quality
and accident which indeed is in it, and which happened unto things after they
were created, that is to say, after they were once made creaturs, but as
having now lost their full and perfect nature in part, by reason of man's
transgression. Which also may be answered unto him, whosoever shall object against
us the saying of S. Augustine in his book against Felicianus, the 7. chap. A
creature is the substance of every corruptible thing, made by the will of God,
out of that which is not yet, or was not sumtime, so far as the nature of the
thing will permit.


S. You think then, that it may otherwise be defined more commodiously and
more truly, generally what a creature is.


M. Yea verily: For neither should the blessed Angels be truly called
creatures, neither we our selves, (if so be that Adam had continued in his
first state of integrity) have been truly termed creatures, if the latter
definitions were retained: for we should have been incorruptible, and
without all vanity. Finally, the flesh of our Lord Jesus Christ should not
rightly be called a creature, as it is oftentimes called by S. Augustine, and
the truth it self bears record, that it was a creature. For of it own
self it might have been void of all infirmity, because it was free from
sin and corruption, neither was it subject to death for it own sin:
although notwithstanding we confess, that Christ died in the fleash.
Wherefore, whosoever stubburnly impugneth y^ which we say, shall fall into all
manner of absurdities. So that this which we have already alleged, and which
we follow in this place, is the most true and ample definition of this word,
creature.


S. Now then by your definition, is that to be called a creature, I mean the
essence of the things themselves, and also their virtues and properties,
together with their accidents? as for example, in a man there is a certain
essence, which consists in the body and soul: there is in him also a virtue
and property whereby he reasons, woorketh, feels, moves and walks.
There are moreover certain accidents which are existinge and inseparable
parts in every particulare man, which do distinguish and separate the same
man, making him to differ from other particulare persons of the same kind,
which in the Schools are called individual Conditions. These are also
necessary and existing parts unto the same particulare persons whereby they
live, as place, time, color of the face, stature of the body, with other such
like: which by reason of their essence, Logicians call accidents. Wherefore I
demand this question of you, whether you co^prise under the name of a
creature, those three kinds of things, to wit, the essence of the thing, the
property, and accident, which, as you see, are distince one from another?


M. Yea truly. For whatsoever was by GOD first ingraffed within things, or by
course of nature is joined unto them, or whatsoever was by him created in this
great universality of all things, whether it be a substance, or called an
accident, I term a creature. Although Moses have only or specially handled
and entreated of those kinds of things which are substances, and so in deed
are called, which only I confess principally and of them selves to belong to
a Natural Philosopher. And whatsoever has not proceeded from him, but is made
by the art of man, or by him wrought, or by his mischeiuous or perverse will
added, that I call not a creature of GOD, no not a creature at all. For there
can be no creature, but that which is made by God, who is the only creator.

Wherefore, the handie works of men, their devises and inventions, which
sometime are very excellent, shall not beelong unto this art: no not y^ sin
of man, but by accident, and in respect that by means thereof there is a great
alteration wrought in the first and pure nature of things, which at this
present appears in all things, but specially in man, who is the most
beutifull work of God.


S. How do the Grecians term a creature?


M. They call a creature Ktisis: although the word among the Grecians
signifies not only the thing that is created, but many times also the very
woorkinge of the creator, and sometimes likewise the condition of the thing
created as it now is, and as we see it.


S. These things I understand. But what mean you by this word visible,
when you say a visible creature was the subject of Natural Philosophy?


M. Not that only which may be comprehended by the sense of the eyes, as are
substance, light, and color, (although this word visible seem properly to
signify the same,) but what so ever else may be known and perceived by any
other sense of the body, as by feelinge, hearing, smellinge, and tastinge: as
smell, sound, sweet, or sour, etc. And all bodily things are especially
termed visible, for that our sight is ye most certain, most excellent, and
most noble of all the senses of our body: and for that also the actions of
every lyuinge thing, and the arguments whereby we perceive them to be alive,
are chiefly gathered by ye sense of seeinge, as moving, and breathinge.
Finally, that bodily things are more exactly discerned by the eye, than by
tastinge or hearing: so that to say, that a visible creature is the matter
and subject of Natural Philosophy, is as much as to mean, that we would have
every creature which is sensible of it own nature, to be the true and proper
object thereof: whether the same be bodies, as are the substaunces of things:
or whether they be not bodies, as are the virtues, properties, qualities,
motions and actions, which unto all corporal things by nature and their first
creation and beeginning either cleave unto them without, or are engraffed in
them within. All these kinds are, as I have said, natural things, and
created by God.


S. I Understa^d these things. But tell me now, by how many manner of means
does a Christian Natural Philosopher handle and consider of these creatures?


M. Only two ways: the first, to wit, as they are all generally contained in
one, and all comprehended as it were, within the compass of one body which
incloseth them all, which is called the world. Or else every one in his kind,
which are sundry, wherein the creatures are distincted, and separated one from
another. Which the particular History of the creation in the six days,
sets down unto us.


S. How prove you that?


M. In that the Scripture many times recites unto us all things created and
visible, under the name of the world: as in Isay the 38. chapter, and 11.
verse: John the 1. chapter, the 9. verse; and the 9. chap. the 39. verse. And
many times the Scripture recites them distinctly and severally, thereby the
more to set forth the wounderfull wisdom of God, as in the 104. and 147.
Plalmes, and 8. verse, and the 149. Psalm. Wherefore we must also entreat of
them after both these manners, that such things as may be gathered and
learned out of these creatures apperteinyng to the knowledge of God, and
setting forth of his glory, according as the Scripture teaches, may be by
us abundantly understood, so that at the length we may beecome perfect
Christian natural Philosophers.


S. With which of these two Methodes must we first beegin?


M. Even with that treatice, which proposes unto us all things generally
comprehended in that one body, which is called the world.


S. And why with that?


M. Because, that way of teaching is more general, and more easy. For whole
things are better known than their parts: for a man shall with more ease
beehold an whole house, than be able too distinguishe or comprehend in his
mind every part thereof. And moreover, that which shall be said concerning
the whole world, will open unto us the way and entrance too the handling of the
particular kinds of things. For it shall be as a foundation to the residue
that shall ensue.


The viii. Chapter. What the world is.
S. DIscourse then of the world.


M. I will.


S. What is the world?


M. The signification of the world is diverse and manifold, as the
Philosophers do teach us, as Laertius in his 7. book, and Plutarche in his
first book of the Philosophers opinions, which signification we must first
distinguishe, least being deceived by the ambiguitie of the word, either we
do mock the reader in this whole disputation, or else deceive him.


S. How many significations therefore are there of this word, world?


M. Three special. First, the world is taken for the creatures themselves,
whereof this whole visible frame and work consists. So is it taken in John
the first chapter, the 10. verse: so likewise in the 2. Epistle of S. Peter,
the 3. chap. and 6. verse. And moreover, for the corrupt and miserable
condition of this world, which falling unto all these things by means of
man's transgression, now hangs upon them: whereby there is a most manifest
confusion, and a great disorder in all things. So says S. Ihon in the 2. chap.
and 16. verse: and likewise the 5. Chapter, and 19. verse. Finally, it is taken
for one part of the world, and that the most noble and excellent, to wit, for
men only, and many times for all men, as to the Romans the 5. chapter, and
12. verse: Ihon the 3. chapter, the 16. verse: and oftentimes for the faithful
and regenerat, as in the 1. Epistle of S. Ihon the 2. chapter, and 2. verse.
and at another time also for the reprobate and vnbeleeuinge, as in the 1.
Epistle to the Corinthians, the 1. chapter. and 21. verse: and S. Ihon the 14.
chapter, the 17. and 22. verses. Otherwise also if a man would call the
definition of this word world, unto certain chapters and special points,
we may say, that under the name of the world, sumtime the place it self,
sumtime the substance of the things, sumtime the men as the principal part
thereof, and sumtime the corruption of the same part, that is to say, of men,
is to be understood.


S. But the world was by the Latins called Mundus, for the most beutifull
order of all things therein coteined, like as it was also termed by the
Grecians, K^smo^, of the cumlynesse thereof: which reason of the name, truly
is repugnant unto that signification, whereby you say that confusion of
things and vice is sumtime signified by the name of the world.


M. Uerily, you have alleged a true definition of this word world, from
which notwithstanding afterward the use both of the Greek and Latin tongue
has deflected. For men understood that rebellion, corruption, and disorder
was generally in all things and parts of the world, they called the same by
the name of the world, because it is inseperably distributed throughout the
whole, and ingraffed, as it were, within the marrowe of every singular thing.
By which means, men are many times termed to be the common destiny and
misery of men. The Hebrews in their tongue call the world Gola (which word
the Apostles do translate Everlasting, as to the Hebrews the 11. chapter, and
3. verse: the 1. chapter, and 2. verse, to the Ephesians the 2. chapter, and 2.
verse: not of eternity, as if the world had been always and from
everlasting, but rather of the fixed and certain order thereof, which the
Lord God has established in it after that he had created the things that are
in it, which we behold to be in it and to continue in it even unto this
day: as are the risinge and settinge of the Sun, and the change and
alteration of the four quarters of the year. And this shall endure so long
as this state of things shall continue, as it appears in the 8. chapter of
Genesis, the 22. verse: the 9. chapter, the 9. or 10. verse: and Job the 26.
chapter, the 10. verse: and Ecclesiast the 8. chapter, and 11. verse. Wherefore,
when this age and figure of this world is past, this order of things shall
perish also: the 1* to the Corinthians the 7. chapter, and 30. verse: the 1.
Epistle of S. Peter the 3 chapter the 4. and 7. verses, but it shall continue
until that time. For the Hebrews themselves do plainle signify, that this
world shall one day have an end, calling the same world by the name of
Chadel. Psalm 39. verse 5.


S. By which definition therefore, or by which of those three significations,
must the world be taken in this disputation?


M. By the first.


S. What is the world?


M. The world is not only a certain comprehensyon and heapinge together of
all these visible things, but also a most orderly and wise distinction,
ordained by God in every kind and space, whereof he made heaven and earth to
be the extreme parts.


S. Whence do you prove this your definition?


M. First, out of the very same places of the scripture, by which I proved
that all things visible and which can be seen, are the matter of this Art:
and also by that ye scripture, for the most part, uses to term the most
excellently and beutifully ordered frame of this whole world, by the name of
the world as in Genesis the 24. Chapter, and 22. verse: the 2. Chapter the 4.
verse: Matthew the 11. Chapter, the 25. verse: and in other places also almost
infinite.


S. Why have you comprehended both these points in your definition, to wit,
that the world is not only a general comprehe^sion of al things together, but
also of them severally distinguished?


M. Because, if we will conceive in our mind confusedly all things whereof
this world consists, and is diforderly heaped together, or lyinge one upon an
other not yet disposed into any order, but as it were ye rubbishe of some house
that were fallen down, or as it were stuff prepared to build some house
withal: such an heap of things can not yet be called a world. It is rather
that which the Grecians, both Poets and others, termed by the name of Chaos:
the Hebrews call the same Bohu, that is to say, a disordered heap, from which
some think the word Chaos was derived, by a small change, to wit of the
letter B. into C. as though the Grecians, being disdainful hearers, and
unskillful Scholars, had understood the word rather after that manner: Hereof
that phrase and manner of speaking in the Latin toungue is known, which
Verrius the learned Grammarian has noted, that in the old time the ancient
people called the world Cohum, and from thence this word, in^h^are, to
beeginne and leave imperfect, was derived. But by the Apostle, in the Epistle
to the Hebrews, the 3. chapter, and 4. verse, the world is called an household,
and compared to a family well and orderly disposed: neither is it a disordered
heap in deed.


The. ix. Chapter. Whether the world may truly and Christianly be called an
universality.
S. BUt in that this world is by some Latin Writers called vniuersitas, an
universality, and by the Grecians all and the whole, do you allow of it?


M. Although I know, that so proud a name as that is, does scarce please well
some very well learned and godly men: notwithstanding, forasmuch as grave
auctours, and also Ecclesiastical Fathers and writers have used that word,
truly I judge that it is not to be rejected. For S. Augustine in his
Enchirid. the 10. chapt. and in the 8. book, and 25. chapt. of Genesis
according to the Letter: and Tertullian also in some place: and Ireneus
likewise in the 2. book and 12. is not afeard to use this word for the world:
that I may not also commend unto you in this respect S. Ambrose, and S.
Basil, whose opinions perhaps may be confirmed out of the 3. chap. and 4.
verse of the E. pistle to the Hebrews. For although, besides this visible
world, there be other creatures of God, and those also many very excellent and
beutifull, as are the Angels, and the seats of the Saints, and blessed men:
and this name, universality, seems to be an arrogant and bold name: yet all
men know in what sense they call it so, and how we ought to understand it, to
wit, that the world is an universality, not of all Gods creatures, but of
those only that can be seen, and are corporal.


S. Hitherto concerning the name of the world: now let us come to the thing it
self.


M. Yes, for so the order of the disputation requires.


The. x. Chapter. Whether the world, and the things that are contained
therein, be sound bodies, or certain shadows only.
S. WHat things therefore, may there be taught out of holy Scripture
concerning the world?


M. Many things truly, and those all most worthy too be known, which
apperteine too the praise and admiration of God the Creator: whereof some
declare the nature of the world, and othersome the causes of it.


S. Which be they that declare the nature of the world, and of this whole
universality?


M. Those questions for the most part, which are diversely tossed, either by
Heretics, or by Philosophers.


S. Which is the first of them?


M. Whether this world, and the things therein contained be substances, that
is to say, certain sound bodies, and natures truly and in deed subsisting:
or whether they be certain shadows only, and the representations and images
of things.


S. How should they be so?


M. Because not only Plato will have all things that are here, to be the
images of certain ideae or patterns, and the shadows only of true natures
which are in heaven, and remain in Gods mind: but also the Valentinian
heretics contend, that whatsoever things are in this world, are only the
mere imagies of their Eternities, and representations, and transitory
shadows of them. In confirmation of which their opinion, they allege the
testimony of S. Paul, the 1. Epistle, the 7. chap. and 31. verse, to the
Corinthians. The figure of this world (says he) passes away: as though they
were but vain shows, and no sound bodies whatsoever things we beeholde here
with our eyes, what manner thing that was which the Poet described in these
words:

And (but his learned guide instruct him did, to let go by
Those flittering tender fourmes, and not to touch those shapes that fly,
Which nothing bin but life, and substance none, but likeness thin)
He would with them have fought, and did in vain to beat beegin.

S. Can you answer unto this?


M. Yea.


S. How I pray you?


M. First, as touching Plato, let us bid him farewell, for that he is not
only an Academike, and doubtful of mind, and uncertain in every thing: but
also an Ethnike, and nothing beelonging unto us Christians: for the things
that are without beelong not unto us, as S. Paul says. But as touching the
Valentinians, who would be called Christians, they are sufficiently confuted,
and most sharply reproved by S. Ireneus in the 2. book, and 7. chap. of his
work which he wroat against heresies. But what absurdities and
inconveniences do follow that opinion, mark. For they must needs confess
that those things, these heavenly ideae and Patterns, whereof, by their
Doctrine, these earthly things are shadows, too be bodies, which is an
absurd thing. Neither can a bodily thing be an image of things yt are mere
spiritual. Moreover, all this whole most beutifull work of GOD, which is
called the world, shall be a fantasy, and a mere dream, and not that thing
which we suppose it to be: which is blasphemous. Also to se, handle, and
feel, shall be nothing else, but to be deceived, and to be mocked, and after
the manner of mad and drunken men too be sick and to dream: and this which
we call sumthing, shall be nothing. The meats which we eat shall be
imaginations: the men with whom we be conversant, shadows the earth which
we go upon, a vanishing shadow, not a sound body, and an element. And
finally, Christ himself, who was made like unto us, was an imaginary man
only, and not a very man in deed, and therefore his passion imaginary also. And
by what meaues might the madness of the Mar^i^nites be better called out of
Hell again? Yea, the case should stand otherwise than has the old Proverb,
to wit, that the life of man is a stage play, and the world the Theater.


S. What answer you to S. Paul?


M. That he does not hold with the Valentinians. Neither does S. Paul
speak of the things themselves and their nature, what manner it is: but only
of the state and condition of them how transitory and uncertain it is, that
we should make no account of it.


S. How do you prove your opinion to be true?


M. Beesydes the great absurdity of these things which we have before
declared, experience it self confirms the truth: add here unto also which
makes plainly for the confirmation of mine opinion, the saying of S. Peter, in
the 2. Epistle of S. Peter, the 3. Chap. the 10. and 12. verse: and Psalm 102.
the 25. and 26. verse. And to be short, all those places of holy Scripture in
which the Lord witnesses that he founded the earth, and created all
things: and not that he has cast before our eyes vain representations, and
empty shadows of things, to deceive us with all.


The xi. Chapter. Whether there be one world only, or many.
S. THis I understand, discourse now of such things as next are wount to be
moved concerning the world.


M. That is this, whether there be many worlds, or but one only?


S. Have there been some of opinion that there be many worlds?


M. Yea truly. And in this point they are of two opinions.


S. Declare them.


M. Some think that there be many, and those of sundry kinds. Others also,
that there are many, but all of them of one nature.


S. What mean those first; which think that the worlds are of sundry kinds?


M. They make two sorts of worlds, whereof the one is intelligible, Ideall,
or as a pattern, which indeed subsisteth, but it is reside^t above this
world: the other is earthly and figurative, which God has created according to
the representation and image of that spiritual and ideall world, which
subsisteth also, and it is this world which we mortal men do inhabit.


S. Do some say thus?


M. Plainly they affirm it. And those not only profane* Philosophers, as
Plato, Philo Iudeus, and Plu tarch in his book of the Moons face: but also
grave men, and some among the Christian writers not to be contemned.


S. Is their opinion true?


M. No verily. For the Scripture in no place makes mention of this ideall
world, as they call it: and they that are of that opinion, they speak to
childishly, I will not say reprochfully, of GOD, as if he were an ignorant and
an unskillful young woorkman, that could do nothing unless he hadan example
or pattern laid before him, and that he could devise on nothing, nor think
upon any thing in his mind, nor understand any thing without a form laid
before his eyes. All which, how well they agree with the omnipotency of God,
and his incomprehensible wisdom, let them see, for I cannot see. Finally,
where, and in what place at the length this spiritual world is, and how it
subsisteth, whether it be in Gods mind, as one substance in another* Surely,
it can not so be. For GOD is a most simple nature, which receives and
contains none other thing then it self: but if indeed it were so, whether
were it as an accident, and a certain fourmyng, or a fantasy and fiction of
Gods mind? Truly it cannot be so neither. For there salleth no such accident
upon God, who in that he sees the things that are present, he gathers not
in his mind the fourmes and representations of things that are object unto
him: when he thinks and meditateth, he discourses not from one thing to
another: when he woorketh and makes somewhat, he does not consider of it,
and examine it according too some pattern which he has conceived in his
mind* to the end he would not err.


S. Howbeit, the Lord commanded Moses, that he should do all thing accordong
to the example and pattern which was showed him in the Mount, as in Exodus the
25. chap. and 40. verse: and in the Epistle to the Hebrews the 8. chapter and
5. verse.


M. First, if I list, I may make exception, that in that place are handled
heavenly things only and not things appertaining to natural Philosophy. Then
again, there is difference between God the most wise creator, and Moses a
creature and a man, subject unto the same blindness and infirmity that other
men were. Wherefore, to theintent he might well execute that which he was
commanded to do, surely he had need of such an example, or pattern. This
pattern also which the Lord showed him in the Mount, did not indeed subsist,
nor was a substanciall thing, as I am of opinion: but it was such a
representation and image, such as were the images of many things to come,
which were afterward by God revealed to the Prophets, and before that, unto
Abraham and the Patriarchs.


S. They that defend that there be many worlds of one kind, what do they say?


M. This for sooth, that like as we inhabit this world, so others inhabit
other worlds, in which is also an other earth like unto ours, and other
heavens, and another Sun, and a Moon, and all other things in them as in
ours. Wherefore, some of them suppose that there are an infinite number of
worlds, some more, some fewer. Among whom are rekoned the followers of the
Philosophers Epicurus, and Democritus.


S. Are there in deed many worlds?


M. Fie upon this infinite or multitude of worlds. There is one and no more:
although S. Jerome out of a certain Epistle of Clements disputes of the same
in his Commentaries upon the Epistle of S. Paul to the Ephesians, the 2.
chapter, and 2. verse.


S. Tell me why you judge we should think so?


M. First, for asmutch as when the holy Scripture does diligently reckon up
the special visible works of God, wherein his majesty and omnipotency may
easilye be perceived, he makes mention of this one world only, and not of
any other. Which if there had bine many, doubtless he would have made
mention of them. For that poinct had made very mutch to the setting forth of
Gods glory, and power. Moreover, what is their state, order, condition, fall,
constancy, Savior and Jesus: what likewise is their life everlasting, and
from whence comes the salvation of this second or third world, it is no where
declared, neither in what sort these other worlds were made and created: but
al these things are expressed concerning this one only. Wherefore, it must
needs be, either that those worlds were made by some other God, or that they
came of themselves, both which opinions are plainly blasphemous. Or if they
be created by the same God by which this was which we dwell in, why does
the Scripture speak nothing of it? Surely there can be no probable reason
alleged of so envious and dangerous silence. And therefore it came to pass,
that the ancient fathers in fore time did very well think and gather that
there is but one God, because there is but one world, and contrariwise that
there is but one world, because there is but one God. Moreover, all this
framing of many and sundry worlds, how foolish and childishe is it? For why
should God make many worlds, since he might comprehend althing more
commodiouslie in one, and the same being of so great receite, which he meant
to comprehend in those diverse and sundry worlds? But, as it is commonly and
truly said, God and Nature make nothing in vain, and that is vainlye and
rashlye done by more things which may be done by fewer. For admit that GOD
had created more in number, those worlds should differ in number only, and
not in kind or likeness. What need he then to create one manner of thing so
often? To conclude, when the self same Scripture oftentimes adds the Greek
article (...), when it speaks of the world, the authority of S. John in the
1. chap. and 10. verse witnesses, that there are not many, but one only, and
that a certain one. For the article which is joined unto it, does signify a
certain and sure thing. But if we grant that there be many worlds, even
by the very same reason we must confess, that they are in number infinite. I
let pass those absurdities which notwithstanding do necessarily follow, to
wit, that never almost we should have any Eclipses of the Sun or Moon. Yea,
we should never have night, since one Sun or another of one of the other
worlds, should either rise unto us when ours goes down, or else should shine
in the mids of Heaven, when ours is shadowed, and in the Eclipse.


S. But why did not God make many worlds?


M. Truly, not by reason of any impotencie, or lack of power: since that he
is omnipotente. Not that his senses were exhausted in the framinge of so huge a
mole, or his strength weried: for he made althinge with his word only, as it
appears in the 33. Psalm. Not also that it happened so for want of matter,
as the Peripatetikes suppose, for that all the matter that was prepared was
spent in making of the body of so great a frame. For he that could first
make this so great a world of nothing, could, if he had lusted, have
prepared matter for him self to make infinite other worlds of. But this is
only the cause that there were not many worlds made, because God would not:
for he made whatsoever he would, Psalm 115. and 3. verse. But why he would
not, it may be, the cause is not known to us, notwithstanding it cannot be
an unjust cause: he himself saw that this world was an argument great
enough unto us, to set forth the commendation and renoume of his wonderful
mercy and justice, who knows all thing: and therefore he created this one
only.


The xii. Chapter. Whether this world be finite.
S. BUT is this world finite, as some do dispute?


M. It is not only one, but it is also finite, and has bounds.


S. How prove you that?


M. Because that is finite, whose extreme parts may plainly and perfectly
be showed, but the Scripture has appointed heaven and earth to be the
extreme parts and ends of this world, whereof Heaven is the farthest, and
the earth the nearest, as it appears in the 20 chap. of Exo. and 11. verse:
and Genesis the 2. chapter and 2. verse, and also in other places. Wherefore,
truly it cannot be doubted, but that it is finite. Moreover, what difference
should there be noted to be beetweene the Creator and the Creature, if, as
he is infinite, and without measure, the creature also should be infinite,
diffuse, and without measure. Finally, there should be two infinites
appointed, which by no means can be indeed, or be defended.


The xiii. Chapter. whether this world be sphericall and round.
S. I Remember althinges which you have hitherto confirmed, to wit, that this
world is substantial, not a shadow: that it is one, not many: and finally,
that it is a certain finite mass and comprehension and not infinite: and
thereunto add also the residue.


M, First, this is wount to be demanded, what is the form of this world,
and specially of this body, with in the compass whereof all these things are
contained: for that some will have it to be sphericall or round, as
Aristotle: othersome of the facion and likeness of the figure Icosaidron
rownde compassinge with a great many of Angles or Corners here and there in
the top, as Plato: Others, plain and flat, like a skin stretched forth
abroode, as S. Basil: others give it other forms, and those also diverse, as
the Greek writer Cleomides reports in his title of ye contemplation of
circles.


S. Is there any of those opinions true?


M. God he knows. We, who in no place of his word do read these matters
plainly determined (unless parhaps some man will alleag that which is written
in Job the 22. Chapter, and 14. verse: and there is mention also made of the
sphere of the earth in Isay the 40. chapter and 22. verse: and in S. James the
3. chapter and 6. verse, to the end he might prove that this world, and
also the outmost heaven, are round like a circle or a wheel) do oftentimes
fall and are drawn into contrary opinions. Uerily, that the world is round,
it seems unto me much the more probable, by that which is written, as I have
said in Job the the 20. chapter, and 14. verse: and in Eccles. the 24.
chapter, and 8. verse: both for that it is the most beutifull and widest form
of all other, by which it was needful that a compass which should conteyne
in the bosom thereof so many things, should be framed: also for that the
principal, and as it were the parts of the whole in respect of this world
as are heaven, water, and earth, are by our senses themselves perceived to be
sphericall and round, unto which it is credible that the compass of the
whole world is semblable. How be it, I can affirm nothing certainly
thereof, since although we admit that this part which is nearest unto us, and
the lowermost of the circu^ference of the high heaven which we beehold, and
which enuironeth althing, be bending, holow, and round notwithstanding it may
be imagined that the farthermoste and highermoste part of the same
circu^ference is of some other form: and I know there be some that have said
that the vttermoste and farthermost part of heaven is shaped like a bell.


S. But in the Prophecic of Isay, it is said, that heaven is stretched forth,
and sprede abroad like a web or a curteine, Isay the 40. chapter, and 22.
verse: whereunto also accords that which is written in the 104. Psalm, and
2. verse, wherefore, it is like to a plain, which form is quite contrary to
a circle. For a circle turns about always in his own rowmeth.


M* Uerily, both the places which you have alleged, declares not the form,
but the uttermost top or end of world, which therefore is said by God so to be
stretched abroad and to cover the earth, both that men may the more
commodiously dwell under it, as it were under a most beutifull and wide rough
(whereof it comes that we French men call all such couerings, heaven, and in
our country language, un ciell) and also to the intent that this is a veil
beeinge sprede before men's eyes, they may be restrained from the ouercurious
and deep entering into and searchinge after the secrets and mysteries of God.


S. But since ye same holy Scripture has plainly distinguished the higher
place from the lower in this world, as in Isay the 55. chapter, the 9. and 10.
verses, it cannot then seem to be sphericall or round. For in a circle no
part can be called high or low, forasmuch as all lines which are drawn from
the center to the circumference are equal, and the circumference it self
which way soever it stand, is always upward and in the higher place.


M. Of this we will speak afterward, and that more at large. But now to set
down so much as shall be sufficient to take all doubt out of your mind,
understand thus much: That by the rules of the mathematicians there be
indeed, and are noted these positions of the higher and lower place, and that
they are indeed distinguished one from an other. For the middle of the circle
which they call the center, is the lower place and downewarde: and the
circumference (which is the upper line, which beeinge hollow, and meetyng
together, contains the whole round space within the circle) is the higher
place, and upward: so that in that these positions and kinds of places and
differences are found in the world, you may conclude that which you would, to
wit, that the whole receite of this world is not sphericall and round.


The xiiii. Chapter. Whether the world have one only soul,
S. NOW, forasmuch as this world is but one only, and since it is finite, is
it governed by some one speciallsoule only, which is dispersed throughout
every part thereof, as it were in the members, as we see the soul to be in
a man's body?


M. That this whole world has a soul, and yt one only, certain Philosophers
of noble fame have long since been of opinion* as Aristotle, and certain
other: whose opinion has he followed who wrote in this manner.

First heaven and earth, and of the seas that flitring feeldes and fines,
These glorious stars, this glistringe globe of Moon so bright that shines.
One lively soul there is that feeds them all with breath of love:
One mind through all these members mixed this mighty mass does move.
But this is not so much a solemn sentence or saying, as it is a great error,
as S. Augustine teaches in his book against Felicia Aria* the 12. Chapter.


S. Why so?


M. Because those bodies which are contained within the gouenrment of one
spirit, and one soul, are all one, and not divided (as is the body of every
one of us) and not separate one from an other as a flock: and not one touching
or near joining to an other, as are the fingers of a man's hand, and houses
that stand one close to an other. As for the parts of this body, which we
call the world, they are not only distinguished one from an other, but
separated also and divided from themselves by distance of space. For every
sheep, every horse, every tree, every particulare man is a part of this world:
yet are they so divided by place and mole of body, and by circumscription of
distance, that it cannot be said, that all and every one of these have one
soul only. For what would come to pass, if it were imagined that in deed
there were one only soul, and spirit in all these things? For sooth this
absurdity: That the soul, which is a certain simple nature and altogether
spiritual, were to be divided as bodily things are, and not by imagination
only. Neither can this inconuenie^ce be avoided, seeinge that those things
in which that only and singular soul is contained are in truth separate and
divided by place, and determined every one of them by circumscription of their
own body. Moreover, it should follow that all the parts of the world had
life, as the Sun, the moon, the stars, the heaven it self, yea and all ye
celestial bodies which notwtstanding S. Augustine most plainly denies in his
book against Priscillia the 8. 9. Chapters: and that this opinion of S.
Augustine against the Mamches is true, the effect proves. For who would ever
affirm, that the stars had life or reason? Finally, since of the parts of
the world, some be mortal, as brute beasts: and certain immortal, as men:
how can it be that this singular and one only soul of the whole world, can
admit in it self qualities and conditions so contrary and repugnaunt one to
an other, that it should be one part of it mortal, and another immortal?
specially being it self singular, one, and simple: not double, and
compounded. Moreover, among such things as die, someperyshe very soon, as
worms, and flies: some continue very long, as Ceder trees, the Crow, and the
Heart: by this reckonyng it cummeth to pass, that this soul of the world,
which notwithstanding in these men's opinion is only one, and in number
singular and a lone, may be called partly dead, and partly a live. All which
how foolish, false, and repugnant they be, you see.


S. I see indeed, and I agree with you, in that you do most truly deny that
there is one only soul, and that in number singular, of this whole world.


M. Yea, farther, beesides the reasons above recited, we will lastly allege
this one out of holy Scripture, as the strongest of them al. To wit, that by
this means, the goodness and wisdom of God, who gives unto every thing, and
ingraffeth within them their proper and distinct virtues, is not only
obscured, but utterly extinguished, and plucked out of men's minds: whiles
we attribute these virtues, the administration and government of those
things, not unto GOD himself, but unto a certain other nature and soul,
contrary to that which we are taught too beeleeue and confess, Psalm. 147.
and 15. and 16. verses: To the Ephesians the 3. chapter verse 20. and Job the
viii. chapter the 5. verse.


S. If then, there be not one certain soul of this whole universality, as
you teach, truly the opinion of the Stoikes, Platonikes, and of certain
other Philosophers: and likewise of the Priscillianist Heretics is
overthrown: who say, that this world is a living creature: and endued with
will and reason.


M. You gather well: For their opinion is altogether foolish, and unreasonable.
For, since that is only a living creature, and so to be called, whose parts
and members are not contained only in one continual compass of the body, but
also governed by one spirit: verily this world is not a living creature. For
the members thereof are disioyned, and separate. As for the authority of the
Stoikes, and other Philosophers which you named erewhile, it should move us
very little, had not S. Augustine sometime written, that he doubted whether
this world were a living creature or not: which thing as he would not deny,
so durst he not affirm: whose doubt notwithstanding we ought not to follow,
or allow of.


The xv. Chapter. That this world was made in time, and is not eternal.
S. BUt I ask you this question, whether this world beegan sometime to be: or
whether it were always, and be eternal?


M. Many arguments do prove, that the world once beegan to be: among which
all, Philo in his book De Mundo, of the world, has gathered five special
ones. We will declare ours and those which be most Christian.


S. Which be they?


M. These four. First the voice and authority of the divine Scripture, which
speaks in this manner: In the beeginnyng God made heaven and earth: Genesis
the 1. chapter and 1. verse. The second reason is certain: For if the world
were coeternall with GOD, it self also were God: for eternity is not only
proper to divine nature, but also the most it self substance thereof, and the
principal part, and definition: Exodus the 2. chapt. and 14. verse. Reuelat.
the 1. chap. and 8. verse. The third, that forasmuch as this world shall have
an end, and every thing has means whereby it does consist, it follows
necessarily that it had a beeginnyng of being. For although, that be truly
said, not whatsoever had a beeginnyng shall have an end (forasmuch as there
be many things made, which through the singular benefit of God, are not
subject to death and corruption, as Angels, and the souls of men which are
immortal) notwithstanding it is most certainly affirmed, that, whatsoever
shall have an end, the same also had beeginnyng of being. Which Rule is so
general, that it admits no exception. Finally, the fourth is this, that not
only the causes of the creation of the world are set down, and also the
certain time noted, but also for the preservation of the perpetual memory
thereof, there are certain spaces of time prescribed, as the order of weeks
do plainly teach: and also the space of fifty years, which is called by the
Hebrews the year of Iubile, which God himself commanded to be observe:
whereby we might easily know and understand, how many ages are past since
the first beeginning of the world.


S. Concerning that auctority which you allege out of the Scripture, and the
1. chapter of Genesis some do otherwise interpret it. They grant, that all
these things indeed were made in the beeginnyng, but not in time. For the
meaning and signification of a beeginnyng, or of this word principium, is
manifold, and in that place, they say, it must not be understood of the
beeginning of time.


M. The signification of a beeginnyng, or of this word principium, is
threefold. For it respects either the time either the thing and the causes,
or else ye order. The beginnynge of time, in those things which are brought
forth in a certain time, is yt moment of an hour either wherein they are
conceived, or are brought forth into the world. Those things have only the
beeginnyng of time, which are done in time. That which is called the beginning
of a thing, and is taken for the cause in those things which are of one age
and time, is that relation and affection, whereby one thing is the cause of the
being of another. So, if we make a conference beetweene the day and the
night, we say that the Sun is the beeginning of the day and light, although
both of them do appear unto us at one moment. Such a beeginning, a diverse or
certain time does not establish. Finally, a beeginnyng in respect of order, is
called that which ministers the beeginnyng of numbryng, in such things as
are disposed in one order, as for example: The father is the beginning among
the three persons in trinity, which are one god: y^ magistrate is one among
many of like authority, with who^ in telling we do begin: like as we do with our
chief Magistrate or Judge in this our City of Geneua.


S. In this respect then, they would have God to be the beginning of this
world, as beeinge the cause and woorkeman thereof, as he that is first
numbered, is called the beginning.


M. Mark how absurd this is. First, what shall be the sense and meaning of
this saying, In the beeginnyng God made heaven and earth, if so be they will
thus expound it, God in the beeginnyng, that is to say, God in God created
heaven and earth? Moreover, why said he, did create, which word does not
only determine a beginning of being, but also the force of woorking, and a
determinate beeginning of time is therein manifestly comprehended and included.
Beesides, will we, nill we: by this reason we shall fall into that damnable
heresy of the Hermogenians, who make the work to be eternal with the
woorkeman, and so we must needs make more Gods than one. Of which error, me
thinks I should speak sumwhat more at large, were it not, that Tertullian,
long science, had utterly overthrown it in a whole work, yea, the Scripture
it self does manifestly expound this saying of Moses, of the beeginning of
time, Proverbs, the 8. Chap. and verses 25. 27. and 28. He uses also the
same words and the same comparison, when he speaks of the beginning of the
world, wherein there must needs be understood a beginning and moment of
time, and of being. Neither can that which S. Paul repeateth so often,
speakinge of the beginning of the world, be understood of the laying of the
foundations thereof to the Ephesi. the 1. Chapter, and 4. verse, and, whereas in
an other place he calls certain times seculare, the 2. to Timothy, the 2.
Chapter and 9. verse: to Titus the 1. Chapter, and 2. verse: unless that we
confess that all these things had a certain time of beginning, and being.
What are these eternal and seculare times, what ugnifieth this word (...), is
there not understood thereby a laying of the foundacions in time: and does he
not term those times seculare, which passed away, and must be numbered from
the moment and prick of time, wherein all these things began to be made? In
which point Sainet Augustine agrees with us, in his book against the
Priscillianists, the 6. chapter. To be short, how should the ages of those
ancient men Adam, Enoch, Noah, and also the time of the universal flood, be
known how far distant it is since the beeginninge of the woorlde, if there
were no beeginning of time in which the world was made? In so much, as I
marvel what should move certain Ecclesiastical writers, to doubt thereof:
and specially S. Augustine, a man so much exercised in the scriptures: as
namely in his book of Genesis upon the letter: although also afterward he
be altogether variable in defending the same, and many times diverse and
dissentinge from him self.


S. But there be some, that object two auctorities which are repugnaunt to your
opinion: whereof the first is that which is written in the 18. chapter, and 5.
verse of Ecclesi. GOD made althing at once, whereunto I pray you to answer
first.


M. It shall be an easy matter so to do. For if I list, I could answer
that, which as I suppose, we have already agreed upon, that the authority of
this book is far to be removed and separated, from the Divine and
canonical Scriptures. And therefore it proves nothing. Howbeit, I had rather
say that that is true, which is confirmed by the words of the text, and that
the place is corruptly translated in this manner, God made all thing at once,
for the meaning of the aucthours words is this: He that lives for ever,
made all things together: he says, altogether. Wherefore we are taught, to
acknowledge one only aucthour and creatuor of all things, as Ireneus says in
the 4. book and 21. chapter: it is not there affirmed that all things that
are created had there being beeginninge, or were all made in one moment, or yt
they were from everlasting, or without beeginning of time. This is therefore the
signification of this word, Pariter, together, to wit, that the power to
create all things, is given to one, and not to many. For the same book in the
16. Chapter, and 25. verse, sets down, how that created things were
disposed and made in certain order, and time, Howbeit, I am not ignorant, how
much the signification and readinge of this only word, Pariter together, did
oftentimes trouble S. Augustine in the 5. book, and 3. Chap: and also in his
6. book, and 6. Chapter of Genesis upon the letter* and also many other of the
Fathers. Thus have you mine answer to your first objection, to wit, that for
at once, you must understand, together. Now tell me your other authority.


S. They allege also, that which is written in S. John's Gospel, the 1.
chapter, and 1. verse, In the beginning was the word. Now if you think that
this word, beginning, is to be referred to time, then must you most impiously
affirm, that the word, or the Sun of God, which is signified thereby, had his
beeginning in some time, and is not eternal.


M. Truly, we should be hardly urged by so great authority of the
Scripture, unless the matter it self, whereof we entreat, did minister unto
us the dissoluing, and exposition of this difficulty. We have already
declared, how that the signification of this word, principium, or beeginnyng,
is sundry, wherefore, it ought too be taken according to the reason and nature
of the thing whereof we dispute. And you see, how S. John plainly says, that
this word, or Sun of GOD, was not created in the beginning, but that it was
in the beeginning, when God created all things: so that S. John sets this
his, In the beginning was, against the saying of Moses, and creation of all
things, where the Scripture speaks thus, In the beginning God created heaven:
and not thus, in the beginning was heaven. And moreover, S. John teaches, that
the same word of God, is also the same God. And that word, says he, was
God. But that which is God, can have no beeginning of time. Wherefore, the same
is most falsely expounded and understood of time and beeginnyng of existencie
in Christ. And therefore this word, Beeginnyng, has another signification in
that place: too wit, that, by which S. John excludes all beeginnyng of time,
to the end that so far as our minds are able by thinkyng too look back, and
to stretche forth themselves, we may not withstanding beeleue most
assuredly, that before, that word and Sun of GOD, had being, and had a
distinct substance from the Father. By which means of speaking, eternity is
accustomably signified in the Scriptures, as it appears in the 8. of the
Proverbs. And also by the self same testimony of S. John it is declared, how
that all these things were made and brought forth in the beeginning of time:
for they were not in the beeginning as was the word, but they were made, for
as much as they were not in the beeginning.


The xvi. Chapter. That the world came of it self.
S. NOw, since you have proved, that the world had a beeginning of being, I
pray you declare, whether it came of it self, or of some other.


M I suppose, there is no man, though he be but slenderly learned in the
Scriptures, that doubts concerning this poinct, to wit, that the world came
not of it self but of another, to wit, of God. For if it came of it self, it
should also be immortal and eternal, and not made in time. For it were then
of ability to minister force unto it self, to endure perpetually, and it
should also have always been. And besides this, it should be a God. For what
soever is of it self, and has life and substance must needs be god. Forasmuch
as ye Creator differs from ye creature in yt respect especially, in yt the
Creator is, and subsisteth by his own power and virtue: and the creatures
only by his power and assistance. Worthily therefore S. Augustine in his
Enchiridion, No man, says he, can be of himself. The omnipotency of the
Creator, and the virtue of him that is omnipotent and possesses all thing, is
the cause of every creatures subsisting. Whosoever therefore, shall deny this,
to wit, that this world was made by the will and power of God, but will contend
that it had the force and virtue in it self of being, plainly repugneth
against the whole sacred Scriptures. For there is no thing almost better
known, or more oftener inculcated into our ears, than that God is the maker
and creator of this world, and that all things were fashioned and brought
forth by his hand, will, and power. And that I may not traueill in the
gathering together of these testimonies, I will here recite unto you: twain
for all, the one in the Psalm 104. and 29. verse, If thou hyde thy face, they
are troubled: if thou take away their breath, they die, and return unto their
dust: if thou send forth thy spirit, they are created, and thou renuest the
face of the earth. the other in Isay the 45. chap. and 18. verse: For thus
says the Lord, that created heaven, God himself, that formed the earth, and
made it, he that prepared it, he created it not in vain: he formed it to
be inhabited. And therefore the ancient Fathers commonly termed the world,
a work perfectly wrought.


The xvii. Chapter. Of the causes of the world, and first of the cause
efficient thereof, which is God: not Angels, nor Devils.
S. Which be the causes of this world?


M There be four, first the efficient or producing cause, the material,
formal, and final.


S. Can you declare them severally unto me?


M. I will.


S. Tell me then, which is the efficient cause?


M. God, and he only.


S. Have you any reason, whereby you can prove this your so short resolution?


M. Yea, I have. And first Moses proves, that it was God y^ made this world,
Genesis y^ 1. chap. In the beginning God made heaven and earth. And David also
confirms same in y^ 33. Psalm, and 6. verse: By the word of the Lord were
the heavens made, and all the host of them by the breath of his mouth. For he
spoke, and it was done: he commanded, and it stood. Likewise Isay in the
44. chap. And Job the 12. chap. And finally both the new and old Testament.
The same also did Anaxagoras the Philosopher signify sum what obscurely,
having before received it by some ancient tradition, who called the mind;
that is to say, God, the Creator of all things: who, although he were
therefore laughed at by the other natural Philosophers of his time, yet he
held the true opinion. Howbeeit, the Marcionites, and after them the
Manichees, do urge farther. They say, that this world wherein there is such
disturbance and disorder among things, is unworthy to be called or counted
Gods woork. For, what confusion, what calamity, what perturbacion is there
seen in this world, and in all these things, where wicked men do rule, good
men are vexed, the Summer sometime is cold, the Harvest grievous, and
dangerous, and such other like accidents do happen? And therefore, if we
say that God made these things, God is not the auctour of order in the world,
but of great confusion.


S. But what is your opinion hereof?


M. They judge amiss, for God is the creator and producyng cause of all those
things, and substaunces, whereof the world consists: and not of the confusion
and disorder which now is, and afterward came upon them: for that is the
effect of man's transgression, and a great part of that vanity, whereunto in the
beeginnyng through Adam, all things were subject: Romans the 8. chap.
Therefore it is not caused by GOD, neither ingraffed by him, nor proceedyng
from him. For he created all things first, good, and in good order, and
subject to no disorder, confusion, or deformity. So Romulus builded the City
of Rome, and not those seditions, which many hundred years after his death,
sprang up at Rome through y^ ambition of men. Wherefore, against the Marcionites
and Manichees, we ought to distinguishe and divide the things themselves,
their nature and substance, from the deformity which afterward happened and
came upon them. For the Heathen Philosophers themselves, as Thales for example,
have called this world: a beutifull work, and counted it worthy of God,
agreate deal better than those Heretics have done.


S. Proceed then with that which you began.


M. It was God therefore, that created and fourmed this world: what GOD?
Forsooth he which is one in substance, and three in person, to wit, the
Father, the Sun, and the holy Ghost: and so is it to be understood that God
made the world, to wit, that it is the work of them all three indifferently:
and not either the Fathers, or the Suns, or the holy Ghosts specially or
principally: the works also of the whole Trinity are undivided, although
the woorkemanship of either of the persons, is distinct in the self same work.


S. Declare this which you spoke, more plainly.


M. Meses teaches in the 1. of the Genesis, that the Father wrought in the
creation of the world, and also the word, that is to say, the Sun, and like
wise the holy ghost. The father creates by his will: the word, or y^ Sun
creates by woorkinge and bringing forth: and the holy Ghost treats by
impla^ting of strength and nature, and by giving of motion and life, which is
in every thing for the bringinge forth and preservation thereof. And therefore
S. Ihon in the 1. chap. and 3. and 14. verses, when he had declared that all
things were made by the word, he says afterward, that the same was the
Sun of God. Wherefore, the Sun is, and is also rightly called the creator
of the world. And ye holy Ghost gives strength to live, and to move, and also
susteineth, both that they may exist and live, and also continue and be
preserved. Wherefore he also in the creation of the world, woorthily
challenges unto himself some part of so worthy a work, which also by
Isay in the 40. chap. and 7. verse: and the 41. chapter, 29. verse, are
plainlyascribed and attributed unto him.


S. There be othersome, that do otherwise interpret this which you say, and
by this name, Word, and also ye holy Ghost, do not understand certain
substances, or any thing existing of themselves: but suppose rather that
thereby the mean is taught, by which this world was made, to wit, not that by
any engine or frame, not by ironwoorkes, not by any handie craft so hugie a
mole was framed and brought forth: but only by the commandment and the word
of Gods will, that is to say, only by the declaring and publishing of Gods
decree, which of it self is of sufficient power and efficacy.


M. I do not deney, but that those things which unto us of their own nature
are mystical and incomprehensible, are opened and declared by such parables:
set and set forth in such words and metaphores, as by us they may be
understood. To wit, that the eternal Sun of God, is called the word: and
the holy Ghost which is that divine person, and substancial virtue subsistinge
by it self, and proceeding from the Father and the Sun, and is distinct,
notwithstanding is called a spirit. But forasmuch as the scripture in an other
place teaches, that, that word is not a certain sound or declaration of Gods
will, and a certain common enuntiane or spoken word, and that the spirit is
not a power and virtue infused into things, but that he is God, and the very
same that is called the dweller in our hearts, John the 1. chap. the 3. verse:
and the 1. to the Corinth. the 6. Chapter, the 19. verse, both which persons,
since it is taught in the scriptures in sundry places, that they wrought with
the Father in the creation of the world, how can it be doubted but that our
opinion is right and true.


S. Forth then, declare whether God created all these things alone?


M. Yea, alone.


S. How prove you that?


M. Out of the 44. Chapter. and 24. verse of Isay, I am the Lord that made
althinges, that spread out the heavens alone, and stretched out the earth by my
self. And Job, the 41. Chapter, the 2. and 3. verse: and to be short, this is
the general doctrine of the scriptures. The same is also confirmed by reason.
For he is alone which calls those things that are not, and brought them
forth into the light, and finally he alone is the aucthor and Father of all
things.


S. But with what and how many armies of gaynsaiers are you now compassed
about?


M. I am not ignorant of that. For I shall be uexed almost with innumerable
rables of Heretics, and Heathen Philosophers: but Gods word shall
sufficiently defend me, and his holy truth shall stand for me against them
all.


S. Tell me then, what were those heretics opinions, or rather errors in
that point?


M. I will gather them together out of Ireneus, chiefly out of the 1. and 2.
book. Some of the Heretics will have it, that this world was first thought
upon and conceived in mind by one God, and procreated and made by another, as
certain of the Valentinians and Carpocratians do affirm. Othersome, by a
certain other nature and far differinge virtue than which ought to be called
a God, and which governs althing, by whom they suppose this world to have
been made as Corinthus held opinion: whom at sumtime they termed Hystera, a
belly or a womb: and at another Demiurgus, a pronouncer of laws: and do
distinguish him from the same whom they will have to be the true God, and
call Propator. Some again, think that the world was made by angels only, and
not by God, as the Simonians, and Menandrians: so many are the wanderings awry,
when a man has once departed out of the right way.


S. What say the Philosophers?


M. They hold opinion, that the world was made by their devils, which they
call Angels, and make them to differ from the great God in whole kind, as do
the Platonikes. As for Epicurus, who says that this world came by chance, I
accoumpt him not among the number of Philosophers: and as for the opinions of
the other, I have no leisure now to rehearse them.


S. What have you now to allege, against so great a power of your
adversaries?


M. The word of GOD, and the reason also which is confirmed by the same
Philosophers. The word of God, that forasmuch as it is the proper and
peculiare attribute or title beelongyng to GOD only to be a creator, the
same cannot agree with Angels, or any other thing: My glory will I not give to
another, says the Lord. etc. Isay chap. 42. verse 8. and chap. 45. verse. 12.
Moreover we should make so many several Gods, as there be Angels, creatours.
For who so creates, the same also gives and susteineth life, and his work
depends altogether of him, and of him it has it only being. Wherefore, the
Angels also shall be life giuers, and susteiners, and Gods, and Jehovah, that
is to say, giuers of existence. Which thing, how mutch it repugneth against
Scripture, it may be understood out of the 45. chap. and 18. verse of Isay:
Whereupon also S. Augustine in his 3. book, and 8. chapter of the Trinity,
woorthily and truly denies with us, that neither the devils, nor Magicians
are able to create one.


S. Can you allege any reason, or opinion to be liked of, that is defended by
any of the Philosophers?


M. Yea, this one, to wit, The nature of beeginnings, loves singularity. And
therefore Aristotle recites and commends the worthy opinion of Homer:

It is not good that many rule, Let one our ruler be. who using likewise ye
same argument in his 12. book of Metaphysikes, affirms that there is one
chief and most excellent God among the residue, who is King and sovereign
above them al. The same opinion has S. Augustine also embraced in his first
book of marriage, the 9. chapter: and undoubtedly experience it self teaches,
that it is a most true saying. Thus can he also make small things, that made
the great: and the same God that made high things, brings forth and
fourmeth the low things also, for he is almighty, as Father Ireneus, says,
in his 2. book, and 44. chap. so that it is not only not necessary that
there should be many creatours of this world appointed, but it is also against
the nature of beginninges, and the omnipotency of God, that there should be
more than one.


The. xviii. Chapter. That the world, and all things that are therein, were
made by God of nothing, and not only decked forth, or set in order, or
brought forth out of a certain disordred heap or matter which was extant
before.
S. BUt after what manner, or in what sense do you say, that God is the
producent and efficient cause of this world?


M. In respect that he has not only given power and beutie unto things, but
first has brought forth and made them out of nothing, having no matter
preexisting or going before, which is properly called to create.


S. Is there any notablenesse or excellency in the signification of that
word, which may be reputed peculiare and proper to the power of God?


M. Yea mary. For by that means GOD is very far separated from all sorts
of other woorkmen, and also from all other kinds of causes, as are parents,
and servants, or else the natural powers.


S. How so?


M. For that no woorkman be he never so mighty and skillful, is able to make
any thing unless he have stuff ministered unto him: for if he have no
stuff, he is able to make nothing. Take away iron from the Smith, timber from
the Carpendour, yearne from the Weauer, what other good can they do but stand
still gaping in their shoppes? For every Art and occupation requires
naturally to have some stuff prepared for it, wheruppon afterward it
woorketh, and brings forth sundry fourmes. Yea, not the causes themselves,
and powers which are termed natural, and are proper to every thing, are able
to bring forth any thing without convenient matter and stuff allotted unto
them. For, if a man search thoroughly the greatest and whole virtues of the
natures of all things, notwithstanding he shall find that to be true which
is generally spoken by ye natural Philosophers. Nothing is made of nothing. Who
ever reaped Wheat or Barley without sowing? who ever saw trees grow without
planting, settinge, or springing from some berrie, or kernel, or herbs and
flowers without seed or slip? But he that is the true creator, he makes
his matter and stuff in which and of which he woorketh, of nothing, he has
it not already prepared, or ministered from some other place. But to say that
the matter was coeternall with God himself, or existing of it self, and to
deny that it was first made and brought forth by God out of nothing, is not
the part of Christians, but plainly of the Hermogenian heretics. So that there
is a most large distinction beetweene creation, and engendring. Those things
are created, which are made of no substanciall or material beeginnyng. Those
are engendered or made, not which are made out of nothing, but out of a former
substance and matter. Wherefore, neither good Angels nor bad, nor diuelles,
be, or ought to be called creatours, mutch less men: for it is only proper
to God to create, which these places following do confirm, to wit, S.
Augustine in his 3. book of the Trinity, the 8. chap. Isay the 45. chapt. Job
the 26. chapt the 33 Psalm, Acts the 17. chap. and 24. verse. Yet am I not
ignorant notwithstanding, what othersome do dispute against this, that the
power of creating may also be given unto creatures.


S. But there be many things that do withstand your opinion.


M. What be they?


S. First that which your self alleged, and is a most certain position
among the natural Philosophers, and confirmed in all men's judgments by
continual experience: Nothing is made of nothing. How then should God have made
al these things, if so be that he had no matter prepared to his hand, that
is to say, if he had nothing to make them of?


M. Truly this is an old objection, and often repeated by Heathen men, in
expoundyng whereof, Iustine the Martyr, or whosoever he was else that answered
the objections of the Ethnikes, he took great pains therein which difficulty
me thinks I can easilye resolve. First in that the insinite and
incomprehensible omnipotency of God the creator is not only a miss, but
peruersly called to the laws of nature, which was made and created. For what
is that other, than to go about to make the creature equal to the Creator?
But as the Lord witnesses, that his thoughts do differ far from ours, so
likewise is the force and power far discrepant from ours, and far excelling
the strength and virtue of this nature, Job the 10. chapter, and 45. verse. Now
if a man would thus conclude: At this present, and since the time that the
Lord appointed this order, that nothing should be made of nothing, there is
now nothing made without matter ready and prepared before. Wherefore in the
beeginning, and before that God had ordained these laws, it took place then,
neither could any thing be made other wise. Your self perceive how much
they are deceived that do so conclude. As, for example, if a man would thus
dispute, that in the beeginning the first trees, at the same very instant
wherein God made them, could not bring forth their fruits, because y^ now
adays they be not so forward, but need longer time to bear and ripen them:
if a man, I say, should reason thus, every body would laughe him to skorne:
and would perceive that his saying were falfe, out of Isay the 46. chapter,
and* 8. verse: and not only out of the first Chapter of Moses. For whosoever were
of that opinion, were deceived through great ignorance and confusion of diverse
times, and conditions, which among things are to be distinguished. And even
so, they, who as you say, do object against the first creation of things,
That Nothing is made of nothing, because that now nothing is made of nothing,
he disputes of most different, and unlike times, and conditions, To wit, from
the nature which was to be created and not yet tied by any law, unto the
nature created and which is now revoked and constrained by sure and certain
laws. Which kind of conclusion S. Augustine also laugheth at in his book 2.
book against Pelagia, the 25. Chapter. Thus have you my answer unto that most
common and usual argument of the Philosophers. What is the second argument,
which you say may be brought against us?


S. The authority which they allege out of the xi. cha. and 18. verse of the
book of Wisdom: For unto thine almighty hand that made the world out of
a rude and vnfourmed matter, there lacked no strength to send a multitude of
bears, or of fierce Lions among them. Ergo the world was made of rude and
unformed matter, and not of nothing. To which opinion Saint Augustine seems
to agree in the 3. book, the 5. and 6. Chapters, of the Trinity. For he
says that There is a certain common matter consisting in the causes of the
world,


M. Indeed, this which you do aleage, has seemed unto some to be a very
forceable argument. And therefore ye materiar heretics, which are called also
ye Hermogenians, do chiefly stay themselves upon that, against whom
Tertullian has written many noble and learned works. And that I may say
nothing of the authority of that book, like as I said before:
notwithstanding I will answer this which is most true, that it is there taught
and believed, yt the same rude and unformed matter out of which it is said the
world was made, was first created by GOD of nothing, and not out of any other
matter wrought or supplied, (for so should we run forth infinitely)
neithere existinge of it self, for then should it be very God. But
whosoever he was that wrote that book, he wrote in such manner, out of the
opinion which was then received and known among the Hebrew Rabbines, and was
afterward allowed of and embraced of all, to wit, that heaven and earth (which
two are said in the 1. of Genesis to have been created the first day) were
as it were the first matter of Gods works which were created afterward,
which God by his mighty virtue prepared unto him self and cast together,
ministered first rudely whereby afterward he might finishe and form the
residue of that so great a work. And as touching Saint Augustine, they that
allege him against us, do altogether wreast his auctority. For S. Augustine
entreats not there of the first matter of this whole world, as though he
would have it to be one: or feigned or imagined it to be coeternall with God:
but he speaks of the second matter, through which as in things now
already created, one thing sprunge of an other by the commandment of GOD,
as out of the earth trees and beasts, and as at this day also they are made
and do proceed. There was foresowne says he, eeuen in those things, the
matter of such things as arose and sprung out of them: the 3. book of Genesis
upon the letter, the 14. chapter, and the 2. book, the 15. chapter, and the
1. book, the 14. and 15. Chapter: and the 5. book, the 5. chap.


S. Thirdly they say, that yt is not the proper and natural force and
signification of this word, Create, For in the 43. chap. and 13. verse of
Isay, the Lord calls himself the creator of Israel, which people
notwithstanding are known to have been borne of seed. And again, in in the
65. Chapter, and 18. verse of the same Prophet, he says. Beeholde, I create
Jerusalem: Which place whether it be understood of the citizens or of the
city it self, it is certain that God made neither of them without seed, or
matter, but the men of the one, and the City of the other. For this word
Barah is used in both places, so that I am of opinion, that we ought not to
stick to religiously or percisely to the interpretation of one poor word.
Likewise they allege this saying of the same Prophet: Beeholde, I create a
new heaven, and a new earth: When as indeed the Lord will only renew these
bodies which now are heaven and earth, and not make the^ again of nothing.


M. It is written in Isay as you say. But these places do plainly confirm mine
opinion, much less confute it. For the word, create, is taken
Metaphorically, and wrested a little from the proper signification, whereby the
power of God may appear the greater and more excellent in restoringe his
people, and holy City beesides al hope, and other things beesides all
ordinary means. For like as the things that are created, are beesides the
course of nature made of nothing, so likewise because the Lord promises that
he will restore and renew his people and City, he uses properly the word
of creating, for that this which the Lord will work, is, as it were, a new
creation, and a certain won^derfull bringing forth and generation out of
nothing. Although I will not deney, but that the signification of this word
Barah is oftentimes translated and used more largely: as when it is said:
Create a clean heart within me, O God, the 51. Psalm, and 12. verse: and
again, The seat of the froward creates iniquity: Psalm. 94. and 20. verse.
Of this saying and opinion of Saint Augustine, that I may say so much by
the license of so worthy a man, I do not well allow. Who in his first book
against the adversaries of the law and the Prophets, the 23 chap, writes
thus: And when there is any difference made beetweene making and creatinge,
this may be the odds beetwene those two words as I said, that that is
made which before was not at all, and that created which is ordained of
sumthinge that was before. He distinguished those two words, Make, and
Creat, toto subtily which oftentimes are used one for an other.


S. How then should it be?


M. Thus the Scripture plainly defines, to wit, that God is the creator of
the world, that is to say, of all things that are, who made, framed and
brought forth them all out of nothing, and not out of any matter preexisting
or made to his hand, or which is coeternall with God himself, or ministered
unto him by some other woorking God, as the Manichees do suppose. For that
opinion induces two Gods: and in making twain, it leaves none. For either
there is no God, or there is but one. Finally, as says S. Ambrose, God should
be only the diuiser of the figure, and not the maker of Nature: and he had
found and received more than he had made, if there had bin any matter ready
to his hand.


S. But there be some that say, that this matter is signified in the
scripture by this word Tohu: where upon afterward the Grecians, and the
Philosophers who received those things first of the Hebrews, and of the
Phenicians near borderers to the Hebrews: which they have written concerning
the beeginnyng of the world: they devised this word Hyle, by a small
alteration of certain letters made according to the use and propriety of their
tongue. For this word Hyle, saiethei, signifies among the Grecians, as much
as a rude heap, unformed, and as it were a certain moiste and waterishe
earth, or quagmire, or dregs, out of which many things are engendered,
through the force of the heat which comes unto it. From the which word
Hyle, is the word Hilys derived, which signifies dregs and froath, that is
to say, a dirtie and moist earth, out of which many things do grow in the
Sea.


M. I doubted not, but those that go about to defend the same error of
theirs, concerning a first matter preexisting, as though it were very
necessary, and they that have thoroughly received the same, do devise many
such foolish fantasies. But how small or none at all the affinity of these
two words is, Tohu and Hyle, in writing of the Letters, or rather how far
this is from the truth, your self do see, and it shall not be needful to
seek farther: forasmuch as God is openly called the creator of heaven and
earth.


S. Yea, God is termed Gos^he Io^ser, that is to say, the maker and the
fourmer, as it is written in Isay, the 66. chapt. and 10. verse: and Job the
35. chap. and 10. verse: and Isay the 54. chap. and 8. verse: as also in the
90. Psalm, the 2. verse.


M. That was done not rashly nor in vain, but to the intent to take away
such errors, as the spirit of God foresawe would grow afterward amongst men.
For there are two errors among men, concerning the beeginning of all things,
beesides the error of the materiare heretics. For some think, that first and
always there was existing a certain whole mass, and that rude and confused,
which was the heap of all the principal parts and things of the world
which now are existing and fourmed, but then disorderly mingled together,
which they call Chaos, And this opinion Hesiodus followed in his Theogonia,
which Ovid describes in his Metamorphosis in these words.

Before the sea and land were made, the heaven that all does hide,
In all the world one only face of nature did abide,
Which Chaos hight, an huge rude heap, and nothing else but eeuen.
An heavy lump and clottred clod of feeds together driven:
Of things at strife among themselves for want of order due.
No sun as yet with lightsome beams the shapelesse world did view. etc.
This much therefore they do attribute unto God, that he is the
distinguisher, trimmer, and setter forth of this so confused a Chaos, mole and
heap: and not the creator of it in time, giuinge unto it the first means of
beeinge. And therefore the Poet said There was, as it were, from everlasting:
and not the same Chaos was made and created by God. And for this cause they do
not call God the Creator of the world, but only the beutifier, and as Saint
Ambrose says, the deviser of the shape and form thereof: as though he
had given a certain comeliness and order unto things that existed before,
and which had of themselves their own proper strength and nature, which he
accomplished by a certain wise and apt distinction of them, and by separating
and distributing of every part into it own convenient place. Othersome there
be that do attribute more unto GOD. For they hold opinion, that the matter
was a great mole from eternity, mary but matter only, and not that althinges
were encluded and comprehended within it (which the first sort do also
hold,) but that it was rude and unshapen. Which matter, for that it was great,
GOD taking it in hand, divided it into small peaces: and, as he is a most
wise and cunninge woorkeman, facioned it into sundry fourmes. And so endued
every part thereof with his own and proper form, which we see them now
rertaine. Even so out of one and the selfsame bar of iron cut into sundry
pieces, the Smith frames and forgeth a key, an hammer, a saw, fetters, and
many other things seruinge to sundry purposes, whereof they term God
Demiurgus, and not the creator or maker. Howbeit the scripture attributes all
this unto God. To wit, both that they be things, and also have the same
force, power, nature, and form, which we see to be in them. And finally, in
that they are situate in such place, and distinguished in such order as we
do beeholde: that they deck forth this mole in such cumly sort as in
hugeness and beutie we do perceive they do, and in such manner as there is no
man able sufficiently to express. Wherefore, the Scripture says, that God
does not only Barah, that is to say, create. And in the Greek tongue K^^zin
or Poem, but also Gascha, which is to say, work. And in Greek also to do
some work, or Demiurgin: and also Iarsar, that is to say, to bring things
into a cumly order, which in the Greek tongue is called ^^smi^: and that all
things which are in this world and which are seen do take their beeginning
from God to be things at all, and to be such manner things as they are: we
must so determine most certeinely with ourselves, understand so, and
confess the same, being thereto constrained by the force of truth.


S. Have you any proofs to confirm this your opinion by?


M. Yea truly, and that especially out of these places of holy scripture: Isay
the 42. chapter and 5. verse: the 43. chapter the 1. and 7. verses: the 45.
chapter, the 12. and 18. verses: Likewise, Job the 26. chapter, and 13. verse
the 25. chapter and 10. verse: where the only and felfesame God is termed by so
many and diverse names.


The xix. Chapter. Of the end for which God created and made this world.
S. WHat cause moved God specially to make this world, he himself lacking
nothing, and dwelling in that everlasting felicity, unto which there can be
no increase of felicity and immortality added, by means of all this great
work?


M. Even his mere goodness, that is to say, his most loving good will to
communicate the same his felicity unto certain things, so far forth as
the nature of those things which he created, was able to receive the same.
Wherefore, he created Angels in heaven, and men upon the earth, to the intent
he might make them, after a sort, companions and partakers of his felicity,
being himself most good, most loving, most perfect, and also in himself and
through himself most perfectly and wholly blessed.


S. How prove you this?


M. Both by authority, and reason. And authority is that which is chiefly
taken out of the Scriptures: as the the 36. Psalm, the 5. verse: Lord, thy
mercy stretches unto the heavens. Psalm 33. the 5. verse: The earth is full
of the mercy of the Lord. Psalm 34, the 9. verse: See how good the Lord is,
and in the 103. Psalm, the 17. verse: The mercy of the Lord indureth from one
age unto another. And in the 111. Psalm, and 4. verse. But specially in the
136. Psalm, throughout, and in the Psalm 145. and 9. verse: The Lord is good
to all, and his mercies are over all his works. And next out of the Fathers.
For S. Augustine in his 1. book of Genesis upon the letter, the 8. chapter:
and also is his Enchiridion the 9. book, says plainly, that the only goodness
of God was the cause, wherefore God made all these things. The same is likewise
affirmed by Ireneus in his third boooke, the 45. and 46. chapters: and also by
Fulgentius in his book de fide ad Petr. the 3. chapt. And if you will also
commend Heathen writers in this respect, you have Plato in Timeo a most grave
auctour among them, who being led by a natural light, and the testimony of
his own conscience, wrote in this manner, which Cicero has expressed is his
book de vniuersitate: Let us tha^ seek out the cause which moved him that
made these things, to beegin a new original and frame of things. He was
good: And he that is good enuieth no man. And therefore some say thus: God
knew, and would have his felicity to be communicated to others. For although
that the divine goodness is, and was in God most fully and most perfectly
without al these things, as it appears in the 60. Psalm, and is also kept
undefiled: Notwithstanding these things which are created are manifestatiue, as
they speak in the schools, and do declare the excellency of Gods goodness,
that is to say, they show that the same goodness is altogether agreeable unto
God. This much say they.


S. I have heard the auctorities, declare now the reasons.


M. Forasmuch as there proceeds nothing from us men, neither from the
blessed and elect Angels, whereby God may be more established in respect of his
eternity: or more blessed in respect of his state and condition, as it is
written in the 16. Psalm, and 2. verse (for it is not possible that any thing
should be added unto him, who of himself is altogether perfect) truly there
was no need that drove him to make these things, but only this one cause, to
wit, his own loving good will. Wherefore, like as it is written in the 3.
chapter to Titus, the 4. verse, that the mere goodness of GOD was the cause of
man's salvation: so was it also the cause of man's creation. And if it were the
cause of men, doubtless it was also the cause of the creation of all other
things.


The xx. Chapter. This world, cannot be called the Sun of God.
S. I Do well understand so much as you have hitherto said of God, who is the
efficient cause of this world, not as a woorkeman only, or a discriber, or
painter, or trimmer up: but rather as a creator, and a bringer forth of it out
of nothing. Tell me now this one thing more, whether in respect of these
causes this world may be called the Sun of God?


M. You renew an old question, which S. Augustine plainly discusseth in his
Enchiridion, the 38. and 39. chapters. Truly if we will speak properly and to
understanding, this world neither can nor ought be called the Sun of God.
First, because it is not made of the substance of GOD. For they that are
properly called a man's children or suns, are beegotten of the fathers seed
and substance. Moreover, whatsoever is said to spring and come of another,
ought not by and by to be called the sun of that from which it springs.
For Lice do breed out of a man's flesh, yet are they not called the suns
of men, or of their flesh. To conclude since the comparison and respect of
GOD unto the world, is rather like the woorkeman to the work, than like the
Father to the Sun, truly the world may be termed the work and perfected
labor of God, but by no means called his Sun.


The. xxi. Chapter. What God created first, to be the matter for things that
were created afterward.
S. Hitherto you have discoursed of the efficie^t cause, now say sumwhat
concerning the material cause of the world.


M. What matter can I name unto you, since there was none at all, as I have
sufficiently disputed and proved before? as this word, Create, declares, if
you have regard to it own proper signification. Neither do I think it worth
the traueill to confute the opinions of the Philosopers, who have almost
every one of them stu^bled at this block: or else to convince the heresy of
the Hermogenians, who revoked that error, which was now long since
extinguished in the Church of God, out of the scooles and opinions of the
Stoikes: and chose rather to learn how the world beegan, at the hands of
natural Philosophers than of true Christians, and out of Gods word. Al whose
arguments, Tertullian has confuted in a noble and profitable work, which
is now abroad in men's hands, and is most worthy to be read.


S. I do not require after that which was not, but this rather, whether that
among those things which God created of nothing, there were any thing
disposed, prepared, and brought forth, that afterward served the turn, and
stood in steed in the creation of other things, out of which God did
afterward facion and form al things else that remained to be made?


M. You move me to enter into a difficult question, which consists both of
like number of weighty reasons, and of auctorities of grave writers. For among
the learned auctours, some think that Heaven and earth, of which in the 1.
chapt. of Genesis, and 1. verse it is written, In the beginning God made heaven
and earth, were made by God of nothing: howbeit, first, and before all things,
to the intent that they might be the prepared matter of all other things that
were to be afterward created. And therefore, they say, that God did nothing the
other days following, but only distinguysh this matter and mass which was
first confusedly brought forth, and contained in it the seeds of all other
things into the proper kinds and elements, and that every thing should be
trimmed forth in it own kind, and governed by it own law. Other do
suppose otherwise, that these things were only set down in the beginning, as
it were, in manner of a preface or supposition of some discourse that should
ensue, to the end that the sum of the whole matter following might be the
better understood, and the bounds of so great a frame as the world is, be
drawn forth. In like manner, cunning Carpenters when they are about to build
some goodly and large house, they first draw out a platfourme in certain
proportions and lines, containing the form of the whole woork that shall be,
to the intent, they may point out and place the other roomthes of the buildyng
within that circuit, and so contain themselves within those limits. Thus,
say they, heaven and earth are proposed by Moses, and that in the beeginning of
his Narration, to the end, we might understand what limits the description
following, and the whole work should have: Like as he also repeateth again
those limits after the narration of the creation, and concludes the whole
work which he set forth, after the same manner. Genesis the 2. chapter,
and 1. verse. Wherefore, In the beginning God created heaven and earth, that is
to say, first of all the sum of all Gods works is laid before us to be
thought on. Moreover, Ireneus in his 2. book, the 10. 11. and 16. chapters,
shows that GOD is not like men, as not having need of any matter that he
had created or prepared before hand, to finish or make his other works of.


S. How then, do you think otherwise?


M. Truly, the interpretation and opinion of the first sort seems unto me
the more probable, which hold that the heaven and earth (in such manner as they
are there spoken of) were first created by GOD of nothing, howbeit as it were,
a rude matter of the whole work and beauty that should follow, out of which
God by his mighty power brought forth all the residue. Although almighty God
lacked no matter to create first heaven and earth with all, neither yet to
bring forth the works of the other days, like as at this day also he
needs not the seed of man to bring forth men of, if he lust to do
otherwise: notwithstanding in these questions we must not enquire how much he
was able to do, says S. Augustine in his 2. book de Genesi, but rather what
ye course of nature in things will suffer, and what his pleasure is, and what
he has revealed unto us by his word. Neither does this mine opinion want
just and sufficient confirmation, either of the authority of men, or of
reason. And as for authority there is none against me, seeing both Philo
Iudaeus, and the Rabbines commonly, and the best learned of the Hebrews do so
expound that place of Moses: yea, S. Augustine also oftentimes, as in the 5.
book de Ge nesi ad Literam, the 3. and 5. chapters: and the 1. book, the 5.
chapter. S. Ambrose likewise in Examero, and S. Chrysostom, and S. Basile,
with others.


S. But can you confirm your opinion by any reason?


M. Yea, by twain. And the first is, that this exposition does very well agree
with Moses words, and order: and again, that it seems to be plainly
confirmed by this word Beeginning, and the signification thereof. For a
beeginning is said in comparison of other things. And therefore, to the intent
he might show how all other things were made afterward out of those twain,
Moses plainly uses this preface, to wit, that the same heaven, and the same
earth were created in the beeginning, that is to say, before all the other
works that God made, and also to the use of all the other, that is to say,
from whence afterward the residue were taken, and as it were, made. The very
footsteppes, as it were, of which opinion, howbeeit the truth being now and
then manifestly intercepted, do appear to be exstant in Hesiodus in his
Theogonia, and Ovid also in that place of the first book of his
Metamorphosis, which is so well known: Before the Sea and Earth, etc. This
reason also may be alleged, that the thing itself, and specially the earth,
is thus described unto us, and is called by Moses Tohu and Bohu: whereby it
appears that there was a certain Mass, stuff, and matter prepared by GOD,
for the world that should afterward be made, which was then first only,
and not prepared from everlasting. Yea, it cannot be denied but that at that
time there was some confusion even in heaven, when as the heavenly and earthly
substances were not as yet distinguished and separated one from another, which
at length was brought too pass. And that also there was no beutie, nor
brightness as yet in heaven, neither was there any light shining therein.
Howbeeit that confusion was greater upon the earth. And therefore in respect
thereof it was called Tohu and Bohu.


The xxii. Chapter. The matter of Earthly things of what sort it was and how
commodiously by God prepared,
S. TEll me then I pray you, what these words Tohu and Bohu do signify?


M. First, they signify some unformed, rude, and confused thing, but yet apt
and disposed to admit and receive form and shape. And therefore the
scripture uses this kind of speech, when it will signify some unpolished
and undigested thing, as it appears in Isay, the 34. chapter, and 11. verse:
and the 40. chapter. and 17. verse. Wherefore, such was the shape of the earth
at that time, as for the most part the Poet Ovid expresses in these words.

For where was earth, was sea and air: so was the earth unstable,
The air all dark, the sea likewise to bear a ship unable.
No kind of thing had proper shape, but each confounded other. etc
Moreover, as there are two chief kinds of althings, one heavenly, the other
earthly: even so at the beginning God created two sorts of matter, God I say,
who knew well enough of what and how manifold natures the things should be
that he would make, and did the^ make but preparation for them. For heaven was
prepared, as a perfect and heavenly matter, of the heavenly parts of the
world. And the earth of the earthly, which earth at that time moiste, wet, and
moorishe, over which the water was spread abroad for this cause, as it is
written in the 104. Psalm and 6. verse. that there should be then only one
body extant, consisting of two elements. And as for heaven, Moses tarieth
less time in the declaration thereof, what manner a thing it was at that time,
for that it was a thing better formed and compounded. But in discribinge the
state of the earth, he uses more words. For he calls that first and
material earth. Tohu and Bohu, that is to say, a certain confused mass: such
an one as we must needs imagine it to have been, if a man will in mind take
from it that beauty and order which the Lord added unto it afterward.


S. What, therefore, does this word Tohu signify in the Scriptures.


M. That which we call empty and desolate, to wit, that wherefore there is no
use and commodity, neither brings fruit, nor yeldeth profit: and to be
short, that is worth nothing. Whereby it comes to pass, that this word
is many times translated for Nothing: as in Job the 26. chapter, and the 7.
verse: and in Isay the 24. Chapter, the 10. and 40. verses, a little before the
end. Wherefore, the force and signification of this word Tohu, excludes
that commodity which at this present we receive out of the earth.


S. But what signifies Bohu?


M. The same among the Hebrews that we call unshapen and unformed: and that
is unshapen, from which all distinction, order, apt and convenient placing of
the parts is absent, and that which represents to the beholders nothing but
confusion and horror: and yet notwithstanding, this wanted not all form, as
having a name, and being called the earth. And thus is it taken in Isay the
29. Chapter, and 21. verse.


S. You tell me of a merucilous strainge beginning and matter, which GOD made
for the creatyng of the world.


M. And such manner of thing it was needful it should be, both that we
might the better thereby understand the mighty power of our great and good
God, who, as S. Paul says in the 2. to the Corinthians, the 4, chapter, and
5. verse, has brought forth so wonderful a beauty, and light, and
commodity out of so great confusion and darkness of all things: and also
that that thing which was first ordained to be as it were the matter,
receiver, and mother of sundry fourmes, ought to be such a manner of thing.
Although I confess that the earth had it own proper form from the very
first moment of the creation thereof, but yet such an one, in respect whereof
we take it for a matter unto other things that might afterward receive other
fourmes. And therefore you see how fairly and plainly this matter, this earth
(as it is declared) is prepared and disposed, to receive afterward the fourmes
of things in it.


The.xxiii. Chapter. Why the deapthes of waters covered this matter, and earth.
S. WHy so?


M. Because it is said, that at that time the deapthes and Pooles of waters
were mingled with the same earth.


S. This increases the horrible show of that so great a confusion.


M. You say true: but Gods power thereby is the more declared. Howbeit, this
co^unixtion of the water and earth together, was very necessary unto this
that we speak of, to wit, that the earth should be a good, commodious, and
well prepared matter for all earthly things, which it pleased God should rise
out of it.


S. Expound your own words more plainly.


M. It behooued, that the seed and matter of all things should be apt to
be fourmed, pliant, and tractable, which in the earth could not be without
moisture. Wherefore, the earth which of it own nature is a dry and hard
thing, not cleauyng together, and not apt to be drawn forth in length or
breadth, unless it be made such, and tempered with some moisture that may
mollisie it and bind it together: had water joined with it. And therefore that
huge multitude of waters, which is called the deapthes, was created, and
comprehended in the same body, under which the earth unshapen was concluded,
and lay hid. Whereby it appears that this whole mass was a greater Chaos,
and more difficult to be manifested: out of which notwithstanding God has
brought forth so great beauty, order, brightness, comeliness, yea and that
most comely. All which things I would in long discourse prove too have been
of necessity in the first matter, yea, and that by the authority of the
Profane Philisophers them selves, unless the place of scripture did confirm
it plainly enough.


S. How?


M. Moses says, and darkness was upon the deapthes, and the Spirit of God
moved upon the waters, Genesis the first chapter, and 2. verse: so that we
are enforced to defend two poinctes, which make for my side, against the
opinions of all the Philosophers. The first is, that the matter of all the
works which God made afterward, was not any small thing, or imagination in
mind, rather than in mole of body comprehensible: but that it was that huge
mole and globe, which being afterward divided into parts, contained this
earth which we go upon, and the great sea which we sail upon. They
imagine of the first matter, as if it were some thin and flittring shadow, and
altogether without form, which can not be. For a thing that existeth can not
be without all form: and what soever is without form, is nothing, and
therefore is not at all. Of which it is thus written in the book against the
foundations and grounds of the Manichees Epistles, the 29. chapter: A certain
unshapen matter without form, without quality, without measure, without
number, without weight, without order and distinction, a certain confused
thing, I wot not what, and wholly without all quality: Whereof it comes,
that certain Greek Doctors do call it (...), that is to say, without
quality. But Saint Augustine mocketh at this opinion. The second is, that
there cannot be one first matter common unto all things visible, held and
established, but there must be diverse, to wit, one of heavenly things, which
is heaven: the other of earthly things, which are the earth and the water,
which is both comprehended with it in one body, and created also at the same
time to soften the earth: which three things were first made of nothing.


S. But what are those deapthes, and pooles?


M. Even the same plainly which afterward is called the sea but y^ Grecians
term it Abyssus, and the Hebrews Tehom. And it is called Abyssus, the
deapthes, because so great Pooles and collections together of waters, are
without bottom so far as may be known, felt, or understood, so wide and
deep they are. But it is called Tehom because it is moved with an horrible
noise, and terrible roaring, insomuch as it swells and ebbeth, and flows of
it own nature, and never stands still.


S. But this is the question, whether those deapthes and moles of water, were
mingled with the earth within, in the veins and hollow passeges there of, or
only abidinge upon the uppermost face of the earth: if you say that it covered
only the uppermost face, the mole of the earth being so big as it is, could
not by means thereof wax soft: but if it were mingled with the earth, you
shall both make the Chaos more horrible, and better conceive the melting and
softeninge of that hard nature, and element. For as I suppose, you do not
agree with those who are of opinion, that those deapthes of waters were only a
thinand rare cloud which covered the earth, whereof Saint Augustine makes
report.


M. Indeed I do not agree with them: neither do I doubt but that by any of
both those means which you have declared, the Chaos may be showed and
thought to be great and horrible, whether the deapthes of water be mingled
with the earth, or only abiding upon the uppermost part of it. Neither can it
be doubted, but that y^ body of the earth being overflowed and compassed with
so many, and so great waters, was then sufficiently infused and soked.
Notwithstanding, to the end I may declare, what seems to me may be
determined in this question out of the word of God, I will allege that
which is written in the 104. Psalm. and 6. verse, where speaking of the earth,
it says thus: Thou coueredst it with the pooles, like as with a garment: so
that every part of the deapthes and waters, were not mingled with every part of
the earth, as they supose, but the whole mole of waters compassed the whole
body of the earth, and flected upon the uppermost face thereof. As afterward it
came to pass in the diluge in the time of Noe. Of which opinion this is also a
reason, that when the Spirit of God, and the darkness lay upon that vnshape^
mole, it is not written that they lay upon the earth it self but upon the
upper part of the waters and pooles, so that it plainly apeareth that the
earth was included and covered with those deapthes and pooles. Moreover, when
as the third day the deapthes were separated from the earth, the waters were
only gathered together from that compassyng and spreading abroad upon the
earth, but is not said that the waters were wron^g out of the earth, as out of
a sponge, which the^ was also needful to have been done.


The. xxiiii. Chapter. Why there was darkness upon the face of the same mole,
and matter.
S. BUt why was there darkness upon the face of the same confused mole, and
matter?


M. Uerely, to the intent that the infinite virtue, wisdom, and power of the
true God might thereby the more plainly appear, who out of so confused a male,
and so many impediments concurring, has so soon, and by his so great force
brought forth so beautiful an order of all things, yea, when there was no
mean at all existing, but rather the contrary, to distinguishe and set forth
the same with all: as S. Paul shows in the 2. too the Corinthians, the 4.
chapter, and 6. verse: for all things are wount to be distinguished in the
light. Wherefore, beesides the confusion of the mole, darkness also was an
impediment unto God. How then did God work, and distinguishe these things,
when there was darkness? Doubtless by his great and almighty power. For
the darkness specially augmenteth the horror of so great a confusion, and
does cause that the distinguishing and dividing of these things seems to be
a work altogether impossible. For, if so be that unto that which is confused
and intricate, darkness also be added, all hope and means of opening and
clearing the same is taken away: that whosoever shall divise in his mind the
means which the Lord toooke first in hand to create and distinguish this
world by, the same may cause it not only to seem to be a work full of
difficulty, but also of great impossibility. And whosoever shall behold the
beauty and form of the world, as it is now distingushed, will judge that
this work was framed and made of principles and parts very well digested and
ordered, and that there was light first before there was any other thing made.


S. Is there any injury done unto God, who being most wise, most good, most
perfect, most beautiful, is said notwithstanding too have created this first
matter so confused, who both could, and as it seems; ought, even in the very
beeginning and at the first moment have made it distinct and beautiful?


M. Uerely the Manichees were deceived in thinking so unadvisedly, and marking
so fondly. Yea, and the Valentinians also their Patriarchs for this cause were
deceived. For, being led by their own wicked thoughts in this kind of
argument, they said, that this world, and the first beginning thereof, were the
matter, fruit, and effect of a certain foul imperfection and ignorance in
God, and not the work of a wise God or woorkman, which can not be read
without horror and trembling. Against whom, Father Ireneus writes cloquently
and sharply in his 2. book, and 3. chap. But now that I may answer, and
allege that which belongs to this question: I say, that the Lord, who made
all things to the intent he might make the riches of his glory and power
known, would specially reveal himself in creatyng the world by this means
and manner, and by using the same to that purpose. Wherefore, like as it was the
part of a most wise God, to find out and choose the way that he thought most
convenient to reveal himself: so is it likewise our duty too allow,
reverence, and adore the same that he has chosen. For faith ought to be the
rule and leader of our minds to understand these works of God by, which
unless we follow, we shall conceive nothing holsomly or profitably in all
this whole work of God, be it never so wide and beautiful. For as it is
written in the 11. chapt. and 3. verse to the Hebrews: By faith we understand
that the world was made. And therefore we ought not to follow the reason of
our own brains in defining these matters.


S. But does not this mention which is made of darkness, which was spread
over the first matter, confirm Aristotle's opinion concerning privation, which
he makes to be the third beeginning of all natural things, in his 1.
book of Physikes?

Fie, away with this Privation, as a dream or dotage, in respect of a
beeginning of the world. For how can a Privation, which is nothing, be called
the cause of a thing? as though a man would defend that fire were the cause of
cold. Moreover, Aristotle's Priuatio^ sticks fast infused in the matter: but
the darkness whereof Moses speaks, was without the body of the matter, and
brought no commodity to the taking of a form, which Aristotle's privation
does: yea, the darkness rather took away al hope of receiving form, so
that Aristotle's opinion is quite repugnant to Moses.


The xxv. Chapcer. Why the spirit of God was upon this mole, and matter.
S. YOu have discoursed of the first matter of this world, and of the
wou^derful confusion thereof, or as I may call it, troubling together: declare
now why Moses speaks of the spirit of God.


M. For many causes, specially for three. First, that the creation of the
world might be understood, not only to be the work of the Father, and of
the Sun, but also of the holy ghost, who is likewise in person distinct from
them twain. Howbeit, if we consider more narrowly of the word, The spirit of
GOD, notes unto us in that place not the third person in Trinity, which is
infinite, and comprehended in no place, but only a certain effect, and power,
and presence which revealed and manifested it self there. But it is common in
the scripture, that the gifts and tokens of the holy Ghost, are taken for the
holy Ghost himself, and when they are recited, he likewise is understood to
be there by his own special means, as appears in the 3. chap. of S.
Matthewe, because we cannot know him any other way than through those his
effects, and gifts. Whererefore, the Spirit of God, had also his own proper
function and office, openly and distinctly in the creation of this world.
Secondly. that we might know by what power and spirit that first mole, which
was so great, was at the beeginning sustained and held up. Truly not of it
self, neither by the waters that were round about it, neither by the darkness
that was upon it, which rather covered that first matter which was now a
growing, as it were in a womb, and made it an untimely fruit: but by the
almighty spirit of God, which susteineth and quickneth all things by his
divine power, by whom that huge and unprofitable mole of earth and water,
subsisted, flourished, was quickened, was sustained, was retained, and as I may
say, made alive: to the end we should ascribe all these things, and their
virtues, only to the glory of God.


S. How prove you that?


M. For that all things at this present, do subsiste and are sustained by the
spirit of God: although now they have gotten their peculiare force and nature,
and yet were not destitute thereof at that time, as it is written in the 146.
Psalm, and 5. verse: and the 139. and 7. verse: Likewise in the 1. to Timothe,
the 6. Chapter, and 13. verse: and Acts the 1. chapter, the 28. verse.


S. What is the third reason?


M. To the end it might be the better declared by what means, moving, and
proceeding all things were by God drawn forth, and framed out of that first
matter and mole. Even as we see at this day, that the first See^es of
things, after that once they be sown, by Gods power are not only sustained,
but also nourished, quickened, and made warm, and so do burgein, and
sendfoorth that body which naturally they contained with in the^: so was it in
y^ first matter of all things, so that the same Spirit by his power did
sustain and nourishe the first seeds of things, and now also continually
moves the same: howbeit, that same action was then more manifestly declared,
in that there was not as yet any ordinary virtue of engendring or bringing
forth, engraffed into things by the word of God: for that was given
afterward. And therefore the spirit of GOD manifested himself mightily in
those things, and nourished that mole. Which thing Moses also teaches
plainly, in that kind of phrase which he uses.


S. Expound your saying more evidently.


M. Moses words do not only signify this, which I say, but plainly declare
it.


S. What words be they?


M. These that follow, and the spirit of God moved itself upon the top of
the waters.


S. What is the meaning of those words?


M. To wit, that the Spirit of God had given a lively force unto that great
mole, not only by which it should exist, sustain, and as it were bear up it
self: but also that it ingraffed, engendered, and raised up in it a ^ert^u^e
virtue, where by it should afterward wax hot, as it were, to conceive, and to
bring forth. For the Hebrew word Merachephet signifies, both those
things, not only, I say, to sustain and move, but also to nourish, as
birds do nourish their young ous: and also to give force to wax warm, and to
move it self: Deuteron the 32. chapter, and 11. verse: which Sainet Paul
seems to translate, to cherish, to y^ Ephesians y^ 5. chapter, and 29. verse.
Likewise, as the same Spirit of GOD is said in the 139. and 7. verse, to
work, and to be sent forth, to the intent that at this present also things
may be inge^dered, and brought forth. Who, if he should cease or be taken
away, nothing would grow, although the seeds of the^ were sown, and men
labored and toyled all that they could, but would lie choked within the
bowels of the earth, and wombes of their mothers.


S. But why is the action and woorking of that spirit, discribed, as it were,
by a certain wagging and moving of himself, and breathing forth of a wind?


M. Because the signification of the presence and action of the Holy Ghost, is
expressed by this moving, and breathing: like as in an other place, the Dove
was the signification of the presence of the same holy spirit, Matthew the 3.
chapter and 16. verse. In an other place also the fiery tongues, were seals
and signs of his operation and gifts* Acts the 1. Chapter. And in an other
place also blowinge and breathinge out of the mouth: Ihon the 20. Chapter, and
22. verse: Although the same Spirit of God, which is GOD also, is not a wind
indeed, howbeeit his woorking is signified and noted by this mystery of
moving, and breathing: for he is a quickninge Spirit: and life is specially
known by wagginge and moouinge, and discerned from death, which is an
everlasting and senseless quietness of all things. So that it is sufficiently
declared by that kind of the mystery, to what end the spirit of God was
present, and also what he did, to wit, he gave force unto things.


S. But why did that spirit remain upon the uppermost face of the waters,
for as much as Moses said not, that the water was created before: and he
might also have lain in the mids of this mole, and so have warmed and
sustained the whole mass within as it were leaven, or a fire?


M. That ye water was created by God at one time with the first earth, Moses
declares sufficiently, when he adds by and by, and darkness was upon the
face of the deapths, that is to say, upon the mole of waters. And these
words do declare, that both those elements made but the mole of one body,
which truly at the first was disordred, and consisted of them twain
together and herein there can consist no doubt. But why that force and spirit
of GOD, did specially appear in the top of the waters, that is to say, of the
whole mole, and not in the bottom or mids, the reason is this: not that it
did not pearce also unto the very deapthes, but sustained only the uppermost
face of the mole (for the Spirit of God reached at that time even unto Hell.
Psalm 139. the 5. verse. and filled also with his power, and went throughout
every part of this mole, were it never so secret and hidden) but forasmuch as
it pleased God that all these things should so be extant and done, to the
end his power should be manifest, open and easy to be known, not hid and
covered* it was behouefull that his mystery and tokens should appear and
show themselves in the vppermoste part and openly, not in the bottom of the
whole mole, or in the midst thereof, that is to say, in secret and out of
fight. Moreover, it was necessary that the same spirit should compass and
nourish the whole mole, and not one part only: which came to pass by the
houering and moving of the same Spirit about the whole mole.


S. Why does he call them earth, water, and heaven, which were not yet
distinct by that name, or separated by their proper natures? for they were so
called the days followyng, after that these things were divided one from
another.


M. As for heaven, God had made it at that time, and it was called heaven, but
the Etymon and cause of the name is understood by the latter works, which
was the stretching forth, and the woorkmanship of the second day. And thus are
they termed heaven and earth by anticipation, lest if these bodies were
signified by no names, the thing it self could not be declared. Beesides
this, inasmuch as these things are also afterward called by their own proper
names, it is a sign, that there is none other substance added unto them, but
the same retained which was in them, when as yet they were confused: but only
beauty added, whereby they were dinstinguished from other things of diverse
kinds, and also made more beautiful in themselves.


S. What? do you allow and renew the opinion of Anaxagoras, who thincketh,
that in the beeginninge all things were mingled together, and that every thing
was made one of an other, and terms the first beginning of all things, but
a distinction and separation out of a certain confused heap, wherein they were
before?


M. No not so: for I do not say, that within the same, mole of earth, whereof
I do now dispute, there were hidden and buried trees already framed, men
fourmed, or cattle and beasts shapen, and that they were covered and
infoulded within certain plightes and fouldes, and so were extant, as
Anaxagoras thought: but Moses confuteth this, who shows, yt those things
which were brought forth the days following, were made, and not only severed,
neither taken and separated, as it were, out of a certain heap, and
stoarehouse of all things. Howebeeit, I may truly say with Saint
Augustine, that the seeds of all things were at the first, yea, and that
thoroughly infused into that first matter: which seeds were not diverse from
the substance of the earth, and yet lay hidden within the bowels thereof: but
the earth being made apt by the word and woorking of the Spirit, did
afterward bring forth those things, which it pleased God should be in the
world. To conclude, how should we bring in this Anaxagoras confusion,
since we read so plainly in the holy Scripture, that the matter of heavenly
things is diverse and separated, from the matter of earthly things? And, as I
suppose, that heaven which as it is written, God made the first day when he
made the earth, was the matter of all heavenly things.


The xxvi. Chapter. Of the matter of heavenly things that are visible.
S. BUT what shall we think of that first Heaven, which was the matter of
heavenly things?


M. That it was not this place, which is called the air, or this open
spreadyng abroad, which was created the second day, Genesis the 1. chapter,
and 8. verse: but rather that the matter of heavenly things was by God
prepared, which by a general name is called heaven.


S. What manner of thing was that heaven, which you call the matter of heavenly
things?


M. Uerely, first it was obscure and darcke, although it were made of a most
subtle and fine substance, but unshapen and disorder, not trim to sight,
nor separated by space or distaunce of place, from the mole of earth and water:
as it appears in the 1. Chapter of Genesis, and 6. verse, but was as yet
near unto it, and touched it.


S. What, was it needful also, that the heavenly matter should be stieped in
the water, as the earthly was, to the end that the heavenly bodies should
afterward be made thereof?


M. Fie for shame. We read not that those heavenly bodies, to wit, the Sun,
the Moon, the stars, and all that which is called the region of heaven,
which God has placed above the elements, were so made out of heaven, as the
earthly were made out of the earth. For like as it is said in the 1. chap. and
11. verse of Genesis, Let the earth bring forth every green herb that
bears seed, and let the water bring forth fish, the 1. chap. of Genesis,
and 20. verse: so is it not likewise written and commanded by God, let heaven
bring forth the Sun and the Moon: but only thus, Let there be lights in
the face of the open heaven. Genesis the 1. chapter, and 14. verse. Whereby it
sufficiently appears, that the first Heaven, was not in such manner the
matter of heavenly things, as it were a certain plentiful and fruitful Father
of them: neither that the matter of heavenly things was so ordained, as the
earth was appointed by GOD too be the matter, and mother of earthly things.


S. Why would the Lord have things so diversely to be made out of those
matters, and that heavenly things should not be made out of heaven, as well
as the earthly are out of the earth?


M. Not only for this cause, that like as they were made by him of diverse
matter, and differing in kind (although they be all partakers of body) so
likewise it beehooued them to declare their use, and execute their duty in
diverse manner, too the end, their difference might be understood and
perceived: but also that God might reveal unto us the better, his mighty
power, and also his manifold wisdom in so great variety of bringing forth
things. So likewise in the framing of man only, God has used one mean in
creating his body, and another his soul, and by those means continually
creates and makes them, notwithstanding that he is able to make them both by
one mean.


The. xxvii. Chapter. What is the form of the world.
S. HEthertoo concerning the matter of the world, say sumwhat now, if you
can, touching the form thereof.


M. I will do so.


S. What therefore, is the form of this so great a work?


M. There cannot be one only, and that substantial, thereof assigned. For as
I have showed before, it is not possible that there should be one only, and
particulare soul of all the world, which being dispersed throughout every
part of the body thereof, should wag, stir, and move this so hugie frame
and mole: whatsheuer the Aristotelians and Platonikes do suppose. Likewise, S.
Augustine in his 7. book de Genesiad Literam, and 12. chapter, does justly
deney, that GOD is the soul of this world, as of some living creature,
forasmuch as he dwells above the body of the world, and above every
Spirit, and stretches beeyonde the ends of the whole world. But God has
given unto every kind, his proper nature and form* which are disputed of in
special treatises, which are written of every kind of thing. As for
roundenesse, which some attribute to the world, as the natural form
thereof: it ought not too be counted or called the inward or essential form
of the world, but only the outward and accidental.


S. But, does not the Scripture attribute unto the world parts, and
differences of situation, as it were to a living creature, and countries, and
regions also distinct one from another?


M. It does so indeed, but notwithstanding it proves not, that there is but
one and theself same form, spirit and soul beelongyng to this world, and
that it is a living creature.


S. Why so?


M. For, forasmuch as there be three kinds of bodies, and ioynynges in
composition: one simple and continual, as a man: the second joined and
touching one another, as an whole house: the third disioyned, as a flock: it
is truly said, that every kind of body, as it were, a certain whole thing,
has evermore some parts, into which it is divided, and also sundry
differences of place and situation, which may be noted in it: howbeeit, every
kind of body is not governed by one soul only, or one Spirit, or one
form: but that only which we termed before, simple and continual, as
every one of us, for example.


The xxviii. Of the parts of the world, and first of the Ethereall, and
Elementare region.
S. Which then be the principal parts of the world, whereof the scripture
makes mention?


M. They are of sundry kinds. For some be integral, which are the parts
constituting the whole world, which we term substanciall: othersome
distinguishing it only, and limited by reason of certain uses, and
commodities.


S. Which are the integrall, and constituting parts of the world?


M. There are briefly twain, for the most part proposed by the Scripture, to
wit, the heaven and earth: as it appears to the Colossians the 1. chapter and
16. verse: and Genesis the 1. chap. and 2. verse: and Isay the 1. chap. and 1.
verse, and in other places almost infinite: although in Genesis the 49. cha.
and 25. verse, heaven and the deapthes be also reckned.


S. What did the Scripture then contain under the name of heaven?


M. All that region of this world, which is called by the Philosophers
Ethereall, and contains the celestial and vnengendred bodies, which
continue, and are not changed since the first day of their creation, as says
S. Peter, 2. of Peter, the 3. chapter, and 4. verse.


S. And what under the name of the earth?


M. Not only this body, and element which we properly call the earth, but
also that whole region of this world, which by the Philosophers is termed
Elementare, which contains in it such bodies as are engendered, and are
continually subject to alteration.


S. Do these two regions differ?


M. Yea, very much both in name and effect. In name, for that the first is
called heaven, and this latter part of the world is termed by the name of
the elements, yea and that by the scripture. For S. Peter in the 2. Epistle,
the 3. Chapter, the 10. and 14. verses, distinguishes these words, Heaven, and
y^ Elements. In effect, for that this endures and continues in the old
state: the other is daily changed, and at one time is engendered, and at an
other time perishes. The first, God has reserved to himself, the other he
has given to the use of man: Psalm 115. and 16. verse. The first, as we are
taught, shall perish at the latter day but with sinale noise, and a light
flashe of flame, for that it consists of a fine and subtle nature: but the
other shall burn with great heat, and be dissolved with mighty rage of fire,
eeuen in such sort, as look how it hapeneth in our earthly and material fire
when it flameth, the sticks crack, and smoke, and send forth a vapor, which
proceeds from the moist parts thereof: so it is said that the elements
shall glowe with heat, and melt, for that they are of an hard, thick and
clammie nature, and not pure and clean. This difference also may be observed
between the two parts of the world, that the things which are in the first,
are the efficient and principal causes, of those things that are engendered in
ye other. But the things that are in the second and eleme^tare part of the
world, are the material causes of those things which are hear engendered.
Wherefore they be in the things, and do constitute and make their substance:
which use and function ye word, element, when it is properly taken does
signify.


S. How far does each of these regions extend, and which be the farthest
ends and bounds of them both?


M. I will now touch them in few words, and at an other time perhapes
declare them more at large. Some determine the ethereall and heavenly region,
from the highest heaven unto the circle of the Moon. And the elementare, from
that place which is under this circle and sphere, unto the lowest center of
the earth. Howbeit, othersome suppose rather, that the Moon belongs to the
elementare and earthly region of the woorlde: concerning which varictie of men's
opinions, read Plutarches book of the face which appears in the globe of
the Moon. Howbeit, I have always thought the first opinion to be truest.


S. What think you then, of that general division of things, whereby all
things that are in this world are divided, not into two parts, but into
four general kinds, to wit, of things that are in heaven, upon the earth,
under the earth, and in the sea, as it is to be seen in the Reuelat. the 5.
chapter and 13. verse? And Saint Paul likewise, has plainly distinguished
three kinds of things to wit, of heaven, of the earth, and of under the earth:
To the Philip. the 2. chapter, and 20. verse.


M. Those general diuisio^s of things whereof you spoke, and whatsoever other
there be, may easily be revoked unto these two general kinds of things
which I proposed. For that which is called the earthly and elementare Region,
comprehends all things that are upon the earth, and in the earth, and in the
waters: yea, those things also that are called things under the earth: which
for the most part are none other in the Scripture, than the things that are in
the sea, as it apeareth by the interpretation which God himself made in the 20.
chap. of Exodus, and 4. verse. And the ethereall region contains all things
that are called heavenly.


The xxix. Chapter. Of the East, West, North, and South parts of the world.
S. DIscourse now of that kind of parts, whi che you termed distinguishing,
and not constituting parts of the world.


M. These be four in number, called thus in the Hebrew tongue. Quedem, Iamin,
Tsaphon, Negeb, or Iamita: and among us thus: East, West, North, and South,
all which Sainet Augustine thinks to be comprehended, and signified by this
word Adam: applying the Hebrew word to the Greek.


S. But what was the cause and reason of first devising these names?


M. It is not needful to seek out the causes and reasons of the Greek and
Latin words, For they are commonly known. And as for the Hebrew words, this
I think, is the reason of them. The East is called Quedem, because it is the
first or foremost part of the world. The west Iamin, which signifies the
sea, because in the West part of the world lies ye great sea which is called
Mare Mediteraneum, the midlande sea. The North Tsaphon, for that, that part of
the world was hid and unknown to the Hebrews, in respect of the regions of
the earth, and of the people with who^ they had no trafycque nor dealinge,
because of the distance of place beetweene them. So that the case stood
contrary with them and us now, who daily behold the North stare and poale.
And as for the South, it is always hidden from us. The South is called by them
Negeb, because that quarter of the world is dry barrein, and burnt with the
perpetual heat and skorching of the Sun: or it may be called Iamin the
first syllable being long, that thereby it may differ from the first Iamin,
which has the first syllable short, because that when we look into the
East. y^ South is on our right hand, and not on our left.


S. Where does the scripture make mention of these four quarters of the world?


M. Almost in infinite places, of which we will allege these few. Genesis,
the 13. chap. and 14. verse: and the 28. chap., and 14. verse: Psalm. 107. and
3. verse: Isay y^ 47. chap. and 5. and 6. verses: Psalm. the 75. and 7. verse


S. Why do you call these only distinguishing parts?


M. Because we observe them, only for the use and commodity of men.


S. For what commodity?


M. Specially for four, whereof two do appertain to the public and common use
of all men and other two do concern the private commodity of every place and
country.


S. Declare this more at large.


M. This distinction of the quarters of the world was necessary for the use
of man, for two causes. The first to the end that the nations and people of
this world might be distinguished one from another: whereof we say some dwell
East, some west, some north, and some south. Moreover, to observe the course of
the Su^ne (whose benefit al nations do enjoy) who rising in ye East, goes by
ye south, until at length he comes into ye West. And finally, to declare the
force and original of the winds: all which cannot possibly be understood and
observed, unless these four quarters of the world be distinguished. And as
touching private use also, it was necessary that they should be distinct.
First, to the intent that the limits and situation of every kingdom, people,
and country, may be discribed. And also that it might be signified and set
forth, where the bounds and ends are of the houses, fendes and places of
every territory, and so thereby in the end all strife and contention be
taken from among private men, concerning the bounds of their lands.


S. I understand what you say. But what are these regio^s distinct by nature,
or rather are they fantasied by the opinion of men, so yt every private
people, or man, may wheresoever he will, make East, West, North and South? For
that region of heaven and earth which is called by the Hebrews Tsaphon, that is
to say, hidden, and by us the North: the same is oftentimes unto us wide,
plain and open to be seen, like as that region of Heaven which was unknown
too the Jews, is unto all the Northren people. And contrariwise, the Southren
Region of Heaven, and the Poale of the world which was seen of them, is
hidden from us as is also the Star called Canopus, with such other.
Moreover, that part of the world which is on the right hand to us, is
oftentimes on the left hand to others. whereof came that which Virgill spoke
of the Articke Poale:

This top over our heads aloft remains still in fight:
The other black Styx sees below, and ghostes that dwell in night.
And that saying also of the Poet Lucane:

Arabians, you now are come into a strangie land,
Much woundring not to see thee shadows fall on your left hand:
with other such like to that purport.


M. No truly. For these quarters of the world be by nature determined,
forasmuch as it can not be East but where the Sun rises: neither West,
but where he goes down. Neither North, or South be appointed, but in plain
contrary parts of the world: the North, where the Northren people dwell,
and South in the contrary part. And although we doc here use these words,
the rising and setting of the Sun, generally and strictly, and not for any
one precise part or point in heaven (for the Sun rises moan place in the
Winter, and in another in y^ Spring, and in another in Summer) notwithstanding
he rises always in one certain place of the world, neither does he pass y^
determinate bounds which the Lord has appointed unto him, too keep his
course in throughout the whole year. Wherefore, this distinction of the parts
of the world, consists not in the opinion of men, or at every man's pleasure,
but is defined and limited by nature, true separation, and experience.


S. Concerning those five quarters and zones, which the Astronomers do
describe in heaven, and upon the earth, of which Virgill has written thus:

Five zones there be which Heaven whole divide: and that which follows:

Again, so many coasts there are upon the earth below,
Whereof the middle uninhabitable is, it so with heat does glowe.
And twain are drenched deep in snow: whereof the one lies to the Northren
Poale, the other to the Southren, and as for the middie ones: between them
both he placed, And with just temperature of heat and cold he interlaced, and
therefore are called habitable: tell me what is your opinion?


M. Although the scripture do not so plainly distinguishe them, yet it calls
one of them Arets, and the earth: the other Tebet, and the habitable world.
Isay, the 33. chapter, 1. verse: and the 38. and 11. verse: whereby it is
declared, that certain Regions of this world are more commodiously and
commonly inhabited, forasmuch as we dauy see that the extreme force of cold
and heat are many times intolerable unto men. Psalm 149. the 17. verse: and
Psalm 91. and 6. verse: and Psalm 121. and 6. verse. Wherefore, experience
tea^^th this to be true, neither do I think that this partition is too vee
rejected, for that it serves too some use: howbeit these places being
searched out by the new nauigations undertaken by men of our age, may be the
more commodiously known.


The. xxx. Chapter. Where these positions are to be found, high, low, before,
behind, on the right hand, and on the left.
S. DIscourse now concerning the sundry differences of situations and places,
which are noted and marked in this world.


M. They are in number six. and they are taken from those three dimensions,
which properly beelong unto bodies. To wit, high, low, before, beehinde, on
the right hand, on the left.


S. How so?


M. For that is proper unto every natural body too be long, broad, deep or
thick. As for those deliniations which are plain and flat, they are not
bodies, but superficies, that is to say, vppermoste faces: and therefore one
of those three dimensions is noted and taken by a right line. But there be
two extreme parts or ends of every straight line. Wherefore there be six
extreme parts or ends of those three dimensions or straight lines, which
do distinguishe and make so many sundry differences of place or situation.
And in length, we term one end high, another low. In breadth, we place
those, on the right hand, and on the left hand. In deapthe or thickness,
before, and beehinde. Howbeeit these two latter differences can not be
observed in every kind of body, but only in that which is called the body
of a living Creature, and is endued with sense.


S. How comes this about, that you reckon only three dimensions of a body,
and S. Paul recites four, to wit, length, breadth, height and deapth: to the
Ephesians the 3. chapter, and 18. verse: likewise in Job the 11. chapter, and
8. and 9. verses, the same are recited.


M. You say truly. Howbeeit these two, deapthe and height, are indeed, and
subject all one, and in reason only distinguished.


S. Declare this more at large.


M. Like as it is the very same way, says Aristotl^, which leads from
Athenes to Thebes, and from Thebes to Athenes: and like as in one and the self
same ladder and staiers, indeed and in respect of the subject, the going up,
and the going down is all one: the going up, if a man climb from the lowest
step to the higstest: the going down, if he descend from the highest step
too the lowest. So in very deed are highth and deapth: but it is then called
highth, when a man looks up from the lowest to the highest: and deapth when
he looks down from the top to the bottom, so that we use but one kind for
both these dimensio^s. And thus it comes to pass, that there be only six
differences of place, and not eight.


S. May there then, or ought any regions in this world be called, on the
right hand, on the left hand, first, last, high, or low?


M. Uerely, if I should stand to declare, how diverse the opinions of men be,
touching this poincte only* I should not only be wearisome, but also far
pass the bounds of mine argument, which I have taken in hand. For
Astronomers do otherwise, and in other places appointe them, and Southsaiers
otherwise, and Historicians otherwise. To be short, eeuen in that very
point, sundry nations are of sundry opinions: as for example the Egiptians,
who will have the East to be the forepart of the world: the West the hinder
part: The North, the right side: and the South the left, as Plutarche writes
in Iside, contrary unto that which Nature, and common course of all things
does admit. The East is the right side of the world, says Aristotle, and
the Weste the left: for the world moves eeuen like a man that beeginneth at
the right hand to set forth upon his journey, on whose right side then is the
North, and the South part of the world on his left. Varro in his 6. book
de lingua Latina, is of an other opinion, to wit, that the East is on the left
hand, the Weste on the right, the Southe right before, and the North
beehinde. But the Scripture says otherwise.


S. What says the Scripture?


M. It constantly calls the East the fore part of the world: the West, the
hinder: the South the right side: and the North the left.


S. How prove you that?


M. First, out of that place of Job, which is in the 23. chapter, 8. and 9.
verses: and because it follows necessarily, that if you make the East the
foremoste part of the world, that then the North multe be on the left hand:
and the South on the right it plainly appears unto him, whosoever shall look
into ye East. And likewise Dionisius. Halicarnasseus teaches, that the same is
necessarily gathered.


S. Why does the Scripture make the East to be the face and foremoste part
of the world?


M. Because, like as our senses, specially our eyes and countenance, are placed
in the face and foremoste part of the man: so does the light first rise unto
us from that part of the world. Whereby it comes to pass, that al men turn
their countenances thither: yea the brute beasts also of the field, who in
the mornings as they feed in the Meadows, do turn themselves toward the
risyng of the Sun, for light. Thus, by very instinct of Nature, all things
do acknowledge and confess that this part of the world, is as it were, the
face, eyes, and fore part of the world.


S. Me thinks, that these things in the world are distinguished rather in
respect of us, than of Nature.


M. Truly, the world is distinguished indeed, specially in respect of us.
For in a circle properly, and of it self, nothing can be said to be on the
right hand, nothing on the left, nothing before, nothing beehinde, forasmuch
as all parts of the circumference, in that kind of figure, are equally
placed. And therefore Arnobius says well in his 4. book: The world of it
own nature, has neither right hand, neither left: neither high regions,
neither low: neither before, neither beehinde. For whatsoever is round has
neither beginning, neither ending. And therefore when we say, this country is
on the right hand, this on the left: we speak it not in respect of the
world, but of the place where we ourselves are situate and dwel^yng. This
far Arnobius. Whereby it appears, how foolish and without ground that
opinion of the ancient Hetruscane Southsaiers is, who judged, that left hand
lightnyng, left hand bird fliyng, let hand signs of heaven, are of nature
more fortunate, than those which appeared in any other part of the world.
For that which is on the left hand to me, may be on the right hand to
you, because these differences of place and situation, are changed by the
diverse respect and reason of men.


S. What, does the Scripture also note high, and low in the world?


M. Yea, plainly.


S. Where?


M. In the 11. chapte of Job, the 8. and 9. verses: and Exodue, the 20.
chapter, and 4. verse.


S. Is there then, some place of the world high and some low?


M. The whole region of heaven is called high and above: and the earth low and
beneath.


S. How prove you that?


M. Out of the above recited places of Job, and Exodus: whereunto also you may
add if you please the 6. verse of the 10. chapter to the Romans: and Deuteronomy.
the 5. chapter, and 8. verse, and almost infinite other like places, as Isay
the 44. chapter, and 23. verse: and Proverbs the 25. chapter, and 1. verse.


S. But tell me, is it so of nature, or consists it only in the opinion of
men, that one part of the world is high, and another low?


M. Of nature surely: for those things that are light do naturally tend
upward, and go toward heaven: and the things that are heavy downwarde,
and toward the earth. Moreover, if we consider the order of things, God has
thus appointed, that those higher things shall work vpoon these lower. For
heaven woorketh upon these earthly things, and we perceive the influences
and effects thereof diuersely, and either it brings forth, or distroyeth
many things upon the earth, as it were, with to much rain, or drought.
Wherefore, Heaven, both by nature of the place, and also situation, is higher
than the earth. Howbeit, concerning this poinet S. Augustine gravely disputes
in the 83. book, and 29. question. For he demands this question, whether
in this universality and world, which is contained within a circulare form,
sumthing may be called high and sumthing low, seeinge all the parts thereof
consist in equal situation.


M. Concerning the circumfere^ce of a circle, perhaps this question may be
demanded, which indeed was S. Augustines meaning, whether the one part thereof
be high and an other low: for in truth, in respect of themselves, they are al
of equal situatio^. But touching the things themselves which are comprehended
within the Circle, this question is clear, and out of doubt. For in every
circle the circumfere^ce is the upper part thereof, and the center the lower:
unto which part those things which come nearest of lowest: like as those
highest yt are nearest to the circumference of the circle.


S. Which is the middle part of the world?


M. The midest of the world may be doubly considered, either in respect of
substance, or of place. Which the great Philosopher Plutarche first observed
in his book of the contrariety of the Stoikes. The midds of the world in
respect of substance is not some o^e certain body, but many, as y^ aier, water,
with other that ^^^e partly of the nature of heaven, and partly of the earth.
But the midds in respect of place, is the earth, as it is agreed upon by those
that hold opinion, that the compass and capablenesse of the world is of a
round and sphericall figure. For, as they affirm, the earth stands in stead
of a center, in comparison of the whole world. Touching which opinion, although
they contend against it, which dency that there be any Antipodes, or dwellers
on the otherside of the earth right against us, as Lactantius and S. Augustine,
good and allowed auctours have done: yet is it more true and credible that
there are such Antipodes, and the rather, for that there can be nothing
alleged out of the Scriptures, to confyrme the authority of Lactantius and S.
Augustine by: and also reason plainly proves it to be true, to wit, the
situation of countries, and the elevation of the Poales.


The. xxxi. Chapter. The chief end of the creation of the world, is, the glory,
and knowledge of God the creator.
S. HEthertoo you have declared the efficient, material, and formal cause of
the world, it remains also that you say sumwhat of the fourth, which is the
final cause: concerning which I demand this question of you, what is the
final cause of the creation of the world, as the scripture notes?


M. You did well to add that clause, as the Scripture notes. For there is
none among the Philosophers, except only Plato and Trimegistus, that, although
they wounder at the world, does declare notwithstanding for what cause it was
made, and what is the end of the creating, or now subsisting thereof. No not
Aristotle himself, although he wroate about 30. sundry books more or less,
concerning the nature of things, which books are extant at this day, and
tossed in all men's hands.


S. Tell me therefore, what is the end of the creating, and conseruyng of the
world?


M. To speak briefly, eeuen the everlasting and immortal GOD himsef, for the
acknowledging and setting forth of whose glory it was created.


S. How prove you that?


M. Not only for that Father Ireneus writes so, in his 2, book, and 64.
chap. but because the spirit of God teaches us so. For first, the holy
Scripture shows plainlye, that all things were made for the glory of the
true GOD, who is revealed unto us in his word: Proverbs, the 16. chapter,
and 16. verse: and also S. Paul says in the 1. chapter to the Romans, the
20. verse, that the knowledge of GOD is learned out of these created and
visible things. For this world is a familiare, common to all lands, people,
and nations, a free and most beautiful looking glass, wherein the power,
wisdom and goodness of God is laid forth before us to be seen, beeholden
and acknowledged, as it is abundantly declared in the 29. Psalm, the 1. 2. 3.
4. and 5. verses: whereunto you may add that which is written in the book of
wisdom the 13. chapter, the 1. and 5, verses. Hereof cummeth that saying of
Job, in the 36. chapter, and 29. verse: Remember that thou do magnify his
work (he means Gods) which all men do beehold and see, and man looks
upon a far of. And therefore Isay in the 44. chapter, and 23. verse, not
only inuiteth men, but all other creatures also to sing praise unto God. The
like is also done in the 147. Psalm.


S. But seeing that the glory of God, is the setting forth of his virtues and
excellency, what virtues, or exceading greatness does there appear in the
looking glass of this world, wherein are seen such and so many confusions of
all things?


M. There are object unto our eyes so infinite and innumerable virtues,
moreover so noble and incomprehensible excellency and majesty, that the
eternal deity of the almighty God, does truly and manifestly shewfoorth it
self in the beeholding and surueiyng of this world, as S. Paul says. But
that I may not run through all, and that this disputation may at length draw
to an end, we will revoke and contract the end of this world into the
klowledge of three special virtues in God.


S. Which be they?


M. Power, wisdom, goodness.


S. Allege unto me some example of these things.


M. First, the power of God appears wounderful great in creating this world,
yea, plainly infinite, and far surmounting al capacity and understanding of
man's wit. In that God has made all these things of nothing, so many in
number, so big in Mo^e, and so wide in place. Which being all severally
beholden and considered, do argue great power and force in the maker: but
being generally looked upon, do declare that his power is incomprehensible and
infinite. This power of God in creating the world, is proposed unto us to be
acknowledged and thought upon, namely in the 19. Psalm, and also in the 145.
And as for other places of the Scriptures and Prophets, what shall I need to
go about to recite them in this place?


S. Give me an example of Gods wisdom, in the creating and contemplation of
the woorkmanship of this world.


M. That may easily be seen. First, in that he has placed so many sundry
and diverse parts, and so many several kinds of things in one whole body:
next, that he has given a peculiare and proper force and nature unto every
kind: Moreover, that he has allotted to every nature his own proper place
and metion: and to be short, that he assigns not only unto every kind, but
also unto every part of every particulare thing, it own proper use, end,
profit, and effect. So that, that great wisdom of God has not made, no not
the least thing in vain, which is truly the manifold wisdom, as S. Paul
terms it to the Ephesians the 3. chapter, and 10. verse. And therefore it is
said in the 136. Psalm: and 5. verse, that he made the heavens with
unsearchable understanding and wisdom. And when as the Prophet David
considered in his mind deeply the framing of this world, he cried out, and
said: Thy knowledge is to wonderful and excellent for me, I can not attain
unto it: Psalm 139. and 6. verse: whereunto also that may be added which is
written in the 39. chapter, and 26. verse of Ecclesiasticus. This our opinion
also is confirmed in the 8. chapt. and 27. and 28. verses, and the residue
following: and also the 21. cha. and 30. verse: and by this one thing moreover,
that whereas there be certain things, yea, and men also, that are of diverse
and fundrie qualities and conditions, and of natures quite contrary: they were
to good purpose by the same wisdom of God, created in such manner. For the
Lord has wisely, made a difference and distinction beetweene the ritchman and
the poor: Proverbs, the 22. chapter, and 2. verse. To be short, those
things which we make none accoumpt of, and are indeed but small, as a Guat,
a Woorme, and a Butterfly, in these notwithstanding appears the wonderful
wisdom of God, insomuche as we must needs acknowledge that to be true
which was spoken by Pliny an Heathen writer: Nature is never more whole in any
thing then in the least.


S. What say you of the goodness of God, does that appear notably in the
woorkemanship, and creatures of this world?


M. Yea, very mutch. And although the ^ame be mosteuident in y^ redemption of
mankind, which was accomplished by the death and passion of our Lord Jesus
Christ: notwithstanding it appears also unto us to be very excellent and
incomprehensible, in the creation, constitution, and co^seruation of this world.


S. Declare how?


M. First, this is a great goodness of God, that he would have things to
exist and be, which were not before. Moreover, in that he gave them life and
nature, to the intent they should exist, which could not be had from any
other than him. Who only is the fountayn of life and afterward has assigned
unto every kind of thing it own proper and most convenient food, and and not
assigned it once, but also prepares, distributeth, and yeldeth it every day.
Finally, in that he daily preserves and defends all things that are: and
being a good and merciful father, of his own great bowntie has not only
given them parts and members, whereby they may co^modiously live, but endewed
them also with motion and sense. Whereby they may pass their life pleasantly,
and willingly enjoy it with a sweet delight. All which it were infinite to
reckon. And therefore it is well and truly said in the 33. Psalm. and 5. verse,
that the whole earth is full of his goodness. And again, in the 145. Psalm.
and 7. verse, it is said, that the multitude of the goodness of God,
springs forth from his works: For he opens his hand, and satisfied
every living thing unto fulness and pleasure. Whereunto that seems to
appertain which is written in the 147. and 148. Psalm. and that may well be
concluded, which all the ancient and godly Fathers have judged and specially
Tertullian has oftentimes written, to wit, That God by the creatinge of this
world, is cognized, and by the preaching of his word is recognized.


S. But there appear many confusions in this world, which do obscure the
light of this goodness, wisdom and power of God.


M. Indeed they darken them somewhat, and sum while that they cannot plainly
be seen of many: Howbeit they do not altogether obscure, or wholly take away
y^ appearing of those the virtues of God, which he has imprinted in his
works. And moreover, forasmuch as these confusions, as you term them, are
the effects of his just judgment, if we so consider of them as we ought,
surely they shall the more set forth the power, and wisdom of God, and not
obscure it.


The xxxii. Chapter. What knowledge of God may be had, by the beeholdinge of
this world.
S. BUT that knowledge of God which may be had by beeholding the world,
and the visible creatures, is it sufficient of it self to get the perfect
understanding of him, or rather does it contain and deliver unto us certain
principles thereof which we must more perfectly and at full afterward seek
and learn by some other means, to wit, out of the word of God which is
written and revealed unto us? For by the framinge and creation of the world we
cannot know that Christ is our Savior, and mediator unto God for us.


M. You say well. For Saint Paul answers in the Epistle to the Romans,
the 1. chapter, and 20. verse, that although the knowledge which is had by the
world, be true, yet is it not fully sufficient, that thereby we may
understand any thing concerning our salvation through Christ: but that it is
in this respect profitable, that thereby we are made vnaccusable. For it
teaches us that God is our Creator, but it is not able to enfourme us y^ he
is also our redeemer through Christ: For we are not able to atteine to that
knowledge without the preachinge of the Gospel. Wherefore, we must not begin
with that knowledge of God, whereby we understand that he is our savior,
but rather that he is our creator, whereat we must indeed beeginne, and
consequently proceed unto better and higher things. For the Heathen people and
Philosophers, who chiefly followed this knowledge of Natural things, neither
perceived they the reason of man's salvation which is in Christ only: neither
were they themselves saved, because they lacked faith. It profits
notwithstanding, and it mutch profits too, that we seek the true God, that
has created all these things: and when we have found him, that we woorship
him and pray unto him, as far as he shall give us grace so to do. This
much at the leastwise he wringeth from us whether we will or no: that he
ought both to be sought and worshipped, who has first created, and now
governs all this world. Wherefore, if we neither seek him, neither woorship
him, he makes us inexcusable.


S. But there be many, that either have not seen at all that way of finding
out God: or when they were entered, have not perceived that glory of God,
whereof you spoke: or else by how much the more they have profited in the
knowledge of this world and natural things, so much the more securely and
boldly have they despised God, like as in times past did the Epicurian
Philosophers, and at this day also to many do.


M. These are the great imperfections and vices of men, which you speak of,
and a sharp accusation of the wonderful frowardnes of man's nature, not the
woorkmans fault, or want of the light of Gods glory, which shines most
brightly in his works. For that light shines clearly enough in this world,
and in such sort as it cannot be put out, and also is easily seen whosoever
will lift up his eyes unto it, and look upon it. For God has engraven in the
world great and wonderful tokens of his goodness, power, and wisdom: he
lays also before our eyes most manifest testimonies, and documentes that may
be understood, yea by the most ignorant persons. Which, whosoever does not see,
let him accuse him self, or his own sluggishnes, and not the hardness of the
book which God has said before our eyes: or the difficulty of the style
thereof: or the dimnesse of the lookingglasse, which indeed we have a most
bright one in the contemplation of this world. For the 19. Psalm does
sufficiently remove this slander from God and his woorkmanship, saying, that
he has founded his truth in the heavens. Psalm 89. and 3. verse. Who has
distinguished and depainted with lively colors, the other arguments and
tokens of his praise in them, as it were, by a certain ingrauyng. Therefore, in
that men of old times have not seen so manifest signs of God, neither see at
this day, neither do profit by them toward the atteining of the knowledge of
God, it comes by means of their own fault, who by reason of their sin
have lost the true light of their minds: which if it had continued in the
first state of it own creation, truly then should they have seen these
signs not obscurely and fayntly, but acknowledged them plainly and perfectly,
and confessed them too be great and wonderful.


S. How then comes it to pass, that if this world be the lookinglasse of so
great virtues in God, and that so bright and so clear, why in another place is
man, and why also is Christ called the image of God, wherein he sets himself
down before us to be seen, and known? It is in vain that you tell us of
another lookinglasse, if this world be so fair an one as you make it C^l^s^.
the 1. chapter, and 15. verse.


M. If we say, that one thing may have many images, and that in sundry
respects, we shall not grant any absurdity. So that, although these three
be called looking glasses, wherein God represents himfelf, yet they be so
called, in diverse respects, and with a large difference. The world is not
called the image of God, which notwithstanding, is verified of man, and
Christ, for the world is only the looking glass of Gods virtues, as it is
their subject, that is to say, that wherein they do express and show
themselves by sundry means and effects. And man is the image of God, and not
only the lookinge glass of his power, but also of his nature after a manner,
for man of all other creatures of the world comes nearest to the nature of
God, and carried the very form of him in the light of his mind and the
vprightnes of his will, which was in him at his first creation. But Christ who
is God manifested in the flesh, who was without sin, in whom the Godhead
remained, who in his whole life and by all means showed forth the nature,
similitude and figure of God through his great power, wisdom, and clemency,
is in a far more excellent respect the image of God than was the first man,
although he were sound and perfect. Wherefore, the world has no such
similitude and likelinesse with Christ, who is unto us not only the image, and
as it were the shadow of the goodness, Wisdom, and Power of God, but also
the most bright, and selfsame representation of the fathers substance: Hebrews
the 1. chapter and 3. verse. And therefore he is not called only the image,
but also the lively brightness of the Fathers glory. And yet farther to the
intent it may be the better understood, what, and how great the difference is
we must note, that the world and man are a notable, but yet a shadowed
representation of those things which they do teach us, concerning god. And
Christ ye express and lively form, in whose inward, natural, and
substanciall brightness, we may most evidently behold the infinite power of
God, and incomprehensible love toward us men. Thus therefore, when we
think upon God and behold him in all other things, such is our vanity,
that immediately we decay and come to naught: but when we look upon him in
Christ, we are quieted and stayed most firmly and substantially. Wherefore
there ought no comparison be made between these, which differ in kind, and
manner of representation.


The xxxiii. Chapter. Two ends of the world, not chief.
S. BUT be there not also other final causes of the world?


M. Yeas, there be two but not chief.


S. What be they.


M. The first is this, to wit, the use of al men. For this world was created
for man's sake, and man for GOD. The second is, for the Church or congregation.
For the world was created to the intent it should be an house and dwelling
place prepared for the Church and congregation that should be hereafter where
in it might remain of it own right, which congregation God would establishe
there, and afterward bring to heaven.


S. How prove you this?


M. First, out of the 8. Psalm. And secondly, by that which S. Paul writes
to the Romans the 4. Chapter, and 13. verse.


The xxxiiii. Chapter. Of the means and engines whereby God raised this so
great a frame of the world: and first of the word of God which was the
means whereby this world was created.
S. Hitherto you have declared the causes of this world, now show the means
and instruments whereby it was created. And when mention is made of the
creation of the woorlde some do demand what wedges, what tools and engines
were occupied to the rearinge up of so great a mole, and they think themselves
not satisfied unless answer be made unto those doubts of their mind.


M. They that seek to know with what instruments this world was created, do
very foolyshly, forasmuch as this word, create, does sufficiently declare,
that all this whole work is plainly miraculous, and supernatural. For God
used no tools nor engines as carpenters use to do, thereby to supply the
infirmity of their strength. But all his framing and buildinge, and the
woorkemanship of this world, does differ far from all our means, and
pollices.


S. Tell me then what it was.


M. In declaringe the means by which this world was created, there are four
things annexed, which we must not pretermit, and they perteine to the settinge
forth of Gods glory and omnipotency: whereof the first is this, that the
world was created at the word and commandment of God.


S. How prove you that?


M. Behold a most manifest place of the Scripture, in the 33. Psalm. 9. verse,
For he spoke and it was done, he commanded and it stood fast: and in the
148. Psalm and 5. verse: He commanded and they were created. Moreover Moses
in the first chapter of Genesis before the creation of every thing, as they
were made and created orderly in every day, so does he plainly show, that
the word and commandment of God went always before: And the Lord said,
let it be made, etc. Yea, the Stoikes have said that the word of God was
the efficient cause of the whole nature of things, as Laertius writes in his
7. book in the life of Zeno.


S. But there be two impedementes that it can not be so.


M. Which be they?


S. The first is that which is written in the 45. Chapter and 12. verse of
Isay: My hands have stretched forth the heavens. Ergo,God made not these
things with his word, but with his hands.


M. Uerily, this saying contains a most manifest Metaphore, when he
attributes hands unto God and when in respect of the weakness of our
understanding. God is compared to an handie crafts man which woorketh with his
own hands, the like whereof there are many authorities to be found in y^
scriptures. And whereas this word of creating is used in the same place, it
plainly calls us back unto that divine and extraordinary work of God, and
to think upon that mean only which Moses has recited.


M. The second impediment is, that whereas in another place in like kind of
things, and semblable argument mention is made of the word of God,
notwithstanding Gods secret will is meant thereby, which is not expressed in
any word, or commandment, as in the 147. Psalm 15. and 18. verses, where he
speaks of Ice: He sends out his word, and melts it.


M. You say well. Howbeit in Genesis, the very text, and also Moses mind
teatheth us, that we must say and think otherwise, where it is plainly written
that God spoke and commanded that to be which was made. Wherefore the only
bare and secret will of God is not there to be understood and taken, but that
which is revealed by the prolation and vtteringe of some word of his, and
commandment. Which opinion of mine is confirmed by an interpretation which
the Scripture it self makes, noting yt this was done by uttering of some
word or voice. For in the 33. Psalm, and 6. verse, after that it is declared
that these things were made by the word of God, for true exposition sake it
is added: and by the spirit of his mouth. For a voice is made by the breathing
forth of air, which is done by the mouth.


S. But by this means, feigning that God has a tongue, roof of the mouth,
and teeth, with out which instruments no voice can be uttered, you seem to
revoke again out of Hell the abominable error of the Antropomorphites.


M. God forbid that I should think so wickedly of the infinite and omnipotent
majesty of God. But like as the Lord spoke so as he might be heard and
understood when he gave the law in mount Sinai, which no man can deney: as
likewise when he spoke to Moses, and when he gave answer by Vrim and Thumim,
y^ Lord spoke and uttered a voice in the hearing of the people, and yet not
withstanding we must not feign y^ god has a tongue, a mouth, a palate of the
mouth, and teeth. So, in the beginning and creation of the world, when it is
said that God spoke, his divine shape was not changed intoo an humane form:
but it came to pass by a special providence and policy. For the Lord took
upon him for a time such means as were necessary for the bringing forth a
clear and audible voice, whereof afterward he left the use.


.S Do you think then that the Lord spoke plainly and distinctly?.


M. Yea verily. Howbeeit I am not ignorant what S. Augustine thinks
concerning this matter, in the 1. book of Genesis ad literam, and 9. chapter.


S. But these things are referred to the Sun, when it is said that the Lord
created all thing by his word, so that Christ is meant by the word, for by
him all things were made. Coloss. the 1. chapter, and 16. verse.


M. I will not much contend herein, so that they will grant me, that as the
Sun is called the word so likewise that word was a sign and token of his
presence, power, and person, and also of his woorking. Which does likewise
distinguishe the Father from, the Sun.


S. Why did God speak, and command them to be made?


M. He commanded, to the intent that the things that were afterward made,
might be known not to have bin made by the Water, or Earth out of which they
came, or the heavens, or, to be short, by the virtue or power of any creature*
but by the commandment of the Lord only, and the power of his word.
Wherefore, let us give praise unto him for all things that are created. And he
spoke, not that he could not have fourmed all things by the virtue and decree
of his alonely will, who had already made Heaven and Earth without speaking
of any word: but when as it pleased God to reveal and manifest himself
outwardly by his works, he used those means whereby he wills and
commands himself to be most certainly known, to wit, his word and
voice. The sum and scope of this word, is Christ, y^ everlasting Su^ne of y^
everlasting father, who was afterward manifested in y^ flesh: and therefore
hereof they do rightly gather, y^ Christ the Sun of God, did work in the
creation of the world. For there is a threefold mean, and book, whereby God
reuealeth himself unto us, to wit, the book of creatures, y^ book of
scripture, and the book of life. That which is called y^ book of scripture, is
far more sure, true, and plentiful tha^ the other two, and therefore God does
especially propose and commend the same unto us. And finally, to confirm mine
opinion, I allege that which Ireneus says, That God created all thing with
his word, that is to say, with his voice, in his second book, and 5.
chapter: and that also which is written by Tertullian in his 4. book against
the Marciomtes in these words: Is it altogether incredible, how the power of
the creator should procure the remedy of one transgression with his word,
who by his word has brought forth so great a mole of the world? In which
saying, doubtless the word, is taken for the voice: and in the 1. chapter,
and 3. verse of the Epistle too the Hebrews, the Scripture uses the word
(...).


The. xxxv. Chapter. Of the light, which was used at the creation of the world.
S. WHat say you, is secondly to be observed and considered of in declaring the
creation?


M. The light. For God made that as a necessary thing for the creatyng of his
other works.


S. Whyso.


M. Both that by appliyng, as it were, a Candle or other light, that confused
mole might be seen, and divided into meet parts and members: and also
because it was necessary that some fiery quality should be applied unto that
moist matter, too warm it, and to make it fruitful. For all things that are
in this inferior world, are engendered by a fiery heat, as it were by a warm
and woorking father. And therefore that first light was created, to be the
continual and common Nurse, and moother, and fountain of the external and
accidental lively heat, which God prepared as an instrument to bring forth
all other things withal. Not that God was not able to see all things that were
in ye great mole, who at this present beholds the most secret things, and
obscurest darkness, and from whom there is nothing hid: not also that he
needed that kind of mean, who of himself is Almighty: but to the intent we
might understand how great wisdom it was that created these visible things,
and what second causes of them he appointed first, which now we do behold to
work in them. And finally, how in the making of these visible things, he
used most conveniently other things of the same kind, which at this day are
the natural, and isntrumental, and chief, and principal causes of the
engendryng of all things. For there are three things of them, too wit, moist
earth, and that shining, bright, and lively heat, which is appliable and
convenient for all things, in that all things have that natural heat in
them. This is therefore, the second thing which I suppose needful to be
considered in the means and manner of creating the world.


The. xxxvi. Chapter. That God made this world without any pain or
wearisomenesse unto him.
S. WHat do you thirdly consider?


M. This forsooth, that GOD framed this so great and huge a Mole of the
world, without any pain or wearysomnesse at all: that the Epicures need not
to fear least we ascribe any grief and pain unto God, in that men are not
able to finishe the least work that they have to do, without some travail
and weariness of body. And therefore it plainly appears hereby, how
great the omnipotency of God is, above the strength of man. This which I say,
is confirmed by Isay in the 40. chapt. and 28. verse: and likewise by S.
Augustine in his 4. book de Genesi ad Literam, and 8. chapter. In so much that
it is said, that all things that were created, were suddeinly brought
forth, and appeared, as it were, in the twinkling of an eye, Psalm 33. and
9. chap. and Esdras the 4. book the 6. chapter, and 48. verse: for nothing
could withstand the pleasure and commandment of God.


The xxxvii. Chapter. The world was created by parts, and not all at once.
S. WHat think you fourthly to be observed?


M. That this whole world was made by parts, and in six days, as Moses
teaches in the 1. chapter of Genesis: and as it appears also in the 4. book
of Esdras the 44. Chapter, and the next folowinge: and not made altogether at
one instante. And to the entente it may be the better borne in memory, what
was made upon every day, I my self made these verses following.

The first day made both heaven and earth, and pleasant glittring light
The second streached out the space beetweene the waters quite*
The third divided Sea from Land: and clad the earth with green.
The fourth created Sun and Moon, and stars that bright do sheene
The fifth brought forth all feathered souls, and fishes of the lake.
The sixth made Cattle in the fields, then man the Lord did make,
And after work the seventh to rest, himself he did betake.

S. But why did not god create al things together in one day, seeing he is
almighty?


M. Because he is almighty, he needed not time for the establishing of this
world, as Saint Ambrose says in his 39. Epistle: neither came it to pass by
reason of impote^cie, wearines, or weakness in God, yt he was six days in
making it: but because he is most wise, by most wise and good reason he would
thus finish his works. For whatsoever is made, requires some order in the
making. And order requires distinct time, and number. First therefore, god
puts us in mind hereby, that he wrought not confusedly, nor out of order:
and so consequently, that we must not meditate and think upon his works
lightly, and as it were a far of in general: but in order, severally, and
particularly of every one. He shows moreover, how great diligence we ought
to use in considering of them, seeing that he declares that he paused upon
the order of his woorks, by this distinction of the days and labors. Beesides
this, he declares that we are not able sufficiently to comprehend his
works: the reason thereof, and manner of creating them is such, and so
general, that we have sufficient matter in them to think upon and beeholde
every day in the week, and so throughout the whole year. For what other
thing is a year, than a continual repeating of one, and the self same
week? For there was an whole day spent in the finishinge of every part and
work. Moreover, god would not creat ye world at once, but by piece meal that
is to say, in some space of time, for he meant immediately after ye creation of
the world, to declare the state, law, and natural order which the things that
he had made should afterward follow, to wit, that, by which all things do
require a space of time for their being, that is to say, are brought forth
in time: and are not perfectly grown in a moment, as we see daily. So those
things that grow out of the earth, do at this day keep this order, that
they spring not suddeynly, but by process of time. So the woman is delivered
of her child, after a certain season: so seeds grow out of the earth: so
trees bring forth their fruits: and there is nothing done suddenly, but
wonderful miraculously. Wherefore, that time of creation, was the first law of
things that should afterward grow and be engendered.


S. And why did God at length, cease the seventh day?


M. Because he would have it so: for there can be no truer reason alleged. For
in that he would have it so, the reason is good, although to us it be
unknown. For as touching those things which are disputed by S. Ambrose im
his 39. Epistle: and also by S. Augustine in sundry places, and likewise by
certain others, and finally by the Heathen Philosophers themselves, concerning
the dignity of the seventh number: I refer them to the Mathematicians, and
specially to the Arith^meticians and Pithagorians.


The. xxxviii. chapter. Of the place wherein the world was made.
S. Hitherto you have declared what y^ world is, what is the cause thereof, and
what was the manner of making it. Add hereunto also that which may be
demanded concerning the place, time, and state of this created world, so that
at length we may conclude this whole disputation.


M. I will do so: if you ask me of them all in order.


S. First therefore, I demand concerning the place wherein the world is
made, what it was, and what manner one it was?


M. It must needs be, that it was some void place, which the Grecians call
Kenos, and the Hebrews Tohu, wherein it should be created, and placed.


S. Why so?


M. For because if the place wherein the world, being so great a frame, was
placed, had bin already full of bodies, there could not be another body placed
in a roomth that was full already. For two bodies cannot be together in one
place. Moreover, this which I say, is plainly confirmed. The Hebrews say out
of the 26. chapter of Job, and 7. verse: He stretched forth the North upon the
void place, etc. Although that before this world was made, GOD occupied that
place wherein the world now stands, and filled it with his power which is
unknown to us, and in an unspeakable manner: as now also he fills althinges
after they be made by the virtue and means of his presence, majesty, and
power: whereof God is called Megonah, that is to say, that fills all things:
Deuteron. the 33. chapter, and 27. verse: notwithstanding in respect of this
filling, which cummeth by the creation of things, verily the place wherein this
world now stands, was a certain void place.


S. How then, will you have that there shall be some void place in the world,
against which thing Aristotle contendeth so mutch, and experience also?


M. To the end that I may cut of all occasion of the vain errors of the
Valentines, concerning Bythus, whom Ireneus abundantly confuteth in his 2.
book, and 4. and 7. chapters, thus I say: That before the world was made, the
place and space wherein it now stands, was void: but since the world was
made, that it is not void now, but full.


S. But do you leave now any void place, within the compass of the world?


M. Uerily if you call that only full, that is filled with this air which we
draw in and breath forth, there be many places too be called void, For all
that space of the world. which is above the Circle of the Moon (which some
say is very large) is void. But if you call that full, which is replenished
with some body and nature of it own kind, then may I call no part of this
whole world void, no not so much as that which the Astronomers say, is
contained within the Globe and space of the Heavens: but all full, and
occupied. Not only because God made nothing in vain, for that is repugnant to
his wisdom, but also for that the whole stretching forth of the heavens,
how big soever it be, is an heavenly body. For there is now no effect, no use
of a void place in the nature of things, which is created: but there are
seen daily many, and most excellent uses in this point, I mean in that
nature will have all thing to be full. And that indeed there is nothing void
and empty, both the use of cupping glasses in Physic, and also in the
plucking up of Wells and waters into high places by Pumpes, and other devises,
sufficiently do teach. Such Philosophers therefore, as contend that there is
some void place in this world, are not only themselves void of wit and
judgment, but strive also most manifestly against certain experience, whom
therefore I judge not too be esteemed of.


The. xxxix. Chapter. Of the time wherein the world was made.
S. YOU have spoken of the place, speak now also of the time, wherein this
world was made.


M. That this world beegan sometime to existe, and is not eternal, neither of
like antiquity with GOD, not only the Majesty of Gods holy word does
testify, but also the opinions of the most ancient Philosophers do declare.
Who, as they were nerer too the beeginnyng of the world, so did they learn
the truth more better of the Fathers, and retained the same more freshly in
memory. For yt Plato in Timeo was of that opinion, and all the Stoikes also,
their own writings do bear witness, yea, moreover, this has bin agreed
upon, by a general consent of the most ancient writers, that the world had
a beginning, whereof Linus the eldest Poet of all, who lived before Orpheus,
writing of the creation of the world, beeginneth thus: A time there was when
all things framed were together once, as Diogenes Laertius reports.


S. There be two special poinctes repugnant to your opinion, whereof the one
is alleged by the Aristotelians, and the other by the Epicurians.


M. What be they?


S. The first is this. Seeing the world is round, and of a Sphericall form,
there can neither beginning, nor endyng be noted therein: whereby it comes
to pass, that when it moves it moves circularly or round, which motion
also has neither beeginnyng nor endyng, but is a continual and perpetual
motion: and is therefore eternal. Now, if the worlds motion be eternal the
world also must needs be eternal. Thus the Peripatetikes by the figure and
motion of the world, do conclude y^ the world it self is also eternal.


M. Truly this is a very slender argument. For first, who will grant unto
them, that all the parts of the world do move, by that circulare and
sphericall motion? seeing that, as they them selves do write, neither, the
fire, neither the aier, neither the water, neither the earth do move by this
motion, but by a right line and a pendent: to wit, the fire and air upward:
the water and earth dounewarde. Moreover, if we deal thus liberally with
them, to grant, that the world is of a sphericall form and figure, who is
able to prove notwithstanding, that there can be no beeginning of motion
assigned, and obscrued therein? Seeing it is not moved of it self, but by an
other, too wit the great God, or, as they term it, by a certain first
intelligence, or Angel. And whereas it is said of a wheel, of a sphere, or
of a circle, that the beginning of the motion there of cannot be assigned in
this poincte of the circumference more than in another, it is true only in
respect of the thing and the figure, and not if you respect the hand that
turns it, or the forcyng of the cause that moves it, in respect whereof,
the poinct is called the beeginnyng of moouyng in the sphere or circle, where
he begins to move it first, that turns the circle, sphere, or wheel
about. Wherefore, although the world can have no beginning of moouyng, neither
of it self, neither of it own figure: notwithstanding it has of God who once
beegan it, and turned it from a certain poincte of the circumference, and a
certain place, to wit, from the East, continually to move into the Weste,
whether it turns now daiely, being by him moved, and not of it self. And
although it be unknown to us now, which part of the circumference of
heaven God first moved (for you see how many, and diverse things men do
affirm, concerning the great year of the world, which is that state of the
world, wherein Heaven and all things return to their place, where they were
first created) yet it is certain, that heaven began sometime to move, from
some one prefixed poincte and part of the circumference.


S. The other repugnancie is this. They say it is to absurd, to say that God
did not create this world from eternity, and time everlasting. For after so
many infinite spaces of years paste, what should move him at length, that he
would Create the world? They demand therefore, why GOD remained so long
sluggishe and idle, why he slept so long, what he did then, why he ceased
from dooyng somethyng so long, why he made not this noble and goodly work
sooner? These and such like floutes, they cast forth against the majesty of
God.


M. You do allege the argument of Velleius the Epicure: unto which I will
answer that which, as S. Augustine writes, was spoken by a certain merry old
man, a Christian. Who, being likewise demanded by such kind of men, what
God did before he created the world: answered: He made Hell, wherein he
might tormente perpetually such curious fellows, as do demand such
questions. For what wickedness is this, to go about to enter into such
secrets: what impudency to creep so far? what blasphemy, to look that
God should render an accoumpt to us of his doings, and forepassed life, who
must be our judge? what needed he too have created these things sooner,
which he neither has need of too his existence, neither thereby to live in
greater felicity? For God has in himself, and that from all eternity, a most
perfect, most happy, and most full state of nature, which is unto himself
sufficient for all things, and he has need of none other thing, neither of
Angel, nor man: Psalm 16. and 2. ver. Neither was GOD then idle, that the
Epicures may not mock, neither did he sleep in slouthfulnes before he made
this world. But even then, as also now, he was inwardly occupied in his
works, that is to say, he was wonderfully delighted in the contemplation of
himself, he enjoyed then himself, and his perfect and unspeakable glory: he
was busied in the most large and incomprehensible light of his substance and
essence, as may easily be understood out of the Proverbs, the 8. chapter,
and 30. verse: and John, the 17. chapt. and 4. verse: and likewise out of
Irenaeus, the 4. book, and 28. chapter.


S. This I understand: declare now what time this world was created?


M. Do you demand this, either of the day, or of y^ Month, or of the Year?


S. Mary, of every one of them severally.


M. Concerning the day, me thinks this much may be said, that the beginning
and first day of ye creation of the world, was that day which we Christians
do now call Sundaye, and which the Jews called the first day of the
Sabbathes, and not that which we commonly call Monday.


S. How so?


M. Because it is euidente, that the Lord wrought six whole days together,
before the Sabbath and seventh day. And among the Hebrews, in old time, that
was the Sabbath and seventh day which we now call Satterdaye, which is the
next day, before Sundaye, and next after Fridaye. For Christians, to the
entente that they would not retain the ancient ceremoneis of the Jews, but
devoutly to honor the resurrection of our Lord Jesus Christ, whereby there
began a new state of the Church, in stead of the Sabbath, they chose the next
day following to rest on, as it appears in the 20. Chapter of the Acts: the
1. to the Corinthians, the 16. chapter: and the first Chapter of the
Reuclation: and also it is extant in the Ecclesiastical history: which day
they called the Lords day, or Sundaye. But, if you would number six days
before the Sabbath day, you must begin upon Sundaye, not upon Mundaye: and
so shall you have six days, after which follows the Sabbath, which is the
seventh: Thus: First Sunday, then Monday. Tuesdaye, Wedensday, Thurseday,
Friday, after which follows the Seventh, which are the Sabbath days. So
that the Lord began his work of creating the world, upon Sunday: which is
confirmed to be true, by a counsel holde^ in Iudaea, as Eus^bius writes in
the 5. book of his history, and the 23. and 25. Chapters,


S. But in what Month seems it unto you, that the world was made.


M. I will utter, in this poinct that which seems unto me most likely, and
I crave pardon herein, that no man think me to be curious: notwithstanding I
must needs utter my mind, for that this question is demanded by many.
Uerily, it seems unto me, that the world was created in that month which is
called by the Hebrews Tisri, and is answereable partly unto our month of
August, and partly to September: for doubtless it began after the Autumnal or
Haruast equinoctium. So that I do nothing agree unto those, that write and
suppose that the world was made in the Month of March, and in the Spring.


S. Can you confirm your opinion by any reason?


M. Yea, and that by diverse. And not only this, that in the time of Autumn
or Haruast, the earth is most apt to receive the seeds of good fruits, as of
Wheat, and Barley, and such like. For at that time, it seems most meet and
fit to conceive, as in the Spring to bringfoorth fruit: and in Summer to
yield them up: and as for winter, then the earth digesteth and concocteth the
seeds that are committed unto her, and embracing them in ye mids of her
bosom, frames and nourishes them, as a mother does her young, which,
notwithstanding, she brings forth in the spring tune, when they be sumwhat
grown: and in Summer is quite del^uered of them, as beeinge then ripe and
perfect. Wherefore, the spring and Summer, do seem rather to be as it were
midwiues to the earth, than to minister unto it any force, or virtue to bring
forth: which virtue notwithstanding Autumn yields unto the earth, as
being yet mindful of the first creation of all things, and of her own
bringinge forth of all manner commodities, reteininge unto this present the
force, effect, and power of the ancient commandment, which the Lord
enjoined at that time. So y^ the Hebrews will have it, that this month Tisri,
shall not be so called of must or new wine, but of iuce, whereof ye earth is
full at that season. And these be the two reasons of mine opinion. The first,
for that as the scripture teaches in the 28. chapter, and 9. verse: and so
folowinge of Leuiticus, this month has been always, since the first age of
man, as far as ever there can be had any remembrance, the beeginninge of the
year and first month. And therefore, in contractes and bargains, in common
and private affairs, and to be brief, in supputation of the years and age
of the world, which was done by the years of Iubilee, the year ever beegan
in this month among the ancient Fathers in old time, and among the Jews: and
ended also in the same. So that ye years and age of Adam, and the residue of
the Fathers which lived both before the floude and since, are to be reckened
from this month. The second reason is this: For that the feast of Trumpettes
which God commanded to be kept upon the first day of this month, seems to
have been specially instituted by God, to the intent, that the remembrance
of the first original and creation of the world, which was done upon that
day might be holily preserved and continued in the Church. Truly, it was not
in vain, that ye Lord would have that day kept holy, and so great honor and
reverence attributed unto these trumpettes and Instruments which we read, at
that time, were so tossed and blown. But by that great and pleasant sownd, he
meant to admonish and put in remembrance, men, and the whole world also, of
their first nativity, which as by the special provision of God, it fell upon
the first day of this month, so was it godlily and reverently renewed and
remembered in the Church, that the world might not be ignorant of it own birth
day. Whereby also it came to pass, that God commanded many feasts and
holidaies to be kept in ye seventh month, which month was called also
Aetanim, that is to say, the Month of strength or strong things. 1. Kings,
the 8. chap. and 2. verse. Yea, some say also, that our Savior Christ was
borne the same month, and not without some reason.


S. But it is said in the 12. Chapter, and 1. verse of Exodus, that Nisan was
the first month of the year, answering unto our months of March and April,
and falling in the Uernall or Spring equinoctium


M. You say well. But thereunto I answer two ways: First, that Nisan or March
was not always the beeginning of the year, but at length after that the
children of Israel returned out of Egyt, in the remembrance of so great a
benefit, that is to say, for the conservation of the memory of the new
founding and restoaringe of that people. Moreover, Nisan was not the beeginning
of the year, for all things that were done among the people of God, but only
in respect of their holy and festival days, and of the tabernacle. For the
tabernacle, as it had it own peculiare revolution, and differinge from the
common: so had it also a proper beginning of the year, not agreeing with the
order of the Politic year: to the intent that men might know that there was
a difference too be put beetweene the Politic and Ecclesiastical government,
and that the reason of them both is diverse, and their nature separate and
distinct.


S. How many years do you now accoumpt, since the world was first made?


M. As some do suppose, since the time that the world was made, unto this
present year 1578. wherein this book was written, are about 5298. years.


S. How do you beegin this number, or by what means do you gather it?


M. Even by this short reckninge. From the creation of the world unto the
general diluge, which happened in the days of Noe, are numbered in the
History of the holy Scriptures 1656. years. And from the diluge, unto the
promise which God made first unto Abraham, and his departing upon
commaundment out of Vr, a City of the Chaldees, and Charris a city of
Mesopotamia, are 427. years. And from that promise, unto the departure of the
children of Israel out of the land of Egypt, which was under Moses, are 430.
years, as it is written in the 12. chapter, and 40. verse of Exodus. And from
the departure out of the land of Egypt, unto the beginning of the building of
Salomons temple, which was begun the fourth year of Salomons reign, are 480.
years, as it appears the 1. Kings, and 6. chap. And from that time, unto
the leading away of the Jews into the captivity of Babylon, I mean that
which beegan under King Ioachim, are about 167. years, or sumwhatlesse. In
this captivity the people aboade the space of 70. years, according as Jeremy
the Prophet foretold them in the 25. chapter. And from the departure of the
Jews out of the captiuitic of Babylon, and from the day of the publication of
Cyrus edict concerning the deliueryng and sendyng home of the Jews into their
own country, unto the passion of Christ, are 70. weeks of years, that is to
say, 490. years, as the Prophet Daniell writes: Daniell the 9. chapter. And
from the passion of Christ unto this our present time, are 1578. years. So
that if all these numbers be gathered toogether into one sum, they make 5298.
which is the distance of years since the creation of the world: although the
Rabbines of the Jews do dissent from this sum of years. Howbeit, we follow
the Scriptures herein, and also the best learned auctours that have written
most truly in this beehalf.


The. xl. Chapter. God created this world, good.
S. THese things now I do understand: proceed therefore unto other poinctes
which you proposed, and promised to entreat of.


M. What other poinctes?


S. Declare now at the length, in what kind of state and manner God made the
world.


M. I can easily tell you that, and dispatche the whole matter in one word.
The world was created a good world, not only generally, but also every part
thereof. For after every days work, Moses adds plainly and perfectly
these words: And God saw that it was good: for so it is written in the 1.
Chapter of Genesis.


S. What does that goodness comprehend and signify?


M. Uerily, not holiness of life and conversation, neither vprightnes of
conscience. For, most of the parts of the world have neither sense, neither
reason, nor conscience, without which there can be no holiness of life.
Wherefore, this word, Good, seems unto me to signify three things specially.


S. What be they?


M. First, the perfection and integrity of the natures which God created, and
of the whole world: secondly the beauty: thirdly the commodity, I judge to
be noted by that word. For, those things which are perfect, and whole: and
likewise fair, and profitable: are called good, and that by common custom of
all men. Although S. Augustine in his book de natura boni against the
Manichees, besides the substance and essence of those three things, has set
down these three things, as certain universal good things, too wit,
measure, form, and order, of which he says thus: Therefore, where these
three be great, there be great good things: where they be small, there be
small good things: and where they be not, there is no goodthing. Howbeit, I
choose rather to follow mine own opinion, and to keep the effect and meaning
of these words, and he saw that they were good.


S. Expound this more plainly.


M. This world, and all things that are created therein, were every one of
them good, if we consider of the^ as they were made by GOD at the beeginning,
in respect of their own nature. For they had it then perfect and whole, that
is to say, in no part failyng: at that time sound and strong, and not as it
is now, weak, sick, and wounded. So that the Nature of Heaven and Earth was
most perfect, and likewise of all Beasts and living things, Herbs, Trees,
and other creatures of God: their strength also pliant and forcible, and not as
they be now adays, weak and imperfect, scarce able to sustain themselves,
or to do their duty and function, neither always able to do it. Moreover,
if we consider the beauty of those things, and of the whole world as it was
made at the first, in respect whereof, both the whole world was good, and
every one of his parts were good. For they had in themselves a merueilous
comeliness of outward form and shape, and glistering beauty: they were
pleasant and delectable to behold, and had due and convenient proportion of
all the parts and members in every body: in respect whereof, and also for
that as yet there remain many tokens of it, it is now at this day called by
the Grecians Kosmos, of the comeliness thereof. They had also a wounderfull
order in respect of the whole world. For every thing was by GOD placed in
convenient and apt place most wisely, and they agreed among themselves with
wounderfull concord, and mutual good will one toward another: and heaven was
answerable too the earth, and the earth to heaven, so far forth and at what
time the one had need to help the other. Which now, discord through sin
being dispersed among them, do seldom help one another, neither does
heaven yeilde rain in due season unto the earth, neither does the earth
send up erhalations and vapors unto heaven in conueniente time, and when
need requires. To be short, the profit also and commodity of these
things, as they were by GOD created, was very great, in respect whereof the
whole world, and all his parts were called good. For the strength and powers
of every one of them were sound, and of force to work and bring forth that,
whereunto God had ordained them. They were fruitful, because they retained as
yet the power and blessing, which GOD had given them, whole, and undefiled:
sin had not yet hindered, or diminished it: which power is as it were now
dead and buried, so that there appears not so much as the least part
thereof unto us, specially in this latter, and as it were, crooked old age of
the world, which so great and manifold gifts of God, should have
perpetually continued in all creatures, if man had not transgressed.


The. xli. Chapter. What manner one this world is now at this present after
sin.
S. WHat manner one is this world now, since Adams trangression?


M. Even such an one, as S. Paul describes in one word, to wit, a creature
now subject unto vanity. And therefore it sigheth and groneth, looking for the
restoaring of the suns of God: Romans the 8. chapter, and 20. verse. So that
this vanity is contrary too that goodness, wherein things were first created.


S. How then, did man's transgression take away the essence and nature of
things?


M. Not so, but it impaired the integrity and perfection of them. For sin
brought in three things with it especially, which are contrary unto those
three above named commodities. To wit, weakness, as it were a sickness in the
natural powers, disorder and disagreement among things for lack of order,
and then when they are not fitly answerable one too another, there follows
barrennes in ingendring and bringing forth of young, and fruits: the 4. of
Esdras, the 5. chapter, and 52. verse. In so much, that the strength and
plentifulnes of the earth, and of all other things decreaseth daily, and are
nothing now in respect as God first created them, which cummeth too pass by
reason of man's trangression, as it may easily be gathered out of the 4.
chapter of Jeremy, and 24. and 25. verses. Finally, in respect hereof, this
whole world is made, as it were, a confused mist, specially the inferior and
elementare part thereof: Job the 10. chap. and 21. and 22. verses: also mortal
and transitory, as it is written in the Proverbs, the 31. chapter, and 8.
verse: and 2. of Peter, the 3. chapter, and 10. verse, so that it may one day
perish and be destroyed.


S. Was not then this world mortal and transitory. before man's
transgression?


M. I can say nothing concerning that point, because the Scripture herein
teaches me not any thing. Howbeit this one thing I may affirm, that this
world of it self and in respect that it was a creature, was subject to
alteration, unless GOD did sustain, and preserve it. But whether God would
always have preserved and sustained it, if man had not trangressed, I will not
say. As for man, for whose sake this world was created, to be as it were his
dwelling house, although he should have bin immortal, as S. Augustine writes
after the book of wisdom, in his book De Agone Christiano: yet should they
at length one after another have binne translated into heaven into a better
state. But whether there should always have bin some men in the world, and
some should always have lived here, I do not know.


The xlii. Chapter. From whence poisons and hurtful things sprang in the
world.
S. NOw, if the world, and all the parts thereof were created so good at the
first: from whence then sprang so many poisons, so many hurtful things, and
deadlye herbs, so many Serpents with the sight of their eyes only
pestiferous unto men?


M. By sin and for the sin of man, these so many Plagues, venimes, poisons,
hurtful herbs, and noysom beasts sprang up, as the words of the Lord do
declare in the book of Moses, Genesis the 3. chapter, and 18. verse. For God
made nothing at the beginning that was unto any thing poison, deadly, hurtful,
and discommodious. Wherefore, if things had continued in that nature wherein
almighty God created them at the first, there should now be neither poisons,
neither evil things. For it is not possible that any thing saving that which
is good should be made, or proceed from him that is most good. Yea, there is
nothing at this day that is absolute and in all respects poison, but that
which is hurtful, as too man: is profitable and wholesome to another, as to a
Serpent.


S. I understand you. But why will God have poisons, noysom herbs, and
hurtful beasts to remain now in the earth, since man's transgression?


M. There may sundry causes be alleged, but specially two, which S. August.
brings forth in his 3. book, and 17. chap. de Genesi ad Literam. The first
cause why these do continue, is for punishment and revenge against Man. And
therefore they do all hurt Man, for whose offense sake they be made poison.
Moreover, they be profitable to prove, tempt, and exercise Man, to the intent
that he may acknowledge his own infirmity, and ask help of God. But this
third reason may be also alleged, that those herbs which be hurtful
unto man, as Hemlock, woulfbane, coloquintida, and such like, are the evil iuce
of the earth, and as it were certain excreme^tes which are needful too be
expelled, to the end that the iuce of the other fruits of the earth may
remain good and sincere, and wholesome and commodious unto us.


S. If the things which God created first, were so good, (for Moses said not
only that they were good, but also that they were very good) what difference
then is there beetweene God himfelfe, and his works?


M. There is a threefolde, and that most large and wide difference between
them. To wit, that God of himself is most excellent, and unchangeable good. But
ye creatures are not so of themselves, but of God: not excellently, but so far
as their nature will suffer: not so unchangeably good but that they might fall
away from it. For that goodness could never have decayed in them, and have
been changed into vanity, if so be they had been vnchaungeably good.
Howbeit, to the end we should not doubt y^ they were good, Moses added this
plainly. God saw that they were good.


The xliii. Chapter. Why the things that were created, are plainly said too
be good.
S. WHy did Moses add these words expresty?


M. For two causes. To ye intent we should not lightly pass over these words
of God, as many do, as though they contained in them no excellency, or
notable quality, which might move us unto admiration. For in deed they have
so in them, and the Lord himself testifies the same. And therefore, much
less that we ought to condemn, dispraise, and mock at so excellent works
of God, because of the confusion and disorder which now is in them through
Man's transgression, as did that blasphemous fellow Momus and the Mamchees, and
Marcianite heretics. For we cannot so do with out offeringe great injury
unto God, and in so doing, we take the Lords name in vain. Wherefore, the
Mamchees, are to be condemned, and whosoever else do contend that the
creatures of themselves, and as God first made them, were evil. For that is
most false, as it appears in the 1. to Timothy, the 4. Chapter, and 4.
verse. Moreover, this admonition and saying moves me not to dispute this
question which certain curious fellows have done, to wit, whether God could
have created every particulare thing, or the whole world better: or now could
if need were frame it in more absolute state, than he first created it. For
to seek and search this, what is it other, than to pass those bonds which
the Spirit of God has laid before us, and to follow our own wandringe
minds? For God made all things that he created, very good. To conclude, this
admonition is very profitable unto us in this respect, that we do not rashely
abuse the creatures of God (which many times seem vile unto us) intemperately
at our lust and pleasure, which y^ holy Ghost himself pronounces to be so
precious. Wherefore we ought to use them, soberly, modestly, and wisely.


S. But why was that saying, And the Lord saw that it was good, let pass in
the work of some days, as of the second day?


M. Because that day contains only the beginning of the whole work,
which was made afterward, and not the consummation and finishyng thereof. And
therefore that blessyng is deferred unto the end of the work.


The. xliiii. Chapter. Whether in the first creation of all things, God made
two Contraries.
S. BUt forasmuch as now you are in handling the state of the world, wherein it
was first made, tell me I pray you, whether that opinion be true, concerning
the things that were first created, whether God made two contraries, and the
one to strive against an other? Thus they say cold things and hot, high
and low, white and black, great and small were first created, to the end
that the force of things might be preserved in a certain temperament, by
these contraries. This is written in Ecclesiasticus the 42. chapter, and 25.
verse: and the 33. Chapter, and 15. verse. Which also S. Augustine in his 2.
book de Ciuitate Dei, and 18 chapter: and Irenaeus in his 2. book, and 43.
chapter, do follow.


M. It is true which you say. For God made not althinges at the first of one
quality, color, and greatness, neither of one kind and nature. But he made
some high some low, some moist some dry, some warm some cold, the day to be
one thing and the night another. Yet God made nothing that was eeuill. But why
he created them in such variety, this is the cause: both for that the power
and wisdom of God is thereby more apparent: and also the things themselves
by this repugnancie of contrary virtues and natures, and mitigacion of them,
may be the more easily preserved. For what manner state of things would there
have bin, if all things had bin hot? what numnesse, if all things had bin
cold? what misery, if all ways there had bin darkness? what wearisomnesse, if
it had always bin day? And therefore when God had created the natures of this
world, and of the things contained therein, he thought it convenient to
refresh and ease them with change and course, because they were bodies, or
apperteinyng to bodies: and likewise to nourishe them with a certain mutual
knot and temperament, because they were diverse parts of one whole thing: he
ingraffed also contrary qualities in them, that the one should be a let,
bridle, and temperament to the other. And to be short, to the intent there
should be change and alteration in these things, that there might be some
difference plainly perceived beetweene the essence of them and of the angels,
and also of God himself, who needs no such means for his preservation. Even
so likewise, a well governed city consists of sundry orders and of diverse
fortes of men, ritche, poor, fair, foul, Subjects, Magistrates, young,
old, Husbandmen, Soldiers, who are of diverse states and unlike callinges,
and many times also of contrary. Notwithstanding they be necessary for the
preservation of the mutual safety of the whole city, whereby it beecummeth
the more beautiful, the more plentiful and convenient for the use of this
life. And therefore I will confirm this opinion with the most excellent
testimony of Tertullian, who in the 45. chapter of his Apologeticum, writes
thus: which reason made the universality out of diversity, that all things
might appear together from many substances into an unity: out of void and
sound: out of living and vnliuyng: out of comprehensible and incomprehensible:
out of light and darkness, and out of life and death. Neither do we
notwithstanding, favor the error of the Manichees, who hold opinion, that at
the beeginning there were two Giauntes which afflicted mutually one another,
one of the light, and another of darkness. There is one, and the same, and only
God, who made all things, and most wisely instituted this contrariety for
the preservation of the whole work.


S. But this variety of things seems to bring in great discord, when it had
bin more meet that this world being, as it were, a certain whole thing,
should have bin builded and compacted of parts freindly and lovingly agreeing
one with another. Which thing, this contrariety among creatures, does seem
very mutch to withstand.


M. You gather not well. For this dissimulitude among things, and variety of
contrary qualities and properties, brings in no discord, but rather causes
great concord and agreement. Like as in man's body, the diversity of the
parts and members, and their force, action, moouinge, place and office, which
many times are contrary, declares that there is great agreement among the
members, and is also necessary for the life, government, and defense of the
whole body. The like truly is to be seen in the world, for it is one body,
and contained within one compass. And why the discord of things so muth
disagreeing is so friendly and agreeinge, and so consenting unto it self, and
also firm and durable, the great and incomprehe^sible wisdom of almighty God
is the cause, who has contempered all those things excellently one with
another as they ought to be, and has made them of apt and convenient weight,
number, and measure, both in respect of themselves, and in comparison also of
other things, as it is written in the book of Wisdom the 11. chapter, and 21.
verse* and S. Augustine afterward also declares the same in his 4. book de
Genesi ad Literam. But what weight, number, and measure this is, or what is the
proportion of their mingling together, by reason of which this world is so
agreeing and meet one part with another, and of all among themselves,
although the Philosophers have by disputation curiously vexed themselves
herein, and yet neither found it out, neither declared it: God knows, and
he himself only.


The. xlv. Chapter. In what sense it is said that God rested, after the
creation of the world.
S. THere remains yet one thing, which I would demand.


M. What is that?


S. Whether GOD have ceased altogether to create any thing since ye time y^
he made an end of the world, seeing he seems daily to create men's souls
out of nothing, and he yet woorketh still, as Christ teaches us in the 5.
chapter, and 17. verse of S. John.


M. An easy matter to answer. For God is said to cease, only in respect
of this world and the work which then he had undertaken to do, that is to
say, in comparison of an other, as S. Augustine answers in his 4. book de
Genesi ad Literam. And not altogether and absolutely, as although God neither
governed now this world which he made, neither were able to make any new thing
more seeing there is nothing made or done now, but by his woorking. Whose most
loving and tender providence, has always governed, and does now govern
whatsoever he has created. Whose infinite power woorketh every thing in every
thing, as S. Paul writes to the Ephesians, the 1. chapter, and 23. verse.
Finally, whose strength and virtue are neither impaired by weakness through
process of time, whereby they are less able every day to create many things,
neither are they beecome slacker or slower in woorkinge, Therefore the Lord
yet every day creates many new things, to wit, the souls of men. Howbeeit,
all that his purposed work, and the fullness, and beauty of this world, he
made most perfectly, and finished most absolutely in every poinct and part, in
the space of those six days, and rested the seventh day. God sanctified,
says S. Augustine, no day of his work, but only the day of his rest, that
it might be understood that God is more blessed than his works. For he was
delighted with none of his works so much as with himself. So he sanctified
the day of his rest, and not of his work. And now because we are come to
the day of Gods rest, let us rest also in this place, and make an end of this
disputation which we erewhile began. So much as may seem can be said
generally concerning the creation of the world, and the first beeginning of all
things apperteining unto Christian Natural Philosophy, we have here for the
most part declared. And we give thanks unto God, for that he has given us a
mind and ability to write those things which we have here declared.(:)


FINIS.
The Table.
What Natural Philosophy is, and how many kinds there be thereof. Cap. 1.
follio. 1 Whether Natural Philosophy be meet for a Christian. cap. 2. fol.
2. From whence the knowledge of the General natural Philosophy is to be had
most safely* cap. 3. fol. 6 The difference beetweene Christian and Heathen
Natural Philosophy. cap. 4 fol. 10 What and how great the certentie is, of
the knowledge of Natural Philosophy. cap. 5. fol. 13 The ends of the
knowledge of Natural Philosophy. cap. 6. fol. 14 The subject of the knowledge
of Natural Philosophy is a creature visible and that can be seen: and first
how far and in what respect the world is a certain universality unto the^
al. ca. 7. fol. 15 What the world is. cap. 8. fol. 20 Whether the world may
truly and Christianly be called an universality. cap. 9. fol. 22 Whether
the world, and all things that are contained therein, be sound bodies, or
shadows only. cap. 10. fol. 23 Whether there be one world only, or many
cap. 11. fol. 25 Whether this world be finite* cap. 12. fol. 27 Whether the
world be sphericall and round. cap. 13. fol. 28 Whether the world have one
only soul. cap. 14. fol. 29 That this world was made in time, and is not
eternal. cap. 15. fol. 31 That the world came not of it self. cap. 16. fol.
34 Of the causes of the world, and first of the cause efficient thereof which
is God: not Angels, nor Devils. cap. 17. fol. 35 That the world, and all
things that are therein, were made by God of nothing, and not only decked
forth, or set in order, or brought forth out of a certain disordred heap or
matter which was extant before. cap. 18. fol. 38 Of the end for which God
created and made this world. ca. 19. fo. 44 This world cannot be called the
Sun of God. cap. 20. fol. 45 What God created first, to be the matter for
things that were created afterward. cap. 21. fol. 48 The matter of earthly
things, what manner of thing it was, and how commodiously of God prepared. cap.
22. fol. 49 Why the deapths of waters covered this matter, and earth, ca 23.
fo. 48 Why there was darkness upon the face of the same mole and matter.
cap. 24. fol. 51 Why the Spirit of God was upon this mole, and matter. cap.
25. fol 52 Of the matter of heavenly things that are visible. cap. 26. fol. 56
What is the form of the world. cap. 27. fol. 57 Of the parts of the
world, and first of the Ethereall, and Elementare region. cap. 28. fol. 57 Of
the East, West, North, and South parts of the world. cap. 29. fol. 59 Where
these positions are to be found in the world, high, low, before, behind, on
the right hand, and on the left. cap. 30. fol. 61 The chief end of creation
of the world, is, the glory, and knowledge of God the creator. cap. 31. fol.
64 What knowledge of God may be had in the beeholdinge of this world. cap.
32. fol. 67 Two ends of the world not chief. cap. 33. fol. 69 Of the means
and engines whereby God raised this so great a frame of the world: and first of
the word of God which was the means whereby this world was created. cap. 34.
fol. 70 Of the light, which was used at the creation of the world. cap. 35.
fol. 72 That God made this world without any pain or wearisomnesse unto him
self. cap. 36. fol. 73 The world was created by parts, and not all at once.
cap. 37. fol. 73 Of the place wherein the world was made. cap. 38. fol. 74 Of
the time wherein the world was made. cap. 39. fol. 76 God created this world,
good. cap. 40. fol. 80 What manner one this world is now at this present after
sin. cap. 41. fol. 82 From whence poison of hurtful things sprang in the
world. cap. 42. fol. 83 Why things that were created, are plainly said to be
good. ca. 43. fo. 84 Whether in the first creation of all things, God made
two Contraries. cap. 44. fol. 85 In what sense it is said that God rested,
after the creation of the world. cap. 45. fol. 86
FINIS.
Imprinted at London for Andrew Maunsell in Paul's Churchyard at the sign of
the Parret. 1578.


