THE TRVE Description of a Royal Masque.

PRESENTED AT HAMPton Court, upon Sunday night, being the eight of January.
1604.

AND Personated by the Queens most Excellent Majesty, attended by Eleven
Ladies of Honor.

LONDON Printed by Edward Allde, and are to be sold at the Long Shop,
adjoining unto S. Mildreds Church in the Poultrye. 1604.

THE TRVE DESCRIPTION Of a Royal Masque. Presented at Hampton Court upon
Sunday night being the eight day of January. 1604.
The Night apparelled in a black vesture set with Stars coming from below,
and approaching near unto the Temple erected toward the upper end of the Hall:
wakens her Son Somnus that there lies sleeping in a Cave; with this speech.
AWake dark sleep, rouse thee from out thy Cave;
Thy Mother Night, that bred thee in her womb,
And fed thee first with silence and with ease,
Does here thy shadowed operations crave.
And therefore wake my son, awake and come:
Strike with thy Hornie wande, the spirits of these
That here expect some pleasing novelties;
And make their slumber to beget strange sightes.
Strange visions and vn-usual properties,
Vn-seene of latter ages, ancient rites;
Of gifts divine, wrapped up in Mysteries,
Make this to seem a Temple in their sight:
Whose maine support, holy religion, frame,
And wisdom, courage, Temperaunce and right:
Make seem the pillors that sustain the same,
Shadow some Sibill to attend the rites;
And to describe the power that shall resort,
With the interpretation of the benefits
They bring in Clouds, and what they do importe,
Yet make them to protend the true desire
Of those that wish them, waking real things;
Whilste I will hoou'ring here aloof retire,
And cover all things with my sable wings.

Some. Dear Mother Night, I your commandment
Obey, and dreams t'interpret dreams, will make
As waking curiosity is wont.
Though better dreams asleep, the dreams awake
And this White Horny wande shall work the deed:
Whose power, does figures of the light present,
When from this sable Radius does proceed
Naught but confusde dark shows to no intent:
And therefore go bright visions, entertain
All round about, whilste I Will to sleep again.

Iris the Messenger of the Goddesses, discending from the Mountain where they
were assembled, decked in the couller of the Rainbow, speaks as follows. I
The daughter of wounder, now made the Messenger of power; here descended, to
signify the coming of a Celestial presence of Goddesses, determined this
fair Temple of peace, with holy hands and devout desires, have dedicated to
unity and concord: and leaving to themselves in Ouidos Ida Paphos their
ancient delighting places of Greece and Asia, now made the seats of
Barbarism, and spoil, vouchsafe to take their recreation, here, upon the
Western Mount of mighty Brittanie, the Land of Civil Music and of rest:
And are pleased to appear in the self-same figures, wherein antiquity has
formorly clothed them; and as they have been cast in the imagination of
pity, who has given mortal shapes to the gifts and effects of an eternal
power: For that those beautiful Carrecters of sense were easier to be read,
then their mystical Ideas, dispersed in that wide and incomprehensible volume
of Nature. And well have mortal men apparelled all the virtues, all the
graces, all blessings, with that shape wherewith themselves are most delighted,
and which work the best motions, and best represent the beauty of heavenly
powers. And therefore, reverend Prophetess, who hear attendest upon the
devotions of this place, prepare thy self for those rites that pertain to thy
function, and the honor of such deities. And to the end thou may have a
fore-notion what powers, and who they are that come; take here this
Prospectiue, and herein note and tell what thou see: For well may thou
there observe their shadows, but their presence will bereave thee of all, save
admiration and amazement. For who can look upon such powers and speak? And so
I leave thee.


Sybilla decked as a Nun, in black upon White, having received this Message,
and the Prospectiue, uses these words. WHat have I seen? Where am I? Or do I
see at all? or am I any where? What? was this IRIS the Messenger of IVNO, or
else, but a fantasma or imagination? Will the Divine Goddesses vouchsafe to
visit this poor Temple? Shall I be blessed to entertain so great powers? It can
be but a dream; yet such great powers have blessed as humble Roofes, and use it
of no other respect, then their own great favors to shine where they will.
But what Prospectiue is this? or what shall I herein see? O admirable powers!
what sights are these?


JVNO.
FIrst, here Imperial IVNO in her chair,
With Scepter of command, for Kingdoms large:
Ascends, all clad in colors of the air,
Crowned with bright Stars, to signify her charge.
PALLAS.
Next, warlike PALLAS, in her helmet dressed,
With Lance of winning; Target of defense:
In whom both wit and courage are expressed,
To get with glory, hold with providence.
VENUS.
Then lovely VENUS in bright Majesty,
Appears with mild aspect in Doue-like-hewe,
With th'al combining scarffe of amity;
T'ingird strange Nations with affections true.
DIANA.
Next, chaste DIANA in her robes of green,
With weapons of the Wood her self addrests,
To bless the Forest where her power is seen,
T'hold peace with all the World, but with wild beasts.
VESTA.
Then comely VESTA with her flames of zeal*
Presents her self, clad in white purity,
Whose book the souls sweet comfort does reveal,
By th'euer burning lamp of piety.
PROSERPINA.
Next, rich PROSERPINA with flames of gold,
Whose estate, although within the earth, yet she
Comes from above, and in her hand does hold
The Mine of wealth, with cheerful Majesty.
MACARIA.
Then al in purple robes, rich Happiness:
Next her appears, bearing in either hand,
Th'ensignes both of wealth and wit; to express,
That by them both, her Majesty does stand.
CONCORDJA.
Then all in partie-coloured robes appears
In White and Crimson-gracefull Concord, rest
With knottes of union; and in hand she bears
The happy joined Roses of our rest.
ASTRAEA.
Cleare-eyde ASTRAEA next, with reverend browe,
Clad in Celestial hew, which best she likes:
Comes with her balance, and her sword to show,
That first her judgment weighes before it strikes.
FLORA.
Then cheerful FLORA, all adornd with flowers,
Who clothes the earth with beauty and delight,
In thousand sundry suits, whilst shining hours,
Will scarce afford a darkness to the Night.
CERES.
Next, plenteous CERES in her harvest weed,
Crowned with the'ncrease of what she gave to keep,
To Gratitude and Faith in whom we need:
Who sowes on Virtue, shall with glory reap.
TETHIS.
Lastly comes TETHIS, ALBIONS dearest Love,
Whom she in faithful arms does deigne t'imbrace:
And brings the Trident of her power t'approue
Her favor and respect to do him grace.
Thus have I read their shadows, but behold:
In glory where they come as IRIS told.
The three Graces march before the Goddesses, discending down the Mountain
with loud Music, and coming up to the upper end, stay and sing this Song,
whilst the Goddesses go up to the Temple with Presents, and from them, march
down the Hall. The Song.
DEsert, Reward, and Gratitude,
The Graces of Society:
Do here with hand in hand conclude,
The blessed chain of amity.
1. For I deserve. 2. I give. 3. I thank:
All. Thanks, gifts, deserts thus join in rank.
We yield the splendent rays of light,
Unto the blessings that descend;
The grace whereof with more delight,
The well disposing does commend,
Whilst gratitude, rewards, deserts,
Please, win, draw on, and couple hearts.
For worth, and power, and due respect,
Deserves, bestows, returns with grace;
The meed, reward, the kind effect,
That gives the world a cheerful face.
And turning in this course of right,
Makes virtue move with true delight.

The Song being ended, and the Maskers in the midst of the Hall, disposing
themselves to their dance, Sibilla having placed their several Presents on
the Altar, utters these words. O Power of powers, grant to our vows we pray,
That these fair blessings which we here arrest,
In figures left us here, in substance, may
Be those great proppes of glory and respect.
Let Kingdoms large, let armed Pollicye,
Mild Love, true Zeal, right shooting at the white,
Of brave designs, let Wealth, Felicity,
Justice, and Concord, Pleasure, Plenty, Might
And power by Sea, with grace proportinate,
Make glorious both this Kingdom and Estate.

After this the Maskers dawnced their own measures, which being ended, and
they ready to take out the Lords, the three Graces sing. I.
Whilst worth with honor, make their choice,
For measured motions ordered right:
Now let us likewise give a voice,
Unto the touch of our delight.
II.
FOr comforts locked up without sound,
Are th'vnborne Children of the thought:
Like unto Treasures never found,
That buried low, are left forgot.
III.
Where words or glory do not show,
There like brave actions without Frame,
It seems like plants not set to grow,
Or as a tomb without a name.

The Maskers having ended the Dancing with the Lords: IRIS, gives warning of
their departure, in this manner, IRIS. AS I was the joyful Messenger, to
notify the coming of these divine powers; so am I now the same of their
departure, who having clothed themselves with these apparances, do now
return back Spheres of there own being from whence they are. But yet of my
self, this much I must reveal, though against the warrant of a Messenger,
who, I know had better to fail in obedience, than in presumption, that these
Deities by (the motion of the all-directing Pallas, the glorious Patroness of
this mighty Monarchy) descending in the Majesty of their invisible essences,
upon yonder Mountain; found there the best and most worthy, the best of
Ladies, disporting her self with the choicest attendants, whose forms they
presently took, as delighting to be in the best built Temples of beauty and
honor, and in them vouch safed to appear in this manner, being otherwise no
objects for mortal eyes.

And no doubt, but that in respect or the persons, under whose beautiful
couerings they have thus presented themselves? these Deities will be pleased,
the rather at their invocation, knowing all their desires to be such, as
evermore to grace this glorious Monarchy, with the Royal effects of these
blessings represented.


After this, they fell to a short parting Dance, and so ascended the Mountain
in the same order as they came down. FINIS.

