TO IMMORTALIZE THE NOBLE MEMORY OF THE right honorable young Lords JAMES and
CHARLES Egerton, both Vicounts of Brackley, both only Heirs to the Earldom
of Bridgwater, and both only sons to that Noble Earl, by his gracious and
Princely Lady, Frances Countess of Bridgwater, a fruitful branch of the
ancient house of Darbie, and Noble family of the Spencers.
ABRAHAM DARCIE Consecrates these French and English verses to their Etermizing
and worthy remembrance, wishing to the third Lord Vicount of Brackley now
living, Nestors long and happy years, and all prosperity to all that
illustrious and religious Family.

Fair beams of short continuance, yet most bright,
If your wished luster, and desired light,
Has had too sudden and untimely end,
Such destiny does on fair things attend.
A morning is the Roses chiefest prime,
And flower-de-luces dye in blooming time.
There Is nothing that is permanent on earth,
The Sun whose operation gave you birth,
And did produce you in this worldly stage,
To be reformers of this vicious age.
That splendent lamp as time will prove it true,
Shall have his setting, loose his light like you.
It is a lucky chance in storms and wind,
If near the shore we do an harbor find,
For since necessity does so ordain,
That our frail ship must perish in the maine,
It Is best, when as such shipwreck soon betides,
Ere a sharp rock have split her wodden sides.
Fair fires, when I your palled ashes see,
All I can do, is to blame destiny:
And to condemn the fatal unjust ire,
Which would not suffer me as I desire,
To pay unto your life that service, I
Do now perform to your dead memory.
Even as the Salamanders do expire,
Taken a little from the ardent fire,
And live best in the greatest heat of flame,
So your rare Beauties, whose admired frame,
Drew nourishment from heaven, here soon did die,
Being so far removed from the sky.
Either your molds should have bin less divine
Or else your forms eternally should shine.
For the more pleasure that a worthy thing
Unto the mind of any man does bring,
When thereof one does the fruition lose,
Grief stronger is, and tears are more profuse.
BEaux Rayons plus clairs que durables,
Si vos lumiers desirables,
On eut leur fin en commencant,
C'est le Destin des belles chooses.
Un matin est l'aage des Roses,
Et les Lis meurent en naissant.
Icy long temps rien ne peut estre,
Le beau Soleil qui vous feit naistre,
Duquel en siecle si meschant,
L'Orient vous fut necessaire.
Subject a la reigle ordinaire,
Comme vous aura son couchant.
Cest beaucoup d'heur quand il arrive,
Qu'on trouue le port des la riue:
Car puis qu'aussy bien le vaisseau:
Doit perir, cest nostre advantage,
S'il aduient qu'il face naufrage,
Auant qu'il face encore l'Eau.
Beaux Feux en voyant vostre cendre,
Ce que ie puis c'est de reprendre,
La Rigueur inuiste du sort,
Qui n'a permis a mon envy,
Que ie fisse pour vostre vie,
Ce que ie fay pour vostre mort.
Comme les Salamandres meurent,
Quand un moment elle demeurent
Horse du feu, qui les fait durer,
Voz Beautez de qui la Nature
Du ciel auoit sa nourriture,
Horse du ciel n'ont peu demeurer.
Mais vous deuiez naistre moins belles,
Ou vous deuiez naistre immortelles:
Car tant plus qu'vnbien est plaisant,
Et qu'il done plus d'esperance,
Quand on en perd la iouissance,
Le regret en est plus cuisant.
The Lord JAMES was borne at York house the day of Anno and was christened
there, King James one of his Godfathers, and at the age of four years three
days he returned to heaven parting from this world at Bridgwater house the day
of Anno

The Lord Charles was borne in Bridgwaters house the day of Anno and was
christened there, Prince Charles being one of his Godfathers, and at two years
of age contemning (...)he world, he followed his brother, and died at
Bridgwater house the day of 1623.


