

A Special Privilege, License and Authority, is granted by the Kings
Majesty's Letters Patents, unto the Author Samuel Daniel, one of the Grooms of
the Queens Majesty's most Honorable privy Chamber, for him his Executors,
Administrators, Assigns or Deputies, to Print, or cause to be Imprinted, and
to sell, assign, and dispose, to his, or their benefit, This Book entitled
The Collection of the History of England, with an Appendix to the same,
hereafter to be printed. Straightly forbidding any other to imprint or cause
to be imprinted, to import, utter or sell, or cause to be imported, uttered, or
sold, the said Book or Books, or any part thereof, within any of his
Majesty's Dominions, upon pain of his Majesty's high displeasure, and to
forfeit Five pounds lawful English Money for every such Book or Books, or
any part thereof, printed, imported, uttered, or sold, contrary to the meaning
of this Privilege, besides the forfeiture of the said Book, Books, etc. as
more at large appears by his Majesty's said Letters Patents, dated at
Westminster, the 11. of March, in the Fifteenth year of his Reign of England,
and of Scotland the one and Fiftith.

THE COLLECTION of the History of England.

By S. D.

LONDON, Printed by Nicholas Oaks, dwelling in Foster-lane for the Author.

Cum Priuilegio.



TO THE MAJESTY OF ANNE OF DENMARK, QVEENE OF ENGLAND, Scotland, France and
Ireland.
QVeenes, the Mothers of our Kings, by whom is continued the blessing of
succession that preserues the Kingdom, having their parts running in the times
wherein they live, are likewise interressed in the Histories thereof, which
contain their memories and all that is left of them, when they have left to be
in this world. And therefore to you, great Queen of England (and the greater
by your love to the nation, and the blessing you have brought forth for the
continuation of the future good thereof) do I your humblest servant address
this piece of our History; which, as it is a work of mine, appertains of
right to your Majesty, being for the most part done under your Roof, during
my attendance upon your sacred person: and if ever it shall come to be an
entire work, and merit any acceptance in the world, it must remain among the
memorials of you, and your time, as brought forth under the splendour of your
goodness. Howsoever, this which is done shall yet show how desirous I have been
to lay out my time and industry, as far as my ability would extend to do
your Majesty, and my Country service in this kind.

And though at high Altares, none but high Priests ought to sacrifize, yet
vouchsafe mighty Queen, to accept this poor oblation from the hand of your
Majesty's

Humblest servant, Samuel Danyel.

Certain Aduertisements to the Reader.
THis Piece of our History, which here I diuulge not, but impart privately to
such Worthy persons as have favored my indeauors therein, should long since
have been much more: and come abroad with Dedication, Preface, and all the
Complements of a Book, had my Health and Means been answerable to my desire:
But being otherwise, I must entreat my Friends, to be content to be paid by
pieces, as I may, and accept my willingness to yield as much as mine ability
can perform. It is more then the work of one man (were he of never so strong
forces) to Compose a passable contexture of the whole History of England. For,
although the inquisition of Ancient times, written by others be prepared, yet
the Collection and Disposition I find most Laborious: and I know, quam sit
magnum dare aliquid in manus hominum, especially in this kind, wherein more is
expected then has been delivered before. Curiosity will not be content with
Ordinaries. For mine own part I am so greedy of doing well, as nothing
suffices the appetite of my care herein. I had rather be Master of a small
piece handsomely contrived, then of vaste rooms ill proportioned, and
unfurnished: and I know many others are of my mind.

Now for what I have done, which is the greatest part of our History (and
wherein, I dare auow, is more together of the main, then has been yet
contracted into one piece) I am to render an account whence I had my furniture:
which if I have omitted to charge my Margin withal, I would have the Reader to
know, that in the Lives of William the First, William the Second, Henry the
First, and Stephan; I have especially followed William Malmsbury, Ingulphus,
Roger Houueden, Huntingdon, with all such Collections, as have been made out
of others for those times. In the Lives of Henry the Second, Richard the First,
John, and Henry the Third: Giraldus Cambrensis, Rushanger, Mat. Paris, Mat.
Westminst. Nich. Trivet, Caxton, and others. In the Lives of Edward the First,
Edward the Second, and Third: Froissart and Walsingham, with such collections
as by Pollidore Virgile, Fabian, Grafton, Hall, Holingshead, Stow and Speed,
dilligent and famous Trauailors in the search of our History, have been made
and diuulged to the world. For forrayne businesses (especially with France,
where we had most to do) I have for Authors, Paulus AEmilius, Haillan, Tillet,
and others, without whom we cannot truly understand our own affairs. And
where otherwise I have had any supplies extraordinary, either out of Record, or
such Instruments of State, as I could procure, I have given a true account of
them in the Margin. So that the Reader shall be sure to be paid with no
counterfeit Coin, but such as shall have the Stamp of Antiquity, the
approbation of Testimony, and the allowance of Authority, so far as I shall
proceed herein.

And for that I would have this Breuiarie to pass with an vn-interrupted
delivery of the especial affairs of the Kingdom (without imbroyling the
memory of the Reader) I have in a body apart, under the title of an Appendix,
Collected all Treaties, Letters, Articles, Charters, Ordinances,
Intertainments, provisions of Armies, businesses of Commerce, withother
passages of State appertayning to our History; which as soon as I have means
to Print, shall, for the better satisfying of such Worthy persons, as may make
use of such Materials, accompany this Collection: and to this Appendix, I have
made references in the Margin, as occasion requires.

For the Work it self I can challenge nothing therein but only the sowing it
together, and the observation of those necessary circumstances, and inferences
which the History naturally ministers: desirous to deliver things done, in as
even, and quiet an order, as such a heap will permit, without quarrelling with
the Belief of Antiquity, deprauing the actions of other Nations to advance our
own, or keeping back those Reasons of State they had, for what they did in
those times: holding it fittest and best agreeing with integrity (the chiefest
duty of a Writer) to leave things to their own Fame, and the Censure thereof
to the Reader, as being his part rather then mine, who am only to recite
things done, not to rule them.

Now for the errors herein committed, either by mine own mistakings, or the
Printers oversight, I must crave a pardon of course, it is a Fate common to
Books and Booke-men, and we cannot avoid it: For besides our own faylings,
we must here take up many things upon other men's credits, which often comes
imperfect to our hands: as the sums of Moneys, numbers of Soldiers, Ships,
the slain in Battle, Computation of Times, differences of Names and Tytles
etc. wherein our Authors agree not. And it were to be wished that we had more
assured notes of these particulars then we have, especially for sums of
Moneys (in regard it serves much for instruction) wherein I doubt many of our
Collectors have been but ill Acountants, reckoning Marks for Pounds, and
Pounds for Marks. The Computation of Times is not of so great moment, figures
are easily mistaken, the 10. of July, and the 6. of August, with a year over
or under, makes not a man the wiser in the business then done, which is only
that he desires. But these things being but of the By, the understanding
Reader will not much care to set at them, and therefore I refer him to the
Main of more important consideration.

THE COLLECTION OF THE HISTORY OF ENGLAND: CONTAINING BRIEFLY THE ESPECIAL
AFFAIRS OF THE GOVERNMENT: COMPIled by SAMVEL DANYEL, one of the Grooms of
the Queens Majesty's most Hononrable privy Chamber.
Undertaking to collect the principal affairs of this Kingdom, I had a
desire to have deduced the same from the beginning of the first British Kings,
as they are registered in their Catalogue: but finding no authentical warrant
how they came there, I did put off that desire with these considerations: that
a lesser part of time, and better known (which was from William the first,
Surnamed the Bastard) was more then enough for my ability: and how it was but
our curiosity to search further back into times past, then we might well
discern, and whereof, we could neither have proof, nor profit: how the
beginnings of all people, and states were as uncertain, as the heads of great
Rivers: and could not add to our virtue, and peradventure little to our
reputation to know them. Considering, how commonly they rise from the springs
of poverty, pyracie, robbery, and violence, howsoever fabulous writers (to
glorify their nations) strive to abuse the credulity of after ages with
heroycall, or miraculous beginnings. For states (as men) are ever best seen,
when they are up, and as they are, not as they were. Besides (it seems) God in
his providence to check our presumtuous inquisitions, wraps up all things in
uncertainty, bars us out from long antiquity, and bounds our searches within
the compass of a few ages, as if the same were sufficient, both for example,
and instruction to the government of men. For had we the particular occurrents
of all ages, and all nations, it might more stuff, but not better our
understanding. We shall find still the same correspondencies to hold in the
actions of men: Virtues, and Vices the same, though rising, and falling,
according to the worth, or weakness of Governors: the causes of the ruins,
and mutations of states to be alike: and the train of affairs carried by
precedent, in a course of Succession, under like colors.

But yet, for that the chain of this collection has a link of dependancie
with those former times, we shall show the passage of things the better: if we
take but a superficial view of that wide, and vncertainly-related state of
this Land, since the candle of letters gave us some little light thereof. Which
was, since the Romans made it a tributary Province to their Empire. For before,
as it lay secluded out of the way, so it seemed out of the knowledge of the
world. For Julius Caesar, being but on the other side in Gaul, could not
attain to any particular information of the state of Britain, by any means
he could use, but by certain Merchants (of whom he got together as many as he
could) who told him something of the coast-townes, but of the state, and
condition of the in-dwellers, they could say nothing: either so incurious were
they of further knowledge then what concerned their trade, or the people here
so wary to keep their state reserved and unknown to strangers. And yet Caesar
gave out, that they sub-ayded the Gauls against him, and made it the occasion
of his quarrel, and invasion of the Land, whereof he only subdued the South
parts, and rather showed it, then won it to the Roman Empire.

But now, what was the state, and form of government among the Britains
before Of the form of Government among the Britains.
this subjection, the first certain notice we have (is also by the same
Caesar) who tells us how they were divided into many several states: nominates
four Princes of Kent by the title of Kings: how Casseuellaunus, by the common
council was elected, in this their public danger, to have the principal
administration of the state, Caes. Comment. lib. 5.
with the business of war: and afterward, how the cities sent their hostages
unto him. Whereby we perceive it was no Monarchy, as it is reported to have
been, but like to the Gauls, with whom it was then one in religion (and much
a like in Complures sunt apud eos dominationes Strabo lib. 4.
fashion, and language) divided into a multitude of petty regiments, without
any entire rule, or combination. As now, we see all the west world (lately
discovered) to be, and generally all other Countries are in their first, and
natural free nakedness, before they come to be taken in; either by some
predominant power from abroad, or grow to head within themselves, of strength,
and understanding to ouer-maister, and dispose of all about them; introducing
such forms of rule, as ambition, or their other necessities shall beget. And
such was then the state of Britain, Gaul, Spain, Germany, and all the west
parts of Europe, before the Romans (ouer-growing first the people of Italy in
like manner divided) did by strength, and cunning, unlock those liberties of
theirs. And such as were then termed Kings, were but as their Generals in
war, without any other great jurisdiction, within those small limits they
held. So that to tell us of the state of a Monarchy in this Land before that
time (as if alone unlike, or more in State then all other nations) is to give
intertainement to those narrow conceits, as apprehend not the progresses in the
affairs of mankind, and only the invention of such, as take all their reason,
from the example, and Idea of the present Customs they see in use. For had
there been an absolute Monarch in these parts, which might have affronted the
Romans with the power of a well-vnited state, it had been impossible for them
(having oftentimes much to do even with some poor Prince of a small
territory) to have circumuented, or confounded (with all their stratagems, and
injustice) the peace, and liberty of the world in such sort as they did. And
though the Britains were then simple, and had not that firebrand of letters,
yet seemed they more just, and honest, and brought forth on the stage of action
men as magnanimous (and touched with as true a sense of honor, and worthiness)
as themselves. But having no firm combinements to chain them together in
their public dangers, they lay loose to the advantage of the common enemy;
working upon the factions, and emulations, usual to such divisions, and were
made the instruments of their own subjection: for whilst every one defended
them apart, the whole was overcome.

So that with what credit, the accoumpt of above a thousand years from Brute
to Casseuellaunus (in a line of absolute Kings) can be cleared I do not see;
and therefore will leave it on the book to such as will be creditors,
according to the substance of their understanding. And yet, let me crave pardon
least being but to report, I might seem to contend, if I make this inquiry:
how the memory of those former times, came to be preserved and delivered to
posterity, if they had not the use of letters in Cic. in Ep. ad Atticum vbi
belli Britannic exitum expectari soribit, nullius ex ea spem praede, nisi ex
mancipijs, ait. ex quibus nullos puto te, literis aut musicis cruditos
expectare. Et lib. de Not. Deorum, paris eos sum Scithis barbaries insimulat.
this Land (as it seems by all probability they had not) before they were
introduced by the Romans, who (sure would have given us notice thereof) had
they found them here at their coming, and especially of schools and the
Greek tongue, reported to have been planted here for many ages before: but
they tell us of no such thing: they inform us how the Drnydes, who were the
ministers of Religion and Justice, the especial men of knowledge) committed
not their mysteries to writing, but delivered them by tradition, whereby the
memory of them after their suppression (first by Augustus, and after by
Claudius) came wholly to perish with them. Which had they had letters and
books, could never by all the power and authority of the Roman State, been
so utterly extinct, but that we should have heard something more of them.

Besides it is strange how the Greek tongue, and the knowledge of Philosophy,
should be brought hither so far off, and so soon; seeing it was late (as
Liuy says) before it came into Italy, being so near at hand. Moreover, it is
considerable, how it made that transmigration, whether by Sea or Land? By Sea,
Hercules had set Pillars Ingenio Gallor^^ partim similes sunt partim
sunpliciores, and magis barbari. Strabo lib. 4.
that shut up the world, many ages after, for passing that way. If by Land,
Germany, and other Countries on that side, would have taken some part in the
passing: but Germany then, we find had no letters at all, only Merseilles, a
Colonie of the Greeks being in the midway; might be a gate, to let it into
Gaul, and so hither: but they say the Merseillans And it was after the
subjection of Gaul that they intertayned Philosophers, and Physicians for
public Readings, and became a school for those parts as we may perceive by
Strabo libro. 2.
used only Greek Charecters at first, but for their private accounts and
contracts in traffic, and no otherwise. So that it seems then, the
Britains received first letters (with their subjection) from the Romans, and
Agricola, Prefect of the Province under Domitian, caused them here to be
taught, (as Cornelius Tacitus (his son in law) reports upon this occasion.
Advice was taken, says he, that the people dispersed, rude, and so, apt to
rebellion, should be inured to ease and quiet by their pleasures: and
therefore they exhorted privately, and aided them publicly to the building of
Temples, Bourses, Pallaees; commending whom they found forward, and correcting
the unwilling, so that the emulation of honor was for necessity: then they
caused the principal men's sons to be taught the liberal Sciences, extolling
their wits for learning, above the Gauls in so much as they who lately scorned
the Roman tongue, now desired eloquence. Hereupon grew our habits in honor,
the Gown frequent, and by degrees, a general collapsion into those softnings
of vices; fair houses, hathes, and delicate banquets, and that, by the
ignorant, was termed humanity, when it was a part of servitude. Thus far he
acquaints us with the introduction, and cause of the Roman learning in this
Land. Which (had it had the Greek tongue, so many hundred years before) would
have been as forward in the liberal Sciences, as the Romans, and not needed
this emollition by learning. Philosophy would have prepared them to a
sufferance of snbiection, that they could not have been so universally rude,
and barbarous as they are reported to have been. So that I fear me, of all
that lies beyond this time, we can have no other intelligence, but by
tradition. Which how we may credit for so long past (when letters, for all the
assurance they can make, break faith with us in the information of things even
present) let it be judged.

And now for the time since, (which seems to be all that amounts to our
knowledge of the State of Britain) we find it, during the Domination of the
Romans, governed by their Praefects: and if they had Kings of the British
Nation, they were tributarie, and had their whole authority depending on that
Empire; which as the same Tacitus says; Nostra aetate, inquit Strabo. lib. 4.
Regulorum quidem Britanicorum, legationibus and officijs arnicitiam Augusti
Caes. consecuti, donaria in capitolio dedicarunt: familiaremque Romany totam
pene insulam redigerunt. And at that time it seems by Strabo, held it not
worth the grading; for that it would not quit the charge.
made it now their custom to have Kings the instruments of servitude: speaking
of Cogedunus, to whom Claudius gave certain Cities in Britain, with title of
King. For now after Caesar had opened the passage, and made tributarie so much,
as he subdued; the rest could not long hold out, against that all incompassing
State of Rome: although during the time of their civil wars, and change of
government, from a Republique to a Monarchy, this Country lay neglected, the
space of twenty years: yet, after Augustus had settled the sovereignty, and
possessed all the wide obedience of that Empire, the Princes and Cities of
Britain (fearing to be enforced) came in of their own accord, with their
gifts and tributes, and the rather; for that as yet, they had found no other
weight of subjection, then a tolerable tribute, which, it seemed, they were
content to endure with the rest of their neighbors. But after Augustus time,
when the corruptions of that State, had bred miserable inflammations in all
parts of the world, the Britains, what with their own factions, and those of
their Roman commanders, remained in an uncertain obedience, till the time of
Claudius the Emporor; who having much of the fume of glory, and little fire to
raise it otherwhere: casts an especial eye on this Province, to make it the
pompous matter of his triumph. And, to prepare the way, without adventure of
himself, foresends Publius Ostorius Scapula a great warrier, Pro-praetor into
Britain, where he met with many turbulencies, and a people hardly to be
driven, howsoever they might be led: yet as one who well knew his mestier; and
how the first events are those which incusse a dauntingnesse, or daring,
employed all means to make his expeditions sudden, and his executions cruel.
Notwithstanding did Carodocus (one of the British Kings) hold these great
Romans work for nine years together, and could not be surprised, till
betrayed by his own Nation, he was delivered into their hands, and brought to
Rome captive, with his wife and children, to be the subject of their triumph:
whereof notwithstanding the glory was his.

But Claudius had the honor of taking in the whole Isle of Britain, to the
Roman Empire, which though thus won, was not, till a long time after,
overcome. For now the Britains (understanding the misery of their
dissociation: how their submission brought but the more oppression) colleague
themselves against the Romans, taking their occasion upon the outrages,
committed on the person, and State of Queen Voadicia, widow of Prasutagus King
of the Iceni, a great, and rich Prince, who (at his death) had left Nero his
heir, and two daughters, hoping theeeby to free his house from injury: but it
fell out contrary; for no sooner was he dead, but his kingdom was spoiled by
the Ceuturions, his house ransac'kt by slaves, his wife beaten, and his
daughters ravished. Besides the chief men of the Iceni (as if all the Region
had been given in prey) were reft of their goods, and the Kings kinsmen
esteemed as captives: with which contumely, and fear of greater mischief,
they conspire with the Trinobantes and others (not yet inured to servitude) to
resume their liberty. And first set upon the Garrisons of the Veteran soldiers
(whom they most hated) defeited the ninth legion, whereof they slew all the
foot, forced Cerialis the Legate, and leader to flight, and put to the sword
seventy thousand Romans and associats, inhabiting their municipall Towns,
London, Virolame, Camolodunum now Maldon.
Camolodunum; before Suetonius Governor of the Province could assemble the
rest of the dispersed forces, to make head against their Army (consisting of
12000 Britains) conducted by Voadieia, who (with her two daughters, brought
into the field to move compassion and revenge) incites them to that noble, and
manly work of liberty: which to recover (she protests to hold her self there)
but as one of the vulgar (without weighing her great honor and bir^h) resolved
either to winoe or dye. Many of their wives were likewise there, to be
spectators and incouragers of their husbands valout; but in the end Suetouius
got the victory with the slaughter of four score thousand Brittans, whereupon
Voadicia poisons herself, and the miserable Country with their heavy loss,
had also more weights laid upon their servitude. And yet after this made they
many other defections, and bravely struggled with the Romans, upon all
advantages they could apprehend, but the continual supplies, ever ready from
all parts of that mighty Empire, were such, as the Brittans (having no means,
but their own swords, in an vncomposed State, laid all open to invasion)
spent their blood in vain. And in the end, growing base with their fortune (as
loosing their virtue with their liberty) became utterly quailed, and miserably
held down to subjection, by the powrefull hand of fourteen Garrisons,
disposed in several limits of the Land, with their companies, consisting of
sundry strange nations, computated in all to be 52. De Notitia, vtr. Imper.
Pancioroul.
thousand foot, and 300. horse; besides 37. companies containing 23. thousand
foot, and 1300 horse; which continually guarded the North parts, where (that,
which is now Scotland, and obeyed not the Roman Empire) was excluded from the
rest with a wall or trench, first raised by Agricola, after reedified by
Adrian, Seuerus and others.

And in this sort continued the state of Britain whilst the Romans held it;
enduring all the calamities that a dejected nation could do under the
domination of strangers proud, greedy, and cruel: Who not only content by all
tyrannical means to extort their substance, but also constrain their bodies
to serve under their ensigns, The misery of the Britains under the Romans.
when, or wheresoever their quarrellous ambition would expose them. And besides
they being at the will of their rulers in their obedience, they were forced to
follow them also in their rebellions. For after the election of the Emperors
grew to be commonly made by the Armies, many possessing those mighty Roman
force here, were proclaimed Caesar's, and put for the whole Empire. As first
Carausius, and after him Alectus whom Constantius (the associate of Maximianus
in the Empire) at his first coming into Britain by Asclepiodorus the
Praetorian Prefect vanquished, with all such as took part with him. After
that, the Caledonians, and Picts, from the North parts, made irruptions into
the State, and much afflicted the Britains; whom to repress, Constantius
(then sole Emperor of the West) came the second time into this Land; and in an
expedition made against them died at York, whither his son Constantine (a
little before his death) repaired out of Illiria, escaping a train laid for
him by Galerius Emperor of the East, with whom he was in the wars against
the Sarmatians, when his father came first into Britain against Alectus. And
here was he now first saluted Emperor, for which it seems he much esteemed
the Country, as that which gave birth to his dignity. And re-ordring the
government thereof (for a future security) devides it into five Provinces to be
ruled by one Vicegerent, five Rectors, two Consulars, and De Notitia vtrinsque
Imper.
three Presidents. After whose time we have no certain nor apparent mark to
direct us which way the State went, till the reign of Valentinian the elder,
who sends Theodosius (the father of him who was after Emperor of that name)
into Britain against the irruption of the Picts, Attacotti, Scoti, Saxones
and Franci, which of all sides invaded and spoiled the Country: and after
Theodosius had by the forces of the Battaui, and Heruli cleared it, Ciuilis was
sent to govern the Province, and Duleitius the Army: men of fair names for
good offices.

In these wars with Theodosius was one Maximus, a man borne in Spain, but of
Roman education, who after, in the time of the younger Valentinian, having the
charge of the Army, was here proclaimed Caesar, and to subvert the present
Emperor, transports The people of Britain consumed in the factions of the
Emperors.
the whole power of Britain: and first in his way subdues Gaul, and there
furnishes every place of defense with British shouldiers: and they say,
peopled the whole Country of Armorica (now called Britain in France) with
the same nation: which yet retains their language, in some kind to this day.
And having spread one Arm to Spain, the other to Germany, embraced so great a
part of the Empire, as he drove Valentinian to seek aid of Theodosius
Emperor of the East, after the vanquishment and death of his brother Gratianus
at Lions. And by this immoderate vent, both of the Garrisons, and the ablest
people of the Land, he dis-furnisht and left it in that impotencie, as it
never recovered like power again. All those great forces he took with him,
either were left in Gaul, or perished with him at Aquileia, where he was
overthrown by Valentinian.

And yet again in the time of Honorius the Emperor, the Colony of the Veteran
soldiers fearing the invasion of the Vandales, made another defection, and
cumultuarilie proclaimed Emperor one Marcus, whom shortly after they slew,
then Gratianus, who likewise within four months being murdered, they gave
the title to one Constantine, not so much for his merit, as the omination of
his name. This Constantine taking the same course that Maximus did, whatsoever
strength was left, or lately in any sort recovered, he emptyed it wholly, and
made himself of that power, as he subdued many of the Western Provinces, gave
his son Constans (a Monk) the title of Augustus, and after many fortunes,
and incounters with the forces of Honorius became vanquished, and executed at
Arles. Where also perished the whole power he brought out of Britain. And so
the State (having all the best strength exhausted, and none, or small supplies
from the Romans) lay open to the rapine, and spoil of their Northern enemies:
who taking the advantage of this dis-furnishment, never left till they had
reduced them to extreme miseries: which forced them to implore the aid of
Aetius, Prefect of Gaul under Valentinian 3. and that in so lamentable manner
(their Ambassadors in torn garments, with sand on their heads to stir
compassion) as Aetius was moved to send forces to succor them, and caused a
wall to be raised upon the trench (formerly made by Adrian from Sea to Sea) of
eight foot thick, and twelve high, inter-set with Bulwarks, which the Roman
soldiers, and an infinite number of Britains (fitter for that work then
war) with great labor effected. And so Aetius left them again once more
freed, and defended from their enemies: advising them from thence forth to
invre and employ their own forces without any more expectation of succor from
the Romans, who (overwrought with other business) could not attend affairs
that lay so far off. No sooner had the enemy intelligence of the departure of
these succors, but on they came (not with standing this fortification)
battered down the wall, overthrew the defenders, and harrowed the Country worse
then before. Whereupon, again this miserable people send to Aetius, using
these words: To Aetius thrice Consul, the sighs of the Britains, and after
thus complain: The barbarous enemy beats us to the Sea, the Sea beats us
back to the enemy: beiweexe these two kinds of deaths, we are either murdered,
or drowned. But their implorations prevailed not, for Aetius at that time had
enough to do to keep his own head, and Valentinian the Empire: which now
endured the last convulsions of a dying State; having all the parts, and
Provinces thereof miserably rent, and torn with the violences of strange
nations. So that this was also in the fate of Britain to be first made known
to perish by, and with the Roman State: Which never suffering the people of
this Land to have any use, or knowledge of Arms within their own Country,
left them (upon their own dissolution) naked, and exposed to all that would
assail them. The end of the Romans government in Britain.


And so ended the Roman Government in Britain, which (from their first
invasion by Julius Caesar to this Valentinianus the third) had continued the
space of five hundred years. In all which time we find but these seven
British Kings nominated to have reigned: Theomantius, Cunobelinus, Guiderius,
Aruiragus, Marius, Choelus, and lastly Lucius, who is crowned with immortal
honor, for planting Christian Religion within this Anno 443.
Land. All other from Lucius to Vortigern, (who succeeds this relinquishment)
were Roman governors.

This is briefly so much of especial note, as I can collect out of the Roman
history, concerning the State, and government of Britain: finding elsewhere
little certainty, and from hence forth (during their short possession of this
Land) far less. Whereof Gildas the Britain complains, laying the cause on
the barbarism of their enemies, who Gildas de excidio Britaniae.
had destroyed all their monuments, and memorials of times past. And though
himself wrote, about forty years after the invasion of the Saxons, and was
next these times we come now to remember, yet has he left (in his
enigmaticall passions) so small light thereof, as we discern very little
thereby. Nor has the Britains any honor by that antiquity of his, which
over-blacks them with such ugly desormities as we can see no part clear:
accusing them to be neither strong in peace, nor faithful in war: and
universally casts those aspersions on their manners, as if he labored to
inveigh, not to inform. And though no doubt there was (as ever is) in these
periods of States a concurrencie of disorder, and a general looseness of
disposition that met with the fullness of time; yet were there no doubt, some
mixtures of worth, and other notions of that age, wherewith aftertimes would
have been much pleased to have had acquaintance. But it seems his zeal and
passion (in that respect) wider then his charity took up the whole room of
his understanding, to whom the reverence of antiquity, and his title of Sapiens
does now give Sanctuary, and we must not presume to touch him.

Such was the State of Britain left without Arms, or order; when Vortigern
(either Anno 450.
by usurpation, or faction) became King, and is said to be the author of the
first calling in (or employing, being in) the Saxons to make good his own
establishment, and the Vortigern calls in the Saxons.
safty of his Kingdom against the Picts and Scots.

The Saxons at this time possessed the third part of Germany, holding all the
Country between the Rivers Rhene, and Elue, bounded on the North by the
Ballique Sea, and the Ocean: On the South by Silua Hircinia, and divided by the
river Visargis into Ostphalia, and Westphalia: governed by an Optimacie of
twelve Princes, with an election, A description of the State of the Saxons.
of a Sovereign leader for the business of war. This being so spacious,
populous, and near a Country, well furnished with shipping (which the
Britains had not) yielded, ever plentiful means to supply the undertakers
of this action (which were first two brothers Hengist, and Horsa) withal
necessary provisions upon every fit occasion. After they had been here a while
as stipendaries, and finding the debility of Prince, and people their number
soon increased. And first they had the Ifle of Thanet allowed them to
inhabit: then the whole Country of Kent was made over to Hengist by
transaction, Hengist and Horsa the Leaders of the Saxons.
under covenant, to defend the Land against the Picts, and Scots. And upon the
marriage of Vortigern with the Daughter, or Niece of Hengist, an exceeding
beautiful Lady, (brought over of purpose to work on the dotage of a dissolute
Prince) larger privileges were granted: so that by this alliance, and the
fertillity of the Land were drawn in so many of this populous, and military
nation, that Kent in short time grew too narrow for them, and Hengist (to
distend their power into other parts) advised Their first plantation.
Vortigern to plant a Colony of them in the North beyond Humber to be a
continual guard against all invasions that way. Which being granted he sends
for Otha his brother, and son Ebusa, with great supplies out of Saxony to
furnish that design. And so came the Saxons to have first domination in Kent,
and Northumberland, which contained all the Country from Humber to Scotland.

And now became they of servants masters, to contemn their entertainours, and
Vortigern is deposed.
commit many insolences. Whereupon the British nobility combine themselves,
depose Vortigern (the Author of this improuident admission) and elect Vortimer
his son, Vortimer elected King of Britain.
a Prince of great worth, who (whilst he lived, which was not long) gave them
many fierce incounters: but all prevailed not, for the Saxons (being possessed of
the principal gate of the Land, lying open on their own Country to receive
all supplies without resistance) had the advantage to wear them out of all in
the end. And besides force, they are said to have used treachery (in murdering
three hundred of the British Nobility) at an assembly of peace at Amesbury,
where they took their King prisoner, and would not release him, but upon the
grant of three Provinces more. Also the long life of Hengist (a politic
leader) of almost forty years continuance made much for the settling here of
their estate: which yet they could not effect, but with much travail, and
effusion of blood. For the Britains (now made martial by long practice, and
often battles) grew in the end so enraged to see their Country surprised
from under their feet, as they sold the inheritance thereof at a very
dearcrate. Wherein we must attribute much to the worthiness of their Leaders
(whence the spirit of a people is raised) who in these their greatest actions
were, especially Ambrosius the last of the Romans, and Arthur the noblest of
Britains: A man in force, and courage above man, King Arthur.
and worthy to have been a subject of truth to posterity, and not of fiction
(as legendary writers have made him) for whilst he stood, he bare up the
sinking State of his Country, and is said to have encountered the Saxons in
twelve set battles: wherein he had either victory, or equal revenge. In the
end, himself overthrown by treason, the best men consumed in the wars, and
the rest unable to resist fled into the mountains, and remote deserts of the
West parts of the Isle, and left all to the inuadors daily growing more, and
more upon them.

For many principal men of Saxony (seeing the happy success, and plantation
here of Hengist) entered likewise on diverse coasts to get Estates for
themselves, with such multitudes of people, as the Britains making head in one
place were assaulted in another, and every where overwhelmed with new
increasing numbers.

For after Hengist had obtained the dominion of Kent (which from him became to
be a kingdom) and Otha, and Ebuse possessed of all the North-countries from
Humber The several entries made by the Saxons.
to Scotland: Ella, and his sons conquered the South-East parts, and began
the kingdom of the South Saxons, containing Sussex, and part of Surrey. Then
Cerdic, and his sons landed at Portsmouth, inuadeth the South, and West
parts, and began the kingdom of the West Saxons, which after contained the
Countries of Hamshire, Berkeshire, Wiltshire, Dorcetshire, Somersetshire, and
Devonshire. And about the same time, Vffa invaded the North-East parts, and
began the Kingdom of the East Angles containing Northfolke, Suffolk,
Cambridgeshire, and the Isle of Ely: Erkenwin began the Kingdom of the East
Saxons, containing Essex, Middlesex, and a part of Hartfordshire.

Having thus (in a manner) surrounded the best of the whole State of Britain;
they after invaded the inner, and middle part. And Cridda began the Kingdom
of Mercna-land, or middle Angles, containing Lincolnshire, North-hamptonshire,
Huntingdonshire, Rutlandshire, Bedford, Buckingham, Oxfordshire, Cheshire,
Derbie, Nottingham, and Staffordshire, with parts of the shires of Hereford,
and Hartford: Warwick, Shropshire, Lancaster, and Glocestershire.

And with all these Princes, and Leaders before they could establish their
dominions, the Britains so desperately grappled, as plant they could not, but
upon destruction, and desolation of the whole Country, whereof in the end they
extinguished both the Religion, Laws, Language, and all, with the people and
name of Britain. Which having been so long a Province of great honor, and
benefit to the Roman Empire, could not but partake of the magnificence of their
goodly structures, Thermes, Aquaducts, Highways, and all other their
ornaments of delight, ease, and greatness: all which came to be so utterly
razed, and confounded by the Saxons as there is not The Britains utterly
subdued by the Saxons.
left standing so much as the ruins to point us where they were: for they
being a people of a rough breeding that would not be taken with these
delicacies of life, seemed to care for no other monuments but of earth, and as
borne in the field would build their fortunes only there. Witness so many
Intrenchments, Mounts, and Borroughs raised for tombs, and defenses upon all
the wide champions, and eminent Hills of this Isle, remaining yet as characters
of the deep scratches made on the whole face of our Country, to show the hard
labor our Progenitors endured to get it for us.

Which general subversion of a State is very seldom seen: Invasion, and
devastation of Provinces have often been made, but in such sort as they
continued, or recovered, with some commixtion of their own with the generation
of the invadors. But in this, by reason of the vicinage, and innumerous
populacie of that Nation (transporting hither both sexes) the incompatibility
of Paganism, and Christianity, with the immense bloodshed on both sides,
wrought such an implacable hatred, as but one Nation must possess all. The
conquest made by the Romans, was not to extirpate the Natives, but to master
them. The Danes, which afterward invaded the Saxons, made only at the first
depredations on the coast, and therewith for a time contented themselves. When
they grew to have further interest, they sought not the subversion, but a
community, and in the end a Sovereignty of the State, matching with the women
they here found, bringing few of their own with them. The Normans dealt the
like with the Province of Nuestria in France, who also after they had the
dominion, and what the victory would yield them in England, were content to
suffer the people here to have their being, intermatched with them, and so grew
in short space into their body. But this was an absolute subversion, and
concurred with the universal mutation, The absolute subversion of Britain,
concurred with the general mutation of other States of the world.
which about that time happened in all these parts of the world; whereof, there
was no one Country, or Province but changed bounds, inhabitants, customs,
language, and in a manner, all their names.

For upon the breaking up of the Roman Empire (first divided into two, and then
by faction disioynted in each part) employing the forces of many strange
Nations to fortify their sides, were made so wide ruptures in the North, and
North-east bounds of that Empire, as there burst out infinite streams of
strange people that over-ranne, and laid open the world again to liberty,
other forms, and limits of State: whereupon followed all these
transmigrations, and shiftings of people from one Country to another. The
French and Burgognons dispossessed the Gauls, and gave the name of France, and
Burgogne to their Province. The Gauls transplanted themselves on some coasts
of Spain, where they could find, or make their habitation: and of them had
Gallicia and Portugal their name. The Hunnes and Auari subdued Pannonia, and
thereto gave the name of Hungary. The Longbeards, a people of Germany,
bordering upon Lumbardie so called of the Longberds.
the Saxons, entered Italy, got the greatest part thereof, and left there their
name to a principal Province, remaining to this day. The Goths and Vandales,
miserably afflicted the rest, sacked Rome, and after subdued, peopled, and
possessed Spain. So that it was not in the fate of Britain alone, to be
undone, but to perish, almost, with the general dissolution of other States,
which happened about the same age.

Wherefore, we are now here to begin with a new Body of people, with a new
State, and government of this Land, which retained nothing of the former, nor
held other memory but that of the dissolution thereof: where scarce a City,
Dwelling, River, Hill, or Mountain, but changed names. Britain it self was
now no more Britain, but New Saxony, and shortly after, either of the Angles
(the greatest people of the inuadors) or of Hengist, called Engist-Land, or
England. The distance, made by the rage of war, lay so wide between the
conquering and conquered people, that nothing either of Laws, Rites and
Customs, came to pass over unto us from the Britains: nor had our Ancestors
any thing from them, but their Country: which they first divided into eight
kingdoms: all which, continued to the last extermination of the Britains
under Caretius their King, with whom they were driven over Seuerne, 136. years
after the first entertainment of Hengist. And soon after, the Saxons,
encroching upon each others parts, or States (which never held certain bounds)
and the stronger usurping upon their weaker neighbors, reduced them to seven
kingdoms; that of the Northanimbrains, being made one of two: and then to six
(the West Saxons taking in the kingdom of Sussex to their dominion.) And so it
continued about 250 years.

At the first, by the space of 150 years, they were merely governed by their
own Laws, without mixture of any other. But after Augustine the Monk, sent
with forty others, by Pope Gregory, had converted AEthelbert, King of Kent,
and some other, they all shortly after received the Christian faith, and had
their Laws and Rites ordered according to Ecclesiastical constitutions. Many
of their Kings, when their stern asperitie grew molified by humility of the
Religion, began to raise presently so many and great monuments of their
piety, in all parts of the Land, as if they striued who should exceed therein,
and had no other glory: Diverse of them renounced their temporal dignities for
Spiritual solitude, and became Monks; as Aetheldred, and Kindred, Kings of
Merena-Land; Offa King of the East Saxons; Kadwalla, and Ina, Kings of the West
Saxons; Eadberte King of Northumbrians, etc.

At length the kingdoms of Merc-naland, and West Sax, so far ouer-grew the
others in power, as between them two it lay, who should have all. For Ina, a
martial, wise, and religious Prince, governing the West Saxons, first advanced
that Kingdom to a preheminencie, and did much to have subdued Merc-naland: but
yet Offa, (afterward King thereof) was in fair possibility to have swallowed
up both the West Saxons, and all the rest of the Kingdoms. For whilst he lived,
which was in the time of Carolus Magnus, (which whom he held league and amity)
he was esteemed as the especial King of the Land. But the many wrongs he did,
and the murder committed in his house upon Aethelbert K. of the East Angles,
coming to him under public faith, and a suitor to his daughter, were justly
revenged upon his posterity, which after him declining, in the end lost al.
For Egbert, descended from Inegild, the brother of Ina, attayning the kingdom
of the West Saxons, began the way to bring all the rest into subjection. And
being a Prince, who (from a private fortune, wherein he lived below, with, and
not above other men) had learned sufferance and moderation; and by the Estate
of an exile, experience; grew to have great advantages over the time, and
others borne-fortunes, and rose by these means.

Ina, his great Uncle, renouncing the world, with his kingdom, and dying
without issue, left the succssion imbroiled, and out of the direct royal line
as he found it. So that those four Kings of the West Saxons, who severally
succeeded him. Ethelard, Sigibert, Kinulph and Britric, were rather Kings by
election, and their own power, then by right of descent. And Britric knowing
the weakness of his title, and the much promising forwardness of Egbert;
with his propinquitie in blood, to the former Kings, practiced to have him made
away; which he perceiving, fled first to Offa, King of Mercna-land, where
finding little security, in regard Britric had (to strength himself) married
the daughter of the King, he escaped into France, and there remained till the
death of Britric, and then returning, obtaines that kingdom of the Westsaxons;
subdues Cornwall, inhabited by the Britains; and after sets upon Bernulph,
newly invested in the Kingdom of Mercna-land; a State (by the rupture of the
Royal line) likewise grown tottering. For Egferth, the son of Offa, enjoyed
but four months, the inheritance of his fathers immanitie: whereby that
Kingdom descended collaterally to Kennulph, who left it to Kenelme a child,
after murdered by his sister Quinred. Ceolulph, brother to Kennulph,
succeeding, after his first years reign, was expeld by Bernulph, and Bernulph
by Egbert, who made that Kingdom tributarie Egbert obtained the kingdom,
which by him was named England.
to the West Saxons, as he did after that of the South, and East Saxons, with
the Kingdom of Northumberland. And by this means (in a manner) attained to a
sovereignty of the whole country. But the Danes imbroiling his peace in the end
of his reign, held him back from enjoying such a fullness of power, as that
we may account him the absolute Monarch of the Kingdom, nor yet any of his
successors, so long as the Danes Anno 802.
continued vnsubiected. For they having first made irruptions into the State,
in the reign of the late King Britric (his predecessor) ever after held a part
thereof, and afflicted the whole, till they had attained the absolute
sovereignty to themselves.

The Danes were a people of Germany, next neighbors to the Saxons, and of
language and manners little different: Possessing besides Cimbrica Chersonesus
(now called Denmark) The description of the Danes.
all the Isles adjacent in the Baltique Sea, and sometimes the kingdom of
Norway: A mighty, rough, and martial Nation; strong in shipping, through
their exercise of piracie, and numerous in people for all suppliments. Who
perceiving here the happy success, and plantation of the Saxons, were drawn
with desire and emulation, likewise, to put in for a part; the coast lying open
to invasion, and the many divisions of the Land, with the discord of Princes,
making them an easy way thereunto. So that in a manner, as soon as the Saxons
had ended their travails with the Britains, and drew to settling of a
Monarchy; the Danes, as if ordained to revenge their slanghters, began to
assault them with the like afflictions. The long, the many, and horrible
encounters between these two fierce Nations, with the bloodshed, and infinite
spoils committed in every part of the Land, are of so disordred and troublous
memory, that what with their asperous names, together with the confusion of
place, times, and persons, intricately delivered, is yet a war to the reader
to ouer-looke them. And therefore to favor mine own pains and his, who shall
get little profit thereby, I pass them over.

After the death of Egbert, Aethelwolph, his son succeeded in the State, with
the title of King of the West Saxons only, and was a Prince more addicted to
devotion then action: as may be seen by his donation of the tenth part of his
Kingdom (with exemption of all regal service) for the service of God: besides
an annuitie of three hundred marks, to be bestowed in pious uses at Rome;
whither he went twice in person, which his youngest son Alfred, whom he
especial loved; and whom (Pope Leo the fourth) anointed a King, at eleven
years of age, as if deuining of his future fortune.

Upon his last journey, and whole years stay at Rome; Aethelbald, his eldest
son, combined with the Nobility of the West Saxons, to keep him out, and
deprive him utterly of his government, and wrought so, as notwithstanding the
great love his people bare him, he was brought to yield up the Kingdom of the
West Saxons, to Aethelbald, and retain only the Kingdom of the East Angles,
(a State of far less dignity) to himself. After which, reigning but two
years, Aethelbald succeeded in the whole, and with great infamy, marrying his
fathers widow, Judith, daughter to Charles le Chauue, King of France, enjoyed
it but two years and a half; when Aethelred, the second son of Aethelulph,
entered to the government, which he held five years in continual conflict
with the Daues. After whom, ALFRED, the mirror of Princes (made a King before
he had a kingdom) at An. 872.
two and twenty years of his age (and in a year wherein eight several
battles Alfred.
had been given to the Danes by the Saxons) began his troublous reign, wherein
he was perpetually in war, either against his enemies, or else against vices.

First after a great danger to lose all, he was forced to yield up a part of
the kingdom (which was that of the East angles, and Northumberland) to
Guthrum, leader of the Danes, whom (upon his baptization) he made his
confederate, and owner of that by right, which before he usurped by violence.

And notwithstanding all the continual, and intricate toil he endured amidst
the clattering and horror of arms, he performed all noble actions of peace,
collecting first K. Alfred first made collection of the Saxon Laws.
the Laws of his predecessors, and other the Kings of the Saxons (as those of
Offa, King of Mercna-land, and Aethelbert the first Christian English King) of
which, by the grave advise, and consent of his States assembled, he makes
choice of the fittest (abrogates those of no use) and adds other according to
the necessity of the time.

And for that the wildenesse of war, by the reason of these perpetual
conflicts with strangers, had so let out the people of the Land to unlawful
riots, and rapine, that no man could travail without conuoy: he ordained the
division of shires, Hundreds, The first division of the Land into Shires,
Hundreds, and Tithings.
and Tithings, that every Englishman (now the general name for all the Saxons)
living legally might be of a certain Hundred, or Tithing, out of which, he
was not to remove without security: and out of which, if he were accused of
any crime, he was likewise to produce sureties for his behavior, which if he
could not find, he was to endure the punishment of the Law. If any malefactor
before, or after he had put in suerties escaped, all the Tithing, or Hundred
were fined to the King, by which means he secured trauailers, and the peace of
his Country.

The opinion he had of learning made him often complain the want thereof,
imputing it amongst his greatest infortunes to have been bred without it, and
to have his kingdom so utterly destitute of learned men, as it was, through
the long continuance of this barbarous war: which made him send out for such,
as were any way famous for letters, and having gotten them, he both highly
preferred them, and also (as they do, who know not to much themselves) held
them in great veneration: Rareness then, setting a higher price on meaner
parts, then after Plenty did on more Public Schools first erected.
perfections. Grimbald, and Scotus, he drew out of France: Asser (who wrote
his life) out of Wales, other from other parts: he was the first lettered
Prince we had in England, by whose means and encouragement public Schools
had here, either their reviving, or beginning.

Those wants of his own, made him take a greater care for the education of his
sons, with whom (were bred under most diligent masters) almost all the
children of the Nobility within his kingdom.

All his own time he could clear from other business, he bestowed in study,
and did himself, and caused others to translate many things in the vulgar
tongue, which he labored (it seems) much to adorn, and especially affected
the Saxon meeters, Mat. Westminster.
whereby to glorify that of a King, he attained the title of Poet.

The natural day, consisting of 24 hours, he cast into three parts: whereof
eight he spent in prayer, study, and writing, eight in the service of his body,
and eight in the affairs of his State. Which spaces (having then no other
engine for it) he measured by a great wax light, divided into so many parts,
receiving notice by the keeper thereof, as the several hours passed in the
burning.

With as fair an order did he proportion his revenues, equalling his liberties
to all The first suruay of the kingdom.
his other expenses, whereof to make the current run more certain, he took a
precise notice of them, and made a general suruay of the kingdom, and had all
the particulars of his estate registered in a book, which he kept in his
treasury at Winchester. And within this circumference of order, he held him in
that irregularity of fortune, with a weak disposition of body, and reigned 27
years, leaving his son Edward, a worthy successor to maintain the line of
Nobleness thus begun by him.

EDWARD, though he were far inferior to him in learning, went much beyond
him in power: for he had all the kingdom of Mercna-land An. 900.
in possession, whereof Alfred had but the homage, and some write, held
Edwardus Senior.
sovereignty over the East Angles, and Northumbrians: though we find (in the
joint Laws that he, and Guthrum made together) they held the same
confederation fore-concluded by Alfred. He also subdued the Britains in
Wales: fortified, and furnished with garrisons diverse towns in England that
lay fit to prevent the incursions of the Danes: and was all his reign of 23
years in continual action, and ever beforehand with fortune. And surely his
father, he, and many that succeeded during this Danicque war, though they lost
their ease, won much glory, and renown. For this affliction held them so in,
as having little out-lets, or leisure for ease, and luxury; they were made the
more pious, just, and careful in their government: otherwise it had been
impossible to have held out against the Danes, as they did being a people of
that power, and vndauntable stomach, as no fortune could deterr, or make to
give over their hold. And the imbecility of some inactive Prince at that time
had been enough to have let them quite into the whole. Which may be the cause,
that in the succession of some of these Kings were certain ruptures made out
of course, in respect of their ableness. As first, after the death of this
renowned King Edward Senior, his son

ATHELSTAN of full years, and spirit, was (notwithstanding the bracke An. 924.
in his birth) preferred before his legitimate son Edmond under age: Nor
Athelstan a Bastard preferred before the lawful son.
did Athelstan disappoint the kingdom in this work, but performed all noble
parts of Religion, Justice, and Magnanimity, and after sixteen years reign
died without issue.

EDMOND his brother succeeded him. A Prince likely to have equalled An. 940.
the worth of his Predecessors, had he not untimely perished by the hand of a
base Outlaw in his own house, at a festival, amidst his people that dearly
Edmond.
loved, and honored him. And though he left two sons, yet was

EDRED his brother preferred to the kingdom before them: who (making An. 946.
no variation from the line of Virtue continued by his ancestors) was Edred or
Eldred.
held perpetually in work by the Danes during the whole time of his reign,
which was of ten years.

EDWIN his nephew, the eldest son of Edmond, succeeded him (an irregular Edwin.
youth) who interrupting the course of goodness lived dissolutely, and died
wishedly. Otherwise had Edgar (the other son of Edmond) continued that rare
succession of good Princes, without the interposition of any ill, which is not
in the Fate of a kingdom.

EDGAR, though he were but sixteen years of age, yet capable of counsel, An.
959.
was by the grave advise of his Bishops (who in that time of zeal held
especially Edgar.
the raines on the hearts, and affections of men) put, and directed in the way
of goodness, and became a most heroical Prince.

Amongst other his excellent actions of government, he provided a mighty Navy
Edgar prouides shipping
to secure his coasts from invasion, which now he found (though late) was the
only mean to keep out those miseries from within, that thus lamentably
afflicted the land ever before negligent, or not inured to Sea-affaires. For
when the Romans first subdued the same, there was no shipping but a few small
vessels made of wicker, and covered with hides: whereby they, and after the
Danes (both mighty, as those times gave, in shipping) found that easy footing
they had. Yet Egbert is said to have provided a strong Navy, about the year
840. And Alfred thirty, or forty years after did the A most useful progress.
like. But either now dis-used, or consumed by the enemy, Edgar re-edifies, and
sets forth a Fleet consisting (as some write) of 1600 sail, others a far
greater number, and those he deuides, and places in four parts of the Realm,
making his progresses yearly, with part of his mighty Navy, round about the
whole Isle, whereof he assumed the title of King.

And to reduce it all to one name, and Monarchy, he was entitled King of all
Albion, as testifies his Charter granted to the Abbey of Maldesmesbury, in these
words: Ego Edgarus totius Albionis Basileus, nec non Maritimorum, seu
insulanorum Regum circum habitantium etc. For he having first of all other made
peace with the Danes, and granted them quiet cohabitation through all his
dominions; had the sovereignty over them: And Kenneth, King of Scots did him
homage, whether for Cumberland, and Westmerland given to that Crowae by King
Emond his father; or for his whole Kingdom; I cannot say. And five Kings of
Wales did the like for their Country, and came all to his Court at Cardiffe.

So that he seems the first, and most absolute Monarch of this land, that
hitherto we find: The general peace that held all his time, honored his name
with the title of Pacificus: and rendered his Kingdom (never before acquainted
with the glory of quietness) very flourishing. But as if the same had been
given to show, and not to use (like a short calm betwixt storms) it lasted
but little beyond his reign of sixteen years: being too short to close the
diffeuered joints of a commixed He reigned 16. years.
Kingdom; which was only, to have been the work of Time: and that none of
these late Princes (who were best like to have advanced, and confirmed the
State of a Monarchy) were ordained to have. But all (as if things would
another way) Saint Edward.
were put off from their ends, by their untimely deaths: as was this glorious
young An. 975.
Prince, in the two and thirtith year of his age: leaving his son Edward, a
child, to undergo the miseries of nonage, to be made a sacrifice for
ambition, and a Saint by persecution, through the hand of a step mother; who to
advance her own Ethelred, brake in, over the bounds of Nature and right, to
make his way: and is said, her self to have murdered him, coming to her
house, estrayed, in hunting, and discompanied, in the Isle of Purbeck.

Ethelred.
BUT Ethelred, as if ill set, prospered not on this ground: the entrance An.
978.
to whose reign was blood; the middle, misery; and the end, confusion: They
write, Saint Dunstan preaching at his Coronation, prophetically (foretold him)
of the calamities would follow this transgression: saying: For that thou have
aspired to the Crown, by the death of thy brother, murdered by thy mother;
thus says the Lord: the sword shall never depart from thy house, raging
against thee all the days of thy life, slaying those of thy seed, till the
Kingdom be transferred to another, whose fashion, and language, thy people
shall not know. Nor shall thy sin, nor the sin of thy ignominious mother,
with her Counselors, be expiated, but by long auengement. And this (whether
so uttered or not) was ratisied in the cuent. For either this unjust disordring
the succession, or the concurrency of hidden causes meeting Two conquests of
this Kingdom in fifty years.
with it, so wrought, as this late begun Monarchy fell quite asunder, and
begat the occasion of two Conquests, by foreign Nations, within the space of
fifty years.

For the Danes, having now been so long inmates with the English, dispread
over all parts by intermatching with them, and multiplying with the late peace
and confederations, had their party (though not their rule) greater then ever:
so that this opportunity of a young and unsettled Prince, in a new and
brangling State, drew over The spoils made by the Danes.
such multitudes of other of the same Nation: as every coast and part of the
Land, were miserably made the open rodes of spoil and saccage: in such sort,
as the State knew not where to make any certain head against them: for if
incountred in one place, they assailed another, and had so sure intelligence
what, and where al preparations were raised, as nothing could be effected
auaylable to quail them; Whereupon Ethelred, in the end, was feign, seeing he
could not prevail with the sword, to assail them with money, and bought a
peace for 10000 pounds: which God wot, proved after, a very dear pennyworth
to the common wealth, showing the seller thereof, how much was in his power, and
the buyer, at how hard a rate his necessity was to be served; and yet not sure
of his bargain, longer then the contractor would. Who having sound the benefit
of this market, raised the price thereof almost every year. And yet had not
Ethelred what he paid for: the Land in one part or other, never free from
spoil and invasion; but rather the more now oppressed, both by the war, and
this taxation. Which was the The original of Dane gelt, the first imposition
laid upon the kingdom.
first we find in our Annals, laid upon the Kingdom (and with heavy
greeuance raised in a poor distressed State) continuing many ages after the
occasion was extinct: And in the end (though in another name) became the usual
supplyment, in the dangers of the Kingdom, and the occasions of Princes.

And hereby Ethelred both enlarged the means, and desire of the enemy, so that
at length, came Swain, King of Denmark, and Aulafe, King of Norway, in person,
as if likewise to receive hier for committing outrage, and were both returned
with great sums, and Aulafe of a milder disposition, with baptism. These
calamities from abroad, were made more, by the disloyalties at home: faith and
respect (being seldom found safe in lost fortunes) held not in most of the
principal men employed in the defense. Aelfric, Admiral of the Navy, is said
to have given intelligence of all Sea-preparations, and disappointed that
work. The Earls Fran, Frithigist, Godwin, and Turkettle, descended of Danike
progeny, and of greatest command, deceiucd the armies by Land, and were the
aucthors of discouragement to the people they led. Edric Earl of Marc-land,
after them made General of the Kings forces, is branded with everlasting
ignominy, and the title of False, for his barbarous disloyalty, frustrating
all attempts wherein he was employed.

Wolnod, a Nobleman, for his misdemeanor outlawed, made depredations on the
coasts, with twenty ships, and was the cause that fourscore more sent to
take him in, were utterly consumed. This defection of his Nobility, howsoever
it might be by their own discontent, emulation, corruption, or affection, is
laid to the pride of Ethelred, whom yet we find more unfortunate then weak,
howsoever they have set his mark: and neglected no occasion to make resistance
and reparations against all events, bringing often his affairs to the very
point of dispatch, and yet put by, at an instant from all, as if nothing went
with him, but his will to do worthily: which howsoever it were (besides the
misery to loose) he must have (that which accompanies infelicity) Blame, and
Reproach. Though the many and desperate battles he made; the good
constitutions for the government; the provisions to supply all important
occasions, show, that he was not much behind the best Princes, but only in
fortune

By the example of Edgar his father, he procured a mighty Navy; causing of
every three hundred and ten Hide or Plough-land throughout the Kingdom, a
Ship to be built, and of every eight, a Corslet to be found: Yet all this
shipping stood him in little stead, but was either quasht with tempest,
consumed with fire by the enemy, or otherwise made unuseful by neglect, or
ignorance: whereby the hope and infinite charge of the State were disappointed.
Famine, and mortality, the attendants of war, with strange inundations,
wrought likewise their part, as if conspirators of destruction, and all
concurred to make a dismal season.

Many years it was not, ere Swain King of Danes, returned to raise again new
sums, by new afflictions; and tormenting here this poor turmoyled people,
more then ever; receives a fee for bloodshed, to the sum of 48000 pounds;
granted in the general assembly of the States at London, and a peace, or
rather paction os servitude concluded; with quiet cohabitation, use of like
liberties, and a perfect union between the two Nations, confirmed by oaths of
either part, and hostages delivered of ours.

But this as a breathing time, scarce hold out the year. When the occasion of
greater mischiefs was given by a universal massacre of the Danes suddenly
here contrived: and effected by the Kings commandment, upon the suggestion of
Hune, a great Commander, and a violent warrier of that time. Urging the
insolency of the Danes, that now grown haughty with this peace; Committed
many outrages, violating the Wives and Daughters of great men, with many other
intolerable disorders.

Such, and so sudden was the general execution of this act, throughout all
parts The massacre of the Danes.
of the kingdom at one instant, as showed the concurrencie of an inueterate
rankor, and incompatability of these two nations, impossible to be conjoined.
So that neither An. 1002.
Temples, Altars, Supplications, nor any band of aliance, were available to
save them from slaughter. Wherein to incense the more their king, Gunild, his
sister, a woman of masculine courage, who had a little before received
Christendom, a mediator and pledge of the peace, having first her husband and
son slain in her sight, rather Cunild slain.
with a threatening, then appaled countenance, met her death, making imprecation
for revenge, and foretelling her blood would, as it did, cost England dear.

Soon was the notice of this enormious act, given to Swain, and as soon
armed with rage and power, re-entred he the kingdom, having now a fayrer show
to do fowly, then ever: wrong had made him a right, who had none before: and
the people of the Land, not so forward to maintain their act, as to commit it,
rather were content to give him the possession of their country, then that he
should win it: the greatest Swain wins England.
part of the Kingdom submitting themselves unto him; only the City of
London, which Ethelred held fortified, made Noble resistance till he left
them; and conveyed himself first into the Isle of Wight, and after into
Normandy, whither he had sent Emma Etheldred flies into Normandy.
his Queen, with their two sons, Aelfrid and Edward, before, from the rage
of this tempest. But within two months he was recalled home by the people of
England, upon the death of Swain, who at the point to have been crowned King,
and had generally Swains death.
taken ostages and oaths of fealty, died suddenly: leaving his son Knute to
succeed his fortunes, and accomplish what he intended.

Ethelred returning, was soon furnished with an Army, sets upon Knute in
Lindsey, Etheldred returns.
where he lay with his fathers shipping, and Hostages, and drove him to take
the seas: where with enraged, making about to Sandwich, he miserably mangled,
and dismembered those hostages, and so sent them home: himself, with the
spoils his father and he had gotten, returned to his Country, to make greater
preparations for the prosecution of his purpose. Ethelred in the mean time, to
increase the sum of reuengement with more wrath, at a general assembly at
Oxford, caused many of the Danique Nobility to be murdered: Among which were
Sigifrith, and Morchar, Earls of Northumberland, whom the false Edric (who had
a hand on each side for mischief) inuiting to his lodging, under pretense of
feasting, barbarously caused to be slain: their followers, after they had so
long as they could desperately defended themselves and their masters, fled
into a Church, where they were with the same burnt. Knute, armed with Knute
returns.
the greatest of his own and neighbors powers made his confederates, landed
again, within the year, at Sandwich, and without resistance, had all the West
parts rendered unto him, with pledges for their obedience, and furnishment with
horse and armor. Here the false Edric leaves his Liege-lord, and yields up
forty ships, and his perjured faith to Knute. Ethelred, languishing in mind
and body, Edmond his son, surnamed Ironside Etheldreds death.
(to oppose youth to youth) was employed against this rabious inuador. A Prince
worthy of a better time, and had he found faith, had made it so, and delivered
his Country at that turn, from the worst of miseries, the conquest by
strangers.

Knute. Edmond Ironside.
BUT now upon the death of Ethelred (whose 37 years reign, shows that
infelicity shall have time too much, and happiness too little.) Knute was by
most of the Clergy and Nobility chosen king: only the City of London, with
some of the Nobility there about, made election of Edmond, Edmond Ironside
son to Ethelred, by his first wife Ethelgina.
and furnished him with that power, as thereby, with the courageous ardour of
his youth (which commonly is most in the first attempts) he had the better in
three imminent battles, within three months, and had likewise obtained the
fourth at Essendon (likely to have been the last with the An. 1016.
Danes) but that the disloyal Edric (late renouncing his new Lord, seeing
Edmonds part in possibility to prevail) again betrayed his trust, and
withdrew himself, and the charge he had, to the enemy. This satal battle lost
England: here perished the best flower of honor it then had: Here amongst the
rest was slain, Vlkill, an Earl of Essex, of ever memorable worth, who had
long stood up for the Kingdom, and in the time of Swain, was the first that
showed there was hope and possibility to quail the enemy, had there been an
union in loyalty.

From this bloody work, Edmond escapes to Gloucester, to recollect new sorces,
nor was he so forsaken with this fortune, but that he soon recovered another
army, to re-assaile the enemy, that might be idle upon this victory. But
Knute, as provident Edmonds single combat with Knute.
in the prosecution of his business, as fortunate therein, makes after: Here,
when both Armies were at the point to encounter, a motion of peace was
propounded: Some say the two Kings, by single combat consented to decide their
fortunes, and the ouer-commer to take all: and that (in an Isle of the river
Seuern their Armies on either shore, spectators of the act) they tried the
maistery for the prize of a Kingdom, Peace concluded.
After long and equal fight, finding each others worth, they cast away their
weapons, embraced, and concluded the peace. But howsoever; it seems (both
sides tired with the misery of a consuming war, never like to be ended, but
by the utter extirpation of the one; and considering the danger of either, and
incertaintie of the future) were easily persuaded to embrace a present
agreement: which was made, by parting England England divided between them.
betwixt them two, and confirmed by Oath and Sacrament: putting on each others
Apparel, and Arms, as a ceremony to express the atonement of their minds,
as if they made transaction of their persons each to other. Knute became
Edmond, and Edmond, Knute. A fatal exchange, for so free and magnanimous a
Prince, as Edmond: who indeed, was now no more himself; and being but half a
King, was in so few days after, none: as makes this peace show fouler then
war: for that, armed him for life, this exposed him naked to death, which was
shortly after treacherously given him The death of King Edmond Ironside at
Oxford.
at Oxford; some say, by the son of Edric (as if to show he would be the
heir of his father also in Treason) whereby both the hope, and the other half
of England were utterly lost, as determinable with his reign: which (with all
we have else of his magnanimous actions) took up scarce the circuit of one
whole year: And yet had that been space enough for glory (whose measure is to
be taken rather by the profundity, then the length, which seldom holds long
and even) could he have had that clear: And better for his renown, to have
died at the battle of Essendon with England, then descended to have made it
half Denmark, and live.

Knute.
BUT by this means, Knute attained the absolute dominion of the whole An. 1018.
Kingdom, which he governed with better Justice then he got it, conforming
Knute the first Da^ique King.
his native roughness, to a more civil, and regular fashion of life: And to
have England see, that now he was hers; he sends away his Navy, and stipendary
soldiers, home to their countries, and puts himself wholly, upon this people;
taking the way of mildness, a better means for his establishment, then force:
but the Land paid for the remuneration of 83000. pounds paid to King Knute,
fot euacuation of Strangers.
his people, and this euacuation of Strangers, 83000 pounds of sisuer; which it
rather consented to do at once, then to have them a daily burden, to pester
the State for ever.

At his first coming to the Crown, he sought to rid himself, as well of his
friends, as of those might prove his enemies. Edric, who came first to salute
him, sole King of England (as if to tell, that he made him so) he caused his
head to be set on the highest part of the Tower of London; therein performing
his promise, of advancing him above any Lord of the Land, and thereby
discharged himself of such a debt; which, though he should have paid, would
never yet be held fully cleared: giving a general satisfaction thereby to the
people, that rejoiced to see Treason so justly rewarded. Like compensation had
shortly after, the Earls Turkil, and Erick, who being banished the Land, were
executed upon their arrival in Denmark. But the love, and high opinion of
Justice he got in these, were lost again in those actions, wherein he took
counsel only of his fears, for the extirpation of all those of the Royal
blood of England; As of Edwin, and Edward, the sons of the late King Edmond
(to whom appertained the moietie of the Kingdom by contract) and of Edwin his
brother; which three, he sent to be murdered abroad, to beguile the rumor at
home: But, which is strange; those times, though rough, affoorded not yet an
instrument for the execution of his desire: and all these Princes were
preserved, and conveyed out of danger by those, who should have made them away.
The two last were bred by Solomon, King of Hungary, where Edward (suruiuing
his brother) married Agatha, sister to that Queen, (and daughter Edward
married to Agatha, the Queen of Hungaries sister.
to the Emperor Henry the second) by whom he had two sons, Emond and Edgar,
daughters, Margaret and Christina.

Aelfred, and Edward, sons of King Ethelred, by Emme, were preserved by
Richard, Duke of Normandy their Uncle, and so lay out of his way. This private
injustice (which often may be more in compassion, then hurt to the State) he
sought to recompense with all public satisfactions: repairing the naufrage of
the commonwealth (made by the rage of war) both in ornament and order:
erecting Churches and Monasteries, with large patents of provisions; both for
the expiation of his immanities fore-committed, and to memorize the places of
his victories with his thankfulness to God. The Constitutions Ecclesiastical
and Civil, diuulged in the language of that time, testify his tender piety,
and care of Justice: and are so full of religious admonitions, His erection of
Churches, and of Church government.
as it seems he held, the best means to have laws observed, was, by having
them first enacted in the consciences of men. Amongst others, he inflicted
exact punishment on all intempetances of his people, and offenses committed
against public manners. Severe he was, but not cruel: few of his laws
sanguinarie, as being not the custom of the time: which though rough, yet
found means to maintain public order, without that luctuall remedy of
blood. No punishments capital, unless conspiracies: the rest were all
pecuniarie mulcts, banishments, bondage, or imprisonment. To show his clemeucy,
this (amongst many) is one example: there was a law, that Whosoever had
committed theft, and the goods found in his house, all his family were made
bond, even to the child in the cradle: This he abrogates as most unjust, and
ordaines, That only the malefactor, and such as should aid him, should endure
the punishment: and that the wife (unless the things stolen, were found under
her lock) should not be guilty of her husbands offense.

Thus was he to his people, with whom, he is said to have so well cleared
himself (howsoever he did with God) that he became King of their affections,
as well as of their Country. And to maintain this opinion, he did many
popular acts: as first all Rites of Honor and reverence to the memory of the
late King Edmond, his confederate: besides, the executing all such as could be
found to have had any hand in that murder. Then married he here at home, Emme,
late wife to King Ethelred (though it were more for his honor then hers, to
accept his bed, that had been the persecutor of her husband and children)
whereby he held the Duke of Normandy, from attempting any thing for his
Nephews, in regard, his sister might have other by him.

Having thus established this mighty Kingdom, occasion prepares him another.
The people of Norway, contemning the debilitie of their King, and conspiring to
depose him, grew into faction: whereupon he fastens; and with the great forces
he brought out of England, the might of money, and high estimation of his
worthiness, so prevailed, as he soon obtained that Kingdom; and was now the
most renowned and potent Prince in all these parts of the world: entitled, King
of England, Denmark Knute King of England, Denmark, and Norway.
and Norway.

Herewithall grew his magnificence, as wide as his power, and was especially
extended to the Church, which he labored most to gratify, either for the
conscience of his deeds, or that his people, (generally addicted to devotion)
might be made the more his. And holding it not enough to power out his immense
bounty here within the land, seeks to make Rome also feel the fullness
thereof; whither he went in person, and performed many works of charity and
honor; both there, and in all his voyage. He freed the Saxon school, his
predecessors of England had founded, from all imposition: as he did likewise
all Streights and passages, where trauailers were with rigor constrained to pay
toll.

Of his entertainment at Rome with the Pope, Conrade the Emperor, and diverse
other Princes of the Christian world, himself writes to the Bishops and
Nobility of England, and withal exhorts them very powerfully, To have an
especial regard to the due administration of Justice, to all his subjects
alike, without doing the least wrong for The effect of King Kautes Letter.
his gain, having no need (as he said) to advance his revenue by sin: And
also charges them to see all Church-scot and Rome-scot fully cleared before his
return.

The active virtue of this Prince, being the mightiest, and most absolute
Monarch that ever yet appeared in this Kingdom, the author of a cloze, and
first of a new Government, Knute the most absolute monarck of this kingdom, of
any that was before. him.
is such; as shows he striued by all worthy ways, to lay the groundworke of
a State; which according to his frame, was either to hold good to his
posterity, or not. And as likely was he, to have been the root of a
succession, spreading into many discents, as was afterward the Norman; having
as plentiful an issue masculine, as he: besides, he reigned near as long;
far better beloved; of disposition more bountiful, and of power, larger to
do good. But it was not in his fate; his children miscarried in the succession,
and all this great work fell in a manner with himself.

Harald.
HArald, the eldest son of Knute (some write by his fathers ordinance, An.
1038.
others by the election of the Danique Nobility, in an assembly at Oxford) was
made King: whereas Godwin Earl of Kent, and the Nobility of England, would
have chosen Hardiknute, borne of Queen Emme, or else Alfride, the son of
Ethelred, who is said to have come out of Normandy, upon the death of Knute, to
claim the Crown; But Harald, being at hand carried it. The first act of whose
reign, was the banishment, and suiprizing all the Treasure of his stepmother
Queen Emme: Then the putting out the eyes Haroids cruelty.
of Alfried her son, his competitor: and committing him to a loathsome
prison, where he died. For which deed, the Earl Godwyn bears a foul mark,
as betraying him. Queen Emme repaires to Baldouin, Earl of Flanders, her
kinsman, where she remained during the reign of Harald, which was but of four
years, and then with her son Hardiknute (who came out of Denmark, as it
seems prepared for some thing else, then to visit her at Bridges) returned
into England.

Hardiknute.
THis Hardiknute invested in the Government, soon frustrated the hope An. 1041.
and opinion fore-conceiued of him: and first in like sort began with that
degenerous act of revenge (wherein none are said so much to delight in, as
women) causing the body of the late King to be vntomb'd, the head cut off, and
thrown into Thames; Then makes inquisition for such as were guilty of the
death of Alfride, his brother by the mother: whereof Earl Godwin and the
Bishop of Worcester are accused; The Bishop is disposest his Sea: and the Earl
with a rich and rare devised present, in form of a ship of gold, appeased that
fury: making protestation of his innocence before the whole Nobility, with
whom in respect his deep root had spread so many branches, he stood firm,
and all the blame was laid to the violence and rankor of the late King.

Besides the offending these great men, he added a general grieuance to the
whole Kingdom, by a prodigal largess, giving to every Mariner of his Navy
eight Marks, and to every Master ten, which he imposed to be paid by the
State. But after having called home Edward his other halfe-brother, out of
Normandy, he lived not long, for farther violences; Dying suddenly the second
year of his reign, in the celebration of a marriage at Lambeth in his
greatest iolity, not without suspicion of poison.

And with him ended the Government of the Danes in England (having only
continued 26 years under these three last Kings) and that without any crack
or noise, by The reason of the extinction of the Danes in England.
reason the nation had no predominant side, that might sway the State, in
respect of the remission of their power home in the first year of Knute, and
no great admission of others after: and that such, as were here before, were
now so incorporated with the English, as they made one body: and most of them
planted in the remote parts of the An. 1042.
Kingdom, that lay over against Denmark: where by, that which with all the
struggling, no power or diligence of man could resist, expired of it self:
leaving England to a King of her own, and Denmark to civil discord about the
succession; Norwey likewise returning obedience to a son of Olaue, recovered
quietness, and a home-borne King.

Edward the Confessor.
EDWARD (the son of Ethelred) is sent for into Normandy, and by Edward the
Confessor.
the whole State elected, and Crowned King of England, at Winchester, by Edsine
Archbishop of Canterbury, Anno 1042. being about forty An. 1042.
years of age. Godwin Earl of Kent, was a principal agent in his preserment,
but, for his own ends. The Kingdom (as having deerly paid for the admission
of strangers) ordained, that he should not bring any Normanes with him. The
first Act he did, was the remission of Danegilt, imposed by his Father, which
amounted to forty thousand pounds yearly, and had been paid for forty years
past. He caused the Laws to be collected, out of those of the Mercians, West
Saxons, Danes, and Northumbrians, and to be written in Latin. He was a Prince
most highly renowned for his piety; and fit for no other, then the calm time
he had. For having been so long brought up with the Nuns at Iumieges, in
Normandy, he scarce knew to be a man, when he came into England. And to show
how little he understood himself; they note, how in a great anger, he said to
a base fellow, that disturbed his game in hunting, I would punnish thee, were I
able. And, asif he had vowed their continency, with whom he was bred, he was
so far from knowing other women (either through conscience or debility) as
his own wife, His continency.
after his death, protested her self free, from any carnal act done by him,
and yet lived he (for the most part) with her in all formal show of marriage.

The soft simplicity of this King, gave way to the greatness of the Earl
Godwin, Earl Godwins greatness.
and his children, who for that he would seem the especial man in his
preferment to the Crown; and by matching his daughter Edith to him, swayed
chiefly the wheel of that time: and yet not without opposition: For Syward,
Earl of Northumberland, and The Earls Syward and Leofrike, men of Noble
actions.
Leofrike, Earl of Hereford (men of as great State and spirit) seeing him most
for himself, became more for the King, and had their turn in performing very
noble actions. Nor did their emulation, but much conduce to the present benefit
both of the King, and State; For the Earl Syward, would not be behind hand, in
effecting as brave deeds in the North, as Harold, Earl of Westsex, the son
of the Earl Godwin performed, against the Welsh, in the West: For thefirst
deprived of life, and Crown, Macbeth, an usurper, and invested Malcolin, in
the Kingdom of Scotland, the other defeited Ris, and Griffine, two brothers,
Kings of Wales, and subdued that Province to this Crown.

Besides the Earl Godwin, had to struggle with an Archbishop of Canterbury,
Robert, a Norman, preferred, from a Monk, first to London, and after to that
Sea, by the King, inwardly affecting most that nation, as being part of their
blood, and bred amongst them. Of whom it seemed (notwithstanding the former
order taken to the contrary) he had many about his person, whose neerenesse,
being strangers, whatsoever they did, could not avoid to be thought, to do
ill offices against the Earl, and the English in general: whereby, what went
not right in the line of men's desires, was thought to be their cause. And in
stomachs full charged, this occasion gave more fire. Eustace Eustace Earl of
Bullogne married Goda the Kings sister.
Earl of Bullogne, who had married Goda the Kings sister, having been at the
Court, and returning into France, his Harbenger in taking up lodgings at Dover,
upon his peremptory behavior, was by a Citizen slain; The Earl arriving with
all his train, pursues, and slew the homicide, with 18 other. The City seeing
this took arms, and in the bickering, the Earl lost 22. of his men,
whereupon, back he hasts to the King, aggrauates the insolency of the Citizens
so far; that the Earl Godwin is sent for, and commanded with a power of men,
to make against the City of Dover, to chastise the people. The Earl
(considering it was upon the information of one side) advised the King rather
to send for the chief of the City, to understand what they could say for
themselves, and accordingly to proceed, which (being taken, for a coldness in
the business, and of favor to his Countrymen) gave the King and his enemies
occasion to suspect his affection.

Shortly after, the Earl is summoned to an Assembly at Gloucester, where
neither he, nor any of his sons would appear; and suspecting some practice
against him by his Earl Godains insurruction.
enemies, raises forces, pretending to suppress the Welsh, who were not found
to offend; whereupon the Assembly remoues to London, summons him again to make
his appearance, to dismiss his forces, and to come only attended with twelve
persons. He sends them word; to dismiss his forces he was content, or any
thing else the King would command him, so it were with the safety of his life
and honor; but to come disaccompanied, was for neither. Then was he commanded
within five days to depart the Realm, which he did, and with Toustaine, and
Swayne his sons, gets him into Flaunders, where Toustone married the daughter
of the Earl Baldouin the 5. Harald his eldest son, departs into Ireland: the
King puts from him the Queen, to be partaker of the disgrace, and misery of
her house; who is described (by the writers of those times) to have been a
Lady of rare parts, excellently learned, beautiful, and as fair of mind as
body. The Earl Godwin in this desperate fortune (whilst the French and his
enemies possessed the King) fell to Piracy, distuibed the coasts, approached
London, by the River; and being so popular, as no forces would oppose against
him, made The French forsake the Court, and Kingdom of England.
at length his own peace with power; in such sort, as the French fearing
revenge, forsook both the Court, and Kingdom.

This (as fore-pointing to a storm that was gathering on that coast) began the
first difference with the French nation: which, thus acquainted with the
distraction of the Kingdom. and factions of great men, wrought on those
advantages, and were instruments to draw on the fatal enterprise that followed.

The weakness of the King, and the disproportionate greatness of the Earl
Godwin, being risen up from so great a fall (learning thereby, to look better
to his seete, and make his sides strong) increased these discontentments, and
partialities in the State; wherein many acts of injustice, by the sway of power
and passion, were committed; which did much blacken that time of peace, and
made a good man (not by doing, but enduring ill) held to be a bad King.

And it is said, that Emme, the Queen mother, had her part of much affliction
in his reign, suffering both in her goods and same: and now to purge her self
of a scandal raised on her with Alwyn Bishop of Winchester, she underwent the
trial of Fire-Ordeall Queen Emmes affliction and trial.
(which was to pass blindfold, with bare feet, over certain plough-shares,
made red hot, and laid an uneven distance one before the other) which she
safely performed. And the reason why, both her son and the State so little
respected this great Lady (whose many years had made her and actor in diverse
fortunes) was, for that she never affected King Ethelred, nor the children she
had by him: and for her marriage with Knute, the great enemy and subduer of the
Kingdom, whom she ever much more loved living, and commended dead.

It seemed these private grudges, with men's particular ends, held these times
so busied, that the public was neglected, and an issue-lesse King, gave
matter for ambition and power, to build hopes and practices upon: though for
his own part, he showed to have had a care for the succession, in sending for
his Nephew Edward, entitled the Outlaw, with his children, out of Hungary. But
Edward, shortly after his artiuall died, and Edgar his son (surnamed
Atheling) to say Prince Edgar) whom he had by his wife Agatha, daughter to the
Emperor Henry the 2. who (either by reason of his youth, which yet was no
bar to his right, or being borne and bred a stranger, little knowing or
known to the Kingdom) had his claim neglected upon the death of this Pious
King Edward, founder of Westminster Church.
King. Which was Anno 1065. when he had reigned 24. years. His corpse was
interred in the Church of Westminster, which he had newly founded.

Harald the second.
AND Harald, son to the Earl Godwin (the next day after) was preferred
Harald the second.
to the Crown, whether by any title he might pretend from the Danique Kings,
as descended from that nation (and as some report, son An. 1065.
to Githa, sister to Swain) or by mere election of the greater part of the
Nobility, we cannot say: but it seems, the pressing necessity of the time,
that required a more man, to undergo the burden of war, and that trouble,
the world was like to fall into, by reason of the claims now made, both by the
Dane, and Norman, cast it suddenly upon him; as the most eminent man of the
Kingdom, both by the experience of his own deseruings, and the strength also
of his own, and the alliance of his wife Algith, sister of Edwin and Morckar,
Earls of Yorkshire and Chester. Neither did he fail (but in fortune) to make
good this election; taking all the best courses, both for the well-ordering of
the State, and all provisions for defense, that a politic and active Prince
could do. But being to deal in a broken world, where the affections of men
were all disioynted, or dashed with the terror of an approaching mischief,
failing (as usually is seen, in these public fears) both in their
diligence, and courage to withstand it, soon found more then enough to do.

And the first man, which began to disturb his new government, was his own
younger brother Toustayne, who (in the time of the late King Edward, having the
Government The Kings brother Toustayne banished.
of Northumberland) was for his pride and immanities showed in those parts,
banished the Kingdom; and now by reason of his former conceived hatred against
his brother, easily set on, by the Duke of Normandy, and Baldouin, Earl of
Flanders (whose two daughters the Duke and he had married) assailes first the
Isle of Wight, and after sets upon the coast of Kent, whence he was chased by
the power of Harald, and forced to withdraw into the North parts; and there
seeking to land, was likewise repulsed, by the Earls Morchar and Edwyn. Then
craves he aid of the Scots, and after of Harald, surnamed Harfager, King of
Norwey, being then taking in the Orchades, and exercising piracy in those
parts; whom he induced with all his forces to invade England. And landing at
Tinmouth (discomfeiting their first incounters) they marched into the heart His
death with the King of Norwey.
of the Kingdom without resistance. Near Stamford, King Harald of England met
them with a puissant Army; and after long and eager fight, ended the day with
victory, and the death of his brother Toustayne, and the King of Norwey.

But from hence was he called with his wearied and broken forces, to a more
fatal business in the South. For now William Duke of Normandy (pretending a
right to the Crown of England, by the testament of the late King Edward his
Kinsman; upon the This Battle was fought in Sussex, 7 miles from Hastings,
upon Saturday the 14 of October 1066.
advantage of a busy time, and the disfurnishment of those parts) lauded at
Pemsey, not far from Hastings in Sussex: near to which place, was tried by
the great Assize of Gods judgment in battle (the right of power) between the
English and Norman Nation. A battle (the most memorable of all other) and how
socuer miserably lost, yet most nobly fought, on the part of England; and the
many wounds of Harald there slain, with 60 thousand 9 hundred 74 of the
English, show; how much was wrought The King valor and death.
to have saved their Country, from the calamity of foreign servitude.

And yet, how so great a Kingdom as England then was, could with one blow be
subdued by so small a Province as Normandy (in such sort, as it could never
after come to make any general head against the Conqueror) might seem
strange; did not the circumstances fore-noted, and other concurrent causes,
hereafter to be declared, give us fair and probable reasons thereof: Besides,
the indisposition of a diseased William Malmsbury.
time (as it is described by such as lived nearest it) may give us great
evidence in this examination. For they say, the people of this Kingdom, were
(by their being, secure from their former enemy the Dane, and their long
peace; which had held, in a manner from the death of King Edmond Ironside,
almost fifty years; grown neglectine of Arms, and generally debaushed with
luxury, and idleness: the Clergy licentious, William Malmsburie.
and only content with a tumultuarie learning: The Nobility given to
Gluttony, Venety and Oppression: The common sort to Drunkenness, and all
disorder: And they say, that in the last action of Harald at Stamford, the
brauest men perished, and himself growing insolent upon the victory (retaining
the spoils, without distribution to his soldiers, not inured to be commanded
by Martial discipline) made them discontent, and unruly: and coming to this
battle with many mercinary men, and a discontented Army, gave great occasion
to the lamentable loss thereof.

Besides, the Normans had a peculiar fight with long bows, wherewith the
English (then altogether unacquainted) were especially overthrown. And yet
their own Writers report, how the maine Battallion of the English (consisting
of Bills, their chief and ancient weapon) held in a body so close locked
together, as no force could dissolve them: till the Normans (faining to fly)
drew them to a disordered a route, And so they excuse the fortune of the day.

The body of King Harald, which at the suit of his mother (who sent two Monks
of the Abbey of Waltham to entreat the same of the Conqueror) was after much
King Harold buried at Waltham.
search, amongst the heaps of the dead found, and interred, in the same Abbey,
which himself had founded. He was a King, who shows us nothing but misery,
reigned least, and lost most of any other. He left four sons, Godwin,
Edmond, Magnus, and His Issue.
Wolf: the two eldest fled after this battle into Ireland, and from thence
made some attempts upon the Western coasts of England, but to little effect.
And here ended the line of the Saxon Kings, about five hundredth years after
the first coming in of Hingist, and their plantation in this Kingdom.

And thus have I in the streightest coutse (wherein, that uneven Compass of
Antiquity could direct me) got over the wide, and intricat epassage of those
times that lay beyond the work I purpose more particularly to deliver. And now,

The Life and Reign of William I.
I Come to write of a time, wherein the State of England received an alteration
An. 1066.
of Laws, Customs, Fashion, manner of lining, Language-Writing, with new
forms of Fights, Fortifications, Buildings, and generally an innovation in
most things, but Religion. So that from this mutation, which was the greatest
it ever had, we are to begin, with a new account of an England, more in
dominion abroad, more in State, and ability at home, and of more honor; and
name in the world, then heretofore: which by being thus undone, was made, as if
it were, in the fate thereof to get more by loosing, then otherwise. For as
first, the Conquest of the Danes; brought it to the intyrest Government it ever
possessed at home, and made it most redoubted of all the Kingdoms of the North:
so did this of the Norman by coming in upon it, make a way to let out,
Englands territories ouershootes the Ocean.
and stretch the mighty arms thereof over the Seas, into the goodly Provinces
of the South; For before these times, the English Nation, from their first
establishment in this Land, about the space of 500. years, never made any
sally out of the Isle, upon any other part of the world, but busied at home in
a divided State, held a broken Government with the Danes, and of no great
regard, it seems, with other Nations, till Knute lead them forth into the
Kingdom of Norwey, where they first showed effects of their valor, and what
they would be, were they employed.

But the Normans, having more of the Sun, and ciuility (by their commixtion
with the English) begat smoother fashions, with quicker motions in them then
before. And being a Nation free from that dull disease of drink, wherewith
their former Conquerours were naturally infected, induced a more comely
temperance, with a nearer regard of reputation and honor. For where as before,
the English lived loose, in little homely cottages, where they spent all their
reucnewes in good fare, caring for little other gaiety at all. Now after the
Norman manner, they build them goodly Churches, Malmsbury. Maurici is, Bishop
of London An. Dom. 1087. new built the Church of S. Paul in London, of stone,
brought out of Normandy.
and stately houses of stone, provide better furnishments, erect Castles, and
Towers in other sort then before. They enclose Parkes for their private
pleasure; being debard the general liberty of hunting, which heretofore they
inioyed: whereupon all the terms of building, hunting, tools of workmen,
names of most handy-crafts apperteining to the defenses and adornements of
life, came all to be in French, And withal, the Norman habits, and fashion of
living, became generally assumed, both in regard of nouelty, and to take away
the note of difference, which could not be well looked on, in this change. The
Charter of William 1. granted to this Church, see the Appendix Before this time
the Chur ches were most of Timber.


And though the body of our language remained in the Saxon, yet it came so
altered in the habit of the French tongue, as now we hardly know it, in the
ancient form it had; and not so much as the Character wherein it was written,
but was altered to that of the Roman, and French, now used. But to the end, we
may the better know the man, and the nation that thus subdude us; we must take
our course, up to the head of their originals. The Normans, we find to have
issued out of Norway and Denmark, and were of like manners, as the rest of
those Northern countries: which by reason of the apt mixture William 1. built
the white Tower, afterward walled and incastelled underneath by William 2. and
Henry 1.
of their Phlegmatique and Sanguine complexions, with their promiscuous
ingendring, without any tie of marriage, yielded that continual surchargement
of people, as they were forced to unburden themselves on other Countries,
wheresoever their violence could make them room. And out of this redundancy,
Roll, or Rou, a great Commander amongst them, furnished a robustious power, in
the time of King Alfrid, and first landed in England (that ever lay in the
Road to all these inuadors) where finding no room empty, nor any employment,
was content (upon some relief received) The Saxon habit, and Characters first
altered.
to use his forces otherwhere; which he did against Rambalt, Duke of Frize, and
Re^gnier Duke of Chaumont, and Hennalt: with whom he had many violent
incounters, and committed great spoils in their Countries. Which done; he
passed along the coast The Original of the Normans Roll, or Rou, the first
Norman that landed in England.
of France, entered the mouth of Seine, and sacked all the Country up to Roan:
where the people having been lately before miserably afflicted by Hasting
(another inuador of the same Nation) were so terrified by the approach of these
new forces, that the Archbishop of Roan, by the consent of the people, offered
him the obedience of that City, and the Country about, on condition, he would
defend them, and minister Justice The History of Normand. Roll, the first
Conqueror of Normandy from the French, calling it Norman.
according to the Laws of CHRIST, and the Customs of the Country. For
Charles the Simple, then King of France, yielding no present succor (being
otherwise imbroiled about the right of his Crown) gave him the opportunity to
plant in that place, and to grow so powerful, as shortly after he attempted
the Conquest of Paris, and gave many notable defeits to the French Leaders. So
that in the end, Charles was feign to buy his peace with the price of an
alliance, and the whole Country of Nuestria (or Westrich) which of the
Normans, was after called Normandy. And thereupon Roll became a Christian, and
baptized, had the name of Robert, given by Robert, brother to Eudes late King
of France, who then stood in competition for that Crown with Charles the
Simple: and is said to have vnder-aided Roll secretly, of purpose to make him
friend his deseignes; though after he urged it in an article against Charles,
the giving away his Country, and the sauouring of strangers.

And thus came Roll to establish a State to his posterity, ordering the same
with that judgment and equity, as he left his name in a perpetual reverence,
and his successors a firm foundation to plant upon. From him, in a direct
line, descended six Dukes of Normandy in the space of 120. years: William, 1.
Richard 1. Richard 2. who had two sons, Richard and Robert, that successively
inherited the Dukedom.

Robert after he had governed eight years (either merely for devotion, which
charity ought rather deem) or expiation for some secret guilt, wherewith his
conscience might stand charged, about his brothers death (which because it was
untimely, might be thought unnatural) resolves to visit the Holy Sepulcher.
And acquainting his Nobility therewithal, was by them much diswaded, in regard
he had no issue: and for that (already they said) Alain, Earl of Britain, and
the Earl of Burgogne, were in contestation, who should succeed him in the
Duchy: so that upon his death, and their strife the Country was like, to
become a prey to the soldier, from which, in conscience he was bound, by his
best means to secure it. The Duke willed them to be content: I have (said he)
a little Bastard, of whose worthiness, I have great hope, and I doubt not, but
he is of my begetting: him will I inuest in the Duchy as mine heir: And from
hence forth I pray you take him for your Lord. The Earl of Britain
(notwithstanding his competition) to show the affiance I have in him I will
constitute his governor, and Seneschall of Normandy; the King of France
shall be his Guardian, and so I will leave him to God, and your loyalties.

Shortly after, the Bishops and Barons did their homage to this base son,
named William, who was the sixth Duke of Normandy after Roll, begotten on
Arlette, a mean woman of Falaise. And Duke Robert taking his intended journey,
delivers the Child with his own hand, to Henry the first, King of France:
whom before he had mainely aided in preserving his Crown (left him by his
father King Roberts Testament) against his elder brother, and his mother
Constance, which with a great side of Nobility, stood for the right of
Primogeniture, according to the custom of France: And therefore might the more
presume (if good turns done to Princes could weigh so much, as their
selfe-respects would not turn the skale) to have had a fair discharge of his
trust; and him for a Protector, whose power was best able to be so. And
causing the Child to do homage for his Duchy of Normandy, commits him to
his Royal faith; departs his Court, and shortly after his life, in Asia.
Whereupon his successor, but nine years of age, became obnoxious to all the
miseries thar afflict Princes in their pupillage: besides the reproach of his
birth; which though his honor and virtue might get over, yet lay it ever a
bar in his way, and hindered his standing clear, stood he never so high.

The Nobles of Normandy soon (after his fathers death, by much entreaty, got
him out of the French Kings hands) thinking the having him amongst them, would
add more to his Counselors, and such as were in office: and the State of of a
Court, awe his State the better. But soon they found, the having his person
(without his power) was, but to put them out, into more discord, and faction.

For presently followed the murdering, and poisoning of Governors, displacing
Officers, intrusion, supplantation, surprizings, and recouerings of his person,
by a Nobility, stubborn, haughty, and incompatible of each others
precedencie or neerenesse. But this was the least, as being done all for his
person. Now followed more dangerous practices against him. His right was
quarrelled by competitors, clear in blood, and great in means. Whereof the
first (though farthest off in descent) was Roger de Tresny, bringing a fair
line from Roll, and much proof of his own worth, by having gotten great
experience, in the Sarazine war in Spain: whereby upon his return,
entertayning and feasting the great, and especial men of worth; he was grown
powerful, well followed, and beloved of many: in so much that at length,
measuring his own height, he vrges, What wrong it was that a Bastard, and a
Child, should be preferred before him, in the succession of the Duchy, his
Ancestors had nobly gotten: and what a shame the Normans ( a people of that
worth) would endure to be so governed; seeing they had others of the renowned
race of Roll, William and Richard, Dukes of Normandy, of a lawful and direct
line, if they held him unworthy to inherit the State. And being impatient (as
is ambition that ever rides without raines) of any long delay, brings his
claim to a strong battle in the field, which by the valiancie of Roger de
Beaumount, was utterly defeited, and himself with his two brethren slain.
Whereby all fear, that way, was extinquished, and the reputation of the Duke
and his, so much advanced, as the King of France (notwithstanding his tutelarie
charge) took from him the Castle of Thuilliers, and demolisht it, pretending
the insolences committed there, by the Garrisons, upon his subjects: and makes
show as yet, only to keep things even. But long it was not, ere he plainly
bewrayed his mind; aiding in person William Earl of Arques, brother to Duke
Robert, and son to Richard the Second making his claim to the Duchy, and
brings a mighty army to succor Arques, assieged by Conte Guiffard, the Dukes
General; who (by a stratagem so trained the French into an ambush) as he
overthrew their whole power, and returns the King to Paris, with great loss,
and dishonor: leaving ( Arques the first Arch of triumph) to this Conqueror,
not yet arrived to seventeen years of age; and the discomfeited competitor (to
seek his fortunes with Eustace Earl of Bologne) finding upon his return
little grace in Court; where fortune ever alters credit, and few regard men
overthrown.

This storm ouerpast, another succeeds more dangerous; there lived with Duke
William, a young Lord of like years, named Guy son to Regnalt, Earl of
Borgogne, and Alix, daughter to Richard the second, who coming to be sensible
of his interest, was advised by some stirring spirits, to attempt for the
Duchy, which they said appertained to him in right, and was wrongfully usurped
by the Bastard: And to advance his purpose, there happens deadly hostility
between two of the greatest Lords of Normandy (Viconte Neele, and the Earl
of Bessin) whose debate, Duke William did not, or could not pacify. This Guy
(lately made Earl of Bryorn, and Vernon, interposed himself to compose this
discord; and by the advice of Grimoult de Plessis (a principal mouer in this
work) so wrought, that either of these Lords, turned the point of their malice
upon him, who in their quarrel favoring neither, made both to hate him; and
easily conspire with Guy to murder him at unawares: which they had done, had
not a certain Fool (whom, for being held a natural, they suspected not)
noting their preparations, got away in the dead of the night to Valogne,
knocking and crying at the gate, till he was admitted to the Dukes presence,
whom he willed in have to fly, or he would be murdered. The Duke seeing the
Fool in this affright, thought dangers were not to be weighed by the A
Conspiracy discovered strangely.
worth of the reporter, but by their likelihood; and knowing his fortune was
liable unto all sudden assasinations; instantly takes horse and all alone
posts to Fallaise, his especial place of strength: on the way, his horse
being tired, about break of day, he comes to a little village called Rye,
where, by good fortune, the gentleman of the place, was standing at his door
ready to go abroad; of whom the Duke enquires the next way to Fallaise: The
Gentleman perceiving who he was (though as then very unwilling to be known)
humbly craves the cause of his so strange and untimely riding alone: The Duke
seeing himself discovered, tells the occasion: the gentleman (whose name was
Robert de Rye) furnishes him with a fresh horse, and sends two of his sons to
conduct him the nearest way to Fallaise: No sooner was he gone out of sight,
but after post the conspirators, enquiring of the same Gentleman, whether he
saw the Duke; who answered, that he was gone a little before, such a way
(showing them a diverse path) and rode on with them, offering his service to
Conte Bessin; where they made themselves so powerful, as the Duke withdrew him
to Roan, and from thence to the King of France, to crave his aid, putting him
in mind of, the faithful service his father had done him: how he was his
homager, under his tutelarie charge, and had no other sanctuary of succor to
fly unto, in this case of his mutinous and turbulent Nobility; the effect
whereof was of dangerous consequence to that Crown. And so far urged the
importancie of relief, as the King at length (who seems was yet content to
have him be, though not too strong, and peradventure rather him then his
competitor Guy de Burgogne) aided him in person with a puissant Army against
these competitors, whom they found in the vale of Dunes with as great power and
resolution to bid them battle, as they to assail them. Here one Guilleson,
Uncle to Viconte Neel by the mother, forced his horse into the battailion of
the French, and made at the King, and struck him down with his Lance: which
Conte Saint Paul perceiving, hastes to encounter him with that violence, as
both fell to the earth: but Guilleson soon gets up, and though his horse was
slain under him, by Chastillon, he escapes out of the press, and after fled
into Apulia with others. The King recovered, and more inkindled with this
affront, spared not his person, to avenge his wrath. Duke William likewise (as
it stood him most upon) showed effects of an all-daring and magnanimous Prince.
And yet had not Ralfe de T^sson been false to his fellows to recover faith
with him, he had not carried (as he did) the victory. After which, diverse of
the conspirators (who had too great hearts to yield) passed the mountains into
Italy, to Robert Guiscard their Countryman (who of a private Gentleman, was
now by his prowess, become Lord of Apulia Calabria, and Sicile, within the
space of twelve years) to whom they were exceeding welcome, and especially
Guilleson, for having incountred with a King in the midst of his battle,
which made him of wider note. But the better to know, what star these Norman
spirits had, as borne for the reuolutions of those times, it shall not lie out
of our way to show, how they first came into Italy, upon this occasion.

There happened a debate between one Osmond Drengot, and William Repostell,
Gentlemen both valiant, and of great parentage in Normandy, who as they hunted
in the forest of Rouuerie (near Rouan) with Duke Robert; Drengot slew
Repostell, in his presence, and fearing the fury of the Duke, and the friends
of the slain, fled to Rome, and so to Naples, where he, with his small
company of Normans that followed him, was entertained of the Duke de Bencuento,
to serve him against the Sarasins, and Affricans, which miserably infested
Apulia, and Calabria, at that time. The brute of which entertainment was no
sooner spread in Normandy, but diverse valiant Gentlemen and Soldiers, allured
with the hope of good fortune, passed the Alps, got to their nation, and so
wrought, as they grew formidable to these Barbarians, and in the end, utterly
chaced and extinguished them. The Calabrians and Apulians, seeing themselves
rid of their enemies, would have been glad likewise (their turn served) to
be rid of their friends, and either using them, more unkindly then of
custom, or they presuming more of desert, turned their swords upon their
intertayners. And first got a little place, which they fortified for the
Rendeuous, and receipt of booty: And so augmenting still their winnings,
obtained Territories, Cities, and Fortresses. After the death of Drengo,
succeeded other gallant leaders, and at length Tancred, Signior de Hauteuille,
in Constantine, with his twelve sons, came into Apulia, of whom his third
son Robert, surnamed Guiscard, attained the command, and was a man of a
fair stature clear judgment, and indefatigable courage. He conquered all
Apulia, Callabria and Cicile, passed the Sea into Greece; relieved Michaell
Diocrisius, Empetour of Constantinople, defeited N cephorus that usurped the
Empire, and shortly after Alexius attempting the like: and in one year
vanquished two Emperors, the one of Greece, the other of Germany: Swayed the
whole Estate of Italy, and was in a fair way to have attained the Empire of
Constantinople for himself, had he not died in the expedition.

Beomond his eldest son, by his first wife, became after Prince of Antioch,
and is much renowned in the holy wars. Roger (of his second marriage with the
daughter of the Prince of Salerno) succeeded in the States of Italy, as more
theirs by birth and blood. His daughters were all highly married; Thus from a
private Gentleman, came this famous Norman to leave a succession of Kings, and
Princes after him, and died the same year as did this William, his concurrent
in the love and favor of fortune. And to this man fled all the discontented
and desperate Normans during these civil wars the Duke had with so many
competitors: and every overthrow he gave them, augmented Guiscards forces in
Italy; and especially this battle of Dunes; which ended not the Dukes
travails, for Guy de Burgogne escaping the fight, fortified the Castles of
Briorn and Verneuille, but in the end was feign to render them both, and
himself, to the Dukes mercy, and became his pencioner, who was his
competitor; which act of clemency in the Duke, brought in many other to submit
themselves; whereby they re-obteyned their segniories, but had their Castles
demolished.

Having ended this work, new occasion to keep him in action, was ministered by
Geoffry Martle, Earl of Aniou, who warring upon the Poictouins, incroached
also upon his neighbors States, and usurped Alenson, Dampfront, and Passais,
members of the Duchy of Normandy: which to recover, the Duke leauies an
Army, and first got Alenson, where (for that he was opprobriously skorned by
the besieged who, when they saw him, would cry La Pel, La Pel, in reproach of
the baseness of his mother, and the trade of the place of his birth) he
showed extreme cruelty. Then lays he siege to Dampfront; which to relieve,
Conte Martel comes with his greatest forces: and the Duke to take notice of his
strength, sends out Roger de Mongomerie, with two other knights to deliver this
message to the Earl, That if he came to victual Dampfronte, he should find
him there the Porter to keep him out: whereto the Earl returns this answer:
Tell the Duke, to morrow by day break, he shall have me there on a white
horse, ready to give him the Combat, and I will enter Dampfront if I can; And
to the end he shall know me, I will wear a shield d' or, without any devise.

Roger replies, Sir you shall not need to take that pains, for to morrow
morning, you shall have the Duke in this place, mounted on a bay horse; And
that you may know him, he shall wear on the point of his Lance, a streamer
of tasfata, to wipe your face. Herewith returning, each side prepares for the
morning: when the Earl, busy in ordering his battles, was advertised by two
horsemen, that came crossing the field, how Dampfronte, for certain was
rendered to the Duke; whereupon in great rage, he presently departs with his
Army: whereof a part, was (in passing a straight) cut off, by Viconte Neel, who
for that service, redeemed his former offense, and was restored to the Dukes
favor, whom ever after he faithfully served. Those of Dampfronte, desperate
of succor, presently yield themselves to the Duke, who with his ingines and
forces remooues from thence to Hambrieres, a frontier Town of Conte Martels,
and by the way (had it not been by himself discovered) he had been utterly
overthrown by an ambush, which gave him much to do, and lost him very many
brave men. Wherewith he grew so enraged, that he rushed into the troops of
his enemies; made at Conte Martel, stracke him down with his sword, claue his
helmet, and cut off an ear: but yet he escaped out of the preasse, though
diverse were taken, and the Aniouuins utterly defeited.

Whilst thus he was travailed with an outward enemy, two more, were found at
home, to conspire against him. William Guelan, Earl of Mortagne, descended
from Richard the second. And William Earl of Eu, and Montreul, issuing from
William, the brother of the same Richard, and of Esselin, Countess of
Montreul: the first upon suspicion, the other upon proof, of an intention, was
banished, and their estates seized: the Earldome of Mortaigne he gave to
Robert: that of Eu to Odo (after Bishop of Bayeux) both his brethren by the
mother. These assaults from abroad, these skornes, conspiracies, and
vnder-workings at home, he passed before he was full 32 years of age: and thus
his enemies made him, that sought to undo him. But now, more to underset and
strengthen his State, against future practices, he conuokes an assembly of
his Prelates, Barons, and Gentlemen, causing them to receive their oath of
Fealty, and raze their Castles, which done, he married Matilde, the daughter
of Baldouin the sift Earl of The Duke marries Matilde daughter of Balaouine
the fifth Earl of Flanders.
Flaunders, but not without contrast and trouble: for his Uncle Mauger,
Archbishop of Roan, excommunicates him, for matching within the forbidden
degrees of kindred: she being daughter to Elinor, daughter to Richard the
second, and so his fathers sisters daughter. To expiate for which offense (upon
a dispensation from Pope Victor) they were enjoined the building of certain
Hospitals for blind people: and two Abbeyes, the one for men, the other for
women: which were erected at Caen.

This match, and the ouer-matching his enemies, set him so high a mark of
envy in The reasons why the King of France, wars with the Normans.
the eye of France, which naturally loved not the Normans (whom in reproach
they usually called Trewans) as they easily incensed their King, who of
himself was forward enough, to abate a power, grown so out of proportion with
the rest of the Princes of his Dominions, to find a quarrel (which confiners
easily do) to set upon him: and to make it look the fairer, pretends to
correct the insolences of the Normans committed on his territories, and to
relieve Count Martel, oppressed by the Duke; besides alleging, It concerwed him
in honor and justice, to have that Province, which held of his Crown, to be
governed by a Prince of lawful blood, according to Christian order and Laws
Ecclesiastical: And therefore resolves utterly to exterminate the Duke, and
establish a legittimate Prince in the Duchy. For which effect, two armies are
gathered from all parts of his Kingdom; the one sent along the river Sein, the
other into the Country of Bessin, as meaning to incompasse him.

The Duke likewise deuides his forces into two parts: sends his brother Odo,
Earl of Eu, Walter Guifford Earl of Longueuill, and others with the one, to
the Country of Caux; himself with the other takes toward Eureux (to make head
to the King that was at Mante) and withdrawes all cattle and provisions out of
the flat Country, into Cities and Fortresses, for their own store, and
disfurnishment of the enemy. The Kings army marching from Beanuois, to
Mortimer, and finding there a fat Country full of all provisions, betook them
to make good cheer, and rests there all that night; thinking the Norman forces
were yet with the Duke at Eureux; which, the army in Caux, conducted by Odo
understanding, marched all night, and by break of day, gave them so hot an
alarm, and so sudden, as put them all in rout, leaving horse, and armor, The
defeiture of the Army of the King of France, by the Normans.
and all to the assaylants; who made such a destruction of them, as of forty
thousand, not the fourth part escaped.

With this defeiture, the King of France is again returned home, with great
rage and grief, and the Duke, with the redemption of the prisoners, recouers
his peace, and the Castle of Thuilliers, taken from him in his vnder-age. Cont
Martell though much dismayed, with the Kings overthrow, yet leaves not to make
some attempts for the recovering his Towns; but with no success. The Duke he
saw was to well beloved and followed, for him to do any good without a stronger
arm. Wherefore the next spring, he goes, again to importune the King of
France, to aid him against the Duke: who (he said) Was now grown so insolent
upon this peace, and the victory he had stolen, and not won, that there was
no living for his neighbors near him: Besides, the Normans had the French in
such derision, and base esteem, as they made their act (at Mortimer) their
only sport, and the subject of their rimes: as if a King of France, upon the
loss of a few men, was retired, and durst not break a dishonorable peace.

With which instigation, and being stung with the touch of reproach, he raises
another Army far mightier then before, wherein were three Dukes, and twelve
Earls, and notwithstanding the sollemne peace made, and so lately sworn with
the Duke, he enters Normandy in the harvest time, ouer-runnes and spoils all
the Country, along the Coast to Bessin: from whence marching to Bayeux, and
Caen, with purpose to paste the river Diue at Varneuille, to destroy the
Countries of Auge, Liseux, and Roumoys, even to Roan: and finding the case-way
long, and the bridge narrow, caused his vantguard to pass over first: and, to
secure his Arierguard, conducted by the Duke of Berry, himself stays behind
in Caen, till his people, and their carriages were passed. Duke William, whom
(all this while, stores his sortresses with men and victual) makes himself as
strong in the Town of Falaise, as he could; has no army in the field, but a
running camp to be ready to take all advantages: lets the fury of the storm
spend it self, and having advertisement of this passage, marched all night
with 10 thousand men, and in the morning early, sets upon the Arierguard, with
so sudden a cry and fury, as they who were before on the Case-way hearing this
noise behind, thrust forward their fellows, hasting to get over the bridge,
with such a crowd and press, as they brake it, and many were drowned in the
river. They who were gotten over, could not return to aid the rest; nor the
King (by reason of Marshes on both sides) yield any succor to his people; but
stood a spectator of their slaughter, and the taking of six of his Earls, of
whom one was the exiled Earl of Eu, whom the King (favoring his great worth)
had made Conte De Soissons.

The grief of this overthrow, shortly after gave the King of France his death,
and The Army of the King of France overthrown at Varneuille by the Normans.
the Duke of Normandy a joyful peace, which he nobly employed in the ordering
and adorning his State: building, endowing, and decking Monasteries and
Churches: gathering relics from all parts to furnish his Abbeyes at Caen
(where he also erectted a Tomb for himself and his wife) feasting and
rewarding his Nobles and men of worth: whereby he so possessed him of the hearts
of all his people generally, as they were entirely his, for what he would.

During this calm of his life, he makes a journey over into England, as if to
visit The Duke comes to visit his kinsman.
King Edward his kinsman: who, in regard of the preservation, and breeding he
had in Normandy, by Duke Richard the second (Grandfather to them both) gave him
most Royal entertainment: And here he showed himself; and here (no doubt)
he found matter for his hopes to work on. In this enteruiew he discovered
England, being to be presupposed, he came not to gather cockle-shels, on the
shore, Nor was it long after ere Harold (whether of purpose to ratify some
paction closly contrived betwixt them: or by casualty of weather driven into
France (and so feign to make it seem a Harald goes over into Normandy.
journey of purpose to the Duke is not certainly delivered) was gallantly
entertained in Normandy, presented with all shows of Arms, brought to Paris,
and there likewise feasted in that Court. And at his return to Rouen,
something was concluded, either His entertainment.
in likelihood to divide the Kingdom between them, or that Harold being a
coastdweller, and had the strongest hand in the State, should let in the Duke,
and do his best to help him to the Crown, upon conditions of his own
greatness, or whatsoever it was; promises were made and confirmed by oaths
upon the Evangelists, and all the sacred Relics at Rouen, in the presence of
diverse great persons. Besides for His promises to the Duke.
more assurance, Harald was fyanced to Adeliza, the Dukes daughter, and his
brother Wolnot, left a pledge for the performance.

This intercourse made the trans-action of the fate of England, and so much was
done, either by King Edward or Harald (though neithers act, if any such were,
was of power to prejudice the State, or alter the course of a right succession)
as gave the Duke a color to claim the Crown, by a donation made by
Testament, which being against the Law and Custom of the Kingdom, could be of
no validity at all. For the Crown of England being held, not as Patrimoniall,
but in a succession by remotion (which is a succeeding to another place) it
was not in the power of King Edward to collate the same by any dispositiue and
testamentary will, the right discending to the next of blood, only by the
Custom and Law of the Kingdom: For the Successor is not said properly to be
the heir of the King, but the Kingdom, which makes him so, and cannot be put
from it by any act of his Predecessor. But this was only his claim; the
right was of his own making, and no otherwise, For as soon as he had heard
of the death of King Edward, with the Election, and Coronation of Harald (for
they came both together) he assembles the States of Normandy, and acquaints
them with the right he had to England, Soliciting an extention of their utmost
means for The Dukes speech to the assembly of the States of Normandy.
his recovery thereof, and auengement of the perjured Usurper Harald; showing
them apparent probability of success, by infallible intelligence he had from
the State, his strong party therein, with the debility and distraction of the
people; What glory, wealth, and greatness, it would add to their Nation, the
obtaining of such a Kingdom, as was thus opportunely laid open for them, if
they apprehended the present occasion. All which remonstrances notwithstanding,
could enduce but very few to like of this attempt, and those such who had long
followed him in the wars, exhausted their estates, and content to run upon
any adventure that might promise likelihood of advancement. The rest were of
diverse opinions: some that it was sufficient to hold and defend their own
Country; without hazarding themselves, to conquer others; and these were men of
the best ability: others were content to contribute, but so sparingly, as would
little advance the business: and for the most part they were so tired with the
former wars, and so desirous to embrace the blessing of peace, as they were
unwilling to undergo a certaiue trouble for an uncertain good. And with these
oppositions, or faint offers, the Dukes The subtle proceeding of the Duke with
his Nobles.
purpose, at first, had so little way, as did much perplex him: At length,
seeing this protraction, and difficulty in general: he deals with his nearest
and most trusty friends in particular, being such as he knew affected the glory
of action, and would adventure their whole estates with him. As William fitz
Auber, Conte de Bretteuile Gualier Guifford Earl of Logueuille, Roger de
Beaumont, with others, especially his own brothers, Odo Bishop of Bayeux, and
Robert Earl of Mortaigne: these in full assembly he wrought to make their
offers: which they did in so large a proportion; and especially William fitz
Auber (who made the first offer, to furnish forty ships with men and munition;
the Bishop of Bayeux forty the Bishop of Man's thirty, and so others, according,
or beyond their abilities) as the rest of the assembly, doubting if the action
succeeded without their help (the Duke aryuing to that greatness) would bear
in mind, what little mind they showed to advance his desires, began to
contribute more largely. The Duke, finding them yielding, though not in such
sort as was requisite for such a work; dealt with the Bishops and great men a
part, so effectually, as at length he got of them severally, which of
altogether he could never have compassed, and causing each man's contribution
to be registered; inkindled such an emulation amongst them, as they who lately
would do nothing, now striued who should do most.

And not only wan he the people of his own Provinces, to undertake this
action, The French likewise aid the Duke.
but drew by his fair persuasions and large promises, most of the greatest
Princes and Nobles of France, to adventure their persons, and much of their
estates with him; as Robert fitz Haruays, Duke of Orleance, the Earls of
Britain, Ponthien, Bologne, Poictou, Main; Neuers, Hiesms, Aumal; Le Signior
de Tours, and even his mortal enemy Martel, Earl of Aniou, became to be as
forward as any. All which, he sure could never have induced, had not his
virtues and greatness gained a wide opinion and reputation amongst them.
Although in these aduancements and turns of Princes, there is a concurrency of
dispositions, and a constitution of times prepared for it: yet is it strange,
that so many mighty men of the French Nation, would adventure their lives and
fortunes to add England to Normandy, to make it more then France, and so
great a Crown to a Duke, who was to great for them already. But where
mutations are destined, the counsels of men must be corrupted, and there will
fall out all advantages to serve that business.

The King of France, who should have strangled this disseigne in the birth, was
a The reason of the Dukes power.
child, and under the curature of Baldouin, Earl of Flanders, whose daughter
the Duke had married, and was sure to have rather furtherance then any
opposition that way: Besides, to amuze that Court, and dazella young Prince, he
promised faithfully, if he conquered this Kingdom; to hold it of that King,
as he did the Duchy of Normandy, and do him homage for the same; which
would add a great glory to that Crown. Then was he before hand with Pope
Alexander (to make religion give reputation and auowment to his pretended
right) promising likewise to hold it of the Apostolic Sea, if he prevailed
in his enterprise. Whereupon the Pope sent him a Banner of the Church, with an
Agnus of Gold, and one of the hairs of Saint Peter. The Emperor Henry 4. sent
him a Prince of Almaine with forces, but of what name, or his number, is not
remembered: so that we see it was not Normandy alone that subdued England, but
a collected power out of all France and Flanders with the aids of other
Princes. And by these means, made he good his undertaking, and within eight
months was ready furnished with a powerful Army at Saint Valerie in
Normandy, whence he transported the same into England in 896 ships, as some
write. And this was the man, and thus made to subdue England.

And now having gotten, the great and difficult battle, before remembered, at
1066. Anno. Reg. 1.
Hastings, the foureteenth of October 1066. be marched without any opposition
to London, where Edwin and Morchar, Earls of Northumberland, and Mercland
(brothers of eminent dignity and respect in the Kingdom) had labored with
all their power to stir the hearts of the people for the conservation of the
State, and establishing Edgar Atheling, the next of the Royal issue, in his
right of the Crown: whereunto other of the Nobility had likewise consented;
had they not seen the Bishops auerse or wavering. For, as then, to the
Clergy, any King (so a Christian) was all one: they had their Province a part,
divided from secular domination: and of a Prince (though a stranger) who had
taken up so much of the world before hand, upon credit and fame Reason for the
yielding of the Clergy.
of his piety and bounty, they could not but presume well for their estate:
and so were content to give way to the present Fortune.

(The Nobility, considering they were so borne, and must have a King: not to
take him (that was of power to make himself) would show more of passion then
providence: and to be now behind hand to receive him, with more then
submission, was as if to withstand: What moved the Nobles to yield.
which (with the distrust of each others faith) made them strive and run
headlong who should be first to pre-occupate the grace of servitude, and
intrude them into forvaine subjection.

The Commons (like a strong vessel that might have been for good use) was
hereby left, without a stern, and could not move but irregularly. So that all
estates in general, either corrupted with new hopes, or transported with
fear, forsook themselves, and their distressed Country. Upon his approach to
London, the Gates were all set open: the Archbishop of Canterbury, Stigand,
with other Bishops, the Nobility, Magistrates, and People, rendting themselves
in all obedience unto him: and he returning plausible protestations of his
future Government, was on Christmas day, then next following, Crowned King of
England, at Westminster, by Aldred, Archbishop of York, for that Stigand was
not held Canonically invested in his Sea: and yet thought to have been a
forward mouer of this alteration.

Here, according to the accustomed form, at his Coronation, the Bishops and
Barons The Coronation and oath of William 1.
of the Realm, took their oaths, to be his true and loyal subjects, and he
reciprocally (being required thereunto by the Archbishop of York) made his
personal oath, before the Altar of Saint Peter, To defend the Holy Churches of
God, and the Rectors of the same: To govern the Universal people, subject
unto him justly: To establish equal Laws, and to see them duly executed. Nor
did he ever claim any power King Williams submission to the orders of the
Kingdom of England.
by Conquest, but as a regular Prince, submitted himself to the orders of the
Kingdom: desirous rather to have his Testamentary title (howsoever weak) to
make good his successiou, rather then his sword. And though the Style of
Conqueror by the flattery of the time, was after given him; he showed by all
the course of his Government he assumed it not: introducing none of all those
alterations (which followed) by violence, but a mild gathering upon the
disposition of the State, and the occasions offered, and that by way of
reformation. And now taking Hostages for his more security, and order for the
defense and Government of his Kingdom, at the opening of the spring next, he
returns into Normandy, so to settle his affairs there, as they might not
distract him from his business in England, that required his whole powers.

And to leave here all sure behind him, he commits the rule of the Kingdom, to
his brother the Bishop of Bayeux, and to his Cousin Fitz Or Osborne.
Auber, whom he had made Earl of Hereford, taking with him all the chief men
of England, who were likest to be heads King William returns into Normandy,
with the chief Nobility of England.
to a revolt. As Edger Atheling, the Archbishop Stigand, lately discontented:
Edwin, and Morchar, with many other Bishops and Noble men: Besides to unburden
his charge, and dis-impester his Court; he took back with him all the French
adventurers, and such as were unnecessary men, rewarding them as far as his
treasure would extend, and the rest he made up in fair promises.

In his absence, which was all that whole summer, nothing was here attempted
against him, but only that Edric, surnamed the Forrester, in the County of
Hereford, called in the Kings of the Welsh, to his aid, and forraged only the
remote borders of that Country. The rest of the Kingdom stood quiet, expecting
what would become of that new world, wherein as yet they found no great
alteration, their laws and liberties remaining the same they were before, and
might hope by this accession of a new Province; the state of England would be
but enlarged in dominion abroad, and not impaired in profit at home, by reason
the Nation was but small, and of a plentiful, and not ouer-peopled Country,
likely to impester them.

Having disposed his affairs of Normandy, he returns toward winter, into
King William returns into England.
England, where he was to satisfy three sorts of men; First, such Adventurers,
with whom he had not yet cleared: Secondly, those of his own people, whose
merits or neerenesse, looked for recompense, whereof the number being so
great, many must have their expectations fed, if not satisfied: Thirdly, the
people of this Kingdom, by whom he must row subsist: For being not able with
his own Nation, so to impeople the same, as to hold and defend it (if he
should proceed to an extirpation of the natural inhabitants) he was likewise
to give them satisfaction.

Wherein, he had more to do, then in his battle at Hastings; seeing all
remunerations, with supplies of money, must be raised out of the stock of this
Kingdom, which could not but be likesome to the State in general, and all
preferments and dignities conser'd on his, to be either by vacancies, or
displacing others, which must needs breed very feeling grieuances in
particular. And yet we find no great men thrust out of their rooms, but such
as put themselves out, by reuolting, after his establishment, and their fealty
given, as appears by the controversy between Warren the Norman, and Sherburn
of Sherburn Castle in Norfolk, which castle though the King had given to
Warren, yet (when Sherburn alleged, How he never bare Arms against him:
Cambden Nors.
that he was his subject as well as the other, and held his Lands by that Law
which he had established amongst all his subjects, the King gave judgment
against Warren, and commanded, that Sherburn should hold his Land in peace. So
that it seems, he contented himself and his, for the time, only with what
he found here ready, and with filling up their places, who were slain in the
battle, or fled, as many were, with the sons of Harald out of the Kingdom.
Such Gentlemen as he could not presently prefer, M. S.
and had a purpose to advance, he dispersed abroad into Abbeys, there to live
till places fell out for them: and 24 he sent to the Abbey of Eley: whereby he
not only lessened the multitude of attendants and suitors at Court; eased that
eyesore of strangers, but also had them a watch over the Clergy, who then
were of great and eminent power in the Kingdom; and might prevail with the
people.

But the English Nobility, incompatible of these new concurrents; found
notwithstanding, 1067. Anno. Reg. 2.
such a disproportion of grace, and darkning of their dignities, by the
interposition of so many, as must needs lessen their splendor; that many of
the chiefest, doubting to be more impaired in honor and estate, conspired
together, and fled some into Scotland, and some into Denmark, to try if by
aid from abroad, they might The English Nobility forsake the kingdom.
recover themselves, and their lost fortunes again at home. Amongst which, the
chief was Edgar Atheling (termed Englands Dearling, which showed the peoples
zeal to his blood) who with his mother Agatha, and his two sisters, Magaret
and Christin, intending to retire into Hungary (their native Country) were
driven by tempest on the coast of Scotland, where they were in all Hospitable
manner entertained by Malcolin the third, whose former sufferings in his exile,
had taught him to compassionate others like distresses; and whom it concerned
now to look to his own, his neighbors house being thus on fire: and to
foster a pattie against so dangerous an incommer, that was like to thrust them
all out of door. Which induced him not only to entertain this Prince,
dispossessed of his right, but to enter league with him for the public safety;
And to inchaine it the stronger, he takes to wife Margaret, the The King of
Scots enters league with the English Nobility and marries Edgars sister.
sister of Edgar (a Lady endued withal blessed virtues) by whom the blood of
our ancient Kings was preserved, and conjoined with the Norman in Henry the
second, and so became English again. Unto Edgar in Scotland, repaired the
Earls Edwin and Morchar, Hereward, Gospatric, Siward, with others: and shortly
after Stigand and Aldred, Archbishops, with diverse of the Clergy: who in the
third year of this Kings reign, raised very great commotions in the North,
beyond Humber, and wrought most egarly 1068. Anno. Reg. 3.
to recover their lost Country: but being now to late, and the occasion not
taken before the settling of the government, whilst it was new, and branling,
they prevailed nothing, but gave advantage to the Conqueror, to make himself
more then he was: For all conspiracies of subjects, if they succeed not,
advance the sovereignty: and nothing gave root to the Norman planting here,
more then the petty reuolts made by discattred troops, in several parts,
begun without order, and followed without resolution; whereas nothing could
be done for a general recovery, but by a general sulleuation of the people:
for which all wary prevention was used; and they had waits enough laid on, to
hold them down. And though these Lords imbroiled themselves, and held him
doing in the North, yet he having all the South parts settled under his
domination, with well practiced and prepared forces, there could be little
hope of good, whilst all their great estates furnished the Normans, both in
state and means to ruin them. The Earldom; and all the Lands which Edwin
held in See the Charter in the Appendix.
Yorkshire, were given to Alain, Earl of Britain, kinsman to the Conqueror;
The Arch-bishopricke of Canterbury, conferred on Lanfranc, Abbot of Caen. That
of York, on Thomas his Chaplain, and all the rest both of the Clergy and
others, which were out, had their places within, supplied by Normans.

And after King William had appeased a Commotion in the West, which the sons
of Harald, with forces out of Ireland had raised, and also repressed the
rebellions of Excester, and Oxford, he takes his journey in person Northward
with all expedition (least the enemy there, should grow to high in heart and
opinion, upon the great slaughter of his people, made at York; and the
defeiture of his Brother and Leiuetenant, Robert Earl of Mortaigne, slain
with seven hundredth Normans at Durham) where, at his first coming he so
wrought, that he either discomfeited, or corrupted the Generals of the Danicque
forces (newly arrived to aid the Lords; sent by Swain, King of Denmark,
under the conduct of his two sons, Harald and Knute, with a Navy of three
hundredth sail) and after sets upon the Army of the Lords, weakened both in
strength and hope, by this departure of their Confederates, and puts them to
flight: Which done, he utterly wasted, and laid desolate, all that goodly
Country between York and Durham, the space of 60. miles, as it might be no
more a succor to the enemy: And the like course he used on all the Coasts
where any aptlandings lay for invasions; and so returns to London.

Most of the Lords after this defeit, came in, upon public faith given them,
and were conducted to Barkehamsted, by the Abbot Fredricke; where, upon their
submission, and Oath of Allegiance re-taken, they had their pardon, and
restitution of grace granted by the King, who it seems was so willing to
acquiet them, that again he takes his personal Oath before the Archbishop
Lanfrancke, and the Lords, To observe See the Appendix.
the Ancient Laws of the Realm, established by his Noble Predecessors, the
Kings of England, and especially those of Edward the Confessor. Whereupon these
stormy dispositions held calm a while.

But long it was not ere many of these Lords (whether upon intelligence of new
1074. Anno. Reg. 8.
hopes, from Prince Edgar (who was still in Scotland) or grown desperate with
new displeasures, at home, finding small performance of promises made, rupture
of Oath, and all other respects, brake out again. The Earl Edwyn, making
toward Scotland, was murdered by his own people. The Lords Morchar, and
Hereward, betook them to the Isle of Eley, meaning to make good that place for
that Winter; whether also repaired the Earl Syward, and the Bishop of Durham
out of Scotland. But the King, who was no time-giuer unto growing dangers,
besets all the Isle with flat boats on the East, and made a bridge of two
miles long on the West, and safely brought in his people upon the enemy; who
seeing themselves surprised; yielded all to the Kings mercy, except Hereward,
who desperately marched with his people through the Fennes; and recovered
Scotland: The rest were sent to diverse Prisons, where they died, or remained
during the Kings life.

Those Lords who persisted loyal upon this last submission, were all employed
and well graced with the King, as Edric the Forrester (and first that rebelled
in his Reign) was held in clear trust, and near about him. Gospatrice he
made Earl of Northumberland, and sent him against Malcolin, who in this time,
subdues the Countries of Tisdall, Cleueland, and Comberland: Waltheof, son to
the Earl Syward, he held so worthy to be made his, as he married him to his
Niece Judith, though he had been a principal actor in the Northern commotion
(and in defending the City of York against him: is said to have stricken off
the heads of diverse Normans, one by one, as they entered a breach, to the
admiration of all about him) showing therein that true touch of the noblest
nature, to love virtue, even in his enemies.

And now seeing Scotland to be the especial retraite for all conspirators, and
discontented in his Kingdom, yielding them continual succor, and assistance,
and where his compecitor Edgar lived, to be get and nurse perpetual matter for
their hopes, and at hand for all advantages; he enters that Kingdom with a
puissant Army: which, incountring with more necessities then forces, soon grew
tired, and both Kings, considering of what difficulties the victory would
consist, were willing, to take the safest way to there ends, and upon fair
ouertures, to conclude a peace; Articling for the bounds of each Kingdom, with
the same title of Dominion, as in former tunes: All delinquents, and their
partakers generally pardoned.

Here with the vniuersoll turn of alteration thus wrought in England,
Scotland (being Scotland before this time gene rally spoke a kind of Irish.
a part of the body of this Isle) is noted to have likewise had a share; and as
in the Court of England, the French tongue became generally spoken; so in that
of Scotland did the English, by reason of the multitude of this Nation,
attending both the Qacene and her brother Edgar, and daily repairing thither
for their safety, and combination against the common enemy: of whom diverse,
abandoning their native distressed Country, were by the bounty of that King
preferred: and there planted, spread their offspring into many noble families,
remaining to this day: The titles for distinguishing Titles of honor in
Scotland.
degrees of honor; as of Duke, Earl, Baron, Rider or Knight, were then (as is
thought) first introduced: and the nobler sort began to be called by the title
of their Signories (according to the French manner) which before bate the name
of their Father, with the addition of Mac, after the fashion of Ireland. Other
innouations, no doubt, entered there likewise at the opening of this wide
mutation of ours: fashion and imitation like weeds easily growing in every
soil.

Shortly after this late made peace, Prince Edgar voluntarily came in, and
submitted Edgar Atheling submitted him self to King William.,
himself to the King, being then in Normandy, and was restored to grace, and a
fair maintenance, which held him ever after quiet. And it made well at that
time for the fortune of the King, howsoever for his own, being thought to have
ill-timed his affairs (either through want of seasonable intelligence, or
despair of success) in making 1075. Anno. Reg. 9.
too soon that submission, which was latter or never to be done. For in this
absence of the King, Roger Fits Auber, the young Earl of Hereford, contrary to
his express commandment, gave his sister in marriage to Raph Waher, Earl of
Northfolke, and Suffolk, and at the great Solemnization thereof, the two
Earls conspired with Eustace Earl of Boloigne (who secretly came over to this
festival) and with the Earl Waltheof, and other English Lords, to call in the
Danes, and by maine power to keep out and dispossess the King. Who having
thus passed over so many gulfes of foreign 1076. Anno. Reg. 10.
dangers, might little imagine of any wrack so near home; and that those,
whom he had most advanced, should have the especial hand in his destruction:
But no rewards, are benefits (that are not held so) nor can ever clear the
accounts with them that ouervalue their merits. And had not this conspiracy
been opportunely discovered (which some say, was by the Earl Waltheof, moved
with the ugliness of so soul an ingratitude) they had put him again to the
winning of England. But now the fire bewrayed before it flamed, was soon
quenched by the diligence of Odon the Kings Vicegerent, the Bishop of
Worcester and others, who kept the Conspirators from joining their forces: So
that they never came to make head, but were either surprised, or forced to
fly. The Earl Roger Fitz Auber was taken, and some say executed; and so was
shortly after the Earl Waltheof, whose dissent from the act, could not get him
pardon for his former consent, though much compassion in respect of his great
worthiness. But the 1077. Anno. Reg. 11.
wide distent of these tumors, fed from many secret veins, seemed to be of
that danger, as required this extremity of cure, especially in a part so apt
for infection, upon any the like humors.

For this Conspiracy seems to take motion from a general league of all the
neighbor Princes here about, as may well be gathered by their several
actions. First in the King of France by defending Dole in Brittaigne (a Castle
of Raph de Waher) against the King of England, and in likelihood, employing the
Earl of Boloigne to wards the Conspirators: In Swayne King of Denmark, by
sending a Navy of two hundredth sail, under the conduct of his son Knute, and
others. In Drone King of Ireland, by furnishing the sons of Harald with 65.
ships. In Malcoline, and the Kings of Wales, by their readiness to assist. But
the Danes being on the coast, and hearing how their confederates had sped, with
the great preparations the King had made, after some pillage taken upon the
coast of England and Flanders, returned home, and never after arrived to
disturb this land. Though in Anno Reg. 19. Knute, then King of Denmark, after
the death of Swain (intending to repair the dishonor of his two last
adventures past) and to put for the Crown of England, his predecessors had
holden, prepared a Navy of a thousand sail, and was aided with six hundredth
more by Robert le Frison Earl of Flanders (whose daughter he had married.) But
the winds held so contrary for two years together, as utterly quasht that
enterprise; and freed the King, and his successors for ever after, from future
molestation that way.

But this business put the State to an infinite charge, the King entertayning
all that time (besides his Normans) Hugh, brother to the King of France, with
many companies 1078. Anno. Reg. 12.
of French. Finding the English (in respect of many great families allied to
the Danes) to incline rather to that Nation, then the Norman, and had
experience of the great and near intelligence continually passing between
them.

And these were all the wars he had within the Kingdom, saving in An. Regni
13. he subdued Wales, and brought the kings there, to do him homage. His
wars abroad, 1079. Anno. Reg. 13
were all about his Dominions in France, first raised by his own son Robert,
left Lieuftenant governor of the Duchy of Normandy, and the County of Main,
who in his fathers absence, tasting the glory of command, grew to assume the
absolute The Kings of wales do homage to King william.
rule of the Province, causing the Barons there, to do him homage (as Duke) not
as Lieutenant, and leagues him with the King of France, who working upon the
easiness of his youth, and ambition, was glad to apprehend that occasion to
disioynt his estate, who was grown too great for him. And the profusse
largess, and disorderly expense, whereto Robert was addicted, is nourished by
all ways possible, as the means to imbrake him in those difficulties of still
getting money, that could not but needs yield continual occasion to intertain
both his own discontent and theirs from whom, his supplies must be raised. And
though thereby he purchased him the title of Courtois, yet he lost the Robert
of Normandy titled Courtois.
opinion of good government, and constrained the estates of Normandy, to
complain to his father of the great concussion, and violent exactions he used
amongst them.

The King understanding the fire thus kindled in his own house, that had set
others all in combustion, hasts with forces into Normandy, to have surprised
his son; who advertised of his coming, furnished with two thousand men at
Arms, by the King of France, lay in ambush where he should pass; sets upon
him, defeited most of his people, and in the pursuit happened to encounter
with himself, whom he unhorsed, and wounded in the arm, with his Lance; but
perceiving by his voice, it was his father, he hasted to remounte him, humbly
craving pardon for his offense: which the father (seeing in what case he was)
granted, howsoever he gave; and upon his submission, took him with him to
Rouen; whence, after cured of his hurt, he returned with his son William
(likewise wounded in the fight) into England.

Long was it not ere he was again informed of his sons remutyning, and how
he exacted upon the Normans, usurped the entire government, and urged his
fathers promise 1080. Anno. Reg. 14.
thereof, made him, before the King of France, upon his Conquest of England:
which caused his little stay here, but to make preparations for his return
into those parts: whether in passing, he was driven on the Coast of Spain, but
at length ariuing at Bordeaux, with his great preparations his son Robert
came in, and submitted himself Robert rebels against his father.
the second time: whom he now took with him into England, to frame him to a
better obedience, employing him in the hard and necessitous wars of Scotland
(the late peace being between the two Kings again broken) and after sent him
back, 1081. Anno. Reg. 15.
and his young son Henry, with the association of charge and like power (but
of more trust) to the government of Normandy.

After the two Princes had been there a while, they went to visit the King of
France at Constance, where feasting certain days, upon an after dinner, Henry
wanne 1082. Anno. Reg. 16.
so much at chesse, of Louis, the Kings eldest son, as he, growing into
choler, called him the son of a Bastard, and threw the Chesse in his face.
Henry takes up the Chesse-bord, and struck Louis, with that force, as drew
blood, and had killed him, had not his brother Robert come in the mean time,
and interposed himself: Whereupon Louis and Henry sons of the Kings of
France, and England.
they suddenly took horse, and with much ado they recovered Pontoise, from
the Kings people that pursued them. This quarrel arising, upon the
in-ter-meeting of these Princes (a thing that seldom breeds good blood amongst
them) re-enkindled a heat of more rancor in the fathers, and began the first
war between the English and French. For presently the King of France,
complots again with Robert (impatient of a partner) cnters Normandy, and
takes the City of Vernon. The King of England inuades France, subdues the
Country of Zaintonge and Poictou, and returns to 1026. Anno. Reg. 20
Rouen, where the third time, his son Robert is reconciled unto him, which
much disappoints and vexes the King of France, who thereupon, summons the King
of England, to do him homage for the Kingdom of England, which he refused to
do, saying, Hce held it of none but God and his sword. For the Duchy of
Normandy he offers him homage: but that would not satisfy the King of
France, whom nothing would, but what King William denies to do homage for
England, to the King of France.
he could not have, the Maistery: and seeks to make any occasion the motive of
his quarrel: and again inuades his territories, but with more loss then
profit. In the end, they conclude a certain crazie peace, which held no longer
then King William had recovered a sickness, whereinto (through his late
travail, age, and corpulencie) he was fallen: at which time, the King of
France, then young and lusty, ieasting at his great belly, whereof he said, he
lay in, at Rouen so irritated him, as being recovered, he gathers al 1087.
Anno. Reg. 21.
his best forces, enters France in the chiefest timeof their fruits, making
spoil of all in his way, till he came even before Paris; where the King of
France then was; to whom he sends, to show him of his vp-sitting, and from
thence marched to the City of Mants, which he utterly sacked, and in the
destruction thereof, gate his own, by the strain of his horse, among the
breaches, and was thence conveyed sick to Ronen, and so ended all his wars.

Now for his government in peace, and the course he held in establishing the
His government in peace.
Kingdom thus gotten; first after he had represt the conspiracies in the
North, and well quieted all other parts of the State (which now being
absolutely his, he would have to be ruled by his own Law) he began to
govern all by the Customs of Normandy. Whereupon the agreeued Lords, and
sad people of England, tender their humble petition, Beseeching him, in
regard of his oath made at his Coronation: And by the soul of Saint Edward,
from whom he had the Crown, and Kingdom; under whose Laws they were borne
and bred; That he would not add that misery, to deliver them up to be
judged, by a strange Law they understood not. And so earnestly they wrought,
that he was pleased to confirm that by his Charter, which he had twice
fore-promised by his oath: What were the laws of England.
And gave commandment to his Iusticiaries to see these Laws of Saint Edward
(so called, not that he made them, but collected them out of Merchen-Law,
Dane-Law, and Westsex-Law) To be inuiolablie observed throughout the Kingdom.
And yet notwithstanding this confirmation, and the Charters afterward granted
by Henry the first, Henry the second, and King John, to the same effect; there
followed a great innovation both in the Laws and government of England: So
that this seems rather done to acquiet the people, with a show of the
continuation of their ancient customs and liberties, then that they enjoyed
them in effect. For the little conformity between them of former times, and
these that followed upon this change of State, show from what head they sprang.
And though there might be some veins issuing from former originals, yet the
maine stream, of our Common Law, with the The original of the Common Law now
used.
practice thereof, flowed out of Normandy, notwithstanding all objections can
be made to the contrary. For before these collections of the Confessors, there
was no universal Law of the Kingdom, but every several Province held their
own Customs: all the inhabitants from Humber to Scotland used the Danique
Law: Merchland, the middle part of the Country, and the State of the West
Saxons, had their several constitutions, as being several Dominions: And
though for some few years there seemed to be a reduction of the Heptarchie,
into a Monarchy, yet held it not so long together (as we may see in the
succession of that broken government) as to settle one form of order current
over all; but that every Province, according to their particular founders, had
their customs a part, and held nothing in common (besides religion, and the
constitutions thereof) but with the universality of Meum and Tuum, ordered
according to the rites of nations, and that ius innatum, the Common Law of all
the world, which we see to be as universal, as are the cohabitations, and
societies of men, and serves the turn to hold them together in all Countries,
howsoever they may differ in their forms. So that by these passages, we see
what way we came, where we are, and the furthest end we can discover of the
original of our Common Law; and to strive to look beyond this, is to look
into an uncertain vastness, beyond our discerning. Nor can it detract from
the glory of good Customs, if they bring but a pedigree of 600 years to
approve their gentilitie; seeing it is the equity, and not the antiquity of of
laws, that makes them venerable, and the integrity of the professors thereof,
the profession honored. And it were well with mankind, if days brought not
their corruptions, and good orders were continued with that providence, as they
were instituted. But this alteration of the Laws of England bred most heavy
doleances, not only in this Kings time, but long after: For whereas before,
those Laws they had, The Law of England put into a foreign Language.
were written in their own tongue, intelligible to all; now are they
translated into Latin and French, and practiced wholly in the Norman form and
Language; thereby to draw the people of this Kingdom, to learn that speech
for their own need, which otherwise they would not do; And seeing a
difference in tongue, would continue a difference in affections; all means was
wrought to reduce it to one Idiom, which yet was not in the power of the
Conqueror to do, without the extirpation, or ouerlaying the Land-bred people;
who being so far in number (as they were) above the inuadors; both retain the
maine of the Language, and in few years, have those who subdued them,
vndistinguishably theirs. For notwithstanding the former Conquest by the Danes,
and now this by the Norman (the solid body of the Kingdom, still consisted of
the English) and the accession of strange people, was but as rivers to the
Ocean, that changed not it, but were changed into it. And though the King
labored what he could to turn all to French, By enioyning their children
here to use no other Language, with their Grammar in schools, to have the
Laws practiced in French, all petitions and business of Court in French, No
man graced but he that spoke French, yet soon after his days, all returns
natural English again (but Law) and that still held foreign, and became in
the end wholly to be enclosed in that language: nor have we now, other mark of
our subjection and inuassellage from Normandy, but only that, and that still
speaks French to us in England.

And herewithall, New Terms, new Constitutions, new Forms of Pleas, new
Offices, and Courts, are now introduced by the Normans; a people more inured to
litigation, and of spirits more impatient, and contentious, then were the
English: who (by reason of their continual war, wherein Law is not borne,
and labor to defend the public) were more at unity in their private: and
that small time of peace they had, Devotion, and good fellowship entertained.
For their Laws and constitutions before, we see them plain, brief, and
simple, without perplexities, having neither fold nor pleite, commanding; not
disputing: Their grants and transactions as brief and simple, which showed
them a cleere-meaning people, retayning still the nature of that Vide Append.
plain realnesse they brought with them, vncomposed of other fashion, then
their own, and vnasfecting imitation.

And for their trials (in cases criminal) where manifest proofs failed, they
continued their ancient custom, held from before their Christianity (until
this great alteration) which trials they called Ordeal; Or ( signifying) Right,
Deal, Part, whereof they had these The English trials in cases criminal.
kinds: Ordeal by fire, which was for the better sort, and by water for the
inferior: That of Fire, was to go blindfold over certain plough-shares, made
red hot; and laid an uneven distance one from another. That of Water was
either of hot, or cold: in the one to put their arms to the elbow, in the
other to be cast headlong. According to their escapes or hurts, they were
adjudged: Such as were cast into the rivers, if they sancke were held
guiltless, if not, culpable, as eiected by that Element. These trials they
called the judgments of God, and they were performed with solemn Oraisons. In
some cases, The accused was admitted to Men of ability cleared by their oaths.
clear himself by receiving the Eucharist, or by his own Oath, or the Oaths
of two or three; but this was for especial persons, and such, whose livings
were of a rate allowable thereunto, the usual opinion persuading them, that
men of ability held a more regard of honesty.

With these, they had the trial of Campefight, or single combat (which
likewise the Lumbards, originally of the same German Nation, brought into
Italy) permitted by the Law, in cases either of safety, and fame, or of
possessions. All which trials, show them to be ignorant in any other form of
Law, or to neglect it; Nor would they be induced to forgo these Customs, and
determine their affairs by Imperial or Pontificiall Constitutions, no more
then would the Lumbards forsake their duellary Laws in Italy, which their
Princes (against some of their wills) were constrained to ratify, as
Luytprandus, their King, thus ingeniously confesses. We are uncertain of the
judgment of God, and we have heard many by fight, to have lost their cause,
without just cause; yet in respect of the custom of our Nation, we cannot
avoid an impious Law. But all these forms of judgments, and trials, had
their seasons; Those of Fire, and Water, in short time after the Conquest, grew
disused, and in the end utterly obrogated by the Pope; as derived The English
trials.
from Paganism; That of combat continues longer-liued, but of no ordinary
use: And all actions now, both criminal and real, began to be wholly
adjudged by the verdict of twelve men, according to the custom of Normandy,
where the like form is used, and called by the name of Enquest, with the same
cautions for the Jurors, as it is here continued to this day. Although some
hold opinion, that this form of trial, was of use in this Kingdom from all
antiquity, and allege an Ordinance of King Ethelred (father to the Confessor)
willing in their Gemote, or conuentions, monthly held in every Hundred, twelve
grave men of free condition, should with the Grieve, the chief Officer amongst
them, swear upon the Evangelists, to judge every man's cause aright. But here
we see twelve men were to be assessors with the Grieve to judge, and no Jurors,
according to this manner of trial now used; Besides, had there been any such
form, we should as well have heard thereof in their Laws and practice, as of
those other kinds of Ordeal, only, and usually mentioned.

But whatsoever innouations were in all other things; the government for the
peace The continuation of the Law for the peace.
and security of the Kingdom (which most imported the King to look unto)
seems to be contrnued as before, and for that business he found here better
Laws established, by the wary care of our former Kings, then any he could
bring. Amongst which especially was the Borough Law, whereby every free man of
the Commons stood as surety for each The Borough Law of the Saxons.
others behavior, in this sort.

The kingdom was divided into Shieres or Shares, every Shiere consisting of so
many Hundreds, and every Hundred of a number of Boroughs, Villages, or
Tythings, containing ten householders, whereof; If any one should commit an
vnlawfullact, the other nine were to attach and bring him to reason: If he
fled, 31 days were enioysed him to appear: If in the mean time apprehended,
he was made to restore the damage done; otherwise the Freeboroughead (to say
the Tythingman) was to take with him two of the same Village, and out of three
other Villages next ad oyning as many (that is, the Tythingman, and two other
of the principal Saxon Laws.
men) and before the officers of that Hundred, purge himself and the Village
of the fact, restoring Lambert.
the damage done with the goods of the malefactor; which, if they suffized not
to satisfy, the Free-borough, or Tything, must make up the rest, and besides
take an oath to be no way accessarie to the fact; and to produce the Offender,
if by any means they could recover him, or know where he were. Besides every
Lord and Master, stood Borough, for all his family, whereof if any servant
were called in question, the Master was to see him answer it in the Hundred,
where he was accused. If he fled, the Master was to yield such goods as he
had to the King. If himself were accused to be aiding or privy to his
servants slight, he was to clear himself by five men, otherwise to forfeit
all his goods to the King, and his man to be outlawed.

These lincks thus intermutually fastened, made so strong a chain to hold the
whole frame of the State together in peace and order, as, all the most
pollitique regiments upon earth, all the interleagued societies of men, cannot
show us a streighter form of combination. This might make the Conqueror,
coming upon a people (thus Law-bound hand and foot) to establish him, so
soon, and easily as he did; This Borough-law (being as a Cittadell, built to
guard the Commonwealth, coming to be possessed by a Conquering Master) was
made to turn all this ordinance upon the State, and batter her self with her
own weapon: and this Law may No popular insurrection before the Conquest.
be some cause, we find no popular insurrection before the Conquest. For had
not this people been borne with these fetters, and an idie peace (but had
lived loose, and in action) it is like they would have done as nobly, and
given as many, and as deep wounds ere they lost their Country, as ever the
Britains did, either against the Romans, or the Saxons, their predecessors,
or themselves had done against the Danes; a people far more powerful, and
numerous then these. The Conqueror, without this, had not made it the work of
one day, nor had Normandy ever been able to have yielded those multitudes for
supplies, that many battles must have had.

But now. First the strict executing this Law. Secondly, dis-wcop'ning the
Commons. Thirdly, The means used by the Norman, to establish his Conquest.
preventing their night-meetings with a heavy penalty, that every man at the
day closing, should cover his fire, and depart to his rest. Fourthly, erecting
diverse Fortresses in sit parts of the Kingdom. Fifthly, collating all offices,
both of command, and judicature, on those who were his; made his domination
such as he would have it.

And where before the Bishop and the Alderman were the absolute Judges to
determine Alteration of the Government.
all business in every Shiere, and the Bishop in many cases shared in the
benifit of the Mulcts with the King, now he confined the Clergy, within the
Province of their own Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, to deal only in
business concerning rule of souls, according to the Cannons, and Laws
Episcopal.

And whereas the causes of the Kingdom were before determined in every Shiere,
The order of deciding contrauerfies in the Saxons time.
and by a Law of King Edward Senior; all matters in question should, upon
especial penalty, without further deferment, be finally decided in their
Gemote, or conuentions held monthly in every hundred: now he ordained, That
four times in the year, for certain days, the same businesses should be
determined in such place as he would appoint, where New orders instituted by
the Normans.
he constituted Judges to attend for that purpose, and also others, from whom,
as from the bosom of the Prince, all litigators should have Justice, and from
whom was no appeal. Others he appointed for the punishment of malefactors,
called Iusticiarij Pacis.

What alteration was then made in the tenure of men's possessions, or since
introduced, The alteration of Tenures.
we may find by taking note of their former vsances. Our Ancestors had only
two kind of tenures, Boke-land, and Folk-land, the one was a possession by
writing, the other Lambert.
without. That by writing was as freehold, and by Charter, hereditarie, with
all immunities, and for the free and nobler sort. That without writing, was to
hold at the will of the Lord, bound Freehold.
to rents and services, and was for the rural people. The inheritances
descended not alone, but after the German manner, equally divided amongst all
the children, which they called Landskiftan, The Tenure of Gauel kin.
to say Part-land, a custom yet continued in some places of Kent, by the name
of Gauel-kin, of Gif eal kin: And hereupon some write how the people of that
Country, retained their ancient Laws and liberties by especial grant from
the Conqueror: who after his battle at Hastings, coming to Dover, to make
all sure on that side, was encompassed by the whole people of that Province,
carrying boughs of trees in their hands, and marching round about him like a
moving wood. With which strange and sudden show being much moved, the
Archbishop Stigand, and the Abbot Egelsin (who had raised this commotion by
showing the people in what danger they The Customs of Kent preserved by the
mediation of the Archbishop Stigand.
were, utterly to loose their liberties, and endure the perpetual misery of
servitude under the domination of strangers) present themselves, and declared,
How they were the universal people of that Country, gathered together in that
manner, with boughs in their hands, either as Olive branches of intercession,
for peace and liberty, or to entangle him in his passage, with resolution
rather to leave their lives, then that which was deerer, their freedom.
Whereupon they say the Conqueror granted them the continuation of their
former Customs and Liberties: whereof, notwithstanding they now retain no
other, then such as are common with the rest of the Kingdom. Geruasius
Tilburieasis. Dialog. Scacc.


For such as were Tenants at the will of their Lords (which now grown to a
greater number, and more miserable then before) upon their petition, and
compassion of their oppression he relieved, their case was this. All such as
were discovered to have had a hand in any rebellion, and were pardoned, only
to enjoy the benefit of life, having all their liuelihood taken from them,
became vassals unto those Lords to whom the possessions were given, of all such
lands forfeited by attaindors. And if by their diligent service, they could
attain any portion of ground, they held it but only so long as it pleased
their Lords, without having any estate for themselves, or their children, and
Villenage.
were oftentimes violently cast out upon any small displeasure, contrary to all
right: whereupon it was ordained, that whatsoever they had obtained of their
Lords, by their obsequious service, or agreed for, by any lawful pact, they
should hold by an inviolable Law, during their own lives.

The next great work after the ordering his Laws, was the raising and
disposing of his revenues, taking a course to make, and know the utmost of his
estate, by a genesuruey of the Kingdom, whereof he had a president by the Dome
book of Winchester, taken before by King Alfride. But as one day informs
another, so these actions of profit A suruay made of the Kingdom.
grew more exact in their after practice: and a larger Commission is granted,
a choice of skilfuller men employed, to take the particulars both of his own
possessions, and every man's else in the Kingdom, the Nature and the quality of
their Lands, their estates, and abilities; besides the descriptions, bounds,
and divisions of Shieres and Hundreds, and this was drawn into one book, and
brought into his treasury, Geruasius Tilburien: de Scatc: Dome book.
then newly called the Exchequer (according to the sovereign Court of that
name of Normandy) before termed here the Talee, and it was called the Dome
book ( Liber iudiciarius) for all occasions concerning these particulars.

All the Forests and Chases of the Kingdom, he seized into his proper
possession, Ibid.
and exempted them from being under any other Law then his own pleasure, to
serve as Penetralia Regum, the withdrawing Chambers of Kings, to recreate them
after their serious labors in the State, where none other might presume to
have to do, and where all punishments and pardons of delinquents were to be
disposed by himself, absolutely, and all former customs abrogated. And to
make his command the more, he increased the number of them in all parts of the
Land, and on the South coast dispeopled the Country for above thirty miles
space, making of old inhabited possessions, a new Forest, inflicting most
severe punishments for hunting his Dear, and thereby The new Forest in
Hamshire.
much aduances his revenues. An act of the greatest concussion, and tyranny,
he committed in his reign, and which purchased him much hatred. And the same
course held (almost every King near the Conquest) till this heavy grieuance
was allayed by the Charter of Forests, granted by Henry the third.

Besides these, he imposed no new taxations on the State, and used those he
found very moderately, as Dangelt, an imposition of two shillings upon every
hide or ploughland He imposed no new taxations.
(raised first by King Ethelred, to bribe the Danes, after to war upon them)
he would not have it made an Annual payment, but only taken upon urgent
occasion, and it was seldom gathered in his time, or his successors (says
Geruasius) yet we find in our Annals, a tax of 6. shillings upon every
hide-land, leauied presently after the general survey of the Kingdom. Esouage
(whether it were an imposition formerly The occasion of paying Escuage.
laid, though now newly named, I do not find) was a sum of money, taken of
every Knights fee: In after times, especially raised for the service of
Scotland; And this also, says Geruasius, was seldom leauied but on great
occasion, for stipends, and donatiues to soldiers; yet was it at first a due,
reserved out of such lands as were given by the Prince for service of war;
according to the Custom of other Nations. As in the Romans time we find
Lands were given in reward of service to the men of war, for term of their
lives, as they are at this day in Turkey: After they became Patrimoniall, and
The Custom of Eiefs.
hereditarie to their children. Seuerus the Emperor was the first who permitted
the children of men of war, to enjoy their Fiefs, provided that they followed
Arms. Constantine to reward his principal Captains, granted them a
perpetuity in the Lands assigned them. The estates which were but for life,
were made perpetual in France, under the last Kings of the race of
Charlemaine. Those Lords who had the great Fiefs of the King, By what means he
increased his Revenues.
sub-deuided them to other persons, of whom they were to have service.

Mulctuary profits, besides, such as might arise by the breach of his
Forest-lawes, he had, few or none new, unless that of Murder, which arose
upon this occasion. In the beginning of his reign, the rankor of the English
toward the new-come Normans, was such, as finding them single in woods, or
remote places, they secretly murdered them; and the deed doers (for any the
seuerest courses taken) could never be discovered: whereupon, it was ordained,
that the Hundred, wherein a Norman was The law for Murder, renewed, first made,
by King Knute, vide Appon.
sound slain and the murderer not taken, should be condemned to pay to the
King: some 36 pounds, some 28 pounds, according to the quantity of the Hundred,
that the punishment, being generally inflicted, might particularly deter them,
and hasten the discovery of the malefactor, by whom so many must (otherwise) be
interessed.

For his prouisionary revenues, he continued the former custom held by his
predecessors, which was in this manner. The Kings Tenants, who held their Lands
of the Geruasius Tilb.
Crown, paid no money at all; but only Victuals, Wheat, Beifes, Muttons,
Hay Oats, andC: And a just note of the quality and quantity of every man's
ratement was taken throughout all the Shieres of the Kingdom, and leauied ever
certain, for the maintenance of the Kings house. Other ordinary in-come of
ready moneys was there none, but what was raised by mulcts, and out of Cities
and Castles where Agriculture was not used. What the Church yielded him, was by
extent of a power that never reached so far before; and the first hand, he
laid upon that side which weighed heanily, was his seizing upon the Plate,
Jewels, and Treasure within all the Monasteries of King William seized upon the
Treasure commitied to Monasteries.
England, pretending the rebels, and their assistants, conveyed their riches
into these religious houses (as into places privileged, and free from seizure)
to defraud him thereof.

Besides this, he made all Bishoprics, and Abbeys that held Barronies (before
that time free from all secular services) contributary to his wars, and his
other occasions. And this may be the cause why they, who then only held the
Pen (the Scepter, that rules over the memory of Kings) have laid such an
eternal imposition upon his name, of rigor, oppression, and even barbarous
immanity, as they have done. When the nature and necessary disposition of his
affairs (being as he was) may advocate for him, and in many things much excuse
his courses. But this name of Conquest, which ever imports violence and misery,
is of so harsh a sound, and so odious in nature, as a people subdued cannot
give a Conqueror his due (how ever worthy) and especially to a stranger, whom
only time must naturalize, and incorporate by degrees, into their liking and
opinion. And yet therein this King was greatly aduantaged, by reason of his
twenty years government, which had much impaired the memory of former customs
in the younger sort, and well inured the elder to the present vsances and form
of State, whereby the rule was made more easy to his sons: who (though they
were far inferior to him in worth) were somewhat better beloved, then he;
and the rather, for that their occasions made them, somewhat to vnwrest the
Sovereignty from that height, whereunto he had strayned it.

How he was underset with able ministers for the managing of these great
affairs of his, though time has shut us out from the knowledge of some of
them (it being in His Counselors.
the fortune of Kings, to have their ministers like rivers in the Ocean, buried
in their glory) yet no doubt, being of a strong constitution of judgment, he
could not but be strongly furnished in that kind; for weak Kings have ever
weak sides, and the most renowned Princes are always best stored with able
ministers. The principal of highest employment, were Odon, Bishop of Bayeux,
and Earl of Kent: Lanfranc, Archbishop of Canterbury, and William Fitz Auber,
Earl of Hereford: Odon supplied the place of Viceroy in the Kings absence, and
had the management of the Treasury. A man of a wide and agile spirit, let out
into as spacious a conceit of greatness, as the height of his place could
show him: And is rumor'd by the infinite accumulation of money (which his
avarice, and length of office had made) either to buy the Popedom, or to
purchase the people of England, upon the death of the King his brother: who
(understanding he had a purpose of going to Rome, and seeing a mighty
confluence of followers gathering unto him) made a close prison stay his
journey: excusing it to the Church, that he imprisoned The Bishop of Bayeux as
an Earl of Kent committed to prison.
not a Bishop of Bayeux, but an Earl of Kent, an Officer accomptant unto him.
Yet, upon his deathbed shortly following (after many obsecrations, that he
would, in respect of blood and nature, be a kind mean for the future peace of
his sons) he released him.

But the Bishop failed his request therein, and became the only kindlefire to
set Reserved for greater mischief.
them all into more furious combustion. The motive of his discontent (the
engine wherewithal Ambition evermore turns about her intentions) was the envy
he bare to Lanfranc, whose council, in his greatest affairs, the King
especially used: and to oppose and ouer-beare him, he took all the contrary
courses, and part with Robert, his Nephew, whom (after many fortunes) he
attended to the holy war, and died in the siege of Antioche.

Lanfranc was a man of as universal goodness, as learning, borne in
Lumbardie, and Lanfranc.
came happily a stranger, in these strange times to do good to England; upon
whose observance, though the King might (in regard he raised him) lay some
tie, yet his affections could not but take part with his piety and place: in so
much as he feared not to oppose against Odon, the Kings brother, seeking to
gripe from the State of his Church: And in all he could, stood so between the
kingdom and the Kings rigor, as stayed many precipitious violencies, that he
(whose power lay as wide as his will) might else have fallen into. For the
Conqueror (howsoever austere to others) was to him always mild and yielding,
as if subdued with his gravity, and virtue.

He reformed the irregularity, and rudeness of the Clergy, introducing a more
The Reformation of the Clergy by Lanfranc.
Southern formalitie and respect, according to his breeding, and the Custom
of his Country: concurring herein likewise to be an actor of alteration (though
in the best kind) with this change of State. And to give entertainment to
devotion, he did all he could to furnish his Church with the most exquisite
ornaments might be procured: added a more State and conueniencie to the
structure of religious houses, and began the founding of Hospitals. Having
long struggled, with indefatigable labor, to hold things in an even course,
during the whole reign of this busy new state-building King, and after his
death, seeing his successor in the Crown (established especially by his
means) to fail his expectation, out of the experience of worldly causes,
deuining of future mischiefs by present courses, grew much to lament (with his
friends) the teadiousnesse of life, which shortly after he mildly left, which
such a sickness, as neither hindered his speech nor memory: a thing he would
often desire of God.

William Fiz Auber (as is delivered) was a principal councellor and instument
in this action for England; wherein he furnished forty ships at his own
charge. A man of great means, yet of a heart greater, and a hand larger then
any means would well suffice. His profuse liberalities to men of arms, gave
often sharp offense to the King, who could not endure any such improuident
expenses. Amongst the Laws he William Fitz Auber Earl of Hereford, made
Laws in his Province.
made (which shows the power these Earls then had in their Provinces) he
ordained, That in the County of Hereford, no man of (or soldier) should be
fined for any offense whatsoever, above seven shillings; when in other
Countries, upon the least occasion of disobeying their Lords will, they were
forced to pay 20. or 25. shil. But his estate seeming to bear no proportion
with his mind (and enough it was not to be an eminent Earl, an especial
Councellor, in all the affairs of England, and Normandy, a chief favorite to
so great a Monarch) but that larger hopes drew him away; designing to marry
Richeld, Countess dowager of Flanders, and to have the government of that
Country, during the nonage of Arnulph her son; of whom, with the King of
France, he had the tutelarie charge, committed by Baldouin the sixth, Father to
Arnulph; whose estate, Robert Le Frison, his Uncle (called by the people to the
government, upon the exactions inflicted on them by Richeld) had usurped. And
against him Fitz Auber opposing, was with Arnulph surprised and slain.

And this was in the fate of the Conqueror, to see most of all these great men,
who had been the especial actors in all his fortunes, spent and extinct
before him; As Beaumont, Monfort, Harcourte, Hugh de Gourney, Vicount Neele,
Hugh de Mortimer, Conte de Vannes etc. And now himself, after his being
brought sick to Rouan, and there disposing The death of William the first.
his estate, ended also his act, in the 74 year of his age, and the one and
twenty of his reign.

Three days the Corpse of this great Monarch is said to have layne neglected
while his servants attended to imbessill his moueables: in the end, his youngest
son Henry, had it conveyed to the Abbey of Cane; where first at the entry
into the Town, they His Corpse lay unburied 3. days.
who carried the Corpse, left it alone, and ran all to quench a house on fire:
Afterward brought to be intombed, a Gentleman stands sorth, and in stern
manner, forbids the interment in that place, claiming the ground to be his
inheritance, descended from his His interment hindered.
Ancestors, and taken from him at the building of that Abbey, appealing to Row,
their first founder, for Justice: whereupon they were feign to compounded with
him for an Annual rent. Such ado had the body of him after death (who had
made so much in his life) to be brought to the earth; and of all he attained,
had not now a room to contain him, without being purchased at the hand of
another, men esteeming a living Dog more then a dead Lion.

He had a fair issue by Maude his wife, four sons, and six daughters. To
Robert His issue.
his eldest, he left the Duchy of Normandy: to William the third son, the
Kingdom of England: to Henry the youngest, his treasure, with an annual
pension to be paid him by his brothers. Richard who was his second son, and
his darling, a Prince of great hope, was slain by a Stagge hunting in the new,
Forest, and began the fatalnesse that followed in that place, by the death of
William the second, there slain with an arrow, and of Richard, the son of
Robert Duke of Normandy, who brake his neck.

His eldest daughter Cicilie, became a Nun, Constance married to the Earl of
Britain: Adula to Stephen Earl of Biois, who likewise rendered her self a
Nun in her age; such was then their devotion, and so much were these solitary
retires, affected by the greatest Ladies of those times: Gundred married to
William de Warrein, the first Earl of Surrey, the other two Ela or Adeliza and
Margaret died before marriage.

Now, what he was in the circle of himself in his own continent, we find him
of The description of William the first.
an even stature, comely personage, of good presence, riding, sitting, or
standing, till his corpulency increasing with age, made him somewhat unwieldy,
of so strong a constitution, as he was never sickly till a few months before
his death. His strength such, as few men could draw his Bow, and being about
50. of his age, when he subdued this Kingdom, it seems by his continual
actions, he felt not the weight of years upon him, till his last year.

What was the composition of his mind; we see it (the fairest) drawn in his
actions, and how his abilities of Nature, were answerable to his undertakings
of Fortune, as pre-ordained for the great work he effected. And though he
might have some advantage of the time, wherein we often see men prevail more
by the imbecility of others, then their own worth; yet let the season of that
world be well examined, and a just measure taken of his active virtues, they
will appear of an exceeding proportion: Nor wanted he those incounters and
concurrencies of sufficient ^^^le Princes, to put him to the trial thereof:
Having on one side the French to grapple withal; on the other the Dane, far
mightier in people, and shipping then himself, strongly sided in this
Kingdom, as eager to recover their former footing here, as ever, and as well
or better prepared. His devotion and mercy.


For his devotion and mercy, the brightest stars in the Sphere of Majesty,
they appear above all his other virtues, and the due observation of the first,
the Clergy (that loved him not) confess: the other was seen, in the often
pardoning, and receiving into grace, those (who rebelled against him) as if he
held submission satisfactory, for the greatest offense, and sought not to
defeit men, but their enterprises: For we find but one Noble man executed in
all his Reign, and that was the Earl Waltheof, who But one Noble man executed
in all the time of this Kings Reign.
had twice falsified his faith before: And those he held prisoners in Normandy,
as the Earls Morchar and Siward, with Wolfnoth, the brother of Harald, and
others (upon compassion of their indurance) he released a little before his
death.

Besides, he was as far from suspicion, as cowardice, and of that confidence
(an especial note of his magnanimity) as he gave Edgar his competitor in the
Crown, the liberty of his Court: And (upon his suite) sent him well furnished
to the holy war, where he nobly behaved himself, and attained to great
estimation, with the Empetours of Greece and Almaine, which might have been
held dangerous, in respect of his alliances that way, being graund-child to the
Emperor Henry the third. But these may be as well virtues of the Time, as of
Men, and so the age must have part of this commendation.

He was a benefactor to Nine Abbeys of Monks, and one of Nuns, founded by
his Predicessors in Normandy, and during his own time were founded in the same
Province seven Abbeys of Monks and six of Nuns; with which fortresses (as
he His works of piety.
said) he furnished Normandy; to the end men might therein fight against the
flesh, and the Devil. In England he founded a goodly Abbey, where he fought
his first Battle, whereof it had the Denomination, and two Nunneries, one at
Hinching-Brooke in Huntingdon shire, and the other at Armthewt in Cumberland,
besides his other public works.

Magnificent he was in his Festiuals, which with great solemnity and ceremony
(the formal entertainers of reverence and respect) he duly observed. Keeping
his Christmas at Gloucester, his Easter at Winchester, and Penticost at
Westminster: whither he summoned his whole Nobility; that Ambassadors and
Strangers might see his State, and largeness. Nor ever was he more mild and
in dulgent, then at such times. And these Ceremonies his first Successor
observed; but the second omitted.

The end of the Life, and Reign, of William the first.
The Life, and Reign, of William the second.
WILLIAM, second son to William the first, not attending his Fathers
funeral, hasts into England to recover the Crown, where (by the especial
1087. Anno. Reg. 1.
mediation of the Archbishop Lanfranc, his own large bounty, and wide
promises) he obtained it, according to his Fathers will; to whom, by his
obsequiousness he had much indeered himself, especially after the abdication
of his elder brother Robert. He was a Prince more gallant, then good, and
having been bred with the sword, always in action, and on the better side of
fortune, was of a nature rough, and haughty, whereunto, his youth, and
Sovereignty added a greater wideness. Coming to succeed in a Government,
fore-ruled by mature, and grave Counsel, he was so ouer-whelmed with his
Fathers worth and greatness, as made him appear of a lesser Orb then
otherwise he would have done. And then the shortness of his Reign, being but
of thirteen years; allowed him not time to recover that opinion, which the
errors of his first Government had lost, or his necessities caused him to
commit. For, the succession in right of Primogeniture, being none of his, and
the elder brother living: howsoever his fathers will was, he must now be put,
and h^^^ in possession of the Crown of England, by the Will of the Kingdom;
which to purchase (must be) by large conditions of relieuements in general,
and profuse gifts in particular. Wherein he had the more to do, being to deal
with a State consisting, of a two fold body (and different temperaments where
any inflammation of discontent, was the more apt to take) having a head
where-to it might readily gather. Which made, that unless he would lay more to
their hopes then another, he could not hope to have them firmly his. And
therefore seeing the best way to win the Normans, was by money, and the
English, with liberties, he spared not at first, to bestow on the one, and to
promise the other, more then befitted his estate, and dignity; which, when
afterward failing, both in supplies (for great giuers must always give) and
also in performances, got him far more hatred then otherwise he could euet
William the second resumes his own Graunts.
have had, being forced to all the dishonorable shifts for raising moneys that
could be devised, and even to resume his own former graunts.

And to begin at first to take the course to be ever needy, presently after his
Coronation, he goes to Winchester, where his Fathers Treasure lay, and empties
out all that; which, with great providence, was there amassed: whereby, though
he won the love of many, he lost more, being not able to content all. And now
although his brother Robert had not (this great Engine) money, he had to give
hopes: and there were here of the Normans, as Odon his Uncle, Roger de
Mongomery Earl of Shrewesbury, with others, who were mainly for him, and work
he does all he can, to batter his brothers fortunes, upon their first
foundation. And for this purpose borowes great sums of Robert of Normandy
borrowes sums of his brother Henry, to purchase the kingdom of England.
his younger brother Henry (to whom the father and mother had left much
Treasure) and for the same, ingages the Country of Constantine, and leauies an
Army for England. But William newly invested in the Crown, though well
prepared for all assaults, had rather purchase a present peace (by mediation of
the Nobles on both sides) till time had better settled him in his government)
then to raise spirits that could not easily be allayed. And an agreement
between them is wrought, that William should hold the Crown of England during
his life, paying to Robert three thousand Marks Per annum.

Robert having closed this business, resumes by force the Country of
Constantin out of his brother Henry's hands, without discharge of those sums,
for which he had engaged it. Whereupon King William obrayds Henry (with the
great gain he had made by his usury) in lending money to deprive him of his
Crown. And so Henry got the hatred of both his brothers, and having no place
safe from their danger where to live; surprised the Castle of Mount Saint
Michel, fortifies him therein, gets aid of Hugh Earl of Britain, and for
his money was served with Britains, who committed great spoils, in the
Countries of Constantin and Bessin.

Odon, Bishop of Bayeux, returning into England, after his imprisonment in
Normandy, Odon for malice to Lanfranc, seeks to distract the Kings forces.
and restored to his Earldom of Kent, finding himself fo far under what he
had been, and Lanfranc his concurrent, now the only man in council with the
King, complots with as many Norman Lords as he found, or made to affect
change, and a new master, and sets them on work in diverse parts of the Realm
to distract the Kings forces: as first Geoffery Bishop of Constans, with his
nephew Robert de Mowbray Earl of Northumberland fortify themselves in
Bristow, and take in all the Country about: Roger de Bigod, made himself
strong in Northfolke: Hugh de Grandemenill about Leicester: Roger de Mongomerie
Earl of Shrewsbury with a power of Welshmen, and other there about, sets out
accom panied with William Bishop of Durham; Bernard de Newmarch, Roger Lacie,
and Raulfe Mortimer, all Normans, and assail the City of Worcester, making
themselves strong in those parts. Odon himself fortifies the Castle of
Rochester, makes good all the coast of Kent, sollicites Robert to use what
speed he could to come with all his power out of Normandy: which had he done
in time, and not given his brother so large opportunity of prevention, he had
carried the Kingdom; but his delay yields the King time to confirm his
friends, vnder-worke his enemies, and The King vnderworkes his enemies, by
rereleeuing the doleances and granting former freedoms to the English.
make himself strong with the English, which he did by granting relaxation of
tribute, with other relieuements of their doleances, and restoring them to
their former freedom of hunting in all his woods and forests, a thing they much
esteemed; whereby he made them so strongly his, as he soon brake the neck
of all the Norman conspiracies (they being egar to revenge them of that Nation)
and here they learned first to beat their Conquerors, having the fair
advantage of this action, which cut the throats of many of them.

Mongomerie, being won fromhis accomplices, and the several conspirators in
other 1088. Anno. Reg. 2.
parts represt, the King comes with an Army into Kent, where the head of the
faction say, and first won the Castle of Tunbridge, and that of Pemsey, which
Odon was forced to yield, and promise to cause those which defended that of
Rochester, which were Eustace, Earl of Bologne, and the Earl of Mortaigne, to
render likewise the same. But being brought thither to effect the business,
they within, receiving him, detayned him, as he pretended, prisoner, and held
out stoutly against the King upon a false intelligence given of the ariuall of
Duke Rohert at Southampton, but in the end they were forced to quit the place,
and retire into France, and Odon to abjure England.

And to keep off the like danger from hence he transports his forces into
Normandy, there to waste and weaken his brother at home. So, as might hold him
from any future attempts abroad for ever after. Where first he obtaines Saint
Valery, and after Albemarle with the whole Country of Eu, Fescampe, the
Abathie of mount Saint Michel, Cherburge, and other places. Robert seeks aid
of Philip King of France, who who comes down with an Army into Normandy; but
overcome with the power of money wherewith King William assailed him, did him
little good, and so retired.

Whereupon Duke Robert, in the end, was driven to a dishonorable peace,
concluded Duke Robert driven to peace.
at Caen, with these Articles. First, that King William should hold the County
of Eu, Fescampe, and all other places, which he had bought, and were delivered
unto him, by William 1089. Anno. Reg. 3.
Earl of Eu, and Stephen Earl of Aumal, sisters son to William the first.
Secondly, He should aid the Duke to recover all other pieces which belonged to
his Father, and were usurped from the Duchy. Thirdly, that such Normans, as had
lost their estates in England, by taking part with the Duke, should be restored
thereunto. Fourthly, that the suruiuer of either of them should succeed in the
Dominions both of England and Normandy. After this peace made, by the mediation
of the King of France, whilst William had a strong Army in the field, 1091.
Anno. Reg. 4.
Duke Robert requested his aid against their brother Henry; who still kept him
in the fort of mount Michel, upon his guard, holding it best for his safety:
For being a Prince that could not subsist of himself (as an earthen vessel
set amongst iron pots) he was every way in danger to be crushed; and seeing he
had lost both his brothers by doing the one a kindness, if he should have
took to either (their turn being served) his own might be in hazard; and so
betook him to this defense. Forty days the two Princes laid siege to this
Castle; And one day, as the King was alone on the shore, there fallies out of
the Fort, a Company of horse; whereof three ran at him so violently, and all
struck his horse together with their Lances; as they brake pectorall, girses,
and all, that the horse slips away, and leaves the King, and the saddle on the
ground: the King takes up the saddle with both hands, and therewith defends
himself The Kings undaunted valor.
till rescue came; and being blamed by some of his people for putting himself
thus in peril of his life to save his saddle, answered: It would have angered
him, the Bretons The King and his two brethren agreed.
should have bragged, they had won the saddle from under him; and how great
an indignity it was, for a King to suffer inferiors to force any thing from
him.

In the end Henry grew to extreme want of drink and water; although he had
all 1092. Anno. Reg. 5.
other provision sufficient within his Fort, and sends to Duke Robert that he
might have his necessity supplied: The Duke sends him a Tunue of Wine, and
graunts him truce for a day to furnish him with water. Wherewith William being
displeased, Duke Robert told him: It was hard to deny a brother meat, and
drink which craved it, and that if he perished, they had not a brother.
Wherewith William likewise relenting, they sent for Henry, and an agreement is
made; That he should hold in morgage the Country of Constantine, till the
money was paid, and a day appointed to receive it at Rouen.

Which accord King William the rather wrought, to draw as much from Robert as
he might, whom by this voyage he not only had wasted, but possessed himself of
a safe and continual landing place, with a part of his Duchy: and caused him
to put from him, and banish out of Normandy; Edgar Etheling, whom Robert held
his Pensioner, and as a stone in his hand, upon all occasions to threaten
William with another right, if his own prevailed not: And besides, he wrought
so as either through promise of money, or some farther ratification to be made
here, he brought his brother Robert with him over into England, and took him
along in an expedition against Malcolm, who had incroched upon his Territories,
during his absence. Which business being determined without battle, Robert,
soon after returns much discontented into Normandy, and as it seems, without
money to satisfy his brother Henry. Who repairing to Rouan Duke Robert commits
his brother Henry to prison.
at his day appointed, in stead of receiving it, was committed to prison, and
before he could be released, forced to renounce the Country of Constantine,
and swear never to claim any thing in Normandy.

Henry complains of this gross injustice, to Philip King of France, who gave
him a fair entertainment in his Court. Where he remained not long, but that a
Knight of 1093. Anno. Reg. 6.
Normandy, named Hachard, undertaking to put him into a Fort (maugre his
brother Robert) within the Duchy; conveyed him disguised out of the Court, and
wrought so, as the Castle of Dampfront was delivered unto him: whereby shortly
after, he got all the Country of Passays, about it, and a good part of
Constantine, by the secret aid of King William, Richard de Riuteres, and Roger
de Manneuile.

Duke Robert leuies forces, and eagerly wrought to recover Dampfront, but
finding how Henry was underset, inueighes against the perfidie of his brother
of England: in so much as the flame of rankor burst out again more then ever.
And over, passes King William with a great Army, but rather to terrify, then
do any great matter; as a Prince that did more contend, then war; and would
be great with the sword, yet seldom desired to use it; if he could get to his
ends by any other means, seeking rather to buy his peace, then win it.

Many skirmishes interpassed, with surprisements of Castles, but in the end a
treaty of peace was propounded: wherein to make his conditions, what he would;
King William seems hard to be wrought, and makes the more show of force;
sending over into England for an Army of thirty thousand men, which being
brought to the shore, ready to be shipped: an offer was made to be proclaimed
by his Lieftenant, that giving ten shillings a man, whosoever would, might
depart home to his dwelling. Whereby was raised so much as discharged his
expense, and served to see the King of France, underhand, for his forbearing
aid to Duke Robert, who seeing himself left by the French, must needs make
his peace as the other would have it.

Now for his affairs at home, the uncertain wars with Wales, and Scotland,
gave him more business then honor. Being driven in the one to encounter with
mountains in stead of men, to the great loss and disadvantage of his people,
and in the other with as many necessities, Wales, he sought to subdue; Scotland
so to restrain, as it might not hurt him. For the last, after much broyle,
both Kings, seeming more willing to have peace then to seek it, are brought to
an enteruiew. Malcolin upon public faith, and safe-conduit came to Gloucester;
where, upon the haughtiness of King William, looking to be satisfied in all
his demands, and the vnyeeldingnesse of King Malcolin, standing upon his
regality within his own, though content to be ordered for the confines,
according to the judgment of the Primate of both Kingdoms; nothing 1084.
Anno. Reg. 7.
was effected; but a greater disdain, and rankor in Malcolin, seeing himself
despised, and scarce looked on, by the King of England. So that upon his
return, armed with rage; he raises an Army, enters Northumberland, which four
times before he had depopulated; and now the fifth, seeking utterly to destroy
it, and to have gone, farther, The King of Scots, and his son Edward slain,
causes Queen Margaret to die with grief. Roger Houeden.
was, with his eldest son Edward slain, rather by the fraud then power of
Robert Mowbray Earl of that County: The grief of whose deaths, gave Margaret,
that blessed Queen, hers. After whom, the State elected Dufnald, brother to
Malcolin, and chased out all the English, which attended the Queen, and were
harbored, or preferred by Malcolin. King William to set the line right, and to
have a King there which should be beholding to his power, aides Edgar, the
second son to Malcolin (who had served him in his wars) to obtain the Crown
due unto him in right of succession: by whose means, Dufnald was expeld, and
the State received Edgar, but killed all the aid he brought with him out of
England, and capitulated that he should never more entertain English or Norman
in his service.

This business settled; Wales struggling for liberty, and revenge, gave new
occasion of 1085. Anno. Reg. 8.
work: whither he went in person, with purpose to depopulate the Country: but
they (retiring into the Mountains and the Isle of Anglesey) avoided the
present fury. But afterward, Hugh Earl of Shrewsbury, and Hugh Earl of
Chester, surprising the Isle (their chiefest retreit) committed there,
barbarous examples of cruelty, by exoecations, and miserable dismembring the
people, which immanity, was there suddenly avenged on the Earl of Shrewsbury
with a double death, first shot into the eye, and then tumbling ouer-boord into
the sea, to the sport and scorn of his enemy the King of Norway, who either by
chance, or of purpose, coming upon that coast from taking in the Orchades,
encountered with him and that force he had at sea.

These were the remote businesses, when a conspiracy brake out within the body
of the Kingdom, complotted by Robert Mowbray Earl of Northumberland, William
d'Ou, and many others, who are said to have sought the destruction of the King,
and the advancement of Stephen Earl of Albemare, his Aunts son, to the
Crown, which gave the King more trouble then danger: for, by the speedy and
maine prosecution of the business (wherein he used the best strength of
England) it was soon ended, with the confusion of the undertakers. But it
wrought an ill effect in his nature, by hardening the same to an extreme rigor:
for after the fear was past, his wrath, and cruelty were not; but (which is
hideous in a Prince) they grew to be numbered amongst incurable diseases.

The Earl was committed to the Castle of Windsor, William d' Ou at a Council
at Salisbury being overcome in Duel (the course of trial) had his eyes put
out, and his privy members cut off. William de Alueric, his Sewer, a man of
goodly personage, and allied unto him, was condemned to be hanged: though both
in his confession to Osmond the Bishop there, and to all the people as he
passed to his execution, he left a clear opinion of his innocence, and the
wrong, he had by the King.

But now; whilst these fractures here at home, the vnrepairable breaches
abroad, (were such) as could give the King no longer assuredness of quiet,
then the attempters would: and that all the Christian world was out, either at
discord amongst themselves, or in faction, by the schism of the Church; Pope
Viban, assembling a general Council at Cleirmont in Auergne, to compose the
affairs of Christendom, exhorted all the Princes thereof, to join themselves
in action, for the recovery of the Holy Land, out of the hands of infidels.
Which motion, by the zealous negotiation of Peter the Hermit of Amiens; took
so generally (meeting with the disposition of an active, and religious world)
as turned all that flame; which had else consumed each other at home, upon
unknown Nations that undid them abroad.

Such, and so great grew the heat of this action, made by the persuasion of
the Justice thereof, with the state and glory it would bring on earth, and the
assuredness of heaven to all the pious undertakers, that none were esteemed to
contain any thing of worth, which would stay behind. Each gives hand to other
to lead them along, and example adds number. The forwardness of so many
great Princes, passing away Peter the Hermit gets 300000 men to recover the
Holy Land.
their whole estates, and leaving all what the deerenesse of their Country
contained, drew to this war 300000 men; all which, though in arms, passed
from diverse Countries and Ports, with that quietness, as they seemed rather
Pilgrims than Soldiers.

Godefrey of Bouillon, Nephew and heir to the Duke of Lorraine, a generous
Prince, bred in the wars of the Emperor Henry the fourth, was the first that
offered up himself to this famous voyage; and with him his two brothers,
Eustace, and Baudouin, by whose examples were drawn Hugh le Grand, Count de
Vermondois, brother to Philip King of France. Robert Duke of Normandy, Robert
le Frison, Earl of Flanders. Stephen Earl of Blois, and Chartres. Aimar
Bishop of Puy, William Bishop of Orange: Raimond Earl of Toulouse: Baudouin
Earl of Hainaut, Baudouin, Earl of Rethel, and Garnier Earl of Gretz: Harpin
Earl of Bourges: Ysoard Earl of Die: Ramband Earl of Orange: Guillaum Conte
de Forests, Stephen Conte de Aumaul: Hugh Earl of Saint Pol; Rotron Earl of
Perch, and others. These were for France, Germany, and the Countries
adjoining. Italy had Bohemond Duke of Apulia; and England, Beauchampe, with
others, whose names are lost: Spain only had none, being afflicted at that
time with the Sarazins.

Most of all these Princes and great personages to furnish themselves for this
expedition, 1097. Anno. Reg. 10.
sold, or engaged their possessions. Godefrey sold the Duchy of Bologne to
Aubert Bishop of Liege, and Metz to the Citizens: besides he sold the Castle of
Sarteney, and Monsa to Richard Bishop of Verdun: and to the same Bishop,
Baudouin, his brother, sold the Earldom of Verdun. Eustace likewise sold all
his liuelihood to the Church. Herpin Earl of Bourges, his Earldom to Philip
King of France: and Robert morgaged his Duchy of Normandy, the Earldom of
Maine, and all he had, to his brother King William of England. Whereby the
Pope not only weakened the Empire, with whom the Church had (to the great
affliction of Christendom) held a long, and bloody business, about the
inuestitures of Bishops; took away and infeobled his partisans, abated, as if
by Ostrocisme, the power of any Prince that might oppose him, but also advanced
the State Ecclesiastical by purchasing these great tempo (more honorable for
the sellers then the buyers) unto a greater means then ever. For by aduising
the undertakers, seeing their action was for CHRIST and his Church: rather to
make over their estates to the Clergy, of whom they might again redeem the
same, and be sure to have the fairest dealing; then unto Lay men; he effected
this work. Whereby the third part of the best Fiefs in France came to be
possessed by the Clergy: and afterward upon the same occasion, many things more
sold unto them in England, especially when Richard the first undertook the
voyage, who passed over diverse Manors to Hugh Bishop of Durham (and also for
his money) created him Earl of Durham, as appears in his life.

This humor was kept up, and in motion almost 300 years, notwithstanding all
An Emperor of Germany, 2 Kings of France with their wives, a King of England,
and a King of Norwey went all thither in person.
the discouragements, by the difficulties in passing, the disasters there
through contagion arising from a disagreeing clime: and the multitudes of
indigent people, cast oftentimes into miserable wants. It consumed infinite
Treasure, and most of the brauest men of all our West world, and especially
France. For Germany, and Italy, those who were the Popes friends, and would
have gone, were stayed at home by dispensation to make good his party against
the Emperor, who notwithstanding still strugled with him; but in the end, by
this means the Pope prevailed. Yet these were not all the effects this voyage
wrought: the Christians who went out to seek an enemy in Asia, brought one
thence: to the danger of all Christendom, and the loss of the fairest part
thereof. For this long keeping it in a war, that had many intermissions with
firs of heates and coldnesses (as made by a league, consisting of several
Nations, emulous, and vnconcurrent in their courses) taught such, as were of an
entire body, their weaknesses, and the way to conquer them. This was the
great effect, this voyage wrought.

And by this means King William here was now rid of an elder brother, and a
Competitor, had the possession of Normandy during his reign, and more
absoluteness, and irregularity in England. Where now, in making up this great
sum to pay Robert, he used all the extreme means could be devised: as he
had done in all like businesses before. Whereby he incurred the hatred of his
people in general, and especially of the Clergy, being the first King which
showed his successors an evil precedent of keeping their Livings vacant, and
receiving the profits of them himself, as he did that of Canterbury, four
years after the death of Lanfranc: and had holden it longer, but that being
dangerously sick at Gloucester, the sixth year of his reign, his Clergy, in
the weakness of his body, took to work upon his mind, so as he vowed,
1099. Anno. Reg. 12.
upon his recovery to see all vacancies furnished, which he did, but with so
great ado, as showed that having escaped the danger he would willingly have
deceived the Saint. And Anselme, an Italian borne, though bred in Normandy, is
in the end preferred to that Sea. But, what with his own stiffenesse, and the
Kings standing on his regalitie, he never enjoyed it quietly under him. For
between them two, began the first contestation about the inuestitures of
Bishops, and other privileges of the Church, which gave much to do, to many
of his successors. Anselme not yielding to the Kings will, forsook the Land,
whereupon his Bishopric was reassumed and the King held in his hands at one
time, besides that of Canterbury, the Bishoprics of Winchester, Sarum, and
eleven Abbayes whereof he took all the profits.

He usually sold all spiritual preferments those would give most, and took
fines of Priests for fornication: he vexed Robert Bluet Bishop of Lincoln in
suite, till he paid him 5000 pounds. And now the Clergy, upon this tax,
complaying their wants, were answered, That they had Shrines of Gold in their
Churches, and for so holy a work, as this war against infidels, they should
not spare them. He also took money of Jews, to cause such of them as were
converted, to renounce Christianity, as making more benefit The Kings show of
religion.
by their unbelief, then their conversion. Wherein he discovered the worst
piece of his nature, Irreligion.

Besides his great taxations laid on the Layetie, he set informers upon them,
and for The antiquity of Informers.
small transgressions made great penalties. These were his courses for raising
moneys, wherein he failed not of fit Ministers to execute his will, among whom
was chief, Ranulph Bishop of Durham, whom he had corrupted with other Bishops
to counterpoise This Raunlph gave a thousand pounds for his Bishopric, and
was the Kings Chancellor. Profusion ever in want.
the Clergy, awe the Layety, and countenance his proceedings. All which
means, he exhausted, either in his buildings (which were the new Castle upon
Tine, the City of Carleil, Westminster Hall, and the walls of the Tower of
London) or else in his prodigal gifts to strangers. Twice he appeased the King
of France with money, and his Profusion was such, as put him evermore into
extreme wants.

This one Act, shows both his violence and magnanimity: As he was one day
hunting, a Messenger comes in all haste out of Normandy, and tells him how the
City of Man's was surprised by Hely Conte de la Flesche (who by his Wife
pretended right thereunto, and was aided by Fouques d' Angiers, the ancient
enemy to the Dukes of Normandy) and that the Castle which held out valiantly
for him, was, without present succor, to be rendered. He sends back the
Messenger instantly, wills him to make all the speed he could, to signify to
his people in the Castle, that he would be there within eight days, if Fortune
hindered him not. And suddenly he asks of his people about him, which way Man's
lay, and a Norman being by, showed him: Presently he turns his Horse toward
that Coast, and in great haste rides on: when some advised him to stay for fit
prouisons, and people for his journey, he said; They who love me, will follow
me. And coming to imbarke at Dartmouth, the Master told him the weather was
rough, and there was no passing without eminent danger; Tush, said he, set
forward, I never yet heard of King that was drowned.

By break of day he arrived at Harfleu, sends for his Captains, and men of
war to attend him all at Man's, whither he came at the day appointed. Conte
de la Flesche, having more right than power, after many skirmishes, was taken
by a stratagem, and brought prisoner to Rouen; where, more enraged, then
dismaide with his fortune, he let fall these words; that had he not been
taken with a wile, he would have left the King but little Land on that side
the sea, and were he again at liberty, they should not so easily take him.
Which being reported; the King sent for him, Set him at liberty, gave him a
fair Horse, bad him go his way, and do his worst. Which act overcame the
Conte more then his taking, and a quiet end was made between them. That he
affected things of cost, even in the smallest matters (is showed) in the report
of his finding fault with his servant, which brought him a new pair of hose,
whereof he demanding the price, was told how they cost threc shillings,
wherewith being angry, he asked his servant if that were a fit price of a
pair of hose for a King, and willed him to go presently and to buy those of a
mark, which being brought him though they were far worse, yet he liked them
much better in regard they were said to have cost more. An example of the Wear
of the time, the humor of the Prince, and the deceit of the servant.

The King returns into England with great iollity, as ever bringing home
better fortune out of Normandy, then from any his Northern expeditions: Feasts
his Nobility with all Magnificence, in his new Hall, lately finished at
Westminster, wherewith he found much fault for being built too little; saying,
It was fitter for a Chamber, then a Hallfor a King of England, and takes a plot
for one far more spacious to be added unto it. And in this gayetie of State,
when he had got above all his businesses, betakes him wholly to the pleasure
of peace, and being hunting with his Brother Henry in the New Forest, Walter
Terell, a Norman, and his kinsman, shooting at a Dear (whether mistaking his
mark, or not, is uncertain) struck him to the heart. And so fell this fierce
King, in the 43 year of his age when he had reigned nie 12 years. A Prince, who
for the first two years of his reign (whilst held in, by the grave counsel
of Lanfrance, and his own fears) bare himself most worthily, and had been
absolute for State; had he not after sought to be absolute in power, which
(meeting with an exorbitant will) makes both Prince, and people miserable.

The end of the Life, and Reign, of William the second.
The Life, and Reign, of Henry the first.
HHNRY the youngest son of William the first, being at hand, and 1100 Anno.
Reg. 1.
borne in England (which made much for him) was elected and crowned within
four days after his Brothers death; it being given out, that Robert, who
should have succeeded William, was chosen King of Jerusalem, and not like to
give over that Kingdom for this. Wherefore to settle Henry in the possession
of the Crown, all expedition possible was used, least the report of Roberts
returning from the Holy wars (being now in Apulia, coming home) might be
noysed abroad to stagger the State, which seemed generally willing to accept of
Henry. The first actions of his government tended all, to bayte the people, and
sugar their subjection (as his predecessor) upon the like interposition had
done, but with more moderation and aduisednesse: this being a Prince better
rectified in judgment, and of a Nature more alayed, both by his sufferings,
having sighed with other men under the hand of oppression, that taught him
patience; and also, by having somewhat of the Book, which got him opinion, and
the Title of Beauclarke.

First, to fasten the Clergy, He furnishes with fit men, all those Vacancies
which his Brother had kept empty, recals Anselme home to his Bishopric of
Canterbury, and restores them to all whatsoever privileges had been infringed
by his Predecessor. And for the Layetie, He not only pleased them in their
releeuements, but in their passion, by punishing the chief Ministers of their
exactions, which evermore eases the The ministers of exactions punished.
spleen of the people, glad to discharge their Princes of the evils done them
(knowing how they cannot work without hands) and lay them on their Officers,
who have the active power, where themselves have but the passive, and commonly
turn as they are moved.

Ralph Bishop of Durham, chief Counselor to the late King, a man risen by
subtlety, Ralph Bishop of Durham committed to prison.
of his Tongue (from infimous condition, to the highest employments) was
committed to a straight and loathsome prison, being famed to have put his
Master into all these courses of exaction, and irregularities, and remains
amongst the examples of perpetual ignominy. All dissolute persons are
expelled the Court: the people cased of their impositions, and restored to
their lights in the night, which after the Couerfeu Bell were Dissolute persons
expelled the Court.
forbidden them upon great penalty, since the beginning of William the first.
Many other good orders for the government of the Kingdom are ordained, and
besides to make him the more popular and beloved, he matches in the Royal
blood of England, taking to wife Maude, daughter of Margueret, late Queen of
Scots, and Niece to Edgar Atheling, descended from Edmond Ironside, A Lady that
brought with her the inheritance of goodness she had from a blessed mother,
and with much ado was won from her Cloister, and her vow to God, to descend to
the world, and be a wife to a King.

Thus stood he entrenched in the State of England, when his brother Robert
returning from the holy wars, and received with great applause into his
Duchy of Normandy, Robert Duke of Normandy returns from the holy war.
shakes the ground of all this business: the first year threatening, the
second, arriving with a strong Army at Portsmouth, to recover the Crown,
appertayning unto him by the course of succession having a mighty party in
England of the Norman Nobility; who either moved with Conscience or their
discontent (a sickness rising of self 1101. Anno. Reg. 2.
opinion, and over expectation) made any light occasion the motive of revolt.
The Armies on both fides meet, and are ready to encounter, when, for avoiding
Christian blood, a treaty of peace was moved, and in the end concluded with
these Articles: 1. That seeing Henry was borne since his father was King of
England, which made him the The agreement between Henry and his brother.
eldest son of a King, though the last of a Duke and now invested in the
Crown by the act of the Kingdom, he should enjoy the same during his life,
paying to Robert 3000 marks per annum. 2. And Robert suruiuing, to succeed
him. 3. That all, who had taken part with Robert should have their pardon, and
receive no detriment. 1102. Anno. Reg. 3.


This business thus fairly passed over, Robert of a generous and free Nature,
stays and feasts with his Brother here in England, from the beginning of
August till Michaelmas, and then returns into Normandy. When Henry, rid of
this fear, takes Henry claymes the inuestitu^es of Bishops.
to a higher strain of Regality, and now stands upon his Prerogative, for the
inuestitures of Bishops, and collation of other Ecclesiastical estates, within
his kingdom, oppugned by Anselme, who refused to consecrate such as he
preferred, alleging it to Anselm oppugnes the Kings prerogative.
be a violation of the Sacred Rites and Ceremonies of the Church, lately
Decreed concerning this business: in so much as the King dispatches an
Embassage to Pope Paschal, with declaration of the right he had to such
inuestitures, from his Predecessors, the Kings of England, who evermore
conferred the same without interruption, till now The King sends to the Pope.
of late.

Anselme follows after these Ambassadors, goes likewise to Rome, to make good
the opposition. The King banishes him the Kingdom, and takes into his hands
his 110. Anno. Reg. 4.
Bishopric. The Pope stands stiffly to the power assumed by the Church, but in
the end, seeing the King fast, strong, and lay too far off out of his way to
be constrained (and having much to do at that time with the Emperor, and
other Princes, about the same business) takes the way of persuasion to draw
him to his will, soliciting him Anselme follows Vide Append.
with kind Letters, full of protestations, to further any designs of his, that
might concern his State, if he would desist from this proceeding.

The King pressed with some other occasions, that held him in, and having
purposes of The King and Anselm accorded.
that Nature, as by forbearance of the Church, might be the better effected,
consents to satisfy the Popes will: and becomes an example to other Princes,
of yielding in this case. Anselme is re-called, after a years bannishment, and
the Ambassadors return with large remunerations.

Whilst these things were managing at Rome, there burst out here a flame,
which The Earl of Shrewsburies combination.
consumed the parties that raised it, and brought the King more easily to his
ends, then otherwise he could ever have expected. Robert de Belesme, Earl of
Shrewsbury, son to Roger de Mongomerie (a very fierce youth) presuming of his
great estate, and his friends, fortifies his Castles of Shrewsburie,
Bridgenorth, Tickhill, and Arundel, with some other pieces in Wales belonging
to him; and combines with the Welsh, to oppose against the present State (out
of a desire to set all in combustion, for his own ends, that were altogether
uncertain) which put the King to much travel and charge: but within thirty
days, by employing great forces, and terrors mixed with promises, he scattered
his accomplices, and took all his Castles; except that of Arundell, which
rendered upon condition, that the Master might be permitted to retire safe
into Normandy; which the King easily granted, seeing now he was but the body
of a silly naked Creature, that had lost both Feathers and wings. And it made
well for the King, his going thither. For, from the loosing of his own estate
in England, and thereby advancing the Kings revenues, he goes to loose
Normandy also, and brings it to this Crown. For, as soon as he came thither,
he fastens amity with one of like condition, and fortunes as himself (an
exiled man) whose insolency had likewise stripped him out of all his estate in
1104. Anno. Reg. 5.
England, and much wasted that in Normandy, which was William Earl of
Mortaigne, son to Robert, half Brother to King William the first. Who being
also Earl of Cornewal, made suit likewise, to have that of Kent: which his
Uncle Odon lately held, but being denied it, and also euicted by Law, of
certain other parcels of Land, which he claimed, retires with great
indignation into Normandy, where not only he assaults the Kings Castles, but
also usurps upon the State of Richard, the young Earl of Chester, then the
Kings Ward. These two Earls combine themselves, and with their Adherents
committed many outrageous actions, to the great spoil and displeasure of the
Country, whereof, though they complained to Duke Robert, they found little
remedy. For, he being now grown poor by his out-lauishing humor, began it
seems, to be little respected: or else fallen from action, and those
greatnesses his expectation had showed him, was (as commonly great minds dashed
with ill fortunes are) fallen likewise in spirit, and given over to his ease.
Whereupon the the people of Normandy make their exclamations to the King of
England, who sends for his Brother Robert, Reprehends him for the sufferance of
these disorders; aduises him to act the part of a Prince, and not a Monk: and
in conclusion, whither by detention of his pension, or drawing him, being of a
facile Nature, to some act of releasing it: sends him home so much
discontented, as he 1105. Anno. Reg. 6.
ioynes with these mutinous Earls, and by their instigation, was set into that
flame, as he raised all his utmost forces to be revenged on his brother.

The King, touched in Conscience with the fowlenesse of a fraternall war (which
the world would take he being the mightier to proceed out of his designs)
stood douotfull what to do, when Pope Paschall, by his Letters written with
that eloquence (says Malmesburie) wherein he was quick persuaded him, That
herein he should not make a civil War, but do a Noble and memorable
benefit unto his Country. Whereby (paid for remitting the Inuestitures) he
held himself countenanced in this business. Whereon, now he sets with more
alacrity and resolution. And after many difficulties, and loss of diverse
worthy men, in a mighty battle, near the Castle of Tenechbray, his England
wins Normandic.
enemies with much ado, were all defeated. Whereby England won Normandy, and
on the same day, by Computation (wherein forty years before) Normandy
ouer-came England, such are the turnings in the affairs of men.

And here Robert, who stood in a fair possibility of two Crowns, came to be
deprived 1106. Anno. Reg. 7.
of his Duchy and all he had, brought prisoner into England, and committed to
the Castle of Cardiffe. Where, to add to his misery, he had the misfortune of
a long life (suruiuing after he lost himself 26 years) whereof the most part
he saw not, having his eyes put out, whereby he was only left to his thoughts,
a punishment barbarously Robert Duke of Normandy is imprisoned by King Hen.
inflicted on him, for attempting an escape.

He was a Prince, that gave out to the world, very few notes of his ill, but
many of his Nobleness and valor, especially in his great voyage, wherein he
had the second command, and was in election to have been the first preferred
to the Crown of Jerusalem, and missed it hardly. Only the disobedience in his
youth showed to his Father (which yet might proceed from a rough hand borne
over him, and the animation of others, rather then his own Nature) sets a
stain upon him: and then, his profusion (which some would have liberality)
showed his impotency, and put him into those courses that overthrew him. All
the Revenues of his Duchy, which should serve for his maintenance, he sold or
engaged, and was upon passing the City of Roan unto the Citizens, which made
him held unfit for the government, and gave occasion to his Brother to quarrel
with him.

And thus came Henry sreed from this fear and absolute Duke of Normandy: had
King Henry Duke of Normandy.
many years of quiet, gathered great Treasure, and entertained good
intelligence with the Neighbor Princes. Scotland, by his Match, and doing
their Princes good, he held from doing him hurt; clearing them from
usurpations. Wales, though under his Title, yet not subjection, gave him some
exercise of action; which he ordered with great wisdom. First he planted
within the body of that Country, a Colony of Flemings, who at that time much
pestred this Kingdom: being admitted here in the reign of King William the
first, marrying their Country woman, and using their help in the action of
England, where they daily increased, in such sort, as gave great displeasure to
the people. But by this means, both that grieuance was eased, and the use of
them made profitable to the State: for being so great a number, and a strong
people, they made room for themselves, and held it in that sort, as they kept
the Welsh, all about them, in very good awe. Besides, the King took for
Ostages the chief men's sons of the Country, and hereby quieted it. For
France he stood secure, so long as Phillip the first lived: who, wholly given
over to his ease and Luxury, was not for other attempts, out of that course:
but his son he was to look unto, whenever he came to that Crown.

With the Earl of Flanders he had some debate, but it was only in words, and
upon 1107. Anno. Reg. 8.
this occasion. King William the first, in retribution of the good his father
in law, Baldouin the fifth had done, by ayding him in the action of England,
gave him yearly three hundred marks, and likewise continued it to his son
after him. Now, Robert Earl of Flaunders, of a collateral line, returning
empty from the Holy wars, and finding this sum paid out of England to his
Predecessors, demands the same of King Henry, as his due; who not easy to
part with money, sends him word; that it was not the custom of the Kings of
England to pay tribute: If they gave pensions they were temporary, and
according to desert. Which answer so much displeased the Earl, that though
himself lived not to show his hatred, yet his Son did, and aided afterward
William, the son of Robert Curtoys, in his attempts, for recovery of the
Duchy of Normandy, against King Henry.

Thus stood this King in the first part of his reign: in the other, he had
more to do abroad then at home, where he had by his excellent wisdom so
settled the government, as it held a steady course without interruption, all his
time. But now Lewis le Gross, succeeding his father Philip the first, gave him
warning to look to his State of Normandy: and for that he would not attend a
quarrel, he makes one; taking occasion about the City of Gisors, situate on
the River Epre, in the confines of Normandy, King Henry quarrels with the King
of France.
whilst Louys was travailed with a stubborn Nobility, presuming upon their
Franchises, within their own Signories, whereof there were many, at that time,
about Paris, as the Contes of Crecy, Pissaux, Dammartin, Champaigne, and
others, who by example, and emulation, would be absolute Lords, without awe of
a Master, putting themselves under the protection of Henry, woe being near to
assist them, fostred those humors, which in sick bodies most show themselves.
But after Louys, by years gathering strength, dissolved that compact, and made
his means the more, by their confiscations.

Now to entertain these two great Princes in work, the quarrel between the
Pope and the Emperor, ministered fresh occasion. The Emperor Henry the fifth,
having 1108. Anno. Reg. 9.
(by the Popes instigation) banded against his Father, Henry the fourth, who
associated him in the Empire, and held him prisoner in that distress, as he
died, touched afterward with remorse of this act, and reproach of the State,
for abandoning the rights of the Empire, leauies sixty thousand foot, and
thirty thousand horse, for Italy, constraines the Pope and his Coledge to
acknowledge the rights of the Empire, in that form as Leo the fourth, had done
to Otho the second, and before that, The Popes Oath to the Emperor.
Adrian to Charlemaigne, according to the Decree of the Counsel of Rome, and
made him take his Oath of fidelity between his hands, as to the true and
lawful Emperor. The Pope, so soon as Henry was departed home, assembles a
Counsel, nullifies this acknowledgement, as done by force, and shortly after
deceased. The Emperor, to make himself the stronger against his successors,
enters into aliance with the King of England, takes to wife his daughter Maud,
being but five The Emperor Hen. 5. marries Maud.
years of age. After this, Calixte son of the Conte de Burgogne, coming to
be Pope, and being French (unto their great applause) assembles a Counsel at
Reimes; were, by Ecclesiastical sentence, Henry the fifth is declared enemy of
the Church, and degraded of his Imperial Dignity. The King of England, seeing
this Counsel was held in France, and composed chiefly of the Galicane Church,
desirous to ouer-maister Louys, incenses his son in law the Emperor (stung
with this disgrace) to set upon him (as the Popes chief pillar) on one side,
and he would assail him on the other. The Emperor easily wrought to such a
business, prepares all his best forces: the King of England does the like. The
King of France seeing this storm coming so impetuously upon him, wrought so
with the Princes of Germany, as they, weighing the future mischief of a war,
undertaken in a heat, with the importance of a kind Neighborhood, advise the
Emperor not to enter thereinto, till he had signified to the King of France,
the History of France.
cause of his discontent. Whereupon an Embassage is dispatched: The King of
France answers, That he grieved much to see the two greatest Pillars of the
Church, thus shaken with these dissentions, whereby might be feared, the whole
frame would be ruined: that he was friend to them both, and would gladly be
an inter-dealer for concord, rather then to carry wood to a fire too fierce
already, which he desired to extinguish, for the good and quiet of
Christendom. This Embaslage wrought so, as it disarmed the Emperor, glad to
have Louys a mediator of the accord between the The King of France accords the
Pope and Emperor.
Pope and him: to the great displeasure of the King of England, who expected
greater matters to have risen by this business. The accord is concluded at
Worms, to the Popes advantage, to whom the Emperor yields up the right of
inuestitures of Bishops and other Benefices. But this was only to appease, not
cure the malady.

The King of England disappointed thus of the Emperors assistance, proceeds
notwithstanding in his intentions against Louys. And seeing he failed of
outward forces, he sets up a party in his Kingdom, to confront him: aiding
Theobald, Conte de Champaigne, King Henry aides Conte Theobald against the king
of France.
with so great power, as he stood to do him much displeasure: besides, he
obtained a strong side in that Kingdom, by his aliances: for Stephen, Earl of
Blois, had married his sister Adela, to whom this Theobald was Brother, and had
won Foulke, Earl of Aniou (an important neighbor, and ever an enemy to
Normandy) to be his, by matching his son William to his daughter.

Louys on the other side, fails not to practice all means to vnder-worke
Henry's estate The King of France combines with the Earl of Flanders, against
King Henry.
in Normandy, and combines with William, Earl of Flanders, for the restoring
of William, the son of Robert Curtoys, to whom the same appertained by right
of inheritance: and had the fairer show of his actions, by taking hold on the
side of Justice.

Great, and many, were the conflicts between these two Princes, with the
expense of much blood and charge. But in the end, being both tired, a peace was
concluded, 1116. Anno. Reg. 17.
by the mediation of the Earl of Aniou. And William, son to King Henry, did
homage to Louys for the Duchy of Normandy: And William, the son of Robert
Curtoys, is left to himself, and desists from his claim.

Upon the fair cloze of all these troubles, there followed presently an
accident, which seasoned it with that sowernesse of grief, as overcame all the
joy of the success. William the young Prince, the only hope of all the Norman
race, at seventeen years of Queen Maud lived not to see this disaster.
age, returning into England, in a ship by himself, accompanied with Richard
his base brother, Mary, Countess of Perch, their sister, Richard, Earl of
Chester, with his wife, the Kings Niece, and many other personages of honor,
and their attendants, to the number of 140. besides 50. Mariners, setting out
from Barbfleete, were all cast away at Sea, only a Butcher escaped. The Prince
had recovered a Cock-boat, and in possibility to have been saved, had not the
compassion of his sisters cries drawn him back to the sinking ship to take
her in, and perish with his company.

Which sudden clap of Gods judgment, coming in a calm of glory, when all
these bustlings seemed past over, might make a conscience shrink with terror,
to see oppression and supplantation repayd with the extinction of that, for
which so much had bin wrought, and the line Masculine of Normandy expired in
the third inheritor (as if to begin the fate laid on all the future
succession hither unto; wherein the third heir in a right descent, seldom or
never inioyed the Crown of England, but that either by usurpation or
extinction of the male blood, it received an alteration) which may teach
Princes to observe the ways of righteousness, and let men alone with their
rights, and God with his providence.

After this heavy disaster, this King is said never to have been seen to
laugh, though within five months after, in hope to restore his issue, he
married Adalicia, a beautiful young Lady, daughter to the Duke of Lovaine, and
of the house of Loraine, but never had child by her, nor long rest from his
troubles abroad. For this rent at home, cracked all the chain of his courses in
France. Normandy it self became wavering, and many Robert de Mellents
conspiracy.
adhered to William the Nephew: his great confederates are most regayned to the
King of France: Foulke, Earl of Aniou quarrels for his daughters dower: Robert
de Mellent, his chief friend and Councellor, a man of great employment, fell
from him, conspired 1123. Anno. Reg. 25.
with Hugh Earl of Monfort, and wrought him great trouble.

But such was his diligence and working spirit, that he soon made whole all
those ruptures again. The two Earls himself surprises, and Aniou, death:
which being so important a neighbor, as we may see, by matching a Prince of
England there; the Maud the Empress married to Geffery Plantagenet.
King fastens upon it with another aliance, and discends to marry his daughter
(and now only child, which had been wife to an Emperor, and desired by the
Princes of Lumbardy and Loraine) to the now Earl Geffery Plantagenet, the
son of Foulke.

The King of France to fortify his opposition, entertaines William the
Nephew, 1126. Anno. Reg. 27.
where now all the danger lay: and aides him in person, with great power to
obtain the Earldom of Flanders, whereunto he had a fair Title, by the
defaillance of issue in the late Earl Baldouin, slain in a battle in France
against King Henry. But William, as if heir also of his fathers fortunes,
admitted to the Earldom, miscarried in the rule, was deptiued, and slain in
battle; and in him all of Robert Curtoys perished.

And now the whole care of King Henry, was the settling of the succession upon
Maude (of whom he lived to see two sons borne) for which he conuokes a
Parliament in England, wherein, an oath is ministered to the Lords of this Land,
to be true to her and her heirs, and acknowledge them as the right inheritors
of the Crown. This oath was first taken by David, King of Scots, Uncle to
Maude, and by Stephen, 1133. Anno. Reg. 34.
Earl of Bollogne, and Mortaine, Nephew to the King, on whom he had bestowed
great possessions in England, and advanced his brother to the Bishopric of
Winchester. And to make all the more fast, this oath was afterward ministered
again at Northampton in another Parliament.

So that now all seems safe and quiet, but his own sleeps, which are said to
have been very tumultuous, and full of affrightments, wherein he would often
rise, take his sword, and be in act, as if he defended himself against
assaults of his person, which showed, all was not well within.

His government in peace, was such as ranks him in the list amongst our Kings
of His government in peace.
the fairest mark: holding the Kingdom so well ordered, as during all his
reign, which was long, he had ever the least to do at home. At the first,
the competition with his brother, after, the care to establish his succession,
held him in, to observe all the best courses, that might make for the good and
quiet of the State; having an especial regard to the due administration of
Justice, that no corruption or oppression might disease his people, whereby
things were carried with that evenness, between the Great men and the
Commons, as gave all, satisfaction. He made diverse progresses, into remote
parts of the Land, to see how the State was ordered. And for that purpose, The
first use of Progresses.
when so ever he was in England, he kept no certain residence, but solemnized
the great festiuals in several, and far distant places of the Kingdom, that
all might partake of him.

And for that he would not wrest any thing by an Imperial power from the
Kingdom (which might breed ulcers of dangerous nature) he took a course to
obtain The beginning of Parliaments.
their free consents to serve his occasions, in their general Assemblies of
the three Estates of the Land, which he first, conuoked at Salisbury, Anno
Reg. 15. and which, He assembles the first Parliment, after the Conquest.
had from his time the name of Parliament, according to manner of Normandy,
and other States, where Princes keep within their circles to the good of their
people, their own glory, and security of their posterity. See Appen. His
reformations.


He was a Prince that lived formally himself, and repressed those excesses in
his subjects which those times entertained, as the wearing of long hair, which
though it were a gayetie of no charge (like those sumptuous braueries, that
waste Kingdoms in peace) yet for the vndecencie thereof, he reformed it, and
all other dissoluteness. His great businesses, and his wants taught him
frugalitie, and wariness of expense, and His means to raise moneys.
his wars being seldom Inuasiue, and so not getting, put him often to use
hard courses for his suppliments of treasure. Toward the marriage of his
daughter with the Emperor, and the charge of his war, he obtained (as it
might seem at his first Parliament at Salisbury) Anno. Reg. 15. three
shillings upon every hide-land, but he had no more in all his reign, except
one supply for his wars afterward in France. He kept Bishoprics and Abbayes
void in his hands, as that of Canterbury, five years together. By an act of
Parliament at London. Anno. Reg. 30. he had permission to punish Vide Append.
marriage, and incontinencie of Priests, who (for fines notwithstanding) he
suffered to enjoy their wives, but hereby he displeased the Clergy and
disappointed that reformation.

Punishments which were mutilation of member, he made pecuniarie. And by
reason of his often, and long being in Normandy, those provisions for his
house, which Tilburiensis de Scaccario.
were used to be paid in kind, were rated to certain prices and received in
money, by the consent of the State, and to the great content of the subject;
who by reason that many dwelling far off throughout all shires of England,
were much molested with satisfying the same otherwise. He resumed the liberties
of hunting in his Forests, which took up much fair ground of the Kingdom;
and besides renewing former penalties, made an Edict, That if any man in his
own private woods, killed the Kings Dear, should forfeit his woods to the
King. But he permitted them enclosures for Parkes, which under him seems to
have had their original, by the example of that of his at Woodstocke, the
multitude whereof grew to be afterward a disease in the Kingdom.

His expenses were chiefly in his wars, and his many and great fortifications
in His expenses.
Normandy. His buildings were the Abbey of Reading, the Manor of Woodstocke,
and the great enclosure of that Park, with a stone wall seven miles about.

The most eminent men of his Council were, Roger Bishop of Sarum, and the
Earl His Counselors.
of Mellent, both, men of great experience in the affairs of the world. Roger
was ever as Viceroy, had the whole management of the Kingdom in his absence,
which was sometimes three, and four years together. He had managed the Kings
money and other affairs of his house, when he was a poor Prince, and a
private man; whereby he gained an especial trust with him ever after, and
discharged his part with great policy and understanding; had the title of
Iusticiarius totius Anglioe. Of whose magnificence The magnificent buildings of
Roger Bishop of Sarum.
and spacious mind, we have more memorials left in notes of stone, then of any
one Man, Prince, or other of this Kingdom. The ruins yet remaining of his
stately structures, especially that of the Devises in Wiltshire, shows us the
carcass of a most Roman-like Fabric. Besides he built the Castles of
Malmsbury and Shirburne, two strong and sumptuous pieces: new walled and
repaired the Castle of Salisbury, and all these he lived to see rent from him,
and seized into the next Kings hands, as being things done out of his part, and
lie now deformed heaps of rubble. Besides, he walled old Salisbury, and
repaired the Church there.

Robert Earl of Mellent, was the son of Roger Beaumont; who of all the great
men which Robert Mellent an especial Councellor to Hen. 1.
followed William the first in his civil wars of Normandy, refused to attend
him in his expedition for England, though with large promises invited
thereunto, saying: The inheritance left him by his predecessors, was sufficient
to maintain his estate at home; and he desired not to thrust himself into
other men's possessions abroad. But his son Robert was of another mind, and
had a mighty estate both in England and Normandy. Was a man of great direction
in council, and ever used in all the weighty affairs of the State. His The
example of frugallitie in great men does much good in a Kingdom.
frugallity, both in apparel and diet, was of such example, being a man of
eminent note, as did much good to the Kingdom in those days. But in the end
he fell into disgrace, (the fate of Court, and eminency) opposed against the
King, and died berest of his estate.

Besides these, this King was served with a potent and martial Nobility, whom
his spirit led to affect those great designs of his in France, for the
preservation of his state in Normandy. Whither in the 32. year of his reign,
he makes his last voyage to dye there, and in his passage thither, happened an
exceeding great Ecclips of the Sun, King Henry's death.
which was taken to fore-signifie his death; for that it followed shortly after
in the thirty five year of his reign.

He was of a graceful personage, quick-eyed, brown hair (a different
complexion His personage
from his brothers) and of a close compacted temperament, wherein dwelt a mind
of a more solid constitution, with better ordered affections. He had, in his
youth, some taste of learning; but only, as if to set his stomach, not to
ouer-charge it therewith. But this put many of his subjects into the fashion of
the Book, and diverse learned men flourished in his time.

He had by Maude his wife the daughter of Malcolin the third, King of Scotland,
none His issue.
other children but Maude and William, of whom any certain mention is made:
but he is said to have had of children illigitimate seven sons, and as many
daughters, which shows us his incontinencie: two of which sons of most
especial note, Robert and Raynold were Earls, the one of Gloucester (a great
Champion and defender of his Sister Maude the Empress) the other Earl of
Cornwall, and Baron of Castle-combe. His daughters were all married to Princes
and Noble men of France and England, from whom descended many worthy families,
as diverse writers report.

The end of the Life, and Reign, of Henry the first.
The Life, and Reign, of King Stephen.
THE Line Masculine of the Norman extinct, and only a daughter left, 1135.
Anno. Reg. 1.
and she married to a Frenchman, Stephen Earl of Bologne, and Mortagne, son
of Stephen, Earl of Blois, and of Adela, daughter to William the first, was
(notwithstanding the former oath taken for Maud) elected by the State, and
invested in the Crown of England, within thirty days after the death of
Henry. Upon what reasons of Council, we must gather out of the circumstances
of the courses held in that time.

Some imagine, The state refused Maude, for not being then the custom, of any
other Kingdom Reasons why Maude was not crowned.
Christian (whose Kings are anointed) to admit women to inherit the Crown;
and therefore they might pretend to be freed from their oath, as being
unlawful. But Roger, Bishop of Salisbury, one of the principal men then in
council, yielded another reason for the discharge of this oath, which was,
That seeing the late King had married his daughter out of the Realm, and
without the consent thereof, they might lawfully refuse her. And so was
Stephen, having no Title at all, but as one of the blood, by mere election,
advanced to the Crown. For if he should claim any right in the Succession,
as being the son of Adela, then must Theobald, Earl of Blois, his elder
brother, have been preferred before him: and Henry Fitz Empress (if they
refused the mother) was nearer in blood to the right Stem, then either. But
they had other reasons that ruled that time. Stephen was a man, and of great
possessions, both in England and France, had one Reasons why Stephen Earl of
Bollogne was crowned King.
brother, Earl of Blois, a Prince of great estate: another, Bishop of
Winchester ( the Popes Legate in England, of power eminent) was popular for his
affability, goodly personage, and actiuenesse: and therefore acceptable to the
Nobility, who, at that time, were altogether guided by the Clergy; and they (by
the working of the Bishop of Winchester, induced to make choice of him) having
an opinion, that by preferring one, whose Title was least, would make his
obligation the more to them: and so, they might stand (better secured of their
liberties) then under such a one; as might presume of an hereditary succession.
And to be the more sure thereof, before his admittance to the Crown (he takes
a private oath before the Bishop of Canterbury) To confirm the ancient
liberties of the Church; and had his brother to undertake, betwixt God and him,
for the performance thereof.

But being now in possession of the Kingdom, and all the Treasure his Uncle
had King Stephen possesses the Treasure of Hen. 2.
in many years gathered, which amounted to one hundred thousand pounds of
exquisite silver, besides plate and jewels, of inestimable value. After the
funerals performed at Reading, he assembles a Parliament at Oxford, wherein,
he restored to the Clergy, all their His first Parliament at Oxford.
former liberties, and freed the Layetie from their tributes, exactions, or
whatsoever grieuances oppressed them, confirming the same by his Charter, which,
faithfully to observe, he took a public oath before all the Assembly:
where, likewise the Bishops swore fealty unto him, but with this condition; So
long as he observed the Tenor of this Charter.

And now as one that was to make good the hold he had gotten, with power, and
his sword, prepares for all assaults, which he was sure to have come upon him.
And first graunts license, to all that would, to build Castles upon their own
Lands, thereby to fortify the Realm, and break the force of any ouer-running
invasion, that should master the field. Which in settled times might be of
good effect, but in a season of distraction, and part-takings very dangerous.
And being to subsist by friends, he makes all he could; Creates new Lords,
gives to many, great possessions, and having a fullpurse spares for no cost to
buy love, and fidelity: a purchase very uncertain, when there may be other
conueyances made of more strength to carry it.

Two ways he was to look for blows: from Scotland on one side, and France
on the other: Scotland wanted no instigators: David their King, moved both by
Nature and his oath to his Niece, turns head upon him: Stephen was presently
there, with the show of a strong Army, and appeased him with the restitution of
Cumberland, and his son Henry, Prince of Scotland with the Earldom of
Huntingdon: which, with that of Northumberland (as the Scortish writers say)
was to descend unto him by the right of his mother Maude, who was daughter to
Waltheof Earl of Huntingdon, and of Judith Niece to William the first, by
whose gift he had that Earldom, and was the son of Syward Earl of
Northumberland. And for this the Prince of Scotland, took his Oath of fealty
to King Stephen which the father refused to do as having first sworn to Maude
the Empress. Though otherwise he might be indifferent, in respect that
Stephen had married likewise his Niece, which was Maude daughter to the Earl
of Bologne, and of Mary Sister to this King David, who by this mean was Uncle
both to Maude the Queen, and Maude the Empress.

The King, returning from this voyage, found some defection of his Nobility,
which presently put him into another action, that intertayned him sometime:
After which, he falls daungerously sick, in so much as he was noysed to be
dead, by which sickness, he lost more then his health: For his friends, put
in danger thereby, cast to seek another party to bear them up: it wakended
Aniou, and sets him on to surprise certain pieces in Normandy, to prepare for
the recovery of his wives right, and made all this Kingdom waver. Thus was
his first year spent, which showed how the rest of eighteen would prove,
wherein we are to have no other representations, But of reuolts, beseeging of
Castles, surprizings, recouerings, loosings again, with great spoils, and
destruction; in brief a most miserable face of a distracted State, that can
yield us no other notes of instruction, but such as are general in all times
of like disposition: and therefore herein we may the better forbeate the
rehersall of many particulars, being all under one head of action, and like
Nature.

The King, having recovered, would make the world know he was alive, and
presently 1137. Anno. Reg. 2.
passes with forces into Normandy, overcame the Earl of Aniou in battle:
after makes peace with him, and upon renouncing of the claim of Maude,
covenants to give them 5000. marks per annum: he intertaines amity with King
Louys the seventh, and causes his son Eustace to do him homage for the
Duchy of Normandy, wherein he was invested: besides to content his elder
brother Theobald, Earl of Blois, he gives him a pension of 2000 marks, and
so returns again into England, to a war against Scotland, which, in the
mean time, made incursions on this Kingdom, where Robert Earl of Gloucester
the natural son of Henry the first.
whilst he was held busy in work, Robert Earl of Gloucester, base son to
Henry the first, a man of high spirit, great direction and indefatigable
industry (an especial actor that performed the greatest part, in these times,
for his sister Maude) had surprised the Castle of Bristow, and procured
confederates to make good other pieces abroad in diverse parts: as William
Talbot the Castle of Hereford; Paynel the Castle of Ludlow; Louell that of
Carry: Moon the Castle of Dunstor: Robert de Nichol, that of Warham, Eustace
Fitz John that of Walton, and William Fitz Allan the Castle of Shrewsbury.

Stephen leaves the prosecution of the Scottish wars to Thurstan Archbishop
of York, whom he made his Lieutenant, and furnished with many valiant
leaders, as Walter Earl of Albemarle, William Peuerell of Nottingham; Walter
and Gilbert Lacies. Himself bravely attended, bends all his power to repress
the conspirators, which King Stephen represses the conspirators.
he did in one expedition, recouers all the Castles (by reason of their
distances, not able to succor one another) and drove the Earl of Gloucester
home to his sister into Aniou.

No less success had his forces in the North, against the Scots, whom in a
great battle He defeited the Scots.
they discomfeited and put to flight, which great fortunes meeting together in
one year, broughter forth occasion of bad, in that following: for now
presuming 1138. Anno. Reg. 3.
more of himself, he fell upon those rocks that rent all his greatness. He
calls a Council at Oxford, where occasion was given to put him out with the
Clergy, that had only set him into the State. The Bishops upon the permission
of building Castles, so out-went the Lords in magnificence, strength and number
of their erections, and especially the Bishop of Salisbury that their
greatness was much maligned by them, putting the King in head, that all these
great Castles, especially of Salisbury, the Vies, Shirburne, Malmsbury, and
Newarke, were only to intertaine the party of Maude, whereupon the King,
whose fears were apt to take fire, sends for the Bishop of Salisbury (most
suspected) to Oxford. The Bishop, as if foreseeing the mischief coming to
him, would gladly have put off this journey, and excused it by the debilitie of
1140. Anno. Reg. 5.
his age, but it would not serve his turn: thither he comes, where his
servants, about the taking up of lodgings, quarrel with the servants of the
Earl of Britain, and from words fall to blows, so that in the bickering,
one of them was slain, and the Nephew of the Earl dangerously wounded.
Whereupon the King sends for the Bishop, to satisfy his Court, for the breach
of peace, made by his servants: The satisfaction required, was the yielding up
the keys of his Castles, as pledges of his fealty, but that being stood upon,
the Bishop, with his Nephew, Alexander Bishop of Lincoln, were restrained of
their liberty, and shortly after sent as prisoners to the Castle of the
Devises, The King feizes upon the Bishops Castles, and Treasure.
whither (the Bishop of Eley, another of his Nephews) had retired himself
before. The King seizes into his hands his Castles of Salisbury; Shyrburne,
Malmesbury, and after three days assault, the Devises was likewise rendered,
besides he took all his Treasure, which amounted to forty thousand marks.

This action, being of an extraordinary strain, gave much occasion of rumor:
some said: The King had done well in seizing upon these Castles; it being
unfit, and against the Cannons of the Church, that they who were men of
religion, and peace, should raise fortresses for war, and in that sort as
might be prejudicial to the King. Against this, was the Bishop of The Popes
Legate a Bishop, takes part with Bishops against the King his brother.
Malmsburie.
Winchester, the Popes Legate, taking rather the part of his function, then that
of a brother: saying: That if the Bishops had transgressed, it was not the
King, but the Cannons, that must judge it: that they ought not to be deprived
of their possessions, without a public Ecclesiastical Counsel; that the
King had not done it, out of the zeal of justice, but for his own benefit,
taking away that which had been built upon the Lands, and by the charge of the
Church, to put it into the hands of Lay men, little affected to religion: And
therefore to the end, the power of the Cannons might be examined, he appoints
a Counsel to be called at Winchester, whither the King is summoned: and
thither repair most of all the Bishops of the Kingdom, where first is read
the Commission of the Legatine power, granted by Pope Innocent to the Bishop of
Winchester, who there openly vrges the indignity offered to the Church, by the
imprisoning of these Bishops: An act most heinous and shameful for the King,
that in the peace of his Court, through the instigation of evil ministers,
would thus lay hands upon such men, spoil them of their estates. Which was a
violence against God. And that seeing the King would yield to no admonitions,
he had at length called this Council, where they were to consult what was to
be done: that for his part, neither the love of the King, though his brother,
nor the loss of his living, or danger of his life, should make him fail in
the execution of what they should decree.

The King, standing upon his cause, sends certain Earls to this Council, to
know why he was called thither: answer was made by the Legate: That the King,
who was subject to the faith of CHRIST, ought not to take it ill, if by the
ministers of CHRIST, he was called to make satisfaction, being conscious of
such an offense as that age had not known: that it was for times of the
Gentiles, for Bishops to be imprisoned, and deprived of their possessions, and
therefore they should tell the King, his brother, that if he would voutsafe to
yield consent to the Council it should be such, by the help of God, as
neither the Roman Church, the Court of the King of France, nor the Earl
Theobald, brother to them both (a manwise, and religious) should, in reason
dislike it: that the King should do advisedly to render the reason of his act,
and undergo a Canonical judgment: that he ought in duty to favor the
Church, into whose bosom being taken, he was advanced to the Crown without
any military hand.

With which answer the Earls departed, attended with Alberic de Ver, a man
exercised in the Law, and having related the same, are returned with the Kings
reply, which Alberic vtters, and vrges the injuries Bishop Roger had done to
the King: how he seldom The Kings Reply.
came to his Court: that his men, presuming upon his power, had offered violence
to the Nephew and servants, of the Earl of Britain, and to the servants of
Herui de Lions, a man of that Nobility and stoutnesse, as would never voutsafe
to come upon any request to the late King, and yet for the love of this, was
desirous to see England: where, to have this violence offered was an injury to
the King, and dishonor to the Realm, that the Bishop of Lincoln, for the
ancient hatred to the Earl of Britain, was the author of his men's sedition:
that the Bishop of Salisbury secretly favored the Kings enemies; and did but
subtlely temporize, as the King had found by diverse circumstances: especially
when Roger de Mortimer, sent with the Kings forces in the great danger of
Bristow, he would not lodge him one night in Malmsbury: that it was, in every
man's mouth, as soon as the Empress came, He and his Nephews would render
their Castles unto him. That he was arested, not as a Bishop, but a servant to
the King, and one that administered his procurations, and received his moneys.
That the King took not his Castles by violence, but the Bishop voluntarily
rendered them, to avoid the calumny of their tumult raised in his Court: If the
King found some money in his Castles, he might lawfully seize on it, in regard
Roger had collected it out of the revenues of the King his Uncle, and
predecessor: and the Bishop willingly yielded up the same, as well as his
Castles, through fear of his offenses; and of this, wanted not witnesses of
the Kings part, who desired that the covenants, made between him, and the
Bishop, might remain ratified.

Against this, Bishop Roger opposes: That he was never servant to the King nor
received his moneys; and withal added threatenings, as a man, not yet broken
though bent with his fortunes: that if he found not justice for his wrongs in
that Council, he would bring it to the hearing of a greater Court.

The Legate, mildly, as he did other things, said: That all what was spoken
against the Bishops, ought first to be examined in the Ecclesiastical
Council, whether they were true or no, before sentence should have been given
against them contrary to the Canons: and therefore the King should (as it is
lawful in judicial trials) reuest the Bishops in their former Estates,
otherwise, by the law of Nations being disseised, they shall not hold their
Plea.

After much debate, the Kings cause was (upon a motion) put off till the next
day, to the end the Archbishop of Roan, an especial instrument for the King,
might be there; who deliueting his opinion, said: That if the Bishops could
rightly prove by the Canons, they ought to have Castles, they should hold
them; but if they could not, it proceeded of great improbitie to strive to do
otherwise. And be it (said he) their right to have them; yet in a suspected
time, according to the manner of other Nations: all great men ought to deliver
the keys of their Fortresses, to be at the Kings pleasure, who is to fight for
the peace of all But it is not their right, by the decree of the Canons to have
Castles; and if by the Princes indulgence it be tolerated, yet in a time of
necessity, they ought to deliver the keys.

The Lawier Alboric adds: That it was signified to the King, how the Bishops
threatened, and had furnished some to go to Rome against him. But, said he, the
King would have you know, that none of you presume to do it: for if any go
out of England, contrary to his will, and the dignity of the Kingdom, it
will be hard returning. In conclusion the Council brake up, nothing was done.
The Bishops durst not excommunicate the King, without the Popes The Legate and
Archbishops submission.
priuitie: and besides, they saw the swords to busy about them, yet failed not
the Legate, and the Archbishop to prosecute their parts, and from authority,
fell to prayer; and (at the Kings feet, in his Chamber) besought him, that he
would pity the Church, pity his own soul, and his fame; not to suffer
dissension to be, between the Kingdom, and the Priesthood. The King
returned thern fair words, but held what he had gotten.

Shortly after, though grief, died the Bishop of Salisbary, and (according to
the fate of ouer-minent and greedy Officers) vnpittied. He was a man (in his
latter time) noted of much corruption, and insatiable desire of having. For
whom, the present King in the beginning of his reigue had done very much,
makingone of his Nephews Chancellor, the other Treasurer, and upon his fute,
gave to himself the Borough of Malmesbury; insomuch as the King would say to
his familiars about him: If this man will beg thus still; I will give him
half the Kingdom but I will please him: and first shall be weary of craving,
ere I of granting. And sure the King had great reason to suspect his adhering
to Maude, whose part he began to favor: only, out of the hatred he bare to
Winchester, who yet was content to forsake his own brother, in regard, by his
engagement he was preferred to the Crown, rather then to loose his good will,
and the rest of the Clergy.

But yet this breaking of the King into the Church (which had made him) utterly
dissolved him. For presently hereupon all his power fell asunder: the Empress
found now away open to let her in, and the Earl of Gloucester presuming of a
sure side, Maude the Empress conducted into England.
conducted her into England only with 150 men: puts her into the Castle of
Arundell, and himself (attended but with twelve horse) passed away clear
through all the Country to Bristow: and from thence to Gloucester, where he had
leisure without opposition, to raise all the Country to take part with the
Empress; who from Arundell Castle, was afterward (by the Legate himself, and
the Kings permission) conveyed to Bristow: received with all obedience, grew
daily in strength, as she went and came at length to her brother (who had taken
in Hereford, made himself strong with the Welsh, and settled those parts) to
gather up more of the Kingdom by showing herself and her power in diverse
places.

Stephen, having no part clear (by reason the Castles, upon which he spent
both his time and means, lay so thick blocks in his way) as he could not
make that speed to stop this stream, as otherwise he would: holding it not
safe to go forward, and leave dangers behind, that might ouer-take him. And
first he lays siege to the Castle of Wallingford, which, Brian son to the
Earl of Gloucester, held against him: then to the Castle of Bristow and other
places, working much, but effecting little: which seeing, to get time and
stagger the swift proceeding of this new received Princess, he causes a
treaty of peace to be propounded at Bathe, where the Legate (who likewise
earnestly solicited the same) with the Archbishop of Canterbury, were
appointed Commissioners for the King; and the Earl of Gloucester for the
Empress; but nothing was effected, both return to make good their sides. The
Empress seeks to recover more, the King what he had lost. And least the North
parts might fall from him, and the King of Scots come on, he repaires
thitherward: and finding the Castle of Lincoln possessed by Ralph Earl of
Chester, who had married a daughter of the Earl of Gloucester, and holding it
not safe to be in the hands of such a master, in such a time, seeks to take
it in by force. The Earl of Chester, who held Newtall, attempting nothing
against the King, took it ill, and stood upon his defense: but being ouer-layd
by power, conueyes himself out of the Castle, leaves his brother and wife
within to defend it, and procures aid of his father in law the Earl of
Gloucester, to succor him.

The Earl takes in hand this business, sets out of Gloucester with an Army of
Welshmen and others, attended with Hugh Bigod, and Robert de Morley, ioynes
with the Earl of Chester, marches to Lincoln, where, in the battle, King
Stephen was taken, carried prisoner to Gloucester, presented to the Empress,
and by her sent to be kept in the Castle of Bristow, but in all honorable
fashion, till his attempts to escape laid fetters on him.

Hereupon the Empress (as at the top of her fortune) labors the Legate to he
admitted She labors the Legate for the Crown of England.
to the Kingdom, as the daugher of the late King, to whom the Realm had taken
an oath to accept for sovereign in the succession; and wrought so, as a Parle
was appointed for this purpose, on the Plain near to Winchester, where in a
blustering sad day (like the fate of the business) they met: and the Empress
swore, and made affidation to the Legate, That all the great businesses, and
especially the donation of Bishoprics and Abbeys, should be at his
disposing, if he (with the Church) would receive her as Queen of England, and
hold perpetual fidelity unto her. The same oath and affidation took likewise
her brother Robert, Earl of Gloucester, Brian his son, Marquisse of
Wallingford; Miles of Gloucester (after Earl of Hereford) with many others for
her. Nor did the Bishop stick to accept her as Queen (though she never came
to be so) and with some few other, make likewise affidation for his part, that
so long as she infringed not her covenant, he would also hold his fidelity to
her.

The next day, she was received with solemn procession into the Bishops
Church at Winchester, the Bishop leading her on the right hand, and Bernard
Bishop of Saint David's on the left. There were present many other Bishops, as
Alexander Bishop of Lincoln, and Nigel Bishop of Ely ( the Nephews of Roger,
lately imprisoned) Robert Bishop of Bathe, and Robert Bishop of Worcester, with
many Abbots.

Within a few days after came Theobald, Archbishop of Canterbury, to the
Empress, invited by the Legate; but deferred to do fealty unto her, as holding
it unworthy his person and place, without having conferd first with the King.
And therefore he, with many Prelates, and some of the Layety (by permission
obtained) went to the King to Bristow. The Council brake up, the Empress
keeps her Easter at Oxford, being her own town. Shortly upon Easter a
Council of the Clergy is again called to Winchester, where the first day the
Legate had secret conference with every Bishop apart, and then with every Abbot
and other, which were called to the Council. The next day he makes a public
speech, Showing how the cause (of their Assembly) was to consult The Legates
speech to the Clergy, to Crown the Empress.
for the peace of their country, in great danger of utter ruin. Repeates the
flourishing reign of his Uncle, the peace, wealth, and honor of the Kingdom
in his time: and how that renowned King, many years before his death, had
received an oath both of England and Normandy, for the succession of his
daughter Maude and her Issue. But, said he, after his decease, his daughter
being then in Normandy, making delay to come into England, where (for that it
seemed long to expect) order was to be taken for the peace of the Country,
and my brother was permitted to reign. And although I interposed my self a
surety between God and him, that he should honor and exalt the holy Church,
keep and ordain good Laws; Yet, how he has behaved himself in the
Kingdom, it grieves me to remember, and I am ashamed to repeat. And then
recounts he all the Kings courses with the Bishops, and all his other
misgouernments. And then, said he, every man knows I ought to love my
mortal brother, but much more the cause of my immortal Father: and therefore
seeing God has showed his judgment on my brother, and suffered him (without
my knowledge) to fall into the hand of Power: that the Kingdom may not
miscarie for want of a Ruler, I have called you all hither by the power of my
Legation. Yesterday the cause was moved in secret, to the greatest part of the
Clergy, to whom the right appertains to elect and ordain a Prince. And
therefore after having inuoked (as it is meet, the Divine aid) We elect for
Queen of England the daughter of the peaceful, glorious, rich, good, and in
our time the incomparable King: and to her, we promise our faith and
allegiance.

When all, who were present, either modestly gave their voice, or by their
silence contradicted it, the Legate adds: The Londoners, who are (in respect of
the greatness of their City) as among the optimacie of England, we have by our
messengers summoned, and I trust they will not stay beyond this day, tomorrow
we will expect them.

The Londoners came, were brought into the Council, showed How they were sent
from the Communaltie of London, not to bring contention, but prayer, that the
King their Lord might be freed from captivity, and the same did all the Barons
(received within their Liberties) earnestly beseech of my Lord Legate, and all
the Clergy there present. The Legate answers them at large, and loftily,
according to his speech the day before, and added, That the Londoners, who were
held in that degree in England, ought not to take their parts, who had forsaken
their Lord in the war, by whose Council the Church had been dishonored,
and who favored the Londoners, but for their own gain.

Then stands there up a Chaplain to Queen Maude, wife to Stephen, and
delivers a letter to the Legate, which he silently read, and then said allowd,
that it was not lawful in the assembly of so many reverend and religious
persons the same should be publicly read, containing matter retrehensible. The
Chapline not to fail in his message, boldly reads the Letter himself, which
was to this effect: That the Queen earnestly intreates all the Clergy there
assembled, and namely the Bishop of Winchester, the brother of her Lord, to
restore him unto the Kingdom, whom wicked men, which were also his subjects,
held prisoner.

To this the Legate answers (as to the Londoners) and shortly after the Council
brake up, wherein many of the Kings part were excommunicated: namely William
Martell, an especial man about the King, who had much displeased the Legate.

Hereupon a great part of England willingly accepted of Maude, in whose
businesses her brother Robert imployes all his diligence and best care,
reforming Justice, restoring the Laws of England, promising releeuements, and
whatsoever might be to win the people; the Legate seconding all his courses.

But now, she being at the point of obtaining the whole Kingdom; all came
suddenly dashed by her ouer-hautie and proud carriage, and by the practice of
the Londoners, who adhering to the other side, began openly to inueigh against
her, who had displeased them, and they had plotted to surprise her in their
City, whereof she having notice, secretly withdrawes herself (accompained
with her Uncle David King of Scots who was come to visit her and her brother
Robert) unto Oxford, a place of more The Legate leaves the Empress.
security. The Leagat himself takes, or makes an occasion to be slack in
her cause, upon her denying him a suit for his Nephew Eustaee, the son of
Stephen, about the inheritance of his Earldom of Mortaine in Normandy.
Besides the Queen regnant, watchful over all oportunities, found means to
parle with the Legar, Sets upon him with her tears, entreaty, promises, and
assurance for the Kings reformation; in so much as she Is entreated with
tears by the Queen regnant.
recalled him to the affections of Nature, brought him about again to absolve
such of the Kings part as he had lately excommunicated.

The Earl of Gloucester seeing this sudden and strange relaps of their
affairs, strives by all means to hold up Opinion, and re-quicken the Legates
dispofition, which to keep sound, was all. He brings the Empress to
Winchester, setles her, and her guard, in the Castle, where she desires to
speak with the Legate, who first delays, then denies The Empress besieged at
Oxford, the Earl of Gloucester taken prisoner.
to come. Whereupon they call their best friends about them. Queen Maude and
the Lords incompasse the Town, and cut off all victual from the Empress, so
that in the end, the Earl of Gloucester wrought means to have her conveyed from
thence to the Vies, but himself was taken and in him most of her.

This sets the sides both even again into the Lists of there trial: the two
prisoners are to redeem each other: The disproportion of the quality between
them, showed yet there was an evenness of power, and the Earl would not
consent to the Kings delivery (who only in that was to have the precedence)
but upon most secure cautions. The Archbishop of Canterbury, and the Legate,
undertook to yield themselves prisoners for him, if the King released him not,
according to his promise: But that would not serve the turn, till they both
had written their Briefes to the Pope, to intimate the course that was taken
herein, and delivered the same unto him, under their hands and seals. So that,
if the King should, as he might not care, to hold the Bishops in prison: yet
the Pope, if hard measure were offered, might relieve them. Which shows the
advantage of credit in the business, lay on this side, and the King was to
have his fetters, though at liberty.

The Queen and Eustace, her son the Prince, upon the enlargement of Stephen,
1142. Anno. Reg. 7.
remain pledges in the Castle of Bristow till the Earl were released, which
was done upon the Kings coming to Winchester. Where the Earl in familiar
conference, was, by all art possible, solicited to forsake the party of Maude,
with promise of all preferments of honor and estate: but nothing could move
him being fixed to his courses, and rather would he have been content to
remain a perpetual prisoner, then that Stephen should have been released,
had not his sister wrought him to this conclusion.

The Legate, after this, calls a Council at London, where the Popes letters,
written unto him, are openly read, which argue him (but mildly) of some neglect
of his brothers Vide Append.
releasing, and exhort him to use all means Ecclesiastical, and Secular, to
set him at liberty.

The King himself came into the council, complains, How his subjects, to
whom King Stephens complaint.
he had never denied Justice, had taken him, and reproachfully afflicted him
even to death. The Legate, with great eloquence, labors to excuse his own
courses: alleging, How he received not the Empress by his will, but
necessity: that presently upon the Kings overthrow, whilst the Lords were
either fled, or stood in suspense attending the event, she and her people came
thundering to the walls of Winchester: and that, what pact soever he had made
with her for the right of the Church, she obstinately brake all: besides, he
was certainly informed, that shoe and hers had plotted, both against his
dignity, and life: But God in his mercy, contrary to her desire, had turned
the business so, as he escaped the danger, and his brother was delivered out
of bands. And therefore he, from the part of God, and the Pope, willed them,
with all their utmost power, to aid the King, anointed by the consent of the
People, and the Sea Apostolic, and to Excommunicate all the disturbers of the
peace that favored the Countess of Aniou.

There was in the Council a Lay Agent for the Empress, who openly charged the
Legate, That in respect of the faith he had given the Empress, to pass no act
there, prejudicial to her Honor: having sworn unto her never to aid his
brother with above twenty soldiers: that her coming into England, was upon
his often Letters unto her: and his cause it was, that the King was taken and
held prisoner. This, and much more said the Agent with great austerity of
words, wherewith the Legate seemed not to be moved at all, nor would stoop to
reply.

Both parts thus set at liberty, were left to work for themselves, holding
the State broken between them; and no means made to interpose any bar to
keep them asunder. Their borders lay every where, and then the engagements of
their Partakers, who (look all to be sauers or to recover their stakes when
they were lost, which makes them never give over) entertain the contention.
But the best was, they were rather troubles, then wars, and cost more labor
then blood. Every one fought with Bucklers, and seldom came to the sharp in
the field, which would soon have ended the business.

Some few months after these inlargements, stood both sides at some rest, but
not idle, casting how to compass their ends. The Empress at the Vies with her
Council, resolves to send over her brother into Normandy to solicit her
husband the Earl of The Earl of Gloucester gets to Normandy.
Aniou, to come to aid her, with forces from thence: Her brother, the better
to secure her in his absence, setles her in the Castle of Oxford, well
furnished for all assaults: and takes with him the sons of the especial men
about her, as pledges to hold them to their fidelity. Stephen seeks to stop
the Earls passage, but could not, and then lays siege to the Castle of
Oxford; which held him all the time the Earl was abroad. Geffrey Earl of
Aniou, desirous rather to have Normandy, whereof, in this mean time, he had
attained the most part, and in possibility of the rest, then to adventure for
England, which lay in danger, refused to come in person, but sends some small
aid, and his eldest son Henry, being then but eleven years of age, that he
might look upon England, and be showed to the people, to try if that would
move them to a consideration of his right: which proned of more effect then an
Army.

The Earl of Gloucester safely returning, makes toward Oxford to relieve the
Empress, The Earls retuine with the Empresses eldest son Henry.
who had secretly conveyed her self disguised out at a posterne gate, only
with four persons, got over the Thames, passed a foot to Abington, and from
thence conuayd to Wallingford, where her brother and son met her, to her more
comfort after hard distresses.

Stephen seeing his enemy thus supplied, and like to grow, labors to win
friends, 1143. Anno. Reg. 8.
but money fails, which made diverse of his Lords, and especially his
mercinaries, whereof he had many out of Flanders, to fall to the rifling of
Abbayes, which was of dangerous consequence: And for Armies there was no
means; only about Castles, with small powers, lay all the business of these
times, and they being so many were to small effect, but only to hold them
doing, which was for many years.

The Earl of Gloucester, the chief pillar of the Empress, within two years
after his The Earl of Gloucester dies.
last coming out of Normandy died, and shortly after Miles Earl of Hereford,
an especial man of hers, which had utterly quasht her, but that in stead of a
brother she had a son grew up to be of more estimation with the Nobility,
and shortly after of ableness to undergo the travails of war. His first
expedition at sixteen years of age was Northward to combine him with David
King of Scots his great Uncle, to whom his mother had given the Country of
Northumberland. After him follows Stephen with an Army to York, least he
should surprise that City, and to inter cept him in his return: but according
to his usual manner, and French-like, after the first heat of his
undertakings, which were quick and brave, he quails: nothing was effected,
and both return without incountring.

Now to advance the State and means of Henry, fortune, as if in love with
young Princes, presents this occasion. Louys the seventh, King of France going
in person to the Holy wars, and taking with him his wife Elenor, the only
daughter and heir of William Duke of Guien, grew into such an odious conceit
of her, upon the notice of her lascivious behavior in those parts, as the
first work he does upon his coming back, he repudiates, and turns her
home with all her great dowry, rather content to loose the mighty estate she
brought him then to marry her person. With this great Lady matches Henry,
before he was twenty years of age (being now Duke of An. 1151.
Normandy, his father deceased, who had recovered it for him) and had by her
the possession of all those large and rich Countries, apertayning to the Duchy
of Guien, besides, the Earldome of Poictou. Whereupon Louys enraged to see him
enlarged by this great accession of State, who was so near, and like to be so
dangerous and eminent a neighbor, combines with Stephen, and aids Eustace his
son (whom he married to his Sister Constance) with maine power, for the
recovery of Normandy, wherein he was first possessed. But this young Prince,
furnished now with all this powerful means, leaves the management of the
affairs of England to his friends, defends Normandy, wrought so, as the King
of France did him little hurt; and Eustace, his competitor, returned home into
England, where shortly after he died, about 18 years of his age, borne never
to see out of the calamities of war, and was buried at Feuersham with his
mother, who deceased a little before, and had no other joy nor glory of a
Crown but what we see. Stephen, whilst Duke Henry was in Normandy, recouers
what he could, and at length besieges Wallinford, which seems in these times
to have been a piece of great importance, and impregnable, and reduced the
Defendants to that extremity, as they sent to Duke Henry for succor, who
presently thereupon, in the midst of Winter, ariues in England with 3000
foot, and 140 horse. Where first, to draw the King from Wallingford, he lays
siege to Malmesbury, and had most of all the great men in the West, and from
other parts coming in unto him. Stephen, now resolved to put it to the trial
of a day, brings thither all the power he could make; and far ouer-went his
enemy in number: but floods and storms, in an unseasonable Winter, kept the
Armies from incountring, till the Bishops, doubtful of the success, and
seeing how dangerous it was for them, and the whole State, to have a young
Prince get the maistry by his sword, mediated a peace, which was after
concluded in a Parliament at Winchester, upon these conditions.

1 That King Stephen, during his natural life, should remain King of England,
and Henry enjoy the Dukedom of Normandy, as descended unto him from his
mother, and be proclaimed heir apparent to the Kingdom of England, as the
adopted son of King Stephen.

2 That the partisans of either, should receive no damage, but enjoy their
Estates according to their ancient Rights and Titles.

3 That the King should resume into his hands all such parcels of inheritance
belonging Resumptions.
to the Crown, as had been aliened by him, or usurped in his time. And that
all those possessions which by intrusion had been violently taken from the
owners since the days of King Henry, should be vestored unto them who were
rightly possessed therein, when the said King reigned.

4 That all such Castles as had been built by the permission of Stephen, and
in his time (which were found to be 1117) should be demolished, etc.

There is a Charter of this agreement in our Annals, which has other Articles
of reservation for the Estates of particular persons. And first for William,
the second son Vide Append.
of Stephen, to enjoy all the possessions his father held before he was King
of England, and many other particulars of especial note.

After this pacification, and all business here, settled, Duke Henry returns
into Normandy, and likewise there concludes a peace with the King of France,
and for that he would be sure to have it, buys it, with twenty thousand
marks.

And now King Stephen having attained (that he never had) Peace (which yet, it
seems he enjoyed not a year after) uses all the best means he could to
repair the ruins of the State, makes his progresses into most parts of the
Kingdom, to reform the mischiefs that had grown up under the sword: and
after his return calls a Parliament An. 1154.
at London, to consult of the best means for the public good. After the
Parliament, He reigned 18 years, and 10 months.
he goes to meet the Earl of Flanders at Dover, who desired conference with
him, and having dispatched him, falls presently sick, dies within few days
after, and was buried (in the Abbey he founded) at Feuersham, with the
unfortunate Princes.

A man so continually in motion, as we cannot take his dimension, but only in
passing, and that but on one side, which was war: on the other, we never saw
but a glaunce of him, which yet, for the most part, was such, as showed him to
be a very worthy Prince for the Government. He kept his word with the State
concerning the relieuement of Tributes, and never had Subsidy that we find.

But which is more remarkable, having his sword continually out, and so many
defections and rebellions against him, He never put any great man to death.
Besides it is noted, that notwithstanding all these miseries of war, There
were more Abbeys built in his Reign, then in an hundredth years before, which
shows, though the times were bad, they were not impious.

The end of the Life, and Reign, of King Stephen.
The Life, and Reign, of Henry the Second; And first of the Line of
Plantagenet.
THAT short time of peace, before the death of Stephen, had so allayed 1154.
Anno. Reg. 1.
the spirit of contention, and prepared the Kingdom (wearied and defaced with
war) to that disposition of quietness: as Henry Plantagenet (though a
Frenchman borne, and at that time, out of the Land: long detained with
contrary winds, yet a Prince of so great possessions abroad, as might make him
feared, to be too mighty a master at home; or doubtful, where he would set
his seat: whither carry England thither, or bring those great States to this)
was, notwithstanding generally admitted (without any opposition or
capitulation, other then the usual oath) to the Crown of England: which he
received at the hands of Theobald, Archbishop of Canterbury, the twentieth day
of December, Anno 1154, about the three and twentieth year of his age.

And though he where a Prince Young, Active, Pawerfull, and had all that might
make him high and presuming: yet the necessity of his own affairs were so
strong raines to hold him in, from all exorbitant courses: as made him wary to
observe at first, all means to get, and retain the love, and good opinion of
this Kingdom, by a regular and easy Government: being sure to have the King
of France perpetually awake, for all advantages (both in regard of daily
quarrels, commune to mighty neighbors, as also for matching with her that came
out of his bed, and brought away those mighty Provinces from that Crown,
whereby, he comes now to ouer-match him) being thus invested in this powerful
Kingdom of England. Where, after having made a choice of grave Counselors,
such as best understood the state thereof; he began at a Council or Parliament
held at Wallingford with an Act (that both served his own turn, and much
eased the stomakes of his people) which was the expulsion of Strangers,
wherewith Expulsion of Strangers.
the Land was much pestered, by reason of the late wars that had drawn great
numbers of them, and especially of Flemings, and Picards, whom King Stephen
especially trusted in his greatest actions, after he grew doubtful of the
English fidelity, and had made their Leader Williamd' Ipres, Earl of Kent, who
likewise was turned home, and his estate seized into the Kings hands.

Then, that he might subsist by his own means, without pressure of his
subjects Resumption of Crown Lands.
(whose voluntary services, and contributions, would yield him more in measure,
then if exacted) He looks to the State, and ordering of his revenues, reformes
the Exchequer, and reuokes all such Lands belonging to the Crown, as had any
way been alienated, or usurped. And though some of the great Lords stood out
for the holding what they had in possession, as Hugh de Mortimer for his
Castles of Clebury, Wigmore, and Bridgenorth: and Roger Fits Miles, Earl of
Hereford for the City and Land of Gloucester. Yet the King took them by force
as appertaining to the Crown. Besides, he resumed the Castle of Skarborough,
which William Earl of Albemarle held, and diverse other Lands and Castles in
Yorkshire, possessed by private men. Hugh Bigot resigned his Castles into the
Kings hands. And more, he took from William Earl of Mortaine, and Warren,
base son to King Stephen, the Castle of Pemsey, the City of Norwitch: with,
other Towns and Castles, notwithstanding himself granted the same, in his
agreement with Stephen; alleging, They were of the Demaynes of the Crown, and
could not be alie^ed Only he suffered him to enjoy such lands, as his father,
King Stephen held in England, in the time of Henry the first.

Then goes he Northward, and recouers the City of Carlisle, seizes all
Cumberland, into his hands: and after takes the Town of New Castle, with the
Castle of Bamberge, and so resumed all Northumberland, which his Mother (the
Empress) had before granted to David King of Scets, her Uncle (Grandfather to
Malcolin, who now reigned) as being not in his Mothers power, nor his, to give
away any part of the Kingdom. Notwithstanding, he was content, Malcolin should
enjoy the Earldom of Huntingdon, which King Stephen had given to Henry,
Prince of Scotland, father to Malcolin, as being a piece in the heart of
England, whereof he could make no use, but at the Kings pleasure, and besides,
was a means, to hold him his Homager, and to perform those services belonging
to that Earldom.

And the same course took he with the Alienations, and usurpations formerly
made of the Demaines of the Duchy of Normandy, and forced Theobald Earl of
Blois, to resign into his hands, two Castles, and Petroch Earl of Perch,
other two. These reuocations, whereby so many were indamaged in their estates,
and Grants, both of his Predecessors, and his own utterly nullified; might
seem, to be an act of great injustice, and in a new Government, of little
safety. But in regard, the Commonwealth had thereby a benefit: and but few
(though great) interessed, it passed as a work universally necessary, seeing
his Maintenance otherwise, must be made up out of public taxations; which
would turn to a general grieuance. But the resuming of the Earldom of Aniou
The King resumes the Earldom of Aniou.
out of his brother Geffryes hands, contrary to his Oath, cannot but be held a
strain beyond conscience, and good nature. For his father Geffrey Plantagenet
desirous to leave some estate to his second son Geffrey, ordained by his
Testament, That when Henry had recovered the Kingdom of England, the other
should have the County of Aniou: and in the mean time, put Geffrey in
possession of the Castles, and Towns of Chinon, Lodun, and Mirabel, whereby he
might, both have maintenance for his estate, and a readier means to come to
the rest when occasion served. And least his son Henry should not perform
this Will, he got certain Bishops, and other Nobles to swear, that they would
not suffer his body to be interred, till Henry, who was then absent, had sworn
to fulfill his Testament: Henry, rather then to suffer his Fathers body to lie
unburied, With great unwillingness takes this oath. But afterward being
invested in the Crown of England, and Geffrey seazing upon the Earldom of
Aniou, he passes over into France, and not only takes from him the Earldom,
but also those three Towns he had in possession; alleging, It was no reason,
a forced Oath (upon such an occasion) should bind him to forgo the inheritance
of his Birthright, being all the Patrimony, that was to descend unto him from
his Father:) and though he had recovered the Kingdom of England; that was not
his Fathers work, but by an other right. And although he held his brother
dear unto him, yet having Children of his own, he was to provide, that what
was his, should descend to them. But yet was content, to allow his brother an
honorable pension (of a thousand pounds English, and two thousand pounds of
Aniouin money yearly) for the maintenance of his estate; and obtained of Pope
Adrian the seventh (an English man borne) a dispensation for his Oath, made in
this case. 1156. Anno. Reg. 2.


And now the first occasion, that put him here into action of war, was the
rebellion of the Welsh, who, according to their usual manner, ever attempted
some thing, in the beginning of the Reign, of new Princes, as if to try their
spirits, and their own fortunes. Against whom he goes so prepared, as if he
meant to go through with his work. Wherein at first, he had much to do,
passing a straight among the Mountains, His first expedition into Wales.
where he lost (with many of his men) Eustace Fitz John, and Robert Curcy,
eminent persons: and himself noysed to be slain (so much discouraged, that
part of the Army, which had not passed the Streights) as Henry an Earl of
Essex, threw down the Kings Standard (which he bare by inheritance) and fled:
but soon, the King made it known, he was alive, discomfited his enemies, and
brought them, to seek their peace with submission. The Earl of Essex was
after accused, by Robert de Monfort The punishment of Corwardize.
for this misdeed, had the Combat, was overcome, pardoned yet of life, but
condemned to be shorn a Monk, put into the Abbay of Reading, and had his
Lands seized into the Kings hands.

It was now the fourth year of the reign of this King; when, all his affairs
were in 1158. Anno. Reg. 4.
prosperous course, his State increasing, his Queen fruitful, and had borne
him three sons in England, Henry, Richard, and Geffrey: his eldst son
William (to whom he had caused the Kingdom, to take an Oath of fealty) died
shortly after his coming to the Crown, so that now, the same Oath is tendered
to Henry, and all is secure and well on this side.

The King of France, who would gladly have impeached the mighty current of this
Kings fortune, was held in, and fettered with his own necessities: his journey
to the Holy Land, had all exhausted his Treasure, and since his coming home,
the Pope had exacted great sums of him for dispensing with his second
marriage, which was with Constantia daughter to Alphonso, King of Galicia, a
feeble alliance, and far off, so that all concurred to increase the
greatness of this King of England; who The resignation of Nants to the King of
England.
having now almost surrounded France (by possessing first all Normandy, with a
great footing in Britain, by the resignation of Nants, with the Country there
about, which Conan the Duke was forced lately to make unto him; then the
Earldom of Maine, Poictou, Touraine, Aniou with the Duchy of Guien) he also
lays claim to the rich Earldom of Toulouse upon this Title:

William Duke of Aquitaine, granfather to Queen Elioner, married the daughter
and King Henry's claim to the Earldome of Toulouse.
heir of the Earl of Toulouse, and going to the holy wars, engaged that
Earldome to Raymond Earl of Saint Gayles, and never returned to redeem it.
William his son, father to Queen Elionor, either through want of means, or
neglect, delayed likewise the redemption thereof: so that the Earl of Saint
Gyles continuning in possession whilst he lived, left it to his son Raymond,
of whom King Louys of France ( having married Elionor, the daughter and heir
of the last William) demanded the restitution, with tender of the sum for
which it was engaged. Raymond refuses it, and stands to his possession, as of a
thing absolutely sold or forfeited, but being too weak to contend with a King
of France, fell to an accord, and married his sister Constans, widow of
Eustace son to King Stephen, and so continues the possession. Now King Henry
having married this Elionor, and with her was to have all the Rights she had,
tenders likewise (as the King of France had done, in the same case) the sum
formerly disbursed, upon the morgage of that Earldom. And with all makes
ready his sword to recover it, and first combines in league and amity, with
such, whose Territories bordred upon it: as with Raymond Earl of Barcelona,
who had married the daughter and heir of the King of Arragon, a man of great
Estate in those parts, intertayning him with conference of a match between his
second son Richard, and his daughter: with covenant, that Richard should have
the inheritance of the Duchy of Aquitaine, and the Earldom of Poictou.
Besides, he takes into his protection, William Lord of Trancheuille
(possessing likewise) many great Signories in the Country: and one who held
himself much wronged in his Estate, by the Earl of Toulouse.

These ay des prepared, he leauies an Army, and goes in person to besiege the
City of Toulouse, and takes along with him Malcolin, King of Scots, who
(coming to his 1159. Anno. Reg. 5.
Court to do him homage, for the Earldom of Huntingdon, and to make claim
for those other pieces, taken from his Crown) was entertained, with so many
fair words and promises of King Henry, as drew him along to this war.

The Earl of Toulouse understanding the intentions of the King of England,
craves aid of his brother in Law the King of France, who likewise with a
strong Army, comes down in person to succor Toulouse, and was there before
the King of England could arrive with his forces, whereupon, seeing himself
prevented, and in disadvantage, King Henry fell to spoiling the Country, and
takes in Cahors in Quercy, where he places a strong Garrison to bridle the
Tholousains, and so returns into Normandy, gave the order of Knight hood to
King Malcolin at Tours: augments his forces, and enters the Country of
Beauuoisin, where he destroys many Castles, and commits great spoils. And to
add more anoyance to the King of France, he obtained of the Earl de
Auranches, the two strong Castles Rochfort, and Monfort, which furnished with
Garrisons, impeached the passage twixt Orleance and Paris: in so much as the
war, and weather grew hot betwixt these two great Princes, and much effusion
of blood was like to follow; but that a mediation of peace was made, and in the
end concluded, With a match between the young Prince Henry, not seven years
of age, and the 1160. Anno. Reg. 6.
Lady Margaret eldest daughter to the King of France scarce three: weak
linkes, to hold in so mighty Princes. The young Lady was delivered rather as an
Ostage then a Bride, to Robert de Newburge, to be kept till her years would
permit her to live with her Husband. In the mean time, notwithstanding, many
ruptures happened between the Parents: The first whereof Prince Henry contracted
to Margaret daughter to the King of France.
grew upon the King of Englands getting into his own hand the Castle of
Gisors, with two other Castles upon the River Eata, in the confines of
Normandy: delivered up before the due time By three Knights Templars, to whom
they were committed in trust, till the marriage were consummated. And this cost
some blood: the Knights Templars are persecuted by the King of France, and the
King of England receives them.

But now the advantage of power lying all on this side, and the King seeing
himself at large (and how much he was abroad) began to be more at home, and
to The King seeks to abate the power of the Clergy and the cause thereof.
look to the Prerogatives of his Crown, which as he was informed, grew much
infringed by the Clergy: which, since the time of Henry the first, Were thought
to have enlarged their jurisdiction beyond their vocation: and himself had
found their power, in the election of King Stephen, with whom they made their
own conditions, with all advantages for themselves, whereby they deprived his
Mother and her issue, of their succession to the Crown. And though afterward
by their mediation, the peace twixt him, and Stephen was concluded, and his
succession ratified: yet for that, might he thank his Sword, the Justice of
his cause, and strong party in the Kingdom. What they did therein showed him
rather their power, then their affection: and rather put him in mind of what
they had done against him at first, then laid any obligation on him, for what
they did afterward. And his own example, seeing them apt to surprise, all
advantages for their own advancement, made him doubt how they might deal with
his Posterity, if they found occasion: and therefore is he easily drawn to
abate their power in what he could.

To this motion of the Kings dislike, the Lay Nobility (emulous of the others
authority) laid more waights: alleging how the immunities of the Clergy
took up so much Complaints against the Clergy.
from the Royalty, as his execution of Justice, could have no general passage
in the Kingdom: the Church held their Dominion apart, and free from any other
authority then their own: and being exempt from Secular punishments, many
enormious acts were committed by Clergymen, without any redress to be had:
and it was notified to the King, that since the beginning of his Reign, There
had been above a hundredth Man-slaughters committed within the Realm of
England by Priests, and men within Orders.

Now had the King, a little before (upon the death of Theobald Archbishop of
Canterbury) 1161. Anno. Reg. 7.
preferred Thomas Becket, a creature and servant of his own, to that Sea. A
man whom first, from being Archdeacon of Canterbury, he made his Chancellor,
and finding him Diligent, Trusty, and Wise, imployes him in all his greatest
businesses of the State: by which trial of his service and sidelity, he might
expect to have him ever the Thomas Becket preferred to the Sea of Canterbury.
readier to advance his affairs, upon all occasions. And besides, to show how
much he respected his worth, and integrity, he commits unto him the education
of the Prince, a charge of the greatest consequence in a Kingdom, which shall
be ever sure to find their Kings as they are bred. At the beginning of this
man's promotion, this reformation of Ecclesiastical jurisdiction is set upon, a
work (in regard of that time of devotion) of great difficulty: the Bishops,
having from the beginning of Christianity, first under the Saxon Kings,
principally swaded the State: and though at the entrance of the Norman, they
were much abriged of their former liberties, they held themselves if not
content, yet quiet. For albeit they had not that power in temporal businesses
as before; yet, within their own circle, they held their own jurisdiction,
and immunities: and had since, both by the Law, civil wars, and the occasion
of foreign affairs, much enlarged them. So that, any restriction, or
diminution, of the power they had, could not but touch veins, that were very
sensible in that part: especially, by reason of the universal participation of
the Spirit that fed them: and therefore could not be but a business of much
trouble,

The King conuokes a Council at Westminster, and there first propounds to have
A Parliament at Westminster.
it enacted, That all such of the Clergy as should be taken and convicted for
any heinous offense should loose the privilege of the Church, and be
delivered to the civil Magestrate, to be punished 1163. Anno. Reg. 9.
for their offenses, as other the Kings subjects were. For, if after Spiritual
punishment, no secular correction should be used; there would be no
sufficient means to restrain them from doing mischief: seeing it was not
likely, such men would much care for their degrading and loss of Order, whom
the Conscience of their calling did not hold in awe.

The Archbishop and his suffragans, with the rest of the Bishops, showed the
King how they were not to yield to any such Act, being against the liberties of
the Church, which himself had sworn to defend, and maintain: and therefore
humbly besought him, that he would not urge auything to the prejudice of their
jurisdiction, and such immunities as they had hitherto enjoyed, both under him
and his Noble Progenitors.

The King, not liking this answer, demands, Whether they would submit
themselves to the Laws and Customs, which the Archbishops and Bishops, in the
time of his grandfather Henry the first did observe? they answered, they would;
their Order, the honor of God; and holy Church, in all things saved, with
which reservation the King grew more displeased, the Parliament brake up, and
nothing effected at that time, for he saw the Bishops fast to themselves, and
the more by the animation of the Archbishop of Canterbury, whom he thought (in
regard of all those his graces bestowed on him) to have found more yielding to
his courses, and therefore his indignation was most against him: and because
he would make him see what the displeasure of so mighty a King was, who could
as well cast down as advance: First denies him access: then takes from him,
what he could possibly, countenances all such as were his opposites, his
businesses in any the Kings Courts go against him, the Earl of Clare is
supported in a contestation he had with him, about his homage for the Castle
of Tunbridge, and preuailes: nothing is left undone, that might be thought to
humble him. And besides the King wrought so, As he unties the knot, gains
first the Archbishop of York ( the ancient Competitor with Canterbury in
dignity) and after, the Bishops of Lincoln, Hereford, and the especial
Prelates: and seperates them both from the counsel, and company of the
Archbishop Becket.

Notice of this jar being given abroad, a Messenger is sent from the Pope,
and all the Cardinals to reconcile it, and to charge the Archbishop to make
peace with his Lord the King, and promise to observe his Laws without
exception. The Archbishop pressed with this message, and the advice of many
great men, repaires to the King at Woodstooke, and there promises in good
faith, without any evil meaning, to observe the Kings Laws so far forth as
was required.

The King supposing now, things better prepared for his purpose then before, A
Parliament at Clarendon.
calls a general Assembly of the Bishops and Nobility at Clarendon, where
John of Oxford, the Kings Clerk was President of the Council: and a charge is
1164. Anno. Reg. 10.
given from the King, That they should call to memory the Laws of his
Grandfather Henry the first, and to reduce them into writing: which being
done, he willed the Arch-bishoppe and Bishops, to set their Seals thereunto.
Which when the rest were content to do, The Archbishop Becket refused. Yet at
length, by the persuasion of the Bishops (urging him to satisfy the Kings
pleasure, and appease his wrath, in regard of his present danger, which, by the
rushing up and down of the Kings servants with threatening countenances, they
suspected themselves likely to fall The Archbishop Becket, takes his oath to
observe the Kings laws.
into) He took his Oath to observe the Kings Laws without any reservation.
And for the writing desired to have a copy, as if better to advise thereof. And
taking it into his hand, he turns to the Clergy, and said: Brethren stand
fast, you see the malice of the King, and of whom we are to beware.

So the Council ended, but not the Kings displeasure against the Archbishop,
whom only he found, durst bear up against his power, the rest all yielding
thereunto. The king uses all means to vex the Archbishop.
unto. And therefore proceeds he, by all means to vex and disgrace him, and
to advance his Concurrent the Archbishop of York, whom he solicites the Pope
( by his Agents John of Oxford, and Geffery Riddle) to make his Legate of all
England. Which the Pope (forewarned acquainted with this business) refused to
do: yet at the petition of those Agents granted that Legation to the King
himself, but so as he should do nothing to grieve the Archbishop, which the
King took as a great indignity, and sent back his Agents with the Popes
Grant.

The Archbishop Becket after his oath at Clarendon, so repented, as he
suspended himself, The Archbishop repents him of his oath.
from the service of the Altar, and did sharp penance till he had obtained
absolution from the Pope, Which (upon his information of the case) was sent
him. After this, as some write, he attempts to depart out of the Kingdom,
contrary to a law made at Clarendon ( forbidding Archbishops, Bishops, and
other Persons to depart out of the Realm without the Kings leave. Which,
although they obtained, yet were notwithstanding to secure the King, neither in
their going, returning, or staying there, to practice any thing preiudicious to
his State or Person) But being by contrary winds brought back, he more
exasperates the King against him.

After this, he is summoned to an Assembly at Northampton (holden about the
ratification of the Acts of Clarendon) where (to dispight him the more) the
Kings horses A Parliament at Northampton.
are placed in his Inn; And there, First had he a Case adjudged against him,
concerning a Manor, for which, one John the Kings Marshall contended with him
in Law, and besides the loss of the Manor, was cast in arrerages five
hundredth Marks, which the King was said to have lent him, but he alleged how
it was given: yet because he confessed the receipt, and could not prove the
gift, he was condemned to pay it. Then was he called to render an account to
the King of all such receipts as in the time of his Chanceller ship he had
received The Archbishop called to account.
for the King, of certain Bishoprics and Abbeys during their vacancies, which
amounted to the sum of three thousand Marks. For these accounts, he
alleged, How the King knew well, he was discharged before his election to the
Sea of Canterbury, and how the Prince, the Barons of the Exchequer, and Robert
de Lucie, Chief Justice of England, had made him his acquittance for all
accounts, and Secular receipts, in the behalf of the King: and so (free and
cleared) was he chosen to the administration of that Office, and therefore
would plead the same no more.

The King, notwithstanding, urging to have judgment pass against him, both
for this, his late attempts, and disobedience, he was commanded the next day to
attend his Censure. The morning before he was to appear, he celebrates early
with great devotion, the Mass of Saint Stephen Protomartir, which has these
words: Etenim sederunt Principes, and aduersum me loquebantur: and so
committing his cause to God, sets forward to the Court in his Stole, his black
Canonical hood, carrying the Cross in his right hand, and guiding his horse
with the left. The people seeing him come in this fashion, flock all about
him, he entering the great Chamber, sat down amongst them, the King being
within, in his Privy Chamber with his Council: from whom, first came forth
the Bishop of London, and much blames him for coming so armed to the Court,
and offered to pull the Cross out of his hand, but the Archbishop held it so
fast that he could not. Which the Bishop of Winchester seeing, said to London,
Brother let him alone, he ought well to bear the Cross, London replies, You
speak brother against the King, and it will be ill for you. After this, comes
forth the Archbishop of York (the heat of whose ancient hatred, says
Houeden, would not suffer him to speak in peace, and rebukes him very sharply,
Roger Houeden.
for coming in that fashion, as if to a Tyrant, or heathen Prince; and told
him, that the King had a sword sharper then his Cross, and if he would be
advised by him he should take it from him. Canterbury replies, the Kings sword
wounds carnally, but mine strikes Spiritually, and sends the soul to Hell.

After much debate, the Archbishop Becket inuayes against this violent
proceeding against him: How no age ever heard before, that an Archbishop of
Canterbury had been adjudged in any of the Kings Courts for any cause
whatsoever, in regard both of his Dignity and place: and for that he is the
Spiritual Father of the King, and all other his subjects. Then to the Bishops,
you see the world rages against me, the enemy rises up, but I more lament,
the Sons of my Mother fight against me. If I should conceal it, the age to
come will declare, how you leave me alone in the battle, and have judged
against me, being your Father, though never so much a sinner. But I charge you
by virtue of your obedience, and peril of your Order, that you be not present
in any place of judgment, where my person or cause comes to be adjudged. And
here I appeal to the Pope, charging you farther by virtue of your obedience,
that if any Temporal man lay hands on me, you exercise the Sentence of the
Church; as it becomes you for your Father the Archbishop, who will not shrink
howsoever, nor leave the flock commitmitted unto him.

Then were all these great complaints of his contempt, Disobedience, and
Perjury, exhibited, and aggrauated against him before the Assembly, and they
cried generally Complaints against the Archbishop.
he was a Traitor, that having received so many benefits at the Kings hands,
would refuse to do him all earthly honor, and observe his Laws as he had
sworn to do. The Bishops likewise, seeing all thus bent against him,
renounced their Ecclesiastical obedience unto him, cited him to Rome, and
condemns him as a perjured man and a Traitor.

Then the Earl of Lecester accompayned with Reginald Earl of Cornwall came to
the Archbishop, and charged him from the King to answer to what was objected
unto him, or else to hear his judgment. Nay, son Earl, said he, first
hear you: It is not unknown to your self, how faithfully I have served the
King, and how in regard thereof he preferred me to the place I have (God is
my witness) against my will. For I knew mine own infermities, and was content
to take it upon me, rather for his pleasure, then Gods cause; therefore now
does God withdraw himself, and the King from me. At the time of my Election
he made me free from all Court bondage, and therefore touching those things
from which I am delivered, I am not bound to answer, nor will I. How much the
soul is worthier then the body, so much are you bound to obey God and me
rather then any Earthly Creature: neither will Law or Reason permit the Sons
to condemn the Father: and I refuse to stand either to the Judgment of the
King or any other person; appealing to the presence of the Pope by whom only
on Earth I ought to be adjudged, committing all I have to Gods protection and
his: and under that authority I depart out of this place. And so went he out
and took his Horse, not without some difficulty in passing, and many
reproaches of the Kings servants. The Archbishop disguised sled out of the
Kingdom.


Being gotten out of the Court, a great multitude of the common people
(rejoicing to see him delivered) and diverse of the Clergy conuayed him
honorably to the Abbay of Saint Andrews, whence disguised (by the name of
Dereman) he escaped over into Flanders, and so into France.

This business of the Church, I have the more particularly delivered
(according to the general report of the Writers of that time) in regard it
lay so chayned to the Temporal affairs of the State, and bewrayed so much of
the face of that Age, with the constitution both of the Sovereignty, and the
rest of the body as it could not well be omitted. Besides, the effects it
wrought in the succeeding reign of this Prince, the vexation, charge; and
burden it laid upon him for many years, is worthy of note, and shows us
what spirit had predomination in that season of the World, and what Engines
were used in this Oppugnation.

Presently upon the departure of this Great Prelate, the King sends over to the
King of France, Gillebert Bishop of London, and William Earl of Arundell, to
entreat him, not only to forbid the Archbishop his Kingdom, but to be a
means to the Pope, that his The King sends Ambassadors to the Pope.
cause might not be favored by the Church, being so contumacious a rebel as
he was against his Sovereign Lord.

The King of France notwithstanding this entreaty sends Friar Francis his
Amoyner under hand to the Pope, to beseech him, as he tendered the honor of
holy Church, and the aid of the Kingdom of France, to support the cause of
Thomas of Canterbury, against the Tyrant of England.

King Henry sends likewise with all speed, Roger Archbishop of York, the
Bishop of Winchester, London, Chichester and Excester, Guido Rufus, Richard
Iuechester, and John of Oxford Clerks: William Earl of Arundell, Hugh de
Gundeuile, Bernard de Saint Walleric, and Henry Fitz Gerrard to inform the
Pope of the whole cause, and prevent the Archbishoppes complaint. The
multitude, and greatness of the Commissioners showed the importance of the
Embassage, and the Kings earnest desire to have his cause prevail. They find
the Pope at the City of Sens, to whom, they showed how peruers and disobedient
the Archbishop had behaved himself to his Sovereign Lord the King of
England: how he alone refused to obey his Laws and Customs, which he had
sworn to do: and that by his peevish waywardness, the Church and Kingdom
were like to be disturbed, which otherwise would agree in the reformation
thereof, as was fit and necessary: and therefore they besought him, as he
tendered the peace of the Church of England, and the love of the King their
Sovereign, not to give credit or grace, to a man of so turbulent, and
dangerous a spirit.

This Information (notwithstanding earnestly urged) they found moved not any
disposition in the Pope to favor the Kings cause, so that in the end, They
besought him to send two Legates over into England, to examine the particulars
of this business, and how it had been carried: and in the mean time, to
admit no other information of the cause, but refer it to their relation. The
Pope refuses to send any Legate; the commissioners depart without any
satisfaction. And with in four days after, comes the Archbishop and
prostrates himself at the Popes seete: delivers him a coppie of those Laws,
which the King called his Grandfathers Laws, which being openly read in the
presence of all the Cardinals, Clergy, and many other people, the Pope
condemned them for ever, and accursed those who obeyed or any way favored them.

Those Laws among the Statutes of Clarendon, which the Archbishop so much
oppugned (and most offended the Clergy) were (as by his own letter to the
Bishop of London appears) these especially: That there should be no appeal
to the Apostolic Sea without the Kings leave. That no Archbishop or Bishop
should go out of the Realm but by the Kings permission. That no Bishop
excommunicate any, who held of the King, in Capite; or interdict any official
of his without the Kings leave, etc. That Clergy men should be drawn to
secular judgments. That Lay men (as the King and other should handle causes of
the Church, Tithes, and such like. And these were dangerous incrochments upon
their liberties.

But now the King, seeing his Embassage to take no effect, and withal, in a
manner 1166. Anno. Reg. 12.
contemned, presently makes his heavy displeasure, and the scorn he took
know by his severe Edicts, both against the Pope, and the Archbishop, that
they might see what edge his secular power had in this case: ordayning, That if
any were found carrying Letter, or Mandat from the Pope, or Archbishop,
containing any The Kings Edicts against the Pope and his agents.
interdiction of Christianity in England, should be taken, and without delay
executed as a Traitor, both to the King and Kingdom. That whatsoever Bishop,
Priest, Monk, or Conuerser in any Order, Clerk, or Layman should have and
retain any such letters; should forfeit all their possessions, goods, and
chattells to the King, and be presently banished the Realm with their kin.
That no Clergy men, Monk or other should be permitted to pass over Sea, or
return out of Normandy into England, without letters from the Justices here,
or from the King being there: upon pain to be taken as a Malefactor, and put
in hold. That none should appeal to the Pope. That all Clerks which had any
revenue in England should return into the Realm within three months, upon
pain of forfeiting their estates to the King.

That Peter Pence should be collected, and sequestered till the Kings pleasure
were farther known.

Besides, this he banishes all that were found to be any way of kin to the
Archbishop, without exception of condition, sex, or years. And withal, takes
occasion upon the Scisme which was then in the Church to renounce Pope
Alexander, and incline to the Emperors faction, which stood thus.

After the death of Adrian the fourth, Rouland a Geneuese, and a great enemy of
the The Election of two Popes.
Empire is by two and twenty Cardinals elected Pope by the name of Alexander
the third, to which election four Cardinals opposed, and made choice of
Octauian a Citizen of Rome that would be called Victor the first. The Emperor
Frederic Barbarossa summons these two Popes to a Concel at Pauia, to understand
and determine their right. Alexander makes the old answer, that the Pope could
not be judged by any man living, refuses to appear before the Emperor, and
withdrawes into Anagnia. Victor consents to appear there, or wheresoever the
Emperor would appoint, so that, he was the man for that side. But all the
other Princes of Christendom (except those of the Emperors faction)
acknowledge Alexander for Pope, as elected by most voices. And especially by
the King of France who called him thither: and at Cocy upon Loyr, he and the
King of England received him with all honor and reverence, in so much, as they
are said to have attended upon his Stirrup, the one, on the right hand, the
other on the left: after this, he calls a Council at Tours, whether the Kings
of England, Spain and Hungary send their Ambassadors, and there, are the
constitutions of the Council of Pauia, and the Emperors confirmation of
Victor nullified, so that Alexander having his party daily increasing in Italy
was shortly after received into Rome.

Notwithstanding all this, the King of England finding him so auers in this
business, Falls off from him, renounces his Authority, turns to the Emperors
faction, seeks to strength himself with the Princes of Germany, consents to
match his daughter Maude to the Duke of Saxony, at the motion of Reginald
Archbishop of Collen, sent over by the Emperor for that purpose, and
intertaines a motion for another daughter to be matched with the Emperors
son.

But now, by reason this contrary faction to Pope Alexander grew to be but
feeble, all this working did the King no good, but exasperates the Pope, and
sets him on the more to support the cause of the Archbishop, who, sollicites
the Clergy of Pope Alexanders letter to the Clergy of England.
England threatnes, entreats, adiures them not to forsake their hold, nor give
way to the inuador of their liberties, which sought to confound the Priesthood
and the Kingdom: and if they opposed not mainely at the first but suffered the
least breach to be made upon them, they were undone. Then excommunicates he
all the especial Ministers of the King that adhered to the Teutonicque
faction, or held intelligence with the Archbishop of Collen: As John of Oxford,
Richard Iuechester, Richard de Lucie, Iosslin Balliol, Alan de Neuile, and with
these all such as had entered upon the goods of the Church of Canterbury, which
he called the patrimony of the Crusifex, and the food of the poor: and these
were Ralph de Brocke, Hugh Saint Clare, and Thomas Fitz Barnard. Thus are both
sides busied in this dry war, wherein, though there were no sword, yet it
gave vexation enough.

And yet this was not all the work that took up the Kings time for during
this dissension, the Welsh again revolt, and to supresse them he spent much
labor, with The King represses the Welsh.
the loss of many great men, and was himself in that danger, as had not
Hubert Saint Clear received a wound for him, by an Arrow aimed directly at his
person, he had there finished his part. In this expedition he is said, to
have used extreme cruelty.

After this, he passes into Normandy to be near his business, which now
lay all on that side. And first to entertain the opinion of Pictie (though he
were fallen out with the Pope) he obtaines at an Assembly of his Bishops and
Barons of Normandy, 1166. Anno. Reg. 13.
two pence in the pound, of every man's Lands and goods to beepayde that year
1166. and a penny of every pound to be paid for four years following, which
was levied for the relief of the Christians in the Holy war, and sent unto
them.

Then he raises forces and takes in certain Castles in the Country of Maine,
and Marches of Britain, from diverse Lords and Barons that had disobayed him.
And whilst he was busy abroad, Matthew son to the Earl of Flanders (who had
married the Lady Marie Abbess of Ramsey, daughter to King Stephen, and had by
her the Country of Bologne) attempted something on the Coast of England, either
to try the affections of the people, or to make spoil and booty, but without
any effect at all, the King being to mighty for any such weak undertaker.

And to distend his power yet wider, falls out this occasion: Conan Earl of
Britain dies, and leaves one only daughter (which he had by his wife
Constance daughter to the King of Scots) to succeed him in his State. The King
of England being then in arms upon the Marches of Britain, deals with the
Guardians of the young Lady to match her to his third son Geffry. The
nobility of that Country being then of a rough, and haughty disposition (given
to fewds, and perpetual quarrelling one with another) were wrought upon, and a
side is won of such as could do most in this business: which is effected to
the great contentation of the King of England.

This fell out to be in the 13 year of his reign, wherein, as some write,
died his Mother Maud the Empress, a Lady of an high and active Spirit:
illustrious by her birth, but more by her first match, and most by her son,
whom she lived to see established in all these mighty States, in the glory of
Greatness and Peace: Fertile in issue, having now The death of Maude the
Empress.
had 4 sons and 3 daughters, linkes of love and strength (oftentimes in
private families) though seldom in Princes, and she left him in the best time
of his days before any great tempest ouertooke him.

Three years after this, he imployes most in France, about the ordering and
clearing the bounds of his Dominions from usurpation, or incrochments of
neighbor Lords (whom his greatness held all in awe) and they must have no
more then he would: especially he settles and reformes the State of
Britain, which was much out of order, and in muteny about the late Match:
which being appeased, he keeps a solemn Christmas at Nants, and Royally
feasts the Nobility of the Country. 1169. Anno. Reg. 16.


Then returns he into England, where, least Peace (by reason of his long and
often absence) might afflict and corrupt his subjects, he looks to that
Divine, and Almighty work of Kings, the administration of Justice, appoynting
certain commissioners as Syndicqs to examine the abuses and excesses committed
by his Officers, and grievously Extortion and Bribety punished.
punishes the Shriefes of the Land, for extortion and bribery.

His Easter, he keeps at Windsor whither, repaires unto him William King of
Scots who lately succeeded Malcom his brother, and brings with him his younger
brother David, both to congratulate the King of Englands return, and also
continue his claim to those pieces in the North which he pretended to be
unjustly detained from that Crown. The King entertaines him, as he had done
his brother with fair words, and tells him, How it was not in his power, to
do any thing therein, without the consent of the State in Parliament; which if
he would attend, there should be that course taken, as he hoped might give
him satisfaction. In expectation whereof this King came often into England, and
once attended the King in an expedition into France, as his Predecesor had done.

But now all this while, the wrath of the Church continues, and the cloud
hangs still over him, daily threatening the great thunderbolt. Although it
seems the Pope of himself, was not very forward to proceed to that
extremity but would gladly have quieted the Archbishop otherwise; Who (he
said) had taken an ill time for this business, the King being mighty, and the
Church in trouble: and therefore writes The Pope writes to the Bishops of
England.
he his letters to the Bishop of London, and Hereford, willing them to deal
effectually with the King, and to admonish him to desist from intruding upon
the liberties of the Church, and to restore the Archbishop to his Sea and
Dignity.

The Bishops wisely answer the Popes Letter, in substance thus: We have (
said they) done your Holiness message, and as much as was decent for the
Majesty The Bishops answer to the Popes Letter.
if a King, instantly urged him to satisfy your desire, made by us: and if he
had erred from the way of truth and Justice, that he would not delay to
return thereunto: that he would not inhibit such as were desirous to visit
the Church of Rome, hinder Appeals, oppresso Churches and Churchmen, or suffer
others so to do: that he would call home our Father the Archbishop, etc.
and persist in the works of Piety; that he by whom Kings reign might
preserve unto him his temporal Kingdom, and give him an eternal in Heaven:
and that unless he would yield to your Holy admonitions, you, who had
hitherto endured, could in patience forbear no longer. Besides we added this
of our selves, how it was to be feared, if he amended not his errors, his
Kingdom would not long stand, nor his prosper.

The King received your admonitions with many thanks, much Temperance and
Modesty, and answers to every point. First he protested that in no sort he
auerted his mind from your Holiness, nor ever purposed so to do, but so long
as you showed him fatherly Grace, he would love you as a Father; reverence,
and cherish the Church as his Mother. And humbly obey your sacred Decrees,
saving his own Dignity, and that of his Kingdom: and if of late he has not
respected you with any reverence, the cause was that, having with all his
affection, and all his power stood to you in your necessity, he was not
answered worthily to his deserts upon his recourse to you by his Ambassadors,
but in every petition had the repulse. And for hindering any which are willing
to visit your Holiness he answers he will not, nor has hitherto done.

But for Appeals, by the ancient custom of the Kingdom, He chalenges that
honor, and cumber to himself: that no Clergy man for any civil cause shall
go out of the Land, till he has tried, whether he may obtain his right by
his Royal Authority, and Justice at home; which if he cannot, he may
(without any hinderance) when he will make his Appeal. Wherein, if any way
he does prejudice Your Honor he offers, by the help of God to correct it,
as it shall be ordered by the Council of the whole Church of his Kingdom. And
for the Emperor, though he knew him a Scismatique, he never understood he
was excommunicate. But if he be by us informed thereof, or has entered
unlawful league with him, or any other, he promises likewise to redress the
same, by the said Ecclesiastical Council of his Kingdom. And for our Father,
the Lord of Canterbury (he says) that he never expelled him out of his
Kingdom, but as he went out of his own accord, so that, at his pleasure it
was free for him to return to his Church in peace: provided, that his Majesty
might be satisfied concerning those complaints of his, and have him to observe
his Royal Dignity. And if it can be proved, that any Church, or Churchman,
has been oppressed by the King or any of his, he is ready to make full
satisfaction, as shall be thought fit by the whole Council of the Church of
his Kingdom.

This ( say they) we have received in answer from our Lord the King, and wish
we could have had it fully according to your desire: but these things we
thought good to notify to your Highness, that your Discretion may perceive
what is like to be the conclusion of this business. The King stands upon the
justification of his own cause, ready to obey the Council and judgment of
the Church of England. Whereupon we thought good to beseech your Highness,
that you would moderate, for a time, that zeal (which by the fire of the
divine Spirit, is worthily inkindled, to revenge any injury done to the Church
of God) and forbear to pronounce any sentence of interdiction, or that last
judgment of abscision, whereby inumerable Churches may be miserably
subverted, and both the King and an infinite number of people with him,
irreuocably (which God forbid) auerted from your obedience.

Then they tell him, That better it were to have a member bad, then cut off:
abscision brought desperation: a skillful Surgeon might recover an infected
part, and how it were filter to employ means to heal the wound, then by
cutting off a most noble part of the Church of God, to bring more disturbance
to the same that has to much already. Though the King were stiff, they ought
not dispare of the grace of God, that a Kings stomach was then to be won,
when he had won, and might not blush to yield, when he had overcome:
Patience, and Meekness, must pacify him, etc. And inconclusion, we speak
foolishly ( say they) but yet withal Charity: if it come to pass that the
Lord of Canterbury loose both his goods; and live besides in perpetual exile;
and England which (God forbid) fall away from your obedience, were it not
better to forbear for a time, then with such zeal of severity to foster up a
party? what if persecution cannot separate many of us from you, yet will not
there want knees to bow to Baall, and receive the Pall of Canterbury at the
hands of an Idol, without choice of religion, or Justice: neither will there
want suppliers of our Chayres that will obey him with all devotion, and
already, many devour these hopes; wishing that scandalls may come, and
straight ways be made crooked.

Thus much out of their letters, which are the best pieces of History in the
world, and show us more of the inside of affairs, then any relations else. And
by this we truly see what bars kept these two mighty powers back from their
wills, and yet how loud they threaten, and both a feared of each other.

But the King of England stood safe enough, and was like to have his businesses
run in a strong and entire course, when by casting to make things safer, then
fast: he lays open a way both to disioynt his own power, and imbroyle his
people with division, which was by the association of his son Henry in the
government, an act without example in this Kingdom, and strange that a
Parliament, an assembly of the State, Prince Henry crowned King
conuoked for the same business, would in so wise times, consent to
communicate the Crown, and make the Commonwealth a Monster with two heads.
But it seems the 1170. Anno. Reg. 16.
strong desire of the King was such, for the love he bare his son, as he
would not be denied in this motion, nor hold it a sufficient Security, to have
twice before caused all the Kingdom to take an Oath of Fealty unto him, and to
have designed, unless he were Crowned King, as he was, with all usual
solemnities the 14 day of June 1170. by Roger Archbishop of York, and had
homage done unto him that day by the King of Scots, David his brother, and all
the Nobility of England. But now with what reseruations this was done, we are
not particularly informed: whether there was an equal participation of rule,
or only but of Title: and that the Father, notwithstanding this Act, was to
have the especial manage of the Government, and the Son, though a King, yet
a Son, with a limited power. Howsoever, this young King showed shortly after,
That a Crown was no State to be made over in trust, and laid much grief, and
repentance, upon his Fathers forwardness.

What moved the King with this precipitation (to be before hand with his
Grave) may be deemed, the iealosie he had apprehended by his Mothers example,
who for all the Oath of Fealty sooften taken for her succession, was yet put
by it, through the working of the Clergy, and now considering in what terms
he stood with them, and that although he had won some few Bishops unto him,
was sure they loved him not, and what they might work with the people, if
himself should fail, made him over do his work.

The King of France, understanding that his daughter was not Crowned with her
husband (which by reason of her tender age was deferred) took it ill, and
threatnes King Henry the Father with war, if it were not presently done,
which causes him to make more haste back again into Normandy (leaving the
young King in England) to satisfy or prevent this quarreling Prince.

And whilst he remained there, means was made that the Archbishop of
Canterbury (who had been now six years in exile) was brought to have
conference with the King, by the mediation of the King of France, Theobald
Earl of Bloys, and diverse great Bishops, which the King of England was the
more willing to accept, in regard he saw this breach with the Church might
much prejudice his temporal businesses whenever they should break out: and
how the Archbishop continually was working the Pope, and all the great Prelates
of the Christian world against him: which, How much such a party as swayed the
Empire of Souls might do in a time of zeal, against a ruler of bodies, was
to be considered. And therefore discends he from the higth of his will to his
necessity, and they meet at Montmiriall before the King of France, where the
Archbishop kneeling at the feet of his Sovereign Lord the King of England,
said, Beckets submission to the King.
He would commit the whole cause in controversy to his Royal Order, Gods
honor only reserved.

The King (who had been often used to that reservation) grew into some
choler, and said to the King of France and the rest: What soever displeases
this man, he would have to be against Gods honor, and so by that shift, will
challeng to himself all that belongs to me: But because, you shall not think
me to go about to resist Gods honor and him, in what shall be The Kings
offer to Becket.
fit, look what the greatest and most Holy of all his Predecessors have done
to the meanest of mine, let him do the same to me and it shall suffice. Which
answer being beyond expectation, so reasonable, turned the opinion of all the
company to the Kings cause, in so much as the King of France, said to the
Archbishop, Will you be greater then Saints? better than Saint Peter? what can
you stand upon? I see it is your fault, if your peace be not made. The
Archbishop replied to this effect: That as the authority of Kings had their
beginning by Beckets reply:
Degrees, so had that of the Church, which being now by the providence of God,
come to that Estate it was, they were not to follow the example of any, that
had been faint or yielding in their places. The Church had risen, and
increased out of many violent oppressions, and they were now to hold what it
had gotten. Our Fathers (said he) suffered all manner of afflictions, because
they would not forsake the name of Christ, and shall I, to be reconciled to any
man's favor living, derogate any thing from his honor?

This hauty reply of a subject to so yielding an offer of his Sovereign, so
much distasted the hearers, as they held the maintenance of his cause, rather
to proceed from obstinacy then zeal, and with that impression, the conference
for that time, brake up. But after this, were many other meetings and much
debate about the business. And the King of France (at whose charge lay the
Archbishop all this while) came to another conference with them, upon the
Confines of Normandy: Where, the King of England took the Archbishop apart,
and had long speech with him; twice they alighted from their horses, twice
remounted, and twice the King held the Archbishops bridell, and so again they
part, prepared for an atonement, but not concluding any. In the end by
mediation The King and Becket accorded.
of the Archbishop of Rouen, the matter is quietly ended before the Earl of
Bloys, at Amboys. And thereupon Henry the father, writes to Henry the son,
being then in England, in this wise, Know ye, that Thomas Archbishop of
Canterbury has made peace with me (to my will) and therefore I charge you,
that he and all his, have peace: and that you cause to be restored unto him,
and to all such (as for him) went out of England, all their substances, in as
full and honorable manner, as they held it, three months before their going,
etc. And thus by this letter we see, in which King, the command lay. Becket
returns into England.


The Archbishop returning into England (not as one who had sought his peace,
but enforced it) with larger power to his resolution then before, Suspends by
the Popes Bull, the Archbishop of York from all Episcopal Office, for
Crowning the young King within the Province of Canterbury, without his leave,
and against the Popes commandment: and without taking (according to the
custom) the Cautionary Oath, for conservation of the liberties of the Church.
He brought also other letters to suspend in like manner, The Bishops of
London, Salisbury, Oxford, Chester, Rochister, Saint Asaph, and Landaff, for
doing service at the Coronation, and vphoulding the Kings cause against him.
And by these Letters were they all to remain suspended, till they had
satisfied the Archbishop in so much, as he thought fit.

Thus to return home, showed that he had the better of the time, and came all
untied, which so terrified the Bishops that presently (having no other refuge)
they repair to the King in Normandy, and show him this violent proceeding of
the Archbishop, How since his return he was grown so imperious as there was
no living under him. Wherewith the King was so much moved, as he is said in
extreme passion to have uttered these words. In what a miserable State am I,
that cannot be quiet, in mine own Kingdom, for one only Priest? is there no
man will rid me of this trouble. Whereupon (they report) four Knights, Sir
Hugh Moruille, Sir William Tracy. Sir Richard Britain, and Sir Raynold Fitz
Vrs (then attending upon the King, and gessing his desire by his words) depart
presently into England, to be the unfortunate executioners of the same, but by
some it seems rather, these four gentlemen were sent with Commission from the
King to deal with the Archbishop in another manner. And first to wish him to
take his Oath of Fealty to the young King: then to restore these Bishops to the
execution of their function: and thirdly, to bear himself with more
moderation in his place, whereby the Church might have comfort upon his
return, and the Kingdom quietness.

But they finding the Archbishop not answering their humor, but peremtory, and
intractable, without regarding their Masters message, grew into rage, and first
from threatening The murdering of Becket.
force fell to commit it, and that in an execrable manner: putting on their
armor (to make the matter more hideous) they entered into the Church, whither
the Archbishop was withdrawn, the Monks at Divine Service; and there calling
him Traitor, and furiously reuiling him, gave him many wounds, and at length
struck out his brains, that with his blood besprinkled the Altar. His
behavior in this act of death, his courage to take it: his passionate
committing the cause of the Church, with his soul to God, and his Saints: the
place, the time, the manner, and all aggrauates the hatred, of the deed, and
makes compassion, and opinion, to be on his side.

The unfortunate Gentlemen (having effected this great service, rifled the
Archbishops house; and after waighing the foulness of what they had
committed, and doubtful whether the King, though they had done him a great
pleasure, would seem so to acknowledge it) withdrew themselves into the North
parts; and from thence pursued, The Murderers miserable end.
fled into several Countries, where they all within four years after (as is
reported) died miserable Fugitives.

Soon ran the rumor of this deed, with full mouth over all the Christian
world, every pen, that had passion, was presently set on work. The King of
France (himself) The King of France informs the Pope of Beckets murder.
informs the Pope of the whole manner, with aggrauation of the souienesse
thereof, and incites him to use the most exquesit punishment he could; To
vnsheath Peter's sword, to revenge the death of the Martyr of Canterbury, whose
blood cries out for all the Church, and whose divine glory was already revealed
in miracles.

Theobald Earl of Bloys, a great and grave Prince (elder brother to King
Stephen) The Earl of Bloys informs likewise.
sends likewise his information to the Pope, and shows him, how he was at the
peacemaking between the King of England and this blessed Martyr: and with what
a cheerful countenance, with what willingness the King confirmed the
agreement, granting him power to use his authority as it should please the Pope
and him against those Bishops, which had contrary to the right, and dignity of
the Church of Canterbury presumed to intrude the new King into the
Royallthrone. And this he would justify by his Oath, or howsoever: and in this
peace ( says he) the man of God doubting nothing, puts his neck under the
sword: this innocent lamb the morrow upon Saint Innocents day, suffered
Martyrdom: the just blood was shed, where the shot of our salvation, the blood
of Christ is offered. And then: how Court dogs, the Kings familiars and
domestics, were his ministers to execute this horrible act, concluding with an
exhortation likewise of revenge.

But William Archbishop of Sens comes with a more maine outcry, as if he would
wake the Pope, were he never so dead asleep: and tells him, how he was
appointed over The Archbishop of Sens writes to the Pope.
Nations, and Kingdoms, to bind their Kings in fetters, and their Nobles with
manacles of iron: that all power both in Heaven and Earth was given to his
Apostleship: bids him look how the Bore of the wood had rooted up the Vineyard
of the Lord of Saboath, etc. and all, in that most powerful phrase of holy
writ. And after, having bitterly inueyed against the King, uses these words: It
imports you, O most mild keeper of the walls of Jerusalem, to revenge that
which is past, and provide for the future. What place shall be safe, if the
rage of tyranny shall imbrew the Sancta Sanctorum with blood, and tear in
pieces the Vicegerents of Christ, the foster children of the Church, without
punishment? Arm therefore all the Ecclesiastical power you may, etc.

Such and so great was the uproar of the Church, raised upon these motives, as
notwithstanding The King declares his innocence by Embassage to the Pope.
the King of England (then the greatest Prince of all the Christian world)
employed the most especial men could be chosen in all his Dominions, for
reputation, learning, and judgment, to declare his innocence to the Pope: to
vow and protest that he was so far from willing such a deed to be done, as
he was from doing it himself, and how grievously he Pope, and Cardinals
denied audience refused conference.
took the matter when he heard thereof; yet so deep was the impression settled
before hand, and his name made so odious at Rome, as not only the Pope denied
Audience to his Ambassadors, but every Cardinal, and all other his Ministers
refused to have any conference with them. Which, with the hard passage they had
in going thither, by the many dangers and restraints they endured, and now the
contempt they found there, did (as they signified to the King) much discourage
them. Yet for all this were there those brave Spirits among them (as great
Princes have always great Ministers) that never gave over working to clear
their masters honor, by Apologies, remonstrances, and all whatsoever wit
could devise: and dealt so, as they kept off the great confounding blow of the
highest Censure, though it were every day threatened and expected. And having
(by gravely urging the mischiefs, might follow in the Church; if a King of so
great a State, and stomach, should be driven to take desperate courses) given
some pawse, and allay to the first hear; they timed it out all that Spring,
and a great part of the next Summer; when, although they could give the King no
great security, yet they advertise him of hope. But the sending of two
Cardinals a Latere Gratianus and Viuianus down into Normandy did exceedingly
vex him. For they were rough against him, and would have interdicted him, and
his Dominions: but being forewarned of their coming and intention, he
appeals to the presence of the Pope, and so put off that trouble. Returning
out of Normandy into England, he gives strict commandment, That no brief
carrier of what condition or order soever, without giving good security for his
behauieur to the King, and Kingdom, be suffered to pass the Seas.

Notwithstanding all the vexation the Church put this King into, he left
nothing The Conquest of Ireland.
undone that concerned the advancement of his affairs, but as if now the
rather, to show his power and greatness, takes this time for an expedition
into Ireland (having commanded a Navy of four hundred ships to be ready at
Milford-Hauen for the transportation of Men, Victuals, and Armor) and sets
soorth in the beginning of November, an unseasonable time, both for those Seas,
and the invasion of a Country not well known. But the business (it seems)
was well prepared for him, having had an intention thereof, ever since the
second year of his reign, in which he sent a solemn Embassage to Pope
Adrian the fourth, to crave leave for the subdument of that Country, under
pretense of reducing those rude people from their vicious fashions to the faith
and way of truth. Which the Pope willingly granted, and returns the
Ambassadors, with an autenticall concession thereof in writing, to this
effect, First showing how laudable a thing it was, and how fitting the
magnificence of so mighty a King to propagate his glorious name on Earth, and
heap up reward of eternal felicity in Heaven, by extending the bounds of the
Church, reducing rude and unlettered people from their vicious manners, to the
veritte of the Christian faith, and civility. And then gives him power to
invade the same, and to execute whatsoever should be to the Honor of God, and
good of the Country, with reservation of Church-rights, and Peeter-pence (a
penny of every house yearly, which he had promised by his Ambassadors) and so
concluds with an exhortation to plant men of good and examplar life in the
Clergy, etc.

But the King at that time, having other occasions, left off the purpose of
this, which comes now of late to be again embraced by this means: Dermot Mac
Marrgh one Dermot complains against O Conor to King Henry.
of the five Kings which then ruled that Island comes unto him into Aquitaine
to crave his aid against Rodorick the Great, called O Conor Dun, King of
Connaught who, contending for the Sovereignty of the whole had chaced him out
of his Dominion of Lemster.

The King of England (glad to find a door thus opened to his intention, that
might yield passage of it self without being broken up) intertaines this
eiected King with promises of aid: and though he could not as then furnish
him, being engaged in other great affairs, he yet permits such of his subjects
as would, to adventure their fortunes with him. But the occasion of the
dissension between these two Irish Kings was indeed foul on the part of
Dermot, who had corrupted, and stolen away the wife of Rodoricke and for that
odious injury, with his injustice to his people (the common causes Dermots
offenses.
of ruininge and transferring Kingdoms) he was by strong hand chaced out of
his Dominion of Lemster; and thereupon makes out for foreign aid. And (having
thus dealt with the King of England) he betakes him into Wales, where first he
wrought one Robert Fits Stephen, a man of a desperate fortune (yet able to draw
many voluntaries) to contract with him: and afterward Richard (of the house of
Clare) surnamed Strong-bow, Earl of Pembrooke commonly called (of his chief
seat in Monmoth-shire) Earl of Chepstow, or Strigil, a Lord of high courage
and worthiness, which made him well followed, and of great possessions both in
England and Normandy, which gave him means for his entertainements. Fits
Stephen was persuaded by promise of rich rewards. The Earl of marriage with
Eua the daughter of Dermot, and the succession of the Kingdom of Lemster.

Fits Stephen with Maurice Fits Gerard, his half brother by the mother, passed
over The conqnest of Ireland.
first with a small company, and landed at the place called by the Irish
Bagg-bun, which in English signifies Holy, and therefore interpreted as
presaging good success, whereof this time retains yet the memory, At the head
of Bag and Bun, Ireland was Triginta Mili tibus.
lost, and won. And the next day after arrived at the same place, Maurice de
Prendergast, with other men at arms, and many Archers in two ships, parcel of
Fits Stephens forces, which from thence marched to the City of Weishford, with
Banners displayed, The beginning of May.
in so strange a form and order (though their number were not four hundredth)
as the Irish unacquainted with so unusual a face of war, were overcome with
1170. Anno. Reg. 16.
fear, and rendered up themselves to their mercy with their City of Wcishford,
which with the Country about, was given by Dermot to Robert Fits Stephen, for
an encouragement to him and hope to others. And there was planted the first
Colonie of the English, which ever since has continued, retaining still in a
sort our ancient attire, and much of our language, proper only to that City
and Country about, and called by a distinct name, Weisford speech.

The next year are new supplies sent out of Wales, and after, upon
intelligence of 1171. Anno. Reg. 17.
good success the Earl of Pembrok ariues in the Bay of Waterford with two
hundred men at arms and a thousand other soldiers, takes the town, which
was then called Porthlarge, puts the inhabitants to the sword (to give terror
to others, and make room for his own people) and there Dermot gives him his
daughter in marriage, with the dowry of his Country, which, after his
wickedness had undone, he lived not to see more years (having had to many by
this) and dies miserably, leaving the Style of Ningal (which signifies) the
strangers friend, added to his name, in memory of his unnatural forsaking his
own Nation.

Strongbow, after having secured the places gotten, marches with those small
forces he had over the Island without resistance. Rodoricke the Great (showing
himself but a little Prince) kept in the Wilds and fastnesses of Connaught,
and never came to appear before the enemy; who passing through the Country at
his pleasure, takes what pledges he would of the inhabitants to secure their
obedience, and with as little labor possessed himself of the City of Dublin
the head of the Island.

Thus Wales got us first the Realm of Ireland, and (which is most strange)
without stroke of battle: a thing scarce credible, that a Country so
populous, a Nation of that disposition, should not lift up a hand to defend it
self: having, it seems, either neglected the use of Arms, or else never
been acquainted with them (other then in a naked manner of domesticke fight
one with another) whereby, the terror of strange, and never before seen forces
in order of war, laid them prostrate to the mercy of the Ouer-runner.

But the King of England advertised of the prosperous success of these
Adventurers and the Estate of the Country grew in jealousy of them, thinking
they presumed farther then their subjection would allow, and would make
themselves that which they must be made by him, and take away the glory of the
work that should be only his; causes proclamation to be made: That no
vessel should carry any thing out of his Dominions into Ireland, and that all
his subjects should return from thence, and leave off their attempts,
otherwise to forfeit their Estates at home. And withal sends over William
Fitz. 1172. Anno. Reg. 18.
Adelm, and Robert Fitz Bernard with some forces to prepare the way for him who
followed shortly after, and lands eight miles from Waterford the Eve of Saint
Luke Anno 1172. being the third year after the first Invasion made by Fitz
Stephen.

At his first landing a white Hare starting out of a bush was taken, and
presented to him interpreted as a presage of a white victory. The next day he
marches to Waterford where he stayed fifteen days; and thither came to him of
their own accord, the Kings of Cork, Limricke, Oxerie, Meth, and all of any
power in Ireland (except Rodoricke King of Connaught, who still kept himself
in the fastness of his Country) and submitted themselves withal the Clergy,
taking their Oath of Fealty to him, and the young King, The Irish kings
submission.
and their Successors for ever; so these divided Princes holding no common
Council for the public safty: rather then to join those hands that had so
often scratched each other, fell all from themselves, and with the same
emulation they had in liberty, strove for their servitude who should be first
to receive a foreign master.

From Waterford the King goes to Dublin, where, he holds an Assembly of all
these subject Kings, with the Lords Spiritual, and Temporal of Ireland, for
the further ratification of their allegiance, and the ordering and reformation
of the State. Which done he causes the Bishops with the Clergy there to
assemble at Cassell, and appoints an especial Chaplain of his own, with the
Archdeacon of Landaff to be assistants and aduisors unto them for reformation
of Church-businesses which seems to have been Henry's reformation of Ireland.
as disordred as the people, for though the Irish had been long before
Christians, it was after a wild and mixed fashion, and therefore, according to
his promise made to the late Pope, and to do a work pleasing to the present,
it was decreed, That all Church Lands should be free from the exaction of
secular men: and that from thence forth, all Divine things should be ordered,
and used in every part of Ireland according to the manner of the Church of
England, being fit (as says the Cannon) that as Ireland has by Gods mercy
obtained a Lord and King out of England, so from thence they should receive a
better form of life, and manners then heretofore they used.

His Christmasse he keeps at Dublin, where he royally feasts all his Kings and
great men of the Country, the rest of his being there he imployes in
fortifying and planting Garnisons where most need required: he makes Hugh Lacy
Justice of all Ireland, gives him the keeping of Dublin, and besides confirmed
unto him and his heirs, by his Charter, the Country of Meth to hold the same
in Fee, for the service of a hundredth Knights: he bestows on Robert Fits
Bernard the keeping of the Towns of Waterford and Weisford (which he took
from Fits Stephen the first inuador) with charge to build Castles in them: and
to humble the Earl Strongbow, and level him with the rest of his subjects, he
takes from him all his dependants, and makes them his.

So was it but his winters work to get a Kingdom, which though thus easily
won it proved more difficult, and costly in the keeping, by reason the
prosequution of a full establishment thereof was neither by him or his
successors (having other diuertments) ever thoroughly accomplished.

On Easter monday he sets out for England, where he makes no stay, but takes
the young King along in his company, and passes over into Normandy to meet
other two Legates ( Theodinus and Albertus) who were sent from Pope Alexander
(but in milder fashion then the last) to examine the murder of the late
Archbishop Becket. Four months were spent in debating the matter, and in the
end, the King by his Oath taken upon the Relics of Saints, and the holy
Evangelists, before the two Legates in the presence of King Henry the son,
the Archbishop of Rouen, and all the Bishops, and Abbots of Normandy in the
City of Auranches purged himself, of either commanding, or consenting to the
murder. Yet for that he doubted least they who committed His purgation for
Beckets murder.
the same might be moved thereunto by seeing him disturbed, and in passion: he
took the same Oath; that in satisfaction thereof, he would faithfully perform
these Articles following: First, never to forsake Pope Alexander, nor his
Catholic Successors, so long as they used him as a Catholic King. Secondly,
That Appeals should freely be made to the Pope, in causes Ecclesiastical.
Provided, that if any were suspected, to work evil to him, or his Kingdom,
they should then put in security before they departed. Thirdly, That he would
(from Christmas next for three years to come) undertake the Cross, and the
summer fol lowing, in person go to Jerusalem, unless he were stayed by the
Pope, or his Successors, or employed against the Sarasins in Spain. Fourthly,
That in the mean time, he should deliver so much money into the Templars hands
as by their opinion would entertain two hundredth soldiers in the Holy war
for one year. Fifthly, call home all such as had endured banishment for the
Archbishop. Sixthly. Restore his possessions. Seventhly, and lastly, abolish
all such customs as in his time had been introduced to the prejudice of the
Church. After himself had sworn, he caused Both Kings swear to these
Articles.
King Henry his son to swear to all these Articles, except such as concerned
his own person. And for a more Memory in the Roman Church, he caused his Seal
to be set unto them, with that of the two Cardinals. So ended this tedious
business, that made more noise in the world, then any he had, and bowed him
more: being his ill fortune, to grapple with a man of that free resolution as
made his sufferings, his glory: had his ambition, beyond this world; set up his
rest, not to yield to a King; was only engaged to his cause, had opinion, and
belief, to take his part: Which so much prevailed, as the King seeking to
master him, advanced him; and now is he feign to kneel, and pray to his
Shrine, whom he had disgraced, in his person, and having had him above his
will, whilst he lived, has him now over his Faith, being dead. And yet 48.
years after this, says the French History, it was disputed among the Doctors
of Paris, whether he were damned or saved: And one Roger a Norman maintained,
he had justly deserved death, for rebelling against his Sovereign, the
Minister of God.

To make the better way to the ending of this business, and content the King
of Henry the son is again crowned with Margaret his wife.
France; Henry the son is again Crowned, and with him Margaret his wife,
with permission shortly after, to go visit Paris; where, this young King, apt
enough (though not to know himself) yet to know his State, received those
instructions as made his ambition quite turn off his obedience, and conceive,
How to be a King, was to be a power above, and vndeuideable.

And to further the birth of this apprehension, fell out this occasion. The
Father ever awake to advance his greatness, takes a journey in person into
Auergnia, and so to Monferrato; and there purchases a match for the price of
five thousand Marks, for his youngest son John, with Alice the eldest
daughter of Hubert, Earl of Mauriena (then, as it seems) Lord of Piemont and
Sauoy, with condition to have with her the inheritance of all those Countries,
containing many great Signories, Cities, and Castles, specified in Roger
Houeden with all the circumstances, and covenants, very remarkable, Vide
Append.
of the contract. So unto greatness (that easier increases then begins) is
added more means, and every way opens to this active, and powrefull King
advantages of State, 1173. Anno. Reg. 19.
in so much, as the King of France was even surrownded with the power, and
dependances of this mighty King of Eng. whose fortunes most of all the
neighbor Princes (which subsist by other, then their own power) now follow.
And being returned from concluding this Match in Piemont, there comes unto him
lying at Limoges, Raymond Earl of Saint Gyles (by whom was given the first
affront he had in France) now to do homage unto him for the Earldom of
Toulouse: and there became the man of the King of England, and of his son
Richard Earl of Poictou, to hold Toulouse from them (by hereditary right) for
service of coming unto them upon their sommons, and remaining The homage of
Raymond. Earl of Saint Gyles for the Earld. of Toulouse.
in their service forty days at his own charge: and if they would intertaine
him longer to allow him reasonable expenses. Besides the Earl should pay
yearly, for Toulouse, and the appertinances a hundred marks of silver, or ten
Horses, worth ten Marks a piece.

About the same time also came the Earl Hubert to Limoges (to know what Land
the King of England would assure his son John) who resolved to give unto him
the Castles of Chinon, Lodun and Mirabell. Where with King Henry the son grew
much Henry the son takes displeasure against his father.
displeased, and here moved his Father, either to resign unto him, the
Duchy of Normandy, the Earldom of Aniou, or the Kingdom of England for
his maintenance: in which motion, he was the more egar being incensed by the
King of France, and the discontented Lords, both of England, and Normandy who
were many, and fallen, or wrought from the Father, upon new hopes, and the
advantage of a divided Sovereignty.

And though there were many other occasions, of this defection of the son,
from the Father; yet, that this for these Castles should first be taken (may
seem to be the work of Gods especial judgment) being those pieces, which
himself had taken from his own brother Geffrey, contrary to his Oath, made
unto his Father as is before related: so (as if to tell injustice, that it must
be duly repayed) the same Castles are made to bring mischief upon him, and
to give a beginning to the fowlest discord that could be: wherein he had not
only the Children of his own body, but the Wife of his bed to conspire,
and practice against him.

For, hereupon the son suddenly breaking away from the Father came to Paris,
where, the King of France (who had no other means to prevent, the ouergrowing
of a neighbor) but to divide him; sommons and solicites, the Princes of
France, and all the friends he could make to aid King Henry the son against
the father, and to take their Oath, either to disposses him of his Estate, or
bring him to their own conditions. The young King likewise swears unto them,
Never to have peace with his father without their consents, and all swears to
give unto Philip Earl of Flanders for his aid a thousand pounds English by
the year with the County of Kent, Dover, and Rochester Castles: To Matthew
Earl of Bologne brother to the said Earl for his service Kerton Soak in
Lindsey, the Earldome of Morton with the Honor of Heize: to Theobald Earl of
Bloys two hundred pounds by year in Aniou: the Castle of Amboys with all the
right he pretended in Tureine etc. and all these Donations with diverse other,
he confirmed by his new Seal which, the King of France caused to be made.
Besides, by the same Seal, He confirmed to the King of Scots, for his aid,
all Northumberland unto Tyne: and gave, to the brother of the same King, for
his service, the Earldomes of Huntingdon, and Cambridge. To the Earl Hugh
Bigot the Castle of Norwich: other Earls of England, as Robert Earl of
Leicester, Hugh Earl of Chester, Roger Mowbray etc. had likewise their rewards
and promises of the Lions Skin, that was yet alive.

Besides they draw into their party Richard, and Geffrey: whose youths (apt to
be wrought on, for increase of their allowance) are easily intised; and with
them their mother enraged with iealosie, and disdain for her husbands
conceived abuses of her bed. So that, this great King in the midst of his
glory, about the twentieth year of his reign, comes suddenly forsaken of his
own people, and is driven through distrust to hire, and intertaine strange
forces; procuring twenty thousand Brabansons (which were certain Mercinaries
commonly called the Routs or Costerels) for the recovery and holding of his
Estate. And some few faithful Ministers he had (notwithstanding this general
defection) who took firmly to him: as William Earl Mandeuile, Hugh de Lacy,
Hugh de Beauchamp, etc.

But how soever we have seen the best of this Kings glory, and though he had
after this good successes, he had never happiness: labor he did by all
means to have qualified the heat of his distempered son, by many mediations
of peace: offering all convenient allowances for his Estate, but all would not
prevail: his sword is drawn, and with him the King of France with all his
forces enters upon his territories on that side the Sea; on this the King of
Scots seizes upon Northumberland; and makes great spoils. The old King
complains to the Emperor, and all the neighbor Princes his friends, of the
unnatural courses of his son, and of his own improuident advancing him
William King of Sicile, writes, and condoles his misfortunes, but lay too far
off to help him.

The King of France besieges Vernoul a place of great strength, and importance,
which Hugh de Lacy, and Hugh de Beauchamp valiantly defended, and after a
months siege, they of the town (victuals failing) obtained truce of the King
of France and permission to send unto their Sovereign for succor, Which if it
came not within three days, they would render the City, and in the mean
time their Ostages. The peremptory day was the Eve of Saint Laurence. The King
of France with King Henry the son, and with diverse great Lords and Bishops
swore, if they rendered the City at the day appointed, their Ostages should be
redeiiuered, and no damage done to the City.

King Henry the Father with all the forces he could make came just at the
limited day; disposes his Army to strike battle with his enemies; but the
King of France to avoid the same, sends the Archbishop of Sens, and the
Earl of Bloys to mediate a parle, which was appointed the morrow: this day
lost, lost Vernoul. For, to the morrow Parle, the King of France neither comes,
nor sends; but had entrance into the Town (according to covenants) which
contrary to his Oath, he sackes, takes with him the Ostages, and spoil
thereof: remoues his Camp, and leaves the King of England disappointed; who
that night, after having persued the flying Army with some spoil, enters into
Vernoul, and the morrow surprises Danuile a Castle of his enemies, with many
prisoners. Thence he goes to Rouen, whence, he sent his Brabansons into
Britain against Hugh Earl of Chester, and Ralph Fulgiers, who had possessed
themselves almost of the whole Country, but being not able to resist the Kings
forces in the field; they with all the great men in those parts, and that side
of France recovered the Castle of Dole; where, they fortified and kept
themselves, till King Henry the Father came in person besieged and took it:
and with them, about four score Lords, men of name and action. Whereupon all
the rest of the Country yielded themselves.

This overthrow being of such import so terrified the adversaries; as they
negotiate a Peace, and a Parle is appointed between Gisors and Try wherein the
King of England (though he had the better of the day) condiscended to make
offer to his son of half the revenues of the Crown of England, with four
convenient Castles therein; or if he had rather remain in Normandy, half the
revenues thereof, and all the revenues of the Earldom of Aniou etc. To his
son Richard he offers half the revenues of Aquitaine and four Castles in
the same. To Geffrey, the Land that should come unto him by the daughter of the
Earl Conon. Besides, he submitted himself to the arbitration of the
Archbishop of Tarento, and the Popes Legates, to add any allowance more as in
their judgments should be held fit, reserving unto himself his Justice and
royal power: which yielding grants showed how much he desired this peace.

But it was not in the purpose of the King of France, that the same should take
effect: for such perverseness and indignity was offered to King Henry in this
Treaty, as Robert Earl of Lecester is said to have reproched him to his face,
and offered to draw his sword upon him, so that, they break off in turbulent
manner, and their troops fell presently to bickering between Curteles, and
Gisors, but the French had the worse.

The Earl of Leicester with an Army makes over into England, is received by
Hugh Bygot into the Castle of Fremingham. Richard de Lucy chief Justice of
England, and Humfrey Bohun the Kings Constable, being upon the borders of
Scotland, hearing thereof, make truce with the King of Scots. And haste to
Saint Edmondsburie where the Earls of Cornwall, Gloucester, and Arundell join
with them, they encounter the Earl of Leicester, at a place called Farnham,
overthrew his Army, slew ten thousand Flemings, took him, his Wife, and
diu^^s great prisoners; which were sent unto the king in Normandy; who, with
his Army was not thereidle, but daily got Castles, and Forts from his Enemies,
until Winter constrained both kings to take truce till Easter following: and
the like did the Bishop of Duresme with the king of Scots, for which he gave
him three thousand Marks of silver, to be paid out of the Lands of the
Barons of Northumberland.

The Spring come on, and the truce expired, king Henry the Son, and
Phillippe Earl of Flaunders are ready at Graueling with a great Army for
England. 1174. Anno. Reg. 20.
The King of Scots is entered Norththumberland, and sends his brother David with
a power to succor the remnant of the forces of the Earl of Leicester, which
held the Town of Leicester, but without success: for Richard Lucy, and the
Earl of Cornwall had before rased the City and taken Robert Moubray, coming
likewise to aid those of the Castle.

King Henry the Father upon his Sons preparation for England draws his
forces Henry the fathers arrival in England.
from his other employments, and brings them down to Barbfleet, ariues at
Southampton with his prisoners, Queen Elioner, Margueret the wife of his son
Henry, the Earls of Leicester, and Chester, and from thence goes to Canterbury
to visit the Sepulcher of his own Martyr and perform his vows for his
victories. And they write how coming within sight of the Church, He alights,
and went three miles on his bare feere, which King Henry visits Beckets
Sepulcher.
with the hard stones were forced to yield bloody tokens of his devotion on
the way. And as, if to recompense (the merit of this work) they note, How the
very day when he departed from Canterbury, the King of Scots to be
overthrown and taken at Alnwick, by the forces of the Knights of Yorkshire,
which are named to be: Robert de Stuteuile, Odonel de Humfreuile, William de
Vescy, Ralph de Glanuile, Ralph de Tilly, and Bernard Baliol.

Lewis King of France, hearing of King Henry's passage into England, and the
taking of the King of Scots, calls back Henry the son, and the Earl of
Flaunders from Grauelin, where, they stayed expecting the wind, and besieged
Roan on all sides saving that of the River. The whilst King Henry is quieting
and settling the State of England, where he had first the Castle of Huntingdon
rendered unto his mercy, saving the lives, and members of the defendants: then
the Castles of Fremingham and Bungaie which the Earl Bygot held by force of
Flemings, for whom (the Earls submission could hardly obtain pardon) but in
the end they were sent The King of Scots his prisoner.
home. From thence he goes to Northampton: where, he receives the King of
Scots his prisoner, and the Castles of Duresme, Norham, and Aluerton rendered
into his hands by the Bishop of Duresme; who, for all his service done in the
North, stood not clear in the Kings opinion. There came likewise thither Roger
de Mowbray yielding up himself with his Castle of Treske: the Earl Ferrers
his Castles of Tutsburie and Duffield: Anketill, Mallory, and William Diue,
Constables of the Earl of Leicester, the Castles of Leicester, Montsorill, and
Groby, so that within three weeks, all England was quieted, and all without
drawing of sword, which in those manly days seemed only reserved for the field.

This done, and supplied with one thousand Welshmen; King Henry with his
prisoners the King of Scots, the Earls of Leicester and Chester, passes over
into Normandy, to the relief of Roan: where those thousand Welshmen sent over
the river Siene entered, and made way through the Camp of the King of France;
slew a hundred of his men, and recovered a wood without any loss of theirs.
After which exploit, the King of England (causing the gates of the City, to be
set open, the Barracadoes taken away, the trenches they had made, between the
French Camp and the City to be filled King Henry favors the French army.
up again, with rubbish and timber) marched forth with troops, to provoke
the enemy, but without any answer at all. In the end the King of France, sends
away the weakest of his people before, and followed after with the rest, upon
sufferance of the King of England by the mediation of the Archbishop of Sens,
and the Earl of Bloys, who undertook that he should the next day come to a
parle of peace, which he performed not.

But shortly after (seeing this action had so little aduantaged either him, or
those, for whom he pretented to have undertaken it) he imployes the former
Agents The King and his sonner reconciled as the Charter of Peace shows. Reg.
Houed.
again to the King of England: and peace with a reconciliation is concluded
between him, and his sons. But with more reservation on his part, then had
been by the former treaty offered, as having now, more of power, and the
advantage of fortune: and yet yielding so much, as showed, the goodness of his
Nature was not over swayed by his ambition; all his proceeding in this war
witnessing, that necessity did ever work more then his will.

And at the signing of the Charter of this Peace, when his son Henry would
have Vide Append.
done him homage (which is personal service) he refused to take it, because
he was a King, but received it of Richard, and Geffrey. Yet after this, Henry
the son to free his father of all scruple became his Liege-man, and swore
Fealty unto him against all men in the presence of the Archbishop of Rouen, the
Bishop of Bayeux, the Earl Mandeuile, and a great Nobility.

At the concluding this Peace, the Earl of Flaunders yielded up to King Henry
the Father, the Charter made unto him by the Son for his remuneration, and
had another confirmed for the pension he had yearly out of England before
this war, which was one thousand Marks out of the Eschequer afterward
granted upon condition of Homage, and for finding the King of England yearly
five hundred soldiers for the space of forty days upon summons given.

This business ended, the Father and Son make their Progresses into all
their Provinces on that side to visit and reform the disorders of War, and
to settle their affairs there. Richard is sent into Aquitaine: and Geffrey
into Britain, upon the same business, and there left with their Counsels to
look to their own.

The two Kings, Father and Son shortly after return into England, where
reformation 1175. Anno. Reg. 21.
in the Government needed as much as in France: and here had the Archbishop
of Canterbury sommoned a Council of the Clergy wherein were many enormities
of the Church reformed, as may be seen in the Canons of that Synod. The King
supplies all Vacancies, and gives to John de Oxenford, that great Minister Vide
Append.
of his) the Bishopric of Norwich, then takes he into his hands all the
Castles he could seize on; amongst other the Tower of Bristoll, which was
rendered by All Vacancies supplied by the King.
the Earl of Gloucester and was never in his hands before. He takes penalties
both of Clerks and Laymen, who had trespassed his Forests in time of
Hostility: for which he is taxed of wrong, Richard Lucy Justice of England,
having warrant by the Kings precept to discharge them for the same. But the
profit which they yielded him made him take the stricter regard therein. For
after the death of Alain de Neuile which had been chief Justice of all the
Forests of England, he deuides them into diverse parts, appointing to every
part four Justices, whereof two to be Clerks, and two, Knights, and two,
Servants of his Household to be Keepers of the Game over all other Forresters,
either of the Kings, Knights, or Barons whatsoever, and gave them power to
implea, according to the Assiese of the Forest.

The King being at York, there came unto them William King of Scots, with
almost all the Bishops, Abbots, and Nobility of Scotland, and confirmed
1176. Anno. Reg. 22.
the Peace and final concord which had formerly been, in the time of his
imprisonment, at Faleise in Normandy: before all the greatest Estates of both
Kingdoms; the Tenor whereof is to be seen in Roger Houeden.

After this, a Council is called at Windsor, whither repair certain
Bishops Vide Append.
of Ireland, and the Chauncelour of Rodoric King of Conaught, for whom a final
concord is concluded, upon doing Homage, Fealty, and a tribute to be paid,
which was, of every ten Beasts, one sufficient Hide, within his Kingdom,
and those Provinces that held thereof.

Within a while after, a Council or Parliament is assembled at Nottingham, and
by advice and consent thereof, the King caused The Kingdom to be divided into
six parts, and constitutes for every part three Justices itinerants, causing
them to The Kingdom divided into six parts for Justice.
take an Oath upon the Holy Evangelists, faithfully for themselves to
observe, and cause inuiolablie to be observed of all his Subjects of England,
the Assizes made at Claringdone, and renewed at Northamton, which Assizes were
chiefly for Murder, Vide Append.
Theft, Roberie, and their receivers: for deceipts, and burning of Houses,
which facts if found by the Verdict of twelve men, the accused were to pass
the trial of Water Ordeil, Vide Append.
whereby, if not acquitted, their punishment, was loss of a leg, or
banishment, that Age seeming to hold it a greater example of a Malefactor
miserably living, then of one dead, for as yet they came not so far as blood,
in those cases.

And yet we find in the reign of this King, that one Gilbert Plumton Knight,
accused for a Rape, before Ranulph de Glanuile, chief Justice of England
(desirous, says Houeden by unjust sentence to condemn him) was adiuged, to
be hanged on a Gibbet, whereunto, when he was brought, and in the hands of
the Executioner, the people ran out crying, that an innocent and just person
ought not so to suffer. Balduin Bishop of Worcester, a religious man and
fearing God, hearing the clamor of the people, and the injury done to this
miserable creature, came forth, and forbad them, from the part of the
Omnipotent God, and under pain of Excommunication that they should not put him
to death that day, being Holy, and the Feast of Saint Mary Magdelene, whereupon
the excution was put off till the morrow. That night means was wrought to the
King, who commanded a stay to be made till other order were taken, being
informed that for the envy which Glanuile bare to this Plumton, he was
desirous to put him to death, in regard he had married the danghter of Roger
Gulwast an inheritrix, whom he would have had Reiner his Shriefe of Yorkshire
to have had, which act leaves a foul stain of Injustice upon the memory of
this Chief Justice Glanuile: in the time of whose Office, a tract of the
Laws, and Customs of the Kingdom of England was composed, which now passes
under his name.

The charge given for businesses in these Assizes consisted but of very few
points Vide Append.
besides those felonies, and was especially for taking Homage, and Ligeancie of
1177. Anno. Reg. 13.
all the Subjects of England: demolishing of Castles the Rights of the King,
his Crown and Eschequour. The multitude of actions which followed in
succeeding times, grew out of new transgressions and the increase of Law and
Litigation, which was then but in the Cradle.

William King of Sicile sends and craves to have Joan the Kings daughter in
marriage. William King of Sicile matches with Joan the Kings Daughter. Rog.
Houed. Vide Append.
Whereupon the King calls a Parliament, and by the universal Council of the
Kingdom granted his daughter to the King of Sicile; to whom she was shortly
after sent, and there honorably endowed with many Cities, and Castles, as may
appear by the Charter of that King.

But the great Match that was provided for Earl John became frustrate by the
Vide Append.
death of Alice, daughter to the Earl of Mauriana, and he is married to the
daughter of William Earl of Gloucester by whom he was to have that Earldome.
This William was son to Robert brother to Maude the Empress.

The same year also he marries Elionor another of his daughters to Alphonso
King of Castile, and takes up the controversy between him, and his Uncle
Sanctio King of Navarre, about the detention of certain bordering pieces, of
each others Kingdom, both the Kings having referred the business to his
arbitration.

Likewise the marriage which should have been between his son Richard,
1178. Anno. Reg. 24.
and Alice daughter to the French King (committed heretofore to his custody)
was again treated on, and urged hard, by the Popes Legate to be consummated
upon pain of interdiction. But yet it was put off for that time, and both
Kings notwithstanding concluded a perpetual League, and amity to aid each
other against all men, and to be Enemies to each others Enemies. Besides they
both vowed an expedition, to the Holy Land in person, which they lived not to
perform.

The King of France upon a dangerous sickness of his son Philip, vows a
visitation of the Sepulcher of Thomas the Martire of Canterbury: and upon
license, and safe conduct of the King of England, performs the same with great
devotion, and Rich presents. First, offering upon his Tomb, a massy Cup of
Gold, and after, gave, and confirmed by his Charter twenty eight Tun and a
half of wine for the Monks annually to be received at Possi, at the charge
of the King of France: and beside, freed them from all Toll, and Custom, for
whatsoever they should buy in his Kingdom.

After having stayed there three days, he returns toward France, conducted
1179. Anno. Reg. 25.
by the King of England to Dover. The Son recouers health, but the Father
lost his in this journey; for coming to Saint Denise, he was taken with a
Palsy, and lived not long after. The weakness of his Age, and disease moved
him presently to have his son Philippe (being but fifteen years of Age) to
be 1180. Anno. Reg. 26.
Crowned King in his life time, which was done at Reins, Anno 1179.

Henry Duke of Saxony (who had married Maude daughter to King Henry) was
expelled his Duchy, and banished by the Emperor Frederic the third for seven
years, for detayning the revenues which the Archbishop of Cologne had out of
Saxony; and refusing to come unto trial at the Imperial Chamber, according
to his faith, and promise made to the Emperor, so that he was driven to come
(for succor with his Wife and Children) to his Father in Law, into England,
where he remained three years, and upon the coming of the Archbishop of
Cologne to visit the Sepulcher of Thomas of Canterbury, means was wrought to
restore him to his Duchy: and a motion is made of marriage for Richard the
Kings son, with the daughter of the Emperor Frederic (notwithstanding the
contract made with Alice daughter to the King of France long before) but this
last intention was made frustrate, by the death of the Emperors daughter.

King Henry sends his son John to reside, in Ireland, to the end (that the
Majesty of a Court, and the number of attendants) which, the same would draw
thither, might both a we, and ciuilise that Country: but he being accompaned
with many gallants, young as himself, who scorning, and deriding the Irish (in
regard of their rude habits, and fashions) wrought an ill effect. For it turned
out three of their greatest Kings (Limmeric, Conact, and Cork) into open act
of rebellion: Gens enim haec, sicut and natio quauis barbara, quanquam honorem
nesciant, honorari tamen, supra modum affectant. says Giraldus Cambrensis.

Now this fair time of peace, which King Henry enjoyed gave him leisure to
seek out all means to supply his coffers, wherein he was very vigilant: and
hearing of the great sums (which Roger Archbishop of York, had given by
his Testament to godly uses) sends Commissioners to find out, and to seize the
same to his own uses, Alleging, that the Archbishop had given Judgment in
his life time, that it was against Law, any Ecclesiastical person should
dispose any thing by will (unless before he The King sends after moneys given
to pious uses by Testators of the Clergy.
were sick) and that himself had done contrary to his own Decree. The
Commissioners having found out, that Hugh Bishop of Durham had received of the
Archbishop three hundred Marks of silver to be bestowed in those uses,
demand the same for the King. The Bishop replies, that having received it from
the hands of the Archbishop he had according to his will, distributed the
same amongst the Leprous, Blind, and Lame; in repayring Churches, Bridges, and
Hospitalls: so that who would have it, must gather it up again of them. Which
answer so displeased the King, as (besides the seizing upon the Castle of
Dures'm) he wrought this Bishop much vexation.

His means certain (besides the revenue of his Demesne, and the benefit of
the Forests) were not then great in England; which caused him oftentimes in The
Vacancie of Lincoln held 18 years to the Kings use.
his necessities to be bold with the Church, and to hold their benifices
vacant: as he did the Bishopric of Lincoln eighteen years. He made a new
Coin in England, which was round, decryed the Old, and put all the Coyners to
great ransom for corrupting the old money. And besides to save his purse (in
regard the continual charge of Horse, and Armor was heavy unto him) he
caused every man's Lands, and substance to be rated for the furnishing
thereof. And first began the same, in his Dominions beyond the Seas:
ordayning, That whosoever had a hundredpounds Aniouin money in goods, and
chattles, should find (a Horse, and all Military furniture thereunto: and
whosoever had in chattle forty, thirty, or twenty pounds Aniouin money,
should find a Corslet, Head-peece, Lance and Sword: or Bow and Arrows, with
a strict prohibitition, that no man should sell, or pawn this Armor, but be
bound to Vide Append.
leave it when he died to his next heir. And this Order afterward, he
established in England, 1181. Anno. Reg. 17.
by consent of the State. The King of France, and the Earl of Flaunders by his
example did the like in their Countries.

Great, and manifold were the expenses of this mighty King, in respect of his
entertainments, pensions, and rewards, having so wide an Estate and so many
ever in his work, both of his own, and others who must always be seed. And
besides, oftentimes he is feign to bribe the Popes Legates, in his business
with the King of France, to have them favorable for his ends: to send many
supplies, by their perswations, and for his own reputation to the Holy war.

Auno 1182 (says Walsingham) he relieved the necessity of the
Ierosolomitans, with 1182. Anno. Reg. 28.
two and forty thousand Marks of silver, and five hundred Marks of gold,
which was in money, seven and forty thousand three hundred, thirty three
pounds, six shillings eight pence. And when Pope Lucius distressed by the
Romans, desired an aid out of England. The King sent him a mighty sum of
Gold and Silver; in Vide Append. Henry 2. releeues Pope Lucius and the
Ierosolomitans with great sums of gold and silver.
leauying whereof, the Clergy here dealt very circumspectly: for when the Popes
Nuncij came to desire the same, they advised the King; that according to his
will, and honor he himself should supply the Popes occasion, as well for
himself, as them: for that it was more tolerable, that their Lord, and King,
should receive from them, the return of that aid; then that the Popes Nuncij
should; which might be taken for a custom to the detriment of the Kingdom.

Now (about eight years) had the peace continued, between the two Kings,
Father and Son, when, again new flames of unnatural discord began to break
out; the occasion whereof as far as can be discovered (in the uncertain
passages of that time) we find to be this.

Anno Reg. 29. After a great Christmas kept at Cane in Normandy, with his
sons 1183. Anno. Reg. 29.
Henry, Richard and Geffrey, the Duke of Saxony with his Wife and Children,
besides a great Nobility of all parts: The King willed King Henry his Son to
take the Homages of his brother Richard Earl of Poictou, and Greffrey Earl of
Britain. Richchard refuses to do it (but upon persuasion) being afterward
content; his brother Great festiuals oftentimes break up with great
discontentments.
refuses to take the same. Whereupon with great indignation Richard departs
from his Fathers Court into Poictou: man's, and furnishes his Castles there. The
King his brother follows by instigation of the Barons of Poictou, and
Aquitaine who were fallen from Richard, and adhered to the young King (as men
that understood what would become of younger brothers Estates in such
Dominions, where the elder brothers birthright, and power, would carry all) and
Greffrey Earl of Britain takes the King his brothers part, comes with forces
to aid him.

Richard sends for succor to his father, who with a powrefull Army (rather to
constrain them to a peace, then to make war) came down into Poictou, where
again his three sons after the debatement of their grieuances swore to obey,
and serve their Father, and to hold perpetual peace among themselves. And for
the farther Henry and his sons accorded.
ratification of this Concord, they meet all at Mirabell, where Henry the
son, desires, that the Barons of Poictou, and Aquitane (whom he had sworn to
defend against his brother Richard) might be there at the concluding this
peace, and to be pardoned for any former act committed. Which request is
granted, and Geffrey Earl of Britain sent to bring the Barons thither. But
the Barons (holding this peace, either not safe, or not profitable) so work,
as they win the messenger to take their part against the Father, and keep
him with them.

Henry the son notwithstanding, continues to mediate still for the Barons,
and to get his Father, and brother Richard to receive them into grace. And
undertaking to bring in both them, and his brother Geffrey; is permitted by the
Father to go treat with them at Limoges, whither also, by another way, and with
small company; it was agreed the Father should come, which he did; but his
approach was met with arrows so dangerously shot at his person, as the next
man to him was slain, and himself with his son Richard, forced to retire
from the place. And yet afterward desirous out of a fatherly affection to have
conference with his sons for the quiet ending of this business (upon their
assurance of his safety) he enters into the City: when again from the Castle
is short a barbed arrow, which had took him directly on the breast, had not his
horse, by the sudden lifting up his head received it in the forehead. Which act
his sons never sought to find out and punish, but still, underhand held amity
with the Barons. At length, notwithstanding King Henry the son comes to the
Father, and protests, that unless the Barons would come and yield themselves
at the Kings feet, he would utterly renounce them. And after, having again
(upon his Fathers promise of pardon and peace) dealt with them: and finding as
he auowed their obstinacy, made show to forsake their party, and returns to
his Father with great submission, delivering up unto him his horse and Armor in
assurance thereof.

But many days he spent not with him, when again (either for the intended
revenge he found his Father meant to prosecute against the Barons) whose
protection having undertaken, he held himself in his honor, engaged to
preserve: or by the working of some mutinous ministers about him, whose element
was not peace: he again The inconstancy of King Henry the son.
enters Oath and League with them. But therein finding his power short of his
will, and desperate of all success in his courses; he suddenly breaks out
into an extreme passion, before his Father, falls prostrate at the Shrine of
Saint Martial, and His vow.
vows presently to take upon him the Cross, and to give over all worldly
business beside.

With which strange and sudden passion, the Father much moved, besought his son
with tears to alter that rash resolution, and to tell him truly, whither
indignation, or religion induced him thereunto. The Son protests, that it was
merely for the remission of his sins, committed against his person. And
unless his Father would now give him leave (without which he could not go) he
would there instantly kill himself His resolution.
in his presence. The Father (after having used all means to diswade him, and
finding him still obstinate) said unto him, Son, Gods will be done, and
yours: for your furnishing I will take such order as shall befit your Estate.

The son (whilst the Fathers passion had made him tender) wrought thereupon,
and besought him, that he would deal mercifully with those of the Castle of
Limoges, the Barons of Aquitaine, and pardon them. To which, the Father in the
end (though unwillingly) yields, so that, they would put in their pledges for
securing their fidelity, His request for the Barons of Aquitaine.
and the peace, which they seemed content to do. But upon the delivery, and
receiving of these pledges new ryots were committed by such as could not endure
the peace (which is never faithful, but where men are voluntarily pacified)
and these young Princes again take part with their Confederates, and are made
the heads of rebellion, committing rapin, and sacrelidge to supply their
necessities, and feed their followers. And in the end the young King having
much strugled in vain, through grief, and vexation of spirit (which caused
the distemprature of body) fell into a burning His death.
fever with a flux, whereof, within few days he died. A Prince of excellent
parts, who was first cast away by his Fathers indulgence, and after by his
rigor; not suffering him to be what himself had made him, neither got he so
much by his Coronation as to have a name in the Catalogue of the Kings of
England.

The sorrow of the Father (although it be said to be great) hindered not his
revenge upon the Barons of Aquitaine; whom he now most eagerly persecuted,
seized on their Castles, and rased to the ground that of Limoges.

Geffrey upon his submission, is received into grace, and the year after died
at Paris: Earl Geffreys submission and death.
having (in a conflict) been trodden under horses feet, and miserably crushed:
so that, half the male issue wherein this King was unfortunate, he saw extinct
before him, and that by deaths as violent; as were their disposition. The other
two, who suruiued him, were no less miserable in their ends.

Now the young King of France, Phillip the second (in whose fate it was, to do
more then ever his father could effect, upon the death of Henry the son)
requires the delivery of the Country of Vexin, which was given in dowre with
his Sister Margaret, but the King of England (not apt to let go any thing of
what he had in possession) was 1184. Anno. Reg. 30.
content to pay yearly to the Queen dowager 17050. pounds Aniouin. And the
more to hold fair with this young King, whose spirit, he saw, grew great, and
active, and with whom he was like to have much to do, did homage unto him, for
all he held in France, which he never did to the Father, being the first
descent of Majesty, he ever Henry the second does homage to Phillip King of
France.
made to any secular power. And beside, took his part against Phillip Earl of
Flanders, who opposed against him, and was in those days a Prince of mighty
power, and had ever stood fast unto King Jews the father. But now Phillip the
son otherwise led, or affectioned, quarrels with him, and demands the
Country of Vermendois, as appertaining to the Crown of France: and withal,
upon allegation of consanguinity, repudiates his wife, Niece to this Earl of
Flanders, given unto him by his Fathers choice a little before his death. The
Earl followed by Odo Earl of Borgogne, the Earls of Champague, Hainalt,
Namur Saint Pol and others, wars upon the King of The Earl of Flanders
compels the King of France to compound.
France, and commits great spoils within his territories, so that he was
feign in the end to compound with him to his disadvantage. After this, the
Kings of England, and France, meet between Gisors, and Tri; where the King of
England swears to deliver Alise, unto Richard his son. And the King of
France her brother graunts her in dower, the Country of Velxin, which
Margueret his other Sister had before.

But these ties held them not long together, for the young King of France so
wrought with Richard, as he drew him from his Fathers obedience, and they
lived together in 1185. Anno. Reg. 31.
that amity, as on bed and board, is said, to have served them, both which so
iniealosed the old King, as he called home his son and before his Bishops
and Nobility, caused him to swear upon the Evangelists, to observe fealty unto
him, against all persons whatsoever, which having done; and ready to pass over
into England, he is informed of the great preparation made by the King of
France, who gave out that he would spoil, and ransacke both Normandy, and
the rest of the Kings of Englands territories in France; unless he would
presently deliver up his Sister Alice unto Richard, or render Gisors, and the
Country of Velxin into his hands. Whereupon the King returns back, and comes
again to a parle between Gisors and Try. Where, the Archbishop of Tire (sent
from the East to call up aid, for the Holy war) did with that power of
perswation so urge his message, as it let out all the humor of private rancor
and contention, The Kings of England and France accorded, and prepare for the
holy war.
between these two great Kings, altered their whole Counsels, their
pretentions, their designs: turned them wholly to undertake in person this
laborious action, and resolve to leave their Kingdoms, their pleasures, and
all the things of glory they had at home, to prosecute the same, through all
the distempratures of climes, and difficulties of passages, whereunto that
voyage was obnoxious: so that now, no other thing was thought or talked on, but
only preparations, and furnishments for this business.

And to distinguish their people, and followers (who all strove which should
be most forward) it was ordered that they who followed the King of England,
should wear a white Cross: France a red: and Flaunders a green. And for a
further engagement in the business, the King of England writes to the
Patriarch of Antioch, a most comfortable and pious letter: in the end whereof
he has these words. Amongst other Princes I and my Son, rejecting the glory
of this world, and dispising all the pleasures thereof in proper person, with
all our strength, will, God willing visit you shortly.

Then to raise money to defray this great enterprise, it was ordained by the
two Kings, their Archbishops, Bishops Earls and others in France, that all
whosoever as well Clerk as Lay (saving such as went the voyage) should pay the
tenth of all their revenues of that year, and the tenth of all their Moueables
and Chattles; as well in gold as filuer. And many excellent orders were made
for restraynt of licentiousness both in apparel, and manners as was fitting
for the undertakers of so civil and devout an action.

The King of England having laid this imposition upon all his Dominions in
France, comes over, calls a Council of his Bishops, Abbors, Earls, Barons,
both 1186. Anno. Reg. 33.
of the Clergy, and Layty at Gayntington, and by their consents imposes the
same taxation upon his Subjects of England. Sub Eleemosinae titulo vitium
rapacitatis includens, says Walsingham, and presently sends forth his
Officers into every Shire to collect the same according as it was done in
France. But of every City in England, he caused a choice to be made of the
richest men: as in London of two hundred, in York a hundred, and so according
to the proportion of the rest: and caused all these, at a certain time and
place to appear before him; of whom he took the tenth of all their Moueables,
by the estimation of credible men which knew their Estates: such as refused he
imprisoned till they had paid it, of which example, and exaction, we must
only hold Piety guilty, otherwise those times had not yielded it.

The King sends likewise Hugh Bishop of Duresme, with other Commissioners, to
William King of Scots to collect the tenthes in his Country, which he would
not permit, Provision by king Henry in England.
but offered to give the King of England five thousand Marks of silver for
those tenthes, and the Castle which he claimed, but the King of England refused
the same.

Whilst these preparations were in hand, and the money collecting, a quarrel
arises between Richard Earl of Poictou, and Raymond Earl of Toulouse upon
this occasion. 1187. Anno. Reg. 33.
The Earl of Toulouse by the persuasion of one Peter Suillar, had taken
certain Merchants of Aquitaine, and used them hardly. The Earl of Poictou
surprises this Peter, imprisons him, and would not suffer the Earl of Toulouse
to redeem him, upon any condition. Whereupon, the Earl imprisons two
Gentlemen servants of the King of Englands, Robert, and Raph Poer, traveling
through his Country (as Pilgrims) from S. James de Compostella, which Earl
Richard took so ill, as he enters into the Earls country with an Army
(prepared for a better act) wastes it with fire and sword, besieges A mean
quarrel dashes and diuerts the great preparation for the holy war, and lays
it upon the self kingdoms.
and takes his Castles about Toulouse. The King of France (upon the lamentable
complaint of the Tholousians) sends to the King of England to understand,
whether his son Richard did these things by his will and Council. The King of
England answers, That he neither willed, nor counseled him thereunto, and that
his son sent him word (by the Archbishop of Dublin) that he did nothing, but
by the consent of the King of France. Who (not satisfied with this answer)
enters presently into Bery with his Army, seases upon the Country; takes in
diverse Castles of the King of Englands, who makes himself ready to recover the
same. And thus that great intended enterprise, undertaken with such feruor,
became dashed, and overthrown, at the very time, they appointed to have set
forward.

All the means the Pope could use by his Legates, nor all the persuasions of
other Princes might prevail, to reconsile these two enraged Kings, though
diverse enteruiewes 1188. Anno. Reg. 34.
were procured, diverse ouertures propounded, yet none took effect; they ever
depart more incensed then they met: in so much as at length, the King of
France, in a rage, cut down the great Elm (between Gisors and Try) under
which, the Kings of France, and Dukes of Normandy were ever used to parle, and
swore, There should be The King of France cuts down the most eminent Elm of
Princely parley.
no more meetings in that place. But yet after this, they were brought to
another parle elsewhere, and therein the Popes Legate threatened to interdict
the King of France, unless he made peace with the King of England. The King of
France told him, that he feared not his sentence, being grounded upon no
equity, and that it appertained not to the Church of Rome, by sentence, or
otherwise, to chastise the Kingdom, or King of France, undertaking to revenge
the demerits, of the rebellious, that dishonored his Crown; and flatly told
the Cardinal, That he smelled of the Sterlings of England.

This enteruiew, wrought a worse effect then all the rest: for here the King of
England (absolutely) refuses to render Alice to his son Richard, but offered
to the King Earl Richard (with the King of France) com bine against his father
king Henry 2.
of France, to give her to his son John, with larger conditions, then should
be granted with the other: which so much alienated the heart of his son
Richard, as he becomes wholly Liegeman to the King of France, did homage unto
him for Aquitaine, and they both join their forces against the father.

And here now comes this mighty King of England (the greatest of all the
Christian world in his time, or that the Kingdom ever saw) to fall quite
asunder; forsaken both of his subjects, and himself, letting down his heart,
to yield to any conditions whatsoever: he who never saw fear (but in the back
of his enemies) leaves now the defense of Man's, and flies away with seven
hundredth men (having promised the City, never to give it over, in regard his
Father was there buried, and himself borne) and afterward, comes to his last
parle, with the King of France, between Turwin, and Arras: where at their
first meeting (no man suspecting the wrath) a thunderbolt, with so terrible a
crack lighted just between them, as it parted their conference in a confused
manner for that time.

Within a while after, they came together again, when suddenly began as
fearful 1189. Anno. Reg. 35.
a thunder as the former: which so amassed the King of England (as he had fallen
off from his horse) had he not been supported by those about him. And in this
sort, began the Proem of that Treaty, wherein, the King of England yields to
all whatsoever conditions, the King of France required, did him homage again
for all his dominions on that side (both kings having at the beginning of this
war, renounced their mutual obligation in that kind) renders up Alice for
whom he had been so much laden with scandal and turmoyle, upon condition, she
should be given in marriage to his son Richard at his return from the holy
war; and in the mean time to remain in the custody of any one of five whom
Richard would nominate: grants that fealty be given unto him of all his
Dominions, and pardons all his partakers. Besides covenants to pay the King of
France 20000 Marks of silver for damage done during these last wars. And
that if he should not perform these Articles, his Barons should swear to
renounce him, and betake them to the part of the King of France, and Earl
Richard. And for more caution, he yeeldes to deliver up the Cities of Man's and
Tureyn, with diverse Castles into their Hands, etc.

And here was an end of this business, and within three days after, of this
kings life: whose heart, not made of that temper to bow, burst with the weight
of a declining fortune. Some few hours before he died he saw a list of their
names who conspired with the King of France, and Earl Richard against him: and
finding therein his son John His death.
to be the first, falls into a grievous passion, both cursing his sons, and
the day wherein himself was borne: and in that distemprature departs this
world, which so often himself had distempered; having reigned 39. years, 7.
months, and 5. days.

His son Richard approaching the Corpse, as it was carrying to be interred
(adorned according to the manner of Kings with all royal ornaments open faced)
the blood 1189. Anno. Reg. 35.
gushed out of the nostrils of the dead (a sign, usually noted, of
guiltiness) as if Nature yet after death, retained some intelligence in the
veins, to give notice of wrong, and check the malice of an unnatural
offender: at which sight, Richard surprised with horror, is said to have burst
out into extreme lamentations.

He had issue by his wife Elianor, four sons, Henry, Richard, Geffrey and
John, besides two other, William the eldest, and Phillip the youngest but His
Issue.
one, died young. Also three daughters; Maude married to Henry Duke of Saxony.
Elianor, the wife of Alfonso the eighth of that name king of Castile. Joan
given Vide 10. Speed.
in marriage unto William king of Sicile. He had also two natural sons, by
Rosamund daughter of Walter Lord Clifford, William, surnamed Longespee, in
English Long Sword, and Geffrey Archbishop of York, who after five years
banishment in his brother King John's time died, Anno 1213.

The first son William surnamed Longespee, Earl of Salisbury (in right of
Ela his wife; daughter and heir of William Earl of that County, son of
Earl Patricke) had issue William Earl of Salisbury, and Stephen Earl of
Vlster. Ela Countisse of Warwick. Idae Lady Beuchampe of Bedford and Isabell
Lady Vescy His Son, Earl William the second, had Earl William the third,
Father of Margaret wife of Henry Lacie Earl of Lincoln.

It is said King Henry had also a third natural Son called Morgan (by the
wife of one Rodulph Bloeth or Blewet a Knight, he lived to be Provost of
Beuerley, and to be elected to the Bishopric of Duresme: and coming to Rome
for a dispensation (because his basiardy made him otherwise incapable) the
Pope willed him to profess him self Blewets lawful son, and not the Kings
Natural, promising to consecrate him on that condition, but he (using the advice of one William Lane his Clerk) told the Pope, that for no worldly
promotion he would renounce his Father, or deny himself to be of blood Royal.

The end of the Life, and Reign, of Henry the second.
The Life, and reign, of Richard the first.
RICHARD surnamed Coeure de Lion borne at Oxford succeeding his Father, He
began his reign the 6^ of July, aged 35.
first seizes upon his Treasure in France, being in the hands of Stephan
Thurnham Seneschall of Normandy, whom he imprisons with fetters, and manacles
to extort the uttermost thereof. And then repayres to Roan, where, by Walter
the Archbishop he is guirt with the sword 1189. Anno. Reg. 1.
of the Duchy of Normandy, takes fealty both of the Clergy and Lay, and then
goes to Parle and compose his bufinesse with the King of France, which he did
by money, and obtained restitution of all such pieces as had been gotten from
his Father in the time of the late wars. Besides for his better strength he
gives in marriage Maude his Niece daughter of the Duke of Saxony to Geffrey
son to the Earl of Perch.

During this stay and settling of his affairs in France, Queen Elianor his
Mother, freed from her imprisonment (which she had endured twelve years) has
power to dispose of the business of England, which especially she employed in
preparing the The slaughter of the jews at the Coronation.
affections of the people by pardons, and releeuement of oppressions, and then
meets her son at Winchester. Where (besides his Fathers treasure which was
900000 pounds in gold, and silver: besides plate Jewels and precious stones)
there fell unto him by the death of Geffrey Ridle Bishop of Ely dying intestate
3060 Marks of Silver, and 205 of Gold, which came well to defray the charge of
his Coronation, celebrated the third day of September 1189 at Westminster, and
imbrued with the miserable slaughter of the Jews inhabiting in, and about the
City of London, who coming to offer their presents, as an afflicted people,
in a strange Country, to a new King, in hope to get his favor, were set upon
by the multitude, and many lost both their lives and substance. The example of
London wrought the like mischief upon the Jews in the Towns of Norwich,
Saint Edmondsbury, Lincoln, Stamford and Linne.

All this great Treasure left to this King, was not thought sufficient for this
intended action of the Holy war (which was still on foot) but that all other
ways were devised to raise more money, and the King sells much Land of the
Crown, both to the Clergy and others. Godfrey de Lucy Bishop of Winchester
bought two Manors Weregraue, and Menes. The Abbot of Saint Edmondsbury the
Manor of Mildhall for one thousand Marks of silver. The Bishop of Duresme the
Manor of Sadborough with the dignity pallitinate of his whole Province, which
occasioned the King iestingly to say what a cunning workman he was that could
make of an old Bishop a new Earl. Besides he grants to William King of
Scots the Castles of Berwike and Roxborough for 10000 Marks, and releaseth him
of those covenants made and confirmed by his Charter unto King Henry the second
as extorted from him being then his prisoner, reserving unto himself only
such rights, as had been and were to be performed, by his brother Malcolin to
his Ancestors the kings of England.

Moreover pretending to have lost his Signet, made a new, and proclamation that
whosoever would safely enjoy, what under the former Signet was granted, should
come to have it confirmed by the new, whereby he raised great sums of money
to the grief of his subjects. Then procures he a power from the Pope, that
whosoever himself pleased to dismiss from the journey, and leave at home,
should be free from taking the Cross: and this likewise got him great
Treasure which was levied with much expedition by reason the king of France, in
November, after the Coronation sent the Earl of Perch, with other
Commissioners to signify to king Richard how in a general Assembly at Paris,
he had solemnly sworn upon the Evangelists to be ready at Tours, with all the
Princes and people of his kingdom, who had undertaken the Cross, presently
upon Easter next following, thence to set forward for the Holy Land. And for
the assurance, and testimony thereof, he sends the Charter of this Deed unto
the king of England, requiring him and his Nobility, under their hands to
assure him in like sort, to be ready at the same time, and place, which was in
like manner concluded at a general Council held at London. And in December
(having only stayed but four months in England after his Coronation) this
King departs into Normandy, Vide Append. The Kings departure out of England
toward the Holy war.
keeps his Christmas at Rouen, and presently after has a parle with the King
of France at Reimes, where by Oath and writing under their hands and seals,
with the faith given by all their Nobility on both sides, is confirmed a most
strict Peace and Union betwixt both Kings, for the preservation of each other
and their Estates, with the orders concluded for their journey. Which done, the
King of England sends for Queen Elionor his mother, his brother John, the
Archbishop of Canterbury, the Bishops of Winchester, Duresme, Norwich, Bath,
Salisbury, Ely, Chester, and others, which came unto him to Rouen: where he
commits the especial charge of this Kingdom to William Longshamp Bishop of
Ely, under the Title of Chief Justice of England, and gives him one of his
Seals and the Custody of the Tower of London: and confers upon Hugh Bishop of
Duresme the Iustice-ship of the North from Humber to Scotland, with the keeping
of Windsor Castle, which after gave occasion of dissension, to these two
ambitious Prelates impatient of each others greatness, Hugh Bardolph, William
Marshall, Geffrey Fitz Peter, and William Brewer are joined in commission with
the Bishop of Ely.

And least his brother John (whose spirit he well understood) might in England
work upon the advantage of his absence, he first caused him to take an Oath
not to come within this Kingdom for the space of three years next following.
Which after, upon better consideration, he released, leaving him to his
liberty and natural respect. But hereby having given him first a wound by his
distrust, his after regard could never heal it up again, nor all the Honors
and State bestowed on him, keep him within the limmits of obedience.

For, this suspicion of his Faith showed him rather the way to break, then
retain it; whenever occasion were offered: and the greater means he had
bestowed on him to make him content, did but arm him with greater power for
his designs. For this Earl John had conferred upon him in England the The
great Estate left to Earl John.
Earledomes of Corwnewall, Dorcet, Sommerset, Nottingham, Darby, Lancaster, and
by the marriage with Isabell, Daughter to the Earl of Gloucester, had likewise
that Earldom, moreover the Castles of Marlborow and Lutgarsall, the Honors
of Wallingford, Tichill, and Eye; to the value of four thousand Marks per
annum, besides the great commands he held thereby: which mighty Estate was
not a means to satisfy but increase his desires, and make him more dangerous
at home.

Then the more to strengthen the reputation of his Viceroy the Bishop of Ely,
the King gets the Pope to make him his Legate of all England and Scotland; and
to the end his Government might not be disturbed through the emulation of
another, he confines the elect Archbishop of York (his base brother, whose
turbulency he doubted) to remain in Normandy till his return, and takes his
Oath to perform the same.

Having thus ordered his affairs he sends back into England this Great
Bishop, furnished with as great and absolute a power as he could give him, to
provide necessaries for his intended journey. Wherein to please the King, he
offended the people, and committed great exactions, Clerum and populum
opprimebat, Exactions by the Viceroy.
confundens fasque nefasque, says Houeden. He took of every City in
England two Palfryes, and two other Horses of service, and of every Abbay one
of each, likewise of every Manor of the Kings, one of each for this service.
And to show what he would prove, he took the Castle of Windsor from the
Bishop of Duresme, and confined him within his Town of Howedon, questions
his Authority, and works him much vexation, and for all his means made to
the King, ouertopt him.

The King takes order for a Navy to convey people and provision to the Holy
land, and commits the charge thereof to the Archbishop of Auxere, and the
Bishop of Bayon, Robert de Sabul, Richard Canuile, which done, both Kings, the
latter end of June, with their powers together, take their journey to Lions;
where (their numbers growing so great, as bred many incomberments, and
distemprings between the nations) they part companies: the King of France
takes the way of Genoua by Land, the The Kings quarrel in the lsle of Sicile.
King of England of Merseilles, where, after he had stayed eight days,
expecting in vain the coming about of his Navy withheld by tempest, he was
forced to hire twenty Galleys, and ten other great vessels, to transport him
into the Isle of Sicilia. The King of France takes shipping at Genoua, and by
tempest was driven to land in the same Isle, and arrived there before the King
of England: where, those mighty companies of both these powrefull Kings, fell
foul on each other, and themselves taking part with their people enter in
quarrel and rancor, so that being of equal power and stomach, and alike
emulous of honor and revenge, they began to show what success their
enterprise was likely to yield. The King of France repayring his wracked Navy
and the King of Englands long staying for his, forced them both to Winter in
Sicilia, to the great pesture and disturbance of that people, themselves and
theirs.

William late king of Sicile who had married Ioane, sister to the King of
England, was dead (which made the intertaynment of the English there, the
worse) and Taneredi base son of Roger, grandfather to that William, was
invested in the kingdom, contrary to the will of the late King (dying without
issue) and the fidelity of the people sworn to Constantia the lawful
daughter of the said Roger, married to Henry King of Almaine, son to the
Emperor Frederic Barbarossa, by which occasion Tancredi was forced to use all
means to hold what he had gotten by strong hand, and had much to do against
the Emperor and his son Henry. The King of England after great contention
with him, to make the conditions of his sisters dowre the better, enters into
league with Tancredi against all men to preserve his Estate, and gets in
conclusion 20000 Ounces of Gold for his Sisters dowre, and 20000 more, upon a
match to be made between Arthur Earl of Britain, son to Geffrey his next
brother (who was to succeed him in the Crown of England, if himself died
without issue) and the daughter of Tancredi.

At the opening of the Spring (both kings having been reconciled, and new
Articles The Kings reconciled.
of Peace and concord signed, and sworn) the King of France sets first forward
to the Holy Land: but the king of England stays in Sicile until Whitsontide
after. And during his abode (which might therefore be the longer) his Mother
Queen Elionor (who in her youth had well known the travail of the East) came
unto him, Berenguela fianced to King Richard.
bringing with her Berenguela, daughter to the king of Navarre, who has there
fianced unto him. Which done, Queen Elionor departs home by the way of Rome,
and the young Lady with the Queen Dowager of Sicile take their journey with
the king; who sets forth with an hundred and thirty ships, and fifty Galleys,
and was by tempest driven to the Isle of Cyprus, where, being denied landing,
he assailes the Isle on all sides, subdues it, palces his Granisons therein,
and commits the custody of the same to Richard de Canuile, and Robert de
Turnham, taking half the goods of the Inhabitants from them; in Lieu whereof
he confirmed the use of their own Laws. And here our Histories say, he
married the Lady Berenguela, and caused her to be Crowned Queen.

These mischiefs suffered these two famous Isles of Christendom in the passage
of these mighty Princes against Pagans, who peradventure would have as well
used them for their goods, and treasure as these did, but Armies and power know
no inferior friends; it was their Fate so to lie in the way of great
attempters, who, though in the cause of Piety, would not stick to do any
injustice.

From hence passes this famous king to the Holy Land, with the spoils, and
treasure of three noble rich Islands, England, Sicile, and Cyprus (besides what
Normandy and Guien could furnish him with all) and there consumes that huge
collected mass, even as violently as it was gotten, though to the exceeding
great renown of him, and the nation. Here for the better understanding this
business, it is not amiss to deliver in what sort stood the Estate of those
affairs in Asia, which so much troubled these mighty Princes, and drew them
from the utmost bounds of Europe, thus to adventure themselves and consume
their Estates.

It was now four score and eight years since Godsrey of Bologne, Prince of
Lorraine, with his company recovered the City of Jerusalem, with the Country
of Palestina, and a great part of Siria, out of the hands of the Sarazins,
obtained the Kingdom thereof, and was Crowned with a Crown of Thorns in
example of our Savior, reigned The State of Palestina.
one year, died, and left to succeed him his brother Baldwin, who governed
eighteen years, and left the Crown to another of that name, Balwin de Burgo,
who reigned thirteen years, and left a daughter, and his Kingdom in
dissension. Fulke Earl of Aniou marries this daughter, and enioyes the
Kingdom eleven years, and left two young sons, Baldwin, and Almerique:
Balwin reigns four and twenty years, and after him his brother Almerique
twelve, and leaves Baldwin his son to succeed him, who being sickly, and
dispayring of issue, made Baldwin his Nephew, son to the Marquess of
Monferrato and Sibilla his Sister, his successor: and commits the charge of
him, with the administration of the Kingdom to Raymond Earl of Tripoly, whom
Guy de Lusignan who had married Sibilla (the Widow of Monferrato) put from
that charge, and usurped the Government, and at length the Kingdom, not without
suspicion of poisoning the young King. Raymond making war upon him, Lusignan
draws in Sultan Saladin of Egypt to his aid, who glad of that occasion, to
augment his own State destroyed them both, with their Kingdom, and won the
City of Ptolomeide, Asoto, Berytho, Ascalon, and after one months siege, the
City of Jerusalem four score and eight years after it had been conquered by
Godfrey.

Now to recover this confounded State, come these two Great Kings from a far
and a different clyme with an Army composed of several Nations, and several
humors, English, French, Italians and Germans; against a mighty Prince of
an united power, within his own air, neera at home, bred and made by the
sword, inured to victories, acquainted with the fights, and forces of the
Christians, and possessed almost of all the best pieces of that Country.

And here they sit down before the City of Acon, defended by the power of
Saladin, The Kings of England and France besiege Acon.
which had been before besieged by the Christians the space of three years;
and had cost the lives of many worthy Princes, and great personages, whose
names are delivered by our Writers, amongst whom I will remember these few of
especial note: Conradus Duke of Suenia, son of Frederic the Emperor (which
Frederic was also drowned coming thither) with the Earls of Perch, Puntif,
and old Theobald Earl of Bloys, that famous Stickler between the Kings of
England and France: Stephen Earl of Sancerre: the Earl of Vandosme, Bertoldus
a Duke of Germany, Reoger and Ioselin Earls of Apulia etc. And lastly Phillip
Earl of Flaunders: and of our Nation Baldwin Archbishop of Canterbury.
Robert Earl of Leicester, Ralph de Glanuile, Chief Justice of England,
Richard de Clare; Walter de Kime, etc. And notwithstanding all the forces of
these two kings, they held out four months after, and then rendered themselves
upon composition.

At their entering into the City, the Ensigns of Leopold Duke of Austrich,
being planted on the walls, were with great scorn taken down by the
commandment of King Richard, and those of the two Kings erected, which bred
great rancour, and was afterward the occasion of much mischief to the king of
England Besides, during this siege diverse stings, were ministered, or taken of
displeasure, and malice between the two kings, apt to be set on fire by the
least touches of conceit.

The king of France full of disdain, for the reiection of his Sister, and the
marriage of the king of England with Berenguela; besides competition of honor
(which their equality was subject unto) made any jot of the least disproportion
thereof, a wound without cure: And daily occasions in so great hearts fell
out to work the same. The Article of equal dividing their gains in this
voyage, concluded between them is questioned. The king of France, claims half
the Isle of Cyprus, the king of England, half the Treasure and goods of the
Earl of Flaunders, whereon the King of France had seized, and therein, neither
is satisfied. Then are there two pretenders to the Crown of Jerusalem, Guy of
Lusignan, and Conrade, Marquis of Monferrato: Guy pleads the possession
thereof, which he had by his wife Sibilla: the King of England takes part with
Guy: the King of France, with Conrade: And with these differences are they kept
in imbroylements, and continually distempered, in so much, as by their own
heats, and the contagion The Kings of England and France dangerously sick.
of the Country, they fell into a most dangerous sickness, that cost them
both, their hair, being more then they got by the voyage.

But being recovered, the King of France had no longer will to stay there,
where he saw no more likelihood of honor or profit: and at home, he knew was
better good to be done with less danger, and the rather by the death of the
Earl of Flaunders, whose state lay so near, as it took up part of his;
whereof he had a purpose to abridge his successor, and therefore, craves leave
of the King of England ( for without leave of each other it was couenanted,
neither of them should depart) to return home, which King Richard was hardly
won to grant, in respect he knew the danger, it might work him, in his
absence, to let such an offended Lion loose.

But in the end through the earnest solicitation of the King of France, and
his assurance) The King of France departs from the Holy war.
confirmed by Oath not to do anything offensive to his Dominions in France,
during his absence, he yields thereunto. And so departs this great Prince
leaving the Earl of Borgogne Lieutenant of his forces: And King Richard
betakes him to the siege of Ascalon: writes inuectiue letters against the King
of France for leaving him: who likewise defames King Richard, amongst his
neighbors at home. And it may be doubted whether the perjury of these two
Kings, did not add more to their sin, then the action they undertook for
the remission thereof could take away, for that a good work impiously managed,
meretts no more then an ill.

Ten months the King of England stays behind in these parts, consuming both
his men and treasure without any great success, though with much noble valor
and exceeding courage, finding ever great peruersuesse in the Earl of
Borgogne, who according to his masters instructions showed no great desire to
advance the action, where another must carry the honor: but willing always to
return home (pretending his want) drew back when any business of importance
was to be done; and at length falls sick, and dies at Acon.

Conrade, who was so much favored by the King of France, in his title for that
Kingdom, Conrade murdered.
was murdered by two Assassini whereof the King of England was (but very
wrongfullie) taxed, and the Earl of Champagne, martying his Widow, Sister to
Queen Sibilla, was by King Richard preferred to the Crown of Jerusalem and
Guy of Lusignan (the other pretender) made King of Ciprus, and so both
contented. During this business abroad in the East, the state of England
suffered much at home under the government of Lonshamp, who usurping the whole
authority to himself without communicating Longshamps train and pomp.
any thing either with the Nobility, or the rest of the Commissioners joined
with him, did what he listed, and with that insolency carried himself, as
he incurred the hatred of the whole Kingdom, both Clergy and Lay. His train
was said to be so great, and the pomp of attendants such, as where he lay in
any religious house but one night, 3 years revenues would scarce suffice to
recover the charge. Besides being a stranger himself, and using only French
men about him made his courses the more intolerable to the English: in so
much, as at length the whole Clergy, and Nobility oppose against his
proceedings, and the Earl John taking advantage upon these discontentments (to
make himself more popular, and prepare the way to his intended usurpation)
ioynes with the state against this B. being the man that had ever crossed his
courses having an especially eye unto him, as the most dangerous person of the
Kingdom, both in respect of the kings charge, and his own saftie.

And now there fell out a fit occasion to ruin the Chancellor by this means:
Geffrey 1191. Anno. Reg. 3.
the Elect Archbishop of York, base son to Henry the 2. to whose preferment,
in Eng. King Richard was auerse (and therefore had confined him within Normandy
during his absence) had by great labor to Pope Celestine, obtained a power to
be invested in that Sea: whose coming into England being advertised to the
Chancellor Long shamp, Geffrey the Elect of York taken and imprisoned by the
Chancellor.
he was at his landing at Doner apprehended, and drawn by force out of the
Church which he had recovered, and from the Altar in his Pontifical habit
trailed into the Castle in most vile manner. Of which violence the Earl John,
and the Bishop taking notice, they command the Chancellor not only to release
him but also to answer the matter, before the assembly of the Bishops, and
Nobilite at Paul's: where, they Article, and urge against him many heinous
actions committed, contrary to the Commission given him, and the Weal of the
King, and Kingdom.

The Archbishop of Roan, and William Marshall Earl of Striguile showed openly
the Kings Letters pattents, dated at Messena in Sicile, whereby they were made
Commissioners with him in the government of the Kingdom; which
notwithstanding, he would never suffer them to deal in any business of the
same: but by his own violent, Longshamp the Chancellor deposed from his office.
and headlong will, do all himself: wherefore in the end he was by the
Assembly deposed from his Office: and the Archbishop of Rouen (who would do
nothing without the Council of the State) instituted therein. The Tower of
London, and the Castle of Windsor are taken from him, and delivered to the
Archbishop. And so this great Officer presuming to much in his place (having
envy so near him, and a master so sarre off) was thrown down from his
State, feign to resign his Legantine Cross at Canterbury, and to take up that
for the Holy war: and privily seekeing to escape over Sea, was in the habit
of a woman, with a web of Linnin cloth under his arm, taken upon the shore
at Dover, and most opprobriouslie made a spectacle to the people, and conducted
with all derision to the Castle; whence after He flies and is taken.
eight days he was by the Earl John released, and suffered to go on his
journey; wherein, being the messenger of his own misusage he had the advantage
of his adversaries, and prevailed against them with the Pope, who took very
tenderly the power Legantine should be so vilified.

The Earl John, the Archbishop of Rouen, and the other Justices of the King,
grant unto the City of London their Common (or liberties) and the Citizens
Swore fealty to King Richard and his hair: and that if he died without issue,
they would receive the Earl John for their Lord and King, and likewise swore
fealty unto him against all men, reserving their faith to King Richard.

In this forwardness was the Earl John for his brothers Crown, whilst he is
beleagaring Ascalon, and grapling with Saladin Sultan in the East. But having
notice of this proceeding in England, and how the King of France had taken in
Gisors, and King Richards departure from Palestina.
the Country of Vexin, contrary to his Oath, he takes the opportunity of an
offer made by Saladin of a truce for three years, upon condition that he
should restore Ascalon to the same State wherein he found it before the siege:
which he did by the Council of the Templars, and the whole Army. And
presently leaving Wife, Sister, and people to come after him (as they could
provide) takes a ship with some few followers, and returns from this action,
with as great precipitation as he undertook it: having consumed therein all
that mighty Treasure left him by his father, and all that otherwise he could
tear from his subjects, and others, by violent extortion, or cunning practices.

Pardon us Antiquity, if we miscensure your actions which are ever (as those
of men) according to the vogue, and sway of times, and have only their
upholding by the opinion of the present. we deal with you but as posterity
will with us (which ever thinks it self the wiser) that will judge likewise
of our errors according to the cast of their imaginations. But for a King of
England to return in this fashion, cannot be but a note of much
inconsideration, and had as pitiful an event. For having taken up by the way
three Galleys to conduct him to Ragusa for three hundred Marks of Silver
(disguised under the names of Pilgtimes) he was by his lavish expenses
discovered to be the His discovery.
King of England which note once taken, it was impossible for him to lay any
covering thereon, that could ever hide him more: though upon warning thereof,
he presently left all his company, and with one man only takes horse, and
through all the dangers of a wild desert, and rocky Country, trauayling day,
and night, passes into Austrich, where Fame, that was a speedier post then
himself, was before him. And coming to a Village nere to Viena, and reposing
himself in a poor hosterie, was taken a sleep, by means of his companion
going forth to provide necessaries for him, King Richard taken prisoner
who as he was changing money was known, taken, and brought before the Duke
of Austrich, and upon examination confessed where his master was, of which
prise the Duke was most joyful, in respect of his revenge for the disgrace he
did him at the entering of Acon, and presently sends him to the Emperor Henry
the sixth, whom likewise he had offended for ayding Tancredi the base son of
Roger in the usurpation of the Crown of Sicilia, against Constantia the
lawful daughter of the same Roger whom this Emperor had married.

News hereof is presently sent by the Emperor to the King of France that he
might likewise rejoice at this fortune, and he tells him, That now the Enemy
of his Empire, and the disturber of the Kingdom of France, was fast in hold,
and all the manner how. The State of England is likewise soon certified of
this heavy disaster, and great means is made to redeem their King out of
captivity, who is said to have borne his fortune with that magnanimity, and
so cleared himself of the scandalls laid on him for the death of Conrade the
Emperors kinsman, and other his actions in the East, in such sort, as he won
the affection of the Emperor, so that he professed a great desire to restore
him, and reconcile him to the King of France. But yet we find, That King
Richard deposed King Richard deposed himself of the kingdom of England.
himself of the Kingdom of England, and delivered the same to the Emperor as
his supreme Lord, and invested him therein by the delivering up his hat, whch
the Emperor returned unto him in the presence of the Nobility of Germany and
England to hold this Kingdom from him for 50 thousand pounds sterling to be
paid as an annual tribute.

And yet notwithstanding all this the King of France, combining with the Earl
John, prevailed so much with the Emperor as he held him his prisoner; a whole
year and six weeks through their offer of mighty sums they made unto him.
For he, and the Earl John fully accounted that he should have been held a
perpetual prisoner, and upon that reckning the Earl John did his homage to
the King of France for the Duchy Earl John does homage to the King of France
for Normandy.
of Normandy, and all the rest of those transmarine territories, and for
England as it is said, and besides resignes unto him Gisors, with the Country
of Vexin, swears to marry his sister Alice, and to be divorced from his other
Wise the Daughter of the Earl of Gloucester. The King of France covenants to
give him with his sister that part of Flanders which he had taken from that
Eareldome, and swears to aid him in the attayning both of England and
whatsoever else the Lands of his brother.

Then goes the Earl John over into England carrying many strangers with him,
and presently the Castles of Wallingford and Windsor are rendered unto him: then
comes he to London and requires of the Archbishop of Rouen, and other the
Commissioners, the Kingdom of England and that fealty be made unto him,
affirming his brother was dead, but they not giving credit unto him, and
denying his desire; with rage and strong hand, he fortifies his Castles, and
in hostile manner inuades the Lands of his brother, finding many partakers to
join with him.

The Queen mother, the Justices of England, and all the faithful servants of
the King, guard and defend the ports, against the invasion of the French, and
Flemings, who in great numbers seek to aid the Earl John, and also they
labor the redemption of the King, whose ransom the Emperor rates at 100
thousand Marks, with the finding of fifty Galleys ready furnished, and two
hundred soldiers to attend his service in the holy wars for one year.

In Normandy the Officers and Servants of the King of England defend with no
less faith, and courage the right of their Master against the King of France,
who withal his power labors to subdue them, and by his large offers to the
Emperor prolongs his redemption and inhaunces his ransom. This toil and
charge is the world put into through the misfortune and weakness of their
hardy King who, only in respect of his valor (being otherwise not worth so
much) and the Holy work he undertook, whereby he obliged the Clergy, which
then managed all, got the opinion and love of his subjects, in such sort, as
they strain even beyond their ability to recover and preserve him, and so
wrought in the end that the Emperor compounds with King Richard in this
manner: that he should send his Commissioners to London, and receive an
hundred thousand Marks of pure silver of Cologne The Emperors composition with
King Richard.
weight, to be sealed up and safely conducted to the bounds of the Empire at
the perile of the King of England, and other fifty thousand Marks of silver
(whereof twenty thousand for the Duke of Austrich and thirty thousand for the
Emperor, to be paid at seven months after, and pledges to be given: three
score to the Emperor, and seven to the Duke. Besides the King of England,
swears to send his Niece, the sister of Arthur Earl of Britain to be
married to the Duke of Austrich, etc.

And the Emperor granted to the King of England by his Charter the Sovereignty
of the Province Vienne, and Viennoys Merseilles, Narbona, Arls, Lions, and
whatsoever he had in Burgogne, with the Homages of the King of Arragon, the
Earls of Dijon, and Saint Giles. In which countries were five
Archbishop-ricks, thirty three Bishoprics, but the Emperor could never have
domination over them, nor they receive any Lord that he presented them. So
that this great gift consisted but in title, which yet pleased King Richard
that he might not seem to part with all his substance for nothing. And the
same wind he sends to Hubert the new Archbishop of Canterbury, lately made his
Vicegerent in England to be blown ouet all the Kingdom, by a letter he wrote
unto him wherein he has these words. For that sure I am, you much desire our
deliverance and greatly rejoice therein, we will that you be partaker of our
joy, and thought fit to signify to your be louednesse, that the Lord the
Emperor has prefixd the day thereof to be upon Monday after the Feast of King
Richards letters into England.
the Nativity, and the Sunday after we shall receive theCrowne of the Kingdom
of Province, which he has given us, whereof we send his Letters Patents unto
you, and other our friends, and well willers, and do you in the mean time, as
much as in you lies, comfort those you know love us; and desire our promotion.
Test me ipso apud Spiram 22. Sep. The Emperor likewise writes to the Bishops,
Earls, Barons, and other the Subjects of England, how he purposed to advance
and magnificently to honor his especial friend their King, and in this Coin
are they paid at home for what they were to lay out.

King Richard sends after this, for his mother Queen Elionor (who is still a
trauailer) and for the Archbishop of Rouen with many others to come unto him,
about the time and business of his deliverance, for which, There is imposed
upon every Knights Fee twenty shillings, the fourth part of all lay men's
revenues, and the fourth part of all the revenues of the Clergy, with a tenth
of their goods is enjoined to be paid. The Chalices and treasure of all
Churches are taken to make up the sum, the like is done in all his
territories beyond the Seas, so dearly cost the return of this King from his
Eastern voyage.

And this Queen Berenguela had likewise her part of affliction in this journey
for she with her sister in law the Queen Dowager of Sicilia, fearing the
Emperors malice were a whole year in trauayling from Palestina, and at length
were conducted unto Poictou The King of France hearing of this conclusion made
betwixt King Richard and The King of France and Earl John proffer great sums
to hold King Richard prisoner.
the Emperor writes to the Earl John how the Devil was got loose, willing
him now to look to himself; and it vexed them exceedingly both being
disappointed thus of their hopes. And there upon, the Earl John leaving his
Castles in England well defended, and encouraging his Soldiers to hold out, and
credit no reports, departes into Normandy, where he with the King of France
whilst King Richard is yet in the Emperors hands solicites him, with the
proffer of a hundred and fifty thousand Marks or else a thousand pounds a
month, so long as he held him his prisoner. But it prevailed not, though it
staggered the Emperor for a time, who in the end showed this letter to King
Richard (that he might see what care was taken for him) and then delivers him
to his mother Elionor receiving the pledges for observation of peace, (and the
rest of the ransom unpaid) The Archbishop of Rouen, the Bishop of Bath, with
the sons of many principal Earls and Barons. And so in February King
Richards return into England.
one year, and six weeks after his Captivity, in the fourth year of his
reign he returns into England, where the Bishops (in whose grace especially
he was) had excommunicated the Earl John, and all his adherents, and taken in
his Castles of Marleborow, Lancaster, and a fortress at Saint Michels mount in
Cornwall defended by Henry de Pumeroy. But his Castle of Nottingham, though
strongly assailed by Ralph Earl of Chester and the Earl Ferrers, and the
Castle of Tichill by the Bishop of Duresme, held out for the Earl John, and
found the King some work to do upon his return; who presently without any
stay otherwhere, came before Nottingham Castle withal the show of state and
greatness he could make; which yet could not so terrify the defen dants, as
to make them yield, confident either in their own strength, or in opinion that
there 1193. Anno. Reg. 5.
was no King ever to return to assault them, and supposiing it but a mere
show, resolved to hold out for their master; which put the King to much
travail, and great expense of blood before they rendered themselves, which was
also upon pardon. Those of the Castle of Tichill yielded to the Bishop of
Duresme, their persons, and goods saved.

The King assembles a Parliament at Nottingham where Queen Elionor was present,
and sat on his right hand. The first day of the Session, he disserseth Girard
de Canuile of A Parliament at Notingham.
the Castle of Lincoln, and the Shriefwike of that Shire: from Hugh Bardolph
he takes the Shriefwicke of Yorkshire, the Castles of York, Scarborow, and
the custody of Westmerland, and exposes them all to Sale. The Archbishop of
York gives for the Shriefwicke of Yorkshire three thousand Marks, with one
hundred Marks of annual rent.

The second day of the Session the King requires judgment upon the Earl John,
for having contrary to his Oath of fealty, usurped his Castles, etc. and
contracted confederacy with the King of France against him. And likewise
judgment against Hugh de Nauant Bishop of Couentry for adhering to the Earl
John, and the Kings enemies. And it was adjudged, they should both appear at a
peremptory day to stand to the law. Which if they did not, the Earl John to
deserve banishment, and the Bishop to under go the judgment, both of the
Clergy, as being a Bishop, and of the Layety being the Kings Shriefe, But this
Bishop two years after, was restored to the Kings favor, and his Bishopric,
for five thousand Marks. The third day of this Session was granted to the
King, of every ploughland, through out England, two shillings, besides the King
required the third part of the service, of every Knights Fee, for his
attendance in Normandy: and all the Wool that year of the Monks Cisteaux.
Which for that it was grievous and insupportable unto them, they fine for money.

The fourth and last day, was for the hearing of grieuances and accusations,
and so this assembly brake up. But here either to add more Majesty after
calamity, or else to nullify his act done to the Eemperour is appointed the
Kings recoronation to be solemnised Richard again crowned at Winchester.
at Winchester, presently upon the Feast of Easter next following. Whilst the
king was in these parts, William King of Scots, repaires to him, and required
the dignities and honors his predesessors of right had in England, and with
all, the counties of Northumberland, Cumberland, Westmerland, and Lancaster. To
whom the King of England first answered, that he would satisfy him by the
advice of his Council, with shortly after was assembled at Northampton, where,
after deliberation, he told him that his petition, ought not in reason, to be
granted at that time, when almost all the Princes of France were his enemies,
for it would be thought rather an act of fear, then any true affection, and so
put it off for that time with fair promises: yet graunts he by the advice, and
consent of the Council, under his Charter, to William King of Scotts and his
heirs for ever: that when by sommons they should come to the Court of the king
of England, the Bishop of Duresme, and the Shriefe of Northumberland should
receive them at the river of Tweed, and bring them under safe conduct to the
river of Teis, and there the Archbishop of York, and the Shriefe of Yorkshire
should receive and conduct them to the bounds of that county: and so the
Bishops, and Shriefes of other Shires till they came to the Court of the King
of England, and from the time that the King of Scots first entered into this
Realm, he should have an hundred shillings a day allowed of gift for his
charge, and after he came to the Court, thirty shillings a day, and twelve
Wastells, and twelve Simnells of the Kings, four quartes of the Kings best
wine and six of ordinary wine, two pounds of pepper, and four pounds of
Cinnamon; two pounds of Wax, or four Wax lights, forty great long perchers of
the Kings best candles, and twenty four of other ordinary, and at his return
to be safely conducted as he came, and with the same allowance.

From Northampton, both the Kings go to Woodstock and thence to Winchester,
where the Coronation is sumptuously solemnised. And there King Richard resumes
the two Resumptions.
Manors he sold to the Bishop of Winchester, at his going to the holy War,
and likewise the Castle of Winchester and that county, with whatsoever sales he
had made else of the Demaynes of the Crown, alleging that it was not in his
power to aliene any thing appertayning to the same whereby his State was to
subsist. The Bishop of Duresme seeing these reuocations, did voluntarily,
deliver up the Castle of Duresme, with the County of Northumberland, which the
King willed to be delivered to Hugh Bardolph. Hugh Bishop of Lincoln gave for
the liberty of his Church one thousand Marks of silver, redeeming thereby the
custom of giving to the King of England every year a cloak furred with
Sabells.

Here all such who had taken part with the Earl John and defended his Castles,
were sommoned to appear, and all the rich were put to their ransom, the
poorer sort let go at liberty, but under sureties of an hundred Marks a piece,
to answer in the Kings Court whenever they should be called. The King of
Scots, seeing the King of England use all means for money, offers fifteen
thousand Marks for Northumberland, with the appurtenances, alleging how King
Henry the second gave the same to Henry his Father, and that after him, King
Malcom inioyed it five years. This large offer of money tempted King Richard
so, as again he consulted with his Council about the matter, and in
conclusion was willing to yield the same to the King of Scots, reserving to
himself the Castles, but that, the King of Scots would not accept, and so with
much discontent departs into Scotland; yet two years after this, King Richard
sends Hubert Walter Archbishop of Canterbury to York, there to treat with the
King of Scots of a marriage between Otho his Nephew, and Margaret daughter to
the said king, to have for her dowre all Lynox, and he would give with his
Nephew, Northumberland and the Earldome of Carlisle, with all the Castles, but
the Queen of Scots in the time of this treaty, being known to be with Child,
it took no effect.

From Winchester, king Richard departs into Normandy with an hundred ships, so
that his stay in England was but from the latter end of February to the tenth
of May, and that time only spent in gleaning out what possible this kingdom
could yield, to consume King Richord departs into Normandy with 100 ships
the same in his businesses of France, which took up all the rest of his
reign, being in the whole but nine years, and nine months whereof he was
never above eight months in England. Nor do we find that ever his wife
Berenguela was here, or had any dowry or honor of a Queen of England, or
otherwise of any regard with him, how much souer she had deserved.

And now all affairs that either concerned the state in general, or any
man's particular, was (to the great charge and travail of the Subjects of
England, to be dispatched in Normandy: and that game we had by our large
dominions abroad. The first action that king Richard undertook upon his
coming over, was, the relieuing of Vernoul, beseiged by the king of France and
there his brother John, by the mediation of their mother Queen Elionor is
reconciled unto him, and abiures the part of the king of France. And to make
his party, the stronger in those countries he first gives his sister Ioane,
Queen Dowager of Sicile to Raymond Earl of Toulouse, being the nearest
neighbor of power to his Duchy of Guien, and might most offend him. Then
enters league with Balduine Earl of Flanders from whom the king of France had
taken Artois, and Vermandois, and on all sides seeks to imbroyle his enemy.
Four years at least, held this miserable turmoyle betwixt these two kings,
surprising, recovering, ruyning and spoiling each others Estate, often deceuing
both the world, and themselves with show of covenants reconciliatorie (which
were ever more broken again upon all advantages according to the mystery of
war and ambition.

King Phillip of France to strengthen himself with shipping to oppose the
English, marries Botilda the sister of Knut king of, Denmark, but this match
made for his ends, and not affection turned to his more trouble, for the next
day after his wedding he put her away, pretending (besides other things)
propinquity of blood, and for this had he long and great contention with the
Church and the king of Denmark. The Emperor sends to the king of England a
massy Crown of gold, and offers to come and aid him against the king of
France, and to invade his kingdom, but the king returns him only thanks,
not willing to have him stire in this business and in regard he suspected the
Emperor affected to add France to the Empire, which would not be safe for
him: or that the King of France dealing with the Emperor might win him with
money, and so in the end, join both together against him. Now to supply the
charge of this great 1194. Anno. Reg. 6.
work, England was sure still to bear the heauiest part: and no shift is
leaft unsought, that might any way raise means to the King from hence.
Witness the Commission given to the Justices Itnerants sent into every Shire
of England for exaction upon pleas of the Crown, for Escheats, wardships,
marriages, etc. with the improuement of the Demaynes, and the order taken for
the exact knowing of the Estates of men, and especially of the Jews, on whom
the King Vide Append.
would have none to prey but himself: Then the raising an imposition upon
allowance of Turnements, which was for every Earl twenty Marks of silver:
every Baron, ten, every Kinght having Means used for money.
lands, four: and for such as had none, two Marks for a license. The
Collection whereof the Archbishop of Canterbury commits to his brother Theobald
Walter. Besides another new seal, the old being lost by the Vice-Chancelor at
the taking of Cirpus brings in a new exaction.

But the proceeding in the pleas of the Crown and extorting of penalties Anno
Reg. 9. By Hugh Bardolph, Roger Arundle and Geffrey Hatchet Justices Itenerants
for Lyncolnshire, Nottinghamshire, Darbyshire, Yorkshire, Northumberland,
Cumberland, and Lancaster, was of a higher strain of exaction, and more
profound, as having more of time, and presumption upon the peoples sufferance,
of whom, when once trial was made that they would bear, were sure to have more
laid on them then they were able to under go. And with these vexations (says
Houeden) all England from Sea to Sea was reduced to extreme poverty, and yet
it ended not hear: another torment is added to the confusion of the Subjects
by the Justices of the Forests, Hugh Neuile, chief Justice, Hugh Wac, and
Ernise de Neuile, who not only execute those hidious laws introduced by the
Norman, but impose other of more tyranicall severity, as the memory thereof
being odious, deserves to be utterly forgotten, having afterward by the hard
labor of our noble ancestors, and the goodness of more regular Princes, been
assuaged and now out of use.

Besides in the same year, this King imposes 5 shil. upon every Hide or
Plough-land, (which contained an hundred Acres) for the leuying whereof a most
strict course was taken: Likewise he required by his Vicegerent the Archbishop
of Canterbury, that the people of England should find three hundred Knights
for one year to remain in his service, or so much money, allowing for every
Knight, three shillings per diem. Against which Hugh Bishop of Lyncoln opposes,
and says, that he would never yield to the Kings will in this, for the
detriment it might be to the Church, and example to posterity, that should not
complain thereof, and say: our Fathers have eaten sour grapes, and the
childrens teeth are set on edge, and turning to the Archbishop, wished him,
that he would do nothing whereof he might be a shamed.

This Archbishop so husbanded the Kings business that in Anno Reg. 7. he
yielded Vudecies centena millia Marc. Houed.
an account unto him, that he had Ieuied of the Kingdom within the space of
two years eleven hundred thousand Marks of silver; which, considering that
time is a most remarkable sum. And now as the first act of this King was his
violent violent proceeding in a business of Treasore with Stephen Thurstan
Seneshall of Normandy, so was it likewise the last, and the cause of his
destruction: for, Widomare, Viscont of Limoges, having found a great treasure
of silver, and gold in the ground, sends a good part thereof to the King, which
he refuses, laying claim to the whole: Widomare denying the same, the King
lays fiege to his Castle where he imagined the treasure was hid; they of the
Castle being but weak, offered to render the same, their lives members, and
Armor saved, which the King would not yield unto, but swore that he would sack
the Castle, and hang them all. Whereupon desperately they resolve to stand to
their defense. King Richard with Marchard, general of the Brabanzons going
about the Castle to view what place was sitiest for an assault; Bertramd:
Gurdun, from the walls shot a barbed arrow that hit the King in the arm, with
such a deadly blow, as he was presently sent to his lodging: notwithstanding
commands he his forces to prosecute the assault without intermission which they
did, and took the Castle putting to execution all the defendants except
Bartram, who by the Kings command was reserved.

But the arrow drawn out with great torture, left the head behind, which
being by a rude Surgeon, after much mangling the flesh hardly cut out,
brought the King to despair of life, and to dispose of his Estate, leaving to
his brother John three parts of his treasure, and the fourth to his servants.

Which done, he willed Bertram Gurdun to be brought unto him, of whom he
demanded, what hurt he had done him, that provoked him to do this mischief,
to whom Bertram replies: thou have killed my father and my two brothers with
thine own hand, and now would have slain me, take what revenge thou will.
I willingly endure what soever torture thou can in flict upon me, iu respect
I have slain thee, who have done such and so great mischief to the world. The
King notwithstanding this rough and desperate answer, caused him to be let
loose, and not only forgave him his death, but commanded 100 shillings The
death of King Richard.
sterling to be given unto him, but Marchard after the King was dead caused him
to be hanged and flayed.

This was the end of this Lyon-like King, when he had reigned nine years, and
9 months, wherein he exacted, and consumed more of this Kingdom, then all
his predecessors 1599. Anno. Reg. 10.
from the Norman had done before him, and yet less deserved then any, having
neither lived here, neither left behind him monument of Piety, or of any
other public work, or ever showed love or care to this Commonwealth, but
only to get what he could from it. Never had Prince more given with less a
do and less noyes then he. The reason whereof, as I have said, was his
undertaking the Holy war, and the cause of Christ, with his suffering therein;
and that made the Clergy, which then might do all, to deny him nothing: and
the people, fed with the report of his miraculous valor, horrible incounters
in his voyage abroad (and then some victories in France) were brought to bear
more the^ ever otherwise they would have don.

Then had he such Ministers here to serve his turn as preferred his, before
the service of God, and did more for him in his absence, then ever peradventure
he would, or could have done for himself by being here present. For, both, to
hold their places, and his good opinion, they devise more shifts of rapine,
then had ever bin practiced before in this Kingdom, and cared not so he were
satisfied, what burden they laid on the Subject; which rent, and torn by
continual exactions was made the more miserable, in that they came betrayed
with the show of Religion and Law, the maine supporters of humane society,
ordained to preserve the state of a people, and not to confound it. But the
insolent ouercharging the state in these times gave occasion to the future, to
provide for themselves; Excesses ever procute alterations. And the Successors
of this King were but little beholding unto him; for out of his irregularitie,
their boundlessnes came to be brought within some limits. Yet what this King
would have proved, had his days allowed him other then this rough part of
war, we know not; but by the operation of a poor Hermits speech made unto
him, we are showed that he was conuertible. For being by him vehemently urged
to be mindful of the subversion of Sodom, and to abstain from things
unlawful, thereby, to avoid the vengeance of God, he upon an ensuing sickness (a
sounder Counsailor then health) remembering this aduertisment, vows a
reformation of his life: and did afterward upon his recovery, every morning
rise early to hear divine service. For which Houeden has this note: how
glorious it is for a Prince to begin and end his actions in him, who is
beginning without beginning, and judges the ends of the Earth. Besides he
grows hospitable to the poor, and made restitution of much Church vessel,
that had been taken and sold for his ransom.

Though this King had no issue, yet was he told by a Priest in France that he
had three evil His issue.
daughters, and admonished to put them away and bestow them abroad to avoid
the punishment of God. The King gave him the lie and said, he knew none he had,
Yes Sir, replied the Priest, three daughters you have, and they are these,
Pride, Covetousness, and Lechery. The King calling those who were present
about him, and relating what the Priest had said, willed them to be witnesses
how he would bestow these his 3 daughters which the Priest charged him withal.
The 1. which is Pride, I give to the Templars and Hospitallers, Couetuousnesse,
to the Monks of Cisteaux Order, and Lechery to the Clergy, this sudden
retortion shows us his quickness, and what kind of men were then muligned,
and out of his grace.

The end of the Life, and Reign of Richard the first.
The Life, and reign of King John.
JOHN having his brothers Army in the field, with all his Servants and
followers, intertaines them generally with promises of large rewards, 1199.
Anno. Reg. 1.
and thereby had the advantages of time, power, and opinion to help him on to
his desires. Hubert Archbishop of Canterbury being upon business in those parts,
and the most potent minister he could wish, for so mighty a work, he presently
dispatches for England, with William Marshall Earl of Striguil, Geffery Fitz
Peter, etc. to prepare the people to receive him for their King: who,
especially dealing with those were most doubted would oppose him, and
undertaking for him that he should restore unto them their rights, and govern
the Kingdom, as he ought, with moderation; wrought so as they were all
content upon those conditions, to swear Fealte unto him against all men. These
undertakers, likewise, send word to William King of Scots (to hold him in, from
any attempt) that he should also have full satisfaction for what he claymed
in England, upon the return of their new Master. And so were all things made
clear on this fide. But on the other, the right of succession, which was in
Arthur the Elder brothers Son, stirred affections of another nature, the
nobility of Aniou, Maine and Tureine, maintayning the usual custom of
inheritance, adhere to Arthur, whom his mother Constance puts under the
Protection of the King of France, who receives him and undertakes the defense
of his right.

John having his chiese aim at the Crown of England could have no time of
stay to close those ruptures that so violently brake out there, but having
received the inuestiture King John's Coronation.
of the Duchy of Normandy, and performed all those rites, he speedily, with
his mother Elionor (who must have her part in every act of her Sons) passes
over into England, and by way of election receues the crown upon the Assention
day, at the hands of Hubert Archbish. of Canterbury, who in his Oration, (as it
is recorded in Mat. Pa.) before the whole Assembly of the state showed, that by
all reason, divine and human, none ought to succeed in the Kingdom, but who
should be for the worthynesse of his virtues, universally chosen by the state,
as was this man, etc. which then, seems especially urged, in respect his title
of succession would not carry it. And the Archbishop afterward, upon this
point, being questioned, confessed to his friends, that he foresaw this man
would, (what blood and mischief soever it should cost) in the end obtain the
crown. And therefore the safer way was, to prevent confusion, that the land
should rather make him King, then he make himself; and that this election
would be some tie upon him.

So came John to the crown of England which he governed with as great
injustice as he gat it, and imbraked the state, and himself, in those
miserable incombrances, through his violences and oppression, as produced
desperate effects, and made way to those great alterations in the government
which followed. The Queen Mother, a woman of an high and working spirit, was
an especial agent in this preferment of her Son John, in respect of her own
greatness, knowing how she should be more by him, then she could be by her
grandchild Arthur, who had a mother would look to become Regent here, and so
ouer-shaddow her estate, which was a thing not to be endured. Besides Arthur
was a child, borne and bred a stranger, and never showed unto the Kingdom, so
that he had nothing but his right to draw a party, which could not be such (in
regard of the danger of the adventure, things standing as they did) that could
do him any great good. Men being content rather to embrace the present, though
wrong, with saftie, then seek to establish another right, with the hazard of
their own confusion.

The state of England secured; King John returns into Normandy upon
intelligence given England secured to King John.
of the defection wrought in those parts by Phillip the French King, who had
given the order of Knighthood to Arthur, and taken his homage for Aniou Poctou,
Main, Turein, and also for Normandy (in regard as he pretended) that King John
had neglected to come, and do him homage for the same, as members held of the
crown of France. King John, not willing upon his new and doubtful admission
to the government to ingulph 1200. Anno. Reg. 2.
himself into a sudden war, mediates a Parle with the King of France, who
well understanding the time, and his own advantages, requires so unreasonable
conditions, as King John could not, without great dishonor yield unto, and so
they fall to the sword. The King of France under pretense of working for Arthur
gets for himself, which being discovered, Arthur with his mother Constance are
brought (by the persuasion of their chief Minister William de la Roche) to
commit themselves to the protection of King John; of whom likewise conceiving a
sudden iealofie (or else informed of his purpose Prince Arthur and his mother
fly to Angiers.
to imprison them) the next night after their coming, got secretly away and
fled to Angiers. So this young Prince, borne to be crushed between these two
potent Kings (intending only their own ends) gave occasion by leaving them
both, to make both his enemies. After many attempts, and little gain on either
side, another treaty is mediated by the Popes Legates, wherein King John buys
his peace upon these yielding conditions: That Louys, eldest son to King
Philip should marry his Ncece Blanch daughter of Alphonso King of Castile, and
have with her in Dowre, the City and County of Eureux, with sundry Castles in
Normandy, and 30 thousand Marks of Silver. Besides, promises if he died
without issue, to leave unto him all his territories in France. And that he
would not aid his Nephew Otho ( lately elected Emperor) against Philip brother
to the late Emperor Hen. 6. whom the K. of France favored, in opposition of
Pope Innocentius who took the part of Otho.

After this Peace made, Otho taking it unkindly to be thus forsaken by his
Uncle John, sends his two brothers Henry Duke of Saxony and William Winton (so
titled, for having been born at Winchester) to require the City of Eureux and
the County of Poictou, and two parts of the treasure which his Uncle King
Richard had bequeathed unto him, besides other moueables; but they come to
late. the obligation of blood, and rendering of dues is held to be of an
inferior nature to the present interests of State. To this unkind, and
unnatural act he presently adds another: Repudiats his wife (daughter to
1201. Anno. Reg. 3.
the Earl of Gloucester, alleging consanguinity in the third degree) and
marries Isabell daughter and inheretrix to the Earl of Anglosme fianced before
to Hugh le Brun Earl of March (a Peer of great Estate and alliance in France)
by consent of King Richard, in whose custody she then was. And having finished
these distasteful businesses he returns, to give as little contentment, into
Eng. where he imposes 3 shillings upon every An imposition of 3 shillings upon
every Plough land.
Plough-land, to discharge the great dowry of 30 thousand Marks he was to give
with his Niece Blanch the collection whereof, Geffrey Archb. of York opposes
within his Prouice. For which, and for refusing, upon summons to come unto this
late treaty in France, the King causes his Shriefe James Potern, to seize upon
all his temporalties. The Archb. interdicts the whole Province of York, and
excommunicats the Shriefe. K. John shortly after, makes a progress with his
wife Queen Isabel over all the North parts unto Scotland and exacts great fines
of offenders in his forests. In his passing through Yorkshire, his brother the
Archb. refused him wine and the honor of the Bells at Beuerley, but by the
mediation of 4 B B. and 4 Barons, and a great sum of money a reconciliation is
made between them with promise of reformation of excesses on either part.

Upon Easter day (after his return from the North) the King again is Crowned
at His second Coronation.
Canterbury, and with him Isabel his Queen, by the Archb Hubert. And there are
the Earls and Barons of Eng. surnmoned to be ready with horse and armor to
pass the Seas with him presently upon Whitsontide, but they holding a
conference together at Leicester by a general consent send him word, that
unless he would render them their Rights and Liberties, they would not attend
him out of the Kingdom. The King, says Houeden, using ill counsel, required
of them their Castles, and beginning with William de Aubenie demanded to have
his Castle of Beauoyr, William delivers his son in pledge, but kept his
Castle. Notwithstanding this refusal of the Lords, having taken order for the
government, he passes over with his Queen into Normandy, where his presence,
with the great show of his preparations, caused the reuolters to forbear their
enterprises for that time, and a 1202. Anno. Reg. 4.
father ratisication, with as strong covenants, and cautions as could be
devised, is made of the Agreements with King Phillip of France, who feasts the
King of England and his Queen at Paris with all complements of amity. And
here both Kings, solicited by the Popes Legate, grant a Subsidy of the fortith
part of all their Subjects revenues for one year (by way of Alms) to succor
the Holy Land. Vide Append.
For the leauying whereof in England, Geffrey Fitz Peter Chief Iusticiar sends
out his Writs by way of request and persuasion, and not as of due or coaction
to avoid example.

But many months passed not, ere a new conspiracy brake out by the instigation
of Hughle Brun, who stung with the rapture of his wife (a wrong of the most
sensible touch in nature) combines with Arthur, the Barons of Poictou and
Brittatne, and raised a strong side, which the King of France (notwithstanding
all those ties wherein he stood engaged to the King of England) betakes
himself unto, in regard of his own interests and advantages from which no
bands could withhold him, and again both these Kings are in Arms. The King of
France declares himself for Arthur, to whom he marries his youngest daughter:
requires King John to deliver up unto him all his territories in France, and by
a peremptory day summons him to appear personally at Paris, to answer what
should be laid to his charge, and abide the Arest of his Court, which King
John refusing, was by sentence adjudged to loose all he held of that Crown.

Then is he assailed on one side by the King of France in Normandy, on the
other by He takes his Nephew Arthur prisoner.
Arthur, and the Barons in Aniou who lay siege to Mirabel, defended by Elionor
the Queen mother, and were upon the point of taking it; when King John, with
greater expedition and force then was expected, came and defeited the whole
army of the assayliants, took prisoner the Earl Arthur, Hugh le Brun with the
Barons of Poictou and above 200 Knights, and men of command, all which he
carried away bound in Carts, and dispersed into diverse Castles both of
Normandy and England.

This victory, which might seem enough to have established his Estate, undid
him, for by the ill using thereof he lost himself and his reputation for ever.
Arthur is shortly after murdered in prison, and the deed laid to his charge,
which, with the Arthur mur. thered.
cruel execution of many his prisoners and Ostages so exasperates the
Nobility of Britain, Aniou and Poictou as they all take Arms against him,
and summoned he is to answer in the Court of Justice of the King of France to
whom they appeal, which, he, refusing is condemned both to loose the Duchy of
Normandy (which his Ancestors 1203. Anno. Reg. 5.
had held by the space of 300 years) and all his other Provinces in France,
whereof the next year after, either through his negligence being (as they
write) given over to the pleasures of his young wife, or by the revolt of his
own Ministers (incensed likewise against him) he became wholly dispossessed.

And in this disastrous Estate, he returns into England, and charges the
Earls and King John fines the Barons.
Barons with the reproach of his losses in France and fines them to pay the
seventh part of all their goods for refusing him aid. Neither spared he the
Church, or the Commons in this imposition. Of which rapin (says Mat. Par.)
were executors, Hubert Archbishop of Canterbury for the Clergy, and Geffrey
Fitz Peter Iusticiar of Eng. for the Layetie.

But all this treasure collected, amounted not to answer his wants, or the
furnishing of fresh supplies for the recovery of his losses (for which he vrges
the same to be raised) and therefore again in less then the space of an
year, another leauie (but by 1205. Anno. Reg. 7. A Parliament at Oxford.
a fairer way) is made. A Parliament is conuoked at Oxford, wherein is granted
two Marks and an half of every Knights fee for military aid, neither
departed the Clergy from thence till they had likewise promised their part. No
sooner is this money gathered but a way is opened, into that all-deuouring
Gulf of France to issue it, through a revolt begun in Britain, by Guido
(now husband to Constance, mother of Arthur) Sauari de Malleon, and Almeric
Lusignian, consederats with many others; who receiving not that satisfaction,
expected from their new Master, call in, their old again, to show us, that
men's private interests, howsoever Honor and Justice are pretended, only sway
their affections, in such actions as these.

And over hastes King John, and by the power he brought, and what he found
there, won the strong Castle of Mont Alban, and after the City of Angiers; and
was in a fair way to have recovered more; but that the King of France, by the
fortune of one day (wherein he overthrew and took prisoners the chief
confedrats, Guido, Almeric, and Saueri) forced him to take truce for two
years, and return into Eng. for more supplies.

And here another imposition is laid of the thirteenth part of all moueables,
and other 1206. Anno. Reg. 8.
goods both of the Clergy and Layetie: who now seeing their substances thus
consumed without success, and likely ever to be made liable to the Kings
desperate courses, begin to cast for the recovery of their ancient immunites,
which upon their former suffrance had bn usurped by their late Kings, and to
ease themselves of these burdens The cause of the breach between the King and
his people.
indirectly laid upon them. And the first man that opposed the collection of
this imposition, was again the Archb. of York, who solemnly accursed the
receivers thereof within his Province, and secretly conuayed himself out of the
Kingd. desirous rather to live as an exile abroad then to endure the misery of
oppression at home: men accounting themselves less injuriously rifled in a
wood, then in a place where they presume of saftie.

And hence grew the beginning of a miserable breach between a King and his
people, being both, out of proportion, and disioynted in those just Ligaments
of Command 1207. Anno. Reg. 9.
and Obedience that should hold them together, the reducing whereof into due
form and order again, cost more ado, and more noble blood then all the
wars foreign had done since the Conquest. For this contention ceased not
(though it often Vide Append,
had some fair intermissions, till the great Charter made to keep the beam
right betwixt Soueraingtie, and Subjection) first obtained of this King John,
after, of his son Hen. 3. (though observed truly of neither) was in the
maturity of a judicial Prince, Edward the first, freely ratifyed An. Reg. 27.
which was above four score years. And was the first civil dissension that
ever we find, since the establishing of the English Kingdom, between the
King, and his Nobles of this nature. For the better knowledge whereof, we are
to take a view of the face of those times, the better to judge of the occasions
given and taken of these turbulencies.

It was this time, about 140. years since William the first had here planted
the Noro man Nobility, whose issue being now become mere English, were grown
to be of great numbers, of great means, and great spirits, ever exercised in
the wars of France, where most of them were Commanders of Castles, or owners
of other Estates, besides what they held in England: and being by this violent,
and vnsuccesfull King shut out from action, and their means abroad, they
practice to preserve what was left, and to make themselves as much as they
could at home. Which, by their martial freedom, and the privileges of the
Kingdom (necessity now driving them to look into it) they more boldly presume
to attempt, in regard they saw themselves, and the Kingdom brought to be
perpetually harassed at the Kings will, and that violence and corruption has
no faculty to prescribe upon them: wherein their cause was much better then
their prosecution. For whilst they strive to recover what they had lost, and
the King to keep what he by advantage of time and sufference had gotten, many
unjust and insolent courses are used on either side, which leave their stain
to posterity, and make foul the memory of those times. We can excuse no part
herein, all was ill; and out of order. A diseased Head first made a distempred
body, which being not to be recovered a part, rendered the sickness so long and
teadious as it was. Besides, the strange corruption of the season concurred, to
add to this mischief: An ambitious Clergy polluted with avarice, brought
Piety in show to be a presumptiue party herein, and takes advantages upon the
weaknesses they found, for which, the Roman Church hears ill to this day. And
the occasion of their interposition in this business, began about the Election
of a new Archb. of Canterbury ( Hubert being lately dead) which the Monks of
that Covent had made secretly in the Reginald first chosen Atehb. by the Monks.
night, of one Reginald their Subprior; to prevent the King whom they would not,
should have a hand in the business, which they pretended to appertain freely to
themselves by their ancient priuiledeges. And this Riginald (thus elected) they
instantly dispatch toward Rome taking his Oath of secrecy before hand. But
the fullness of his joy burst open that lock and out comes the report of his
advancement, upon his landing in Flanders, which the Monks hearing, and
fearing what would follow, send to the king to crave leave to Elect a fit man
for that Sea. The King nominates unto them John Gray Bishop of Norwich whom he
especially favored, and persuaded them (upon great promises of their good) to
prefer: the Kings desire is propounded to the Covent, and after much debate,
is John Gray advanced to the Chair.

Wherein their last error ( says Mat. Par.) was worse then their first, and
began that discord which after proved an irreparable damage to the Kingdom.

The King sends to Rome certain of the Monks of Canterbury (amongst whom was
one Helias de Brandfield a most trusty servant of his) with bountiful
allowance, to obtain the Popes confirmation of this Election. And about the
same time likewise send the Bishops suffragans (of the Church of Canterbury)
their complaynts to the Pope against the Monks for presuming to make election
without their assistance, as by Right and Custom they ought: allegation,
examples of three Archbishops so elected. The Monks, oppose this allegation,
offering to bring proof that they only, by the special privilege of the
Roman Bishops were accustomed to make this Election. The Pope appoints a
peremptory day for deciding this Controversy, wherein the first Election for
being made in the night, out of due time, and without solemn ceremony is
oppugned by the Kings procurators: the last was argued by some of the Monks to
be ill, by reason there was no cassation of the first, which just or unjust
ought to have been, before any other Election, could iuridically be made.

The Pope seeing the procurators not to agree upon one person, by the Council
of Innotent. the ninth.
the Cardinals adjudged both Elections void, and presents unto them a third
man, which was Stephan de Lancton a Cardinal of great spirit, and an
Englishman borne, who had all the voices of those Monks which were there,
through the persuasion of the Pope, alleging it was in their power by his
prerogative to make good this choice.

Stephan Lancton thus elected, and after consecrated at Viterbo, the Pope
dismisses Stephan Lancton elected Archbishop of Canterbury.
the Monks and the rest of the Agents with letters to King John, exhorting
him, benignly to receive this Archbishop Canonically elected, native of his
Kingdom, learned in all the Sciences, a Doctor in Theology, and, which
exceeded his learning, of a good life and conversation: a man fit, both for his
body, and his soul, etc. withal he writes to the Prior, and Monks, of
Canterbury, charging them by the virtue of Holy obedience to receive the
Archbishop to their Pastor, and humbly to obey him in all Spiritual and
Temporal matters.

These letters, with the notice of what was done at Rome, so enraged the King,
as with all precipitation he sends Foulke de Cantlo, and Henry de Cornhill, two
fierce knights, with armed men, to expel the Monks of Canterbury, as
Traitors, out of the Kingdom, and to seize upon all they had, which presently
was as violently executed as commanded, and away pack the Prior and all the
Monks into Flanders (except such as were sick and not able to go) and all
their goods confiscated.

Here withal, he writes a sharp letter to the Pope, accusing him of the wrong
he did in King John offended with this Election writes to the Pope.
cassing the election of Norwich whom he especial favored, and advancing
Stephan Lanction, a man unknown unto him, bred ever in the Kingdom of France
and among his enemies; and, what was more, to his prejudice, and subversion of
the liberties appertayning to his Crown, without his consent (given to the
Monks,) which should first have been required, he had presumed rashly to
prefer him; so that he much meruailed that the Pope, and the universal court
of Rome, would not call to mind how necessary his friendship had hitherto
been to that sea: and consider, that the Kingdom of England yielded the same
greater profit, and commodity, then all the Kingdoms else on this side the
Alps. Besides, that he wouldstand to the liberties of his Crown to the death:
constantly affirming, that he could not be revoked from the Election and
preferment of the Bishop of Norwich, whom he knew every way fit for the place.
And in conclusion threatens, that if he be not righted in the Premises, he
would stop up the passages of his people to Rome; and that if necessity
required, he had in the Kingdom of England, and other his Dominions,
Archbishops, Bishops, and other Prelates of so sufficient learning, as they
needed not go to beg justice, and judgment of strangers. The Pope returns
answer to the Kings letter, and begins with these words, when about the
business of the Church of Canterbury, we wrote unto you, exhorting and
requesting you humbly, earnestly, and benignly, you again wrote back to us
(as I may say, by your leave) in a fashion threatening, reproving, contumacious,
and stubbornely, and whilstwee took care, to give you above your right, you
regard not to give us according to our right, respecting us less then becomes
you. And if your devotion be most necessary for us, so is ours no less fit
for you. When we, in such a case have honored no Prince so much as you, you
stick not to derogate from our honor, more then any Prince in such a case
would have done: pretending certain frivolous occasions, wherein you allege
that you cannot consent to the Election of our beloved son Master Stephan
Praesbiter by the title of Saint Chrysogonus Cardinal, celebrated by the
Monks of Canterbury for that he has been bred among your Enemies, and his
person is altogether unknown unto you. Then argues he; that it was not to be
imputed unto him for a fault, but was his glory to have lived long at Paris,
where he so profited in study as he deserved to be Doctor, not only in the
liberal Sciences, but also in Theology: and his life agreeable to his
learning was thought fit to obtain a Prebend in Paris. Wherefore he held it a
marvel if a man of so great note native of England could be unknown unto
him, at least in fame, since ( says he) you wrote thrice unto him after he
was, by us preferred to be Cardinal: that though you had a desire to call him
to your familiar attendance, yet you rejoiced that he was exalted to a higher
Office, etc.

Then excuses he the point that the Kings consent was not required, in regard
that they who should have required the same affirmed how their letters never
came to his hands, etc. Although ( says he) in elections celebrated at the
Apostolic Sea, the consent of Princes is not to be expected. Yet were two
Monks deputed to come to require your consent, who were stayed at Dover, so
that they could not perform their message enjoined them: with other
allegations to this effect, so that at length, says he, we were disposed to
do what the Canonical Sanctions ordained to be done, without declyning
either to the right hand, or the left, that there might be no delay or
difficulty in right intentions, least the Lords flock should be long without
pastoral cure: and therefore revoked it cannot be. In conclusion he uses
these words, As we have had care of your Honor beyond right, endeavor to
give us ours according unto right, that you may more plentifully deserve Gods
grace, and ours, least if you do otherwise you cast your self into those
difficulties whence you cannot easily get out. Since he, in the end must
overcome, to whom all knees bow in Heaven, Earth, and Hell; whose Vicegerencie
here below (though unworthy) We exercise. Yield not therefore to their
Counsels, who desire your disturbance, that themselves might fish in troubled
Waters; but commit your self to our pleasure, which will redound to your
praise, Glory and Honor, Neither is it safe for you to repugne against God,
and the Church, for which, the blessed Martyr and glorious Bishop Thomas
lately shed his blood, especially since your father, and brother of clear
memory late Kings of England, have in the hands of the Legates of the
Apostolic Sea abiurea that impious Custom. We, if you acquit your self,
will sufficiently take care for you and yours that no prejudice shall arise
unto you hereby. Dated at Lateran the 10 year of our Pontificat.

Thus we see how these two mighty powers strive to make good each other
prerogative, and defend their interests with words. But when the Pope
understood how the King of England had proceeded against the Church of
Canterbury, he sends presently his Mandate to the Bishop of London, Ely and
Worcester, to deal with the The Popes Mandat to the B B.
King, by way of exhortation, to reform himself; and if they found him still
contumacious, they should interdict the whole Kingdom of England. If that
would not correct him, then himself would lay a seuerer hand upon him, and
withal charged the Bishops suffragans of the Church of Canterbury by virtue of
their obedience to receive for father the Archbishop Stephan, and to obey him
withal respect. The Bishops as they were enjoined, repair to the King. Show
the Popes Mandat, and with tears besought him, as he had God before his eyes
to call home the Archbishop, and the Monks of Canterbury to their Church, and
voutsafe to use them with Honor and Charity, thereby to avoid the scandal of
interdiction, etc.

The King interrupting the Bishops speech, breaks out into violent rage
against the Pope, and the Cardinal, swearing by the teeth of God, That if they
or any other King John's answer to the B B.
should dare to put his Kingdom under interdiction, he would presently send
all the Clergy of England to the Pope, and confiscat their goods. Besides, if
any of Rome were found within any part of his Land, he would cause their eyes
to be put out their noses cut, and so sent home, that by these marks they
might be known of other Nations. Charging moreover the Bishop plresently to
avoid his presence, as they would avoid their own danger.

Of this their ill satisfaction the Bishop certifies the Pope; and shortly
after the 1208. Anno. Reg. 11.
whole Kingdom of England is interdicted: all Ecclesiastical Sacraments
cease, except Confession, Extreme Unction, and Baptism of Children: the dead
are carried out, and put into the earth without Priest or prayer. The Bishops
of London, Ely, Worcester, Bathe and Hereford secretly get out of the Kingdom.

To answer this violence with the like, the King sends presently his Shriefes,
and other his ministers to command all Prelates and their servants forthwith
to depart out of the Kingdom, deputes the Bishoprics, Abbayes and Priories
into the hands of Lay men confiscating all these revenues, but the Prelates
themselves get into Monasteties, and would not out, except expelled by force,
which the officers would not do, having no Commission for the same, but they
seize on all their goods to the Kings use.

Here the Monastical Writers of that time (of whom only we have notice of
these proceedings, aggrauate the rigorous course taken in this business)
telling us that religious men, of what Order soever, found trauayling, were
pulled from their horses, robbed, and vily treated by the Kings servants, and
none to do them Justice. And how the servants of a Shriefe bringing bound unto
the King a these, who had robbed and killed a Priest) to know what should be
done with him: the King said, loose him and let him go, he has killed our
enemy. But howsoever this were, there were Excesses to many committed in a time
so untied as this was.

The King to prevent the defection of his subjects which he daily doubted
would The King takes pledges of his Nobles for their fidelity.
follow upon this his breach with the Church; sends with a military power, to
all the Potent men of the Kingdom, to require pledges for the assurance of
their fidelity; wherein many of them satisfied the Kings will, sending, some
their sons, some their Nephews, other the nearest of their kin. William de
Brause a Noble man being required to deliver his pledge, his wife preventing
her husbands answer, tells the Commissioners, that the King should have none
of her sons to keep, that was so ill a keeper of his own brothers son,
Arthur: For which sudden, and intemperat speech, the Baron sharply
reprehending his wife before the Kings servants, told them he was ready, if he
had offended, to satisfy the King, without any pledge, according to the
judgment of his Court, or that of his Peers, at any time, or place
wheresoever.

Upon the report of this answer the King sends down privily to apprehend the
His cruelty she wed to the wife and children of W. Brause.
Baron, but he having notice, or doubting what would follow fled with his Wife,
and Children into Ireland, where, afterward this afflicted Lady to recover
mercy of the King, is said, to have sent Queen Isabel four hundred kine, and
a Bull, which yet could not mediate her pardon, or pacify his wrath. But in
the end she was there taken with her 2 sons (the husband escaping into France)
and sent prisoner to the Castle of Windsor, where she with her innocent
children were famished to death: so dearly paid she, for the offense of her
rash tongue.

The King displeased with the Londoners removed his Eschequer to Northampton,
and The Eschequer removed to Northampton.
with a great army marches toward Scotland to make war upon that King for
receiving his enemies, and ayding them against him. But by mediation an accord
is made, in this sort, that the King of Scots should pay eleven thousand marks
of silver, and deliver up his two daughters pledges for securing the peace.
Returning back, he caused all enclosures within his forests to be laid open,
a work of great grief to his subjects, whom, though in nothing he sought to
satisfy, yet seeks he what he may to fasten them in their obedience (whereof
love, and not rigor is the surest bond) and takes homage of all free Tenants,
yea even of Children of twelve years of age throughout the Kingdom.

Two years, to the great distraction of the State, the interdiction held, when
the King John excommunicated.
Pope, seeing no yielding in the King, proceeds to the excommunication of his
person, that extreme course of abscicion, which his Predicessor Alexander,
better advised, forbear to take, upon suggestion of a more heinous act
committed by Henry the second, upon the person of Thomas Becket, and by this
violence, thinking to quail the heart of a most vnmaisterable King, put him
into more desperate rage with the Clergy, who, notwithstanding the Popes
mandate, durst not execute the same for many days after. And first one
Geffery, Archdeacon of Norwich, serving in the Kings Exchequer conferring with
the rest of his assistants, about this Sentence, affirmed, it was not safe for
men beneficed to remain in the obedience of an excommunicated King; and so
without The Archd. of Norw forsakes the kings service, his torture, and death.
leave retired himself home; and was the first subject of his masters wrath.
Who presently sent Sir William Talbot with force to apprehend him, and lay him
fast in fetters in a most straight prison, and afterward, upon the kings
commandment, he was put into a sheet of lead, wherein, with the weight, and
want of victuals he soon perished.

This excommunication of the King of England, was accompained the same year
with that of the Emperor Otho his Nephew, and are noted to be strains of an
unjust nature, especially for being both done in cases of the Popes own
particular interrest, seeking to extend The Emperor Otho excom.
a predomination, beyond the bounds allowed unto piety, which was only to
deal with means souls, and not their Estates. For in the advancement of this
Emperor Otho the third, the Pope had an especial hand, opposing, for his own
ends the Election of Phillip Son to the Emperor Frederick Barbarossa. And in
the vancancy of the Empire had seized upon certain pieces in Italy
appertayning thereunto; which, Otho seeking to revoke, procured undeservedly
the Popes displeasure, who sent unto him diverse messages willing him to desist
both from the prosecution of this recovery, as also from that which Frederick
King of Sicile (who was under the tuition of the Apostolic Sea) had seized
upon.

The Emperor, is said to have answered the Popes Nuncij, in this manner: If
the Pope unjustly desires to vsurp what apertaines to the Empire, let him
absolve me from the Oath he caused me to take at my Coronation, Which was; that
I should revoke whatsoever rights were distracted from the same; and I will
desist. But the Pope refusing the one, and the Emperor not yielding unto the
other, the sentence of excommunication is pronounced against him. And all the
states, as well of Germany as the rest of the Roman Empire, are absolved of
their fealty unto him. Thus were these two mighty Princes, the greatest of all
the Christian world, leaft to the mercy of their subjects, who, though they
were, by this means, all untied from obedience, yet many were not so from
their affections, or other obligations that held them firm unto their
Souraignes. For there are so many ligaments in a state that tie it together, as
it is a hard thing to dissolve them altogether, unless it is by an universal
concurrency of causes that produce a general alteration thereof. And it is
seldom seen of what temper soever Kings are, but they find an eminent party
in the greatest defections of their people. As this King (the first of England,
we find put to this straight) had yet many noble members of power, besides the
chief officers of the kingdom (whom their places confirm) that stuck unto
him. Whose names are recorded in Mat. Par. and other writers.

And the better to hold his reputation, and his people in action, having now no
employment abroad, he seeks to secure all other members of the Crown of
England, 1210. Anno. Reg. 12.
which were under his dominion. And having ransackt great treasure from the
Jews, makes an expedition into Ireland, upon intelligence of some revolt and
disorder there. And at his first ariuall, all the great men which held the
maritime Castles and the Champion countries came in, and did homage and fealty
unto him at Wublin: such as inhabited the remote parts, and fastnesses of the
Kingdom kept them selves away, and refused King John reformes Ireland
to come. Here to reduce the country into better order, he ordaines the same to
be governed by the laws and customs of England, causes English money to be
coined there, and to be of equal value with that of this Kingdom, and current
alike in both. With many other orders, which had they been with that care
continued, as they were advisedly begun, would (as wise men deem) have settled
that Kingdom in an entire obedience, and saved all that great toil, and
expense which the neglect thereof cost this state, in succeeding ages. And now
having deputed John Gray Bishop of Norwich Iusticiar there, after only three
months stay, he returns into England The Clergy pay to the K. 100000. ster.
where presuming now upon his new gathered strength, he summons all the
Prelates of the kingdom to appear before him at London; of whom says Mat.
Par. he extorted for their redemption the sum of an hundred thousand pounds
sterling.

And the next year, being the twelfe of his reign, with this treasure he
reduces Wales (that had rebelled) to his obedience, and takes eight and twenty
children of 1211. Anno. Reg. 13.
the best famelies for pledges of their future subjection. Returning thence
exacts of every Knight, that attended not his Army in that expedition two
marks, and at Northampton is pleased to receive the Popes Agents, Pandolphus
and Durandus (sent to make peace between the Kingdom and Priesthood) by whose
exhortation, and the consideration of the State of his Kingdom, he consented
that the Archbishop and the Monks of Canterbury with all the exiled Bishops
should in peace return to their own. But refusing to make satisfaction for
their goods confiscated, the Agents depart unsatisfied, to the greater
prejudice of the King, whom now the Pope finding to be yielding in any thing,
falls to be more imperious to constrain him to all whatsoever he desired. And
absolues all the Kings subjects of what condition soever from their obedience,
strictly forbidding them, under pain of excommunication, his Board, 1212.
Anno. Reg. 14.
Council, and Conference. Which notwithstanding prevailed not to divert the
subject from the service of their King. Who about this time takes occasion,
upon the breaking out of certain poor Mountainers of Wales that make pillage
upon the Borders, to raise another Army to invade the whole Country. And being
at Nottingham, prepared for this action (before he would sit down to dinner)
caused those eight and twenty children, the innocent pledges of the Welsh, to
be all hanged in his presence. But before he had dyned, letters came that gave
him intelligence of a conspiracy intended for his own destruction; and that
if he went forward in this war he would be either slain of his own people,
or betrayed to the enemy. Whereupon he returns to London, again requires, and
has pledges of those Nobles he suspected, and here Eustace de Vescy, and
Robert Fitz Walter are accused of the conspiracy, who fled, the one into
Scotland, the other into France.

But now the Pope, for the last, and greatest sentence that ever yet was given
against 1213. Anno. Reg. 15.
any Sovereign King of this Kingdom, pronounces his absolute deposition from
the Royal government thereof; and writes to the King of France, that as he
looked to have remission of his sins he should take the charge upon him, and
expel King John out of the Kingdom of England, and possess the same for him,
and his heirs for ever. To the same effect The Pope gives the Kingdom of
England to the King of France.
sends he likewise his letters to the Princes, and great men of other Nations,
That they should aid the King of France in the deiection of this contumacious
King of England, in revenge of the injuries done to the Universal Church;
granting like remission of their sins as if they vndertocke the Holy war.

And with this Commission is the Archbishop of Canterbury, and the other exiled
Bishop of England with Pandolphus dispatched to the King of France for the
execution thereof. Which, notwithstanding, seems rather done to terrefie King
John, then any way to advance the King of France, whom the Pope desired not to
make greater then he was, howsoever, to amuse the world, he made show to
engage him in this business. For he gave a secret charge to Pandolphus a part,
that if upon the preparation, and forces gathered by the King of France for
this deiection, he could work the King of England to such conditions as he
should propound; absolution, and restorement should be granted unto him.

The King of France, upon this act of the Pope, and the solicitation of his
Ministers, The King of France assembles his forces for England.
commands all the Princes and Nobility within his Dominions to assemble their
forces with Horse, Armor, and all Munition to assist him in this business, and
be ready, under pain of exheredation, at the Spring of the year; preparing,
likewise a great Navy for the transportation of these forces into England.
King John, upon intelligence hereof sends to all the Ports of his Kingdom
commandment, to have all shipping whatsoever possible to be made ready with
all expedition: summoning likewise all Earls, Barons, Knights, and who else
could bear Arms of any condition, to be ready at Dover, presently upon
Easter, furnished with horse, armor, and all military provision to King John's
preparations for defense.
defend him, themselves, and the Kingdom of England against this intended
Invasion, under pain of Culuertage, and perpetual servitude.

Whereupon so great numbers resorted to Dover, Feuersham, Ipswich, and to other
places suspected, as exceeded the means both of furnishment, and provision to
intertaine them, So that multitudes were sent home again of unnecessary men,
and only a choice reserved of the abler sort, which arose to the number of
sixty thousand well appointed for battle. Besides so mighty a navy was made
ready, as exceeded that of France.

And thus prepared King John expects his enemies, when secretly, two Knights,
Templars, sent by Pandolphus so wrought with him, as notwithstanding all this
great power of his, he discends to accept of a treaty with him. whereof
Pandolphus is presently advertised, and withdrawes himself out of the French
Kings army, comes over, and so terrifies King John with the mighty forces bent
against him, and the eminent danger wherein he stood, as he yields to any
conditions whatsoever propounded unto him. And not only graunts restitution
and satisfaction of what ever had been taken from the Archbishop, and the
Monks of Canterbury; the Bishops of London, Ely, Bath, and Lincoln (who were
sled to the Archbishop.) But also lays down his Crown, K. John delivers up
the kingdom of England with his Crown to Pandolphus.
Scepter, Mantle, Sword, and Rring, the ensigns of his royalty, at the feet of
Pandolphus delivering up there with all the Kingdom of England to the Pope,
and submits himself to the judgment and mercy of the Church.

Two days (some wright six) it was before the Legate restored him his Crown:
at the receiving whereof, he swore (and his Earls undertaking for him) that
he and his successors should hold the Kingdom of England, and Lordship of
Ireland from the Sea of Vide Append.
Rome, at the annual tribute of a thousand Marks of silver. And this, with
his homage and fealty, he confirmed by his Charter at a house of the Templars
near Dover. The The causes that moved K. John to this act
especial waights that moved King John to this extreme lowenes, they of those
times note to be. First, the consideration of his offenses to God, having lived
five years excommunicated, to the great deformity of his Kingdom. Secondly,
the greatness of his enemy the King of France, and his adherence. Thirdly, the
doubtful faith of his Nobilities, whom he had offended. Fourthly, for that the
Assencion day was at hand; after which, one Peter, an Hermit and Southsayer had
prohesied, he should be no more King of England. Which though mistaken in the
manner, was fulfilled in a sort by this resignation, and a new condition of
Estate. But the Southsayer with his Son, suffered shortly after the penalty
of death, for his otherwise interpreted divination.

Now, notwithstanding this act and submission of King John, the interdiction of
the Pandolplus forbids the French Kings proceedings.
Kingdom continues, and his own absolution deferred, till restitution, and
full satisfaction were performed to the Clergy; of which, eight thousand marks
of silver was presently delivered to Pandolphus; who at the receiving thereof
tramples it under his feet, as contemning that base matter, in respect of the
grace conferred upon the transgressor; and returns with the same into France.
Where he declares what had passed in England: and forbids the King of France
upon pain of excommuication, to proceed any farther in this enterprise, seeing
King John had thus submitted himself to the Church.

The King of France, now all in readiness for this great invasion, invasion,
and full, with hope of victory, receiving this sudden, and unexpected Message
grew into great rage, and was, in regard of his honor, and infinite charge,
hardly diuerted from this enterprise. Yet in the end, seeing his confederates,
and followers quailed with this menace of the Church, extremely discontent, he
giuesit over.

Notwithstanding, for his own reputation and desire of revenge having all
these great forces on foot, and his navy ready in the mouth of Seine, would
undertake something The French K. sets upon Flan.
to give satisfaction both to the adventurers, and his own people interressed
in this action. And for that, Ferrand Earl of Flanders, adhering to king John,
refused to follow him in this expedition, on him he falls (as being next him)
enters into his port of Dam, vowing that flanders should either be Erance, or
France Flanders. Ferrand, seeing this tempest come to light upon him, sends for
aid to king John; who glad, having escaped at home the occasion of a defensive
War, to enter into an offensive abroad, both to employ this great collected
Navy of his, and also put his people in action, whose dismission, without some
satsfaction, he knew would breed no safe humor; dispatches five hundred sail,
with seven hundred knights into Flanders, under the conduct of his base
brother William Long-sword Earl of Salisbury, Reginald Earl of Bologn, whom
he had lately intertayned with a pension, being for some demerit driven out of
France. And these ariuing at the Port of Dam, where they found the French Navy
unorderly dispersed, and without defense (their forces going out to invade the
Country) set upon, and utterly defeited the same, and afterward joining their
power with that of Ferrand, drove the King of France home with great dishonor,
and exceeding loss.

King John, raised with this victory, and his peace with the Church, sets upon
great designs, taking opportunity of this disaster of the King of France,
whom, in revenge of his injury, and hope of recovering his transmarine
Dominions, he plots to assail on all sides: stirring up his Nephew Otho to
aid the Earl of Flanders, for an Invasion on the East part, whilst himself
withal his power should enter upon the West. For execution whereof, first he
sends supplies of treasure to his Chieftaines in Flaunders, then assembles a
great Army at Portsmouth, wherewith, he resolves to pass the Seas.

But his design contrary to his desire and haste, came to be delayed by the
withdrawing The Nobility refuse to aid King John.
of his Nobility, who refused to aid or attend him, until he were absolved,
and had confirmed unto them their liberties: wherewith much enraged, seeing no
other remedy, he speedily sends for the Archbishop of Canterbury, and the
other Bishops, which were yet in France, promising them present restitution,
and satisfaction under the hands and seals of four and twenty Earls, and
Barons undertaking for the performance thereof, according to the form of his
Charter granted in this behalf. Pandolphus with the Bishop and the rest of
the exiled Clergy, forthwith come over, and find the King at Winchester,
where he goes forth to mere them, and on his knees, with tears, receives
them, beseeching them to have compassion on him, and the Kingdom of England.
Absolved he is with great penitence, and compassion expressed with tears of all
the beholders, and swears upon the Evangelists, to love, defend, and maintain
Holy Church, and the Ministers thereof, against all their adversaries to the
uttermost of his power: That he would revoke the good Laws of his
Predecessors, and especially those of King Edward, abrogating such as were
unjust: Judge all his subjects according to the just judgment of his Court:
That presently upon Easter next following he would make plenarie satisfaction
of whatsoever had been taken from the Church.

Which done, he returns to Portsmouth, with intention to pass over into
France, 1214. Anno. Reg. 16.
committing the government of the Kingdom to Geffrey Fitz Peter, and the
Bishop of Winchester, with charge that they should order all businesses,
together with the Council of the Archbishop of Canterbury.

And here a numerous company of soldiers repayring to him, complained that by
The Archbishop threatens to excommunicate the King.
their long attendance their money was spent, so that they could not follow him
unless they might be supplied out of his Eschequer, which the king refusing to
do, in a great rage, with his private family, takes ship, and puts forth to
the Isle of Iersey, but seeing none of his Nobles or other to follow him, was
forced (having lost the opportunity of the season) to return into England;
where he gathers an Army, with intention to chastise the Lords who had thus
forsaken him, But the Archbishop of Canterbury follows him to Northampton,
Urging that it was against his Oath taken at his absolution, to proceed in that
manner against any man; without the judgment of his Court. To whom the King in
great passion replied; That he would not defer the business of the
Kingdom, for his pleasure, seeing Lay judgments appertained not unto him: and
so in fury marches to Notingham.

The Archbishop follows him, and plainly told him, that unless he would
desist from this business, he would excommunicate all such, as should take
arms against any, before the releasing of the interdiction, and would not
leave him, until he had obtained a convenient day for the Lords to come to
his Court, which shortly after they did, and a Parliament is assembled in
Paul's, wherein the Archbishop of Canterbury produces a Charter of King Henry
the first, whereby he granted the ancient liberties of the Kingdom of
England (which had by his Predecessors been oppressed with unjust This Charter
is recorded in Mat. Par. with restes of the Subscribers.
exactions) according to the Laws of king Edward, with those emendations which
his father, by the Council of his Barons did ratefie. And this Charter being
read before the Barons they much rejoiced, and swore in the presence of the
Archbishop, that Lagam regis Edwardi vobis reddo cum illis emcndationibus
quibus pater mcus eam amendauit.
for these liberties, they would, if need required, spend their blood. And
there withal, concluding a confederation with the Archbishop; the Parliament
brake up.

Shortly after dies, Geffery Fitz Peter Iusticiar of England, a man of a
generous spirit, learned in the laws, and skillful in government. Who in that
broken time, only held vncrased, performing the part of an even Consellour and
officer between the King and Kingdom, whom though the King most used, he most
feared, and least loved, as ill Princes do their worthiest ministers; whose
gravity and judgment may seem to Vide Append.
keep them in awe. And hearing of his death, rejoicing said: now when he comes
into hell, let him salute the Archoishop Hubert, whom assuredly he shall find
there. And turning to those about him, swore by the feet of God, that now at
length he was King, and Lord of England, having a freer power to vnty himself
from those knots which his oath had made to this great man against his will,
and to break all the bands of the late concluded peace, unto which he repented
to have ever condiscended. And to show the desperate malice of this king (who,
rather then not to have an absolute domination over his people, to do what he
listed, would be any thing himself under any other that would but support him
in his violences) there is recorded an Embassage (the most base and impious
that ever yet was sent by any free and Christian Prince) unto Miramumalim the
Moore, entitled the great King of Africa, Morocco and Spain, wherein he
offered to render unto him his kingdom, and to hold the same by tribute from
him, as his Souraigne Lord: To forgo the Christian faith (which he held vain)
and receive that of Mahomet. In which negotiation, the Commissioners are named
to be, Thomas Hardington, Raph Fitz Mat. Par.
Nichols, knights, and Robert of London Clearke, the manner of their access to
this great King is related with the delivery of their message, and King John's
Charter to that effect: and how Miramumalim having heard at large their
message, and the description both of the King and Kingdom with the nature and
disposition of the people, so much Miramumalim scorns the Message of K. John.
disdayned the baseness, and impiety of the offerer, as with skorne he
commanded his ministers to depart instantly out of his presence, and court. Yet
afterward, to understand some more particulars of the madness of this King of
England, he called for Robert the Clearke, and had private conference with him
apart about many particulars which he himself revealed to many in the hearing
of Matthew the monk of Saint Albons, who wrote and declared these things,
discribing the person of this Robert, to be of a low stature, black, one arm
shorter then another, two fingers unnaturally growing together, of visage like
a Jew, etc. which relation we are not utterly to contemn, proceeding from an
Author of that gravity and credit, and living so near those times, though to
us that are so far off both in fashion and faith, it may seem improbable in
some part; yet if we consider whereto the desperate violence of this King, (who
had made utter wrack of conscience, and all humane respect) might carry him,
seeing himself in that Estate he was, we may not think it void of likelihood,
to have had this dealing with an heathen king (who, in that time, was
formidable to all Christendom, and had on foot the mightiest army that ever
the Moors had in Spain) which might either be to hold amity with him, or
intertayne him otherwise for his own ends. Though for the point of offering to
forgo the Christian faith, we may in charity forbear to make it a part of
ours. Although this relator gives us a note (amongst other which he suppressed)
that poynted at the irreligion of this King who at the opening of a fat Stag,
iestingly said: see how prosperously this beast has lived, and yet never heard
Mass. Which skoff, in regard of the zeal then professed, sauored of an
impiety, unsitting the mouth of a religious A note of the Kings irreligion.
King, and gave scandal to the hearers, who took it according to their
apprehension, apt to censure whatsocuer comes from the mouth of Princes; which
may warn them to be wary what they utter in public.

But this Embassage, either neglected by Miramumalim, or disappointed by the
over throw of his great army with the death of his Son, which shortly after
followed) King John sets upon another course, assayles Pope Innocentius (prone
to be wrought by gifts to do any thing) with great sums of money, and a
reassurance of his tributary subjection, which shortly after he confirms by a
new oath, and a new Charter before the Popes Legate the Bishop of Tusculum sent
over for the same purpose, and King John bribes the Pope and renewes his oath.
with full authority to compose the dissentions between the Kingdom and
Priesthood. Which at many Assemblies in diverse places was after debated, and in
the end order was taken for a plenary satisfaction to be made for the damages
done to the Church. For which the King upon account already, had paid twenty
seven thousand Marks, and thirteen thousand more were undertaken by Suerties
to be answered by a certain day.

And hereupon is the interdiction released, having continued six years three
months and fourteen days, to the inestimable loss of the Church, and
Churchmen, The interdiction released.
whereof an innumerable multitude of all orders now repair to the Legate for
satisfaction of damages received by the Kings ministers during this
interdiction. To whom 1214. Anno. Reg. 16.
the Legate answers: that it was not in his commission to deal for
restititution to be made unto them all, but aduises them to complain to the
Pope, and crave of him plenary justice. Whereupon they depart much
discontented, holding the Legates proceeding (for that he pleased not them)
inclining only to please the King: Who now is recommended to Rome for a most
tractable obedient, and indulgent Son of the Church, and the Clergy hears of
blame for their obstinacy used toward him.

The King having referred the ending of all this controversy to the Legate, and
some other of his own ministers (being assured of the Popes favor) was now
gone into Poictou, to assail (according to his former design) the King of
France on that side: whilst his forces with those of the Emperor Otho, by the
way of Flanders, invaded him on the other. And being with his Queen, landed at
Rochel, many principal Barons of Poictou (apter to promise then perform their
faith) came and swore fealty unto him: With whom he marches forward into the
Country, recouers many Castles and pieces of importance. Whereof particularly
by his own letters from Parthenai he certifies his Justices of the Eschecquer.
And withal shows them how he had Vide Append.
granted to the Son of the Earl of March, his daughter Joan in marriage
(though said he the King of France desired her for his Son, but fraudulently,
etc.

After this he goes into Britain, takes in the city of Nantes, prepares to
encounter with Louys the French Kings Son, who was come down with a mighty
army to oppose his proceeding. But the Poictouins distrusting his power, or he
them (having discovered the forces of the Enemy) refused to fight: Whereupon
the King of England to his extreme grief, forsook the field, and made a
dishonorable truce with the King The famous battle of Bouines.
of France; and this was the last of his transmarine attempts. His forces in
Flanders had far worse success, for the King of France with all the power he
could possibly make incounters them at the bridge of Bouines, and overthrew the
Emperor Otho, and the whole army of the confederates, wherein are reported to
have been an hundred and fifty thousand foot besides horse, and in the
battle slain a thousand five hundred Knights and taken prisoners, Ferrand
the Earl of Flaunders the Earls of Salisbury, and Bologne. And (as report the
Annals of Flanders,) the Earl of Sauoy, the Dukes of Brabant and Lamburg, and
the Earl of Luxemburg: the Emperor Otho 4. hardly escaped, The death of the
Emp. Otho.
and lived not long after.

Upon these misfortunes, and fearing the outrage of a necessitous and
distempred King, the Barons of England assemble themselves at S. Edmondsbury,
where they confer of the late produced Charter of Henry the first, and swore
upon the high Altar that if King John refused to confirm and restore unto them
those liberties (the rights of the Kingdom) they would make war upon him
until he had satisfied them therein: and further agreed that after Christmas
next they would petition him for the same, and in the mean time provide
themselves of horse and furniture, to be ready if the King should start from
his Oath made at Winchester at the time of his absolution for the confirmation
of these liberties, and compel him to satisfy their demand. After Christmas
K. John takes upon him the cross to secure himself from the Barons.
they repair in a military manner to the King lying in the new Temple, urging
their desire with great vehemence: the king, seeing their resolution, and
inclination to war, made answer that for the matter they required he would
take consideration till after Easter next: and in the mean time, he took upon
him the cross (rather as is said, through fear then devotion) supposing
himself to be more safe under that protection. But the Lords continuing their
resolution, foreseeing nothing was to be obtained but by strong The resolution
of the Barons assembling their army at Stamford.
hand, assemble an Army at Stamford, wherein are said to be two thousand
Knights, besides Esquires with those that served on foot: and from thence
marched toward Oxford where the King then expected their coming, according to
the appointed time, for answer to their demands. And being come to Brackly
with their Army, the King sends the Archbishop of Canterbury and William Earl
of Pembrooke Mareschall, with other grave Counselors, to demand of them, what
were those Laws, and Liberties A Schedule of the Demands of the Lords.
they required, to whom they showed a schedule of them, which the Commissioners
deliver to the King, who having heard them read, in great indignation asked why
the Barons did not likewise demand the Kingdom, and swore that he would
never grant those liberties whereby himself should be made a servant. So
harsh a thing is it to a power that has once gotten out into the wide liberty
of his will, to hear again of any reducing within his circle: not considering
how they who inheret Offices succeed in the obligation of them, and that the
most certain means to preserve unto a King his Kingdoms, is to possess them
with the same conditions that he has inherited them.

The Barons upon this answer, being as hasty as he was auers, resolve to
seize on The Lords seize on the Kings Castles.
his Castles, and presently march toward Northampton, which they besiege,
constituting Robert Fitz Walter their General, intituling him the Mareschall of
the Army of God, and holy Church. And after they assail the Castle of Bedford,
where William de Beauchamp rendering his charge, receives them: and the
Londoners send thither privy message to join with them, and deliver up the
City to be guarded by their direction.

And thither they repair, and are joyfully received, under pact of their
indemnity, The Lords repair to London.
where daily increasing in number of new Confederats, they make their
protestation, never to give over the prosecution of their desire, till they had
constrained the King (whom they held perjured) to grant them their Rights.

King John seeing himself, in a manner generally forsaken, having scarce seven
King John forsaken of his people.
Knights faithful unto him, counterfeits the Seals of the B B. and writes in
their names to all nations that the English were all Apostats, and whosoever
would come to invade them, he, by the Popes consent, would confer upon them all
their Lands, and possessions. The Earl Mareschall and other mediate a
reconciliation.
But this devise working no effect, in regard of the little confidence they had
in the King, and the power of the Kingdom: a new mediation is made to the
Barons by the Earl Mareschall and others, and a Parle is had between Windsor,
and Stanes in a Meadow called Running-mead (a place anciently used for such
Conferences) where after many meetings, and much debate, the King freely
consented, for the glory of God, A Parliament for restoring the Rights and
Liberties of the Kingdom.
and emendation of the Kingdom, to confirm those Laws, and Liberties
formerly restored, and in part ordained by Hen. 1.

And to the end that all discord should utterly cease, he grants for the
entire and firm enjoying these Laws and Liberties, Security in this manner.
That there should be five and twenty Barons chosen of the Kingdom, such as
they would, who should, to their utmost power cause the same to be held, and
observed. And that, if either the King or his Chief Articles of the Agreement
confirmed by King John.
Iusticiar should transgress in any Article of those Laws, and the offense
showed, Four Barons of the five and twenty should come to the King, or in his
absence out of the Kingdom, to his Chief Iusticiar, and declare the excess,
requiring without delay, redress for the same: which if not made, within the
space of forty days after such declaration; those Four Barons should refer
the cause to the rest of the five and twenty, who with the Commons of the Land
might distraine, and enforce him by all means they could ( viz. by seizing
upon his Castles, Lands and Possessions, or other goods (his person excepted,
and that of his Queen and Children) till amends should be made, according to
their arbitration. And that whosoever would; should take their Oath for the
execution hereof, and obey the commandment of the five and twenty Barons
herein without prohibition. And if any of them dissented, or could not
assemble, the mayor part to have the same power of proceeding. Besides for Vide
Append.
more caution, the four Chatelaines of the Castles of Northampton, Kenelworth,
Notingham, and Skarbrough, should be sworn to obey the commandment of the
Five and twenty Barons; or the mayor part of them, in whatsoever they thought
good concerning those Castles. Wherein none should be placed but such as were
faithful, and would observe their Oath, etc. That all strangers, whereof
diverse are expressly nominated should be removed out of the Kingdom. And a
general pardon is granted for all transgressions committed, through the
occasion of this discord, from the beginning thereof to this present time. And
mutual Oaths taken of both sides, in solemn manner, for the inviolable
observing all these Articles. The King likewise sends his letters Pattents to
all the Shriefes of the Kingdom, to cause all men of what degree soever,
within their several Shires, to swear to observe those Laws and Liberties
thus granted by his Charter.

And in this manner (though it were to be wished it had not been in this
manner) 1215. Anno. Reg. 17.
were recovered the rights of the Kingdom. Whereof, though they seem to have
now the Liuerie they had not the Seisin. For presently the King being loose
from the doing, which he pretends to be by force, vnlooses the Deed, and there
wanted not those about him, who observing which way his will bent, to turn him
more violently upon that King John by evil council frustrates his own Grants.
side; not in regard of his good, but their own interests, making more profit
by his irregularity then otherwise they could, of his orderly courses: telling
him, he was now a King without a Kingdom, a Lord without a Dominion, and a
subject to his Subjects. Wicked counselors, as if it were not enough, to be
above men, but to be above mankind, as those Princes would be, that would be
under no Law; considering the preservation of Kings and Kingdoms is to have the
balance of satisfaction, both of the one and other, equal. But by such
Counsailors is he confirmed in his refractory humor. And worthily that Prince
deserves to be deceived in his executions, who understands not, as well the
Counsailors, as the Council.

Resolved he is (given over to confusion, and revenge) to dissolve this tie,
and privily withdrawes himself into the Isle of Wight, from whence he sends
his Agents to Rome Retires into the Isle of Wight and writes to the Pope.
(where now he could do any thing) to complain of this enforced act to the
Pope, who by a definitive Sentence, first condemns and nullifies what was
done, and after excommunicates the Barons: who during this absence and retire
of their King, knowing the violence of his nature, and doubting their own
danger, keep in, and about the The Pope excommunicates the Barons.
City of London; and there under color of Turnements and exercise of arms,
inuit those who were abroad to resort unto them, and so retain themselves
together in a combination for their own defense, without seeking farther to
interrupt their Kings courses, either by surprise of his person, which they,
being of so great strength, might easily have done, or using means to
intercept his Agents, and take from him those Limbs of his power that might
work to offend them.

But this must either argue that their end was only to have (but what they had
obtained) The error of the Barons.
the restitution of the Liberties of the Kingdom (which though thus recovered
by violence they seemed desirous to hold with peace) or else their negligence;
which may be thought strange in those wakefull and active times, to be such, as
to leave a displeased King alone to his own working, especially removed to a
place, where the sea being open unto him, his outsendings might be without
view or noting: unless either they presumed of his little credit abroad, or
their own power at home.

But during this his retire in the Isle, which was three months, he slacks no
time to put his desires in execution, and besides his dispatch to Rome, sends
the Bishop of Worcester, Chancellor of England the Bishop of Norwich and others
with his seal to procure The King sends to leauy foreign forces.
him foreign forces out of such parts beyond the seas, as held correspondency
with him, appoynting them to make their repair to Dover about Michaelmas next.
In the mean time, without any royal show or stir (attended with some borrowed
servants of the Bishop of Norwich, and mariners of the Cink-ports, whom he
intertayned) he, as they write, fell to piracy and exercised himself at sea:
whiles various reports are made of him here on land: some giving out, that he
was turned Fisher, some a Merchant, others a Pirate: But at the time appointed
he meets at Dover with those foreign forces, drawn He meets with them at
Dover.
together, out of Poictou and Gascony, under the Conduct of Sauarie de Malleon,
Geffrey and Oliver Buteuile brothers: with others out of Louayne, and Brabant,
under Walter Buck, Gerrard Sotin, and Godshall, all desperate adventurers,
leading an excecrable sort of people, whose miserable fortunes at home easily
drew the^ to any mischiefs abroad; and with these is King John furnished to
set upon his own people. And, had not Hugh Hugh de Boues with forty thousand
men etc. coming out of Flanders drowned.
de Boues (to whom the Countries of Suffolk, and Norfolk were allotted for
service to be done) setting forth from Calice with 40 thousand more (men women
and children) been by sudden tempest drowned in the Sea, he had made an
universal Conquest of the Kingdom, far more miserable then the Norman;
considering that with those he had, he wrought so much as we shall hear
presently he did.

For, after he had recovered the Castle of Rochester which William de Albinet,
with memorable courage, held out three months against all that mighty power of
his (the The King in half a year recouers all his Castles.
Barons not able or not aduenturing to succor him) he marched over the most
of the Kingdom, and within half a year got in all the Castles of the Barons
even to the borders of Scotland, and was absolute Master of all England except
the City of London, on which he forbear to adventure, in regard of the close
united power of the 1216. Anno. Reg. 18.
Barons that resolutely held and vowed to die together: and separate them he
could not, and therefore from Rochester he marches to Saint Albones, where the
first publication of the Popes excommunication of the Barons is pronounced.

And here he deuides his Army (consisting most of ravenous strangers) in two
King John at Saint Albons deuides his army in two parts.
parts: appoynting his brother William Earl of Salisbury, with Falcasius,
Sauarie de Malleon leader of the Poictouins, Briwer, and Buc of the Flemings
and Brabantines, to guard the Countries and Castles about the City of London,
to cut off all provisions, and anoy the Barons by all means possible: himself
with the other part of his forces draws Northward, and lays waste all the
Countries before him, and both these Armies set only upon destruction, inflict
all those calamities, that the rage of a disorderly war could commit, upon a
miserable people that made no head at all against them.

All Countries suffer in this affliction, and King John marching as farte as
Berwike, had purposed to have carried it farther (threatening Alexander King of
Scots that he would hunt the Fox to his hole, alluding to his red hair) had
he not been called from that attempt to come back to these parts upon
discovery of new designs practiced by the Barons, who seeing themselves
deprived of their Estates (given away to Strangers) The Barons solicit Louys
the French Kings son, to take upon him the Crown of England.
their wives and daughters violated, all their substance consumed, desperately
fall upon another extreme, making out for succor to Louys the French Kings
son soliciting him to take upon him the Crown of England, wherein they
promised by their free Election to inuest him, and to send pledges for the
performance thereof, being persuaded that those forces of the French, which
King John had intertayned, would upon the coming of those aides from the King
of France, being their Sovereign, forsake him. This message is intertayned, a
Parliament is called at Lions by King Philip the father of Louys, the business
consulted, and resolved upon. Louys, besides the assurance made of this
proffered election, relies upon a title which he claymes by his wife Blanch,
daughter to the Sister of King John, and writes to the Barons that he would
shortly send them succor, and not be long behind to be with them in person.

The intelligence of this design is soon intimated to the Pope who presently
sends The Pope writes to divert Louys from the enterprise.
his Agent to the King of France with letters to entreat him, not to suffer his
son to invade or disquiet the King of England, but to defend him, in regard
he was a vassal of the Roman Church, and the Kingdom, by reason of Dominion,
appertayning thereunto. The King of France answers, that the Kingdom of
England, never was, nor is, or ever shall be the patrimony of Saint Peter, and
that King John was never lawful King thereof, and if he were, he had
forfeited the same by the murder of Arthur, forwhich he was condemned in his
Court, neither could he give away the Kingdom without the consent of the
Barons who are bound to defend the same. And if the Pope would maintain this
error, it would be a pernicious example to all Kingdoms.

Herewith the Popes Agent departs unsatisfied, Louys having first dispatched
Commission Quater Vigint. Coggis.
to Rome to declare his right and justify his undertaking, sets forth from
Calice with 600 ships, and 80 other vessel, and Lands with his Army at
Sandwich. King John attends him at Dover with purpose to encounter him at his
landing, but upon notice Louys lands in Kent 21 of May.
of his great power, and distrusting the faith of his mercinaries, having
committed the keeping of the Castle of Dover to Hubert de Burg, forsakes the
field (and with it himself) retyres first to Winchester, after to Gloucester,
and leaves all to the will of his enemy Louys: who after he had obtained the
submission of all Kent (except the Castle of Dover which he never could get) he
comes to London, where he is joyfully received of the Barons, and upon his Oath
taken to restore their Laws, and recover their rights, has homage and fealty
done him as their Sovereign Lord: thither came likewise the Earls Warrein,
Arundle, Salisbury, William Mareschall the younger with many other (forsaking
King John) and rendered themselves unto him.

Guallo the Popes Agent (notwithstanding the sword was out in all the way of
his passage) got to Gloucester, shows King John the Popes care of him, and in
solemn manner The little effect the Popes Exmunication wrought.
pronounces the sentence of Excommunication against Louys and all that took
part with him, which though it brought him some comfort for the time, yet it
took little or nothing from the enemy: neither could it so confirm his
mercinaries, but that most of them left him, and either returned home into
their Countries with such spoils as they had, or betook themselves to this
new commer. King John was not yet so forsaken, but that he had power enough
remaining, to infest, though not encounter his enemies, and faith he found
abroad amongst many of his Ministers that well defended their charge. Dover
Castle with a small company holds out, against all the force that Louys could
bring against it. Windsor Castle guarded but with 60 men could not be won with
all the power of the Barons; some other pieces, as Nottingham and Lincoln
Castles made very resolute resistance. But nothing is effected, save the ruin
of the Country.

The most-yeelding and fertile parts of the Kingdom as about Gloucester, the
marches of Wales, Lincolnshire, Cambridgshire, Norfolk, Suffolk, Essex, Kent,
and all about London, are the Stages of this war, and here they act their
mischiefs, which continued all that Summer: And about the later end of
October, a burning fever makes an end of this fiery King, which took him upon
an extreme grief conceived for the loss of his carriages sunk in the Sands,
passing the Washes between Lin and Boston; and was augmented by a surfeit of
Peaches, and new Ale taken at the Abbay of Swineshead, from whence, in The
death of King John.
great weakness he is conuayed to Newarke, where, after he had received the
Eucharist, and taken order for the succession of his son Henry, he departs
this life, having reigned 18 years, five months, and four days.

The Abbot of Crockeston, a man skillful in physique and at that time the Kings
Physician disbowelled his body, who, no doubt would have given notice, to the
world had his Master (as it was in after ages vainly bruted) been poisoned
by a Monk of Mat. Par.
Swinshead Abbay, but the Writers of those times report no such matter.
Howsoever his death takes not away the reproach of his life, nor the infamy that
follows him, whereunto ill Princes are as subject as their evil Subjects, and
cannot escape the brute ofa clamarous Pen. witness this Disticque. Anglia
sicut adhuc sordet foetore Iohannis,
Sordida foedatur foedante Iohanne Gehenna.


He had issue by his wife Isabel (daughter to Aymer Earl of Angolesme) two
sons Henry and Richard, also three daughters Ioane, Eleanor, and Isabel.

Henry succeeded him in the Kingdom, Richard was Earl of Cornwall, and
Crowned His issue.
King of the Romans, and had issue Henry, and John that died without issue,
also Edmond John speed.
Earl of Cornwall and others.

Ioane the eldest daughter (married to Alexander the second, King of Scots)
died without issue.

Elianor the second daughter (married to Simon Earl of Leicester) had issue
Henry, Simon, Almaricke, Guy, Richard, and Elianor. Henry slain without issue.
Simon Earl of Bigorre, and Ancestor to a Famely of the Mountfords, in France.
Almarick first a Priest, after a Knight. Guy Earl of Angleria, in Italy, and
Progenitor of the Mountfords in Tuscaine: and of the Earls of the Campo Bacchi
in the Kingdom of Naples. Richard remaining privily in England, and changing
his name from Mountford, to Wellesborne, was Ancester of the Wellesbornes in
England. Elianor borne in England, brought up in France, married into Wales to
Prince Lewin ap Griffith.

Isabel their youngest daughter (married to the Emperor Frederic the 2) had
issue, Henry, appointed to be King of Sicile, and Margaret wife of Albert,
Landgraue Thurine. She died in childbed after she had been Empress six
years. He had also two natural sons. Geffrey Fitz Roy, that transported
soldiers into France, when Hubert forbad his father to go thither: Richard
(that married the daughter and Heir of Fulbert de Dover (who built Childham
Castle) had issue by her, of which some famelies of good esteem are descended.

Likewise one natural Daughter Ioane married to Lewin Prince of Wales.

The end of the Life, and Reign of King John.
The Life, and Reign of Henry the third.
THE death of King John, though it much altered, yet it ended not the miserable
businesses of the Kingdom: for Louys, notwithstanding held 1216. Anno. Reg. 1.
his hopes, and his party though much shaken by the sudden Coronation of
Henry, eldest son to King John, solemnized in a great Assembly of State at
Gloucester the 28 of October, and committed to the tutelage of the great
Marshall, William Earl of Pembrooke; the maine Pillar of the father, and now
the preserver of the Crown to his son, a man eminent both in courage Henry
the 3 Crowned at Gloucester.
and Council, who with Guallo the Popes Legate, the Bishops of Winchester,
Bathe, and Worcester work all means to draw the Barons, and as many of power
as they could to their new and natural King from this excommunicate stranger,
and his adherents. And bred great fluctuation in the minds of most of them
doubtful what to resolve upon, in regard of the tender youth of Henry, and
their Oath made to Louys.

But such was the insolence of the French, making spoil and prey of whatsoever
they could fasten on (and now invested by Louys, contrary to his Oath, in all
those places of importance they had recovered) as made many of the English to
relinquish The confession of the Viscont Melun at his death.
their sworn fidelity, and forsake his part. Which more of them would have
done, but for the shame of inconstancy, and the danger of their pledges,
remaining in France, which were great ties upon them. Besides, the popular
bruit generally divulged concerning the confession of the Viscont Melun a
Frenchman, who, lying at the point of death, touched with compunction, is said
to reveal the intention, and vow of Louys (which was utterly to extinguish the
English nation, whom he held vile, and never to be trusted, having forsaken
their own Soueraign Lord) wrought a great auersion in the hearts of the
English, which whither it were indeed uttered, or given out of purpose, it was
so to be expected, according to the precedents of all in-brought farreiners
upon the deuisions of a distracted people.

And first William Earl of Salisbury, moved in blood to succor his Nephew,
took Diverse Lords revolt from Louys.
away a maine piece from the side of Louys, and with him the Earls of Arundle,
Warren; William, son and heir to the great Marshall, return to the fidelity
of Henry, after 6 months they had revolted to the service of Louys, which now
may be thought was don but to temporise, and try the hazard of a doubtful
game, otherwise a brother would not have forsaken a brother, nor so Noble a
father, and son have divided their stars.

Notwithstanding Louys found hands enough to hold London, withal the Countries
about it a whole year after, so that the young King was constrained to remain
about Gloucester, Worcester, and Bristow, where his wakefull Ministers fail not
to employ all means to gather upon whatsoever advantages could be espied, and
at length so wrought as they draw the enemy from the head of the kingdom down
into the body, first into Leceister-shire to relieve the Castle of Montsorell,
a piece apertayning to Saer de Quincy Earl of Winchester, a great partisan of
Louys, and after by degrees, to Lincoln, where, a Noble Lady, called Phillippa
(but of what famely, time has injuriously bereft us the knowledge) had, more
then with feminine courage defended the Castle, the space of a whole year,
against Gilbert de Gant, and the French forces which were possessed of the town.

The Earl Marshall Protector of the King and kingdom, with his son William:
the Bishops of Winchester, Salisbury and Chester, the Earls of Salisbury,
Ferrers, and Albemarle. William de Albinet, John Marshall, William de
Cantelupe. Falcasius, Thomas Basset, Robert Veypont, Brent de Lisle, Geffrey
Lucy, Philip de Albinet, and many other Barons, and marshall men, being with
all the power of the young king (whose forces as he marched, grew daily
greater) come to a place called Stow within 8 miles of Lincoln, the Legate
Guallo (to add courage and resolution to the army) caused upon confession of
their sins, the Eucharist to be ministered and gives them a plenary
absolution, solemnly The forces of Louys overthrown.
accursing Louys with all his adherents, as separated from the unity of the
Church, which done, they set forth, and with such violence assail the City on
all sides, as the defendants (after the Earl of Perch, valiantly fighting was
slain) were soon defeited, and all the principal men taken prisoners,
whereof these are nominated: Saer Earl of Winchester, Henry de Bohun, Earl of
Hereford, Gilbert de Gant, lately made Earl of Lincoln by Louys. Robert Fitz
Walter, Richard Monfichet, William Moubray, William Beauchamp, william Maudit,
Oliver Harcort, Roger de Cressy, William de Coleuile, William de Ros, Robert de
Ropsley, Ralph Chandnit Barons, besides four hundred Knights or men at Arms,
with their servants, horse and foot. The number, and quality of the persons
taken, show the importance of the place, and the greatness of the victory,
which gave Louys his maine blow, and was the last of his battles in England.

The spoils were very great being of a City, at that time rich in Merchandise,
The spoil of Lincoln.
whereupon the winners (in derision) termed it Louys his Fair. Many of those
who escaped, and fled from this overthrow; were slain by the Country people in
their disorderly passing toward London, unto Louys, who upon notice of this
great defeat, sends presently over for succors into France, and draws all the
power he had in England, to the City of London; whether the Earl Marshall
with the young King bend their course, with purpose either to assail Louys
upon this fresh dismay of his loss, and the distraction of his partakers, or
induce him by agreement to relinquish the Kingdom. The first being found
difficult, the last is propounded, whereunto Louys would not The Peace was
concluded the 11 of Sep.
be brought to yield, until hearing how his succors coming out of France,
were by Phillip de Albenie, and Hubert de Burgh with the forces of the
Cinke-ports all vanquished at sea; he then hoplesse of any longer subsisting
with safty, condiscendes to an accord: takes fifteen thousand marks for his
voyage: abiures his claim to the Kingdom: promises by Oath to work his
father, as far as in him lay, for the restitution 1218. Anno. Reg. 3.
of such Provinces in France, as appertayned to this Crown; and that when
himself should be King, to resign them in peaceable manner.

On the other part King Henry takes his Oath, and for him, the Legate, and the
Protector, to restore unto the Barons of this Realm, and other his Subjects,
all their rights and heritages, with those liberties for which the discord
began between the late King, and his people. General pardon is granted, and
all prisoners freed on both fides: Louys is honorably attended to Dover, and
departs out of England about Michelmas: above two years after his first
atiuall, having been here, in the greatest part, a received King, and was more
likely to have established himself, and made a Conquest of this Kingdom
(being thus pulled in by others arms) then the Norman that made way with his
own, had not the All-disposer otherwise diuerted it.

Such effects wrought the violence of an unruly King, and the desperation of an
oppressed people, which now notwithstanding the fathers iniquity, most
willingly embrace the son, as naturally inclyned to love, and obey their
Princes.

And in this recovery, the industry of Guallo the Legate wrought much, though
what he did therein was for his own ends, and the pretended interest of the
Pope, whose ambition 1219. Anno. Reg. 4.
had been first an especial cause of this great combustion in the Kingdom,
but as they who work the greatest mischiefs, are oftentimes the men that can
best repair them, so was it in this, and therefore the less worthy of
thanks. The Legate was well paid for his pains, and, notwithstanding the
great distress of the Kingdom carries away twelve thousand Marks with him to
Rome.

But thus the long afflicted state began to have some peace, and yet with many
distemp ratures at the first, ere those virulent humors which the war had
bred were otherwise diuerted. For many of the Nobles who had taken part with
the King, either unsatisfied in their expectations, or knowing not how to
maintain themselves and theirs, but by rapine; fall to mutiny, surprising of
Castles, and making spoils in the Country, as the Earl of Albemarle, Robert
de Veypont, Foulke de Brent, Brian de List, Hugh de Bailioll with many other,
but at length, they are likewise appeased. And seeing the war must nurse whom
it had bred, an Action is undertaken for the Holy Land, whither Ralph Earl of
Chester, Saer de Quincy Earl of Winchester, William de Albeny Earl of
Arundle, Robert Fitz Walter, William de Harcort with many other, are sent with
great forces: Besides to unburden the Kingdom, all strangers, unless such as
came with Merchandise, are commanded to avoid the Land, and all means used
for the regayning the ability it had lost.

And no sooner had this provident Protector the Earl of Pembrooke settled the
The death of the Protector Earl Marshall.
Kings affairs, but he dies, to the great regrate of the Kingdom; leaving
behind him a most Noble memory of his active worth, and is to be numbered
amongst the examples of the best of men, to show how much the Wisdom, and
Valor of a potent Subject may steed a distracted State in times of danger.

The Bishop of Winchester (imparting the charge with many other great
Counselors) is made Protector of the young King, who in An. Reg. 4. is again
Crowned, and the next year after has by Parliament granted for Elcuage two
Marks of Silver of every Knights fee, for the affairs of the Kingdom, and
recovery of his transmarine The King again crowned 1. Parliament.
Dominions, which now is designed, and Malleon de Sauerie the Poictouine with
William Long sword Earl of Salsburie sent over into Guien to try the
affections of that people, whom they find, for the most part inclinable to the
obedience of this Crown. The King of France is required to make restitution of
what he had usurped, but returns answer; that what he had gotten both by
forfeiture, and Law of Arms he would hold.

To retain amity with Scotland, and peace at home, Joan, the Kings Sister is
given 1220. Anno. Reg. 5.
in marriage to Alexander King of Scots, and Margueret, sister to the same
King, to Hubert de Burgh, now made Iusticiar of England, and the especial man
who guided the greatest affairs of the Kingdom. Wales, reuolting under their
Prince Lewelin, gave occasion of great charge and trouble to this State in the
beginning of this Kings reign and long after, till it was wholly subdued. And a
commotion in Ireland, made by Hugh Lacy, is appeased by William Earl of
Pembrooke son to the late great Marshall, 1221. Anno. Reg. 6.
and some few years after has the Kingdom a kind of quietness, saving that
Falcasius (or Foulke de Brent) with certain Chatelaynes (the dregs of war)
fortifying the Castle of Belford with some other pieces of strength, and
committing many outrages, gave occasion of business till they were gotten by
hard assault.

But now, the King being come to some years of understanding, was, in a
Parliament holden at London, put in mind by the Archbishop of Canterbury, in
behalf of the State, of his Oath made, and taken by others for him, upon the
peace with Louys for confirmation of the liberties of the Kingdom, for which
the war began with his father, and being the mainebase whereon his own good,
and that of his people must subsist, without which the whole State would again
fall a sunder; they would have him to know it betime, to avoid those miserable
inconveniences which the disunion of 1222. Anno. Reg. 7.
Rule and Obedience might bring upon them all, which though it were impiously
there oppugned (as Princes shall ever find mouths to express their pleasures
in what course soever they take) by some ministers of his (amongst whom one
William Brewer a Councellor is named) who urged it to have been an act of
constraint, and therefore 2. Parliament.
not to be performed; was, notwithstanding promised at that time by the King to
be ratifyed, and twelve knights, or other Legal men of every shire, by writs
charged to examen what were the Laws and Liberties which the Kingdom enjoyed
under his Grandfather, and return the same by a certain day, and so by that
usual shift of Prolongation the business was put off for that time, to the
greater vexation of that following. For during all his reign of six and fifty
years (the Longest of any King of England) this put him to the greatest
imbroylement, made him ill beloved of his paople (ever crossed in his
intendements) and far a less King, only by striving to be more then he was:
the just reward of violations. And even this first pause, upon the lawful
requisition thereof, turned the blood, and showed how sensible the state was, in
the least stoppage of that tender vain: For, presently the Earls of Chester,
and Albimarle with many other great men assemble at Lecester with intent to
remove from the K. Hugh de Burgh chief Iusticiar, and other officers supposed
to hinder this motion. But the Archbishop of Canterbury by his spiritual
power, and the rest of the nobility, more careful to preserve the peace of the
Kingdom, stood to the King, and would not suffer any proceeding in this kind,
so as the Lords effected nothing at that time, but were constrained to come in,
and submit Resumptions.
themselves. And here the king by parliament resumes such alienations as had
bin made by his Ancesters, of what had apertayned to the Crown, whereby he
might have the 1223. Anno. Reg. 8.
more means of his own without pressing his subject; but this served not his
turn.

The next year after another Parliament is held at Westminster, wherein is
required the fiftieth part of all moueables both of the Clergy and Layetie, for
the recovery of those parts in France withheld from this crown by Louys now
King, contrary to his 3 Parliament.
oath and promise made here in England at his departure. Which motion, though
it concerned the honor and dignity of this Kingdom, (being the inheritance of
the King, and the Estates of most of the Nobility, and other the subjects, who
had lands and possessions in those parts, which no doubt, they desired to
recover with their utmost means; yet would they not yield to the grant of this
subsidy but upon confirmation of their liberties; which in the end they
obtained, in the same words and form as King John had granted them in the two
Charters before.

And twelve Knights or Legal men are chosen in every shire, upon their Oath,
to disparte the old forests from the new: and all such as were found to have
Disforrestations.
been inforested since the first coronation of Henry the second to be
disafforested, and disposed at their pleasure, who were to posses them.
whereupon they were laid open, plowed, and improued to the exceeding comfort,
and benefit of the subject, whereby men, in steed of wild beasts, were
sustained and more room made for them to use their industry.

Two years with great quietness, and general content (the blessing of a
state) 1225. Anno. Reg. 10.
these liberties were inioyed, when the King at a Parliament at Oxford,
declaring himself to be oflawfull age, and free from custody, to dispose of
the affairs of the Kingdom; cancells, and anulles the Charter of Forests, as
granted in his Nonage, having no power of himself, or of his Seal, and
therefore of no validity: and causes Proclamation to be made, that both the
Clergy, and all others, if they would enjoy those liberties, 4. Parliament.
should renew their Charters, and have them confirmed under his new Seal: for
which, they were constrained to pay, not according to their ability, but the
will of the chief Iusticiar, Hugh de Burgh, to whom is laid the blame of this
mischief, which procured him the general hatred of the Kingdom; and bread a
new insurrection of The reuoking the Charters of Forests which bred a new
insurrection.
the nobility, who, taking advantage upon a breach lately falen our, between
the king and his brother Richard Earl of Cornwell (about the Castle of
Barkhamsted appertayning to that Earldom, which the king had committed to the
keeping of on Walleran a Dutchman) join with the Earl, and put themselves in
arms. For the king mayntayning the cause of Walleran commands his brother to
render the Castle which he had taken from him; or else to depart the kingdom.

The Earl answers that he would neither do the one or the other: without the
judgment of his Peers; and so departes to his lodging, leaving the king much
displeased with this answer. The chief Iusticiar fearing the disturbance of
the peace, aduises the king suddenly to apprehend the Earl, and commit him to
close custody, but the Earl either through notice, or doubt thereof, flies
presently to Marleborough, where he finds William Earl Mareshall, his friend,
and consedrate by Oath, with whom he hastes to Stamford, and there meets with
the Earls of Chester, Gloucester, Waren, Hereford, Ferrers, Warwick, with diverse
Barons, and men at arms: from whence they send to the King aduising him to
right the injury done to his brother. The cause whereof, they impute to Hugh
de Burgh, and not to himself, besides they require restitution to be made
without delay, of the liberties of the Forests lately cancelled at Oxford,
otherwise they 1226. Anno. Reg. 11.
would compel him thereunto by the sword.

The King, to anoyd this danger, appoints them and day to come to an assembly
at Northampton, where a concord is concluded: and to satisfy his brother,
(besides the rendering unto him his Castle) he grauntes him all that his mother
had in dowre, and s. Parliament.
whatsoever lands the Earl of Britain held in England, with those of the
Earl of Bologn lately deceased, and so the Parliament brake up. After this the
general motion 1227. Anno. Reg. 12.
for the holy wars intertaines some time. Which so strongly wrought in that
credelous world as sixty thousand sufficient men, are reported to have
undertaken that voyage: of whom Peter Bishop of Winchester, and William Bishop
of Excester are the leaders.

The King is solicited by Hugh le Brun Earl of March, who had married his
Mother, and by other great men of Normandy, to come over into France to recover
his right, upon the great alterations happening in those parts by this
occassion.

Louys the eight (who succeeded Phillip the second,) being lately dead after
his great siege of Auignon, and his wars made against the Heretics
Albegeois in Province, leaves the Kingdom to his Son Louys of the age of
twelve years, in whose minority his Mother Blanch, taking upon her the
regency, so discontented the Princes of the French Hist.
blood, as they oppose themselves against her, holding it both dishonorable and
dangerous, that a woman and a stranger by the Council of Spaniards (whom she
advanced above the Naturalls of the Kingdom) should govern all according to
her pleasure, and therefore enter league against her. The chief of whom were
Phillip Earl of Bologne, uncle, by the Father, to the King: Robert Earl of
Champaigne, Peter de Dreux Duke of Britagne, and Robert Earl of Dreux his
brother, and with these Hugh the Earl of March takes part, in regard the Queen
Regent had erected the Country of Poictou to a Conty, and made Earl there of
Alphonso her Son, brother to the young king, whereby finding himself
enclosed within that County, he refuses to acknowledge Alphonso for Lord:
instigated thereunto by his wife, a Queen Dowager of England, who could not
comport a superior so near her door, in so much as they likewise draw in the
Earl of Lusignan, brother to the Earl of March, who also, presuming upon the
greatness of his house descended of kings, was apt to take their part; and
these with the Earl of Britagne call in the King of England. Who after he head
exacted great sums of the Clergy, of the City of London for redemption of
their liberties, and taken the third part of all the goods of the Jews, passes
over with an Army, lands at Saint Mallos, is met by many Nobles of Poictou, who
with the Earl of Britagne do homage unto him, and great preparations are made
to recover such pieces as had been obtained by the late King of France.

The Queen Regent sets out a powerful army to stop the proceeding of the King
of England, and much mischief is wrought on both sides in Pocitou, Xaintonges,
Angoumois, where their friends and enemies suffer all a like. At length, seeing
no great good to arise by their travail, both weary of the business, either a
peace, or truce is concluded.

The King of England besides an infinite expense of treasure having lost diverse
of his Nobles and other valiant men in the iourny, without any glory returns
home, bringging with him the Earl of Britagne and many Poictouins to receive
their promised rewards, which, notwithstanding all the former expense must be
wrung out of the substance of the poor subject of England.

Upon his return he intertaines a purpose of Marriage with a sister of the
King of Scots, against which, the Earls, and Barons of England generally
oppose; alleging it to be unfit that he should have the younger Sister, when
Hubert his chief Iusticiar, had married the eldest: and the Earl of Britagne,
by whose Council he was now much directed, disswades him likewise from it. To
this Earl (after supplies obtained toward his expenses, and debts in France)
he gives five thousand marks, as if remaining The King calls his officers to
accoumpt.
of the sum he had promised. And for the rest of the Poictouins, their
preferments and rewards were to be had by the displacing and spoils of his
Officers, Receiuors, and others whom now he calls to accoumpt, and castes for
defrauding him in their offices, of whom Ralph Breton treasorer of his Chamber
is first, who was committed to prison and grieuoulsy fined: then Hubert de
Burgh his chiese lusticiar, (a man who 1228. Anno. Reg. 13.
had long ruled all under him in a place ever obnoxious to detraction and envy)
is called to accoumpt for such treasure as passed his office (which was then
for all reliefes, and subsidies whatsoever raised on the subject) and,
notwithstanding he had the kings Charter for it during life, yet is he thrust
out of his office, and besides accused of heinous crimes of treason.

No sooner was this great officer, and inward councellor fallen into the Kings
displeasure, but presently a whole volly of accusations (which fear in time of
favor held in) were discharged upon him, and every act of his examined, and
urged according to the passion of the complainers. The city of London lays to
his charge the execution of their citizen Constantine (in the time of a riot
committed between their people and those of Westminster at a wrestling in
Saint lames feilds, Anno. Reg. 4.) as done without warrant and law, and crave
Justice for his blood. Hubert, to avoid this sudden storm coming upon him,
fled to the Church of Merton for Santuary, whence, by armed men sent to pursue
him, he is drawn out by force, and committed to prison. Of which violence done
contrary to the privilege of that sacred place, the Bishop of London, in whose
dioses it was, complains, and so wrought that he is brought back again to the
same chapel. But yet all that could not shelter him from the Kings wrath, who
gives strict commandment to the Shriefes of Hartford and Sussex to set a guard
about the place, that no sustenance be brought him. Hunger inforces him to
commit himself to the Kings mercy, and away is he sent prisoner to the Vize,
his money, left in the custody The King remoues his officers.
of the templars, is brought forth, and seized into the Kings hands; clayming
that, and much more as stolen out of his exchequer. Stephen de Segraue is put
into his office, a worse minister for the commonwealth (which seldom gaynes
by such shiftings) and who must shortly run the same fortune. Walter Bishop
of Carliel is likewise thrust out of his office of Treasorer, and William Rodon
Knight, of his place of Marshall of the kings house, and all the chief
Counselors, Bishops, Earls and Barons of the Kingdom, are removed, as
distrusted, and only strangers preferred to their rooms. Peter Bishop of
Winchester, lately returned from the holy wars to be the author of most
unholy discord at home, is charged to be the cause hereof, and with him, one
Peter de Riuallis, now the sepeciall minion about the King.

These strains of so strange and insufferably violences so exasperate the
Nobility, as many (whereof Richard, now Earl Marshall upon the death of his
brother William was chief) do combine themselves for defense of the public,
and boldly do show the King his error, and ill advised course, in preferring
strangers about him, to the disgrace and oppression The Lords combine for the
public defense against the K.
of his natural liege people, contrary to their laws and liberties, and that
unless he would reform this excess, whereby his crown and Kingdom was in
eminent danger, he and the rest of the nobility would withdraw themselves from
his council, whereunto the Bishop of Winchester replies: that it was lawful
for the King to callwhat strangers he listed about him for defense of his
crown and Kingdom, thereby to compel his proud, and rebellious subjects to
their due obedience. With which answer the Earl, and the rest, depart with
more indignation: vowing that in this cause, which concerned them ail, they
would spend their lives.

Hereupon the King suddenly sends over for whole legions of Poictouins, and
withal sommons a Parliament at Oxford whether the Lords refused to come, both
in regard they found themselves despised, and holding it not safe by reason of
those multitudes The Lords refuse to come to Parliament upon summons
of strangers. Then was it decreed by the Kings Council that they should be
the second and third time sommoned, to try whether they would come or not. And
here, from the Pulpit, whence the voice of GOD and the people is uttered, the
King is boldly showed the way to redress this mischief of the Kingdom, by
one Robert Bacon a Friar Predicant: but more comically by Roger Bacon, (in
pleasant discourse) asking the king: my Lord, what is most nocent to Seamen,
and what feared they most, the King replies: Seamen know that best themselves;
then, my Lord I will tell you: Petrae et Rupes, alleging to Petrus de Rupibus
Bishop of Winchester.

After this, the Lords were summoned to a Parliament at Westminster: whether
likewise they refused to come, unless the King would remove the Bishop of
Winchester, 1232. Anno. Reg. 17.
and the Poictouines from the court: otherwise, by the Common Council of the
Kingdom they send him express word, they would expel him, and his evil
counselors out of the land and deal for the creation of a new King.

Upon this threatening, pledges are required of the nobility to be delivered by
a certain day for security of their alleagiance. But no act passed in this
Parliament though 6. Parliament.
though diverse Lords came thither, as the Earl of Cornwall, Chester, Lincoln,
Ferrers, and others, in regard the Earl Marshall, the Lord Gilbert Basset, and
other Nobles were not present, Then are Writs sent out to all who held by
knights service to repair to the King at Gloucester by a certain day: which
the Earls Mareschall and his associates refusing, the King without the
judgment of his court, and their Peers, cause to be proclaimed outlawes,
seizes upon all their lands, which he gives to his Poictouines, and directs out
Writs to attach their bodies wheresoever in the kingdom.

The Bishop of Winchester to weaken the party of the Mareschall, won the
Eatles of Chester and Lincoln with a thousand marks, and the King had so
pleased his brother the Earl of Cornwall, as he likewise left them.
Whereupon they withdraw them into Wales, and confederat with Lewelin and other
great men in that country, (whither also came Hubert de Burgh escaping out of
the Vize Castle, and ioynes with them) taking their oath intermutually, that no
one without other should make their accord.

The King goes himself in person with an Army, against these revolted Lords,
into Wales, Where he had the worst of the business, and much dishonor, returns
to Gloucester, The K. with an army against the Lords.
imployes new forces of strangers, but all without success. Whereupon a Friar
of the Order of Minors is employed to confer with the Earl Mareschall, and to
persuade him to come in, and submit himself to the kings mercy, whom he had
heard to say, that notwithstanding his great offenses, he would pardon, and
restore to his estate upon submission; and besides gives him so much of
Herefordshire, as should conveniently mayntaine him. Besides the Friar told him
what he heard of other Counselors about the King, concerning the wishing of
his submission, and in what form they desired Vide Appond.
it should be imparted in private. And then, as of himself, he uses all
inducements. possible to draw him thereunto, showing how it was his duty, his
profit, and safty so to do. Wherewithal the Earl nothing moved, told the
Friar what injuries he had received, and that he could not trust the King so
long as he had such Counselors about him: who only sought the destruction of
him, and his associats, who ever had been his loyal subjects. And after many
objections made by the Friar with urging the Kings power, his own weakness, and
the danger he was in: the Earl concludes that he feared no danger: that he
would never yield to the Kings Will, that was guided by no reason: that he
should give an ill Example to relinquish the justice of his cause to obey that
Will which wrought all injustice, whereby it might appear, they loved wordly
possessions more then right and honor, etc.

So nothing was done, the war continues with much effusion of blood, all the
borders of Wales unto Shrowesbury, are miserable wasted, and made desolate. At
length means is used to draw the Earl Mareschall over into Ireland to defend
his estate there, which was likewise seized upon, by authority given under the
Kings hand and Seal, and all those great possessions descended unto him from
his Ancestor the Earl Strongbow (the first conquerors of that country)
spoiled, and taken from him. And here, seeking to recover his liuelihood he
lost his life circumuented by treachery: his death gave occasion of grief both
to his friends and enemies. The king disauowes the sending 1234. Anno. Reg. 19.
of this commission into Ireland protesting he never knew thereof, and
discharges himself upon his councellor. A poor shift of weak Princes.

After two years his affliction, a Parliament is assembled at Westminster,
wherein the Bishops gravely admonish the King (by his Fathers example, and his
own experiene, 7 Parliament.
of the mischief of dissension between him, and his Kingdom, occasioned
through the ill council of his ministers) to be at union with his people, to
remove from him strangers, and others, by whose instigation, for their own
ends, these disturbances are fostered, and his natural Subjects estranged from
him, to the great alienation of their affections, which was of dangerous
consequence. Wherefore (after recital of the Greeuances of the State, and the
abuses of his Ministers, which were such as all corrupted times produce) they
humbly besought him to govern his, according to the example of other
Kingdoms, by the natives of the same, and their Laws: otherwise they would
proceed by Ecclesiastical censure, both against his Counselors, and himself.

The King seeing no way to subsist, and get to his ends but by temporizing,
consents to call home these Lords out of Wales, restores them to their places
and possessions, amoues those strangers from about him, and calls his new
Officers to account. The Bishop of Winchesler. Peter de Riuallis and Stephan
Segraue thereupon take Sanctuary, but afterward, upon mediation they obtained,
with great fines, their Liberty, dearly paying for their two years eminency
and grace.

Things thus appeased the King gives his sister Isabel in marriage to the
Emperor Frederic the second (successor to Otho, and grandchild to Frederic
Barbarossa) the Archbishop of Cologne and the Duke of Louaine were sent for
her. She is conducted Isabel the Kings Sister married to the Emperor.
by the King her brother to Sandwich with three thousand horse. The marriage is
solemnised at Worms. She was the third wife of this Emperor, an alliance that
yielded neither strength or benefit (though that were both their ends) to
either Prince. The continual broyle which this Emperor held with all the
Popes of his time, Innocent the third, Honorius, Innocent the fourth Gregory
the ninth) was such and so great as all he could do, was not enough for
himself. For not to let go that hold of the Empire he had in Italy, with his
hereditarie Kingdoms of Naples and Sicil which the Popes wrought to draw to
the Church, he was put to be perpetually in conflict, never free from
vexations, thrust from his own courses, enjoined to undertake the Holy wars,
to waste him abroad, weakened at home by excommunications, and fines for
absolutions, for which, at one time he paid eleven thousand marks of Gold.
And in the end the Popes so prevailed that in the Grave of this Frederic was
buried the Imperial Authority in Italy, after he had thus reigned four and
thirty years, leaving his son Conrad successor rather of his miseries then
his inheritance. He had a son by Isabel named Henry, to whom he bequeathed
the Kingdom of Sicile, and a hundred thousand ounces of Gold, but he lived
not to enjoy it.

To the marriage of this Sister, the King qiues thirty thousand marks, besides
an Imperial Crown and other ornaments of great value: toward which, is
raised two 1236. Anno. Reg. 20.
Marks upon every Hide Land. And the next year after, himself marries
Elianor daughter to Raymond Earl of Province, a match in regard of the
distance of the place, with the means and degree of Estate, little
aduantagious either to him, or his Kingdom, but the circumstance of alliance
drew it on, with some other promises which were not observed. So, that he is
neither greater, nor richer by these alliances but rather lessened in his
means, having no dowre with his wife, full of poor kindred, that must draw
means from this Kingdom.

After the solemnization of this marriage (which was extraordinarily sumptuous)
a Parliament is assembled at London, which the King would have held in the
Tower, whither the Lords refusing to come, another place, of more freedom, is
appointed: where, after many things propounded for the good of the Kingdom
order is taken that all Shriefes are removed from their Offices upon complaint
of corruption; and Shriefes removed for corruption.
others of more integrity, and abler means (to avoid briberie) put in their
rooms, taking their Oaths to receive no gifts, but in victuals, and those
without excess.

Here the King displaces his Steward, and some other Counselors, and offers to
take from the Bishop of Chichester, then Chancellor, the great Seal, but the
Bishop refuses to deliver it, alleging, how he had it by the common Council
of the kingdom, and without assent of the same, would not resign it, and
having carried himself irreprehensible in his Office, is much favored by the
people. Peter de Riuallis, and Stephan Segraus, are again received into grace:
an argument of the kings leuitie, and irresolution, moved, it seems, with any
Engine to do and undo, and all out of time and order, wherein he ever looses
ground.

And now feign would he have revoked, by the Popes Authority, some grants of
his made heretofore, as being don beyond his power, and without the consent of
the Church, which harsh intention adds more to the already conceived
displeasure of the people.

Anno Reg. 21. another Parliament, or the same adiourned is held at London,
where, in regard of the great expense for his Sisters marriage, and his own,
he requires the 9 Parliament
thirtith part of all moueables, as well of the Clergy as Layetie. Whereunto
great 1237. Anno. Reg. 21.
opposition is made, and recital of the many Leuies had been exacted of the
Kingdom, now of the twentieth, now of the thirtith, and fortith parts: and that
it was a thing unworthy and injurious, to permit a King, who was so lightly
seduceble, and never did good to the Kingdom, either in expelling, or
repressing enemy, or amplyfing the bounds thereof, but rather lessening and
subiugating the same to Strangers, that he should extort by so many pretenses,
so great sums from his natural people (as from slaves of the basest
condition) to their detriment, and benefit of Aliens. Which when the King
heard, desirous to stop this general murmur, promised by Oath that he would
never more injury the Nobles of the Kingdom, so that they would benignly
relieve him at that present, with this supply: in regard he had exhausted his
treasure, in the marriage of his Sister, and his own: whereunto they plainly
answer, that the same was done without their Council, neither ought they to
be partakers of the punishment, who were free from the fault. After 4 days
consultation, the King promising to use only the Council of his natural
Subjects, disauowing and protesting against the reuocation lately propounded,
and freely granting the inviolable observation of the Liberties, under pain of
excommunication, has yielded unto him the thirtith part of all moueables
(reserving yet to every man his ready coin, horse, and armor to be employed
for the Commonwealth. For the collection of this subsidy, it was ordained that
4 Knights of every Four knights of every shire ordained to take charge of the
subsidy.
Shire, and one Clerk of the Kings should upon their Oath receive and deliver
the same, either unto some Abbay or Castle, to be reserved there, that if the
King fail in performance of his Grants, it might be restored to the Country
whence it was collected: with this condition often annexed, that the King
should leave the Council of Aliens, and only use that of his natural
Subjects. Wherein to make show of his part, he suddenly causes the Earls
Warren and Ferrers, with John Fitz Geffrey to be sworn his Counselors. And so
the Parliament ended, but not the business for which it was called, the King
not giving that satisfaction to his subjects as he had promised concerning
Strangers, and besides, that order concluded in Parliament was not observed in
the leauying and disposing of the susidie, but stricter courses taken in the
valewing of men's Estates then was held convenient. Moreover William Valentine
Uncle to the young Queen, is grown the only inward man with the King, and
possesses him so, as nothing is done without his Council: the Earl of
Province, the father; a poor Prince, is invited to come over to participat of
this Treasure, which seems was disposed before The coming of Simon Monford
into into England.
it came in. Simon de Monford a French man borne (banished out of France by
Queen Blanch) is intertayned in England, and preferred secretly in marriage to
Elianor the Kings Sister (widow of William Earl of Pembroke Great Mareschall)
and made Earl of Leicester by right of his mother Amice daughter to Blanchman
Earl of Leicester. Which courses (with other) so incense the Nobility, and
generally all the Subjects, as put them out into a new commotion. and Richard
the Kings brother (whose youth and ambition apt to be wrought upon, is made the
head thereof; who being as yet Heir apparent of the Kingdom (the Queen being
young and child-lesse) the preservation of the good thereof, is argued to
concern him, and he is the man employed The Greeuances of the Kingdom.
to the King to impart the public greeuances, and to reprehend, first the
profusion of his Treasure (gotten by exaction from the subject.) and cast away
upon Strangers who only guide him, then the infinite sums he had raised in
his time: How there was no Archbishopricke or Bishopric, except York,
Lincoln and Bathe, but he had made benefit by their Vacancies: besides what
fell by Abbayes, Earldomes, Baronies, Wardships and other Escheates, and yet
his treasure, which should be the strength of the State, was nothing increased.
Moreover how he as if both dispising his, and the Council of his natural
Subjects, was so obsequious to the will of the Romans, and especially of the
Legate whom he had inconsiderately called in, as he seemed to adore his
footsteps, and would do nothing either in public or private, 1238. Anno.
Reg. 22.
but by his consent, so that he seemed absolutely the Popes Feudarie, which
wounded the hearts of his people. The King upon this harsh remonstrance of his
brother, and the fear of a present commotion, after he had sounded the
affections of the Londoners, whom he found resolved to take part against him,
he again (by the advice of the Legate, who had earnestly dealt with the Earl
of Cornwall to reconcile himself to his brother, but without effect) calls a
Parliament at London. Whither the Lords came armed 10 Parliament
both for their own saftie, and to constrain the King (if he refused to the
observation of the premices, and reformation of his courses.

Here, after many debatements the King (taking his Oath) to refer the
business to the order of certain grave men of the Kingdom, Articles are
drawn, sealed, and publicly set up to the view of all, with the seals of the
Legate, and diverse great men. But before it came to effect, Simon Monford
working his peace with the Earl of Cornwall, and the Earl of Lincoln
likewise (with whom he and the State were displeased) the Earl grows cold in
the business. The Lords perceiving the staff of their strength to fail them,
failed themselves, so that nothing is effected, and the miseries of the
Kingdom continue as they did.

Shortly after, the King takes displeasure against Gilbert Earl of Pembrooke
(the third son of William the great Mareschall) and caused his gates to be
shut against 1239. Anno. Reg. 23.
him at Winchester, whereupon the Earl retyres into the North. And to show how
inconstant this King was in his favors, Simon Norman (entitled Master of the
Kings Seal, and not only so, but said to be Master of the Kingdom; yea of
the King, the Rector, and Disposer of Court) is thrown out with disgrace, the
Seal taken from him, and given to the Abbot of Euesham. In like sort, his
brother Geffrey a Knight Templar is put out of the Council, both of them much
maligned by the Nobility; who had often before labored their amouement, as
held to be corrupt Counselors, and wrongers of the State, and now are they
fallen off themselves. But the cause of this their deiection may show, that
oftentimes Officers under weak Princes are not so much faulty, as the World
holds them to be: for not yielding to pass a Grant from the King made unto
Thomas Earl of Flaunders (the Queens Thomas of Sauoy marries the inheretrix
of the Earldom of Flanders, which he held but during her life.
Uncle) of 4 pence upon every sack of Wool (an enormious act then accounted)
they both lost their places, though not their reputations in this; their fall
discovering what the Envy that attended their fortune, hindered men to see. To
this Earl of Flanders the next year after the King grants (notwithstanding)
300 Marks (to be paid out of his Eschequer annually, for his homage.

Now, besides the great exactions of the King, and his wastes. The Sea of Rome
extorts huge sums, as if one Gulf sufficed not to swallow up the substance
of the Kingdom, which opened the mouths of our Clergy so wide; as they let
out many exclamations against the avarice of the Popes of that time: and the
Roman Factors, who by permission of the King, or by his negligence, presumed so
far upon the easi-yeeldingnesse of the State, as they wrung out what they
listed. In so much, as besides the fleece, they would now have the bodies of
their possessions. And the Pope sends his Mandat to have three hundred Romans
preferred to the benefices which should be first vacant in England, which so
amazed the Clergy, and especially Edmond Archbishop of Canterbury, as he;
seeing no end of these concussions of the State, and Liberties of the Church:
and himself (on whom the Scandal of all must light, unable by reason of the
Kings remissness to withstand it, tired with the vanity of worldly actions)
gives over all; and betakes himself to a voluntary exile in the Edmond
Archbishop of Canterbury gives over his Sea.
Abbay of Pontiniac in France; and there applies him to the contemplation of a
better life. But before his departure, he yields, as a ransom for his Church,
800 Marks to the Pope.

The Clergy, although thus left by their head, generally oppose what they
could, against the Popes rapine, who to get money for his wars with the Emperor
used daily Pope Gregory the 9.
new and insolent pressures upon them, in so much as they repair to the King,
declare how prejudicial, and detogatory it was to his royalty, and the
liberty of the Kingdom to suffer this proceeding, which none of his
Predecessors heretofore euct did: and of how dangerous consequence it was to
his successors. The King, either not apprehensiue of the mischief, or content
to join with the Pope to punish and awe the Kingdom, not only refers them to
the Legate, but offers to deliver the chief opposers up unto him. Whereupon
they seeing themselves forsaken, and no power to succor them but their own,
did what they could to withstand the Legates proceeding, who now by the Kings
animation presumes more peremptorily to urge them to supply the Popes present
occasion, and holds a Convocation at London for effecting the same. Wherein the
Clergy declare how this contribution now required by the Pope for the
destruction of the Emperor, and effusion of Christian blood was unlawful, he
being not an Heretic, nor condemned by the judgment of the Church although
excommunicated: That it was against the Liberties of the Church of England,
being required under pain of Ecclesiastical censure, as a thing of servitude
and compulsion: That they had heretofore given a Tenth to the Pope, on
condition, that never any such exaction should again be made, least it might
be drawn to a Custom, for as much as binus Cod. de Episcopal. L. Nemo.
actus inducat consuetudinem: That for their business in the Court of Rome,
they were to pass through the Emperors Countries, and the danger they might
have thereby: That it was not safe for the Kingdom to impouerish the King, who
had many enemies, against whom he must have to sustain war: And besides how
for the furnishing of diverse Noble men, undertaking of late the business of
the Cross, great contributions had been made: That the Church of England was
poor, and hardly able to sustain it self. That a general contribution was
to be made by a general Council, etc.

Notwithstanding these reasons, though at first they staggered the Legate, yet
such course was taken by winning some of them, upon hope of preferment, as the
rest could not without the note of contumacie but yield perforce, so, by this
treason of division, the body of the Council is entered into, and the Pope
preuailes in this business.

The King has now a son lately borne, and Richard his brother Earl of
Cornwall Edward eldest son to King Hen.
having likewise issue (by permission of the State which, heretofore he could
not obtain) undertakes the Cross, and with him his Uncle William Longsword
Earl of Salibury, and many other Noblemen. These departing out of England,
Peter of Sauoy, another Richard Earl of Cornwall undertakes the Cross.
Uncle to the Queen, comes in, and has the Earledom of Richmond bestowed on
him, with many other gifts, he is knighted and feasted suptuously, for which
the poor Jews by way of redemption, pay 20 thousand Marks at two terms of
that year. Boniface, the son of Peter of Sauoy, Nephew to the Queen is
preferred to the Archbishopric of Canterbury. After this the King makes an
expedition into Wales, which had often put him to great charge and trouble,
having been very unfortunate, in his many attempts 1241. Anno. Reg. 25.
against Lewellin, entitled Prince, or King of North Wales; who being lately
dead, had left his two sons David, and Griffin by division of State to be at
discord between themselves, whereby he came to make an easier end of that
business, and now only but with the show of his power, got that, which,
heretofore he could not with much blood; has submission, and fealty rendered
unto him by David, withal his charges for that journey, but now this ended,
another attempt of greater expense, but less benefit is in hand.

The Earl of March with his wife, the Queen Mother, and many other Great
Lords of Poictou, so work by their earnest solieitation, with assurance of
success, as the King is induced to undertake another expedition into France.
The 11 Parliament
matter is moved in Parliament, general opposition made against it, the great
expense, and the ill it last brought to the Kingdom, vehemently urged, How it
was unlawful to break the truce made with the King of France, who was now too
strong for them to do any good, etc.

Notwithstanding many of the greatest Peers drawn by fair promises, and
their own hopes for recovery of their Estates so prevail as the action is
resolved on, and an Aid demanded for the same. The very motion for money was
so distastefull, as presently all the Kings supplies made from the beginning of
his reign, are particulerly again, and opprobriously rehearsed, as the 13. 15.
16 and 40 part of all men's moueables, besides Carucage, Hydage, Escuage,
Escheates, Amercements, and such like, A repetitio^ of the Kings supplies
formerly made.
which could not but fill his Coffers. Then the Popes continual exactions,
with the infinite charge for those who undertook the Holy war, are likewise
repeated. Besides they declare, how the 30 levied about four years past (in
regard it was to be laid up in certain Castles and not to be issued but by
the allowance of four of the Peers) was, as they held it yet unspent: the
King, to their knowledge, having had no necessary occasion to employ the same
for the use of the Commonwealth, for which it was granted, and therefore
resolutely they denied to yield him any more. Whereupon the King comes himself
to the Parliament and, in most submissiue manner craves their aid at this
time, urging the Popes letter, which he had procured to solicit and persuade
them thereunto. But all prevailed not, their vow made to each other not to
disseuer their voices, or to be drawn to a disunion held them fast together.
In so much as the King is driven to get what he could of particular men,
either by gift or loan, and uses such means, as notwithstanding, The King
carries over 30 Barrells of silver into France.
he carries over with him thirty Barrells of sterling coin, and taking with
him his Queen, leaves the government of the Kingdom to the Archbishop of
York, having first, for his better quiet at home, contracted a match between
his daughter Margueret (yet an infant) and Alexander eldest son to Alexander
3 King of Scots to whom he commits the government of the Marches.

This second expedition into France, had no better success then the first. For
therein The Kings second expedition into France.
he likewise consumed his treasure upon strangers, discontented the English
Nobility, was deceived in his trust by the Poictouines, who failed him with his
money, and after more then a whole years stay (the Lords of England leaving
him) was driven to make a dishonorable truce with the King of France. And after
having been relieved with much provision out of England, and another
imposition of Escuage, he returns, puts the Jews to another redemption;
exacts of the Londoners; is visited by his An imposition of Escuage with
another redemption of the Jews.
wives mother, the Countess of Province, who, bringing with her Zanchia her
daughter, is (to add to his other expencesses) sumptuously feasted, and a
marriage solemnized between the young Lady and Richard Earl of Cornwall,
whose wife was late dead, and he returned from the Holy wars.

The old Countess at her return is presented with many rich gifts, having
besides, The Countess of Province mother to the Queen comes over into England
to the great charge of the Kingdom.
received an annual pension of 4000 Marks out of England for five years
passed, in consideration of a pact made, that King Henry should, after her
discease have the Earldom of Province. But shortly after her return home,
she disappoints him of that hope; and bestows the same with her youngest
daughter Beautrix, on Charles the French Kings brother, who was after King of
Naples, and Sicile. So that she lived to see all her four daughters Queens;
Richard Earl of Cornwall coming afterward to be elected King of the Romans.

Means now, upon these profusions, to have fresh supply of Treasure, was
1244. Anno. Reg. 28.
only by way of Parliament which is again in Anno Reg. 28. assembled at
Westminster, and therein the Kings wants, and the present occasions urged for
the necessary defense of the Kingdom, having now to do with Wales and
Scotland, whose Princes lately reuolting, join together to annoy the same; but
nothing could be effected 12 Parliament
without the assurance of reformation, and the due execution of the Laws,
notwithstanding the King comes again himself in person, as before, and
pleades his own necessities. Here they desire to have ordained that four of
the most grave and discreet Peers should be chosen as Conseruators of the
Kingdom, and sworn of the Kings Council, both to see Justice observed, and
the Treasure issued, and these should ever attend about the King or at least 3,
or 2 of them. Besides that the Lord Chief Iusticiar, and the Lord Chancellor
should be chosen by the general voices of the States assembled, or else be
one of the number of those four. Besides they propound that there might be
two Justices of the Benches, two Barons of the Eschequer: and one Justice for
the Jews, and those likewise to be chosen by Parliament. That as their
function was public, so should also be their Election.

But whilst these things were in debating, the enemy of mankind and disturber
of Peace, the Devil, says Mat. Paris, hindered the proceeding, by the coming
of Martin a new Legate sent from the Pope with a larger power then ever any
before, to exact upon the State; which he supposed now to have been so
wrought, and ready, as the Kings turn being served, his likewise should be
presently supplied. But making too much haste before the first had passage, he
frustrates his own desire, and receives a most peremptory repulse of the whole
Kingdom, in so much as his Agent was disgracefully returned home with this
displeasing message. That the Kingdom was poor: had great wars, the Church
in debt, not able to yield any more. Besides this course was of dangerous
consequence to this State, which alone seemed exposed to the Popes will, and
therefore seeing a general Council was shortly to be held at Lions, if the
Church would be relieved, it were fit the same should be done by a general
consent in that Council.

Besides, at this time the Emperor Frederic, by his Letters which were openly
read Vide Append. The Empetor Fredericks letters to the King.
in this Assembly, first intreates, as before he had oftentimes done, that the
Pope might have no supplies out of England, which (he said) were only required
to ruin him, whom contrary to all Piety and Justice he had oppressed, by
seizing upon his Cities, and Castles appertayning to the Empire. And for many
years (notwithstanding his often submission and desire of Peace) proceeded in
all foul and Hostile manner against him, both by the sword, and unjust
excommunications. And seeing he could obtain no due hearing, he had referred
his cause to be arbitrated by the Kings of France, and England, and the
Baronage of both Kingdoms. And therefore desires, he might not receive
detriment, whence he expected favor, as a brother and friend. Adding in the
end, that if the King would be advised by him he would by power free this
Kingdom from that unjust tribute which Innocentius the 3, and other Popes had
laid upon it. These letters pleased the Assembly and animated them the rather
to deny the Popes Mandate.

The interposition of this business took up so much time, as nothing else was
done in this Parliament, only they granted an Aid to the King, for the
marriage of his daughter, twenty shillings of every Knights fee, and that with
much ado and repetition of all former Aids.

After this, upon a light occasion, the King undertakes an expedition of great
charge against Alexander King of Scots, for which every Baron which held in
Capite, Spiritual and Lay, were commanded to be ready withal Military
provision due for that service. Whereunto, likewise repaires Thomas Earl of
Flaunders with three score Knights and a hundred other servants (thirsting for
the Kings money) whose unnecessary Another Greeuanees of the Barons.
coming was ill taken by the Barons of Eng. as if the strength of the Kingdom
without him, were not sufficient for that Action, which was as suddenly ended
as undertaken, by a fair conclusion of Peace with King Alexander; a Prince
highly commended for his virtues, by the Writers of that time.

Upon his return, again that Winter he assembles another Parliament, wherein
he moves for an Aid, upon a design he had for Wales, and to supply his
wants, and pay 13 Parliament
his debts, which were urged to be so great, as he could not appear out of his
chamber for the infinite clamor of such to whom he owed for his Wine, Wax, and
other necessaries of House. But they all to his face, with one voice, refused
to grant him any thing. Whereupon other violent courses are taken. An ancient
quarrel is found out against the city of London for which they are commanded
to pay fifteen thousand Marks. And Passeleise the Kings Clerk is employed
with others in a most peremptory commission, to inquire of all such lands, as
had been inforrested, and either to fine the occupiers An inquiry about Lands
inforested which bred great greeuances.
thereof, at their pleasure, or take it from them and sell the same to others.
Wherein such rigor was used, as multitudes of people were undone. So unsafe are
private men's estates, where Princes fall into so great wants. Passeleue for his
good service in this business should have been prefeired to the Bishopric
of Chichester, but the Bishop withstood the king therein.

Now, in regard to show the King the Estate of his kingdom, and the oppression
of Popes; Inquiry was made of the revenues which the Romans and Italians had in
England, which was found to be annually, sixty thousand Marks, being more then
the An inquiry of the Popes revenues in Eng
yearly revenues of the Crown of England: which so moved the King, as he
caused the same to be notified, withal other exactions, by his procurators to
the general council now assembled at Lions; Which (with the ill usage of
Martin) so vexed the Pope, as he is said to have uttered these words: It is fit
that we make an end with the Emperor that 1245. Anno. Reg. 29.
we may crush these Petty Kings, for the Dragon once appeased or distroyed,
these lesser snakes will be soon trodden down. Which impious speech proceeding
from such a mouth, whence the Oracles of peace, and charity ought to be
uttered, was as ill taken, bred great scandal, and gave warning to Princes of
prevention; who, though they maligned the corruptions of the Court of Rome,
they were yet ever at one with the Church.

And the Clergy of England were most forward to vindicate the State from that
miserable oppression which of late by degrees they were drawn unto, through
the humility of their zeal: For, such is the nature of Domination, wheresoever
it sits, that finding an yeeldingnes to endure, it never thinks it has power
sufficient, unless it has more then enough: for, if the Popes (the professed
souraignes of piety) upon the advantage of men's zeal, and belief, grew to
make their will, and their power equal (so that to question their sanctions
was taught to be sin against the Holy Ghost) no marvel if secular Princes,
whose consciences are untied, strive to break out into the wildness of their
wills from those bounds wherein by the law of the state they are placed.

But upon the Popes rejecting the consideration of these greeuances of England
(which were particularly delivered in this council at Lions) and dispising the
Kings Vide Append.
message (who, he said began to Frederize) it was absolutely here ordained,
under great penalty, that no contribution of money should be given to the Pope
by any subject of 1246. Anno. Reg. 30.
England: and the King, for a time, bustles against these foreign exactions,
in such sort as it gave some hope of redress. But being of an irresolute, and
wavering nature, and a feared of threats, soon womanlike gives over what he
manfully undertook: so that the Pope continues his former rapine, though
having by the continual exclamations of the Clergy, been brought to promise
never to send any more Legates into England, yet imployes he other ministers,
under the the title of Clerks, who had the same power, as had his former
Agents, and effected underhand his desires.

Now the other part of the state have new occasions of complaynt offered. Peter
of Sauoy Earl of Richmond brings over certain maids to be married to young
noble 1247. Anno. Reg. 31.
men of England the Kings Wards, of which Edmond Earl of Lincoln has one, and
Richard de Burgh another. And the same year, 3. of the Kings brothers by the
mother Guy de Lusignan, William de Valence, and Athelmar Clarke are sent for
over to be provided of Estates in England. Thomas of Sauoy (sometimes Earl of
Flanders by right of his wife) comes with his sister Beatrix Countes of
Province the Queens Mother: 1248. Anno. Reg. 32.
and they are again feasted, and guifted: for which the King is taxed in the
next Parliament conuoked at London in Candlemas Term: and besides sharply
reprehended for his breach of promise (upon his requiring of another aid)
having vowed and declared (upon his last supply) by his Charter, never more to
injury the state in that kind. Besides 14 Parliament
they blame him for his violent taking up of provisions for diet, Wax, Silks,
robes, etc. and especially for wine, contrary to the will of the sellers,
whereby Merchants both of this, and other That he took from his subjects,
quicquid habuerlint in esculentis, and poculentis. Rusticorum enim Equos,
Bigas, Vina Victualia ad libitum capit. Rishanger.
Kingdoms withdraw their commo^ities, in so much as all traffic and commerce
utterly cease, to the detriment and infamy of the Kingdom. That his Judges
were sent in circuit under pretext of Justice to fleece the people. That Robert
de Passeleue had wrung from the borderers of Forests, for encroachments or
assarts, great sums of money, and therefore they wonder he should now
demand relief from the impouerished commons: and advised (him since his
needless expenses (posquam Regni caepit esse dilapidator) amounted to be
above 800 thousand pounds) that he should pull from his favorites enriched
with this treasure of the Kingdom, and revoke the old Lands of the Crown.

Then they reprove him for keeping vacant in his hands Bishoprics, and
Abbayes, contrary to the liberties of the Church, and his Oath made at his
Coronation. Lastly they all generally complain for that the Chief Iusticiar,
Chancellor, and Treasorer, were not made by the Common Council of the
Kingdom, according as they were in the time of his Magnificent Predecessors,
and as it was fit and expedient; but such advanced, as followed his will, in
whatsoever tended to his gain, and sought not promotion for the good of the
Kingdom but their own.

The King patiently indures this reprehension, in hope to obtain his desire
and gives them promises of redress, but nothing is effected; after many
meetings and much debate the Parliament is proroged till Midsommet following,
during which time, they would with Patience expect how the King would bear
himself toward them; that accordingly they might obey, and satisfy his
desire.

But this delay wrought no good, the King through ill Council grows more
obdurate, and harsh to his people, in so much as at the next Session he makes
this speech: Would you curb the King your Lord, at your uncivil pleasure, and
impose a servile condition The Kings speech in Parliament.
upon him? will you deny unto him what every one of you, as you list, may do?
It is lawful for every one of you to use what counsel he will, and every
master of a famely to prefer to any office in his house whom he pleases, and
displace again when he list, and will you rashly deny your Lord, and King to
do the like? Whereas servants ought not to judge their Master, nor Subjects
their Prince, or hold them to their conditions. For the servant is not above
his Lord, nor the Disciple above his Master. Neither should he be your King,
but as your servant who should so incline to your pleasures: wherefore he will
neither remove his Chief Iusticiar, Chancellor, nor Treasorer, according to
their motion. In like manner finds he answers to the rest of their Articles,
and for the aid he required, it concerned (he said) their Right as well as
his. And so the Parliament brake up in discontent.

The King is advised to furnish his wants with the sale of his Plate, and
Jewels of the Calus, An. 48. and 49. Hen. 3. Begins first with sale of
Land, then of Jewels, pawneth Gascoyne, and after his crown when having
neither credit nor pawnes of his own, he lays the ornaments and lewels of
Saint Edwards Shrine, gives over housekeeping.
Crown, being told that as all rivers have reflux to the sea, so all these
things though sold, and disperced would reuert again unto him, and therefore it
should not move him, and having with great loss received money for this ware,
he inquires who had bought it, answer was made, the City of London, that
City, said he, is an vnexhaustible Gulf. if Octauius treasure were to be sold
they would surely buy it, and therewithal inueighes against the City which had
so oftne served his turn, and devises all means to vex the same, causing
shortly after a new fair to be kept at Westminister, forbidding under great
penalty all exercise of Merchandise within London for 15 days, and all other
Faires in England, and namely that of Ely. This novelty came to nothing, the
inconvenience of the place, as it was then, and the foulness of the weather
brought more affliction then benefit to the Traders.

That Christmas also (without respect of Royal Magnificence) he requires new
years gifts of the Londoners, and shortly after writes unto them his letters
imperiously deprecatorie, to aid him with money, which, with much grudging
they do, to the sum of 20000 pounds, for which, the next year after he
craves pardon of the City, sending for them to Westminster Hall. And not with
standing his continual taking up of all provisions for his house, he so much
lessens his hospitallity (introducing, 1249 Anno. Reg. 33.
say they, the Roman Custom of diet) as was held very dishonorable, and
unusual to the English Magnificence of Court.

Then, whereas he could obtain nothing of the States together, he calls unto
him, or writes to every Noble man a part, declaring his poverty and how he
was bound The King requires Newyeares gifts.
by Charter in a debt of 30 thousand pounds to those of Bordeaux, and the
Gascogines (who otherwise would not suffer him to depart home) at his last
being in France. notwithstanding he required nothing but of favor, which where
he found, he would return with the like. And failing likewise herein, he
addresses his letters to the Prelates, where he finds as little relief. By
much importunity, and his own presence he got of the Abbot of Ramsey 100
pounds: but the Abbot of Borough had a face to refuse him the like sum. Though
the King, told him it was more alms to give unto him, then to a beggar that
went from door to door: the Abbot of Saint Albones yet was more kind, and
gave him 60 Marks. To this lowness, did the necessity of this indigent King
(through his profusion) decline him. The Jews ever exposed to his will, feel
the weight of these his wants, and their Estates are continually ransackt. One
Abraham, found a delinquent, redeemes himself for 700 Marks. Aron another
Jew, protests, the King had since his last being in France, taken from him by
times, 30 thousand Marks of Siluar, besides he had given 200 Marks in Gold
to the Queen.

The Lords assemble again at London, and press him with his promise made unto
1250. Anno. Reg. 34.
them, that the Chief Iusticiar, Chancellor, and Treasorer might be
constituted by the general Council of the Kingdom; but by reason of the
absence of Richard Earl of Cornwall, which was thought to be of purpose,
they return frustrate of their desire. So that coffeehouse still gos on,
and neither side get any thing but by hard wrestings, which became them both
ill, and show us the miseries of a disioynted time.

The King labors the Covent of Duresme to prefer his brother Athelmar to the
Bishopric the Covent refuses him, in regard of his youth and insufficiency:
the King answers, that then he would keep the Bishopric 8. or 9. years
more in his hand, till his brother were of more maturity. Shortly after the
Bishopric of Winchester falls void; and thither he sends presently his
solicitors to prepare the Monks of the Cathedral The Kings speech to the
Chapter at Winchester.
Church, to elect his brother, and for that he would not have also their
repulse; he suddenly goes thither himself in Person, enters the Chapter house
as a Bishop or Prior, gets up into the Presidents Chair, begins a Sermon, and
takes this text: Justice and Peace have kissed each other, and thereupon uses
these words: To me, and other Kings, and to our Princes and Iusticiars, who
are to govern the people, belong the rigor of Judgment, and Justice: to you,
who are men of quiet, and religion; peace and tranquillity: and this day I
hear, you have (for your own good) been favorable to my request. Justice and
Peace have kissed each other. Once I was offended with you for withstanding me
in the election of William Rale your late Bishop, a man I liked not, but now I
am friends with you for this, and will both remember and reward your kindness,
As by a woman came destruction to the world, so by a woman came the remedy. I
to satisfy my wife, desirous to prefer her uncle William Valentine,
disquieted, and damnified you, so now, willing to advance my brother, by the
Mother will reconcile my self unto you, etc. And you are to consider how in
this city I was borne, and in this Church Baptized. Wherefore you are bound
unto me in a straighter bond of affection, etc. Then commends he the high birth
and good parts of his Brother, and what honor and benefit they should have by
electing him, but concludes with some threatening. So that the Monks, seeing
him thus to require the Bishopric, held it in vain to deny him: and Athelmar
is elected though with this reservation; if the Pope allowed thereof. Shortly
after follows the memorable cause of The cause of Sir H. Bath.
Sir Henry de Bath a Iusticiar of the Kingdom, and an especial Councellor to
the King, who by corruption had attained to a mighty Estate, and is said in one
circuit to have gotten 200. pound land per annum. he is accused by Sir Phillip
Darcy of falsehood in the 1251. Anno. Reg. 35.
Kings Court, and the King so incenced against him, as in the Parliament about
this time holden in London Proclamation is made that whosoever had any action
or complaint against Henry de Bath, should come and be heard: one of his fellow
Iusticiciats accused him of acquitting a malefactor for a bribe. The King
seeing the friends of the accused strong, breaks out into rage protesting that
whosoever would kill Hugh de Bath should be acquitted for the deed: but
afterward he comes pacified by the Earl of Cormwale, and the Bishop of London,
who urged the danger of the time, the coffeehouse 15 Parliament
of the Kingdom; and how the proceeding in such a manner with one of his
council, whom he had used in so great business, would discourage others to
serve such a master, who upon malicious accusations should so for sake them,
whose places were ever exposed to envy and detraction. And thereupon Sir Henry
is released paying, 2000 Marks and after restored to his former place and
favor. The marriage of Margueret with Alexander K. of Scots solemnizedat at
York.


The King keeping his Christmas at York, the marriage is solemnised between
Alexander King of Scots and Margaret his Daughter, the riot of which feast with
the vain expenses of apparel (the note of a diseased time) is discribed by
our author, who amongst other things, reports how the Archbishop gave 60. fat
Oxen which were spent at one meal; besides that feast cost him 4000. Marks,
which shows, the poverty of the Church, was not so great as it was pretended
to be, seeing when they would show their glory, they could find what they
denied at other times.

The Pope Sollicites the King to undertake the Cross, and so does Alphonsus
King of Castile; Offering to accompany him in Person to reskue the King of
France. Who The King of France prisoner with the Soldian.
having even emptied his country both of Treasure and nobility, was now taken
prisoner by the Sultan, and held in miserable captivity. A ransom collected
for him in France, with great vexation, is by tempest cast away on the Sea,
other means are made for treasure, which could not easily be had: the captive
king offers to restore Normandy to the King of England so he would come to his
rescue. Which, the nobility of France takes ill and disdain the weakness of
their King: upon the Popes solicitation The King of England under takes the
Cross.
and the grant of a Tenth of the Clergy and Laytie for 3. years to come, the
king of England undertakes the Gross, rather, it seems to get the money then
with any purpose to persorme the iourny. Which, had it been collected, would,
says Paris, have amounted to 600. thousand pound, to the utter impourishing of
the Kingdom, which was that, they both sought, but by several ways, for many
now began to discover, that the Pope, by this imbarking the Princes of
Christendom in this remote, and consuming war, to wast them, their nobility
and Kingdom, was only but to extend his own power, and domination.

The king by Proclamation calls the Londoners to Westminster, and there causes
1252. Anno. Reg. 36.
the Bishops of Worcester, and Chichester, to declare his intention; and exhort
the people to undertake the cross and attend him: but few are moved by their
perswation, only 3. knights (and they of no great note) are nominated: whom
the king presently, in open view, embraces, kisses, and calls brethren,
checking the Londoners, as ignoble mercenaries for that few of them were
forward in this action, notwithstanding he there takes his Oath for performing
of the same and to set forth presently upon Midsommer day next. In taking this
oath, he lays his right hand on his breast (according to the manner of a
Priest) and after on the book, and kissed it, as a lay man.

A parliament about this tenth (granted by the Pope but not the people) is
called at London, the Bishops are first dealt withal (as being a work of
piety) to induce the rest, they absolutely refuse the same, then the Lords are
set upon, they answer: The Bishops and Lords deny the K. the Tenth granted by
the Pope.
what the Bishops (who were first to give their voice consented unto) they
would allow the same. this shufling put the King into so great rage as he
drove out all that were in his chamber, as he had been mad. Then falls he to
his former course, to preswade them a part, sends first for the Bishop of Ely,
deals with him in all mild and kind manner, recounting the many favors he
had received at his hands: how forward he had found him heretofore to supply
his occasions: and entreats him now to give good example to others, etc. The
Bishop replies: he was glad, at any time to have done him acceptable service,
but in this, for himself, to go from that form, the universality of the
state had determined, he held it a dishonest act; and therefore be sought his
highness he would not urge him thereunto, dissuading him from that iourny by
the example of the King of France, on whom, he might see the punishment of God
to be The speech of Isabel Countes of Arundel to the king.
falen, for his rapine made on his peoples substance, wrerewith he had now
enriched his enemies, who were grown fat with the infinite treasure of the
Christians transported into those parts.

The King, seeing the resolution of this grave Bishop, in great passion
commanded his servants to thrust him out of door, perceiving by this what was
to be expected of the rest; and so falls to his former violent courses. During
this Parliament (an ill time for suitors) Isabel Countess of Arundel (widow)
comes unto him a bout a Ward detayned from her, in regard of a small parcel of
land held in Capite (which drew away all the rest) the King giving her a harsh
answer and turning away she said unto him. My Lord, why turn you away your
face from Justice, that we can obtain no right in your Court you are
constituted in the midst betwixt God and us: but neither gourne your self
nor us discrectely as you ought, you shamefuliy vex both the Church, and Nobles
of the Kingdom by all means you may. To which speech the King disdainefully
replies: Lady Countess has the Lords made you a Charter and sent you (for
that you are an Eloquent speaker) to be their advocate and prolocutrix? No Sir,
says she, they have not made any Charter to me. But the Charter which your
father and you made, and sworn so often to observe, and so often extorted from
your subjects their money for the same, you vaworthily transgress, as a
manifest breaker of your faith. Where are the Liberties of England, so often
written, so often granted, so often bought? I (though a woman) and with me,
all your natural, and faithful people, appeal against you to the tribunal
of that High Judge above, and Heaven, and Earth shall be our witness, that you
have most unjustly dealt with us, and the Lord God of revenge, avenge us. Here
with the King disturbed, asked her if she expected no grace from him being his
kinswoman: How shall I hope for grace, said the, when you deny me right? and I
appeal before the face of Christ against those Counselors of yours, who,
only greedy of their own gain, have bewitched, and infatuated you.

As boldly, though in fewer words, is he reproved by the Master of the
Hospital of The King reproved by the Master of the Hospital of Jerusalem.
Jerusalem in Clerken-well, who coming to complain of an injury committed
against their Charter, the King told him; The Prelates, and especially the
Templars and Hospitalars, had so many liberties and Charters that their riches
made them proud, and their pride mad, and that those things which were
unadvisedly granted, were with discreation to be revoked; and alleges how the
Pope had often recalled his own grants, with the clause non obstante, and why
should not he cassat those Charters inconsiderately granted by him, and his
Predecessors. What say you Sir, (Said the Prior, God forbid so ill a word
should proceed out of your mouth. So long as you observe Justice you may be a
King, and as soon as you violate the same you shall leave to be a King.

The Friars Minors, to whom he had sent a load of Frees to cloth them,
returned the same with this message: That he ought not to give Alms of what
he had rent from the poor, neither would they accept of that abominable
gift. With these and many such like bold incounters (ill becoming the
obedience of Subjects) is this King affronted: to show us the ill complexion of
the time, and how miserable a thing it is for a Prince to loose his reputation,
and the love of his people, whereby they both have their vexations.

And daily more and more hardened he is against the English: whereby Strangers
Strangers commit ryots.
are made so insolent, as they commit many ryots and oppressions in the
Kingdom. William de Valence (whose youth and presumption went which way his
will led him) goes from his Castle of Hartford to a Park of the Bishop of Ely,
lying near his manner of Hatfield, where after having spoiled much game he
enters into the Bishops house and finding no drink but Ale, causes the Cellar
door being strongly barred, to be broken open by his people, who after they
had drunk their fill, let out the rest on the floor. But a greater violence
then this was offered to an Official of the Archbisnop of Canterbury by the
commandment of the Elect of Winchester (the one brother to the Queen, the
other to the King) which troubled them both, and gave them much to do before
it was appeased. Guy de Lusignan, the other brother of the King coming as a
guest to the Abbot of Saint Albones violates the Rights of Hospitality, and
many other iniuties, are reported by our Author to have been committed by
strangers, and much complaint is made of that time, wherein, this was said to
be the usual exclamation. Our inheritance is given to Aliens, and our houses
to Strangers, which notwithstanding the King seeks still to prefer.

A daughter of Guy de Lusignan Earl of Angolesme is married to Richard (or
Gilbere de Clare Earl of Gloucester a man eminent, and dearly loved of the
Nobility: Learned in the Laws of the Land; and held a great Patriot: which
manacle of alliance locked not yet his hands from defending the liberties of his
Country, the King promises her a dower of five thousand Marks, which he
sought to borow of diverse, but could not.

The City of London is again compelled to the contribution of 1000 Marks: and
the Gascoyns being upon revolt (unless speedy remedy were taken) general
musters are made, and commandment given that whosoever could dispend 13 pound
per annum, should furnish out a horseman. This with the extreme wants of the
King occasions another Parliament, wherein the State began, it seems wisely to
consider that all their opposition did no good, the Kings turn must be served
one way or other, some must pay for it; and where it lighted on particulars it
was far more heavy, then it could be in general: and therefore they agreed to
relieve him rather by the usual way, then force him to those extrauagant
courses which he took. But so, as the reformation of the government and
ratification of their laws might be once again solemly confirmed.

And after fifteen days consultation to satisfy the Kings desire, for his
holy expedition A Tenth, and Scutage granted by Parl.
(a Tenth is granted by the Clergy) which yet by view of the Lords should, upon
his setting forth, be distributed for 3. years; and Scntage, (3. Marks of
every knights Fee) by the Laytie for that year. And now again those often
confirmed Charters are ratified, and that in the most solemn and ceremonicall
manner, as Religion and State, could ever devise to do.

The King with all the great Nobility of England, all the Bishops and chief
Prelates 1253. Anno. Reg. 37.
in their reverent Ornaments, with burning candles in their hands assemble to
hear the terrible sentence of Excommunications against the infringers of the
same. And, at the lighting of those Candles, the King having received one in
his hand, gives it to a Prelate that stood by, saying, it becomes not me being
no Priest to hold this candle, my heart shall be a greater testimony. and
withal, laid his hand spread on his breast the whole time the sentence was
read, which was thus pronounced: Autoritate dei omnipotratis, etc. which done
he caused the Charter of K. John his Father granted by his free consent to be
Vide Append.
likewise openly red. In the end, having thrown away their candles (which lay
smoking on the ground) they cried out: So let them who incur this Sentence
be extinct, and stincke in hell. And the King with a loud voice said: As God me
help, I will, as I am a Man, a Christian, a Knight, a King crowned, and
anointed, inuiolably observe all these things. And therewithal the Bells rung
out, and all the people shouted with joy.

Never were laws amongst men (except those holy commandments from the mount)
established with more majesty of Ceremony to make them reverend, and respected
then were these: they wanted but thunder and lightning from heaven (which if
prayers could have procured, they would likewise have had) to make the sentence
ghastly, and hydeous to the infringers thereof. The greatest security that could
begiuen was an oath (the only chain on earth, besides love, to tie the
conscience of man, and human society together) which, should it not hold us,
all the frame of government and order must needs fall quite a sunder.

Now the business of Gascoigne (that required present care) is in hand, which
the The K. resumes Gasoigny from his brother Richard, gives it to his son
Prince Edward
better to know, we must return to the head whence it sprung. 27. years past,
the King, by the council of his Lords, freely granted to his brother Richard
all that Province, who is there received as their Lord with their oaths of
Fealty made unto him; and so continues, until the King (having issue of his
own, by motion of the Queen) reuokes his gift, and confers it upon his
eldest son Edward. Richard, though he were deprived of the possession would
not yield to forgo his right, and at the Kings last being in Gascoigny, many
of them stand doubtful whom to attend; the King in great displeasure commanded
his brother to resign his Charter, and renounce his right; which, he refusing
to do, the King commands those of Burdeax to take, and imprison him: but they
(in regard of his high blood, the homage they had made him, and the kings
mutability, who might resent his own commandment) would not adventure there
on. Then he assayles them with money which effected more then his commandment:
the Earl is indaunger to be surprised, escapes out of Bnrdeaux, and comes over
into England.

The King assembles the nobility of Gasconie at Bordeaux; invaighs against his
brother: a man, he said was covetous, and a great oppressor, a large
promiser, but a spare payer; and that he would provide them of a better
governor: with all, promises them thirty thousand Marks (as a price of their
obedience) and so nullifies the Charter of his former donation, with their
homage, and takes their oath of Fealty to himself. Which yet they would not
make unto him, till he had inwrapt himself Simon Monford Earl of Leicester
sent into Gascony.
both by his Charter and Oath for this promised sum: whereunto they so held
him, as thereby, afterward they lost his love. And to be revenged on them, he
sends Simon Monford Earl of Leceister, a rough and Martial man to Master
their pride: makes him a Charter for 6. years to come, and furnishes him with
10000. marks the better to effect his command. Monfort by his stern
government so discontents the Gascoins, as after three years suffering, they
send the Archbishop of Bordeaux with other great men, to complain of his hard
dealing, and accuse him of heinous crimes: their greeuences are heard before
the King and his council. Monfort is sent for over, to answer for himself,
the Earl of Cornwall for his received wrong in those parts, and, the Lords of
England for their love to him, take Monforts part; and that so egarly, as the
King comes about to favor and countenance the Gascons against Monfort; not for
his love to them, but to awe, and abate the other. Whereupon Montfort enters
into undutiful contestation with the King, vpraydes him with his expencefull
service: wherein, he says, he had utterly consumed his Estate: and how the
King had broken his word with him: and requires him either to make it good,
according to his Charter, or render him his expenses. The King in great rage
told him, no promise was to be Monforts contestation with the K.
observed with an unworthy traitor: Wherewith Monfort ryses up protesting that
he lied in that word, and were he not protected by his royal dignity, he
would make him repent it. The King commands his servants to lay hold on him,
which the Lords would not permit. Monfort thereupon, grew more audacious
saying, who will believe you are a Christian? were you ever confessed? if you
were, it was without repentance, and satissaction. The King told him he never
repented him of any thing so much, as to have permitted him to enter into this
Kingdom, and to have honored, and it stated him, as he had done.

The Gascoignes, after this, are privately sent for by the king, who gives them
all comfort, and incourages them against Monfort, whom yet he would again send
over to his charge, but with clipped wings, whereby both himself and they might
the better be revenged on him, and withal confirms the state of Gascoigne to
his son Edward whom he promised them shortly to send over, wherewith they are
much pleased, and after they had done their homage to the Prince, depart. The
effect of this confused, and ill-packt Monfort returned to his charge.
business was such, as all indirect courses produce. Monfort returns in
flames to plague the Gascoignes, and they in like manner him, but he by his
great alliance in France draws together such a power, as beyond expectation,
he over matches the Gascoigne whose Estates he exposes to spoil, and
therewithal intertaines his great collected army. They again send over their
complaints, and unless they were speedely relieved, they of force must put
their country into some other hand that would protect them.

And in this state stood Gascoigne now at the time of this last Parliament,
whither the King, upon this late supply granted (omitting his Eastern
enterprise) goes with The K. goes over into Gasc. with 300. great ships.
300. Sail of great ships and lands at Burdeux in August, Anno Reg. 38. having
first deposed Simon M. from the government there, and makes void his Charter
by Proclamation. Monfort retyres from thence, and is offered intertaynment by
the French, but refuses it. Before Winter the King had in some fort appeased
the Gascoignes, and taken in such Castles, as had long held out against him,
and the late governor. For they having put themselves under the protection of
the King of Spain; who being so Alliance with the King of Spain.
near a neighbor, and the discontents and factions of the country strong,
caused the King of England with more have, and care to look to his work, and
the rather for that the King of Spain pretended title to Aquitaine; of whom,
that King Henry might be the more secure, he sends to treat with him of a
marriage betwixt Prince Edward, 1254. Anno. Reg. 38.
and his Sister Elionor, whereunto the King of Spain willingly consents.

The King of England keeps his Christmas at Burdeux. The Queen sends him a
Newyeares gift of 500. Marks, and the next Summer, with the Prince, goes over
unto him. The marriage is solemnised at Burgos, where the king of Spain knights
the Prince, Prince Ed. marries Elionor sister to the King of Spain.
and by his Charter quits his claim to Aquitaine, for him, and his successors
for ever. The king of England inuestes the Prince, and his Wife therein, and
besides gives unto him Ireland, Wales, Bristow, Stanford, and Grantham. This
business dispatched, the king prepares to return, having consumed all
whatsoever he could get in this iourny, which, with the other two he had
before made, was reckned to have cost him 27. hundred thousand pounds, and was
said to be more then all the Lands he had there (should they be sold) were
worth, which, when he was told, he willed it might not be revealed in public
to his disgrace.

Now in regard of danger by sea he obtaines leave of the King of France
(lately returned King Henry comes to Paris with 1000 horse, is teasted by the
K. of France.
from Captivity) to pass through his Country, and comes to Paris with a 1000
horse, besides Sumpters, and Carts, where he stays 8 days, is sumptuously
feasted, and with as great magnificence feasts the King of France. This
meeting, in regard of the two Queens, Sisters, and their other two Sisters the
Countess of Cornwall, and Province (who were likewise afterward, Queens) was
made the more triumphant, and splendidous. The King about Christmas ariues in
England, and the first that paid for his coming home, were the Londoners, and
the Jews. The Londoners presenting him with He returns into England fines the
Londoners.
100 pounds were returned without thanks: then being persuaded that plate would
be better welcome, they bestow 200 pounds in a fair vessel: that had some
thanks, but yet served not the turn. An offense is found, about the escaping
of a prisoner for which they pay 3000 Marks. Now complains he of his debts,
which he says to be 300 thousand Marks, and how his own means was
deminished by the preferment of the Prince, who carried away 15 thousand Marks
per annum, and money must be had howsoever. First he begins to serve his present
turn with loanes, and borowes great sums of the Earl of Cornwall, upon pawn,
and after the King had wrung what he could from the Jews, he lets them out to
farm to this rich Earl to make the best of them.

Then a Parliament is called in Easter Term, which yields nothing but returns
of 1257. Anno. Reg. 41.
greeuances, and complaints of breach of Charter, with requiting their former
pretended rights in electing the Iusticiar, Chancellor and Treasurer. After
much debate to no purpose, the Parliament is prorogued til Michelmas after,
when likewise the Kings motion for money is disappointed, by reason of the
absence of many Peers being not, as 16. Parliament adiourned.
was alleged, sommoned according to the Tenor of Magna Charta. New occasions
of charge, and dislike arise. Thomas Earl of Sauoy, the Queens brother, has
wars with the City of Thuren, and must be supplied by the King, and Queen,
and his brother Boniface Archbishop of Canterbury. The elect Bishop of Toledo
brother to the King of Spain with other great men, come over, lie at the Kings
charge, and are presented with great gifts. Shortly after, Elionor the Princes
wife ariues with a multitude of Spaniards, and she must be met, and received by
the Londoners in sumptuous manner; and her Pope Alexander 4.
people after many feastings returned home with presents. The Pope sends the
Bishop of Bononia with a Ring of inuestiture, to Edmond the Kings second son
for the Kingdom of Sicile (with the hope of which Kingdom his Predicessor
Innocent the 4 Edmond the Kings second son is promised the Kingdom of Sicile.
had before deluded the King himself) and he is returned with a great reward.
Then comes Rustandus with power to collect the Tenth of England, Scotland and
Ireland, to the use of the Pope and the King, and also to absolve him from his
Oath for the Holy War: so that he would come to distroy Manfred son to the
Emperot Frederick, now in possession of the Kingdom of Sicile and Apulia. And
this man likewise has great gifts bestowed on him, besides a rich prebend in
York: but yet he obtained not, what he came for, of the Clergy, who
protested rather to loose their lives and livings, then to yield either to the
will of the Pope or the King, who they said, were as the Shepherd, and the
Wolf combined to macerat the flock.

The Pope sent likewise to borow of the Earl of Cornwall 500 Marks, in regard
of his Nephews preferment to the Kingdom of Sicile, but the Earl refused it,
saying, he would not lend his money to one on whom he could not distraine. So
this project came to nothing, though all means were used to draw it on. News
was spread that Manfreds forces were vrterly defeated, and himself either
slain or taken prisoner: wherewith the King is so much ioyed as he presently
vows with all speed to make an expedition thither, and gives his son Edmond
no other title but King of Sicile. This vain hope had already, by the cunning
of the Popes inwrapt him in obligations, of a hundred and fifty thousand
Marks. But shortly after this news proves false, and the contrary is
notified. Manfred is victorious, and the Popes power defeated by those of
Apulia, who took such indignation that the Pope should give away their
Country (without their consent) to an unknown Stranger, as with all their
maine power they join to establish Manfred, who is now found to be the
legitimate son of Frederick, and confirmed in his right, which a strong sword
will make howsoever.

The King keeps his Christmas at Winchester, where the Merchants of Gascoigne
The complaint of the Merchants of Gascoigne.
having their wines taken from them, by the Kings Officers, without due
satisfaction, complain to the Prince, being now their Lord, and show him, How
they were better to trade with Sarazins and Infidels then thus to be used here,
as they were. The Prince addresses him to his father, and craves redress
herein. but the Officers having been with An ill Office of Officers.
the K. before to prevent the clamors of the Gascoignes, and telling him, how
they falsely exclayme, relying wholly upon the Princes favor, who took upon
him their unjust cause (and that there ought to be but one in England, to whom
the ordring of Justice appertayned) put him into so great a rage with the
Prince, as he breaks out into these words. See now my blood, and mine own
bowels impugn me, behold my son, as my brother has done, is bent to
afflict me, the times of my grandfather Henry the second are again renewed,
what will become of us? but this passion being allayed by Council, he
dissembles the matter, and gives order that these injuries should be
redressed. But yet the Prince for more caution, amplyfing his train rode with
200 horse. So easily are iealosies, by evil Ministers infused into Kings, who
are of themselves too apprehensiue in that kind, being a thing that soon
turns the blood.

And now to add to the misery of these times, there are new mischiefs
committed by the insolence of the Servants of the Prince, who being himself
young, was attended by many youthful and violent spirits, many strangers, and
men without means, who, wheresoever he went, made spoil, and took for their
own, whatsoever Insolences committed by the Princes servants.
they could fasten on, to the extreme vexation of the subject. And they report
how this Prince meeting a young man trauayling on the way caused one of his
ears to be cut off, and one of his eyes put out: which foul act, made many
to suspect his disposition, and what he would prove here after. And indeed,
had he not been endued with an innated Nobleness of Nature (which, with his
long experience in travail and great actions overcame the Vices, the
looseness of the time, and his own breeding contracted) he might have
proved as bad, as any other. For unless Princes of themselves, by instinction
from above be not endued with a natural goodness, they shall gain little by
their education, wherein they are rather showed what they are, then what they
should be: and are apter to learn to know their greatness, then themselves:
being ever soothed in all whatsoever they do.

These youthful actions of this Prince, with his ryotous train (which are
said to be more ravenous, then those which Louys brought out of France with
him) put out the Welsh (of whom he had now the government) into open act of
rebellion, and to make spoil of the English, as his did ofthem: whereupon he
craves means of his father, the Queen, and his Uncle Richard to suppress
them. But all was vented already, the Kings treasure was gone over the Alps,
Earl Richard had lent more then he could get in, and the Earl of Sauoy in
his wars had spent that of the Queens.

The King is still at his shifts to supply his everlasting necessities. Now he
comes himself into his Exschequer, and, with his own voice pronounced That
every Shriefe, which appeared not yearly in the Octaues of Saint Michel, with
his money, as well of his Farms as amercements and other dues: for the first
day should be amerced five Marks for the second, ten, for the third fifteen,
for the fourth, to be redeemed at the Kings pleasure. In like sort, that all
Cities and Freedoms which answer by their Bayliffes, upon the same default
should be amerced, and the fourth day to loose their freedoms. Besides every
Shriefe, through out England is amerced in five Marks for that they did not
distraine within their Counties upon whomsoever held 10 pound land per annum,
and came not to be made knight, or freed by the King. Then falls he to the
examination of measures for Wine and Ale, for Bushels and Weights, which
likewise brought in some small thing, and every year commonly has one
quarrel or other to the Londoners, and gets some thing of them.

But now there fell out 2 business that intertayned some time, and gave
occasion to amuze the world with conceits of some great advantage and honor to
the Kingd. by the Election of Richard Earl of Cornwall to be King of Romans,
which was (as our The Earl of Cornwall Elected King of the Romans.
Writers say) by the general consent of all the Electors, and by them is he
sent for to receive that Crown: the matter is here debated in Council. Some,
who thought his presence, necessary to sway businesses in the Kingdom, were
unwilling, and diswade him by example of the miserable destruction of two
lately elected to that dignity, Henry the Lantgraue of Turing, and William
Earl of Holland: but others, and especially the King (who was willing to be
rid of him, as one he had often found too great for a subject: and being a King
abroad he might make use of him) persuades him to take it upon him, which he
is easily (though seeming otherwise) induced to do.

But the German Writers (who are best witnesses of their own affairs)
declare how after the murder of the Earl of Holland, the Electors were
divided about the choice of a successor. Some stiff to uphold their ancient
Custom in Electing one of their own Country, which was more natural. Others,
of a stranger, who might better support their declyning State; which was more
politic. Long were the conflicts of their Counsels: hereupon in the end,
their voices who stood for strangers were most, but they likewise disagreed
among themselves, some would have Richard, brother to the King of England,
others Alphonsus King of Spain, both of them not only contending who should
have it, but who should give most to buy it: in the end Richard being nerest at
Richard Crowned at Aquisgraue.
hand, and his money the redier, is preferred by the Bishop of Metz, the Bishop
of Cologne, and the Palsgraue, whose voices he is said to have bought, and
afterward is crowned at Aquisgrane. Now to confirm himself, say they, in his
State, he proceeds in all violent, and hostile manner (according as he was set
on) against those who opposed his Election, and having consumed himself both
by his excessive gifts, in purchasing the suffrages he had, and by this
prosecution, he came to be dispossessed, forsaken, and forced to return into
England to his brother Henry, then in war with his Nobles. Thus they deliver
it.

But before the Earl departed out of England, the Earl of Gloucester, and Sir
John Mansel, were sent into Germany to sound their affections, and how they
stood disposed toward him. They return well persuaded of the business, and
shortly after the Archbishop of Cologne comes to conduct him over, on whom, the
Earl bestows 500 Marks toward his charges, and a rich Miter set with
precious stones. This Prince the Earl of Cornwall is reported able to dispend
100 Marks a day for ten years, besides his revenues in England.

The French, and especially the King of Spain are much displeased with this
advancement, complaining to the Pope and the King of England of the
supplantation of the Earl of Cornewal. Spain pretending to have been first
elected, but being, it seems a Philosopher, and studious in the Mathematikes
(which he first reuiude in Europe) he was drawing Lines, when he should have
drawn out his purse, and so came prevented of his hopes.

About the time of the departure of Earl Richard (in the iollity of the
Kingdom 1257. Anno. Reg. 41.
upon this new promotion, and to set forward another) the King calls a
Parliament, wherein (bringing forth his son Edmond, clad in an Apulian habit)
he uses these words: Behold my good Subjects, here my son Edmond whom God of
his grace has called to the dignity of regal excellency, how fitting and
worthy is he the favor of you all, and how inhumane, and 15. Parliament
tyranous were he who (in so important a necessity) would deny him Council,
and aid? And then shows them, how by the advice and benignity of the Pope,
and the Church of England, he had for attayning the Kingdom of Sicile bound
himself, under Covenant of loosing his Kingdom of England, in the sum of 140
thousand Marks. Moreover, how he had obtained the Tenth of the Clergy, for 3
years to come, of all their benefices to be estimated according to the new
rate, without deduction of expenses unless very necessary: besides their
first fruits likewise for 3 years. Which declaration, how pleasing it 52
thousand Marks, upon conditions promised by the Clergy.
was to the Clergy, may be judged by their former grudgings. Notwithstanding,
after they had made their pitiful excuses, in regard of their poverty, they
promised upon the usual condition of Magna Charta etc. so often sworn, bought
and redeemed, to give him 52 thousand Marks, but this satisfied him not.

The next year after is another Parliament at London wherein, upon the Kings
pressing 1258. Anno. Reg. 42.
them again, for means to pay his debts to the Pope, the Lords tell him
plainly: they will not yield to pay him any thing. And if unadvisedly he
without their consents, and council bought the Kingdom of Sicile, and had
been deceived, he should impute it to his own imbecility, and been instructed
by the example of his prouide^t brother, who, when the same Kingdom was offered
unto him by Albert the Popes Agent, absolutely refused it in regard it lay so
far off; So many Nations between: the cauills of the Popes: the infidelity
of the people: and the power of the pretender etc. Then repeat they their own
greeuances, the breach of his promises contemning both the keys of the Church,
and the Charter he had solemnly sworn to observe: the insolence of his
brethren, and other Strangers, against whom, by his order, no Writ was to pass
out of the Chancerie, for any cause what soever: How their pride was
intolleable especially that of William de Valence, who, most reproachfully had
given the lie to the Earl of Leicester, for which he could not be righted upon
his complaint: How they abounded all in riches, and himself was so poor, as
he could not repress the small forces of the Welsh that wasted his Country,
but going the last year against them, and effecting nothing, returned with
dishonor. The King hearing this (as he was apt upon rebukes soundly urged to
be sensible, and his own necessities constrayning him thereunto) humbles
himself, and tells them: how he had often by ill council been seduced, and
promises by his oath, which he takes on the tomb of Saint Edward, to reform
all these errors. But the Lords not knowing how to hold their euer-changing
Proteus (says Paris) in regard the business was difficult, get the Parliament
to be adiourned till Saint Barnabas day, and then to assemble at Oxford. In the
mean time the Earls Gloucester, Leicester, Hereford, the Earl Mareschall
Bigod, Spencer and other great men confederate, and provide by strength to
effect their desires. Whilst the King put to his shifts to obtain money, gets
the Abbot of Westminster, upon promise of high preferment to put his Seal and
that of his Covent to a deed obligatorie, as a surety sor three hundred Marks,
that by his example he might draw on others to do the like. Sending his
trusty Counsaylors, and Clerk Simon Passeleue abroad with his Letters, and
this Deed unto other Monasteries. But Passeleue, notwithstanding all the
diligence and skill he could use, by threats or otherwise: telling them, how
all they had came from the benignity of Kings, and how their Sovereign was
Lord of all they had, they flatly refuse to yield to any such Deed. Saying,
they acknowledged the King to be Lord of all they had, but so, as to defend,
not to distroy the same. And thus he comes likewise disappoynted in this
project.

The Prince, who likewise must participate in the wants of his father, was
driuien Prince Edward morgages Stamford, and other towns to William de Valence.
to morgage the Town of Stamford, Braham and many other things, to William de
Valence, who out of his store, supplied him with money, which after turned to
the good of neither, for it laid a recentement on the necessity of the one,
which made him break through his bands, and Envy on the other whose
superfluity made him odious.

But now comes assembled the Parliament at Oxford, and in a hot season (the
worst time for consultation) and here burst out that great impostume of
discontent so long in gathering. The train which the Lords brought with them,
was pretended to be for some exploit against the Welsh, upon the end of the
Parliament: and their securing the ports, to prevent forrainers, but the taking
order for keeping of the Gates of London, and their Oaths and Hands given to
each other, showed that they were prepared to make the day theirs. Here they
begin with the expostulation of the former Liberties, and require the
observation thereof according unto the Oaths, The Barons expostulate for their
former Liberties.
and Orders formerly made. The Chief Iusticiar, Chancellor, and Treasorer to
be ordained by public choice: The 24 Conseruators, of the Kingdom to be
confirmed, 12 by the Election of the Lords, and 12 by the King, with whatsoever
else made for their own imagined security. The King seeing their strength, and
in what manner they required these things, swears again solemnly to the
confirmation of them, and causes the Prince to take the same Oath.

But the Lords left not here, the Kings brethren, the Poictouines and other
Strangers must be presently removed, and the Kingdom cleared of them, and this
they would have all the Peers of the Land sworn to see done. Here they found
some opposition in the Prince, the Earl Warrein and Henry eldest son to
Richard now King of Romans, the last refusing to take his Oath without leave
of his father; they plainly Cron. Lichfield, Henry eldest son to the King of
Romans refuses to take his Oath.
told him that if his father would not consent with the Baronage in this case,
he should not bold a Furrow of Land in England. In the end, the Kings brethren
and their followers are dispoyled of all their fortunes, and exiled by
proscription under the Kings own hand directed to the Earls of Hereford, and
Surrey, with charge not to pass either their Money, Arms, or Ornaments but in
such sort as the Lords appointed: and after their departure, Claus 49.
he enioyneth the City of Bristow, and other ports not to permit any
strangers or Hen. 3.
kinsmen of his to ariue, unless they did so behave themselves, as both he
and the Lords should like.

The Poictouines retyring to Bolongne in France, send to King Louys to crave
safe passage Mat. Par.
through his Country into Poictou, which (in regard the Queen of France had
been informed how they had defamed her Sister of England) was, by her means
denied at that time, and Henry son to the Earl of Leicester (whose
estimation was great in France) follows them with all eagerness thither, to
incense the French against them. And as they whom Envy tumbles down from high
places, shall be sure ever to have all the thrusts possible to set them
headlong into disgrace with the world, so now the death and sickness of
diverse great men and others, happening in England soon after this fatal
Parliament, is imputed to poisons supposed to have been prepared by those
Gentlemen. The Earl of Gloucester in a sickness suddenly lost his hair, his
teeth, his nails: And his brother hardly escaped death, which made many to
suspect their nearest servants and their Cooks. Walter Scotny the Earls
Steward being one, is strictly examined, committed to prison, and after without
confession executed (upon presumptions) at Winchester. Elias a converted Jew,
is said to have confessed, that in his house the poison was confected, but it
was when he was a Devil, not a Christian. Any thing in the prosecution of
malice serves the turn. Every man that had received any wrong by those great
men, now put up their complaints, and are heard to the agrauation of their
insolence and injustice. Guido de Rochfort a Poictouin; to whom the King had
given the Castle of Rochester, is banished, and all his goods confiscat.
William Bussey Steward to William de Valence is committed to the Tower of
London, and most reprochfully used, as an especial minister of his Masters
insolences. Richard Gray whom the Lords had made Captain of the Castle of
Dover, is set to intercept whatsoever the Poictouines conuayed that way out of
England, and much treasure of theirs, and the elect of Winchester is by him
there taken: besides great sums committed to the new Temple are found out, and
seized into the kings hands. And as usually in such heates much wrong is
committed in these prosecutions of wrongs. But now (as an amuzatory to make the
ill governed people think they are not forgotten) the new chief Iusticiar
Hugh Bigod brother to the Earl Mareschall (chosen this last Parliament by
public voice) procures that four Knights in every shire should enquire of
the oppressions of the poor done by great men, and under their hands, and
seals certify the same, by a certain day to the Baronage, that redress
might be made. Moreover, order was taken that from thence forth, no man should
give any thing (besides provisions) for justice, or to hinder the same, and
both the corrupter and corrupted to be grievously punished. Notwithstanding
this pretended care of the public it is noted by the writers and records of
that time, how the Lords enforced the services of the Kings tenants which dwelt
near them, and were totidem tyranni: how they furnished the especial
fortresses of the kingdom with Regist. in Scace. William Rishangar.
Guardians of their own, sworn to the Common state, and took the like
assurance of all Shirifs, Baylifes, Coroners, and other public ministers,
searching the behavior of many by strict commission upon oath. And to make
their cause the more popular, it was rumored that the Kings necessity must be
repaired out of the Estates of his people, and how he must not want whilst they
had it, whereupon the King sends forth proclamation: How certain malicious
persons had falsely and seditionsly reported, that he meant unlawfully to charge
his Subjects, and subvert the Laws and Liberties of the Kingdom, and by these
subtle suggestions altogether false, auerted the hearts of his people from
him; and therefore desires them not to give credit to such perturbers, for that
he was ready to defend all Rights an Customs due unto them, and that they
might rest of this secured, he caused of his freewill his letters to be made
Patents.

But now Monfort, Gloucester and Spencer, who had by the late institution of the
24 Conservators, drawn the entire managing of the Kingdom into their hands,
enforce 1258. Anno. Reg. 42.
the King to call the Parliament at London, where the Authority of the 24 is
delivered unto themselves, and order taken that three at the least, should
attend in the Court, to dispose of the custody of Castles, and other
businesses of the Kingdom, of the 18. Parliament at London. Ordinat. inter
Record. Civil. Land.
Chancellor, Chief Iusticiar, and Treasorer, and of all Officers great and
small. And here they bind the King to loose to them their Legal obedience
whenever he infringed his Charter.

In this State stood the Kingdom, when intelligence was given to the Lords
that Liceat omnibus de Regno nostro contra nos insurgere, and ad gravamen
nostrum open and operam dare, ac si nobis in nullo tenerentur Chart. Orig. sub
Sigillo.
Richard King of Romans had a purpose to come over into England, which made
them greatly to suspect (being ignorant of the occasion) least he were sent for
by the King to come with power to subvert them, by the example of King John.
Whereupon they send to know the cause of his coming, and to require of him an
Oath before he should land, not to prejudice the now established orders of the
Kingdom: which he sternely refuses to do, saying: He had no Peer in England,
being the son and brother of a King, and was above their power: and if they
would have reformed the Kingdom, they ought first to have sent for him, and not
so presumptuously attempted a business of so high a Nature. The Lords upon
return of this answer sends presently to guard the Ports, and come strongly
to the Coast, prepared to encounter him if occasion were offered. But finding
The Lords require an oath of him.
his train small, accompanied only with his Queen, two German Earls, and
eight Knights, they upon his promise to take their propounded oath receive him
to land: but would neither permit the King (who came thither likewise to meet
him) nor himself to enter into Dover Castle. At Canterbury they bring him into
the Chapter house, where the Earl of Gloucester standing forth in the midst,
calls out the Earl, not by the name of King, but Richard Earl of Cornwall,
who in reverent manner coming forth, takes his Oath ministered in this manner.

Hear all men, that I Kichard Earl of Cornwall do here swear upon the Holy
Evangelists The Oath of the King of Romans.
that I shall be faithful, and dilligent to reform with you the Kingdom of
England, hitherto by the Council of wicked persons overmuch disorded, be an
effectual coadiutor to expel the rebels and disturbers of the same, and this
Oath will inviolably observe under pain of loosing all the Land I have in
England: so help me God.

In this manner deal the Lords to bind this great Earl unto them, supposing
his power to have been more then it was, which at length they found to be
nothing but an Ayrie Title: for having consumed all that mighty substance
abroad, in two years (which with great frugality, had been many in gathering)
he returns in this manner home, poor and forsaken by the Germans, without any
other means to trust unto, but only what he had in England.

Notwithstanding upon his return the King takes heart, and seeks all means
to vindicate his power, dispatching first messengers secretly to Rome, to be
absolved from 1259. Anno. Reg. 44.
his enforced Oath, then sends into Scotland to the King, and the Queen his
daughter for aids to be ready upon his occasions. And to have the more
assurance of the King of France, and be freed from foreign business, he makes
an absolute resignation of whatsoever right he had to the Duchy of Normandy,
and the Earledomes of Aniou, King Henry resignes his right to Normandy, etc.
Poictou, Tourene, and Maine, in regard whereof the King of France gives him
three hundred thousand pounds (some say crowns) of Aniouine money, and grants
him to enjoy all Guien beyond the river Garoune, all the Country of Xantonge to
the river of 1261. An. Reg. 45.
Charente, the Countries of Limosin, and Quercy for him and his successors,
doing their Homage, and Fealty to the Crown of France, as a Duke of Aquitayne,
and a Peer of that kingdom,

The Lords likewise on the other side seek to strengthen their association,
and hold in each other to their Oaths, and observation of their orders, which
was hard to do: for consisting of manifold dispositions there was daily
wavering, sometimes Pikes among themselves, in so much as the Earl of
Leicester (the chief man that kept the fire of that saction in) told the Earl
of Gloucester finding him staggering, that he cared not to live with such men,
whom he found so mutable and uncertain, for said he, my Lord of Gloucester, The
Lords combine against the K.
as you are more eminent, so are you more bound to what you have undertaken for
the good of the kingdom. And as he incensed others, so had he those that
animated him, as Walter Bishop of Worcester, and Kobert, Bishop of Lincoln who
enjoined him upon remission W. Rishenger.
of his sins to prosecute the cause unto death, affirming how the peace of
the Church of England could never be established but by the material, sword.

But now many being the temptations, many are drawn away from their side,
especially after the sentence given against them by the King of France (made
Arbitor of the quarrel) who yet though he condemned the provisions of Oxford,
allowed the 1262. An. Reg. 46.
confirmation of King John's Charter, by which distinction he left the matter as
he found it, for those provisions (as the Lords pretended) were grounded upon
that Charter. Howsoever, his sentence much aduantaged the King of England, and
made many to dispense with their Oath, and leave their party. Amongst whom was
Henry Son to the Earl of Cornwall (on whom the Prince had bestowed the
Honor of Tyckhill) who coming to the Earl of Leicester told him, he would
not be against his Father, the King, nor his allies: but said he, my Lord, I
will never bear Arms against you, and 1263. Anno. Reg. 47.
therefore I crave leave to depart. The Earl cheerfully replies: my Lord
Henry, I am not sorry for your departure, but for your inconstancy, go,
return with your arms, I fear them not at all. About the same time Roger de
Clifford, Roger de Leiborn, Hamo I Strange, and many other (won with gifts)
depart from the Barons.

Shortly after Roger de Mortimer of the Kings part breaks into open act of
hostility, makes spoil of the lands of the Earl of Leicester, who had now
combined himself with Llewellin Prince of Wales, and had sent forces to invade
the lands of Mortimer in The beginning of the wars.
those parts. And here the sword is first drawn in this quarrel, about three
years after the Parliament at Oxford. The Prince takes part with Mortimer,
surprises the Castle of Brecknock with other places of strength which he
delivers to his custody. The Earl of Leicester, recouers the town and Castle
of Gloucester, constraines the Citizens to pay a thousand pounds for their
redemption, goes with an Army to Worcester possesses him of the Castle, thence
to Shrewsbury and so comes about to the Isle of Ely, subdues the same, and
grows very powerful.

The King, doubting his approach to London (being not yet ready for him) works
so as a mediation of peace is made and agreed upon these conditions. That all
the Castles 1264. Anno. Reg. 48.
of the King should be delivered the keeping of the Barons, the Provisions of
Oxford should be inuiolably observed. All strangers by a certain time should
avoid the Kingdom, except such as by a general consent should be held
faithful, and profitable for the same. Here was a little pause, which seems
was but a breathing for a greater rage. The Prince had fortified Windsor
Castle, victualled, and therein placed strangers to defend it, and himself
marches to the town of Bristow, where, in a contention between the Citizens,
and his people being put to the worse, he seends for the Bishop of Worcester
(an especial partaker of the Barons) to protect, and conduct him back. When he
comes near Windsor, he gets into the Castle which the Earl of Leicester was
going to besiege, and being about Kingston, the Prince meets him to treat of
peace, which the Earl refuses and lays siege to the Castle which was rendered
unto him, the strangers turned out and sent home into France,

The King to get time conuokes another Parliament at London, wherein he won
many Lords to take his part, and with them (the Prince, Richard Earl of
Cornwall, Henry 19 Parliament held at London.
his son, William Valence with the rest of his brethren lately returned) he
marches to Oxford whither diverse Lords of Scotland repair to him: as John
Comin, John Baliol, Lord of Galloway, Robert Bruce, and others, with many
Barons of the North, Clifford, Percy, Scottish Lords come to aid the King of
England.
Basset, etc. From Oxford withal his forces he marches to Northampton, where
he took prisoners, Simon Monfort the younger, with 14. other principal men,
thence to Nottingham making spoil of such possessions, as appertained to the
Barons in those parts.

The Earl of Leicester in the mean time, draws toward London to recover and
make good that part, as of chiefest importance, and seeks to secure Kent with
the Ports. Which hastes the King to stop his proceeding, and succor the Castle
of Rochester besieged.

Success, and authority now grows strong on this side, in so much as the
Earls of Leicester, and Gloucester in behalf of themselves, and their party
write to the King, humbly protesting their loyalty, and how they opposed only
against such as were enemies to him and the Kingdom, and had belyed them. The
King returns answer, how themselves were the perturbers of him and his siate:
enemies to his person, and sought his and the Kingdoms destruction, and
therefore defies them. The Prince, and the Earl of Cornwall send like wise
The Barons mediate a peace.
their letters of defiance unto them. The Barons notwithstanding doubtful of
their strength, or unwilling to put it to the hazard of a Battle, mediate a
peace, and send the Bishops of London, and Worcester with an offer of 30
thousand Marks to the King, for damages done in these wars, So that the
statutes of Oxford might be observed: which yeeldingnes, the other side
supposing to argue their debility, made them the more neglectiue, and securer
of their power, which commonly brings the weaker side (more watchful of
advantages) to have the better.

The Earl, seeing no other means but to put it to a day (being a man skillful
in his work) takes his time to be earlier ready then was expected, and
supplies his want of hands with his wit, placing on the side of a hill nere
Lewys, where this battle was The battle of Lewys.
fought, certain ensigns without men in such sort, as they might seem a
far of to be squadrons of succors, to second those he brought to the
encounter, whom he caused all to wear white-crosses, both for their own
notice, and the signification of his cause, which he would have to be for
Justice. Here the fortune of the day was his, the King, the Prince, the Earl
of Cornwall and his son Henry, the Earls of Arundell, Hereford, and all the
Scottish Lords are his prisoners. The Earl Warrein, William de Valence, Guy
The K. Prince and others taken prisoners.
de Lusignian the Kings brethren, with Hugh Bigod Earl Mareschall save
themselves by flight. Five thousand are slain in this defeit, which yet was
not all the blood, and destruction this business cost.

All this year, and half of the other, is Simon Monfort in possession of his
prisoners: the King he carries about with him to countenance his actions, till
he had gotten in all 1265. An. Reg. 46.
the strongest Castles of the Kingdom. And now (as it usually falls out in
considerations where all must be pleased or else the knot will dissolve) debate
arises between the Earls of Leicester, and Gloucester about their dividend,
according to their agreement. Leicester (as fortune makes men to forget
themselves) is taxed to do more for his own particular, then the common good:
to take to himself the benifit and disposition of the Kings Monsort taxed of
wrong.
Castles: to usurp the redemption of prisoners at his pleasure: to prolong the
business, and not to use the means of a parliament to end it. His Sons also
presuming upon his greatness The Earl of Gloucester leaves him.
grow insolent, which made Gloucester to forsake that side, and betake him to
the Prince, who lately escaping out of the Castle of Hereford, had gotten, a
power about him of such as attended the opportunity of a turning fortune, and
to revenge the dishonor of one Battle by another.

The revolt of this Earl brought many hands to the Prince, whereby many pieces
of strength are regained both in England and Wales, The Earl of Leicester to
stop the proceeding of this mighty growing Prince (being now with his Army
about Worcester) imbattailes in a plain near Euesham to encounter him: and
noting the manner of the approach of his Army, said to those about him: these
men come bravely on, they learnt it not of themselves, but of me. And seeing
himself likely to be beset, and ouer-laid with numbers, advised his friends
Hugh Spencer, Ralph Basser, and others to shift for themselves, which when he
saw they refused to do: then said he, let us commit our souls to God, for our
bodies The Earl Monsort slain.
are theirs, and so undertaking the main weight of the Battle, perished
under it. And with him are slain his Son Henry, eleven other Barons with
many thousands of common soldiers. At the instant of his death, there happened
so terrible a thunder, lightning, and darkness, as it gave them as much horror
as their hideous work.

And so ends Monfort this great Earl of Leicester, too great for a subject,
which had he not been, he might have been numbered amongst the worthiest of
his time. Howsoever, the people which honored, and followed him in his life,
would (upon the fame of his miracles) have worshipped him for a Saint after his
death, but it would not be permitted by Kings.

And here this Battle delivers the Captive King, (but yet with the loss of
some of his own as well as his subjects blood, by a wound casually received
therein) and rid him of his Iaylor Monfort, whom he hated and had long feared
more then any man living, as himself confessed upon this accident: passing one
day (shortly after the Parliament at Oxford) upon Thames, there happened a
sudden clap of thunder, wherewith the King was much affrighted and willed
presently to be set on shore at the next landing, 1266. Anno. Reg. 50.
which was at Duresme house, where Monfort then lay, who seeing the King
ariuing hastes down to meet him, and perceiving him to be troubled at the
storm, said, that he needed not now to fear, the danger was past. No,
Monfort, said the King, I fear thee, more then I do all the Thunder and
tempest of the World. And now the King with the victorious Prince, the redeemer
of him, and the Kingdom, repaires to Winchester, 18 Parliament held at
Winchester.
where a Parliament is conuoked, and all who adhered to Simon Monfort, are
disinherited, and their estates conferred on others, at the Kings pleasure. The
Londoners have their liberties taken from them, Simon and Guy de Monfort,
Sons of the Earl of Leicester, with the disinherited Barons and others who
escaped the Battle of Euesham All who took part with Monfort disinherited.
take, and defend the Isle of Ely. The Castle of Killing worth defended by the
servants of the late Earl, although it were in the heart of the Kingdom,
endured the Seige of half a year against the King and his Army: in the end
their victuals failing they yield upon condition to depart, their lives,
members, and goods saved. And it is worthy the note that we find no exccution
of blood, except in open Battle, in all these combustions, or any noble man
to dye on a Skaffold, either in this Kings reign, or any other since William
the first, which is now almost 300 years. Only in Anno 26. of this King,
William Marisc, the Son of Geffrey Marsc a Nobleman of Ireland, being
condcmned of Piracie, and treason was hanged, beheaded, and quartered: and is
the first example of that kind of punishment we find in our Histories.

After the Parliament at Winchester the King goes with an army against the
disinherited Barons, and their partakers, which were many resolute, and
desperate persons strongly fastened together. And being at Northampton, Simon
and Guy de Monfort, by mediation of friends, and promises of favor came in and
submitted themselves to the King, who, at the earnest suite of the Earl of
Cornwall their Uncle and the Lord Phillip Basset, had restored them to their
Estates, but for Gloucester, and others who (doubting their spirits) wrought to
hold them down where their fortune had laid them. In so much as they were
feign in the end to fly the Kingdom, and work their fortunes other where,
which they did, the younger in Italy, the Elder in France: where they were
propagators of two great Famelies. Their mother was banished shortly after the
battle of Euesham. A Lady of eminent note, the daughter and sister to a King,
nocent only by her fortune, who from the Coronet of miserable glory, betook
her to the veil of quiet piety, and dyed a Nun at Montarges in France.

Three years after this, the disinherited Barons held out in those fastnesses
of the Kingdom where they could best defend themselves, made many excursions,
and spoils Motions of peace made to the disinherited Lords.
to the great charge and vexation of the King, at length motions, and
conditions of render are proposed, wherein the Council are divided. Mortimer
now an eminent man in grace, with others stated in the possessions of the
disinhereted, are auers to any restoration, alleging it a great act of
injustice, for them to be forced to forgo what the King 1267. Anno. Reg. 51.
had for their pains, and fidelity bestowed on them, and the others justly
forfeited, and therefore would hold what they had. Gloucester with the 12.
ordained to deal for the peace of the state, and other his friends whch were
many, stand mainely for restoration. This caused new pikes of displeasure, in
so much as Gloucester, who, conceiving his turning, not so to serve his turn,
as he expected, taking his time, again changed foot: retires from the Court,
refuses to come to the Kings Fcast on Saint Edwards day: sends messengers The
Earl of Glocest. revolt^
to warn the King, to remove strangers from his Council, and observe the
provisions of Oxford, according to his last promise made at Euesham; otherwise
that he should not marvel, if himself did what he thought fit. Thus had
victory no peace, the distemprature of the time was such, as no sword could
cure it: recourse is had to Parliament (the best way if any would serve, for
remedy) and at Bury is the state conuoked, where likewise all who 19 Parliament
held by Kinghts service are sommoned to assemble, with sufficient horse and
armor for the vanquishing of those disherited persons, which, contrary to the
peace of the Kingdom held the Isle of Ely.

John de Warreine Earl of Surrey, and William de Valentia, are sent to
persuade the Earl of Gloucester ( who had now levied an army upon the borders
of Wales) to come, in fair manner to this Parliament, which he refuses to do,
but yet thus much the Earls had of him under his hand, and seal: never to
bear arms against the King, or his Son Edward, but to defend himself, and
pursue Roger Mortimer, and other his enemies, for which he pretended to have
taken arms. The first demand in the Parliament was made by the King and the
Legate; for a grant of a Tenth of the Clergy for three years to come, and for
the year past, so much as they gave to the Barons for defending the Coasts
against the landing of strangers. Whereto they answer, that the war was
begun by unjust desires, which yet continues, and necessary it were to let
pass so evil demands, and to treat of the peace of the Kingdom; to convert
the Parliament to the benefit thereof, and not to extort money, considering the
land had been so much distroyed by this war, as it could hardly be ever
recovered. 2. Then was it required, that the Clergy might be taxed by lay men,
according to the just value of what appertayned unto them. They answer: it was
no reason, but against all Justice, that Lay men should inter meddle in
collecting Tenths, which they would never consent unto, but would have the
ancient taxation to stand. 3. Then was it required, they should give the Tenth
of their Baronies and Lay Fee, according to the utmost value. They answer:
themselves were impourished by attending the King in his expeditions, and their
lands lay vntilld by reason of the wars.

4. Then it was required, that the Clergy should in lieu of a Tenth, give
amongst them 30. thousand Marks to discharge the Kings debts contracted for
Sicilia, Calabria, and Apulia, They answer; they would give nothing in regard
all those taxations, and extorsions formerly made by the King were never
converted to his own, or the benefit of the Kingdom. 5. All this being
denied, demand is made, that all Clergy men that held Baronies, or other Lay
Fee should personally serve in the Kings wars. They answer, they were not to
fight with the material, but the spiritual sword, etc. that their Baronies
were given of mere alms, etc. 6. Then was it required, the whole Clergy
should discharge the 9000. pounds, which the Bishops of Rochester, Bath, and
the Abbot of westminster stood bound to the Popes Merchants for the Kings
service at their being at the Court of Rome. They answer: they never consented
to any such lone, and therefore were not bound to discharge it. 7. Then the
Legate, from the part of the Pope required, that without delay predication
should be made throughout the kingdom to incite men to take the Cross for the
Holy war, whereunto answer was made, that the greatest part of the people of
the Land were already consumed, by the sword, and that if they should undertake
this action, few or none would be leaft to defend the Kingdom, and that the
Legate hereby showed a desire to extirpat the natives thereof and introduce
strangers. 8. Lastly it was urged, that the Prelates were bound to yield to all
the Kings demands by their oath at Coventrie; where they swore to aid him by
all means possible they could. They answer, that when they took that oath,
they understood no other aid, then spiritual, and wholesome council, So
nothing was obtained but denyalls in this Parliament.

The Legate, likewise imploies sollicitors to persuade the disherited LL. which
held the Isle of Ely, to return to the faith, and unity of the Church, the
peace of the King, according to the form provided at Couentry, for redeeming
their inheritances from such as held them by gift from the King for 7. years
profits, and to leave of their robberies. The disherited return answer to the
Legate. First, that they held the faith, they received from their Catholic
Fathers, and their obedience to the Roman Church, as the head of all
Christianity; but not to the avarice and wilful exaction of those who ought
to govern the same. And how (their Predicessors whose heirs they were, having
conquered this land by the sword) they held themselves unjustly disherited.
that it was against the Popes Mandat, they should be so dealt withal.

That they had formerly taken their Oath to defend the Kingdom and Holy
Church, all the Prelates thundering the sentence of excommunication against such
as withstood the same and according to that Oath they were prepared to spend
their lives. And seeing they warred for the benefit of the Kingdom, and Holy
Church, they were to sustain their lives by the goods of their Enemies, who
detained their Lands, which the Legate ought to cause to be restored unto them,
that they might not be driven to make depradation in that manner, which yet was
not so great as was reported: for that many of the Kings and Princes followers
made rodes, and committed great robberies which, to make them odious, were
imputed, and given out to be done by them, wherefore they wish the Legate to
give no credit to such reports: for if they should find any such amongst them,
they would themselves do Justice upon them without delay.

Besides they declare to the Legate, that he had irreuerently eiected out of
the Kingdom the Bishops, of Winchester, London and Chichester, men circumspect
and of deep judgment, whereby the Council of the Kingdom was in great part
weakened to the danger thereof, and therefore willed him to look to the
reformation of the same: and that they might be restored to their Lands
without redemption. That the proutsions of Oxford might be observed. That they
might have Ostages delivered them into the Island to hold the same peaceably
for five years to come, until they might perceive how the King would perform
his promises.

Thus they treat, not like men whom their fortunes had laid on the ground, but
as they had been still standing: so much wrought either the opinion of their
cause, or the hope of their party. But this stubbornness so exasperates the
King as the next year following, he prepares a mighty Army, besets the Isle
so that he shuts them up, and Prince Edward, with bridges made on Boats enters
the same in diverse places, and constraines them to yield. In the mean time the
Earl of Gloucester, with his army collected on the borders of Wales to aid
them, marched to London where, by the Citizens he was received: but the Legate
who kept his residence in the Tower so prevailed The Earl of Gloucester
reconciled.
with him, as he again renders himself to the King to whom he was afterward
reconciled, by the mediation of the King of Romans, and the Lord Philip Basset
upon forfeiture of twelve thousand Marks, if ever after he should raise any
commotion.

This effected, the King goes with an Army into Wales, against Lewellin, for
ayding Simon Monfort and the Earl of Gloucester, in their late attempts against
him, but his wrath being by the gift of 32 thousand pounds sterling, appeased,
peace is concluded betwixt them, and four Cantreds, which had by right of war,
been taken from him, restored.

And here was an end of the first Barons Wars of England, wherein we see
what effects it wrought, how no side got but misery and vexation, whilst the
one struggled to do more then it should, and the other to do less then it
ought, they both had the worst, according to the usual events of such
imbroylements.

The next year after this appeasement, the Legate Ottobon signs with the 1269.
Anno. Reg. 53.
Croissado both the Kings sons Edward, and Edmond, the Earl of Gloucester,
and diverse Noblemen induced to undertake the Holy War by the solicitation of
him: and the King of France, who notwithstanding his former calamities endured
in that action, would again adventure therein. So much either the desire of
revenge, with the Prince Edw. his brother and others undertake the Holy War.
recovery of his fame and honor, or the hope of enjoying another World
provoked him to forgo this, and haste to his final destruction. And for that
Prince Edward wanted means for his present furnishment, this King of France
lent him 30 thousand Marks, for which he morgaged unto him Gascoigny. An act,
which subtler times would interpret to be rather of Policy then Piety, in this
King to engage in such manner, and upon so especial a caution, a young
stirring Prince, likely in his absence to imbroyle his Estate at home, and to
draw him along in the same adventure with himself, without any desire
otherwise, either of his company or aid; considering the inconveniences that
stung these several Nations heretofore by their incompetability, in the same
action: but here it were sin to think they disguised their ends, or had
other couerings for their designs then those through which they were seen;
their spirits seem to have been warmed with a Nobler flame.

And now whilst this preparation is in hand, King Henry labors to establish
the Peace of the Kingdom, and reform those excesses the war had bred,
causing by 21 Parliament at Marleborough.
proclamation stealth of Cattle to be made a crime Capital, and the first
that suffered for the same was one of Dunstable who had stolen twelve Oxen from
the inhabitants of Colne, and being persued to Redburne was by the Bayliffe of
Saint Albones (according to the Kings Proclamation condemned and beheaded. And
the same year the King assembles his last Parliament at Marleborugh where the
Statutes of that Title were inacted.

Nere two years it seems to have been after the undertaking the Cross
before 1271. Anno. Reg. 55.
Prince Edward set forth, a time long enough (if those resolutions would have
been shaken) to have bred an alteration of desire, but so strong was the
current of this humor as no worldly respects could give any the least stoppage
thereunto. Otherwise a Prince so well acquainted with action, so well
understanding the world, so forward in years (being then 32) so near the
possession of a Kingdom, would not have leaft it, and an aged father broken
with days and travail to have betaken himself (with his dear and tender
consort Elionor and as it seems then young with child) to a voyage that could
promise nothing but danger, toil, misery, and affliction. So powrefull are
the operations of the mind, as they make men neglect the ease of their bodies,
especially in times not dissolved with those softnings of Luxury and Idleness
which vnmannes them. And we cannot but admire the vndauntable constancy of
this Prince, whom all the sad examples of others calamities (crossing even the
beginning of this action) could not deter from proceeding therein. For, first
the King of France who with two of his sons, the King of Navarre and a mighty
Army, being set out before, and by the way besieging the City of Tunis in
Africa (possessed then by the Sarazines that infested Christendom) perished
miserably by the Pestilence that raged in his Army, and with him one of his
sons and many of his Nobles, whereby all their enterprise was dashed and
utterly overthrown. Besides, Charles King of Sicile, brother to this King of
France, who likewise came to aid him, returning home, lost the greatest part
of his Navy by tempest. Moreover many of this Princes own people were
desirous to leave him and return home. Whereupon he is said to have stricken
his breast, and sworn: that if all his followers The resolution of Prince
Edmond.
forsook him, he would yet enter Tolemais or Acon, though but only with his
Horse-keeper Fowin. By which speech they were again incenced to proceed: but
yet his Cousin Henry son to the King of Romans, obtaines leave of him to
depart, and was set on shore in Italy: where, notwithstanding he found what
he sought to avoid, Death; and was slain in the Church at Viterbo (being at
divine service) by his own Cousin German Guy de Monfort (son to Simon late
Earl of Leicester) in revenge of his fathers death. The news of which
unnatural murder seems to hasten the 1274. Anno. Reg. 57.
end of Richard King of Romans, who died shortly after, and the next year
following, finished likewise Henry the 3 of England his act, in the 65 of his
age having reigned 56 years, and 20 days. A time that has held us long, and
taken up more then a tenth part from the Norman Invasion to this present: and
yielded notes of great variety with many examples of a crasie, and diseased
State, bred both by the inequality, of this Princes manners, and the impatience
of a stubborn Nobility.

He had by his wife Elionor six sons, whereof only two suruiued him, Edward
and Edmond: His issue.
and two daughters, which lived to be married, Margueret the eldest to
Alexander King of Scots. Beatrice the other to John the first entitled Duke of
Britain.

Here ends the Life, and Reign of Henry the third.
The Life, and Reign, of Edward the first.
Upon the death of Henry, the State assembles at the new Temple, and 1272.
Anno. Reg. 1.
proclaims his son Edward King, though they knew not whether he were living,
swears fealty unto him: causes a new Seal to be made: and appointes fit
ministers for the custody of his Treasure, and his Peace, whilst himself
remains in Palestine, where by an Assasin (making show of delivering letters)
he receives three dangerous wounds with a poisoned knife, whereof he was hardly
recured. After three years travel, from the time of his setting forth, and
many conflicts without any great effect, disappointed of his aides, and his
ends, he leaves Acon (which he went to relieve) well fortified, and manned:
returns homeward, lands in Sicile, is royally feasted by Charles the King
thereof: passes through Italy, with all the honor could be showed him, both by
the Pope, and the Princes there. Thence descends into Burgogne; where at the
foot of the Alps, he is met by many of the Nobility of England, and there
challenged by the Earl of Chabloun (a fierce man at Arms) to a Turneament:
Wherein again he hazards his person to show his valor, which may seem to be
more then became his Estate, and dignity. From thence he comes down into
France, where he is sumptuously entertained, and feasted by Phillip 3.
(surnamed the Hardy) to whom he does homage for all the Territories he held
of that Crown.

Thence he departs into Aquitayne, where he spent much time in settling his
affairs. His Coronation.
And after six years, from his first setting out, he returns into England:
Receives the Crown (without which he had beeene a King almost three years)
at the hands of Robert Archbishop of Canterbury in September. 1275. And with him
is Elionor his Reg. 3 An. 1274.
Queen likewise Crowned at Westminster. Alexander King of Scotts, and John
Duke of Britain, (who both had married his Sisters) being present at the
Solemnity.

The spirit and abilities of this Prince showed in the beginning of his Actions
under his Father, after the great Defeit he gave the Barons at Euesham: The
prosecution of the disherited Mutiners of the Kingdom: The exposition of his
Person to all hazards, and travail: His single Combat with Adam Gordun the
Outlaw near Farnham: His great adventure and Attempts in the East: And finally
his long experience in the affairs of the World, with his Maturitie of years
(being about 35. before he came to the Crown) might well presage what an able
Master he would prove in the manage thereof. And how (by these advantages of
Opinion, and Reputation) he was likely (as he did) to make a higher Improuement
of the Royalty; hauingwonne, or worn out, the greatest of those who
heretofore opposed the same. In so much as he seems the first Conqueror,
after the Conqueror that got the Domination of this State in that emminent
manner, as by his government appears,

And even at his first Parliament, held shortly after his Coronation at
Westminster, he Quintam Decimam omnium bonorum Temporalium tam Clericorum, quam
Laicorum in audito more ad vnguem taxatam Rex iusserat confiscari Mat. West
made trial of their patience, and had the Fifteenth of all their goods (
Clergy and Lay) granted unto him, without any Noise as we hear off. The
Clergy having yielded before a Tenth for two years to be paid to him, and his
brother Edmond toward the charge of the Holy War. But yet all this could not
divert the Designs he had to abate the power Ecclesiastical, which by
experience of former times, he found to be a part grown to strong for the
Soueraignety, whenever they combined with the Lay Nobility: and therefore
now at first (whilst he was in the exaltation both of opinion and estimation
with the World) he began to set upon their privileges. And in Anno Reg. 6.
(to extend says the Monkish History, the Royal Authority) he deprived many
famous Monasteries throughout England of their Liberties, and took His
proceeding against the Clergy
from the Abbot, and Covent of Westminster the Return of Writts granted them
by the Charter of his Father King Henry 3. The next year after he got to be
inacted the Statute of Mortmaine, to hinder the increase of their temporal
possessions (which made them so powerful) as being detrimentall to the
Kingdom, and the Military service of the same. In the Second Statute of
Weminster, he defalked the Jurisdiction of Ecclesiastical Judges. He left not
here, but afterward growing more upon them, he required the Moietie of all
their goods, as well Temporal, as Spiritual for one year: which (though it
put them into extreme perplexity and grief) they yet were feign to yield to
his demand. And at the first propounding thereof, one Sir John Hauering Knight
stands up amongst them, as they were assembled in the Refectorie of the Monks
at Westminster (and said) Reverend Fathers, if any here will contradict Mat.
West.
the Kings demand in this business, let him stand out in the midst of the
Assembly, that his person may be known, and seen, as one guilty of the
Kings peace. At which speech they all sat mute. So much were the times altered
since the late reign of the father, wherein such a business could not have so
passed. But now this Active King being come home, and having composed his
affairs abroad, must needs be working, both to satisfy his own desire in
amplyfying his power, and intertayning his people in those times incompatible
of rest; and therefore some action must be taken in hand.

Wales, that lay nearest the danger of a superior Prince, and had ever
strugled for An occasion taken for subduing of Wales.
liberty, and the rule of a Native Governor; had always been the Receptacle,
and aid of the Rebellious of England: had ever combined with Scotland to
disturb the peace, and government thereof: having never her borders without
blood, and mischief; was an apt subject to be wrought upon in this time. And
occasions are easily taken, where there is a purpose to quarrel, especially
with an Inferior. Leoline, now Prince of that Province, who had so long held
in the fire of the late civil wars of England (and dearly paid for it)
having refused upon summons to come to the Kings Coronation, and after to his
first Parliament (alleging he well remembered, how his father Griffin burst
his neck out of the Tower of London, for which he brooked not that place) and
therefore returned answer, That in any other, upon Hostages given him, or
Comissioners sent to take his Fealty, he would (as it should please the King)
be ready to render it. This gave occasion that King Edward the next year
after, goes with a powerful Army: enters his Country with Fire and Sword Reg.
4. An. 1276.
in so fierce manner, as Leoline (unable to resist) sues for Peace, and
obtaines it, but upon those conditions, as made his Principallitie little
different from the tenure of a subject. And besides he was fined in fifty
thousand pounds sterling, and to pay 1000 pounds per annum for what he held,
which was but for his own life. But yet the King to gratify him in some thing
that might be a tie to this Peace, restored unto him Elionor (daughter to Simon
Montfort late Earl of Leicester) who, with her brother Almericke had been
lately taken prisoners by certain ships of Bristoll, as she was passing out
of France into Wales, to be made the miserable wife of this unfortunate
Prince. Whose restraint, and affliction might perhaps be a motive, the rather
to incline him to this lowness of submission, and accord: which, as it was
made by force (an unsure contractor of Covenants) so was it by disdain, as ill
an obseruer, soon broken. And either the ill administration of Justice upon
the Marches (the perpetual Fire-matches of bordring Princes) or the
euer-working passion of desire of Liberty in the Welsh, threw open again
(within three years) this ill infensed closure. And out is Leoline in arms;
surprises the Castles of Flint, and Ruthland, with the person of the Lord
Clifford sent Iusticiar into those parts: and commits all Reg. 6. Anno. 1278.
acts of Hostility. With him ioynes his brother David, on whom King Edward (to
make him his, finding him of a more stirring spirit) had bestowed, after the
last accord, the honor of Knighthood: matched him to the daughter of the
Earl of Derbie, a rich Widow: and given him, in steed of his other lands,
the Castle of Denbigh with 1000 pounds per annum. All which graces could not
yet hold him back from those powrefull inclynations os Nature. The ayding his
Country, the partaking with his Brother, and the attempting of Liberty.

King Edward advertised of this Revolt (being at the Vize in Wiltshire)
prepares an Army to repress it. But before his setting forth, he privately
goes to visit his Mother Queen Elionor living in the Nunnery at Amsbury; with
whom whilst he conferred, there was brought into the Chamber one who feigned
himself (being blind) to have received his sight at the Tomb of Henry 3. As
soon as the King saw the man, he formerly knew him to be a most notorious
lying Villain. And wished his Mother in no case to believe him. His Mother,
who much rejoiced to hear of this Miracle (for the glory of her husband) grew
suddenly into rage, and willed the King to avoid her Chamber. The King obayes,
and going forth meets with a Clergy man, to whom he tells the story of this
Imposter, and merrily said, He knew the Justice of his father to be such, that
he would rather pull out the eyes (being whole) of such a wicked wretch, then
restore them to their sight.

The Archbishop of Canterbury (to whom the Welsh had before sent a Roll of
their grieuances, and the causes that drove them to revolt) of himself goes,
and labors Reg. 11. Anno. 1283.
to bring in Leoline, and his brother to a resubmission and stay the ruin
which he foresaw would light upon the Nation. But nothing could he effect,
certain petty defeites Leoline had given to the English: the instigation of
his people: the conceit of a Prophecy of Merlin (that Ginne of Error) how he
should be shortly crowned with the Diadem of Brute; so ouerweighed this poor
Prince, as he had no ear for Peace, The death of Leoline the last of the
Welsh Princes.
and shortly after no head; the same being cut off (after he was slain in
battle by a common soldier) and sent to King Edward. Who (as if his death
were not sufficient without his reproach) caused the same to be crowned with
Iuie, and set upon the Tower of London. This was the end of Leoline the last of
the Welsh Princes, betrayed (as they write) by the men of Buelth.

Shortly after, to finish this work of blood, is David his brother taken in
Wales, and judged in England to an ignominious death. First drawn at a horse
tail about The execution of David his brother at Shrewsburie the first in that
kind.
the City of Shrewsbury, then beheaded, the Trunck of his Body divided, his
Heart, and Bowels burnt, his Head sent to accompany that of his brother on the
Tower of London, his four quarters to four Cities, Bristoll, Northampton,
York, and Winchester: a manifold execution, and the first showed in that kind
to this Kingdom, in the person of the son of a Prince, or any other
Nobleman, that we read of in our History.

But this example made of one, of another, grew after to be usual to this
Nation. And even this King (under whom it began) had the blood of his own, and
his brothers race, miserably shed on many a scaffold. And just at the sealing
of this Conquest, Alphonsus his eldest son of the age of 12. years (a Prince
of great hope) The death of the Prince Alphonsus.
is taken away by death. And Edward, lately borne at Carnaruan (an Infant,
uncertain how to prouo) is heir to the Kingdom; and the first of the English
entitled ( Prince of Wales) whose unnatural destruction, we shall likewise
hear of in his time.

But thus came Wales (all that small portion leaft unto the Britains the
ancient Wales united to England.
possessors of this Isle) to be united to the crown of England, Anno Reg. 11.
And strange it is how it could so long subsist of it self, as it did; having
little or no aid of others; little or no shipping (the hereditarie defect of
their Ancestors) no Alliance, no confederation, no intelligence with any
foreign Princes of power out of this Isle: and being by so potent a Kingdom
as this, so often invaded, so often reduced to extremity, so eagerly pursued,
almost by every King, and said, to have been (by many of them) subdued, when
it was not; must needs show the worthiness of the Nation, and their noble
courage to preserve their liberty. And how it was now at last gotten, and upon
what ground we see; But the effect proves better then the cause, and has made
it good. For in such Acquisitions as these, the Sword is not to give an Account
to Justice; the public benefit makes amends. Those miserable Mischiefs that
afflicted both Nations come hereby extinguished. The Division and Plurality of
States in this Isle, having ever made it the Stage of blood, and confusion: as
if Nature that had ordained it but one Piece, would have it to be governed but
by one Prince, and one Law, as the most absolute glory and strength thereof,
which otherwise it could never enjoy. And now this prudent King (no less
provident to preserve then subdue this Province) established the government
thereof according to the Laws of England, as may be seen by the Statute of
Ruthland Anno Reg. 12.

This work effected, and settled. King Edward passes over into France (upon
notice of the death of Philiple Hardy) to renew and confirm such conditions,
as his State Reg. 13. Anno. 1286.
required in those parts with the new King, Philip 4 (entitled le Bell) to whom
he does Homage for Acquitaine, having before quitted his claim to Normandy
for ever. And afterward accommodates the differences between the Kings of
Sicile, and Aragon in Spain (to both of whom he was allied) and redeemes
Charles entitled Prince of Achaia (the son of Charles King of Sicile)
prisoner in Aragon, paying for his ransom thirty thousand pounds.

After three years and a half being abroad, he returns into England, which
must now supply his Coffers emptied in this Voyage. And occasion is given (by
the general Reg. 16. An. 1289.
complaints made unto him of the ill administration of Justice in his absence)
to inflict penalties upon the chief Ministers thereof; whose manifest
corruptions, the hatred to the people of men of that profession (apt to abuse
their Science, and Authority) the Necessity of reforming so grievous a
mischief in the Kingdom, gave easy way thereunto by the Parliament then
assembled; wherein, upon due examinations, and proof of their extortions, they
are fined to pay to the King these sums following.

First Sir Ralph Hengham Chief Justice of the higher Bench, seven thousand
Marks. Sir Ralf Henghans a chief Commissioner for the government of the
Kingdom in the Kings absence.
Sir John Loueton Justice of the lower Bench, three thousand Marks. Sir
William Bromton Justice, 6000 Marks. Sir Solomon Rochester, four thousand
Marks. Sir Richard Boyland, 4000 Marks. Sir Thomas Sodington, two thousand
Marks. Sir Walter Hopton, 2000 Marks: these four last were Justices
I^enerants. Sir William Saham 3000 Marks. Robert Lithbury Master of the Rolls,
1000 Marks. Roger Leicester, 1000 Marks. Henry Bray Escheater, and Judge for
the Jews, 1000 Marks. But Sir Adam Stratton Chief Baron of the Exchequer was
fined in 34000 Marks. And Officers fined for briberie and extortion.
Thomas Wayland (found the greatest delinquent, and of the greatest substance)
has all his goods, and whole estate confiscated to the King. Which were it but
equal to that of Sir Adam Stratton, these fines being to the Kings Coffers
above one hundred thousand Marks; which, at the rate (as money goes now)
amounts to above 300 thousand Marks. A mighty treasure to be gotten out of
the hands of so few men. Which, how they could amasse in those days, when
Litigation, and Law had not spread it self into those infinite wreathings of
contention (as since it has) may seem strange, even to our greater getting
times. But peradventure now the number of Lawyers, being grown bigger then the
Law (as all trades of profit come ouerpestred with multitude of Traders) is the
cause (that like a huge River dispersed into many little Rilles) their
substances are of a smaller proportion, then those of former times, and Offices
now of Judicature peradventure more piously executed.

Of no less grieuance, this King the next year after eased his people, by the
banishment of the Jews; for which the Kingdom willingly granted him a
Fifteenth. Having before (in Anno Reg. 9.) offered a fifth part of their goods to
have them expelled, The banishment of the Jews.
but then the Jews gave more, and so stayed till this time, which brought him
a greater benefit by confiscating all their Immouables with their Talleis, and
Obligations which amounted to an infinite value. But now has he made his last
commodity of this miserable people, which having been never under other cover
then the will of the Prince, had continually served the turn in all the
necessary occasions of his Predecessors, but especially of his father and
himself. And in these reformations that are easefull, and pleasing to the
State in general; the Justice of the Prince is more noted, then any other
motive, which may be for his profit. And howsoever some particular men suffer
(as some must ever suffer) yet they are the fairest, and safest ways of
getting: in regard the hatred of the abuses, not only discharges the Prince of
all imputation of rigor, but renders him more beloved and respected of his
people. And this King, having much to do for money (coming to an empty
Crown) was driven to all shifts possible to get it, and great supplies we
find, he had already drawn from his Subjects. As in the first year of his
Reign, Pope Gregory procured him a Tenth of the Clergy for 2. years,
besides a Fifteenth of them, and the Temporalty. In the third likewise another
Fifteenth of both. In the Fifth, a Twentieth of their goods His many supplies,
and means for Money.
toward the Welsh Wars. In the seventh the Old Money was called in, and New
coined in regard it had been much defaced by the Jews, for which 297. were at
one time executed at London, and this brought him in a great benefit. In Anno
Reg. 8. seeking to examine Men's Titles to their Lands by a Writ of Quo
Warranto (which opposed by the Earl Warreine, who drew out his Sword upon the
Writ, saying, How by the same he held his Land, and thereby would make good
his Tenure) the King desists and obtaines a Fifteenth of the Clergy. In the
Eleauenth, he had a Thirtieth of the Temporaltie, and a Twentieth of the
Clergy for the Welsh Wars. In the Thirteenth, Escuage, forty shillings for
every Knights fee for the same purpose. In the Fourteenth, he had a Thousand
Marks of certain Merchants fined for false Weights. In the Seventeenth, those
fines fore-declared of the Judges. In the Eighteenth, this Confiscation of
Jews, and a Fifteenth of the English. After this Anno Reg Nineteenth
pretending a Voyage to the HolyLand, the Clergy grants him an Eleauenth part
of all their Moueables, and shortly after the Pope procures him a Tenth for Six
years to be collected in England, Scotland, and Ireland, and laid up in
Monasteries until he were entered into Mare Maggior. But he made the
Collectors pay him the money gathered for Three years without going so far,
having occasion to use it at home, about the purchase of a new Kingdom.

For, the crown of Scotland (upon the death of King Alexander, and of the
Daughter of Reg. 17. Anno. 1290.
his daughter Margaret, who was to inherit) was now in controversy. Six
Competitors pretend title thereunto; all discending from David earl of
Huntingdon, younger brother to William King of Scots, and great Uncle to this
late King Alexander. This title King Edward takes upon him to decide,
pretending a right of Superiority from his Ancestors The occasion of his
Wars with Scotland.
over that Kingdom. The Scotts which swayed the Interregnum, are constrained
for avoiding further inconveniences, to make him Arbiter thereof, and the Six
Competitors bound to stand to his Award. Two are especially found, between
whom the Right lay: John Baliol Lord of Galloway, and Robert Bruce: the one
descending King Edward chosen by the Scots to arbitrate the right of the
pretenders to that Crown.
from an elder Daughter, the other from a Son of a younger Daughter of Alan,
who had Married the Eldest Daughter of this David Brother to King William. The
Controversy held long. Twelve of either Kingdom learned in the Laws, are
elected to debate the same at Berwick: All the best Ciuilians in the
Universities of France are solicited to give their oppinions, the differences,
and perplexednes whereof made the decission more difficult: According to the
Nature of Littigation that ever begetts rather Doubts then Resolutions, and
never knows well how to make Reg. 18. Anno 1291.
an End.

King Edward, the better to sway this business by his presence, takes his
Journey Northward, and whilst he sought to compass greater felicity, he
lost the better part of what he had in this world, his dear consort Elionor
(who had ever attended Queen Elionor dies. Her Praise.
him in all his Fortunes, the Paragon of Queens, and the honor of Woman-hood:
who is said to have sucked the Poison out of the Wound given him by the Assasin
in the East, when no other means could preserve his Life) dies by the way in
Lincolnshire. With whose Corpse, in extreme grief he returns back to
Westminster, causing (at all especial places where it rested by the Way)
goodly engraven Crosses, with her Statue to be erected, As at Stamford,
Waltham, West-Cheape, Charing and others, Grateful Monuments of his Affection,
and her renowned Faithfulness.

Her Funerals performed, back he returns to his Scottish business: And now
Six years it was since the Death of King Alexander, and much time having been
Scottish Hist.
spent, and nothing concluded in this controversy: King Edward that would be
sure (whosoever prevailed) to have the hand that should make him, deals
privately with Bruce (who had the weaker Title but the more friends) and
promises him, if he would yield Fealty and Homage to the Crown of England, he
would inuest him in that of Scotland. Bruce answers, He was not so desirous
of Rule, as thereby to infringe the Liberties of his Country. Then with the
like offer he sets upon Baliol, who having better right but less love of the
people, and more greedy of a Kingdom, then honor Bal ol made King of Scotland.
yields thereunto: is Crowned King at Scone: has Fealty done him of all the
chief Nobility, except Bruce: comes to New Castle upon Tyne where King Edward
then lay: and there (with many of his Nobles) swears Fealty, and did Homage
unto him, as his Sovereign Lord. Which Act, as he thought done to secure him,
ouer-threw Reg. 21. Anno. 1294.
him. For, being little beloved before, hereby he became less: such as stood
for Bruce, and others of the Nobility (more tender of the preservation of their
Countries liberty) grew into Stomach against him; as having not only
discontented them in this Act, but shortly after in his Justice, in the case of
the Earl of Fife, one of the six Governors in the time of the Anarchie, who
had been slain by the Famelie of Aberneth. And the brother of this Earl now
prosecuted in Law, before King Balioll in his high Court of Parliament (where
having no right done him, King Baliol giving Judgment on the side of the
Aberneths) the wronged Gentleman appeals to the Court of the King of England.
King Baliol is thither summoned: appears, sits with King Edward in his
Parliament till his cause was to be tried, and then is he cited by an Officer
to arise and stand at the place appointed for pleading: He craves to answer by
a Procurator: it is denied: then himself arises, and discends to the ordinary
place, and defends his cause.

With which Indignity (as he took it) he returns home, with a breast full
Baliol discontented returns into Scotland.
charged with indignation: Meditates revenge, renewes the ancient League with
France: Confirms it with the marriage of his son Edward, with a daughter of
Charles brother to King Philip, glad, in regard of late offenses taken against
the Reg. 23. An. 1296.
King of England, to embrace the same: Which done, Baliol defies King Edward:
renounces his Allegiance as unlawfully done, being not in his power (without
the consent of the State) to do any such act. Hereupon brake out that mortal
dissension between the two Nations (which during the reign of the three last
Scottish Kings had held fair correspo^dence together) that consumed more
Christian blood; wrought more spoil, and destruction, and continued longer
then ever quarrel we read of did between any two people of the World. For
he that began it could not end it. That Rancor which the Sword had bred, and
the perpetually-working desire of Revenge of wrongs (that ever beget wrongs)
lasted almost three hundred years. And all the Successors of this King (even
to the last, before this blessed Union) have had The occasion of the wars
between England and Scotland.
their shares more or less in this miserable affliction, both to their great
exspence of treasure, and extreme hindrance in all other their designs.
Although the intention of this Great and Marshall King for reducing this whole
Isle under one government, was Noble, and according to the Nature of power, and
greatness, that ever seeks to extend it self as far as it can: yet as all
such Actions has much of iniquity, so had this, and we see it was not force or
the Sword could effect it. God had fore-decreed to make it his own work by a
cleaner way, and ordained it for an unstained hand to set it together in peace,
that it might take the more sure, and lasting hold, which otherwise it could
never have done. Violence may join Territories, but never affections together;
which only must grow voluntarily, and be the work of it self. And yet no
doubt it was in the design of this King to have obtained it in the fairest
manner he could. As first shows his seeking to match his son Edward with
Margaret daughter to the King of Norway, grandchild, and heir to the last
King Alexander, who (dying an Infant soon after her grandfather) disapointed
his hopes that way: and drove him to have recourse to his Sovereignty, which
being opposed, he was forced to take the way of Violence, both to maintain his
own honor, and to effect what he had begun. Whereof the miserable events
were such, as now we may well spare their memory, and be content those bloody
Relations should be razed out of all Record: but that they serve to show us
the woeful calamities of our separation, and the comfortable blessings we
enjoy by this our happy Union. Neither does it now concern us to stand upon
any points of Honor, whether of the Nations did the brauest Exploites in those
times, seeing who had the better was beaten, neither did the ouercommer
conquer, when he had done what he could: That little which was gained, cost
so much more then it was worth, as it had been better not to have been had at
all. And if any side had the Honor, it was the invaded Nation, which being the
Weaker, and Smaller, seems never to have been subdued, though often overcome:
Continuing (notwithstanding all their miseries) resolute to preserve their
Liberties; which never People of the World more Nobly defended, against so
Potent, and rich a Kingdom as this, by the which, without an admirable
hardiness, and Constancy, it had been impossible, but they must have been
brought to an utter consternation.

For all what the Power of this Kingdom could do (which then put all the
strength to do what it could) was showed in this Kings time: Who now (upon
this defection of King Baliol, and his League made with France) Counter-leagues
with all the King Edward combines with other Princes.
Princes he could draw in, either by gifts, or Alliance to strengthen his
party abroad. As first with Guy Earl of Flanders, with whose Daughter he
seeks to match his Son Edward. Then with Adolph de Nassaw the Emperor, to
whom he sends Fifteen thousand pounds Sterling to recover certain Lands of
the Empire which Adolph claymed in France: He had likewise married one of his
daughters to the Duke of Bar, who pretends Title to Champaign, another to John
Duke of Brabant: All which, with many other confining Princes, he sets upon
the King of France; who had (for Certain spoils committed on the Coast of
Normandy, by the English, and no redress obtained) summoned King Edward, as
owing Homage to that Crown, to appear and answer it in his Court, which he
refusing to do, is by an Arrest condemned to forfeyt all his Territories in
France: And an Army is presently sent forth to seize upon An Army sent into
France
the same, led by Charles de Valois, and Arnold de Neele Constable of France.
Bordeaux with diverse other Pieces of importance are taken, and fortified. For
the recovery whereof, the King of England sends over his Brother Edmond Earl
of Lancaster, Another into Scotland.
the Earls of Lincoln and Richmond with eight and twenty Bannerets, Seven
hundred men at Arms, and a Navy of three hundred and Sixty Sail. And
notwithstanding all this mighty chargde, and Forces employed in those parts.
King Edward sets upon King Baliol (refusing upon Summons to appear at his
Court at Newcastle, standing upon his own Defense) and enters Scotland with an
Army sufficient to Reg. 24. Anno. 1297.
Conquer a far mightier Kingdom, consisting of Four Thousand men at Arms
on Horse, and Thirty Thousand Foot, besides 500. Horse, and one Thousand
foot of the Bishop of Duresme: intending here to make speedy work that he
might afterward pass over Sea to aid his Confederats, and be revenged on the
King of France.

Berwick is first won with the Death of Fifteen Thousand Scotts, (our
writers report more: but nothing is more uncertain then the number of the
slain in Battle) and after that the Castles of Dunbarre, Roxborough,
Edenborough, Sterling, and Saint John's Town were won or yielded unto him,
King Baliol sues for peace: Submits King Edwards victories in Scotland.
himself; takes again his Oath of Fealty to King Edward as his Sovereign
Lord. Which done, a Parliament for Scotland was held at Berwick, wherein the
Nobility did likewise Homage unto him, confirming the same by their Charter
under their hands, and Seals. Only William Dowglasse refuses, content rather
to endure the misery of a Prison, then yield to the subjection of England.
King Baliol (Notwithstanding his submission) is sent Prisoner into England,
after his Four years dignity, I cannot say Reign: For it seems he had but
little Power, and King Edward returns from this expedition, leaving John
Warrein Earl of Surrey and Sussex, Warden of all Scotland, Hugh. Cressingham
Treasorer, and Ormesley Chief Justice, with Commission to take in his Name the
Homages, and Fealties of all such as held Lands of that Crown.

And here this Conquest might seem to have been effected, which yet was not.
Reg. 25. Anno. 1298.
It must cost infinite more Blood, Travail, and Treasure, and all to as little
effect. And now the French businesses (that require speedy help) are wholly
intended. For which King Edward calls a Parliament at Saint Edmonds Bury,
wherein the Citizens, and Burgesses of good Towns granted the eighth part of
their goods, and other of the people a twelfth part. But the Clergy (upon a
prohibition from Pope Boniface, that no Tallage or Imposition, laid by any lay
Prince, upon whatsoever appertained to the Church should be paid) absolutely
refuse to give any thing. Which Prohibition may seem to have been procured by
themselves, in regard of the many Leauies lately made upon the estate
Ecclesiastical. As in Anno Reg. 22. they paid the moietie of their goods; of
which the Abbay of Canterbury yielded 596 pounds 7 shillings and 10 pence: and
besides furnished six horses for the Seacoasts. This Leauie as Stow notes in
his collection amounted to six hundredth thousand pounds. And in Anno Reg. 23.
the King seized into his hands all the Priories Aliens, and their goods.
Besides he had a Loan of the Clergy, which amounted to 100 thousand pounds,
whereof the Abbat of Bury paid 655 pounds.

Notwithstanding now, upon this their refusal, the King puts the Clergy out
of The King puts the Clergy out of his protection.
his protection, whereby they were to have no Justice in any of his Courts (a
strain of State beyond any of his Predecessors) which so amazed them being
exposed to all offenses and injuries whatsoever, and no means to redress
themselves, as the Archbishop of York, with the Bishops of Duresme, Ely,
Salisbury, Lincoln, yielded to lay down in their Churches the fifth part of
all their goods, toward the maintenance of the Kings wars: whereby they
appeazed his wrath, and were received into grace. But the Archbishop of
Canterbury by whose animation the rest stood out, had all his goods seized on,
and all the Monasteries within his Diocese and part of Lincoln, taken into the
Kings hands, and Wardens appointed to minister only necessaries to the Monks,
converting the rest to the Kings use. At length by much suite, the Abbots, and
Priests giving the fourth part of their goods, redeem themselves, and the
Kings favor. Thus will Martial Princes have their turns served by their
Subjects, in the times of their Necessities howsoever they oppose it.

During this contrast with the Clergy, the King calls a Parliament of his
Nobles at Salisbury, without admission of any Churchmen; wherein, he requires
certain of the great Lords to go unto the wars of Gascoine, which required
a present supply, upon the death of his brother Edmond (who having spent much
treasure, and time in the siege of Bordeaux without any success, retyres to
Bayon, then in possession of the English, and there ends his life. But they all
making their excuses, every man for himself; the The Lords refuse to go into
Gascoigny except the King went in person.
King in great anger threatened they should either go, or he would give their
lands to others that should. Whereupon Humfrey Bohun Earl of Hereford high
Constable, and Roger Bigod Earl of Norfolk Mareschall of England, make their
declaration, that if the King went in person they would attend him, otherwise
not. Which Answer more offends, and being urged again; the Earl Mareschall
protested he would willingly go thither with the King, and march before him
in the Vantgard, as by right of inheritance he ought to do. But the King told
him plainly he should go with any other, although himself went not in Mat.
West.
Person. I am not so bound said the Earl, neither will I take that journey
without you. The King swore by God, Sir Earl you shall go or hang. And I
swear by the same oath, I will neither go, nor hang, said the Earl: and so
without taking his leave departs.

Shortly after the two Earls assembled many Noblemen, and others their friends
to the number of thirty Bannerets, so that they were fifteen hundred men at
Arms well appointed, and stood upon their own guard. The King like a prudent
Prince who knew his times, prosecutes them not as then, but lets the matter
pass: In regard that both his business in France, and the pressing necessity
of ayding his Confederats (whereon his honor, and whole estate abroad
depended) called him over into Flanders; which the King of France had now
invaded; pretending the same title of Sovereignty to that Province, as King
Edward did to Scotland. And having had intelligence The French King inuites the
Earl of Flanders to Paris, and there imprisons him.
of the intended Alliance, and other designs of the Earl Guy, sends for him
(as if knowing nothing thereof) to come with his wife, and daughter to make
merry with him at Paris: where in steed of feasting, he makes him his prisoner,
and takes from him his Daughter, in regard he sought being his vassal to match
her to the Son of his capital enemy. The Earl excuses it the best he could,
and by much mediation is released, and suffered to depart, but without his
Daughter: of whose surprise, and detention (contrary to the Law of Nations) he
complains to the Pope, and other Princes, who earnestly urge the release of
the young Lady, but all in vain; and thereupon this Earl (presuming on the
aid of his confederates) takes arms, and defies the King of The French King
inuades Flanders.
France. Who now comes with an Army of sixty thousand against him; which caused
the King of England to make what speed he could, to relieve this distressed
Earl, and to leave all his other businesses at home in that broken estate
which he did; the Scots in revolt, and his own people in discontent. For
which yet he took the best order he could: leaving the administration of the
Kingdom during his absence to the Prince, and certain especial Counselors,
as the Bishop of London, the Earl of Warwick, the Lords Reginald Gray, and
Clifford, and besides, to recover the Clegry received the Archbishop of
Canterbnry into favor.

And being ready now to take ship, the Archbishops, Bishops, Earls, Barons, and
the Commons send him a Roll of the general grieuances of his Subjects:
Concerning his This roll of grieuances is recorded by Tho. Wall. viz. Append.
Taxes, Subsidies, and other Impositions; with his seeking to force their
services, by vnlawsull courses: his late impost laid of forty shillings upon
every sack of Wool, being before but half a mark, estimating the Wool of
England, to a fifth part of all the substance thereof. The King sends answer,
that he could not alter any thing without the advice of his council, which
were not Reg. 26. Anno. 1299.
now about him: and therefore required them, seeing they would not attend him
in this journey (which they absolutely refused to do though he went in
person, unless he had gone into France or Scotland) that they would yet do
nothing in his absence prejudicial to the peace of the Kingdom. And that upon
his Return, he would set all things in good order as should be fit.

And so with 500 sail, eighteen thousand men at Arms, he puts out for this
journey, wherein Fortune showed him, how she would not be always his: For
contrary to King Edward passes over into Flanders to the aid of the Earl Guy.
his expectation he found the Country of Flanders distracted into popular
factions; a rich and proud people, who though they were willing to aid their
Prince, and defend their liberties (which they respected more then their
obedience) yet would they not be commanded otherwise then themselves pleased.
And now the King of France, daily getting upon them (having won Lisle, Doway,
Courtray, Bruges, and Dam; and the Emperor Adolph failing of his aid and
personal assistance, as vn-interessed confederates often do, especially
having received their gage before hand, as had this Emperor to the sum of
100 thousand Marks) drove the King of England into great perplexity, and held
him with long delays, to his extreme travail and expenses: which forced him
to send over for more supply of Treasure, and give order for a Parliament to be
held at York by the Prince, and such as had the manage of the State in his
absence. Wherein, for that he would not be disapointed, he condiscends to all
such Articles as were demanded concerning the great Charter: promising from
thenceforth never to charge his subjects otherwise then by their consents in
Parliament, and to pardon such as had denied to attend him in this journey. For
which the A Parliament held at York in the absence of the King.
Commons of the Realm granted him the ninth penny of their goods: the
Archbishop of Canterbury, with the Clergy of his Province, the Tenth penny:
York, and his Province, the Fifth: so the Kings instant wants are relieved,
and the Kingdom satisfied for a present shift. But it is not well with a
State, where the Prince, and people seek but to obtain their several ends,
and work upon the advantages of each others necessities: for as it is
vn-sincere, so it is often vn-successull, and the good so done hurts more, then
it pleasures.

The King thus supplied, stays all this Winter in Gaunt, where his people
committing The Gantois take arms against the English.
many outrages, so exasperats the Gantois; as they took arms, made head
against them, slew many, and put the Kings person in great danger: so that,
do what the Earl Guy, and himself could to appease them, in satisfying such,
as had received wrong, and giving the rest fair words, he hardly could escape
safe out of the Country; King Edward in danger.
which rather desired to have the English commodities, then their companies.
This was the success of his journey into Flanders, which he leaves at the
Spring of the year, having concluded a truce with the King of France for two
years. And He returns into England.
the poor Earl Gay left to himself is shortly after made the prey of his
enemy, and his Prisoner in Paris; where he and his daughter both died of
grief. And Flanders is reduced to a possession, though not to the subjection
of the King of France. For after they had received him for their Lord, his
exactions and oppressions upon them, contrary to their ancient Liberties so
armed the whole people, being rich and mighty, as they gave France the greatest
wound that ever before it received at one blow; which was at the famous battle
of Courtray, wherein the Earl of Artoise General of the Army, Arnold de Neel
Constable of France, and all the Leaders with Twelve thousand Gentlemen were
slain. And to show what this King of France got, by seeking to attain The
History of France.
this Sovereignty of Flanders (as well, as we shall hear of the King of
Englands getting upon Scotland for the same title) It is recorded in their
Histories, that in the space of Eleven years, this quarrel cost the lives of
100 Thousand French men. Besides it drove the King likewise to consume the
substances of his people, as well as their blood, and to load them with new
impositions as, that of Malletoste and the Tenth Denier upon the liver of all
Merchandises, which in the Collection bred great outcries, and dangerous
seditions among his Subjects: And these were the fruits of these great
attempters.

Now for King Edward of England, he presently after his return, falls a new
upon Reg. 27. Anno. 1300.
Scotland, which in his absence had beaten his officers, and people almost out
of the Country, slain Sir Hugh Cressingham with 6000 English: recovered many
Castles, and regaind the Town of Berwick. And all by the annimation and
conduct of William Wallice a poor private Gentleman (though nobly descended)
who seeing his K. Ed. prosecutes his Scottish business. Will. Wallice animates
the Scots against the subjection of England.
Country without a Head, and thereby without a Heart (all the great men either
in Captivity or subjection) assembles certain of as poor and desperate estate
as himself, and leads them to attempt upon whatsoever advantages they could
discover, to annoy the English. And having therein good success, it so
increased both his Courage, and Company; as he afterward comes to be the
general Guardian of the whole Kingdom: leads their Armies; effects those great
Defeits upon the Enemy: and was in possibility to have absolutely redeemed his
Country, from the subjection of England) had not some private Emulation
amongst themselves, and the speedy coming of King Edward, with all his power)
prevented him. So much could the spirit of one brave man work, to set up a
whole Nation upon their feet, that lay utterly cast down. And as well might
he at that time have gotten the Dominion for himself, as the place he had:
but that he held it more glory to preserve his Country, than to get a Crown.
For which, he has his immortal honor; and whatsoever praise can be given to
mere Virtue, must be ever due unto him.

And now King Edward to bring his work near together, remoues his Eschequer
K. Ed. remoues his Escheker and Courts of Justice to York.
and Courts of Justice to York: where the continued above Six years. And
thither calls he a Parliament, requiring all his Subjects that held of him by
Knights setuice, to be ready at Roxborough by a peremptory day: where are
assembled Three thousand men at Arms on barded Horses, and Four thousand
other aimed men on Horse without bards, with an Army on foot answerable,
consisting most of Welsh, and Irish: besides, Five hundred men at arms out of
Gasconie, and with this power makes he his second expedition into Scotland.

The Earls of Hereford, and Norfolk, notwithstanding their former contempts,
attend him. And although he were thus guirt with all this strength, and in the
midst of his mightiness, they urge the ratifications of the Two Charters, and
their Pardons: which they held not sufficient to secure them, in regard the
King was out of the Realm, at the late granting thereof. The Bishop of
Duresme, the Earls of Surrey, The famous Battle of Fonkirk.
Warwick, and Gloucester undertook for the King, that after he had subdued
his Enemies, and was returned, he should satisfy them therein. And so these
two Earls with the Earl of Lincoln, Led his Vauntguard at the famous Battle
of Foukirke, The Scots overthrown.
which the King of England gat, wherein are reported to be slain, 200 Knights,
and Forty thousand foot of the Scots. But William Wallice with some few escaped
to make more work.

And here again that Kingdom might seem, as if quite overcome. Most of the
estates of the Earls, and Barons of Scotland (with their titles) that had
stood out were bestowed on the English Nobility, to make them the more egar to
maintain and A Parliament at St. Andrews.
prosecute this Conquest. And a Parliament is called at Saint Andrews, where
all the great men of that Kingdom (except only Wallice) again swear Fealty
to the King of England.

The Scottish writers here set a wide mark of Tyranny upon King Edward in
this The Scottish writers inueigh against the tyranny of K. Ed.
expedition, as not content to carry away captive all such as might seem to
have any the least ability to stir: but also endeauours to extinguish if it
were possible, the very memory of the Nation: abolishing all their ancient
laws, traducing their Ecclesiastical rights, to the custom of England:
dispoiling them of their Histories: their instruments of State: their Antique
Monuments, left either by the Romans, or erected by themselves: transporting
all their Books and Bookemen into England: Sending to London the Marble stone,
wherein (as the Vulgar were persuaded) the Fate of the Kingdom consisted: and
left them nothing that might either encite them to remember their former
fortune, or instruct generous spirits in the way of Virtue and worthiness. So
that he bereaved them not only of their strength: but of their minds:
supposing thereby to est ablish a perpetuali Domination over that Kingdom.

This journey ended, a Parliament is called at Westminster, wherein the
promised confirmation A Parliament at Weatminster.
of the Two Charters, and the allowance of what disforrestation had heretofore
been made, was earnestly urged, and in the end with much a do granted, with
omission of the Clause, Saluo Iure Coronae nostrae, which the King labored to
have inserted, but the people would not endure the same: the perambulation of
the Forests of England is committed to Three Bishops, Three Earls, and Three
Barons.

In this little pause of Peace at home, a Concord is, by the mediation of Pope
Boniface, Reg. 28. Anno. 1301.
concluded with the King of France: whose sister Margeret, the King of England
takes to wife in the Sixty two year of his age (something too late for so young
a Match) and the Daughter of the same King is likewise affianced to the Prince.
And thereupon restitution made of what had been usurped by the French King in
Gasconie, Bordeaux returns to the obedience of the King of England (to the
Merchants of which City he paid 150 Thousand po^uds for his brother Edmonds
expenses in the late wars, and all is well on that side. Besides the same Pope
obtained permission, for John Baliol the captive King of Scots to depart and
live in France upon certain lands he had there, and undertook for his
observation of the Peace, and his confinement, who shortly after dies, having
had little joy of a Crown or scarce leisure to know he was a King. The
Decrying, and calling in of certain base Coin named Crocard, and Pollard,
with the new stamping them again, yielded something to the Kings Coffets:
which must be emptied in Scotland, whither again (having been scarce
Eighteen months at home) he makes his Third expedit. but did little, besides
the regaining of Sterling Castle which held out Three months siege against all
his power, and Ingines reared with insinite charge, and labor. And in the end
not won but yielded up by the Defendant William Oliver, upon promise which was
not kept with him. The rest of the Scots made no head, but kept in the
Mountains, and Fastnesses of their Country: whereby the Kings Army having
more to do with barrenness then men, suffered much affliction and many Horses
were starued.

Now upon this Peace with France, the Scots being excluded and having none to
relieve them, send their lamentable complaints to Pope Boniface, showing him
the afflicted state of their Country: the usurpation of the King of England
upon them, and his most tyrannical proceeding with them, contrary to all
right and equity. Protesting they never knew of any Sovereignty he had over
them, but that they were a free kingdom of themselves; and so at first he
dealt with them, upon the death of their last King Alexander, both in the
treaty of the marriage for his son Edward, with Margaret the beire of
Scotland: and also after her death for the decision of the Title, wherein he
sought by their consents to be made Arbitror, as he was. Howsoever afterward
they were constrained to give way to his will; yet, what they ever yielded unto
was by reason they were otherwise unable to resist etc. Upon this remonstrance
of the Scots, the Pope writes his powerful letters to the King of England, to
forbear any further proceeding against them; Claiming withal, the
Soueraintgie of that Kingdom, as belonging to the Church.

The King answers the Popes Letters at large. Alleging from all Antiquity,
how the direct and superior Dominion of Scotland, had ever appertained to this
Crown, even from Brute to his own time: And withal the whole Nobility write
to the Pope, auowing the same right. And absolutely conclude that the King
their Lord should in no sort undergo his Holiness judgment therein. Neither
send his Procurators (as was required) about that business, whereby it might
seem that doubt were made of their Kings Title, to the prejudice of the
Crown, the Royal Dignity, the Liberties, Customs and Laws of England; which
by their oath and duty they were bound to observe, and would defend with their
lives. Neither would they permit, nor could, any such vn-usuall, vn-lawfull,
and detrimentall proceeding. Nor suffer their King, if he would, to do, or
any way to attempt the same. And therefore besought his Holiness to
intermeddle no more in this matter. These Letters subscribed with all their
Vid. Apend.
names were dated at Lincoln; where, then was held the Parliament Anno Domini
1301.

The Pope upon this answer, or rather having his hands full of other
business, stirs no more in this. The King of France whom he had
excomunicated, and given away his Kingdom to the Emperor Albert of Austrich,
shortly after so wrought, as his Spiritualty was surprised at Anagne a City of
Abruzzo, whither he was retired from the troubles of Rome; and so violently
treated by Sciarra Colonesse, a Banditto of Rome, and Nog^ret, an Albigioye
(whom he had both persecuted) as in extreme rage, and anguish within few days
after he ends his turbulenr life.

And the King of England (having been supplied, with a Fifteenth upon
Confirmation Reg. 32. Anno. 1305.
of the Charters again, at the Parliament at Lincoln) he makes his Fourth
expedition into Scotland, and as it were the Fourth Conquest thereof, having
had Four times Homage and Fealty sworn unto him. Which might seem
sufficient to confirm his Soueraingtie, whereof now he rests secure, and home
returns in triumphant manner: Remoues his Eschequer from York: Feasts his
Nobilitty at Lincoln with all Magnificense: From thence he comes to London,
and renders solemn thanks to God and Saint Edward for victory. Which to make
it seem the more entire, shortly after, William Wallice (that renowned
Guardian of Scotland, betrayed by his Companion) is sent up prisoner to London:
adjudged according to the Laws of England, to be drawn, hanged, and quarterd,
for his treasons committed against the King (whom at his Araignement he would
not yet acknowledge to be his King) protesting never to have sworn Fealty
unto him.

Thus suffered that worthy man for the defense of his own in a strange
Country, and remains amongst the best examples of Fortitude and Piety in that
kind. And now King Edward, being (as he supposed) at an end of all his
business: an universal Lord at home: strong in Alliance, and Peace abroad;
begins to look more severely to the government of this Kingdom, and to
draw profit out of those disorders, which the License of War, and Trouble had
bred therein. And first, amongst The case of Sir Nicholas Segraue.
other examples of his power (which it seems he would have equal to his
will) is the case of Sir Nicholas Segraue, one of the greatest Knights then of
the Kingdom, who being accused of treason by Sir John Crombwell, offers to
justify himself by Duel, which the King refuses to grant, in regard of the
present War then in hand. Whereupon Segraue without license and contrary to
the Kings prohibition, leaves the Kings Camp, and goes over Sea to fight with
his enemy, for which the King (as against one that had not only contemned him,
but as much as in him lay exposed him to death, and left him to his enemies)
would have Justice to proceed against him. Three days the Judges consulted of
the matter and in the end adjudged Segraue guilty of death, and all his
moueables and immouables forfeited to the King. Notwithstanding in regard of
the greatness of his blood, they added. He went not out of England in
contempt of the King, but only to be revenged of his accuser, and therefore it
was in the Kings power to show mercy unto him in this case. The King hereto in
great wrath replied, have you been all this while consulting for this? I know
it is in my power to confer grace, and on whom I will to have mercy, but not
the more for your sakes then for a dog. Who has ever submitted himself to
my grace and had repulse, but let this your judgment be recorded and for ever
held as a Law. And so the Knight for example and terror to others, was
committed to prison, though Mat. West.
shortly after by the labor of many Noble men of the Kingdom, Thirty of his
Peers guirt with their swords standing out to be bound body for body, and goods
for goods to bring him forth whenever he should be called; the King restored
him to his estate.

Shortly after, the King likewise sends out a new writ of inquisition, called
Trailbaston, For Intruders on other men's lands, who to oppress the right owner
would The inquisiti on of Trailbaston.
make over their lands to great men: For Batterers hired to beat men: For
Breakers of the Peace: For Rauishers, Incendiaries, Murthercrs, Fighters, False
Assisors, and other such Malefactors. Which Inquisition was so strictly
executed, and such Fynes taken, as it brought in exceeding much treasure to the
King. So did likewise another Commission the same time sent forth to examine
the behavior of Officers, and Ministers of Justice, wherein many were found
Delinquents, and paid dearly for it. Informers here, as fruitful agents for
the Fiske (and never more employed then in shifting times) were in great
request. Besides these means for treasnre above ground, this King made some
profit of certain Silver mines in Devonshire, as is to be seen in
Hollingshead, but it seems the charge amounting to more then the benifit, they
afterward came discontinued.

The King likewise now begins to show his resentiment, of the stubborn
behavior of his Nobles toward him in times past; and so terrefies Roger Bigod
EarleMarshall, Reg. 33. An. 1306.
as to recover his favor, the E. made him the heir of his lands (though he
had a brother living) reserving to himself a Thousand pounds pension per annum
during his life. Of others likewise, he got great sums for the same offense.
The Earl of Hereford escapes by death. But the Archbishop of Canterbury (whom
he accused to have disturbed his Peace in his absence) he sends over to Pope
Clement the Fifth (who succeeded Boniface) that he might be crushed with a double
power. This Pope was Native of Bordeaux, and so the more regardefull of the
Kings desire, and the King more confident of his favor; which to intertaine
and increase he sends him a whole Furnish of all Vessels for his Chamber of
clean gold: which great gift so wrought with the Pope, as he let loose this
Lion, untied the King from the covenants made with his Subjects concerning
their Charters confirmed unto them by his three last Acts of Parliament, and
absolved him from his oath: an Act of little Piety in the Pope, and of as
little conscience in the King, who (as if he should now have no more need of
his Subjects) discovered with what sincerity he granted what he did.

But suddenly hereupon there fell out an occasion that brought him back to
his right Orb again, made him see his error and reform it, finding the love
of his people, lawfully ordered to be that which gave him al his power, and
means he had, and to know how their subsistances were intermutuall. The news
of a new King made, and crowned in Scotland was that which wrought the effect
hereof. Robert Bruce Earl of Carrick, son to that Robert who was Competitor
with Baliol, escaping out of England. becomes head to the confused body of that
people, which, having been so long without any to guide them, any entire
Council, scattered in power, disunited in mind, never at one together, were
cast into that miserable estate as they were. For had they had a King as well
as their enemies to have led them, held them together, and managed their
affairs accordingly, that which they did in this distraction, shows how much
more they would have done otherwise. And therefore no sooner did Bruce appear
in his design, but he effected it: had the Crown, and hands ready to help him
at an instant; and that before Rumor could get out to report any thing of it.
Although John Common his Cosen german being a Titeler himself, a man of great
love and Alliance in Scotland, wrote to have bewrayed Brucos intention to the
King of England, in whose Court they both had lived, and were his Pensioners.
But Bruce (as great undertakers are ever a wake, and ready at all hours)
preuents him by speed: Bruce murders John Cumyn in the Church.
and either to be avenged on him for his falsehood, or rid of him as a
Competitor, finding him at Dunfraies, sets upon and murders him in the Church.

Which Foundation laid on blood (the Place, the Person, and the manner making
it more odious) much stained his beginning, and effected not that security for
which he did it, but raised a mighty party in Scotland against him. King
Edward (though so late acquainted herewith, as he could not be before hand
with him, yet would he not be long behind to overtake him) sends Amyer de
Valence Earl of Pembrooke, the Lords Clifford and Percy with a strong power to
relieve his Wardens of King Ed. sends and prepates for Scotland.
Scotland, who upon this Revolt were all retired to Berwicke, whilst himself
prepares an Army to follow. Wherein to be the more free, and Nobly attended,
Proclamation is made, that whosoever ought by their paternall succession, or
otherwise had means of their own for service, should repair to Westminster
at the Feast of Penticost, to receive the order of Knighthood, and a Military
ornament out of the Kings Wardrobe.

Three hundred young Gentlemen, all the sons of Earls, Barons, and Knights,
assemble at the appointed day, and receive Purples, Silks, Sindons, Scarffs
wrought with gold or Silver, according to every man's estate: For which train
(the Kings house being too little, by reason a great part thereof was burnt
upon his coming out of Flanders) room is made, and the Apple Trees cut down
at the New Temple for their Tents, where they attire themselves and keep their
Vigil. The Prince (whom the King then likewise Knighted, and guirt with a
Military Belt, as an ornament of that honor; and withal gave him the Duchy
of Acquitaine) kept his Vigile with his train at Westminster, and the next day
guirds these Three Hundred Knights with the Military The Prince gives the
honor of Knighthood to 300 Gentlemen.
Belt, in that manner as himself received it. At which ceremony the press
was so great, as the Prince was feign to stand upon the high Altar (a place for
a more divine honor) to perform this: Which being solemnized, with all the
State and Magnificence could be devised, the King before them all makes his
vow, that alive, or dead, he would revenge the death of John Cumyn upon Bruce,
and the perjured Scots: Adiuring his son, and all the Nobles about him upon
their Fealty, that if he dyed in this Journey, they should carry his corpse with
them about Scotland, and not suffer it to be interred, till they had vanquished
the Usurper, and absolutely subdued the Country. A desire more Martial then
Christian, showing a mind so bent to the world, as he would not make an end
when he had done with it, but designs his travail beyond his life.

The Prince, and all his Nobles promise upon their faith to employ their utmost
Reg. 34. An. 1307.
power to perform his Vow, and so upon grant of the Thirtieth penny of the
Clergy and the Laity, and the Twentieth of all Merchants, he sets forth with
a potent Army presently upon Whitsontide and makes his last expedition into
Scotland, Anno Reg. 34. The Earl of Pembrooke, with that power sent before,
and the aid of the Scottish party (which was now greater by the partakers of
the Family of Cumyn, being many, mighty, and egar to revenge his death) had,
before the King arrived in Scotland, defeited in a battle near S. John's
town, the whole Army of the new King, and narrowly missed the taking of his
person: Who escaping in disguise recovered an obscure shelter, and was reserved
for more, and greater battles: His brother Nigell Bruce, and shortly after
Thomas, and Alexander a Priest, were taken and executed after the manner of
Traitors at Berwicke; so that K. Edward at his coming, had not so much to do
as he expected. But yet he passed over the Country, to show them his power, and
to terrify his enemies, causing strict in quisition to be made for all who had
been aiding to the murder of Cumyn, and the advancement of Bruce. Many, and
great Personages are A great execution made of the Scots.
found out (being impossible amongst a broken people for any to remain
vndiscovered) and were all executed in cruel manner to the terror of the
rest. The Age of the King of England, his Cholar, Wrath, and desire of revenge
made him now inexorable, and to spare none of what degree soever they were. The
Earl of Athol (though of the Royal blood, and allied unto him) was sent to
London, and preferred to a higher Gallows then any of the rest. The wife of
Robert Bruce taken by the Lord Rosse is sent prisoner to London, and his
daughter to a Monastery in Lindsey. The Countess of Boughan that was aiding at
the Coronation of Bruce is put into a wooden Cage, and hung out upon the
walls of Berwicke, for people to gaze on etc.

Which rigorous proceeding rather exasperates the Enemy, and adds to the party
of Bruce, then any way quailed it: desperation being of a sharper edge, then
hope. And though Bruce now appeared not, but shifted privily from place to
place, in a distressed manner (attended only with two noble Gentlemen, who
never forsook him in his fortunes, the Earl of Lenox, and Gilbert Hay) yet
still expectation, love, and the well-wishing of his friends went with him, and
so long as he was alive they held him not lost; this affliction did but harden
him for future labors: which his enemies (who now neglected to look after
him, as either holding him dead, or so down as never to rise again) found
afterward to their cost. For this man, from being thus laid on the ground,
within few years after, gets up to give the greatest overthrow to the
greatest Army, that ever the English brought into the Field, and to repay the
measure of blood in as full manner as it was given.

All this Summer the King spends in Scotland, and winters in Carleil, to be
ready A Parliament. at Carliel.
the next Spring if any fire should break out, to quench it. For resolved he
is not to depart, till he had set such an end to this work, as it should need
no more. And here he holds his last Parliament, wherein the State mindful of
the Popes late action, got many Ordinances to pass for reformation of the
abuses of his Ministers, and his own former exactions; who being but poor,
sought to get where it was to be had. Wringing from the elect Archbishop of
York in one year Nine thousand five hundred Marks: and besides, Anthony
Bishop of Duresme to be made Patriark of Ierasalem, gave him and his Cardinals
mighty sums. This Bishop Anthony is said to have had in purchases, and
inheritances, 5000 Marks per annum, besides what belonged to his Myter: which
showed the Pope the riches of this Kingdom, The King and Pope divide the
benefit of the Clergy.
and moved him to require the fruits of one years revenue, of every Benefice
that should fall void in England, Scotland, Wales, and Ireland; and the like
of Abbayes, Priories, and Monasteries: which though it were denied him, yet
something he had; the King and he dividing it betwixt them. The Pope granted
the King the Tenth of all the Churches of England for two years: and the King
yielded that the Pope should have the First fruits of those Churches. And the
better to effect this business, the Pope makes an errand, and sends Petrus
Hispanus Cardinal, a Latere to call upon the King for consummation of the
Marriage between Prince Edward, and Isabell daughter to the King of France.
And this Cardinal got something, but not so much as he expected.

Whilst they were thus busy at Carliel, about the opening of the Spring,
opens K. Bruce teeouers new forces.
himself the hidden King Robert Bruce, and with some forces he had gotten
together, soddainely assailes the Earl of Pembrooke at vn-awares, and gave him
a great defeit; and within Three days after chases the Earl of Gloucester into
the Castle of Air, where he besieged him, till by the Kings forces, he was
driven again to his former retire. But this showed, that so long as he was
(in what estate soever he was) there would be no end of this war.

Which caused King Edward to send out his strict commandment, that whosoever
ought him service should presently, upon the Midsommer after, attend him at
Carliel. K. Ed. enters Scotland and dies there.
And withal he sends the Prince to London, about the business of his
Marriage. In July, although he found himself not well, he enters Scotland
with a fresh Army, which he led not far; for falling into a Dissenterie, he
dies at Borough upon the Reg. 35. An. 1340.
sands, as if to show on what foundation he had built all his glory in this
world; having Reigned Thirty four years, Seven months, Aged Sixty eight. A
Prince of a generous spirit, wherein the fire held out even to the very last:
borne and bred for action and military affairs, which he managed with great
judgment: ever wary, and provident for his own business: watchful and eager
to enlarge his power: and was more for the greatness of England, then the
quiet thereof. And this we may justly say of him, that never King before, or
since shed so much Christian blood within this Isle of Britain, as this
Christian warrior did in his time, and was the cause of much more in that
following.

He had issue by his first wife Queen Elionor Four Sons, whereof only
Edward His Issue.
suruiued him, and Nine Daughters, Elionor married to the Earl of Bar. Joan to
Gilbert Clare, Earl of Gloucester; Margaret to John Duke of Brabant. Mary lived
a Nun in the Monastary of Amsberie. Elizabeth married first to John Earl of
Holland, after to Humfrey Bohun Earl of Hereford, the rest died young. He had
by his Second wife Two Sons Thomas Surnamed Brotherton which was Mareschall
and Earl of Norfolk, and Edmond Earl of Kent.

The end of Edward the First.
The Life, and Reign of Edward the second.
EDward of Carnaruan, removed more then one Degree from the Father in height of
Spirit, and nearer the Grandfather in flexibility, and Reg. 1. Anno. 1307.
easiness of Nature (which made him apt to be taken) began his Reign in July
1307. in the Three and twentieth year of his Age. A Prince which shows us what
confusion and mischief attends Riot, Disorder, Neglect of the State, and
advancing unworthy, or ill-disposed Minions to the prejudice of others, the
grief of his people, and the deminution of the Royal Majesty. And though his
youth might somewhat excuse the first sickness of his private Favors, yet
those often Relapses of his showed it was an habitual indisposition in the
whole state of his Mind, not to be cured.

Never was Prince received with greater love, and opinion of all, or ever any
that sooner lost it. For his very first actions discovered a headstrong
wilfulness that was K. Ed. the first, imprisoned his son, and exiled Pierce
Gaueston.
vncouncellable: Whereof the intertaining again his old Companion Pierce
Gaueston was one, whom the Father had banished the Kingdom, finding him to
have corrupted the youth of his Son, and lead him to commit many ryots:
amongst which was the breaking of the Park of the Bishop of Chester. for which
he both Anno. Reg. 33
imprisoned his Son, and exiled Gaueston. Besides this provident King (as if
foreseeing the mischief might ensue) at his death charged his Son (upon his
blessing) never to recall or entertain Pierce Gaueston again about him, and
required the Lords (who were present) to see his Will observed therein: which
notwithstanding, he Pirce Gaueston recalled and preferred by the King.
brake before his Fathers Funerals were performed: and not only intertaines,
but inuests Gaueston in the Earledom of Cornewale, and the Lordship of Man;
being both of the Demaines of the Crown, and makes him his chief
Chamberlain. Then to be revenged on the Bishop of Chester his Fathers
Treasurer (who had abbridged his expenses, and complained of him for his riot)
he caused him to be arrested, committed to prison, and seises upon all his
goods, which he gave to Gaueston: makes a new Treasurer of his own: remoues
most of his Fathers Officers: and all without the advice, or consent of his
Council, which gave them their first discontent, and bewrayed his disposition.

Before his Coronation, a Parliament was held at Northampton, wherein was
ordained, A Parliament at Northampton held before the Coronation.
that the Moneys of his Father (notwithstanding the people held them base)
should be current; and a Fifteenth of the Clergy, a Twentieth of the
Temporalty is there granted. After the Funerals performed at Westminster, he
passes over to Bologne, where his Nuptials with Isabel, Daughter to Philip le
Bell, are sumptuously The marriage of K. Ed. solemnized at Belogne.
solemnized. at which were present the King of France, the King of Nauare, his
Son, the King of Almaine, the King of Sicile, and three Queens besides the
Bride, with an extraordinary concourse of other Princes. At which Feast
Gaueston is said to have exceeded them all in bravery, and daintiness of
attire, wherewith afterward he infected the Court of England. A mischief the
most contagious to breed a Consumption in a State, that can be introduced. For,
the imitation thereof presently distends it self over all, and passes beyond
the example, and at length all means to maintain it. And had he done no
other hurt to the Kingdom then this, it had been enough to have made him (as
he was) odious thereunto. But besides, he afterward filled the Gaveston
corrups the King.
Court with Buffons, Parasites, Minstrels, Players, and all kind of dissolute
persons to entertain, and dissolve the King with delights and pleasures.
Whereby he so possessed him, as he regarded no other company, no other exercise,
but continually day, and night spent his time, and treasure in all Wantonness,
Riot, and disorder: neglecting the affairs of the State: and the company, and
counsel of all the rest of the Nobles: who assembling together (at the
instant, when he was to be Crowned with his Queen at Westminster, Anno Reg. 2.)
require him that Gaueston might be removed from The Lords displeased with
Gave.
out the Court, and Kingdom; otherwise they purposed to hinder his Coronation
at that time. Whereupon the King to avoid so great a disgrace, promises on his
faith, to yield to what they desired in the next Parliament; and so the
Solemnity with much festination, and little reverence is performed. Wherein,
Gaueston for carrying Saint Edwards Crown before the King, aggrauates the
hatred of the Clergy, and Nobility against him.

Shortly after his Coronation, all the Knights Templats throughout England are
at once arrested, and committed to prison. They were an order of Knights
iustituted by Balduin the Fourth King of Jerusalem about 200 yearts past, and
first appointed for The Knights Templers arrested and committed to prison.
the defense of that City, and the safe conuaying of all such as travailed
thither: afterward they were dispersed through all the Kingdoms of Christendom
and by the pious bounty of Princes, and others, enriched with infinite
possessions, which made them to degenerate from their first institution, and
become execrably vicious. So that all the Kings Their dissolution.
of Christendom at one instant (combining together) caused them to be
apprehended within their Dominions, and put out of their order, and estates.
The King of France began, having a purpose to make one of his Sonns King of
Jerusalem, and possess him of their revenues. Their accusation follows their
apprehension, and condemned they are (rather by fame, then proof) in the
general Council at Vienna; as apeares by the condemnatory Bull of Pope
Clement the Third: Wherein he has this clause, Quanquam de iure non possumus,
tamen ad plenitudinem potestatis, dictum ordinem reprobamus. Their estates are
after given to the Hospitaliers.

These businesses passed over, the Lords prosecute their purpose against
Gaueston, The Lords prosecure Gaueston.
whose insolency, and presumption upon the Kings favor; made him so far to
forget himself, as he scorned the best of them all, as much as they hated
him. Tearming Thomas Earl of Lancaster the Stage player: Aymer de Valence
Earl of Pembrooke, Joseph the Jew: and Guy Earl of Warwick, the black dog
of Ardern: Which scoffs, leaving behind them the sting of revenge (especially
where they touch) drew such a party upon him, as in the next Parliament, the
whole Assembly humbly besought the Reg. 3. Anno. 1310.
King to advise, and treat with his Nobles, concerning the State of the
Kingdom, for the avoiding of eminent mischief, likely to ensue through
neglect of the Government; and so far vrges the matter, as the King consents
thereunto, and not only grants them liberty to draw into Articles what was
requisite for the Kingdom, but takes his oath to ratisie A Parliament. The king
takeshis oath to rate fie whatsoever Articles the Lords would conclude in
Parliament.
whatsoever they should conclude. Whereupon they elect certain choice men both
of the Clergy, Nobility, and Commons, to compose those Articles. Which done,
the Archbishop of Canterbury, lately recalled from exile, with the rest of his
Suffragans, solemnly pronounce the sentence of excommunication against al such
who should contradict those Articles, which are there publicly read before
the Barons and Commons of the Realm, in the presence of the King. Amongst
which the observation and execution of Magna Charta is required, with all other
ordinances necessary for the Church and Kingdom. And that as the late King had
done, all Strangers should be banished the Court, and Kingdom, and all ill
Counselors removed. That the business of the State should be treated on by
the Council of the Clergy and the Nobles. That the King should not begin any
war, or go any where out of the Kingdom, without the common Council of the
same.

Which Articles though they seemed harsh to the King yet to avoid further
trouble Gaueston banished into Ireland.
he yields unto them, but especially to the banishment of his Minion, as if
that would excuse him for all the rest; and away is he sent into Ireland,
where he lived a while, not as a man exiled, but as the Lieutenant of the
Country. The King not enduring to be without his company, never ceased working
till he had recalled him back again: which within a few months after he
did. And to make him (as he thought) to stand the faster on his feet, he
marries him to his Niece (the Daughter of Joan de Acres) Sister to Gilbert de
Clare Earl of Gloucester, a man beloved and highly esteemed of all the
Nobility: for whose sake he hoped Gaueston should find the Gaueston recalled.
more favor amongst them, but all this could not shelter him. Either his
behavior, or their malice was such as they could not endure to have him about
the King, who by making him so great, lessened him, and the more he was
enriched, the worse was his estate; The Subjects spectators of their Kings
immoderate gifts, held it to be taken out of the bowels of the Commonwealth,
and as it were of their substance that was so wasted. For it is reported, the
King gave him the Jewels of the Crown, which he sold to Merchant strangers,
and conuayed much treasure out of the Kingdom, whereby the King sustained
great wants, and the Queen is abridged of her allowance, whereof she
complains to the King of France her Father.

These stingues put the Barons on to send plain word to the King, that unless
he The Lords threaten the King.
put from him Pierce Gaueston, and observe the late Articles, they would all
with one consent rise in arms against him, as a perjured Prince. The King
(whom they found was apt to be terrified) yields again upon this message to
the banishment of his Minion: whose fortune being to have a weak master, was
driven to these sudden extreamities, Gaueston again banished.
mities, and disgraceful expulsions, at their will who were his enuiers; and
who now obtain this Clause; that if hereafter he were found again within the
Kingdom he should be condemned to death as an enemy of the State. Ireland was
now no more to protect him: France most unsafe for him (wait being their laid
to apprehend him) in Flanders he luiks a while, but in great danger: and
finding no where any security, back again he adventures upon England, and
into the Kings bosom (the sanctuary he thought would Gaueston returns.
not be violated) he puts himself, and there is he received with as great
joy as ever man could be. And to be as far out of the way and eye of envy as
might be, the King carries him into the North parts, where notwithstanding the
Lords shortly after found him out. For no sooner had they heard of his return,
and receiving into grace, but they presently combine and take arms, electing
Thomas Earl of Lancaster The Lords take arms.
for their Leader. This Thomas was the Son of Edmond, the second Son of
Henry the third: and was likewise Earl of Leicester, Ferrers, and Lincoln, a
most powerful and popular Subject, with whom ioynes Humfrey Bohun Earl of
Heresord, Aymer de Valence, Earl of Pembrooke, Guy de Beaucham Earl of
Warwick, the Earl of Arundel, With many other Barons. But Gilbert Earl of
Gloucester the Kings Nephew, for that he would neither offend him, nor be
wanting to his Peers, stands as Mediator for their liberties, and the peace of
the Kingdom. The Earl Warrein remained a while doubtful, and favoring
rather the Kings part, till the Archbishop of Canterbury induced him to consent
with the Lords: who being thus prepared send to the King in the behalf of the
whole Comunaltie, beseeching him to deliver up unto them Pierce Gaueston, or
else to send him away with his train out of England. The King neglecting their
petition they set forward in arms toward the North. The King and Gaueston,
withdraw to Newcastle, and there being advertised of the strength of the
Gaueston taken and beheaded.
Lords, they take ship (leaving the Queen in much grief behind) and land at
Scarborough Castle; whereinto the King puts Gaueston with the best forces he
could provide for his defense, and departs himself to wards Warwickeshire.

The Earls of Pembrooke and Warrein sent by the Earl of Lancaster lay siege
to the Castle. Gaueston is forced to render himself into their hands, but
intreates thus much that he might be brought once more to speak with the
King, and then after they should do with him what they pleased. The Earl of
Pembrooke undertakes upon his honor he should, but as his servants were
conducting him to wards the King, the Earl of Warwick took him from them by
force, and commits him to his Castle of Warwick, where after some consultation
among the Lords (not withstanding the Kings earnest solicitation for his life,
they condemned him to the block, and took off his head.

This was the end of Pierce Gaueston, who for that he was the first Priuado of
this The description of Pierce Gaueston.
kind ever noted in our History, and was above a King in his life, deserves to
have his Character among Princes being dead. Native he was of Gascoine, and
for the great service his father had done to this Crown, entertained and bred
up by King Edward the first, in company with his son this Prince, which was
the means that invested him into that high favor of his. He was of a goodly
personage, of an haughty and vndauntable spirit, brave and hardy at arms, as
he showed himself in that Turneament which he held at Wallingford, wherein
he challenged the best of the Nobility, and is said to have foiled them all;
which inflamed the more their malice toward him. In Ireland where he was
Liuetennant during the short time of his banishment, he made a Journey into
the mountains of Dublin, brak and subdued the Rebels there, built Newcastle in
the Kerns country, repaired Castle Keuin, and after passed up into Munster and
Thomond, performing every where great service with much valor and worthiness.
He seems to have been a Courtier which could not fawn nor stoop to those
he loved not, or put on any disguise upon his Nature to temporize with his
enemies; But presuming upon his fortune (the misfortune of such men) grew in
the end to that arrogancy as was intolerable, which the priuacie of a King
favor usually begets in their Minions, whose understanding and judgment The
miserable ostate of Minions.
being dazed therewith, as is their sight who stand and look down from off
high places never discern the ground from whence they ascended. And this
extraordinary favor showed to one though he were the best of men, when it
arises to an excess, is like the predomination of one humor alone in the
body, which indangers the health of the whole, and especially if it light upon
un worthiness, or where is no desert, and commonly Princes raise men rather
for appetite then merit, for that in the one they show the freedom of their
power, in the other they may seem but to pay their debt.

But this violent part of the Lords showed the nature of a rough time, and was
the beginning of the Second Civil War of England. For now having had their
desire in The peremtorie proceeding of the Lords.
this, and finding their own power and the weakness of the King, they
peremtorily require the confirmation and execution of all those Articles
formerly granted; threatening the King that unless he presently performed the
same, they would constrain him thereunto by strong hand. Thus will Liberty
never cease till it grow licentious, and such is the misery of a State, where
a King has once lost his reputation with his people, and where his Nature
agrees not with his Office, or answers the duties thereunto belonging. And with
this menacing message they had their swords likewise ready drawn, and with
strong forces assemble about Dunstable making toward London where the King
then lay.

The great Prelates of the Kingdom, with the Earl of Gloucester labor to
appease The Prelates and the E. of Gloucester labor to pacify and bring in the
Lords.
them, and (with two Cardinals, which at that time were sent by the Pope to
reform these disorders of the Kingdom) they repair to Saint Albons and desire
conference with the Lords, who receive them very peaceably, but their letters
which the Pope had written unto them, they refused to receive, saying they were
men of the sword, and cared not for the reading of letters: that there were
many worthy and learned men in the Kingdom whose Counsels they would use,
and not strangers, who kyew not the cause of their commotion: absolutely
concluding, that they would not permit Forrainers and Aliens to intermeddle
Their submission.
in their actions, or in any business that concerned the Kingdom. With which
answer the Cardinals return to London. But the Prelates of England so labor
the business Reg. 5. Anno. 1313.
as the Lords were content to yield up to the King such Horses, Treasure, and
Jewels as they had taken of Pierce Gaueston at Newcastle, so that the King
would grant their petitions, And thereupon John Sandall Treasurer of the
Kingdom, and Ingelard Warle Keeper of the Wardrobe, are sent to Saint Albons
to receive those things at their hands.

About this time Queen Isabel is delivered of a son at Winsor whom Louys her
brother, Queen Isabel delivered of a son.
and other great men and Ladies of France, would have had christened by the
name of her father Philip, but the Nobility of England had him named Edward.
And here the King keeps his Christmas, feasts the French with great
Magnificence, and is said (or rather suspected) to be evil counseled by them
against his Nobles, between whom there being so ill correspondence already,
any imagination serves to make it worse, Suspicion causing all things to be
taken in ill part.

Shortly after, a Parliament is called at London, wherein the King complains of
the great contempt was had of him by the Barons, their rising in Arms, their
taking and murdering A Parliament.
Pierce Gaueston etc. Whereunto with one accord they answer: how they had not
offended therein, but rather mereted his lous and favor, having taken arms
not for any contempt of his Royal person, but to destroy the public enemy of
the Kingdom, banished before by the consent of two Kings: a man by whom his
fame and honor was most highly disparaged, his substance, and that of the
Kingdom wasted, and a most dangerous dissension between him and his subjects
raised. Whereof otherwise with all their labor and travail they conld never
have had an end. Besides they tell him plainly, they would now no longer
attend vain promises nor be deluded with delays, as they had hitherto been
concerning their required Articles. Which stout resolution of theirs, the
Queen with the Prelates, and the Earl of Gloucester seeing, they seek by all
persuasions to quallifie their heat, and at length so far prevailed with
them; as to appease the Kings wrath they brought them and their confederates in
open Parliament, to humble themselves to the King, and to crave pardon for what
they had done, which they obtained, and the King receives The Lords are
pardoned. A Fifteenth granted.
them into grace, as his loyal subjects, grants them their Articles, and
particular pardons by his Charter, for their indemnity concerning the death of
Gaueston. And for this, the State upon his great wants granted him a Fifteenth.
Guy de Beauchamp Earl of Warwick is here appointed to be one of the Kings
Council, who Reg. 6. Anno. 1314.
being a man much envied by such as possessed the King, shortly after dies, not
without suspicion of poison.

Whilst the State of England stood thus diseased at home, through the infirmity
of a weak Head, that of Scotland grew strong by the providence of a vigilant
King, who had not only overcome the Scottish faction, and recovered the most of
his own K. Bruce grows strong in Scotland.
Country, but also made spoils on this, wasting all Northumberland in such
sort, as King Edward wakened with the outcries of his people and the great
dishonor of the K. Ed. goes with a mighty Army into Scotland.
kingdom, is drawn to take arms for redress thereof, and enters Scotland
with the greatest Army that ever yet went thither, consisting as the Scottish
writers report of 100 Thousand men, whereof were great numbers of Flemings,
Gascoines, Welsh, and Irish, who in imagination had devoured the Country
before they came thither, and thought not of Battles, but of dividing the
prey. Besides the King had with him most of the Nobility, and especial men of
England, except Thomas Earl of Lancaster, the Earls of Warwick, Warrein and
Arundell, who refused to go, for that the King protracted the execution of the
foresaid Articles.

The Castle of Sterling is the piece that is to be relieved, which chiefly now
held out, defended by Philip Moubray a valiant Knight, who seeing the daily
success of Bruce, had manned and victualed the same for many months. Near to
this place upon the River Bannocke is incountred this great Army of England by
Bruce, with 30 Thousand Scots, a small number say their writers, in respect of
their enemies: but as men hardened with daily use of war and domestical
evils, fierce and resolute, carrying all their hopes in their hands, of life,
estate, and whatsoever was dear unto them. The advantage of the ground was
theirs, having behind inaccessable Rocks to defend them, before a Moorish
uncertain ground wherein they dug trenches, The battle of Bannocks borough.
which they pitched full of sharp stakes, and covered them over with hurdles,
so that tht footmen might pass over safely without impediment, but it so
confounded the Horse, as it gave the Scots the day, and the greatest overthrow
to England that ever it received. There perished in this Battle (called of
Bannocks Bourough) Gilbert The defeit of the English.
the last Clare Earl of Gloucester, a maine Arch of the State of England, and
Robert Lord Clifford the Noblest of our Barons, with the Lord Tiptoft, the Lord
Mareschall, the Lord Giles de Argenton, the Lord Edmond de Maule, and 700
Knights, Esquires and Gentlemen of sort: of common soldiers, theirs say Fifty
thousand, ours Ten: taken prisoners Humfrey Bohun Earl of Hereford, Ralph de
Morthelmere (who married Joan de Acres, Countess dowager of Gloucester,) with
many others: the King and those who were preserved escaped by flight.

This defeit put Scotland both into Arms and Wealth, so that they held their
own the better for a long time after, and discouraged so much this kingdom
for many years as it wrought not (though it often attempted) any great
revenge. King Eddward upon his coming back to York showed a great desire to
repair this dishonor, but nothing was done; his people grew cold, home they
return, and sit down by their loss. The poor Borderers have the worst of
it, and become so dejected as 100 of them would fly from three Scots says
Walsingham. To such a sudden faintness are the inferiors brought, when the
nobler parts of a State, which should give them spirit, are ill affected.

This disaster (as mischief never comes alone) was attended with inundations,
which brought forth Dearth, Dearth Famine, Famine Pestilence, all which
exceeded any that ever before had been known. A Parliament is called at London
upon A Parliament at London.
the beginning of this Dearth to abate the prices of victuals, which suddenly
grewto be excessive. And therefore it was ordained, that an Ox fatted with
grass Reg. 8. An. 1315.
should be sold for sixteen shillngs, fatted with corn for twenty
shillings, the best Cow for twelve shillings, a fat Hog of two years old
three shillings four pence, a fat Sheep shorn fourteen pence, with the
fleece twenty pence, a fat Goose for two pence half penny, a fat Capon two
pence, a fat Hen a penny, four Pigeons Rates for victuals.
a penny, whosoever sold above should forfeit their ware to the King. Here
seems then to have been no Calves, Lambs, Goslings, Chickins, young Pigges,
to be sold, those dainties were not yet in use.

After these rates imposed, all kind of victuals grew more scarce then
before, and such a Murrein followed of all kind of Cattle, with a general
failing of all fruits of A Dearth which lasted 3. years.
the earth, by the excessive raines and unseasonable weather, as provision
could not be had for the Kings house, nor means for other great men to
maintain their Tables (such a just punishment had Excess and Riot inflicted
thereon in those days) in so Reg. 10. An. 1317.
much as men put away their servants in great numbers, who having been
daintily bred, and now not able to work, scorning to beg, fell to Robbery
and spoil, which adds more misery to the kingdom. Three years this
affliction held, and was attended with so great a Pestilence and general
sickness of the common sort, caused by the ill nutriment they received, as the
living scarce sufficed to bury the dead.

Notwithstanding could all this extinguish the rancour between the King and
his Nobles, but daily one mischief or other brake out, to hold in and
increase the same. The wife of Thomas Earl of Lancaster is taken out of his
house at Canford in Dorcetshire, The wife of the E. of Lancaster taken out of
his house at Canford.
by one Richard Saint- Martin, a deformed Dwarffe (as he is described) a
follower of the Earl Warrein: claiming her for his wife, and auowing how he
had layne with her before she was married to the Earl, which the Lady her
self to her perpetual ignomy; and the shame of honor, voluntarily auerred.
This base creature claymes by her the Earledomes of Lincoln, and Salisbury,
whereunto she was heir; Which with out being supported by great Abbettors,
he would never have presumed to attempt. The King is noted an Actor herein,
which being in so tender and reserved a business as marriage, added much to
his other violations of order: and gave The King advertised of his errots.
occasion and hardiness to inferior persons to reprove his courses as may be
noted by this passage. Being at the celebration of the feast of Pentecost at
dinner in the open Hall at Westminster, a woman fantastically disguised enters
on Horse-bake, and ryding about the Table delivers him a letter, wherein was
signified the great neglect he had of such as had done him, and his father
noble services, taxing him for advancing men of unworthy parts, etc. which
letter read, and the woman departed, put the King into a great rage. They who
guarded the door being sharply reprehended for suffering her to enter in that
manner, excused themselves, alleging, it not to be the fashion of the Kings
house in times of festiualls to keep out any which came in that manner, as
they thought to make sport. Search being made for this woman, she is found
and examined who set her on. She confessed a Knight gave her money to do as
she did. The Knight is found, and upon examination boldly confessed, he did
it for the Kings honor and to none other end, and escapes without further ado.

Thus while the North parts were not only infested with the Scots, but likewise
by such of the English as under color of using aid for resistance, robbed and
spoiled The miserable affiction of the Borderers.
all where they came, to the miserable undoing of the people. Besides Robert
Bruce now absolute King of Scots, sends his brother Edward with a mighty power
into Ireland, whereof he got a great part, and the title of a King, which he
held three years. Thus all things went ill, as evermore it does in dissolute
and dissenrious times wherein the public is always neglected.

But these mischiefs abroad was the occasion that a reconciliation between
the A reconciliation between the King and the Nobles. A new occasion of trouble.
King and the Earl of Lancaster is made by the mediation of two Cardinals
upon such conditions as were soon after unjustly broken by the King. A Knight
is taken passing by Pomfret with letters sealed with the Kings Seal, directed
to the King of Scots about murdering the Earl, which Messenger is executed,
his head set upon the top of the Castle, and the letters reserved to witness
the intended plot. Which whether it were fained or not, the report thereof cast
an aspersion upon the King, Reg. 11. Anno. 1318.
and won many to take part with the Earl. After this, upon an invasion of
the Scots forraging as far as Yorks, a Parliament is assembled at London,
wherein again the King by the working of the Cardinals, and Clergy of
England yields, faithfully A Parliament at London.
to observe all the former required Articles. Whereupon an aid is granted him
of Armed men to go against the Scots. London settes forth 200. Canterbury 40.
Saint- Albons 10. and so of all Cities and Boroughs according to their
proportion, whereby a great Army was leauied. Which coming to York; through
mutenie, emulation, and other impediments was dissolved, and turned back
without effecting any thing.

The next year after upon the rendering up of Berwicke to the Scots by the
treason of Peter Spalding who had the custody thereof; the King of England
raises an Armic Reg. 12. Anno. 1319.
and beleagers it: the Scots to divert his forces, enter upon England by other
ways, and were like to have surprised the person of the Queen lying near
York. The siege notwithstanding is eagerly continued, and the King in great
possibility to have The L. Hugh Spencer the younger succeeded Gaueston in the
office of L. Chamberlain.
regained the Town, had not the Earl of Lancaster with his followers
withdrawn himself upon discontent, hearing the King say, how he would give
the keeping thereof to the Lord Hugh Spencer the younger, who was now grown an
especial Minion (the successor both of the Office, and private favor of
Gaueston) and therefore not to be induted by the Earl.

Those of York and the Country adjacent having received inestimable damages
by the Scots, collect an Army of 10000 men, and encounter them at Milton on
Swayle; but being not well led, nor experienced they received the defeite,
with the loss of 3000 men. Whereof the King being certified and seeing all
things to succeed ill with him, concludes a truce with the Scots for two
years, and again returns with dishonor from those parts. In the time of
this peace, a great flame arises from a Reg. 14. Anno. 1321.
small spark, and took beginning upon this occasion. A Baron named William
Brewes, having in his licentious age, wasted his estate, offers to sell unto
diverse men a part of his inheritance called Powes. Humfrey Bohun Earl of
Hereford, in regard the land lay near his, obtaines leave of the King to buy
it, and bargains for the same. The two Rogers Mortimers, Uncle and Nephew,
great men likewise in those Another occasion of revolt.
parts, not understanding it seems any thing of the former bargain, Contract
also for the same land, with the said Sir William Brewes. Hugh Spencer the
younger hearing of this sale, and the land adjoining to part of his, obtaines a
more especial leave of the King, being now his Chamberlain, and buies it out
of all their hands.

The Earl of Hereford complains himself to the Earl of Lancaster (the
refuge of all discontented men) who at Sherborn enters into a Confederation
with diverse Barons there assembled, taking their oaths intermutually to live
and die together, in maintaining the right of the kingdom, and to procure the
banishment of the two Spencers father, and son, whom they now held to be the
great seducers of the King and oppressors of the State, disposing of all things
in Court at their will, and The Lords oppose the Spencers.
suffering nothing to be obtained but by their means: Which the State
accounted a mischief most intolerable and grievous unto them, seeing all
graces and dispatches were to pass out but at one door, whereby the Kings
benignity and power is diminished, the Kingdom dishonored, all corruptions
introduced to the overthrow of Justice and good order.

And under this pretense they take Arms, wherein themselves proceed not in
that And take Arms.
even way of right as they made show, but follow the fury of their wills, being
once out and astray, they seize upon, and make spoil of the lands and goods of
those persons they prosecuted, and all such as had friendship and affinity with
them, killing their servants and disposing their Castles at their pleasure. And
coming armed thus to S. Albons they send to the King, residing then at London,
the Bishops of London, Salisbury, Hereford and Chichester (who were there
assembled to consult for peace) requiring him as he tendered the quiet of the
Realm to rid his Court of those Traitors the Spencers, condemned in many
Articles of high Treason, by the Communalty of the Land, and withal to grant
his Letters Patents of Pardon and Indemnity both to them, and all such as took
part with them, and that for no offenses past or present they should hereafter
be punished. The King returns answer, That Hugh Spencer the father was beyond
the Seas employed in his business, The King excuses the Spencers.
and the son was guarding the Cinque-Portes according to his office, and that
it was against Law and Custom they should be banished without being heard.
Moreover that Denies the Lords their demands.
their request was void of Justice and Reason, for that the said Spencers were
ever ready to answer to all complaints made against them, according to the
form of Law, and if the LL. could prove they had offended the Statutes of the
Realm, they were willing to submit themselves to the trial thereof. And
besides swore he would never violate the oath made at his Coronation, by
granting letters of Pardon to such notorious offenders who contemned his
person, disturbed the Kingdom, and violated the Royal Majesty. Which answer
so exasperated the Lords as presently they approach to London, and lodged in
the Suburbs till they obtained The Lords come armed to London.
leave of the King to enter into the City: Where they peremptorily urge their
demands; which at length by mediation of the Queen and the chief Prelates,
the King The King yields unto them The Earl of Hereford publishes the Kings
Edict in Westminister Hall.
is wrought to condescend unto, and by his Edict published in Westminster Hall,
by the Earl of Hereford, are the Spencers banished the Kingdom. Hugh the
father keeps beyond the Seas, but the son secretly hides himself in England
expecting the turn of a better season. The Lords (having thus obtained their
desire with the Kings Letters of impunity) depart home, but yet not with such
security, as they gave over the provision for their own defense.

Shortly after, there fell out an unexpected accident that suddenly wrought
their confusion. The Queen who had ever been the nurse of peace, and labored
to accord The occasion of the Queens displeasure with the Lords
the King and his Barons, making her progress toward Canterbury was disposed
to lodge in the Castle of Leeds, appertaining to the Lord Badlesmere (who had
been long the Kings Steward, but lately took part with the Barons) and
sending her Mareschall to make ready for her and her train, they who kept the
Castle told him plainly, that neither the Queen or any else should enter
there, without letters from their Lord. The Queen her self goes to the Castle,
and receives the like answer, whereupon She is denied lodging in the Castle of
Leeds.
she is driven to take such lodging other where as could be provided. Of which
indignity she complains to the King, who took it so to heart, as presently
with a power of armed men out of London, he lays siege to the Castle, takes
it, hangs the The King takes the Castle of Leeds. Grows strong.
keeper, Thomas Culpeper, sends the wife and children of the Lord Badlesmere to
the Tower, and seises upon all his goods and treasure. And having this power
about him, and warmed with success and the instigation of the Queen,
suddenly directs his course to Cicister where he kept his Christmas, and there
provides for an army against the Barons, whereof many (seeing the Kings power
increasing) left their associates and yield themselves to his mercy, amongst
whom were the two Rogers Mortimers, men of great might and means, the Lord
Hugh Audeley, the Lord Maurice Barkley, and others, who notwithstanding,
contrary to their expectation, were sent to diverse prisons. The Earls of
Laucaster and Hereford seeing this sudden change withdrew themselves and their
companies from about Gloucester toward the North-parts. The Lords withdraw into
the North parts, and are overthrown.
The King follows them with his Army wherein were the Earls of Aihol and
Angus, and at Burton upon Trent, where they had made head, discomfited their
forces and put them all to flight. Whereupon seeking to escape they retire
further North, and at Borough Briggs are encountered by Sir Simon Ward Shriefe
of York, and Sir Andrew Harckley Constable of Carleil, who (after the Earl of
Hereford was slain in striving to pass the Bridge) took the Earl of
Lancaster, with diverse other Lords and brought them to Pomfret, where the
third day after, the King sitting himself in judgment with Edmond Earl of
Kent his brother, the Earl of Pembrooke, the Earl Warren, Hugh Spencer,
lately created Earl of Winchester and others, Sentence of death is given
against Thomas Earl of Lancaster, by drawing, hanging, and beheading as a
traitor. The two first punishments are pardoned in regard he was of the The
execution of the E. of Lancaster, with diverse other Losds in diverse places.
royal blood, and only beheaded he was the same day without the town of
Pomfret before his own Castle. And by the like judgment were condemned the
Lord Roger Clifford, the Lord Warrein Lisle, the Lord William Tuchet, Thomas
Maudit, Henry Bradburne, William Fiztwilliams, William Lord Cheyny, Thomas Lord
Mowbray, Ioseline Lord Danyll, all which were executed at York. Shortly after
the Lord Henry Teyes is taken, drawn, hanged and quartered at London, the Lord
Aldenham at Windsor, the Lords Badlesmere, and Ashbiunham at Canterbury, the
Lord Gifford at Gloucester; principal men in principal places, to spread the
more terror over the kingdom. All their estates and inheritances are
confiscated, and many new men advanced by the same. And this is the first blood
of Nobility that ever was shed in this manner in England since William the
first, which being such, and so much as The first of any Earl or Baron of
England that ever was executed upon Scaffold, or otherwise, since the time of
William the first.
it was, opened veins for more to follow, and procured a most hidious revenge,
which shortly after insued. Thus is the beam of power turned, and Regality
(now in the heuier scale) weighes down all.

And presently upon this Maister-worke, the King both to busy the minds of
his people, and to Keep their hands doing whilst the terror thereof lasted,
marches from York with a mighty host (but small provisions) into Scotland.
Where, the Scots conuaying themselves and all succors out of his way, put that
want upon him, as confounded his great Army without blows, forcing him to
return with much dishonor. And having passed far within his own Country,
they assailed him at unawares, and had like to have taken his person, as well
as they did The Kings ill success in Scotland.
his treasure with the Earl of Richmond (with whom having miserably ransackt
all the Country over, even to the walls of York, they return laden with
mighty Reg. 16. Anno. 1323.
spoils safe into Scotland; and this was the success of this unfortunate King
(not borne for triumphs) in his third Scottish expedition.

And now being at leisure, in a calmer humor it seems, he began to have a
sense of the Execution of the Earl of Lancaster, which he discouers upon this
occasion. Some about him making earnest suit to grant a pardon to one of the
Earls followers (a man of mean estate) and pressing him hard thereunto, he
falls into a great passion, exclayming against them as unjust and wicked
Counselors, which would urge him so to save the life of a most notorious
varlet, and would not speak one word for his near kinsman the Earl of
Lancaster: who said he, had he lived might have been useful to me and the
whole kingdom; but this fellow the longer he lives the more mischief he
will commit, and therefore by the soul of God, he shall die the death he
has deserved. Sir Andrew Harckley who was the man which took prisoner the
Earl of Lancaster at Borough Brigges, being advanced for his service to the
Earldom of Carliel, inioyed his honor but a while: for the next year after,
either thrust out into discontent, by the Spencers envying his high The E. of
Carleil degraded and executed.
preferment, or combyning with the Scots, allured with the hope of a great
Match (as he was accused) is degraded of all his honors, drawn, hanged and
quartered at London for treason, and remains amongst the examples of sudden
downefalls from high places, under an inconstant and ill governing Prince.

Occasion drew on a Parliament to consult, amongst other important businesses
Reg. 17. An. 1324.
concerning the Sommons lately sent to King Edward, from the new King of France
Charles le Bell (who succeeded his brother Phillip le Long) to come and do his
homage For Gascoine, and it was by the common consent of all decreed that the
King shoould not go in person at that time but send some especial men to
excuse or defer A Parliament.
his appearance.

Besides in this Parliament, the King required a Subsedie both of the Clergy
and Laity, for the redemption of John Britain Earl of Richmond, lately
taken prisoner The King is denied a Subsidy.
by the Scots. But it was denied and alleged that no contribution ought of
right to be made but for the redemption of the King. the Queen or Prince, and
so nothing was there gotren but more displeasure. The Bishop of Hereford was
arrested, and accused of high The Bishop of Hereford accused of treason.
treason before the King and his Council for ayding the Kings enemies in their
late rebellion, but he refused to answer (being a consecrated Bishop) without
leave of the Archbishop of Canterbury, whose Suffragan he was (and who he
said was his direct Judge next the Pope) or without the consent of the rest of
his fellow Bishops, who then all arose and humbly craved the Kings clemency in
his behalf; but finding He refused to answer.
him implacable they took away their fellow Bishop from the Bar, and
delivered him to the custody of the Archbishop of Canterbury, till some other
time the King should appoint for his answer to what he was charged withal.
Shortly after he was again taken and conuented as before, which the Clergy
understanding, The B. taken from the Bar.
the Archbishops, Canterbury, York, and Dublin, with ten other Bishops, all
which with their Crosses erected went to the place of judgment, and again
took him away with them, charging all men upon pain of excommunication to
forbear to lay violent hands on him, with which audacious act the King was
much displeased, and presently commanded inquiry to be made ex officio
Iudicis, concerning those objections against the Bishop, wherein he was found
guilty, though absent, and had all his goods and possessions seized into the
Kings hands.

This act lost him the Clergy, and added power to the discontented party,
which The B. being absent is condemned ex officio.
was now grown to be all in general, except the Spencers and their
followers, who enriched with the spoils of the Barons, governed all at their
pleasure, selling the Kings favors, and shutting him up from any others, but
where they pleased to show The presumption of the Spencers.
him: and in this violence which knows no bounds, they presume to abridge the
Queen of her maintenance, and lessened her household train, which was the
rock whereon they perished.

The proceeding of the King of France against the King of England for the
omission of his homage, was grown so far, as that all his territories there
were adjudged to be forfeited, and many places of importance seized on by the
French, The Earl of Kent sent into Gascoine.
whereupon Edmond Earl of Kent the Kings brother is sent into Gasconie but to
little effect, the King of France was before hand, his power ready and his
people in those parts yielding that way where they saw most force. So that,
either the King of England must go in person to appease this trouble, or send
his Queen to her brother to mediate an accord, otherwise all was there in
danger to be lost. For the Kings going in person, the Spencers held it unsafe
both for him, and them, if he should leave his kingdom at home in so great,
and general discontent as then it was. Wherefore the Queen with a small
train is sent over to accomodate the The Queen is sent to accomodate the
business of France.
business, which she negotiates so well, as all quarrels should be ended
upon condition the of King England would give to his son Edward the Duchy of
Aquitaine with the Earledom of Ponthieu, and send him over to do homage for
the same, which after many consultations the King is wrought to yield unto.

The Prince is sent with the Bishop of Exeter and others, to the Court of the
King The Prince is sent to do his Homage for the Duchy of Aquitaine.
of France, where he was most welcome to his mother, who herein had her
desire, and being wholly bent to revenge (whereof none are said to be more
eager then women) found there, besides her great party in England, those who
nourished that humor in her amongst whom was chief Roger Mortimer Lord of
Wigmor, lately escaped out of the tower of London, a gallant young Gentleman
whom she especially favored. The Bishop of Exceter perceiving some plots to
be in hand, and their The Bishop of Exceter discovers the Queens plots.
close consultations made without him, withdrawes secretly from thence, and
discouers to the King so much as he observed of their courses. The King sends
presently for the Queen and Prince, soliciting withal, the King of France to
hasten their return, which when he saw was neglected and delayed, he caused
them openly to be proclaimed enemies to the kingdom, banishing them and all
their adherents out of the The Queen proclaimed enemy to the Kingdom.
Land: and withal causes all the Ports to be strongly kept, and sends three
Admiralls to attend on several coasts to oppose their landing.

The Queen to inflame her the more is informed of a plot laid to murder her,
and the Prince: and either doubting how much the money of England might work
in those should be tempted therewith, or else finding little forwardness in
her brother to aid or countenance her course against her husband, withdrawes
to the Earl of Haynault being then a Prince of great means, and likewise
Earl of Holland, to whose daughter Phillippa she contracts her son the
Prince, and gets aid and money of him to transport her into England. Arriving
at Harwich with the Prince, the Earl The Queen returns with forces.
of Kent the Kings brother (whom she brought with her from the Court of France)
the Earl of Pembrooke, the Lord Roger Mortimer, and John brother to the Earl
of Heynault with 2500 Henowayes and Flemings, she was received with great joy
and concourse of all the discontented Nobility and others: and especially by
the Bishops of Hereford and Lincoln, who soon resorted unto her, as men who
had lost, to recover their fortunes.

The King, upon notice of this sudden and safe arrival of the Queen, demands
aid Reg. 19. Anno. 1326.
of the City of London, which returns answer, That they would with all duty
honor the King, Queen, and Prince, but their gates they would shut against
all forreiners and traitors to the Reatme, and with all their power withstand
them. The King with his small Council The King demands aid of the City of
London.
about him reposing no assurance in this answer (after Proclamation made that
none, upon pain of death, should aid the Queen, and commandment given to
destroy all her adherents, only her own person, the Prince, and his brother
the Earl of Kent excepted, and that whosoever brought the head of Roger
Mortimer should have 1000 pounds) he leaves the City, committing the keeping
of the Tower to Sir John Weston with the guard of his younger son John of
Eltham, and his Niece the Countess of Gloucester (first wife to Pierce
Gaueston, now of Hugh Spencer the younger: a Lady unfortunate by the over great
fortunes of both her husbands) and departs toward the West, hoping to find
aid in those parts as formerly he had done against the Barons, but he saw the
world was altered, and no man there to regard him. The King departs toward the
West.


The Queen advertised of his course marched after him (growing daily greater
as she marched) and comes to Oxford, where the Bishop of Hereford Preached
before her and the whole assembly, and delivers the cause of her proceeding
taking for his The Queen follows.
Text, My Head aketh, my Head aketh: and concludes most undevinely, that an
aching, 2. King. 24.
and sick Head of a Kindome, was of necessity to be taken of, and not otherwise
to be cured. A most execrable doctrine, and repugnant to the Sacred Word, which
in all corrupted times is evermore produced, to abuse men's Credulity and
justify Impiety in whatsoever Ambition or Malice shall attempt: a sin beyond
all other that can be committed upon earth. And the more to countenance the
Queens proceeding, it was noised two Cardinals were seen in her Camp, sent
by the Pope to excommunicate such as took Arms against her, and the cause of
hers to be for the delivering the kingdom from the misleaders of the King, the
Spencers, the Lord Chancellor, and their adherents, all others to be safe. And
here proclamation is made, that nothing should be taken from any subject
without paying ready money, and a penalty imposed on whomsoever The Queens
Proclamation.
did the contrary, as for the value of three pence to loose a finger, six
pence the hand, twelve pence the head, and that whosoever brought to the Queen
the younger Spencers head should have 2000 pounds. Thus is a bad cause defended
with show of Justice, and an vunaturall presumption made to seem right by
power and authority: An impotent woman led with passion, and abused by wicked
counsel is brought to make head against her own head, to conduct an innocent
son against the father; to undertake an action she knew not how to manage,
and to put her self into their hands, who having other ends then hers, would
work beyond, though under her authority, what pleased themselves. And though
the event (as commonly it does in such attempts) prove worse then the intention
of the undertaker; yet howsoever, the infamy of all what was acted lies foul
and open upon her Memory, and no Apology extant any way to cover it, and
therefore we must leave the same as we find it. And better had it been for
the honor of the state of England to have been without her great dowre, then
to have had her example, the worst of a Queen it ever yet had. The miserable
King having his reputation (the maine support of Majesty) blown up with the
hurlewinde of his pursuers, found few or no hands to aid him: So that, after
he had put Hugh Spencer the father into the Castle of Bristoll, with what
defense could be provided for the guarding thereof; he leaves to trust the
Land, and commits himself to a more unfaithful Element, the Sea, with purpose
either to hide himself a while in the Isle of Lundie, or to pass over into
Ireland, The King betakes him to the Sea.
but tossed to and fro with contrary winds (after Sir Thomas Blunt his Steward
with others were shrunk from him) he lands in Wales in Glamorgan shire;
where, though he found not saftie he found love and was hidden in the Abbey
of Neth

The Queen with her Army from Oxford goes to Gloucester, where the Lords
Percie and Wake, with aid from the North, met her; and thence to Bristoll:
assailes and winnes the Castle: puts to death the defender Hugh Spencer Earl
of Winchester without form or trial of Law: causing him to be drawn, and
hanged, on the common Hugh Spencer the father hanged at Bristol.
gallows in his Coat armor, cut up before he was dead, headed, and
quartered. This done, she passes to Hereford, and the King being not to be
found, Proclamation is made, that if he would return and conform himself to
rule the State as he ought to do, he should come and receive the government
thereof, by the general consent of his people. But he, either not daring (as
destitute both of courage and counsel) to trust to this offer, or not well
informed thereof, keeps himself still concealed. Whereupon (as may seem was
intended) advantage is taken to dispose of the government, and the Prince who
is now under their guard, is made Guardian of the Kingdom, has Fealty sworn
unto him, and a new Chancellor, and Treasurer, are appointed.

Long it was not ere the King came to be discovered as a person too great for
any cover, and was by Henry Earl of Lancaster brother to the late Thomas,
William The King taken prisoner.
Lord Zouch and Ries ap Howell taken and conuayed to the Castle of Kenelworth.
The younger Spencer with Baldocke the Chancellor, and Simon Reading apprehended
with him, are sent to the Queen to Hereford, Spencer (who was now Earl of
Gloucester) is drawn, and hanged on a gallows Fifty foot high (wherein he was
exalted above his father, otherwise had the like execution) and likewise in his
Coat armor, whereon was written Quid gloriaris in malitia. psalm. 52. Simon
Reading was hanged Ten foot lower then he: But Baldocke in regard he was a
Priest, had the favor to be pined to death in Newgate. And here likewise a
little before was the Earl of Arundell with two Barons, John Danyll, and
Thomas Micheldeuer executed as Traitors by the procurement of Roger Mortimer,
for adhering to the Kings part.

To accompany these mischiefs of the Country, the Commons of London made
insurrection, and force their Mayor, who held for the King to take their part,
let out all prisoners, possesses them of the Tower, put to death the Constable
thereof, Sir John Weston, murder the Bishop of Excester to whom they bare an
especial hatred, for that being the Kings Treasurer he caused the Justices
Itenerants to sit in London A Parliament at London, where the Prince is elected
King.
by whom they were grievously fined, and thus all is let out to liberty and
confusion.

After a months stay at Hereford, the Queen with her son returning kept
Christmas at Wallingford, their Candlemas at London, where the Parliament being
Reg. 20. Anno. 1327.
assembled agreed to depose the King, as unfit to govern (obiecting many
Articles against him) and to elect his eldest son Edward: which they did in
the great Hall at Westminster, with the universal consent of the people there
present, and the Archbishop of Canterbury makes a Sermon upon this text, Vox
populi, vox Dei, exhorting the people to inuoke the King of kings for him they
had there chosen.

The Queen, either out of the consideration of the difference of a husband and
a son (whom now she was not like long to guide) or through remorse of
conscience looking back upon what she had done, takes this election
grievously to heart, insomuch as her son to recomfort her, swore he would
never accept of the Crown without the consent of his father, whereupon by a
common decree, three Bishops, two Earls, two Abbots, four Barons, three
Knights of every Shire with a certain number of Burgesses of every City and
Borough, and especially of the Cinque Ports, are sent to the imprisoned King at
Kenelworth, to declare unto him the election of his son, and to require the
renuntiation of his Crown and royal dignity, whereunto if he would not
consent, the State was resolved to proceed as it thought good. The King being
first privately made acquainted with the Message The King is brought to resign
his Crown.
(the most harsh to Nature that could be imparted) and by two, whom he
especially hated (for having especially offended them) the Bishops of
Hereford and Lincoln was brought forth before the assembly; to whom as soon
as his passion (wherewith he was ouercharged, would give him leave) he
confessed, how he had been misguided (the common excuse of a poor spirit) and
done many things whereof now he repented, which if he were to govern again,
he would become a new man, and was most sorrowful to have so much offended
the State, as it should thus utterly reject him, but yet gave them thanks that
they were so gracious unto him, as to elect his eldest son for King. Having
spoken to this purpose, they proceed to the Ceremony of his resignation (which
chiefly consisted in the surrender of his Crown) for the form whereof, being
the first that ever was seen in England, they could follow no precedent but
must make one, and William Trussell a Judge put it into the Style of Law to
render it the more authentical, and pronounced the same in this manner. I
William Trussell in the name of all men of the Land of England, and of all the
Parliament The form of his resignatio^.
Procurator, resign to thee Edward the Homage that was made to thee sometime,
and from this time forwards now following, I defy thee and prive thee of all
royal power, and I shall never be tendant on thee as King after this time.
This was the last act and the first example of a deposed King, no less
dishonorable to the State then to him. He was a Prince more weak then evil,
and those exorbitances of his met with as great or greater in his people, who
as we see, dealt over roughly and uncivilly with him. He is reported by some
to have been learned (which perhaps might make him the softer) to have written
verses when he was in prison: to have founded Oriall College, and Saint Mary
Hall in Oxford.

He had by his wife Isabell two sons, Edward borne at Windsor, who succeeded
Misissue.
him, and John Surnamed of Eltham, who was created Earl of Cornwall An. 1315.
and died in the Flower of his youth in Scotland. And also two daughters, Joan
married to David Prince of Scotland, and Elionor to the Duke of Gelders.

The end of Edward the second.
The Life, and Reign of Edward the third.
Upon the resignation of Edward the second, Edward his son of the 1327. An.
Reg. 1.
age of fourteen years, began his Reign the twentieth of January 1327, and
sends forth Proclamations of his peace into all Shires in this form. Edward by
the grace of God, King of England, Lord of Ireland, Duke of Aquitaine, to N. N.
our Shirife of S. greeting. Whereas the Lord Edward, late King of England our
father by the common council and assent of the Prelates, Earls, Barons, and
other chief men, with the whole Communaltie of this Realm, did voluntarily
amoue himself from the government thereof, willing and granting that we as
his eldest son and heir, should assume the same etc. which proclamation made
to palliat a wrong did but the more, discover it. Within 5 days after was he
crowned at West. by Walter Archbishop of Canterbury: at which solemnity the Q.
made show of great sorrow and hevinesse, but being after pacified by the
enlargement of her Ioynture (which took up three parts of the Kings revenewes)
she began to be of better cheer. Twelve especial The Queen has her
ioynture enlarged. Twelve especial men chosen for the government.
men are here appointed to manage the affairs of the Kingdom, till the King
were of fit years to govern of himself: the Archbishops of Canterbury and
York, the Bishops of Winchester, Hereford and Worcester, Thomas Brotherton
Earl Mareschall, Edmond Earl of Kent, John Earl Warrein, Thomas Lord Wake,
Henry Lord Percie, Oliver Lord Ingham, and John Lord Rose; but the Queen and
Roger Lord Mortimer usurped this charge, and took all took all wholly to
themselves. And to busy the present and An expedition into Scotland.
uphold this Change, an expedition instantly is undertaken for Scotland,
wherein (those strangers still retained which the Queen brought over with her)
are employed under the conduct of the Lord John Beaumont brother to the Earl
of Haynault, and at York the whole Army were to meet, where the English
(being not all of a party) quarrel with those strangers, and so great a
conflict arose between them as cost some blood, and was hardly appeased, an
ill presage of that journey.

At Stanhop Park the English Army encounter the Scottish, and though the
English were thrice greater, and might easily have vanquished them, yet by the
treason of some great men (as it was bruited) they escaped all away, and
nothing was done; so The Scots retire from Stanhope Park, ^^ nothing done.
that the young King borne for victories, was deprived the honor of his first
action, which yet, being not conducted by his own Spirit, was held more
dishonorable to others then to him. Upon their return, all the Hannowayes and
Stipendaries are sent home into their own Countries.

During this business the deposed King remains prisoner at Killingworth, with
the allowance of 100 marks a month for his expenses, deprived of all those
comforts the world should yield him. His wife whom he loved (though now the
author of all his misery) sends unto him letters and apparel, but excuses her
coming as being not permitted by the State: Neither was he thought safe enough
where he was, nor so straightly looked unto, as they desired to have him, being
in the custody of his Uncle the Earl of Lancaster; And therefore they commit
him to other guardians, and men of the most rough Natures could be found, the
Lord Matrevers and Thomas Borrney, who from thence removed him to the Castle of
Berckley in Glocestershire, where long he The miserable estate of the
imprisoned King.
staid not, but was conveyed to Corfe Castle, and thence to other places up and
down to beguile and disappoint his friends, by the uncertainty of his being,
if any plot were laid (which they doubted) to restore him. Besides to disguise
him the more, and that he might not be easily known, they shave his Head and
Beard, which as a servant of his Sir Thomas de la More a Knight of
Glocestershire reports (who wrote his life) was done in the open fields, by the
commandment of Gourney who most barbarously caused the miserable King to sit
on a Molehill whilst the Barbor shaved him, and to take cold water out of a
ditch to wash him withal, which the patient King (says this Reporter) seeing,
told them, That yet in despite of them he would have warms water at his
Barbing, and therewithal shed abundance of tears. Other vile reproaches this
savage Iaylor put upon his anointed Sovereign, as here-conveyed him back to
Berckley He is murdered at Berkley Castle.
Castle, where shortly after he, and Matrevers caused him to be murdered in a
most hideous manner by thrusting up a hot Iron into his bowels through an hollow
instrument, whereby no outward Note might appear to bewray how he came by his
death: For the body being after laid forth, and vewed by many substantial
Citizens of Bristoll and Gloucester (called thither for that purpose) they could
find no sign either of wound or poison, so that their Evidence confirmed the
report that was given out, how he died of extreme grief. This was the end of
Edward the 2 within eight months after his deposing.

The deed-doers Matrevers and Gourney though they had commission and great
hopes given them to do as they did, yet being by those who were ashamed to avow
it, they durst not abide the trial, but as Fugitives fled presently their
Country: Gourney three years after was taken at Merseilles, and murdered on
the Sea before he came to England, that he might tell no tales who set him on
work. But this was not all the blood this deed cost, the judgment of God fell
heavily, not only upon the great contrivers, but even upon the whole Kingdom:
and what the issue of this present Prince, whose throne (though without his
guilt) was thus set up on his fathers blood, sustained in after times, the many
imbrued Scaffolds, the diverse bloody fields, the infinite slaughters in the
civil discord of their divided families, which the consumed race of the most
part of all this present Nobility will testify. But now for the present, the
authors of this change use all means to increase and fortify their own
fortunes, whilst the State in general receives no great satisfaction thereby.
Men's expectations are not answered in that manner as they were conceived, The
Queen mother and her Minion Mortimer (lately created Earl of the Marches of
Wales) guide all, and all that is not well done, or amiss in the Government
is now attributed to them and their council: So that discontentments in gender
new Factions according to the Nature of turbulent times.

The Kings marriage with Phillippa of Haynault is solemnized, and a Parliament
is 1328. Anno. Reg. 2.
held at Northampton, where a dishonorable peace is concluded with the Scots,
and confirmed by a match between David Bruce Prince of Scotland, son to
Robert Bruce, and Ioane sister to the King of England, which match by reason of
the tender age of the Prince, being but seven year old, could promise little
good. Besides by the secret working of the Queen Mother, the Earl of March,
and Sir James Douglasse, The King surrenders by his Charter his Title of
Soveraignety to the Kingdom of Scotland, A Parliament at North.
restores diverse Deeds, and instruments of their former Homages and Fealties,
with the famous Evidence called the Ragman Roole, and many ancient Jewels and
Monuments among st which was the Black Cross of Scotland, etc. Moreover any
Englishman is prohibited to hold Lands in Scotland, unless he dwelt there. In
consideration whereof King Bruce was to pay 30 thousand Marks. Shortly after
another Parliament is held at Winchester, A dishonorable peace made with Scotl.
where Edmond Earl of Kent, brother to the late deposed King, is accused and
condemned upon his confession, for intending the restoring of his brother, and
conferring with diverse great men concerning the same, but without any matter of
fact. This miserable Earl stood on the Scaffold from one till five, and no
Executioner could be found to dispatch him, at length a silly wretch of the
Marshalsey cut off his head.

These violences and unpleasing courses in a new alteration, could not long
hold without effecting another, which the next year produced. A Parliament is
held at Nottingham wherein all the power and glory of the Queen and Mortimer
(being scarce A Parliament at Nottingham.
of three years growth) were overthrown; the Queen has all her great
Ioynture taken from her, and put to her pension of 1000 pounds per annum,
Mortimer is accused to have procured the late Kings death; to be the author of
the Scots safe escaping from Articles against Mortimer.
Stanhope Park, corrupted with the gift of twenty thousand pounds: to have
procured the late marriage, and peace with Scotl. so dishonorable to the King
and Kingdom: to have consumed the Kings treasure, besides all what was taken
from the Spencers: to have been too familiar with the Queen, etc. And for
these heinous offenses is condemned of high treason, sent up to London, drawn
and hanged at the common Gallows at the Elms, now called Tyburne, He is hanged
at Tyburne.
where his body remained two days as an opprobrious spectacle for all
beholders. Such were the tragical and bloody returns, those ambitious
supplanters of others, got by exchange of the times, which now, may seem, made
the world weary of such violences, and more wary to run into them. And the
King growing to years of more Ability to govern of himself, wrought a
greater respect of his service in those who were of power about him, seeing him
to be of a spirit likely to go through with his work, and therefore they use
their best advice to put him into courses that might be most honorable for him
and the Kingdom. The stains which his youth had received by such as governed
the same, are now discovered, and means devised how to take them of. And
withal, occasions fall out to put him into Action.

And first a new King of France lately crowned (upon the death of Charles le
Bell King Edward is summoned to do his homage to Phillip de Valois K. of France.
without issue Male) requires his homage according to the custom for the Duchy
of Guien and his other lands in France held of that Crown: whereunto though
King Edward was supposed to have the better right, yet seeing Phillip de Valois
was now in possession of the same, and himself then young, his own Kingdom
factious, turbulent and unsettled, he was not as yet otherwise then by Law
(which seldom gets a Crown) able to debate his title; and therefore is content
to temporise, and go over in person to perform this ceremony, which did much
prejudice his after claim, laid an imputation upon the justness of his
cause, having thereby acknowledged and made good the right of his Competitor.

The difference between them stood thus: Philip le Bell father to Isabell,
Mother The Title of K. Ed. to the Crown of France.
to King Edward, had three sons, Louys, Philip, and Charles which all were
successively Kings of France, and died without any issue male to inherit the
kingdom, and notwithstanding Louys the eldest son had a daughter, whom Eudes
Earl of Bologne her uncle by the mother labored to have crowned Queen, yet
for that it was adjudged contrary to the Salicque Law, which debarred women
from the succession, Phillip the younger brother of Louys is ad admitted to the
Crown. This Phillip likewise left four daughters, and yet does Charles his
brother succeed him by the force of the same law (which passed now as a case
adjudged) without any controversy. Charles dying leaves his wife young with
child: difference arises about the Regencie of that kingdom, between King
Edward of England the Nephew, and Phillip de Valois, Cosen-german to the last
King Charles. This Phillip was the first Prince of the blood, son to Charles
de Valois, brother to Phillip le Bell. And though King Edward was in degree
nearer then he, yet was the Regencie adjudged to Phillip (if the Queen
brought forth a son) as descending from a brother more capable of the Crown
then King Edward descending from a daughter that was incapable, as they
alleged.

The Queen at length delivered of a daughter the process is ended, and
Phillip received and crowned King of France, by their Salicque Law, maintained
to be vnviolable. Robert de Artois a Peer of great power, was a special
means of his pre. ferment, and the exclusion of King Edward, who shortly after
upon Sommons given 1331. An. Reg. 5.
(as is aforesaid) goes over and meets King Phillip at Amiens; where, by the
Councels of both Kings, two especial points are debated, the one concerning
the quallity of the Homage, pretended liege by the Council of King Phillip,
but denied by that of King Edward. The second point, for the lands in Guiene,
which the last King Charles had detayned as his, whereof the Council of King
Edward demanded restitution, as appertaining to that Duchy. The Composition for
this last point was easy, in regard of the treaty of Peace made between the
said King Charles and Edward the second, the last of May 1325. wherein their
rights were saved by protestations, reciprocal, advised and received in offer
and acceptance of Homage made to the said King Charles by this Edward before
he was King, which protestations were agreed to be followed and repeated in
this, with Covenant that if King Edward would pursue his right in Parliament, he
should have justice done him accordingly for those things in controversy. Now
for the first point concerning the quallity of his Homage, it was accorded
without specifying the same, that it should be done and received according to
the usual manner of former kings, with sufficient time granted to King Edward
to inquire of the said quallity, and to make his declaration thereof. And
thereuppon Iean Tilet.
the sixth of June 1329. King Edward in a Crimson velvet gown imbroydered with
K. Ed. does Homage to the French K.
Leopards, with his Crown on his head, his sword by his side, and golden
spurs on his heels, presents himself in the body of the Cathedral Church
at Amiens before King Phillip, sitting in his chair of estate in a velvet
gown of violet color, imbroydered with flowers de lis of gold, his Crown on
his head, and his Scepter in his hand with all his Princes and Peers about
him. The Viscount Melun Chamberlain of France, first commands King Edward to
put off his Crown, his sword, and his spurs and to kneel down, which he
did on a crimosine velvet cushion before King Phillip, and then the Viscount
putting both his hands together between the hands of the King of France,
pronounced the words of the Homage which were these: You become Liegeman to the
King my master here present as Duke The form of the Homage.
of Guyene and Peer of France, and you promise to bear says and loyalty unto
him. Say yea, and King Edward said, yea, and kisses the King of France ( as the
Lord of the Fee) in the mouth, the like Homage he then did for the Earl do me
of Ponthieu

This act of submission performed in the person of a King, young, active,
hauty, and powerful, who held himself wronged in doing it to whom he did,
bred that rancour in his heart, as it had been better for all Christendom
that Ceremony had been spared at this time, and not so punctually been
exacted by King Phillip; whom their own Historians blame for standing so much
upon his Regality, with one as mighty as himself, and more able and likely to
shake his new gotten Throne then any other whatsoever: to whose passion
considering the fiery heat of his youth, he should rather have ministered Oil
then Vinegar, and more hospitably intertertained him in his Court, coming with
that State and Magnificence, as he did, attended with the best of all the
kingdom of England to show what he was, and to beget a respect of his high
estate. But these are the errors of improuident Princes, who carried with the
sway of their own will, imbroyle themselves and their subjects, that ever
suffer the worst and are sure to pay dearly for others faults.

And now thus wounded in reputation, with a mind swollen for revenge, the King
K. Ed. returns out of France intertaines the Scottish business.
of England returns to settle his affairs at home, where Scottish businesses
fall out to intertaine him. The late peace concluded with them is held so
dishonorable, as it must not hold, and to break the same, followed an
occasion begun upon their own quarells. The tender age of their King (the
affliction of kingdoms) with the emulation and factions in great men, put
Edward Balliol son to John Balliol (sometime King of Scotland) thirty two
years after his fathers deposition, to attempt Ed. Balliol comes out of France
defeited his opposers and is crowned King of. Scotland.
the recovery of that Crown: and out of France, where he had all that while
remained, he comes by the solicitation of his friends into England, where he
was permitted underhand to get aid, and had all such Scots and English who
were of the faction against Bruce to take his part, and with them he suddenly
assailes those who had the government of that kingdom during the nonage of the
young King David (being at that time with the King of France) and overcame
them in a battle, with the slaughter of many Noble men, and Thousands of the
common people, and thereuppon was immediately crowned King of Scotland at
Scone. But his party being not so potent as they could maintain and defend his
quarrel against all those which opposed it, he was forced notwithstanding
this great defeit, to retire him into England to get more aid of King Edward;
who now shows himself in the action, Berwick recovered.
ioynes with Baliol against his brother in law king David, goes in person with
a strong Army to recover Berwicke, which after three months siege, being
valiantly defended The bataile of Halidown hill.
by the Lord Seton, was again taken in, and the Army of the Scots which came
to the rescue thereof at Halidowne hill utterly defeited: where were slain
seven Earls, 900 Knights and Baronets, four hundred Esquires, and about two
and thirty thousand common soldiers, as our writers report, theirs, fourteen
thousand. And with this effusion of blood is Baliol returned to his miserable
kingdom.

In this oppugnation of Berwicke, though my haste be great, I must not so much
A memorable act in the oppugnation of Berwicke.
trespass virtue as to ouerpasse one memorable particular, recorded by the
Scottish writers, which is, how the Lord Seton seeing all relief failing, and
the assaults so violent, as he could not long hold out, conditions with king
Edward, if rescue came not at such a day to render him up the town: and for
assurance delivers him two of his sons. Shortly after king Edward, having
notice of the Scottish Army approaching with greater power and speed then he
expected, and likely to be there before the day, sommons the Lord Seton to
render the town presently otherwise he should see his two sons executed
before his face, and withal a Gallows is made ready within sight of the
town, the young Gentlemen brought forth and under the hand of the Executioner;
wherewith the distressed Lord, rent between those powerful passions of Nature
and Honor, standing doubtful what to do, his wife the mother of those
sons, a Lady more then a woman, comes unto him, exhorts him to remember his
Fealty sworn to the King, his Charity to his Country, the dignity of his
noble Family, that they had other children left though these were destroyed,
and besides themselves were not so old, but that they might have more. How
those, if they should be preserved from death at this time might otherwise
shortly perish by some worse occasion: And what a stain he should lay on the
name of Seton, and their posterity for ever, by a base act of yielding and
betraying the place committed unto him: whereby also he was not certain
whether he should preserve his children or no: for how could he hope that this
King, who had violated his first promise with him, would perform the last. And
therefore besought him that he would not prefer an uncertain and momentany
benefit, before a certain and perpetual ignominy. And so recovering her
Lords resolution for holding out, withdrew him from the walls, into some other
parts aside, that he might not be Spectator of the execution of his innocent
children.

The next year after this defeit at Hallidown Hill, Edward Baliol King of
Seots at 1333. An. Reg. 7.
Newcastle does Homage to the King of England as his superior Lord, and takes
his oath of Fealty, Binding himself and his heirs to hold that Kingdom of
him and his successors for ever with the inheritance of five Countries next
adjoining to the Borders. So large a part yields he to forgo, rather then to
be in danger to loose the whole, which Edward Baliol does Homage for the
Kingdom of Scotl.
yet could not secure his estate, but rather imbroyled it the more, by reason
of the discontent which most part of the Nobles of Scotland conceived upon this
act of Alienation, and subjection of their Country. Insomuch as it gave both
Kings, continual occasion of trouble for a long time after, with the expense
of infinite treasure. A Parliament holden at London.
There was granted to the King of England for these wars a Fifteenth of the
Temporalty, a Twelfe of Cities and Boroughes, and a Tenth of the Clergy, in a
Parliament holden at London. And. 3 years together the King goes in person with
armies into those parts, and never returned without destruction and bloodshed
of that afflicted people: inso much as it may move us to admire, how it could
be possible that little corner of this Isle, being no more fertile, and withal
so often wasted could breed so many (had A remarkable confideration.
it bred nothing but men) as had been slain in battle within these fifty
years past, and yet still to be able to supply and furnish their fields with
such numbers as they did, both to maintain their own quarrels, defend their
liberties, and that poor ground they dwelt upon, which was not worth so much
blood as it cost them, deserving to have had a better piece of earth, and a
more perspicuous place in the world to have showed those acts of magnanimity
and courage, as they did.

The reason that moved King Edward with such violence to prosecute the
business of Scotland was out of a desire, so to settle the same, as he might
be wholly for the 1336. Anno. Reg. 10.
designs he had upon France, which chiefly he intended, and was the sooner
put thereinto by the instigation of Robert de Artois, who being chased from
thence by King Phillip his brother in Law, comes over into England, and is
here entertained with great honor.

This Robert a Prince of the blood of France descended from Robert son to
Louys the eighth, brother to S. Louys, had long contention with Maud his Aunt
Countess Robert de Artois discontented with the Fr. King.
of Burgogne about the Earldom of Artois; and presuming upon his own power,
his alliance with King Phillip who had married his sister, and the service he
had done in advancing him to the Crown, counterfeits a Deed thereby to
overthrow his Aunts right, which being afterward discovered, made it the more,
and moved the French King to give judgment on her side, so that the County of
Artois was by arrest of Parliament, confirmed upon Maud, which so offended
Robert, as in his rage, he openly said, He would unmake the King by the same
power he made him: Which rash menace uttered before many witnesses so stung
the French King, as presently he lays to apprehend him, but failing therein,
causes him to be proclaimed Traitor, confiscates Iean Tillet.
all his estate, forbids his subjects whosoever, either without or within the
Kingdom, which held of that Crown, in any sort to receive him, comfort,
counsel or aid him, upon pain of confiscation of body and goods: and withal
charges them by any means to seize upon his person, and to send him prisoner
unto him. Whereupon this chased Prince finding no place on that side safe for
him, over he Robert de Artois comes into Engl.
comes into England, is joyfully entertained by King Edward, made of his
Council, invested in the Earldom of Richmond, and here is he the
Kindle-fire between these two mighty Nations, and began such a flame, as lasted
above an hundred years after, and the smoke thereof much longer. First he
discovers to King Edward the secrets of their Councels in France, and what
means had been used for the advarcement of King Phillip, whose title he now
disapproues, and prefers that of King Edward, as more just: and a declaration
is published and sent to the Pope and all the Vid. Apend.
Neighbor Prince showing the usurpation of Phillip de Valois upon that Crown.

Now had King Edward ever since his return from Amiens prepared to make good
his party to oppose the French King, and by the assistance of his Father in law
William Earl of Haynault, combined with the Dukes of Brabant, and Geldres, the
Earl of Iuliers, the Archbishop of Cologne, Valeran his brother, John of
Haynault, and other Princes of Germany. And besides, had of late obtained by
great gifts of Louys de Bavier, the present Emperor, to be Vicar General of
the Empire, whereby he was V. Ed. made Vicar general of the Empire.
to have all those Princes confiners upon France, who held of the same, to do
him service. And this grace the Emperor did him, the rather for that he had
stood for him against his competitor Frederick of Austrich, with whom the
French king took part; and besides he had married King Edwards wives sister,
which might be a motive to procure him this honor. Then seeks he to gain and
draw in the Flemmings whose Earl though adhering to the French King as his
Vassal; yet the Cities which ever entertained a kinke of liberty among
themselves, were easily won to take part with King Edward, in regard their
wealth chiefly grew by the wools of this Kingdom, which by a Parliament holden
at London, Anno Reg. 9. were prohibited to be The making of cloth introduced
in this kingdom.
transported unwrought, That Clothes should be made here, and habitation with
all Privileges and Liberties allowed to such Artifieers as would come from
other parts to inhabit. Besides it was enacted, That none should wear other
then English Cloth, except the King, Queen and their Children, that no man
should wear any facing of silks or furs, but such The first sumptuary Law
we find in our History.
as could dispend 100 pounds, per annum. But those ordinances (more beneficial
to this Kingdom then these wars will be) were upon this new entertained
correspondence with the people of Flanders, soon after neglected; but yet the
making of cloth K. Ed. winnes Jacques d' Artiuile
continued, and many come out of Flanders to exercise that trade in England.

Now there was among the Flemmings one Jacques de Artevile, Citizen of Gaunt, a
Brewer as some say (but of more then Beer) a man of greatest estimation
amongst the people, and was as their Tribune or Chiefetaine in their tumults,
him King Edward gets by great rewards to take his part, and thereby had them
all ready to assail the French King upon any occasion.

Having thus prepared his party abroad, all means are devised to raise monyes
at Means used for money.
home to supply this business. The Tenth penny of Towns and Boroughes, a
Fifteenth of others, and a Tenth of the Clergy is granted in a Parliament at
Northampton. All such treasure as was Vid. Apend.
committed to Churches throughout England for the holy war is taken cut for
the Kings use in this. The next year after, all the goods of three orders of
Monks, Lombards, Cluntacques and Cistercences are likewise seized into the
Kings hands: and the like Subsidy as before, granted at Nottingham. Honors
are likewise bestowed on many Noblemen to encourage Reg. 12. Anno. 1338.
them in this intended action. Henry of Lancaster the younger, is created Earl
of Derby, William Mountacute Earl of Salisburie, Hugh Audeley Earl of
Gloucester, William Clinton Earl of Huntington, William Bohun Earl of
Northampton, Robert Vfford Earl of Suffolk: Prince Edward was likewise at
this time created Earl of Chester, and Duke of Cornwall. In anno Reg. 12. at
a Parliament at Northampton (as some write in the absence of the King) was
granted by the Laytie, one half of their Wools, but of the Clergy A Subsedie
of Woll.
was levied the whole, and they were caused to pay Nine Marks for every sack
of fine Wool. The next year after a Fifteenth was likewise paid in Wool by
the Comunaltie. And K. Ed. goes into Fland. with his wife and children.
now for the better managing of his work abroad (having well accommodated the
Scottish affairs) he goes over into Flanders, takes with him his Queen and
children, lies at Antwerp, where, by persuasion of the Flemings he took upon
him the Style, Title, and Arms of the King of France, whereby they held they
might the better justify their partaking in his quarrel, and dispense with
their oath formerly made to the French King, having besides bound themselves in
20 hundred thousand crowns never to bear Arms against the King of France,
and thereupon the league was established between them and King Edward. The
French King was not behind in his The French Kings partakers.
preparations and confederacies, having to take his part the King of Bohemia,
the Count Palatine of Rhene (who covenanted to serve him against K. Edward and
his adherents, with 300 horse for 56000 Florins) The Bishop of Mets, Albert and
Otho Dukes of Austrich, Theodore Marquess of Monferat, Ame Earl of Geneva,
besides many Princes of Estate, and diverse great Captains out of Germany,
French-County, Sauoy, Dauphine, Spain and other Countries. So that all the
best of the Christian World, are Means to appease these two Kings.
either in Arms, or aiding in this quarrel, between these two mighty Kings.
Long were they preparing and making a noise before they came to grapple; and
much was wrought by the Pope, and the King of Sicile, a great Astrologer (who
devined by skill he had in the Stars of much future calamity to France) to
have accorded them, which would not be.

The Preface of this war began on the Borders of each others State: On this
side King Edward sets upon Cambray defended by the French. Phillip on the
other, seises on The French King seises on Duchy of Guyen.
the Duchy of Guyen, and thither sends Conte d Eu Constable of France with the
Earls of Foix and Arminiacg, who surprise many strong pieces thereof: Besides
he has a great Navy at Sea which committed much spoil on the coast of
England. King Edward King Edward enters into France.
enters France by the way of Vermandois and Thierache, approaches near to King
Phillip: Both Armies were lodged between Vironfosse and La Flamenguere, the day
of the fight appointed upon the Friday after, the Battles on both sides made
ready, the advantage of number was on the French; But both Armies furnished
with brave men of war, and circumspect, depart without encounter: The French
esteeming it no discretion to put the person, and state of their King to the
hazard of Battle within his own Kingdom: And the English consisting of less
number, thought fit not to assail them: and so they passed the day in
Countenances, and nothing was done. Only this accident fell out, which after
gave matter of sport: A Hare starting before the head of the French Army, a
great shot was suddenly made, which they who were behind Froissart.
supposing to have been upon the onset of Battle, disposed themselves to
fight: some Knights of the Hare.
Esquires for their more encouragement, are according to the custom presently
Knighted, who were ever after called Knights of the Hare.

The next morning early both Kings dislodge, the French retires to Paris, the
King of England into Brabant, where after he had strongly fastened his
confederated, and disposed of his affairs, he leaves the Queen and returns
into England about Candlemasse, 1330. An. Reg. 14.
having been in Brabant above a year, lands at the Tower about Midnight (and
finding it unguarded was much displeased) sends for the Mayor of London, whom
he commanded to bring before him the Chancellor and Treasurer, with John S.
Paul Michael Wath, Phillip Thorp, Hen. Stratford Clergy men (who it seems
were officers for his receipts) and John Sconer Justice of the Bench, all
which, except the Chancellor were arrested and committed to prison, as were
afterward in like manner diverse officers of Justice and Accomptants upon
inquiry made of their unjust proceeding. A Parliament at London. Great Subsides
granted. Custom, at first but temporary.


Then calls he a Parliament at London in Lent which granted unto him for custom
of every Sack of Wool, Forty shillings, for every 300 Wooll-fells, Forty
shillings, for every Last of Leather, Forty shillings: and of other
Merchandises according to that rate, the same to endure from that Easter to the
Whitsontide Twelue-month after. Besides, there was granted of Citizens and
Burgesses, a Nynth part of Goods, of Foreign Merchants and other a Fifteenth,
of Husbandmen, the Ninth Sheaffe, the Ninth Fleece, the Ninth Lamb for two
years. Also another Tenth of the Clergy. And for his present supply, he has
Loanes of diverse wealthy persons, and the City of London let 20 thousand
Marks. For the grant of which mighty Subsidy, the King (besides his Pardon to
drivers kinds of offenders Pardons and Remission of ancient Debts.
) remits all Amercements for transgression in his Forests, Reliefes, and
scutage unto the first time of his going into Flanders: Besides all Aids for
the marriages of his Sons and Daughters during his reign: pardoning and
remitting all ancient debts and arrerages both Retribution.
of his Fermors and others any way due, in the time of his Progenitors, and his
own, till the tenth year of his reign (excepting such as were compounded
for, and determined to be paid into his Exchequer) and here he likewise
confirms the great Charter.

During King Edwards aboade in England, William Montague Earl of Salisbury,
and Robert Vfford Earl of Suffolk, left in Flanders to oppose the proceeding
of the French, having persormed diverse great exploits with happy success, and
presuming overmuch The Earls of Salisbury and Suffolk taken prisonerg in
France.
upon their fortune, were in an encounter about Lisle, so overlaide by
multitude, as they were both taken and sent prisoner to Paris, to the great joy
of the French King: who now to impeach the King of Englands return, had
prepared a mighty Navy in the Haven of Sluice, consisting of 200 Sail of Ships
(besides many Galies) and two thousand armed men in the Port, ready to
encounter him upon his landing: Whereof King Edward being advertised, provides
great strength, with the like number of Ships, and sets out to Sea upon
Midsomer Eve, is met the morrow after with a Navy likewise from the North
parts, conducted by Sir Robert Morley, and in counters his enemy which lay to
intercept him, with such force and courage, and advantage of wind and Sun, as
he utterly defeited their whole Navy, took or suncke all their Ships, King
Edward vanquishes the French Kings great Navy.
slew 30 thousand men, and landed with as great glory, as such a victory (the
greatest that ever before was gotten by the English at Sea) could yield. Most
of the French, rather then to endure the Arrows, and sharp swords of the
English, or be taken, desperately leap into the Sea. Whereupon the French
Kings Iester, set on to give him notice of this overthrow (which being so ill
news, none else willingly would impart on the sudden) said, and oftentimes
re-iterated the same, Cowardly Englishmen, Iean Tillet.
Dasterdly Englishmen, Faint-hearted Englishmen. The King at length asked him
Why: For that said he, They durst not leap out of their ships into the Sea, as
our brave Frenchmen did, By which speech the King apprehended a notion of this
overthrow: which the French attribute to Nicholas Buchet one of their chief
Commanders, who had armed his Ships with men of base condition (content with
small pay) and refused Gentlemen, and sufficient Souldeirs, in regard they
required greater wages: and it osten happens that the Avarice of Commanders
have been the occasion of great defeits.

But this loss much abated the power of the French King, who notwithstanding
in these Martial times was soon supplied, both out of his own Dominions, and
those of his Confederates, and makes a mighty head against this victorious,
powerful and freshly furnished King of England; who suddenly sets down
before Tourney, with King Edward and sends hic Challenge to the French King.
all his own and his adherents forces. And from Chyn (a place neere-by where
he lodged) sends his Cartell the 17 of July, to Phillip de Valois, lodging at
S. Andrew les Air with his puissant army. Declaring how he with the power of
his own Kingdom, and aid of the Flemmings, was come to recever his right in
the Kingdom of France uniustly detained from him, contrary to the Laws of God
and Man: and that seeing no other means would serve, he was forced in this
manner to have recourse to his sword. Notwithstanding seeing the business was
between them two, he offers for the avoiding of Christian blood, and
devastation of the Country, to try the same by combat in close Camp, body to
body, or each of them accompaned with 100 choice persons: which if the said
Phillip refused, then to strike battle within ten days after, before the
City of Tourney.

Phillip de Valois returns answer the last of July in this manner, Phillip by
the grace of God King of France, to Edward King of England: We have perused
your letters sent to the The French Kings answer to the Challenge.
Court of Phillip de Valois, containing certain requests to the said Phillip:
and for that it appears: hose letters and requests were not written or made
unto us, we will in no sort answer you. But seeing by those letters, and
otherwise we understand how you, led by Wilfulness, without all reason, have
entered our Kingdom of France with armed power, and committed no small damage
in the same, and on our people, contrary to the duty of a Liegeman: having
lalely sworn homage unto us, acknowledging us, as by right King of France, and
have promised that obedience which is due from the Vassal to his Liege-Lord,
as is manifest by your letters Patents under your great Seal, which we have
with us, and you likewise ought to have the same with you. And therefore our
intention is as becomes our Honor, to chase you out of our Kingdom, as we
firmly hope in Christ (from whom we have our power) to do. For that by this
your war, most wickedly begun, our Journey undertaken for the East is
hindered, no small number of Christians there murdered, the holy service
neglected, and the Church dishonored. And whereas you allege you possess the
aid of the Flemmings, we are assuredly persuaded, that they with the
Communalty of their Country, will so bear themselves toward our Cosen their
Earie and us their superior Lords, as they will not omit to observe their
honor and fidelity, whatsoever has been by some, through ill counsel
perpetrated for their own private, contrary to the common good.

The French write how King Phillip with this Letter sent word to King Edward,
how by his Cartell he adventured nothing of his own, but only exposed the
dominion of another, which was without all reason. If he would hazard the
kingdom of England (though it were less) against the kingdom of France, the
said King Phillip would enter combat in close camp with him, on condition the
Victor should enjoy both kingdoms. But that, they say, King Edward would not
do.

Three months the siege of Turney had continued (and nothing effected but the
waste of the Country about) all the eyes of Christendom bent upon this
action, both kingdoms, deeply engaged, expecting with anxiety the doubtful
event thereof, when Jane de Valois sister to Phillip, widow of William late
Duke of Haynault, and mother A mediation for peace.
to Phillippa wife to King Edward, a Princess of excellent virtue, came from
Fountenelles where she had rendered herself a Nun vowed to God, to mediate a
peace between these two intaged Kings, her brother and her son in law: and
labors to stay the sword of destruction lift up for blood, trualying from one
to the other (stubbornly bent to their intentions) and never left them (though
often denied) till she had with great patience, and wise counsel quallified
their boiling passions, in such sort as she obtained day and place for both
Kings to parle together. A memorable work to be effected by a woman,
especially in such an age of Iron as that was. This parle brought forth a truce
for one year, and both these great Armies A Truce concluded.
are dissolved. The French King returns home, and so does the King of England
with his Queen: who had remained in those parts three years, and had there
Anno Reg. 15.
brought forth two sons, Lionell, afterward Duke of Clarence, and John borne
at Gant, who first was Earl of Richmond, and after Duke of Lancaster.

But King Edwards condiscending to this sudden truce, had indeed no other
motive the^ the want of his supplies of treasure, which came short to his
expectation, notwithstanding those mighty impositions which were laid on his
subjects. And whereas he had upon his last return into England, in great
displeasure, removed his Chancellor, and imprisoned his Treasorer, with other
Officers (most of them Cleargymen) and still held them in durance, John
Stratford Archbishop of Canterbury, (on John Strarford Archbishop of
Canterbury his Letters to King Edward.
whom the King laid the blame of his wants) writes him a most bold and
peremptory Letter to this effect: first showing him how it was for the safety
of kings and their Kingdoms, to use grave and wise Counsailors, alleging many
examples out of holy Writ of the flourishing happiness of such as took that
course, and their infelicity who followed the contrary. Then wills him to
remember how his father led by evil counsel vexed the kingdom, putting to
death, contrary to the law of the Land, diverse of the Nobility, and wished
him to consider what happened thereby unto him. Also to call to mind, how
himself at first, through evil counsel about him, had almost lost the hearts
of his people. But afterward, by the great circumspection and care of his
Prelates and Nobles, his affairs were reduced into so good order as he
recovered them, and now possessed them in such sort, as they all, both Clergy
and Lay, have yielded their helping hands, more to him then to any of his
Progenitors, whereby he had gloriously triumphed over his enemies, the French
and Scots, and is reputed the noblest Prince of Christendom. But now at this
present, through the wicked counsel of such as affect their own profit more
then his honor, or the welfare of his people, he had caused Clergy men and
others to be arrested, and held in prison by undue proceeding, contrary to the
laws of England (which he was bound by his oath at his Coronation to observe)
and against Magna Charta, which whosoever shall presume to infringe, are to be
by the Prelates (according to the Bull of Pope Innocent the fourth)
Excommunicate. So that hereby he incurred no small danger to his soul, and
detriment to his State and honor. Then he tells him, how he doubted that
if the King proceeded in this manner, he should lose both the hearts of his
people and their help, in such sort as he should not be able to prosecute his
war in hand, and thereby give his enemies heart and occasion to rise against
him, to the hazard of his honor and the kingdom. And therefore aduises him to
assemble the Nobles and prudent men of the Land, and to consult with them
(without whose aid and counsel he could not govern his kingdom, or
perform his enterprises) concerning what was a miss. And whereas, said he,
certain near about you by their adulation and soothing, falsely betray and
deceive you, we here denounce them Excommunicate, and beseech you as your
spiritual Father, that you hold them so. Besides, he vrges him, that whereas
through the negligence of some Ministers of his, the City of Turney was not
gotten, the matter might be examined in Parliament, and inquiry made, to whose
hands, from the beginning of the war, the Wooles and Moneys were committed to
be bestowed, and by whose default the City of Turney was not subdued, but
left in such manner as it was: and that as an equal and wise Lord he would
chastise such as were culpable, and not condemn or misdeeme his subjects
without sufficient trial, etc. This Letter bare date the 1. of January.

Then writes he also to Robert Bouser Chancellor of England, showing him what
contributions the Clergy had yielded to the King by their free consents, and
that none other were to be exacted of them. Requiring him to do nothing
prejudicial to the Law of Magna Charta; and that if any Writ, Commission, or
Precept had gone out of the Chancerie contrary thereunto, or the privileges
and liberties of the Church or Kingdom, he should within ten days after the
receipt of these his Letters (as he said the Chancellor was bound to do)
revoke and anull the same. This bare date the 28. of January.

Another Letter he likewise sends to the King and his whole Council,
declaring that whereas contrary to the privileges and liberties of the Church
and Kingdom contained in Magna Chatta, John de Saint Paul, Michael de Wath,
Robert Chickwill, John Thorpe, and Henry Stratford, were arrested, committed to
prison, and there detayned without being indicted, or convicted of any notorious
crime, and that whosoever were ayding or councelling to this proseeding had
incurred the sentence of the Canon, which he had caused to be published both in
his own Dioces, and in all other of his suffragans. And therefore besought the
King and his whole Council, without delay to deliver the said prisoners,
otherwise (he Quatenus de iure poterunt excusari.
plainly writes) that according to his Pastrall charge, he must proceed to
the execution of the sentence. Concluding how notwithstanding it was not his
intention to include therein the King, Queen, or their children, so far as
they might by law be excused.

To this purpose he likewise sends to the Bishop of London and other his
Suffragan Bishops, whom after having complained of the great exactions and
wrongs done to the Church by lay men) he charged him not only to denounce and
publish in their Church, but fix up in all eminent places the sentence of
Excommunication, against all offenders in those articles of Magna Charta: which
are at large added to his Vid. Append.
Letter, to the end (as he said) that every man might know the danger, and none
pretend to be ignorant thereof.

The King wakened with this clamor of the Archbishop, is feign to apologize
for himself, by his Letters written to the Bishop of London, wherein, after
having declared King Edward accuses the Archbishop of false dealing.
how much he had ever honored and trusted the Archbishop, he accuses him of
manifest wrong, for that relying upon his counsel, he was put at first upon
this action against the French King, and by him assured he should not want
treasure and means for the performance thereof, and that he needed not to
care but only to provide men to execute the work. And how notwithstanding,
through the negligence or malice of the said Archbishop and his Officialls,
those provisions granted him by his subjects in Parliament, were in so slender
proportion levied, and with such delays sent over, as he was pressed of
necessity (to his great grief and shame) to condescend to the late Truce, and
through extreme wants (charged with mighty debts) forced to throw himself
into the gulf of the usurers; in such sort, as having just cause, he began to
lookeinto the dealings of his Officers: some of whom upon apparent notice of
their ill administration of Justice, their corruptions and oppression of his
subjects, he removed from their places, and some of inferior degree culpable
of the same offenses, he committed to prison, and there detained them, to the
end he might find out by their examinations, the truth of their proceedings,
whereof none could so well inform him as the Archbishop, to whom of long time,
he had committed the whole administration of the kingdom. And therefore
desirous to confer with him at London, he had of late sent an especial
messenger, his trusty servant Nicholas de Cantelupe, that he should repair
thither: which the Archbishop refuse to do, alleging how he stood in fear
of some about the King, and therefore would not endanger himself, nor depart
from his Church. Then the King sent Ralph Scafford, the Steward of his house,
with safe conduct under his great Seal for the Archbishops security.
Notwithstanding he refused to come, returning word how he would have no
conference with the King but in open Parliament: which at that time (said the
King) was not for especial reasons convenient to be called. Then aggrauates
he the undutiful contempt of the Archbishop and his hypocritical dealing
with him: avowing that although by hereditary right, and the divine grace he
was advanced to that sublimitie of regal power, he held it always to have
been a detestable thing to abuse the greatness thereof, and how he affected
nothing more in the world, then to govern his subjects with mildness,
clemency, and moderation of Justice; that he might with peace enjoy their
love. And how notwithstanding the Archbishop had most injuriously (by his
Letters published in diverse parts) torn his innocence, and slandered the
faithful service of his Counsailors and Officers, who executed his regal
Justice, exclayming how the people were oppressed, the Clergy confounded, the
kingdom agrieued with taxations and all kind of exactions. Which the King
argues was to no other end, but to raise sedition amongst his people, and to
withdraw their love and obedience from him. Lastly, to give notice of the
Archbishoppes corruption, he declares how, himself being under age, had
through his counsel made so many prodigal donations, prohibited alienations,
and excessive gifts, as thereby h^s treasury was utterly exhausted, and his
revenues diminished, and how the Archbishop corrupted with bribes, remitted
without reasonable cause, great sums which were due unto him, applying to his
proper use, or to persons ill-deseruing many commodities, and revenues which
should have been preserved for his necessary provisions. And therefore
concluded, unless he desisted from this his rebellious obstinacy, he
intended in due time and place more openly to proceed against him: inioying
them to publish all and singular these his malignities, and to cause others to
do the like, for the manifestation of his own pious and Princely intention,
in relieuing his own and his subjects wrongs. This Letter was said to have
been penned by Adam Bishop of Winchester, and bare date the 12. of February,
An. Reg. 15.

Thus the King and his Officers, whose proceedings must not receive a check,
are cleared, and the imputation rests upon the Archbishop, who is charged with
great accou^ts, and pressed by such as lent the King money, to render the same.
But shortly after the King found much to do in the Parliament held at London,
being earnestly petitioned by the whole Assembly of the three Estates, that the
great Charter of Liberties, and the Charter of Forests might be duly observed,
and that whosoever of the Kings Officers infringed the same should lose their
place: that the high Officers of the kingdom, should as in former times, be
elected by Parliament. The King stood stiff upon his own election and
prerogative, but yet yielded, (in regard to have his present Vid. Stat. 15.
Edward. 3.
turn served, as himself after confessed) these Officers should receive an
oath in Parliament, to do justice unto all men in their offices, and thereupon
a Statute was made and confirmed with the Kings Seal; both for that, and many
other grants of his to the subjects, which notwithstanding were for the most
part presently after revoked.

The truce agreed on before Turney for one year, was by the Commissioners of
both The Articles Vid. Appen.
Kings, and two Cardinals from the Pope, concluded at Arras, which yielded
some cessation of Arms, but not of plotting more mischief. Louys of Bauier
(entitled Emperor) is won to the party of the French King, becomes his
sworn confederate, The Emperor reuokes the Vicariate, the reason why. Vid.
Append.
and reuokes the Vicarshippe ofthe Empire, formerly confirmed on the K. of
England, pretending the cause to be for concluding the late truce without him,
as appears by his Letters to King Edward, which are again by him fully and
discreetly answered.

But in steed of this remote and unconstant confederate (whose power lay
without the limits of France) Fortune brought in another more near, and of
readier The controversy for the Duchy of Britain.
means to offend, within the body of that kingdom. The inheritance of the
Duchy of Britain is in controversy between Charles de Blois, Nephew to King
Phillip, and John de Monfort, upon this title: Arthur Duke of Britain had by
Beatrix his first wife, two sons, John and Guy, by Yoland Countess of
Monfort his second wife John de Monfort. John the eldest son of Arthur having
no issue, ordained Jane his Niece, daughter to his brother Guy (who died before
him) to succeed him in the Duchy. This Jane, Charles de Blois marries on
condition his issue by her should inherit the same, wherein after consummation
of the Marriage he is invested, and had homage done unto him during the life
of John their Uncle. But after his death, John de Monfort does homage for the
Duke of Britain to King Edward.
Monfort claymes the Duchy, comes to Paris to do homage for the same to the
French King. Charles de Blois in the right of his wife, opposes him, the
controversy is referred to the Parliament. Sentence passes on the side of
Charles. Monfort enraged repaires to the King of England, does his homage unto
him for the Duchy, is received with great applause, and his title (howsoever
held bad at home) is here made to be good. Returning back into Britain both
with comfort and means, after some encou^ters Monfort taken prisoner His wife
prosecutes her husbands quarrel.
with his enemy, he is taken and committed prisoner to the Louure in Paris:
His wife the Countess of Monfort sister to Louys Earl of Flanders (a Lady who
seemed to have more of the man then her brother) prosecutes her husbands
quarrel, puts on Armor, leads and incourages her people, surprises, and
defends many strong pieces of Britain: but in the end, like to be ouerlaide
by the power of Charles de Blois, she craves aid of the King of England, and
has it sent, under the conduct of the Lord Walter de Manny, which relieved her
for the present, but the future required more: whereof King Edward was not
sparing, in regard of his own designs, for aids are seldom sent to
forrainers but for the Senders benefit. The Lady her self comes over into
England to treat both for supplies and alliance, tendering a match between her
son and a daughter of King Edward. The Earls Salisbury, Pembrooke, and
Suffolk, Forces sent over into Britain.
the Lords Stafford, Spencer, and Bourchier, with Robert de Artois Earl of
Richmond, are sent with great forces back with the Lady. Many were the
incounters, surprises, and recouerings of Fortes between the English and the
French; and in this action The death of Robert de Artois.
Robert de Artois received his last wound, at the siege of Vannes, but yet was
brought to die in England, it being not in his Fate, that his country (which
by his means had suffered so much affliction) should have his bones, though it
had his blood, which he lost with little honor, though with much valor,
leaving behind him but the fame of a Rebel, after he had served the English
about six years.

King Edward shortly after these supplies sent into Britain, goes himself in
person with more, and lying before Vannes (lately recovered by the French) John
Duke of Normandy eldest son to the French King, sent to aid Charles de
Bloys, with an Army of forty thousand, came to give him battle, and being
upon the point of encounter, a mediation of truce is made by two Cardinals,
sent from Pope Clement the fixed, and concluded for three years, upon many
conditions, with a reference to the Pope, and the Court of Rome, to hear and
examine the differences betwixt the two kingdoms, but not to determine them
without the consent of both Kings. This pause again gives them more time to
work for greater wounds, and nothing is left unpracticed that might advance
the same. And though the people now seemed to put off their Armor, they left
not off arms, but had diverse bickrings, both in Britain and Gascony, for
which either side accused other.

King Edward returning, makes an expeditio^ into Scotland against K. David,
whom he chased into the Islands: And here the Isle of Man is conquered by
William Montacut Earl of Salisbury, whom king Edward caused to be styled King
thereof, and returning back, solemn Turneaments are held at Dunstable, where
he is attended with 230. Knights. For now all the pastime, and exercise in
England were Iustes and Turneaments held in Smithfield, Winsor, and other
places. A society of Knights of the Round table, in imitation of King Arthur,
is designed, and a magnificent Chamber of 200. foot round, erected for the same
at Winsor, and to this society many strangers of other Countries are allured.
The French K. also practices the like martial association in France. Reg. 17
An. 1343.


And about this time began the order of the Garter, instituted at Winsor upon a
solemn feast there celebrated (which held for many days) and served that time
as an The institutio of the Order of the Garter.
Emblem of a tie and combinement in honor of such as were admitted thereunto,
which was the end of the constitution thereof: Howsoever the Garter of the
Countess of Salisbury, taken up by the King in dancing with her, was said to
have been the occasion. But it were some derogation to that noble institution,
to impute the original thereof to an act of Leuitie, seeing with what a grave
and religious ceremony it is performed. Although, we see oftentimes, accidents
of little consequence give beginnings to things of great estimation, which time
makes venerable.

But besides these exercises of Arms, this great and provident King, during
this truce, takes especial care for the Government of the Kingdom, and
reformation of the abuses thereof, which daily grow as diseases in full bodies,
and must of necessity have sometimes their cure, otherwise there will be no
health in a State. A Parliament is called at Westminster, wherein upon the
grieuons complaint exhibited by the Earls, The Nobility write to the Pope
concerning his collation of Benifices in England.
Barons, Knights and Burgesses against the collation of Benifices on strangers,
a letter was sent to Pope Clement 6. in humble manner beseeching him to
consider how inconvenient, and derogatory it was to the state of the Kingdom
of England, that such reseruations, provisions, and collations, of Benifices as
had been formerly used, should in such sort be continued. For that the
Churches of England had in times past been endowed, by noble and worthy
persons: to the end the people might be instructed by such as were of their
own language: and how by the usurpation of some of his Predicessors,
strangers, and sometimes enemies to the Realm, were preferred to many of them,
whereby the money and profits were transported, the Cures unfurnished, alms
and Hospitality unused, the edifices ruinated, the charity and devotion of the
people deminished, and many other grievous inormities, contrary to the will of
the Founders, occasioned: which they could not suffer any longer, and therefore
besought his Holiness wholly to revoke such reseruations, provisions and
collations, that meet and native persons might exercise those Cures, and
without delay to signify his intention therein, otherwise they meant to employ
their diligence, that remedy and redress might be had according to reason.
The date of these Letters was in full Parliament at Westminister the 28. of May
1343, with which were like wise sent the Kings letters to the same effect, by
Sir John Shordich, a grave person and of great understanding in the Law; whose
message made Sir John Shordich sent with these Letters.
him so unwelcome to that Court, as he departed without leave, or answer,
which though the Pope afterward sent: yet the King proceeded to the prohibition
of all such provisions and collations within his Realm, on pain of
imprisonment, or death to whom soever should in time to come present or admit
any such person or persons, who by the Pope were so preferred to the prejudice
of the Kings royal prerogative. And to this effect were Writs directed to all
Archbishops, Bishops, and others to whom it appertained, inhibiting them in no
wise to attempt any thing preiudial to this ordinance.

Here is the Archbishop Stratford with much ado upon his submission
reconciled The Archbishop of Canterbury reconciled.
to the Kings favor. And much debating there is in this Parliament concerning
Wools and the asseasement of certain prices upon the same, more or less,
according to the several parts of the Realm: and concerning customs to be
imposed on them, as at three Marks and a half upon the transportation of
every sack; but it seems nothing was done in this business.

Ptince Edward about the age of 13 is created Prince of Wales, and
Commissioners Prince Edward created Prince of Wales.
are appointed to be sent to the Pope to treat of Peace between the two
Kings, according to the Articles concluded in the truce, which were John Bishop
of Excester, Henry de Lancaster Earl of Derby, Hughle Dispensier Lord of
Glamorgan, Cousins to the King, Rauph Lord Stafford with others.

The next year after, another Parliament, or the same proroged, is held at
London, Reg. 18. An. 1344.
wherein after much altercation, a tenth was granted by the Clergy, and a
fifteenth by the Laytie for one yeate, and a certain Coin of gold called the
Floren of base alloy, which had been for the wars in France, is decryed,
and Nobles of finer coined, to A Parliament.
the great liking of the subjects. And for their better commodity the exchange
of moneys at London, Canterbury and York is ordained. Shortly after general
Musters are taken throughout the Kingdom, and Certificate made of all
sufficient and able Bowmen, General musters and appointing of Armor.
and of all others fit to bear Arms. Besides, a Commission is sent into every
country to inquire of men's abilities, and all of five pounds to teu of lay
Fee, were appointed to find an Archer on horseback, of 25 pounds, a
Demilance, and so ratably above. The King himself goes in person to confirm
and make the Flemings fast unto him: and at Sluice, Jacques van Arteuile with
other Commissioners from their chief Towns, repair unto him, where a motion
is made, that either Louys their Earl should do homage to the King of England,
or else be disinherited, and Edward Prince of Wales received for their Lord:
for which King Edward promises to erect their County to a Dukedom. Arteuile
was forward to entertain this motion: but the rest of the Commissioners
require leave to acquaint therewith the Towns that sent them, which though
they were all desirous to have the Protection of the King of England, yet
disliked the disinheriting of their natural Lord. Arteuile notwithstanding
undertakes to induce them unto it, and returns to Gant, guarded with five
hundredth Welsh, which he desired to have, for that one Gerrard Denyse Provost
of the Weauers opposed him, and sought his destruction. The people whom he had
so often led to muteny against others, now upon his return rose against
himself, and a Cobbler with an Axe struck out his brains. And so King Edward
lost his great Agent, which much displeased him, and disappointed his business
in those parts. Yet the Towns sent to excuse themselves of this accident,
laying the fault on the turbulent Gantoys, and in all things vowing their
faithful service unto him: only to the disinheriting of their Earl they
could not consent. But they hoped to persuade him to become his homager, and to
procure a match between the son of their Earl, and his daughter. And thus
pacifying his present displeasure, the league is renewed betwixt them, and King
Edward returns to prosecute his other designs.

But now the wars in Guien grew hot, the Earl of Darby General of the Army,
assaults and takes in Ville-Franche, Agenois, Angolesme, Rions, Saint Basile,
with many other Cities and Castles. The French King sends his eldest son John
Duke of Normandy to encounter him; who recouers the Cities of Angolesme, and
Ville-Franche, and thus is the sword out before the Truce is expired, the
breach whereof, the French King lays on the King of England, and he the same
on him, for entertayning King David, and setting the Scots upon attempts of
invasion of his Realm. So that it seems both were prepared to break, not
able to hold their hands any longer from the fatal work of destruction.

It was now the twentieth year of this mighty and active Kings reign, wherein
Reg. 20. Anno. 1346.
he had prepared the greatest Fleet that ever yet crossed the Seas for France,
and over he passes into Normandy in July, leaving for Wardens of England in
his absence, the Lords Percy, and Neuile, taking the young Prince with him,
about the age of fifteen years, to learn him the way of men, and what
travel greatness was borne The king goes with a mighty Army into Normandy.
to endure, to attain glory in this world. His Army consisted of four
thousand men at Arms, and ten thousand Archers, besides Welsh and Irish, which
followed on foot; he had of Earls, Hereford, Northampton, Arundell,
Huntingdon, Warwick, Suffolk, and Oxford: of Barons, Mortimer, (who was
after Earl of March) John, Louys, and Roger Beauchamp, Cobham, Lucy, Basset,
Barkeley, and Willoughbie, with diverse other, both Knights and gallant
Captains. He had of late entertained Godfrey de Harcourt, who had been as a
minion to the French King, and became another Robert de Artois, upon some
discontent, or doubt of some discoueries of favoring the English party in
Britain, for which cause the French King had a little before executed Oliver
de Clisson, Bacon, Percy, Geffrey de Malestroit, men of especial mark, whom
he had there employed. And now instead of this Harecourt had won from King
Edward the Lord John de Beaumont, who had long served him, was his wives Uncle,
and acquainted John de Beaumont when King Edward had made him Earl of
Cambridge, takes the French Kings part.
with all his courses. Such is the trust of mercinaries, who sell their faith
for better entertainment. Neither did this Harecourt long hold out, but
changed colors, and made his peace with the French King his natural Lord: but
in the mean time did him and his country much mischief. For upon King
Edwards landing with his mighty Army, in the Isle of Costantine in Normandy by
his conduction, he made him one of his Marshals, and the Earl of Warwick the
other. The Earl of Arundell is appointed Constable. He diuides his people into
three battles, one to march on his left hand, along the Sea coast; the other
on the right, conducted by the two Marshals, and himself in the midst with his
main Army. The Earl of Huntingdon employed for Admiral of his Fleet, was to
take all the ships he found on the Sea The manner of King Ed. proceeding
with his Army.
coast. The three Armies by land lodged every night in one field. And first he
sackes the City of Caranton, slew all he found armed or disarmed therein,
burns, razes, desolates the City, saying he sacrificed those oblations to
Bacon, Percy, and others (whose heads he found set upon the principal gate)
unjustly massacred by Phillip. Thence he marches forward, and took Saint Lo,
a rich Town of merchandise, and pillaged the same. Then after some bickring,
became Master of Caen, and put all that country into so great terror, as
Falaise, Lyseaux, Honfleur, strong walled towns, rendered themselves unto him.
This done he spread his power in the Isle of France, to draw out Phillip to
the combat, giving out that he would wrestle with him in the eye of all
France, on the great Theater before his capital City of Paris.

Phillip this while held not his arms in his bosom, but had ramassed one of
the The French K. prepares to oppose K. Ed.
fairest Armies, says the French History, that ever was seen in France,
composed of French, Lorraynes, Alemaines, Genouoys, which he led toward
Meulan, where King Edward was said to have made a stand and attended him; but
upon report of his coming on, retyres: it was supposed he fled for fear, but
the event showed that the great God of Armies had destined his victory for
another place. King Phillip follows and ouertakes him at a Village called
Arenes, a name remarkable (signifying the Sand) to show on what unstable earth
all the trust of human forces, and the designs of the great are founded.
This mighty Army of King Phillip, having the advantage to be at home where all
was theirs, made him account the victory certain. King Edward retires to gain
the River of Some at Blanquetaque, but the passage was to be disputed by the
sword. For Phillip had before sent thither Gundemar de Fay, with a thousand
horse, and fix thousand foot. King Edward notwithstanding resolves to K. Ed.
goes over the river of Some, defeites the Fren.
pass or perish, and plunges foremost into the River, crying out: They who love
me will follow me. At which voice all thrust in without dispute, striving who
should be foremost, and lo presently the shore gained by the English. Gondomar
astonished with this unexpected, and bold adventure, astonishes his people by
his fearful countenance. So that the English incountring the French all in
disorder, fell upon them and put them to flight. But the retraite was near to
Abbe-ville and Saint Requier. The loss was not so great as the shame, but
served as a presage for a greater mischief to France. These disrouted men all
affrighted flock into Abbe-ville. Where King Phillip The French K. resolves to
encounter K. Ed.
enraged with this dishonor, resolves to revenge it, and presently to provoke
King Edward to the combat. The advice of his Council was otherwise; to suffer
his troops to repose some few days, and recover their spirits, and King
Edward to cool and spend his, in the mean while. But hardly had this King the
patience to stay in Abbe-ville one day, whiles the bridge to pass over his
Army, was repayring. And His impatie^ce and his hopes.
with this precipitation and fury, into the field he marches, cleuated with an
assured hope of a triumphant victory.

King Edward better tempered, manages his work with admirable discretion and
vigilance, and had now in camped in a Village called Crecy, and there
entrenched and fortified himself, not onley with the trees of the Forest
about it, but with deep rampires, and other defenses besides: causing also a
Park to be paled under the wood side behind his host, wherein were placed
all the Carts and Carriages. His Army consisted of thirty thousand men, but in
order and courage double the number. The vauntgard he gave to the Prince, and
for guides the Earl of Warwick, The ordering of K. Ed. Army.
Godfray de Harecourt, the Lords Stafford, De la ware, Bourcheir, Clifford,
Cobham, Holland, Sir John Chandos, Sir Bartholomew Burwash, Sir Robert Neuile
with eight hundred men at Arms, and two thousand Archers, besides a thousand
other, most of them Welsh men. The second battle was committed to the Earls
Arundell, and Northampton, the Lords Rosse, Willoughby, Basset, Saint Albin,
Multon, and others, wherein were eight hundred men at Arms, and twelve hundred
Archers. The third battle the King led himself, having seven hundred men at
Arms, and two thousand Archers. These Battayles thus ordered, mounted on a
white Hobby, he rode from rank to rank to view them, the one Marshall on his
right hand, the other on his left, encouraging every man that day to have
regard to his right and honor.

The French Kings Army was greater both in luster and advantage, composed of
above sixty thousand combatants well armed, whereof the chief were, Charles
Earl of Alanson the Kings brother, John de Luxembourg King of Bohemia, Charles
de Bloys the Kings Nephew, Ralph Duke of Lorrayne, the Earl of Flanders,
Neuers, Sancerre, the Dolphin de Viennois: of Barons, Knights, and Gentlemen,
above three thousand: and on the Eve of the battle Ame Earl of Sauoy arrived
with a thousand men at arms more, which made the French king swell with
assurance of the maisterie, so that he longed to be at the encounter. The
Vauntgard he commits to his brother The ordering of the French Kings Army at
the battle of Cressy.
Conte d' Alanson, the Reere to the Earl of Sauoy, the main battle he leads
himself: his heat would scarce permit time for a little counsel what was fit
to be done. The old King of Bohemia advised that the Army should first take
some repast, and that the Infanterie consisting of Genouese (which were about
fifteen thousand crosse-bowes, and sure men) should make the first front, and
the Cauallarie to follow, which was agreed on. After their repast the Vauntgard
set on, the Conte d' Alanson, contrary to this order, took it ill that the
Genouese were in the first rank, and in fury caused them to change place,
which changed the Seat of the Army, and wrought that discontent as it
irritated them more against the leader then the enemy: besides there fell at
the instant a piercing shower of rain, which dissolved their strings and made
their bows vnusesull, and at the breaking up of the shower, the Sun shone
full in the face of the French (dazzling their sight) and on the backs of the
English, as if all made for them.

King Edward who had gotten to a winde-mill hill, beholding as from a
Sentinel, with a settled spirit, the countenance of the enemy, and discovering
both this accident, King Edward discouers the disorders of the Frdnch.
and the hurlement made by the change of place, slacks not to take advantage
thereof, and instantly sends to charge that part, without giving them time to
reaccommodate themselves; insomuch as the discouraged Genouese recoyle, which
the Conte d' Alanson perceiving, and coming on with the horse, in great rage
cries out, On, on, let us make way upon the bellies of these Geuouese, who do
but hinder us: and instantly pricks on with a full carrier through the midst
of them, attended with the Earls of Lorrayne, Sauoy, and the Dolphin de
Viennois, and never takes breath till he came up to the English battle, where
the Prince was, which they found better settled: their horses flanked with
troops of Archers, whose strings having not felt the rain, rained such a
shower of steel upon them, as cooled their heat and all disordered them. The
French king seeing his brother thus endangered, makes up to disingage him,
whereupon the fight grew hot and doubtful, insomuch as the Commanders about
the Prince, send to King Edward to come up with his power to aid them: the King
demands the messenger, whether his son were slain or hurt: the messenger
answered no, but he was like to be over laid. Well then said the King,
return, and tell them who sent you, that so long as my son is alive, they
send no more to me what ever happen, for I will that the honor of this day be
his. And so being left to try for themselves, they wrought it out with the
sword, and recovered the advantage, by reason the French king (having his horse
slain under him and in danger to be trodden to death, had he not been
recovered by the Lord John Beaumont, his new Pensioner) was to the great
discouragement of his people withdrawn out of the field. Whereof notice being
once taken by the English, the day was soon after theirs, and King Edward
obtaines the victory in this great battle of Cressy.
the greatest victory they ever had yet against the French: and so bloody as
there is not mention made of one prisoner taken in the battle: for they being
once put to rout, were all, whom the sword could overtake, slaughtered out
right. Some few troops that held together, saved themselves by retyring to
places near adjoining. The French king himself with a small company got to
Bray in the night, and in approaching the walls, the Guard, asked Who goes
there, he answered, The fortune of France. His voice being known the gates are
opened, and in is he received with the tears and lamentations The French King
flies.
of his people, when yet seeks to comfort all he could. The number of the
slain on the place are certified to be 30. thousand. The chief men were
Charles d' Alanson, John Duke of Borbone, Ralfe Earl of Lorraine, Louys Earl
of Flanders, Jacques The number of the slain.
Dauphin de Viennois, Son to Imbert (who after gave Dauphine to the Crown of
France) the Earls of Sancerre, Harcourt (brother to Geoffry) and many other
Earls, Barons, and gentlemen to the number of 1500. This memorable victory
happened upon the Saturday after Bartholomew day, being the 26. of August 1346.

All the Marks of an entire overthrow rested with King Edward: the field of
the Battle, the bodies of the slain, and their spoils. The occasion of this
great defeit (according to human conjecture) the French attribute to the
choler, rashness and precipitation of their King and his brother, and sure
temeritie and presumption have ever been the ruin of great Actions, especially
in war.

King Edward managed this victory with as great moderation as he wanne it: and
first, having embraced his Son, commending his valor showed that day, he
renders thanks to God after, as he had inuoked his aid before at the
beginning of the Battle, and early in the morning, being Sunday, he sent out
300. Lances, and 2000. Archers to discover what was become of the enemy, who
found great Troops of such as were coming from Abbe-uille, St. Requier, Roan,
and Beauvoys, (ignorant of what had happened) led by the Arch-byshop of Roan and
the Prior of France, whom they like wise defeited, and slew 7000. Our Writers
report, that of Straglers which were fled from the Battle, or coming on,
(having lost their way by reason of a thick mist which happened that morning)
were slain many more then in the field the day before, which shows us the
wonderful loss this afflicted Country sustained at one fatal blow.

But this was not all the victories that fell to King Edward that year, there
was an other of more importance gotten in England, by the Queen and his people
at home against the K. of Scots; who being set on by the French to divert the
war there, entered King David overthrown and taken prisoner.
upon this Kingdom with 60. thousand men, as our Writers report, assuring
himself of success, in regard (as he supposed) the maine strength thereof was
now gone into France. But he found the contrary: the Lords of the North, as
Gilbert de Humfrivile, Earl of Angos, Henry Percie, Ralph Nivile, William
Dayncourt with the Arch-byshop of York, the Bishop of Durham, and others of
the Clergy, gathered so great force, and so well ordered them by the animation
of the Queen (who was there in person) as they utterly defeited this great
Army; took David their King prisoner, with the Earls of Fife, Menteth,
Murry, Sutherland, the Lord Douglas, the Arch-byshop of Saint Andrews and
others, and put to the sword 15. thousand Scots. This Victory sell likewise
upon a Saturday, and six weeks after that of Cressie. And as if all concurred
to make this year tryumphant. The aids sent to the Countess of Monfert in
Britain, lead by Sir Thomas Dagworth, overthrew and took prisoner, Charles
de Blois, pretender to that Duchy, and with him Monsieur la Val, the Lords
Rochford, Beaumanoyr, Charles de Bloys taken prisoner.
Loyacque, with many other Barons, Knights and Esquires: there were slain in
the encounter the Lord De la Val (father of him which was taken) Vicont Rohan,
Monsieur de Chasteau Brian, de Malestroit, de Qnintin, de Direval, great Lords,
besides many other worthy men at Arms, Knights and Esquires, to the number of
about 700. Thus all fell before the Sword of England.

Now King Edward, without meddling with the great Cities, Amiens, and Abbeville,
which were both near, marches on directly and sets down before Calais, a
Town of more importance for England, and the gate to all the rest: wherein
John de Vienne Marshal of France, and the Lord d' Andreghen, a great man in his
time, commanded. All that Winter King Edward having sheltred his people as in
another Town, furnished with all provisions, lay without any molestation of
the French King, who King Edward besieges Calais.
this while was likewise besieged with the affliction of his own state.
Misfortune is ever held a great fault, both in mighty men and mean, and opens
the mouths of those whose hearts are perverse. The people of France were in
extreme poverty, yet notwithstanding the necesitie of the Kings affairs must
constrain fresh supplies. The ill managing the public treasure, the falsehood
of the Financiers, the decrying of Moneys, the deminishing of traffic,
augmentation of impostes, Subsidies, Gabels, etc. were the causes of this
public murmur, and put the people in despair, seeing no end of the troubles
wherein their King was daily more and more engaged. And now was no way to help
him, but by an assembly of the States. Wherein the Financiers, Receivers and
managers of moneys are called to render an account, and the treasure committed
to the disposing of the Clergy and the Nobles, to take away suspicion in the
people of ill dealing. Four Bishops, two Abbots, and four Knights are chosen
for that business. Pierre des Essars, Treasurer of France, is committed to The
State of France.
prison, condemned in a great Fine to the King. Other Officers and accountants
restore at once, what they were long in gathering. The Banquiers, Lombards, and
other usurers, are put to the press for their unlawful exactions: the
Intrests are proved to exceed the Principal, which is confiscate to the King,
and the Intrest given to the Debtors. Courses, wherewith indigent Kings in
expensiue times use to serve their turns, and please their oppressed people.
Which I have the rather noted, though it lie without our circle, to show that
other Kings likewise laid hand upon what they could fasten, as well as ours
have done, and made benefit of men's offenses: only this of the Usurer is new
to us, but yet like to that practiced heretofore upon the Jews, and might
serve a turn with as much content to the people, and as fair a show of a just
correction as theirs did, the nature of the Extortors being alike.

Aided with this means, and the ready service of his Nobles and ablest
subjects, the French king, in the Spring, has an Army in the field, approaches
Callais, but finds no way open to come to relieve it. The King of England was
both Master of the Haven, and possessed all other ways whatsoever were
passable, and had the Flemings his friends, who with a huge Army had besieged
Air, and did much mischief on the confines of France. To oppose them, is John
Duke of Normandy, the Prince, sent for out of Guien, who being no sooner
removed from thence, but Henry of Lancaster, Earl of Derby became master of
the field (having an Army consisting of twelve hundred men at arms, two
thousand Archers, and three thousand other foot, English and Gascoines) takes
in most of the Towns of Yaintonge, and Poictou, in the end besieged and sacked
Poytiers, and so returns to Bordeaux with more pillage then his people could
well bear. Thus the French suffer every where. Their King, not being able to
approach to grapple with the king of England, sends to solicit him to appoint
some place of battle, and he would encounter him. King Edward returns
answer; If he would make his own way to come thither unto him, there he
should find him: for, from thence he would not part, having there layne so
long, to his great labor and charge, and being now so near the point of
gaining the place. The two Cardinals sent from the Pope, labor to mediate a
peace, and Commissioners on either side meet to treat: but nothing could be
effected. So that the French King was forced to break up his Army and retire
to Paris, leaving Callais, and the defendants vnrelieued, to the mercy of the
Besieger, which when they understood, they sent to desire Parle, had it
granted, and therein received this final sentence: that six of the chief
Burgesses should be sent to the King bare-headed, barefooted, in their shirts,
with halters about their necks, the keys of the Town and Castle in their
hands, and submit themselves to the Kings will: for the residue he was content
to take to mercy. This sentence intimated to the miserable townsmen, Conditions
for the rendering of Callis
they all in lamentable manner looking each on other, who should be chosen for
this sacrifice, one amongst the rest stands up, and boldly spoke to this
effect. Fellow citizens, for mine own part I that have so often exposed my
life, in this long fiege for my Country (and have been every day to die) am
now most willing to sacrifice the same for my last oblation thereunto, and will
cherefully carry my head to the victory of the King of England, not desiring to
survive the perdition of my miserable Country. Which free and resolute speech
so wrought with this amazed people, as now they strive who should be one of
the six; and cried, Let us go, let us go unto death, it is the last daty we
ought to render to our native soil. Six are presently chosen, and sent
according to the sentence, presenting themselves on their knees to the King,
and beseeching him to show mercy unto them. The King commands them instantly to
be carried to their execution, and would not (although great supplication was
made for them by his Counsel) be diuerted; in regard as he said of his oath:
till the Queen, great with Child, fell The Queen obtaines pardon for the
Burgesses of Calais.
on her knees before him, and with tears obtained their pardon, and had them
given unto her: which done she caused them to be clothed, gave them their
dinner, and six nobles a man, appointing them to be safely conuayed out of the
Army, and set at liberty. An Act worthy of so great a Queen, and the greater
by this her deed of mercy. The King though in this he were stern, yet was he
more sparing of blood than his Grandfather Edward 1. and had more of
Compassion; as showed an Act in this Seige. When victuals within the Town
began to fail, and all unuseful persons, as King Edwards Clemency.
old, men, women, and children put out of the gates, he forced them not back
again which he might have done, the sonner to consume their store, but
suffered them to pass through his Army, gave them to eat, and two pence a
piece to every one,

And thus was that strong Town of Callais the third of August 1347. gotten,
The Conquest of the Town of Calais.
after almost an years siege with infinite cost and labor: all the
inhabitants are turned out, and sent away to seek new dwellings; a Colonie of
the English planted therein, and so it remained in the possession of the Crown
of England, 210. years after. And now this tryumphant King having made truce
for some few months, and taken order for the safe-keeping of his hard gotten
prize, returns with his Queen, the Prince, and his people into England, to
make Holy Day, and enjoy the benefit King Edward returns into England.
of their booties brought home out of France, which are said to be so great as
every house had some part, and the wives of England, now flourish with the
stuff and ornaments of those of France, who in the mean time lament their
losses: and here is nothing but Feasts, and Tryumphes throughout the Kingdom.
And to add to this glory, the Princes Electors send to signify, that they
had chosen King Edward, King Edward refuses the Election of King of the Romans.
King of the Romans: which great dignity, notwithstanding he refused, being it
seemed out of his way, or cumbersome to deal withal.

But before that year ended, this great iollitie, here in England turned to
the saddest mourning that could be possible. The invisible Sword of Heaven
makes such a The first great Pestilence.
rauage upon Mankind, as had not been known before. A contagious Pestilence
arises in the East and South parts of the World, that dispreads it self over
all Christendom. And in England they write that it took away more then the
half of men: as if the Divine providence seeing them thus violently bent to
destroy and massacre one another, would lessen their numbers for their fields,
and take to it self the vengeance of bloodshed in his terrible manner.
Churchyards could not here suffice to bury the dead, new grounds are
purchased for that purpose. It is noted there dyed in London, between the
first of January and the first of July 57374. persons. Other Cities and Towns
suffered the like, according to their portions. All which calamity
notwithstanding, could not deter those egar Princes from prosecuting their
quarrel, nor yet so unfurnish their fields but that they found still fresh
hands for bloodshed, as showed their many conflicts shortly after. But yet it
gave some pawse, till the fervor of the contagion assuaged, which was also
attended with a miserable famine, murraine of Cattle, and sterrilitie of the
earth, caused through the indisposition of the Heavens, and want of culture.

The first Action after this, was the Kings going over to Caluis, upon an
information Anno Reg. 23.
of a practice to surprise the Town, contrived by the French, which was thus.
Monsieur de Charmy, Governor of Saint Omers, had dealt with Americo de Pauia,
whom King Edward had left Captain of the Castle of Callais, offering him 20.
thousand King Edward goes over to Calais.
Crowns to be received into the Castle: Americo accepts the offer, and
appoints a night for the business. In which night (by advertisement from
Americo) King Edward arriues with 300. men at Arms, and 600. Archers. Monsieur
Charmy sets out The French circumuented in their practice.
likewise the same night from Saint Omers with his Forces, and sent 100. armed
men before with the Crowns to Americo, and to possess the Castle. The men are
let in at a Posterne Gate, the Crowns received, and themselves laid in hold.
Which done the gates of the Town are opened, and out marches the King before
day, to encounter Monsieur de Charny, coming on with his forces, who
perceiving himself betrayed, put his people to the best defense he could, and
the king of England to a hard bickring; who, for that he would not be known
there in person, put himself and the Prince, under the colors of the Lord
Walter Manny, and was twice beaten down on his knees, by Monsieur de
Riboumont, a hardy Knight (with whom he fought hand to hand) and yet
recovered, and in the end took Riboumont prisoner. Charny was likewise taken,
and all his forces defeited. King Edward the night after (which was the first
of the new year) feasted with the prisoners, and gave Riboumont in honor of
his valor (wherein he honored his own) a rich chaplet of Pearl, which
himself wore on his head (for a New-yeares-gift) forgave him his ransom, and
set him at liberty. The rest pay dearly for what they got not, and were well
warned how to traffic in that kind. Yet the English not long after in the
like practice had better success, and got the Castle of Guisnes (a peace of
great importance near Calais) for a sum of money given to one Beauconroy a
French man. Of which Castle, when the French King demanded restitution, in
regard of the Truce; King Edward returns answer: That for things bought and
sold between their people, therein was no exception, and so held it.

Shortly after, the French king not borne to live to see any better fortune,
dies, leaving that distressed kingdom to his son John; who found far
worse. For An. 1305. Reg. 24.
these fore noted wounds, were but as scratches to that State, compared with
those horrible maimes it endured in his, and after in the Reigns of Charles 6.
and 7. till the sword of England was turned home upon it self, to let out the
blood of revenge The French King dies.
with as tragical mischiefs, on the fuccessours of these great actors, who
now thus wrought others ruins aboade.

King Edward, the next year after, is again in person with a Fleet on the
Sea, to encounter certain Spanish ships, passing from Flanders laden with
cloth and other King Edward in action at sea against the Spaniards.
commodities, whom, after a great fight, and much blood shed on either side,
he took with all their substance: for that the Spaniards the year before,
entered the River Garonne, and took away certain English ships, laden with
wines and slew all the English. His forces in Guien were not idle this while,
but many conflicts passed between the French and them; notwithstanding the
Truce which was renewed. The wars in Britain likewise continue, and are
hotly maintained between the two Ladies, the widow of Monfort, and the wife
of Charles de Bloys (whose husband remaynes prisoner in England) eager
defenders of eithers pretended right.

Diverse ouertures of peace had been made by Legates, sent from the Pope, and
Commissioners often met, to the great expense of both Kings, but nothing could
be concluded, (the winner and the loser seldom agreeing upon conditions, in
regard the one will have more then the other is willing to yield unto) and so
temporary Truces (which Alterations of moneys.
were but slenderly observed) are only taken to win time. These actions not
only consumed our men, but the treasure of the kingdom. The war, though
inuasiue, could not maintain it self. The monyes here are altered, and abated
in weight, and yet made to pass according to the former value. Before this
time there were none other pieces but Nobles and half Nobles, with the small
pieces of silver called sterlings: but now grotes of foure-pence, and half
grotes of two pence, equiuolent to the sterling money, are coined, which
inhansed the prices of things, that rise or fall according to the plenty or
scarcity of Coin. Which made servants and laborers to A Parliament.
raise their wages accordingly. Whereupon a Satute was made in the Parliament,
Anno Reg. 27.
now held at Westminster, to reduce the same to the accustomed rate which was
given before the late great Mortality. This caused much murmuring amongst them,
imputing the cause thereof to William Edington Bishop of Winchester, the Kings
Treasurer, whom they held to be the Author of the abatement of the Coin.

The King conceiving displeasure against the Flemmings, for being disappointed
of the Match between a Daughter of his, and their young Earl Louys (who was
escaped into France, and bestowed on a daughter of the Duke of Brabant)
with-drawes the Mart or Staple of Woolls from their Towns, greatly enriched
thereby, and can The Staple established in England.
sed the same to be kept at Westminster, Chichester, Canterbury, Lincoln,
Warwick, York, New Castle, Excester, Carmarden, Bristoll, and Hull. Holding it
fitter to advance his own Towns then Strangers, by the commodities of the
Kingdom. And here are provident Ordinances enacted, for the governing and
ordering this Staple.

An Act is also made in this Parliament, that all Wears, Milles, and other
stoppages Walsinham.
of Rivers, hindering the passages of Boats, Lighters, and other Vessels should
be removed. An Act most commodious to the Kingdom, but it took little effect,
says my Author, by reason of bribing and corrupting Lords, and great men, who
regarded more their own, then the public benefit: A mischief fatal to all
good Ordinances; and yet is it an honor to that time, that so behoufull an Act
was ordained. For, this eafie conuaying and passing of Commodities from place
to place, to impart the same more generally, would (no doubt) be an infinite
benefit to this State: And seeing God has made us Rivers proper for the same,
it is our negligence, or sloth if we mar them, or make them not useful in
that kind, as other Nations do with far lesser Streams.

There is mentioned also an Act to be made, at the instance of the Londoners,
that Stow.
no common Whore should wear any Hood; except rayed, or striped with diverse
colors, nor Furs, but garments reuersed, the wrong side outward: wherein
they did well to set a deformed mark upon foulness, to make it appear the
more odious.

After this Parliament, Henry Earl of Derby, is created Duke of Lancaster, and
The Earl of Derby created Duke of Lancaster.
Ralfe Lord Stafford, Earl of Stafford; and here Charles de Bloys, a long
Prisoner in England, agreed for his Ransom, which was 40. thousand Florins, and
was permitted to return into Britagne to provide the same. Great mediation is
made by the Pope to accord the two Kings, and Commissioners meet on both sides,
to treat and conclude a Peace. The chief Article in deliberation, was; That
the King of England should enjoy all the Lands of his Duchy of Aquitaine,
without holding the same by resort or Treaty of Peace.
homage of the Crown of France: and in consideration thereof, should resign
all his Claim and Title to that Kingdom. And this was in a manner then fully
agreed on, yet in the end broken off by the French (Alleging, they could not
alienate any thing from the Body of that Crown) to their farther confusion
and mischief, having been better to have spared a formal Ceremony
appertaining to a part, then to have had the whole so miserably rent and torn
in pieces as it was. And yet in the end were they feign to make their agreement
upon the same very Article, at the Treaty of Britigny.

But now the Commissioners returning without effecting any thing, the King of
Anno Reg. 27.
England grew so displeased, as he would not hearken to any further
prorogation of Truce, though it were instantly urged by two Cardinals, sent
from Auignion by Pope Clement the 6. (who being a Frenchman borne, labored
much for the peace of his Country) and preparation is made for fresh wars. The
Prince of Wales, now grown a man, is appointed by Parliament to go into
Gascoigne with 1000. men at Arms, 2000. Archers, and a great number of
Welshmen, and in June following, sets forth with 300. Sail; attended with the
Earls of Warwick, Suffolk, Salisburie, and Oxford, the Lord Chandos, the Lord
James Audley, Sir Robert Knoles, Sir Frank de Hall, with many others.

About Michelmas following, the King himself passes over to Calais with
another King Edward passes with an Army into France.
Army, taking with him two of his Sons, Lionel of Antwarpe, now Earl of
Vlster, (by the right of his wife, Elizabeth Daughter and Heir to William
Brugh;) And John of Gant, and Earl of Richmont. There met him at Calais, of
Mercinaries out of Germany, Flanders, and Brabant, a thousand men at Arms. So
that his Army consisted of three thousand men of Arms, and two thousand
Archers on horseback; besides Archers on foot. The City of London sent 300.
men at Arms, and 500. Archers all in one Liuerie, at their own charge. But
all this great Power effected nothing at that Returns with out doing any thing.
time, the French king would not be drawn to any encounter: both in regard of
the potency of his enemy, and some turbulencies happening amongst his own
people, but he so disfurnishes the country (where the English were to pass)
of all prouisios to sustain them, as the King of England was forced to return.

The distemperatures of France that this time diseased it, grew from the
violent humors of Charles King of Navarre, who had married Jane the French
kings daughter, a Prince of a stirring spirit, subtle, haughty, and presuming
upon his great Estate, and high blood, being the son of Louys Conte d' Eureux
and Jane daughter to king Louys Huttin, which Jane was put by the inheritance
of the Crown of France by Phillip le Long her Uncle, in regard of their
Salicque Law: and by him preferred to be Queen of Navarre, in whose right this
Charles her son, bare both the title and state of that kingdom, with many
other great inheritances: all which The King of Navarre, disturbes the French
King.
could not yet content him, but holding himself wronged that he had not also
the Counties of Champagne and Bry, which appertained to his mother by the same
right as did the kingdom of Navarre, enters into violent courses. And (daring
not to complain directly of the King) he falls upon the Constable of France,
as chief of his Council, and one of whom he was jealous, in regard of the
Kings particular favor unto him, and in the end caused him to be murdered in
his bed at L' Aigle in Normandy, rushing himself up into his Chamber,
accompanied with his brother Phillip of Navarre, two of the Harecourts, and
diverse other of his own retinue. After the deed done, he retyres to his own
City of Eureux, and iustifies the act to be lawful.

The French King, though extremely stung herewith, yet was feign to temporise,
and promises the king of Navarre, if he would come and crave pardon, he should
have it. Whereupom he appears at Paris before the Council, to render reason
for his act, is condemned, as guilty of treason (notwithstanding the Kings
promise) and committed prisoner. Three Queens are earnest suitors for him, his
mother (the old Queen of Navarre) his sister (the widow of the late King
Phillip de Valois) and his own wife daughter to the French King. His release
is obtained, and away he goes with the rancour of this wound (which had been
better not given, unless it had been home) offers his service to the King of
England (who knew well how to make use of such a powerful member) and withal
surprises certain pieces in Normandy, practicing all he could to withdraw the
peoples affections, and aids from their King, when he had most need of them.
These insolences, notwithstanding the French king is feign to endure and
dissemble, until he might again take him upon some advantage: to use force,
he saw was dangerous, both in regard of his party, and the time. An occasion
at length fell out, whereon he seazes. Charles his eldest son being lately
invested in the Duchy of Normandy, is visited by all the great men in the
Country, amongst whom as chief comes the King of Navarre, and The French King
commits the King of Navarre prisoner.
is royally feasted at Roan. Whereof the French king having notice, sets out of
Paris suddenly, takes him at dinner with his son, and without farther process
causes four of the principal which massacred the Constable, to be presently
executed: of which, two were the Harecourts brethren: and withal sends away
Navarre under sure guard to Arras, and his chiefest servants to diverse
prisons. The Duke of Lancaster sent into Normandy to aid the King of Nauarres
brother, and others.


This sudden execution, though it gave a present amazement, yet it wakened the
partisans of Navarre, and especially Phillip his brother, who with Geoffrey
Harecourt (Uncle to the two brethren) post over into England, exclayming
against this violent murder, inuoking King Edward, in a case of so notorious
injustice, to aid them: offering their hearts, their goods, their towns and
havens, to let him into Normandy. The occasion is intertayned, the Duke of
Lancaster is sent over with Anno D. 1335. Reg. 29.
four thousand men at Arms, and by the assistance of this great party, winnes
many strong Towns.

King Edward to be furnished for so great actions, has by Parliament granted
unto him fifty shillings upon every sack of wool, for six years next
ensuing: by Fifty shillings granted by Parliament of every sack of wool, for
six years.
which imposition it was thought, (say our Histories) the King might dispend a
thousand marks sterling, a day. Such vent of wools were there in that time.
And presently after the Parliament, in winter (to show that he was for all
weathers) he goes with an Army to recover Barwicke, which had been surprised
by the Scotts, whilst he was last at Calais; and here has he not only his
Town, but the whole Kingdom of Scotland resigned unto him, by Edward Baliol,
who held himself King Edward Baliol resignes the Kingdom of Scotland to King
Edward, reserving to himself a pension.
thereof by the best Title, but not best regarged: For King Alexander (though
now Prisoner in England) had the most powerful Party there: and so both were
Kings to their several sides that held them so: a miserable distraction to
that poor Kingdom. And every where dwelt affliction but in England, and here
was nothing but Tryumphes, Vanquishings, and Recouerings in all parts.

The Prince enters Guien, passes over Longuedoc to Toulouse, Narbonne, Burges,
without any encounter in the field; sacks, spoils, destroys where he goes,
and laden with booty returns to Burdeanx.

The French King thus assaulted on all sides, gathers what power he possibly
Anno Reg. 30. 1336.
could, and first makes against his enemies in Normandy, recouers many of his
lost Towns; and was likely to have there prevailed, but that he was drawn of
force to oppose this fresh Inuador, the Prince of Wales, who was again abroad,
and come up into Toureyne; against whom he brings his whole Army, causing all
the Towns and passages The French King has the Prince of Wales at an
advantage.
upon the River Loyr to be strongly guarded: Whereupon the Prince, whose forces
were not to encounter those so mighty, was advised to withdraw again through
Toureyne, and Poyctou, toward Bordeaux. The French King to prevent his course
follows, and within two Leagues of Poyctiers has him at a great advantage.
Two Cardinals at that instant came from the Pope to mediate a peace. The
French King supposing he had his Enemy now in his mercy, would accept of none
other conditions, but that the Prince should deliver him four Hostages, and as
vanquished, render himself and his Army to his discretion.

The Prince was content to restore unto him what he had gained upon him, but
without prejudice of his honor; wherein he said: He stood accomptable to his
Father, and his Conntry. So the Legates persuasions (though earnestly urged)
could prevail nothing upon the French Kings obstinacy: who presuming of
victory (in regard his Army was six to one) would instantly (as loath to
loose time to loose himself) set upon the Prince: who reduced to this
Straight, takes what advantage he could of the The Battle of Poytiers, fought
the 19. of September. 1336.
ground, and prouidently got the benefit of Vines, Shrubs and Bushes, on that
part he was like to be assailed, to impester and entangle the French Horse,
which he saw were to come furiously upon him. The success answered his
expectation, for behold the Cauallarie of his Enemies upon their first assault,
wrapped and encumbered amongst the Vines, so that his Archers without danger, gall
and annoy them at their pleasure.

For the French King to give the honor of the day to his Cauallarie (whereof
he had caused a choice to be selected out of every company, to the
discontent of the rest) employed them only without his Infantery: So that they
being disordered and put to rout, his whole Army came to be utterly defeited.

The errors committed in the Battle of Cressie, could not warn this King to
avoid the like. For had he had the patience to have tymed it out awhile, the
Prince could not have possibly subsisted, being thus environed, and shut up
from all succors as he was: and now thus furiously assaulted, and having no
safety but what was to be The French King taken prisoner.
wrought by the Sword (which desperation ever makes the sharper) He, and his
showed that admirable courage that day, as purchased them the most memorable
glory that ever any Mattiall action did, that was at chiued by the English
with so few hands.

Here was now the Head of that great Kingdome-claymed, taken Prisoner, with his
youngest son Phillip (who valiantly defending his father, when his other
brothers forsook him, had afterward the Title of Hardy, and became Duke of
Burgogne) Jacques de Borbon, Conte de Ponthieu, the Arch-byshop of Sens, John d'
Artoys, Conte d' Eu, Charles d' Artoys, his brother Conte de Longnevitle
Charles Conte de Tancarville, The number of Prisoners taken.
the Conts of Vendosme, Salbourg, Dampmartin, and La Roche, with many other
Lords of marks besides 2000. Knights, Esquires, and Gentlemen; in so much as
the Conquerors, holding it not safe to retain so many, let many of them go.
The French, who can give best account of their own losses, report there dyed
in the battle a thousand seven hundred Gentlemen, amongst which were fifty
two Bannerets: the most eminent, Peter de Borbon, the Duke d' Athens Constable
of France, Ian de Clermont Marshall, Geoffrey de Charny High Chamberlain. The
slain in the battle.
There escaped from this battle three of the French Kings sons (for he
brought them all thither) Charles Prince Dauphin (and the first so entitled)
Lonys after Duke of Aniou, John Duke of Berry, all great actours in the time
following.

This blow might seem to have been enough to have utterly overthrown that
kingdom, and absolutely subdued it to the Crown of England, but that is was a
body which consisted of so many strong limbs, had such store of spirits
dispersed in several parts, and contained so wide an extent of state, as all
this blood letting could not dissolve it, or make it faint to give over. And
sure these powerful kingdoms, howsoever they may be diseased, and suffer,
either through the distemperature of their Heads, or distractions of their
other parts, can never (unless by a gene rall dissolution) be so low brought,
but they will recover again in the end: their frame holds by many nails,
which never fail all together.

The Prince of Wales in this battle, has a double victory, the one by the
sword the other by his Courtesy: first he visits the captive King, with all
reverence and regard of Majesty, comforts him by examples of the fortunes of
war, and assures him of all fair entertainment according to his dignity.
The especial great men who were actors in this work must not pass
unremembered, the Earls, Warwick, Suffolk, A memorable act of James Lord
Audley.
Salisbury, Oxford, Stafford: the Lords, Cobham, Spencer, Barkley, Basset: Of
Gescoignes Le Capital de Beuf, the Lords Pumier, Chaumont, and others. And here
the Lord James Audley is renowned both for his valor and bounty, who having
vowed to be foremost in this fight, performed his word, and sealed it with many
wounds: for which the Prince having rewarded him with the gift of Five hundred
marks, Fee-simple in England, he presently gave it to four of his Esquires,
who had with him endured the brunt of the day. Whereupon the Prince demanding,
whether he accepted not his gift, he answered how these men had deserved the
same, as well as himself, and had more need thereof. The Prince pleased with
this reply, gave him five hundred marks more in the same kind. An example of
the worthineste of the time, wherein good deseruings went not unrewarded.

All things prouidently accommodated after the battle, the Prince with his
ptisoners first retyres to Bordeaux, and thence passes with great glory into
England, now Anno Reg. 31. 1336.
the Theater of triumph. The French king is lodged at the Sauoy, then a goodly
palace of Henry Duke of Lancaster. Many prisoners upon reasonable ransom, and
many upon the French kings word (undertaking for them) are delivered and sent
home honorably. David King of Scots, who had remained prisoner eleven years in
England, is shortly after, by the earnest solicitation of Joan his wife, sister
to King Edward, set likewise at liberty for the ransom of a hundred thousand
marks striulin, to be paid in ten years. The security now had of France, gave
way to this Princes liberty.

Above four years the French King remained prisoner in England, in which time
were many ouertures, and great offers made for his delivery, but nothing
effected. Charles the Dauphin, who managed that kingdom (during the captivity
of his father) a Prince of great discretion, wrought all means possible to
bring that factious people to yield their contribution, for ransoming their
King, but little prevailed. The Parliament there called to consult thereof,
rather augments the misery of the State, then prouides remedy. Wherein after
the Dauphin had gravely delivered The state of France during their Kings
captivity.
the desolation and danger they were in, being thus deprived of their Head, and
the necessity of recovering and relieuing the same, by their utmost means:
There was a choice required of fifty (to avoid confusion) to be made out of
all the Provinces, to consult of what was propounded, according to the
instructions they should receive. These fifty, after many meetings, send for
the Dauphin to hear their resolution, which was much otherwise then he
expected. For instead of aid and subuention, they require reformation in the
State. And first, the Bishop of Laon, chosen their Speaker, besought him to
keep secret what should be uttered unto him by the States. Theyong Prince
answers: That it were much prejudicial to the degree he held in the Kingdom,
to take Law of his Fathers Subjects: and therefore commuanded them (by their
Allegiance) openly to reveal what they had in their hearts. The Bishop there
upon, declares the evil managing of the Public Revenues, demands redress,
and Commissioners appointed to call such as were answerable, to yield their
Accounts: That all who had managed the Treasury, should be deposed from their
Office; That both the Moneys, and all the affairs of the State, should from
thencefoorth be directed by four Bishops, and twelve Burgesses, whereof the
City of Paris should be chief: and that without this Council the Dauphin
should do nothing: And in conclusion, they instantly require; That the King of
Navarre might be set at liberty. On which Conditions they would yield any
reasonable subuention for redeeming their King.

To these harsh Demands, the Daupbin requires time to answer, which he so puts
off from day to day, (in hope thereby to separate and dis-vnite their Councels)
as the the Deputies, at length, tired with delay grew cold, and the Assembly
brake up without doing any thing.

But this left such a poison as infected the people, and specially those of
Paris, who shortly after presumptuously demand to have the King of Navarre
delivered, according to the Decree of the Deputies; and without delay they so
wrought with Pinquigny, the Governor of Artoys (who had the keeping of this
Firebrand) as he The King of Naurre set at liberty.
was delivered after 19. months imprisonment, and comes to Paris so
accompanied, as showed both of what Spirit and state he was, and that he meant
to take his time of revenge. Here is he welcome with the applause of the whole
City, to whom in public manner with great eloquence, he declares the wrongs
he had received; and besides intimates, what right he had to the Crown of
France, thereby to imbroyle the affairs of that State, which were already too
much in combustion. This put the business of redeeming the captive King quite
out of their minds for that time: and the Dauphin is constrained (by an Act
of Abolition) to acquit the King of Navarre and his Complicies, of all former
offenses. And seeing the perverseness of the Parisians, goes to solicit other
Cities, and Provinces: travailing from place to place for aid and succor,
leaving his brother Phillip, Duke of Orleance, at Paris, to keep them in (the
best he could) during his absence.

The Province of Languedoc, is renowned in their Hystories, for being the first
that made the largest offer of aid toward the redemption of their King, in the
Assembly of the three States at Toulouse, wherein they promised to their
Governor, the Conte d' Arminiacque not only to employ their Revenue, but
their mooueables, and even to sell their wives Jewels to raise the same.
Besides, to witness their public sorrow, they ordain, that no costly
Apparel, Feasting, Plays, or other iollyties, shoul be used within their
Province, during the time of their Kings captivity. Champagne by their example
does the like. But nothing could move the Parisians to yield any thing. The
King of Navarre had won them, both from their obedience, and all humanity,
and put them into such flames of rebellion, as when the Dauphin came back to
the City, the Provost of Merchants assalted his house with three thousand
Artificrs in Arms, and rushed himself up into his Chamber with certain of
his train: wherewith the Dauphin being amazed, the Provost bids him be
content, it was resolved it must be so. And presently upon Signal given, Ian
de Couflans, and Robert de Cleremont, Marshalls of France, and his chief
Counselors, are slain in his presence. The Dauphen cries out; What mean you?
Will you set upon the Blood of France? Sir (said the Provost) Fear you not, It
is not you we seek, it is your disloyal servants, who have evil counseled
you. And here withal he takes (and puts on) the Dauphins hat, edged with
gold, and sets his own, which was party colored, Red and Peach-colour (as
the Liuerie of the City) upon the Dauphins head, and out he goes adorned with
the Hat of a Prince, as a sign of his Dictator-ship, causing the bodies of
these two noble men to be trayled along the streets to the Court of the
Palace, for all the furious multitude which ran to applaud the murder, to
gase on.

This done the Provost writes in the name of the whole City, to all the great
Towns, soliciting them to join with theirs (the principal of the kingdom)
and take their Livery, as the Dauphin had done, for the reformation of the
State. Besides, they compose a Council of themselves, whereof the Bishop of
Laon, the Primier President, the Provost, with some of the University, were
chief, assuming a Sovereign power to order all affairs of the State, as a
Commonwealth. So that we see in what a miserable confusion that kingdom
stood, being without a head, and how apt it was then to shake off all
authority, and dissolve the government into parts: showing us that it was no
new project amongst them to Cantonize, as the great Towns and the Princes of
late practiced to do, in their leagues during their civil combustions.

The Dauphin thus disgraced, with much a do, gets out of this tumultious City,
and retyres into Champagne, and at Vertus assembles the States of the Country,
whom he found loyal, and ready to yield him all succor. The rest of the
great Towns refusing (with much disdain) to join with the City of Paris,
offer him likewise their aid: So that he was put into some heart, and likly
to effect his desires in short time, had not the King of Navarre, who sought
his destruction, still raised new broils in the State, and taken Arms against
him.

Now besides these confusions, greater mischiefs arose in that miserable
kingdom: the poor Paysants that had been eaten out by the Soldiers, and
trodden under foot by their Lords, colleague and arm themselves in the Country
of Beauuoysis, France spoiled by the soldiers and others, on all sides.
and turn head upon the Gentry, and such as had done them wrong, spoiling,
sacking, burning their houses, killing their wives and children in most
outrageous manner. This was not all, troops of soldiers which had no work or
means to live, join together in mighty Companies, overrun and rauage other
parts of the kingdom. The forces in Britain under the conduct of Sir Robert
Knoles, break out upon the confining Countries, and return laden with
inestimable booties of wealth. All which miserable calamities (enough to have
utterly dissolved a State) prolong the imprisonment of their King in England;
so that nothing could be effected for his ransom, which King Edward thinks
long till he have in his Treasury: and vrges likewise for his part, very hard
conditions; requiring, say they, besides infinite sums, that King John should
do homage, and hold the kingdom of France of the Crown of England: which
he with great disdain refuses, as being not in his power to alien what was
vnalienable, vowing that no misery of his, should constrayne him to do any
thing prejudicial to his successors, to whom he would leave the State as he
received it. But yet at length offers other, and more large conditions then the
French were willing to yield unto, which being long in debating, and nothing
concluded (after four years expectation) King Edward in great displeasure,
resolves to make an end of this work with the sword, and to take possession
King Edward goes to take possession of the kingdom of France.
of the kingdom of France. And over he passes to Calais, with a Fleet of
eleven hundred Sail. His Army he diuides into three battles, one he
commits to the Prince of Wales, another to the Duke of Lancaster, and the third
he leads himself. And first he marches to the City of Aras, which he takes
within three days. Thence into Champagne, where the Cities of Sens, and
Neuers, are rendered Anno Reg. 34.
unto him. The Duchy of Burgogne terrified with these examples, redeemes it
self from spoil, upon paying two hundred thousand Florins of gold. Furnished
with which treasure, and booties by the way, up King Edward marches to Paris,
where the Dauphin (who had now the title of Regent, having lately overcome the
faction, and executed the principal of the Mutiners) was with great forces
(which in the common danger flocked together to defend their Country) and
would not (by the example of his father and Grandfather) be drawn out to
hazard upon any attempt, but stood only upon his defenses: which the King of
England seeing, after many prouocations, raised his siege, and returns into
Britain to refresh his Army.

In the mean time the Regent lays in mighty store of victuals, prouides that
the Soldiers should have enough without pressing the inhabitants, and with
extreme diligence so fortifies the City, as King Edward returning with all
his refreshed power, was utterly disappoynted of his hopes, to do any good
there. Thus that great City which was like to have endangered the whole
kingdom of France, was the only means to preserve it.

From hence King Edward takes his way toward Chartres, with purpose to besiege
that City, but being by an horrible tempest of hail, thunder, and lightning,
that fell upon his Army, so terrified as he vowed to make peace with the
French King, upon any reasonable conditions, as he shortly after did, at the
treaty of Britigny The Treaty of Accord concluded at Britigny.
near Chartres, upon these Articles. That the country of Poicton, the Fiefs of
Thouars, and Belleuille, the Country of Gascoigne, Agenois, Perigort, Limosin,
Cahors, Torbe, Bigorre, Rouergne, Angoulmois in sovereignty, with the Homages
of the Lords within those Territories, Monstruel on the Sea, Ponthieu, Calais,
Guines, La Merk, Sangote, Boulogne, Hames, Vales and Onis should be to the
King of England: who besides was to have three Millions of Scutes of gold:
whereof six hundred thousand presently in hand, four hundred thousand the
year following, and the Surplus in two years after ensuing, upon reasonable
payment.

And for this, the King of England, and his Son the Prince of Wales, as well
for them, as their Successors for ever, should renounce all their right
pretended to the Vid. Append.
Crown of France, the Duchy of Normandy, the Countries of Touraine, Aniou,
Maine, the Sovereignty and Homage of the Duchy of Britagne, and the Earldome
of Flanders; and within three weeks King John to be rendered at Callais, at
the charge of the King of England, except the expenses of his House. For
assurance of which Accord should be given into his hand Hostages: Louys Duke of
Aniou, John Duke of Berry (King John's sons) Phillip Duke of Orleance his
brother, John Duke of Burgogne, the Conts of Bloys, Alenson, Saint Pol,
Harcourt, Poncian, Valentinois, Grand Pre, de Brenne des Forests, the Lords
Vaudemont, Couscy, Piennez, de Saint Venant, de Preaux, de Momerancy, de
Garanciecis, La Roche guion, Estou-teuille, Le Dauphind' Auergne, d' Andrigil,
de Craon, sufficient cautions for the said Sums, and conditions. The Scots
not to be aided by the French King, nor the Flemmings by the English. Charles
King of Navarre, and his brother Phillip are comprehended likewise in these
Articles, etc.

This Treaty of good accord and final Peace, signified by both Kings, was
ratified King John delivered.
by their two eldest Sons; Edward, and Charles: and sworn unto by the
Nobility of both Kingdoms. The Hostages are delivered unto King Edward, who
departing from Honfleur, brought them into England, leaving the Earl of
Warwick in France, to have a hand in the execution of the Accord. King John is
honorably conducted to Calais, attending the promised Sum, the first gage of
his liberty. Anno Reg. 35. 1361.
The City of Paris yields one thousand Royals; by whose Example other Cities,
contribute according to their proportions. And thus is King John delivered,
after having remained Prisoner in England near about five years. And both
Kings depart in kind manner, with all demonstrations of brotherly Love.

King Edward returning with his Crowns, calls a Parliament, wherein, the
form of the Accord was read, and allowed of all the Estates, and an Oath taken
by the Nobles to observe the same for their parts. Here the King restorees to
the Priors Aliens, their Houses, Lands, Tenements, which he had taken from
them, Anno Reg. 12. for the maintenance of his French Wars: which now being
ended, he grants by his Letters Pattents, in as free manner, as before they
held them. A rare Example of a just King, being seldom seen that Princes let
go any thing, whereon they have once fastened.

Now again, was the joy and glory that England received by their gettings,
seasoned The second great Pestilence.
with the sowrenesse of another mortality, called The second Pestilence,
whereof dyed many Noble men, the chief was Henry Duke of Lancaster, of the
Royal blood, a Prince of great note for wisdom and valor: who had been an
especial Actor in all these Wars, and a principal Pillar of the Crown of
England: whose Daughter and Heir was a little before married to John of Gaunt
(by dispensation being near of consanguinitie) whereby he is made Duke of
Lancaster. And shortly after, by the like Dispensation, the Prince of Wales
marryes the Countess Anno Reg. 36.
of Kent, Daughter to Edmond, brother to Edward the second. And so both are
provided of Matches within the Kingdom. The King gives to the Prince of Wales,
the Duchy of Aquitaine, reserving to himself Homage and Fealty, and shortly
after sends him over with his wife, and Court to live there. His son Lionell
Earl Vlster is sent into Ireland, with a regiment of 1500 men to guard his
Eatledome against the Irish, and was created Duke of Clarence in the next
Parliament held at Westminster in November, which continued until the feast of
Saint Brice, King Edwards Birthday, and the Fiftith year of his age. Wherein
for a Jubilee he shows himself extraordinarily gracious to his people,
freely pardoning many offenses, releasing prisoners reuoking Exiles, etc. And
upon petition of the Commons, causes Pleas which before were in French, to be
made in English, that the subject might understand the Law, by which he
holds what he has, and is to know what he does: A blessed act and worthy so
great a King, who if he could thereby have rendered the same also perspicuous,
it had been a work of eternal honor: but such is the Fate of Law, that in
what language soever it speaks, it never speaks plain, but is wrapped up in
such difficulties and mysteries (as all professions of profit are) as it gives
more affliction to the people then it does remedy. Here was also an act passed
for Purueiors (as there had been many before in his time) that nothing should
be taken up but for ready money, upon strict punishment. For retribution of
which relieuements the Parliament granted six and twenty shillings eight pence
for tranportation Vid. Stat.
of every sack of woole for three years. Thus all were pleased, saving, the
removing of the Saple, from the Towns of England to Calais, was some grieuance
to those whom it concerned. Yet the Kings desire to enrich that Town, being of
his own acquisition, and now a member of the Crown of England, might herein
be well borne withal. And sure this King, the most renowned for Valor and
Goodness, that ever reigned in this kingdom, not only labored to advance
the State by enlarging the Dominions thereof, but to make his people as well
good as great, by reforming their vices (whereunto fortunate and opulent States
are evermore subject) as may be noted in the next Parliament held at
Westminster Anno Reg. 37. wherein for the public Good, certain Sumptuary
laws, the most necessary to prevent Riot (that dissoluing sickness, the
fever Hectique of a State) were ordained both for Apparel and Diet; appointing
every degree of men from the Shepherd to the Prince, the Stuff and Habits
they should wear: prohibiting the adornements of gold and Silver, Silks, and
rich Furs to all, except eminent persons. Vid. Stat.
Whereby foreign superfluities were shut out, and home-made Commodities only
used. The Labourer and Husbandman is appointed but one meal a day, and what
meats he should eat, etc. whereby Gluttony and Drunkenness, those hideous
evils which have since utterly disfashioned and infeebled the English Nation,
were avoided. So careful was this frugall King for preserving the estates of
his subjects from Excess.

And as provident was he for the ordering of his own, committing his treasure
to the safest Chest that Religion could keep locked. For by a certificat Anno
Clergy men Officers to the King.
Reg. 39. sent to Pope Vrbane, concerning Plut alities, and the estates of
Churchmen in England, there were found more of the Spirtualty which bare
office about this King, then any other of Christendom beside. As first Simon
Langham Archbishop of Canterbury, was Chancellor of England, William Wickham
Archdeacon of Lincoln, Keeper of the Privy Seal: David Weller, Parson of
Somersham, Master of the Rolls: Ten beneficed Priests Ciuilians, Masters of
Chancery: William Mulse Deane of Saint Martins le Grand, Chief Chamberlayne of
the Exchecquer, Receiver and Keeper of the Kings treasure and Jewels: William
Askby Archdeacon of Northampton, Chancellor of the Exchecquar: William Dighton
Pribendary of Saint Martins, Clarke of the Privy Seal: Richard Chesterfield
Prebend of Saint Staphans, Treasurer of the Kings house: Henry Snatch Parson of
Oundall, Master of the Kings Wardrobe: John Newnham, Parson of Fenni-stanton,
one of the Chamberlaines of the Exchequer, and keeper of the Kings Treasury
and Jewels: John Rousbie, Parson of Harwick, Surueior and Comptroler of the
Kings works: Thomas Britingham Parson of Asbie, Treasurer to the King for the
parts of Guisnes, and the Marches of Calais: John Troys Tresurer of Ireland a
Priest, and beneficed there. These men, being without those Feminine Ginnes of
attraction and consumption, devoted only to Sanctity, were thought then
fittest to be husbands for his profit.

Shortly after, three Kings came to visit the King of England; The King of
France, the King of Scots, and the King of Cypres: The occasions that moved
the French king might be diverse, but it seems the especial wereto free some
Hostages that remained here, and to clear such imputations as were had of
him, for not observing in all points the late Accord: wherewith his Nobles
were much discontented, and many dissiculties arose among them: so that in an
Assembly of the States at Paris, certain particular Lords, whose Homages were
passed over to the King of England, protested against it; Alleging, how that
the King could not dispose of the Soureigntie of the Kingdom, nor alien his
Domaine, and therefore they would not obey it. The French King,
notwithstanding, least King Edward should: think this but a collusion between
him and his subjects, publishes his Commandment for the observation of the
Accord, and thereof certifies King Edward. Besides, he had undertaken a journey
for the Holy wars, and desired to settle all things in peace at home, before
his going. And this might be the occasion of his coming, and not his love to
the Conntesse of Salisburie, as is reported. But howsoever, this King showed a
Strange disposition to return to the Jail, where he had endured so much
affliction, and where shortly after his coming, The death of King John of
France.
he ended his life, much lamented of the King of England, who sole mnly
attended his Corpse to Dover, whence it was conuayed to Saint Denis, and
entombed with his Ancestors. An. 1364. Reg. 38.


The debate for the Duchy of Britaigne, is about this time determined, by the
death of Charles de Bloys slain in a Battle near Vannes, by John de
Monfort, and the English Forces, led by the Lord Latimer, Sir John Chandos, and
Sir Hugh Cauerley. The business of Britayne accomdated for a time.
John de Monfort marries Mary Daughter to King Edward, and by his consent, does
his homage for the Duchy, to Charles (now King of France) compounding with the
widow of Charles de Bloys for a sum of money, and some estate in land.

And here we have some time of rest, which the Soldier whom the war had
bred, could not well brook. The cast Companies in France, though they had no
Head, yet had strong Bodies, and did much mischief in many parts of that
Kingdom, till they were employed in the Wars of Spain, which fell out
shortly after. A Company of them passed over into Italy, under the conduct of
Sir John Haucut, a great The Italians call him Iohannos de Acuto.
Warrior, who found such entertainment with the Princes there (where he
revived Military discipline, that had layne long unused among them) and got
such honor and estate by his valor, as his fame remains to this day, and his
Statue amongst their memorable Princes for action and virtue, though he went
but a Taylorout of this Kingdom, which in those days could have furnished the
whole world with Leaders, and expert Military men.

And now here have we brought this mighty King to the Fortieth year of his
Anno Reg. 40.
Reign, which had it been his last, we had left him the most glorious and
tryumphant Prince in the world, to whom Fortune never yet showed her back,
never was retrograd. But now these last ten years present us with a turning of
the Beam, a declination from that height of glory, with certain blemishes
that age and frailty brought upon him. This new King of France, Charles the
fifth, Entitled The wise; recovered great advantages upon him, having in the
life time of his Father strugled so with affliction (a better Mistress of
wisdom then prosperity) and learned so well to know a Crown before he had
it, as now he manages the same with great temperance and vigilancie: and
finding the preservation of that State consisted more in counsel then force
(which had been too aduenturously employed by his Father and Grandfather) he
works his fortune by lying still, having excellent aids and ministers to
execute his designs, and labor for him: of whom for his wars, Guesclin a
Britain whom he made Constable of France, was of especial note, and first
showed the way how that State was to be recovered.

The Prince of Wales remaining in his Duchy of Aquitayne, with a great Court,
which required great expenses, and many military attendants, without work, is
Anno Reg. 41. 1367.
solicited by Peter King of Castile, chased out of his kingdom by his bastard
brother Henry, to aid him to recover the same: which the Prince upon great
promises of remuneration, undertakes by the consent of his father. The cause
was better then the person. For this Peter son to Alphonso 11. King of
Castile, had committed so tyrannical outrages, as were intolerable to his
subjects, oppressing and destroying The Prince of wales aides the King of
Castile.
his Nobles to enrich himself, putting away, and after murdering his wife
(which was daughter to Peter Duke of Burbon, and sister to the now Queen of
France) by the instigation of his Concubine Maria de Padilla, whom he
afterward married. Whereupon the State adhering to his brother Henry (who
though he were a bastard by his birth was more Legittimate by his virtues then
he, who was more a bastard by his vices) crowned him King of Spain at Bargos,
and forced Peter to fly the kingdom. This Peter thus rejected, the Prince of
Wales, with an Army of thirty thousand, attended by his brother John Duke of
Lancaster, and many Lords of England, goes to re-inuest in his kingdom. Henry
is aided by the French, and those floting companies fore-remembred, led by
Guesclin Constable, and Dandrehen Marshall of France; having besides of
Castilians, Christians, and Sarasins so many, as his Army consisted of near an
hundred thousand men. Upon the borders of Castile it came to a Battle, the
Prince of Wales has the victory: Henry is put to flight, the French Leaders
taken prisoners, and Peter put into his Throne again at Bargos.

The work done, reward for the same is required by the Prince, which Peter
could not, or cared not to provide, but staruing him with delays, enforced him
in the end to return to Bordeaux, without money to pay his Army, and which was
worse without health, which he never after recovered. This success had this
unfortunate action, undertaken to right an ungrateful Tyrant, who afterward
notwithstanding, was The Prince obtaines the victory in Spain.
again dispossessed, taken, and put to death, by his brother Henry. It is
written, that to strengthen himself, he combined with a Prince of the
Sarazins, married his daughter, and renounced the Christian faith: but it is
commonly the reward of evil princes to be made worse then they are.

The Prince of Wales returning thus out of Spain, charged with more debts then
before, and destitute of means to content his people, falls upon another
misfortune The il success of that iourny.
(as commonly men in these declinations, seeking remedies increase maladies)
imposing a new taxation upon the Gascoignes, of Feuage, or Chymney money, so
discontented the people, as they exclaim against the government of the
English, and appeal to the King and Court of France for redress. The King of
France, at the instance of the great Lords and others, who were turned over by
the accord to hold of the Crown of England, sends a Gentleman to the Prince of
Wales at Bordeaux with sommons to answer before him and his Court at Paris, to
these complaints.

Now had the Lords of Arminiaque, D'Albert, Peregort, Cominges, and many
others, Anno Reg. 43. 1369.
made their protestations against the King of England, for the Crown of
France: which, they say, they were by nature to obey, and not to a strange
Sovereign: that it was absolutely against the Fundamental Law of the
Kingdom, to disseuer them from the Crown: that the Contract was made in
prison, and therefore inciuile, and not to be held by the right of Nations. So
that they were resolved to spend their lives and estates, rather then be under
the government of England. By their example the Cities of the County of The
Emperor Charles 4. makes a iourny into France to reconcile the two Kings.
Ponthieu rendered themselves to Guy Conte de Saint Poll, and Guy de Chastillon.

The King of England complains of this breach of accord to the Pope, and the
Emperor Charles 4. who made a journey into France to reconcile the two Kings,
and determine the business. Before whom our Ambassadors first declare how
this Accord, having been more for the good of France then us, in regard we
resigned thereby, not The allegations of the English Ambassadors before the
Emperor.
only our Title to Normandy, Touraine, and Aniou, the fairest and richest
Countries of France: But also our Title to the Crown, to the end we might hold
in Souraigntie the Duchy of Aquitayne, the Country of Ponthieu, with some other
pieces, which by Hereditary right appertained to the Crown of England, whereby
the effusion of Christian blood was stayed, France had peace, and their King
restored in fair manner, after a fair imprisonment, and upon the most
reasonable Conditions could be devised: Notwithstanding the French King, (who
Vid. Appen.
himself, with the whole Council of France contracted the Accord, and
solemnly swore to observe the same) has contrary to the Law of God and Nations
(after he had recovered his Hostages by fraud) seized both upon the Duchy of
Aquitayne, and the Country of Ponthieu, without denouncing War, by his
Heraldes, etc.

The French Reply: How we by the Accord, were bound immediately to with draw
our The Reply of the French.
Army out of France; which they say we did not, during all the Reign of their
King John: That the Peace was thereby made more offensive then the War, they
being constrained to purchase the departure of our Soldiers with greater
charge then would have maintained an Army. That the breach was on our side,
for that the Soldiers were ours. That King Edward was bound to renounce his
Title to the Crown of France, in open Assembly of the States of both Realms,
which they say was not done. And concerning the releasing of their King: they
say, it cost France more gold, then the redeeming of Saint Louys their King,
his brother, the Peers, and the whole Army, taken by the Sultan, an Infidel.
Thus both sides defend their cause, being easy for Princes who will break out
of their Covenants to find euasions. The French King (it seems) though willing
to get in what he could, yet was very loath to renew a War, and therefore
with many Presents courts the King of England: Who seeing himself thus
deluded, prepares to have out his Sword. And Anno Reg. 44.
having borrowed great Sums of the Clergy, sends over John Duke of Lancaster,
and Humphry Bohun Earl of Hereford, with a mighty Army to Calais, to invade
France on this side; whiles the Prince of Wales works to recover the revolted
Towns on the other. But little was effected, The Duke shortly returns. And
then Thomas Beauchamp Earl of Warwick, with fresh supplies is sent over, who
dies in the journey. Forces sent into France.
Sir Robert Knoles a man renowned in those times for valor and counsel, is
made Leader of an Army, Consisting of many great Lords, who disdayning to be
commanded by him whom they held their inferior, ouer-threw themselves, and
the Action.

Thus all went back, and the French King grows both in State and Alliance.
Anno Reg. 45.
Margueret, sole daughter and Heir to Louys Earl of Flauders, to whom King
Edward sought to match his son Edmond, is won to marry Phillip Le Hardy
Duke of Burgogne, brother to the French King. And this much vexes King Edward,
who A Subsidy granted by Parliament, and the manner of seyzing the same.
the better to furnish himself for revenge, calls a Parliament at
Westminster, wherein he resumes his claim to the Crown of France, and
requires aid of his Subjects, and has it. The Clergy granted him, 50.
thousand pounds, to be paid the same year; and the Laity as much. For the
leuying whereof, every Parish in England was rated first to pay 23 shillings
four pence (the great helping the less) upon supposition there had been
Parishes enough to have made up that sum. But by certificate upon the Kings
Writs sent out to examine what number of Parish Churches were in every Shire,
they found it came short: and then rated every Parish at five pound sixteen
shillings (the greater to help the less) and so, of 8600. Parishes, found to
be in the 37. Shieres, 50. thousand, 181. pound, 8. peence was raised. But in
regard of the great poverty of Suffolk and Deuon. Shire, the 181. pound was
abated, and the King answered 50. thousand pounds for the Laytie.

Upon this Supply the King grants that the great Charter, and the Charter of
The Duke of Lancaster sent into Aquitaine.
Forests, should be observed in all points: which in most Parliaments of his,
is ever the first Act; as may be seen in the printed Statutes. And now John
Duke of Lancaster, and Edmond Earl of Cambridge, are sent with Forces into
Aquitayne, to aid the Prince of Wales, who after he had sacked the City of
Limoges, that was revolted, his health failing to perform any more, leaves the
prosecution of the War to his brother: and with his wife, and young son
Richard borne at Bordeaux, returns The Prince of Wales returns into England.
home into England, and here resignes unto his father the Duchy of Aquitayne.

The Duke of Lancaster, after the departure of the Prince, did little, but
being now a widdower (his wife dying two years before, in the third great
Pestilence, in which year also Phillippe wife to King Edward ended her life)
he marries Constance eldest daughter to Peter King of Castile, by whom he had
the empty title of King, The Duke of Lancaster marries Constance daughter to
the King of Castile.
and was (after the death of his father-in-law) styled King of Castile and
Leon. This Constance, though she were the daughter of a wicked father and
infamous mother, yet was so happy, that the daughter she had by this Duke of
Lancaster, named Katherine, became after Queen of Castile and Leon, (being
married to Henry 3. in possession before, and in her right King of both those
Realms) and left her posterity Kings of Spain. Edmond Earl of Cambridge,
married also at the same time Isabell Anno Reg. 46. 1372.
the youngest daughter of King Peter, and both shortly after returned into
England, though without victory, yet with wives. Lionell Duke of Clarence, a
little before, marries Violanta, the Duke of Millaines daughter in Italy, where
they feasted him so as shortly after he died.

The City of Rochell, that yet held out for the English, had endured a long
siege both by Sea and land, to relieve which important piece, the Earl of
Pembroke is sent with forty ships well manned and victualled, and besides
furnished with twenty The Earl of Pembrooke taken prisoner by the Spaniards.
thousand marks to defrey the voyage, who incountring the Spanish Armado sent
to aid the French in this siege (by Henry now King of Castile) after a long
and cruel conflict, is taken prisoner, and his Navy utterly destroyed. King
Edward himself, though now aged, sets forth, with a mighty Army to recover
these losses, but thereby Anno Reg. 47. D. 1373.
lost more, the winds with his fortune being against him, beat him back,
having spent in this preparation Nine hundred thousand marks.

Shortly after, John Duke of Lancaster, passes over again to Calais with
another Army, which he leads through France, by the way of Auergne, where
amongst the mountains he lost many of his people for want of victuals, and
almost all his horse, so that he came to Bordeaux with a starued and
distressed company, which after some time he relieues and made certain
attempts upon the enemy, but effected nothing, the date of victories was out,
all went ill with the English. The Duke returns the next year, and all
Gascoigne reuolts except Bordeaux and Bayon.

King Edward has another supply by Parliament, a Tenth of the Clergy, and a
Fifteenth of the Laytie, toward these wars: which now are sought to be
ended Another Subsidy granted by Parliament.
by treaty, an unlikely way to do any good. Two years are spent therein, at
Burges and other places, with great charge of Commissioners, and much debate.
The French having now the advantage of the time, would make their own
conditions, they require the Town of Calais (from whence King Edward had now
removed his Staple, in regard of the danger of Merchants goods) and restitution
of great sums of money, which were not to be yielded: So that nothing but
temporary Truces were to be gotten to serve present shifts, wherein the
English, and their party, had ever the worse.

And here at home, besides the sickness of the Prince (which grew desperate)
the State is diseased, the Kings age is misled, his treasure exhausted, and his
affairs Anno Reg. 50. 1376.
ill managed. A Parliament to cure these evils, is called at Westminster, the
Kings wants are opened, and supplies required: the whole body of the Assembly,
weary to bear these continual burdens, in steed of Contributions, exhibit
Complaints, charging the Kings Officers with fraud, and humbly crave that the
Duke of Lancaster, A Parliament at Westminster which was called the good
Parliament. The Duke of Lancaster with others banished the Court.
the Lord Latimer, then Lord Chamberlayne, Dame Alice Pierce, the Kings
Concubine, and one Sir Richard Sturry, might be amoued from Court. Their
Complaints and desires are so vehemently urged by their Speaker, Sir Peter de
La Mare, as the King rather then not to be supplied, gave way unto them, and
all these persons are presently put from Court. The Prince was held to favor
their proceeding, for there seems to be no good correspondence between him
and his brother the Duke of Lancaster, who now managed all under his aged
father, and whose ambition might be dangerous to his young Son Richard, whom
he was like to leave to his mercy.

The King in this Parliament, being the Fiftieth year of his reign, to
gratify his Subjects, grants another general Pardon, as another Iubile;
wherein only William Another Iubile.
Wicham, Bishop of Winchester is excepted, being lately by the procurement of
the Duke of Lancaster fallen into the Kings displeasure, and forbidden to come
to the Parliament. But this Iubile was soon turned to sorrow, by the death of
the Prince The death of the Prince of Wales.
of Wales which happened in this Parliament time. A heavy loss to the State,
being a Prince of whom we never heard any ill, never received other note then
of goodness, and the noblest performances, that Magnanimity and Wisdom could
ever show: inso much, as what praise can be given to Virtue, is due unto him.
His death changed the face of affairs. The late excluded parties return to
Court, and their former places. This Parliament, called the good Parliament,
now wrought ill effects. The Duke of Lancaster returns with the rest, to the
Court.
Sr Peter de la Mare, at the suite of Allce Pierce, an impudent woman (working
upon the Kings impotencies) is committed to perpetual imprisonment at
Nottingham. An act without example of former times, and did no good in this,
especially being wrought by such a Subject. This woman presuming upon the Kings
favor, whom The revenge and behavior of Alice Pierce.
she had subdued, grew so insolent (the common evil of such fortunes) that she
intermedled with Courts of Justice and other Offices, where she her self
would sit to effect her desires: which, though in all who are so exalted, are
ever excessive, yet in a woman most immoderate, as having less of discretion,
and more of greediness.

The Duke of Lancaster is come now to have the Regencie, and to manage all the
The Duke of Lancaster gouerns all.
affairs of the Kingdom, and might thereby presume farther. But King Edward,
to prevent the mischiefs, which by disordering the succession might grow in
the Kingdom, prouidently settled the same in this Parliament, upon Richard of
Bordeaux, Richard of Burdoaux created Prince of Wales.
creating him first Earl of Chester and Corne-wall, and then Prince of Wales;
which made much for his present safety, least John of Lancaster should
supplant him, as Earl John did his Nephew Arthur, in the like case. For (sure
it seems) the Duke had his design that way bent: but this confirmation by the
Parliament (which he had offended) and shortly after a breach with the
Citizens of London, put him so by, as he durst not now attempt that which his
Son after effected. But yet he behaues himself very imperiously in this
state he had. And first shows his authority on the Earl The Earl of March
resigns his Office of Marshall, which is given to Sir Henry Percie.
of March, commanding him over to the guarding of Calais, and the parts there
about. Which the Earl refuses, and rather yields up his Rod, with the Office
of Marshall, then obey his commandment therein. The Duke takes the Rod, and
gives it with the Office, to Sir Henry Percie, a man most inward with him.

Shortly after, the Parliament is assembled again at Westminster (whether a
new; or the last prorogued I know not) and thither, the Duke himself brings
Prince Richard (of the age of 11. years) places him in the Kings Seat, and
taught him to John Sow.
demand a Subsidy. Which was two Tenths, to be paid in one year: Or twelve
The Prince motions a Subsidy in diverse kinds.
pence in the pound of all Marchandizes sold, for one year; and one pound of
silver for every Knights Fee; and of every Fire-house one penie. And this
Demand the Duke earnestly vrges, Saying, one of them ought of necessity to be
granted, in regard the Enemy proclayming War, purposed to invade the Realm.

The Knights of the Parliament (whom the Duke they said, had by practice made,
The Parliament divided
and put by all of the last Assembly, except twelve which he could not alter)
require respite to answer: a day is appointed. The mayor part make choice of
one Hungerford, a Creature of the Dukes to deliver their answer. The other
would have Sir Peter Dela Mare to be enlarged, and deliver theirs; and also
answer to what could be objected against him, before the Lords in Parliament,
and thereto submit himself. Then the Duke demands aid of the Bishops. They
refuse to treat therein, without their Brother, the Bishop of Winchester,
prohibited from coming to the Parliament.

Now there fell out an Accident, that besides gave interruption to this
business. A certain Divine, named John Wicliff, deprived by the Archbishop
of Canterbuie of a benefice in Oxford, which he was found unjustly to hold,
had heretofore, being discontented (the humor that commonly breeds Scisme)
inueighed in his Sermons, A dissension about John Wicliffe.
and other acts in the Schools against the abuses of Churchmen, Monks and
other religious orders (which were not then so free from scandal, but might
well be taxed) and had by his doctrine there, and in London won many
Disciples unto him (who after were called Lollards) professing poverty, going
barefooted, and poorly clad in russet, which made them (as extremes are) the
more noted, and get passage into the opinion of the people, apt to embrace
novelties, and usually beguiled by disguises, in regard they rather believe
then judge. Amongst other his Doctrines, he taught that neither King or other
Secular Lord, could give any His doctrine.
thing in Perpetuity unto Churchmen, and that Temporal Lords if they need,
might lawfully take the goods of such religious persons to relieve them in
their necessities, by the example of William Rufus, etc. A doctrine very
pleasing to great men, who commonly embrace Sects, either for ambition to get,
or for jealousy not to lose, or for hatred to revenge.

This man, the Duke of Lancaster, and Sir Henry Percy, much favor and
cherishe, The Duke of Lancaster favors Wicliffe and why.
extolling him both for his learning and integrity of life, which made him so
far presume, as he daily in one Church or other published his opinions
without fear: whereupon at length he is cited to answer before the
Archbishop, the Bishop of London and others, in Paul's. At the day appointed,
the Duke of Lancaster and the Lord Marshall go to conduct him: by the way he
is animated by his followers not to fear the Bishops, and entering into Paul's,
the press is so great, as hardly any passage could be made, whereupon the
Marshall using some violence, thrust in upon the people, which Courtney, Bishop
of London prohibited him to do, saying: The conuention of Wicliffe before the
Bishops in Paul's.
If he had known he would have behaved himself so in that place, he should
not have come into the Church. The Duke hearing these words, angerly replied,
That the Marshall should execute his authority, whether he would or not, When
they were come to our Ladies Chapel, the Duke and Barons, with the Bishops,
sitting down, John Wicliffe (sent for in by the Lord Marshall) was by him
likewise willed to sit down, in regard he said, the man had much to answer,
and needed a convenient seat. The Bishop of London told him, it was against
all law and reason, that he who was there cited before his Ordinary, should
sit: hereupon contumelious words arose between the Lord Marshall and the
Bishop, the Duke takes the Marshals part, and sharply reprehended the Bishop,
the Bishop returns the like to the Duke, who in great rage, seeing he could
not prevail, swore he would pull down the pride of him, and all the Bishops
of England. You trust, said he, in your Parents, but they can profit you
nothing. I trust not in my, Parents said the Bishop, nor in any man living, but
in God in whom I ought to trust. The Duke, as if whispering in his ear, told
him, he had rather pull him out of the Church by the hair of the head, then
suffer these indignities: which words the Londoners ouer-hearing, swore with a
loud voice, they would rather lose their lives, then suffer their Bishop to
be thus injuriously used, and threatened to be pulled out off The Citizens of
London take their Bishops part.
his own Church. Their fury was the more incensed against the Duke, for that
the day before in the Parliament (whereof he was president) it was required in
the Kings name, that from thence forth there should be no more a Mayor of
London, but a Captain appointed for the government of the City, and that the
Lord Marshall of England should arrest offenders within the Liberties, as in
other places.

About this business, and this wrong offered to their Bishop, the Citizens
assembling The Citizens in uproar.
the morrow after, to consult amongst themselves, it happened the Lord
Fitzwater, and Guido Brian, came into the City, which the people seeing,
furiously ran upon them, and were like to beat them down for coming unsent
for, at that time. The Lord Fitzwater protested he came for no other end, but
to offer his setuice to the City, being by inheritance their Standard Bearer,
and was to take injuries offered to them, as to himself, and therefore willed
them to look to their defense. Whereupon they presently take Arms, assail
the Marshals Inn, break open the gates, brought forth a prisoner in his
Gyues, and let him at liberty, but found not the Lord Marshall, who with the
Duke that day were to dine with one John de Ypres, Thence thus surious
multitude ran to assail the Sauoy, which a Knight of the Dukes seeing, hastes
to the place whsre his Master dyned, and acquaintes him with this vp-roare in
the City. The Duke leaps from the Table so hastily, that he hurt The Duke of
Lancasier in danger slees to the Princess.
both his shinnes in the Form, and with Sir Henry Percie, alone takes boar,
and away he gets to Kennington, near Lambeth, where the Princess with the
young Prince lay; to whom he complains of this Riot, and the violence offered
him. In the mean time the multitude coming to the Sauoy, a priest inquisitiue
to know the business, was answered, They went to take the Duke and the Lord
Mashall, and compel them, to deliver Sir Peter de la Mare, unjustly detained
in Prison. The Priest replied; That Sir Peter was a Traitor to the King, and
worthy to be hanged, At which words they all cried out; This is Percie, this is
the Traitor of England, his speech bewrayes him though his Apparel be
disguised: and presently they ran upon him, and wounded him to death.

The Bishop of London hearing of this Outrage, leaves his dinner, hastes to
the The Bishop of London appeases the tumult.
Sauoy, admonishes them to be mindful of the Holy time, (being Lent) and for
the love of Christ to desist from such seditious acts; assuring them, all thing
should be fairly ended for the good of the City. Whereupon they were
something pacified, and forbear to assault the Dukes house, whose person (if
they could have found) they had (no doubt) made an end of him, and the Lord
Marshall in this their surie, at that time; but missing him, they yet hung up
his Arms reuersed, in sign of Treason in all the principal streets of the
City.

The Princess from Kenington, sent Albert de Vere, Louys Clifford, and Simon
Burleygh to the Citizens, persuading them to make their peace with the Duke.
They returned this answer, That for her Honor they would do whatsoever she
commanded: but yet enjoined the Kinghts, to will the Duke, to permit the Bishop
of Winchester, and Peter de la Mare to come to their Answer, according to the
custom of the Laws of England. The Citizens send to the King.
They sent likewise of the chief Citiznes to the sick King, to excuse them of
this Tumult, protesting themselves not to be privy thereunto, but sought all
means to suppress the same, which they could not do (the whole Communaltie
being in Commotion) upon an Information, that their Liberties should be taken
away from them by Parliament. The King told them, It never was in his thought
to infringe their Liberties, but he rather desired to enlarge them. And
therefore willed them not to fear, but return to appease the Citizens, and
keep them in peace and order: which they did, and were well pleased with this
answer. But yet they could not stop the passage of Rimes and Libels (those
secret stings that wound unseen) but that they were daily spread in the City
to the defamation of the Duke; and to make his name odious to the people. For
which, he procured the Bishops to excommunicate the Authors of all such Rimes,
and Libels.

Notwithstanding, this harsh proceeding of the Duke with the State, and in a
time so unseasonable, both for his own Ends and the Public business he
undertook; The Commons in Parliament, desirous to aid their King, granted a
Subsidy on this condition, that being leauied, it should be committed to
certain Earls and A Subsidy granted in this Parliament.
Barons to see it issued, according to the occasions of the Kingdom. But this
Subsidy was of a new nature neither in any of those kinds propounded. Every
person, man and woman within the Kingdom, above the Age of 14. years, were to
pay 4. pence, (those who lived by Alms only excepted. The Clergy likewise
grants 12. pence of every Parson Beneficed; and of all other Religious persons
4. pence of the head, A mighty and unknown Aid, such as never was granted to
any King of England before, and became a Precedent for the next Reign: wherein
it caused the first and grearest popular Insurrection, that ever was seen in
this Kingdom: So tender a thing is it to tax the people by the Poule.

And now here-upon the Parliament ended: but not the Dukes displeasure against
the City. The Mayor and Aldermen are brought before the King to Shene, and
advised to submit themselves to the Duke, and crave pardon for their grievous
offenses. They protest as before: they could not stay the rage of the
multitude, who committed those insolences, beseeching the King not to punish
such as were innocent and ignorant of the fact, promising the Duke, they would
endeavor by all means to bring in the malefactors, and compel them to make
satisfaction, to the honor of the Duke, and more, said they, we cannot do.
Whereupon they were dismissed the Court, and shortly after from their places,
by the power of the Duke of Lancaster. Sir Nicholas Brember was elected Mayor
in steed of Adam Staple, and other Aldermen appointed in their places, who were
put out.

The King was desirous to have reconciled them to his Son, but sickness
having now vanquished him, he is forced to give over the world, as the same
did him, before his breath left him. And first his Concubine packing away what
she could snatch, even to the rings of his fingers, left him: then his other
attendants, by her example, seasing on what they could fasten, shift away, and
all his Counselors and others forsook him in his last agony when most he
needed them, leaving his Chamber quite empty: which a poor Priest in the house
seeing, by chance as he passed, approaches to the Kings beds side, and finding
him yet breathing, calls The death of King Edward and the manner thereof.
upon him to remember his Savior, and to ask mercy for his offenses, which
none before about him would do, but every one putting him still in hope of
life, though they knew death was upon him (a misery fatal to Princes and great
persons, whom flattery will never suffer to know themselves, nor their own
state either in health or sickness) made him neglectiue of those spiritual
cogitations fit for a dying Christian. But now stirred up by the voice of this
Priest, he shows all signs of contrition, and his last breath expresses the
name of Jesus. Thus dyed this mighty and victorious King, at his Manor of
Sheene (now Richmond) the 21. day of June, Anno Dom. 1377. in the 64. year of
his Age, having reigned fifty years, four months and odd days.

His Character we find best expressed in his actions, yet thus briefly. He was
a Prince, the soonest a man and the longest that held so, of any we read. He
was of His Character
Personage comely, of an even stature, graceful, respectively affable, and
well expressing himself: A Prince who loved 1. Justice, 2. Order, 3. and his
People, the Supreme virtues of a Sovereign. 1. His love of Justice, was seen
by the many Statutes he made His Justice.
for the due Execution thereof, and the most Straight-binding Oath, he ordained
to be ministered unto his Judges and Iusticiars: the punishment inflicted on
them for corruption in their Offices, causing some to be thrust out, and others
grievously fined, as Sir Henry Green, and Sir William Skipwith Anno Reg. 39.
He bettered also that form of public Justice which his Grandfather first
began (and which remains to this day) making also excellent laws for the
same, 2. His regard to the observation of Order amongst his people, witness so
many Laws, as were made to restrain them from His love to his people.
Excesses in all kinds. 3. His love to his subjects, was expressed in the often
easing of their grieuances, and his willingness to give them all fair
satisfaction, as appears by the continual granting of the due observation of
their Charters in most of his Parliaments. And when ( Anno Reg. 14.) they were
jealous, upon his assuming the title of the Kingdom of France, least England
should thereby come to be under the Subjection of that Crown, as being the
greater, he to clear them of that doubt, passed a Statute, in the firmest
manner could be devised, that this Kingdom should His Proui dence.
remain intyre as before, without any violation of the rights it had.

Provident he was in all his actions, never undertaking any thing before he
had first furnished himself with means to perform it. And therein his
subjects allowed him more with less ado, then ever any of his Predecessors
had: and he as fairly issued what he received from them, having none other
private vent of profusion, then his enterprises for advancing the State, and
honor of the Kingdom. True it is that most attent and careful he was to get
moneys, but yet it was without the Sackage of any man, such as his Grandfather
made upon the Officers of Justice, the Jews and others.

For his gifts we find them not such as either hurt his own fame and
reputation, or any way distasted the State. To be short, he was a Prince who
knew his work, and did it: and therefore was he better obeyed, better
respected and served then any of his Predecessors.

His Works of Piety were great and many, as the founding of East-minster, an
Abbay His works of Piety.
(of the Cisteaux Order) near the Tower. An Abbey for Nuns at Detford. The
Kings Hall in Cambridge for poor Scholars. An Hospital for the poor at
Calais. The building of Saint Stephans Chapel at Westminster, with the
endowment of 300. pound, per ann. to that Church. His augmenting the Chapel
at Winsor, and provisions there for Churchmen, and 24. poor Knights, etc.
These were his public His Buildings.
Works, the best Monuments and most lasting to glorify the memory of
Princes. Besides these, his private buildings are great and many; as the Castle
of Winsor, which he re-edified and enlarged. The Castle of Quinborow,
Fortifications at Calais and other places.

His magnificence was showed in his Tryumphes and Feasts, which were
sumptuously His Magnifcence.
celebrated, with all due Rites and Ceremonies, the preseruers of Reverence and
Majesty. To conclude, he was a Prince, whose nature agreed with his Office;
as only made for it. Those defaillances we find in him at last, we must not
attribute to him but his age, wherein we never yet saw Prince happy. When
their vigor fayles them (which is commonly about 60.) their Fortune does.
Whilst this Prince held together he was indissolueble, and as he was then, we
take his Figure.

Fortunate he was also in his Wife, a Lady of excellent virtue, who though
she His Wife, and issue.
brought him little or none Estate, she brought him much content, some benefit
by Alliance, and a fair Issue. She drew euenly with him in all the courses of
Honor that appertained to her side, and seems a piece so just cut for him, as
answered him rightly in every joint. Gracious and loving she ever showed
her-selfe to this Nation, and did many works of Piety, amongst which Queens
College in Oxford remains especially, a Monument of her Name, and Renown.
And it is worthy the Mark, that this King and his Grandfather Edward the
first, the best of our Kings had the two best Wives. Which shows that
worthiness is such an Elixar as by contaction (if there be any disposition of
goodness in the Metal, it will render it of the same Property: So that these
Queens could be no otherwise then they were having so execellent Husbands.

She bare unto him 7. Sons, whereof 5. lived to have Issue; Edward Prince of
Wales, Lionel Duke of Clarence, John Duke of Lancaster, Edmond Earl of
Cambridge, after Duke of York, and Thomas of Wood-stock, which became Duke of
Gloucester. Four Daughters (of five she bare) lived to be married. Isabel the
eldest, to Ingelxam Lord of Coucy, Earl of Soissons, and Bedford. Joan to
Alphonso 11. King of Castile, but she dyed before she lay with him. Mary, to
John Monfort Duke of Brittaigne. Margaret, to John Hastings, Earl of Pembroke,
and she also dyed without Issue.

Thus have we seen the end of this great King: who, how he came to the Crown,
we know, and now how he left it we see: in both are considerations of
importance. His stepping over his Fathers head to come to his throne, though it
were not his fault, yet had it a punishment, and that in a most high kind:
For, having so plentiful, and so able an Issue Male, he had not yet a Son of
his own to sit on his Seat: but left the same (worse then he found it) to a
Child of eleven years of age, exposed to the Ambition of Uncles, which over
weighed him: to a factious and discontented State at home: to broken and
distracted inheritances abroad: himself having seen all his great gettings,
purchased with so much expense, travail, and bloodshed, rent clean from him,
and nothing remaining, but only the poor Town of Calais. To show that our
Bounds are prescribed us, and a Pillar set by him who bears up the Heavens,
which we are not to transpasse.

The end of the Life, and Reign, of Edward the Third.
THus far have I brought this Collection, of our History, and am now come to
the highest exaltation of this Kingdom, to a State full built, to a Government
reared up with all those main Couplements of Form and Order, as have held it
together ever since: notwithstanding those dilapidations made by our civil
Discord, by the Nonage or negligence of Princes, by the alterations of
Religion, by all those corruptions which Time has brought forth to fret and
can ker-eate the same. And here I leave, unless by this which is done I find
encouragement to go on.


